[1]              
In a consent order dated January 7, 2022, the
court appointed Eagle Audit as the inspector of York Condominium Corporation
No. 25, pursuant to s. 130 of the Condominium Act, 1998, S.O. 1998, c.
19. Eagle Audit’s mandate required it to investigate York Condo’s records
pertaining to the board election at the June 2021 Annual General Meeting.
[2]              
The hearing of this application concluded a
lawsuit contesting the 2021 election for four open seats on York Condo’s board
of directors at the AGM chaired by the building manager, Bert Berger. Mr.
Berger was an employee of a third-party agency under contract to run the
condo’s daily operations. After the meeting, Mr. Berger announced the
re-election of four incumbent directors. The inspector’s review of the ballots
and interviews of Mr. Berger concluded that the true vote had been the exact opposite
– that the owners voted in four challengers and did not re-elect the incumbents.
[3]              
Despite its consent to the auditors’
appointment, York Condo questioned the point of the in-depth and costly
investigation. It replaced Mr. Berger, after he lost his condominium management
licence for unrelated reasons. The 2022 election proceeded without incident,
and in 2023 the owners passed a resolution ratifying the 2021 result despite
the inspector’s conclusion that Mr. Berger had subverted the election in the
incumbents’ favour. The current manager’s evidence was that the 2021 AGM “was
so long ago it is irrelevant.” York Condo tried to turn the tables on Ms. Ramos
and submitted that in 2021 she had failed to get “her friends on the board” to avert
compliance with a 2019 court order to restore doorways she had installed in
three of her units.
[4]              
York Condo’s position that the result of the
2021 AGM no longer matters and its collateral attack on the applicant’s motives
for having sought the inspector’s appointment together demonstrate a profound
apathy about the legal and social importance of trusted officials counting
votes. Even Timothy Duggan, York Condo’s rebuttal inspector, assailed Mr.
Berger’s role in the failed election: “Mr. Berger’s comments to the Inspector
during his various interviews suggest that he was of the view that the result
of the vote at the 2021 AGM was obvious, and that there was no need to conduct
a detailed count.”
[5]              
Section 130 is the introductory enactment in
Part IX of the Act, setting out the various mechanisms for enforcement
of condominium governance. The appointment of an inspector need not lead to
other measures. The pursuit of truth and transparency lies at the heart of any community
institution. The importance of this pursuit therefore defines the dispute
before the court.
[6]              
Maria Ramos seeks a declaration confirming the inspector’s
report that the AGM was improperly conducted and an order directing York Condo
to pay the inspector’s fees. Eagle Audit has also brought a motion asking the
court to approve the reports and require York Condo or Ms. Ramos to pay its
auditing fees.
[7]              
York Condo accepts liability for only a fraction
of Eagle Audit’s invoices and asks for an order that Ms. Ramos pay the balance
of any fees allowed. Included in this position is the contention that Eagle
Audit’s fees were exorbitant and should be reduced to be in line with the fees
of the rebuttal auditor it hired. It also submitted that the cost of preparing
supplementary reports extended beyond the mandate of the court appointment.
Ultimately, York Condo’s resistance to paying Eagle Audit is rooted in a firm belief
that the investigation was pointless and tied to Ms. Ramos’ agenda.
[8]              
In reaching the conclusion that York Condo is
responsible for paying the entire amount invoiced by Eagle Audit, I will
examine the importance and extent of the inspector’s mandate in relation to the
amount charged.
[9]              
With regard to the requests for declarations
adopting the inspector’s findings, I will decline to make a declaration. I
agree somewhat reluctantly with York Condo’s submission that declaring the 2021
vote fraudulent is of no practical impact on the corporation’s current
governance. Instead, the conclusions regarding the necessity and value of Eagle
Audit’s work, as well as the financial impact on the unit owners’ common
elements accounts, should serve as a deterrent against future abuses of the
electoral process. For condominiums in Ontario to function, their boards must
follow the rules. To hold otherwise would allow corruption to spread unchecked
in a significant form of residential living.
[10]          
The origin of the whole controversy appears to
be Ms. Ramos’ modifications to common elements of her three units. York Condo’s
position is that she “illegally converted” at least two of the three units into
rooming houses. The order of Dow J. of August 21, 2019, did not reach that
conclusion. Rather, it was a consent order requiring the removal of doorways. York
Condo contended that Ms. Ramos had not progressed the work beyond obtaining
building permits. In her September 3, 2024, case conference endorsement, Akbarali
J. properly identified the course of the remedial work and the responsibility
for Eagle Audit’s invoices as two distinct issues.
[11]          
Given that Ms. Ramos had consented to the 2019
compliance order allowing the corporation to perform the work at her expense if
she failed to complete it, any validity to York Condo’s attack on the bona
fides of Ms. Ramos proceedings to appoint an inspector of the 2021 AGM must
be of limited relevance. If delay or forbearance by a condo board with a
majority of her allies had been her aim, she was within her rights as a unit owner
to promote the allies’ election. Indeed, such a board could very well have
applied to the court to rescind the consent order. York Condo sought to colour the
issues with allegations of Ms. Ramos’ illegal use of the property, but the part
of the dispute before me entailed responsibility to pay the invoices. The
integrity of the election concerned a process in which Ms. Ramos was fully
within her rights to recruit candidates from the pool of unit owners.
[12]          
By happenstance, the cost of the remedial work
and the disputed cost of the inspector’s invoices are roughly equivalent. The
remedial work is estimated in the range of $160,000 to $170,000. The
inspector’s fees amounted to $166,044.98, of which York Condo agreed to pay
$20,000.00. (York Condo conceded liability to pay the inspector’s legal
expenses of $26,263.81.)
[13]          
Determining whether York Condo should pay the
fees requires consideration of three points: (a) the investigation and York
Condo’s rebuttal, (b) York Condo’s appointment of an ‘independent chair’ and resolution
to nullify the investigation findings, and (c) the amount of the fees.
[14]          
The inspector at Eagle Audit in charge of the
investigation of York Condo’s handling of the 2021 AGM was Judy Sue, a Chartered
Professional Accountant, Certified General Accountant, and Certified Fraud
Examiner. In 2020, she was appointed to the board of directors of the
Condominium Authority of Ontario.
[15]          
After her appointment by Black J., Eagle Audit
took possession of the 2021 AGM records. Ms. Sue observed anomalies and
omissions. Not only did these impede the auditing workflow, but they were also
“red flags for the possibility of deeper problems.” Among them, 87 out of 90
paper proxy forms were marked in favour of the same 4 candidates, a result that
appeared “improbably one-sided for a condominium corporation with 252 voting
units and 8 nominated candidates.” The electronic voting system also listed a
ninth candidate whose name did not appear on scrutineers’ tallies. The task of
reviewing ostensibly regular documentation tainted by red flags prompted a more
intensive review on a page-by-page basis.
[16]          
The investigation turned from the paper review
to interviews with Mr. Berger. Initially, he was absent when Ms. Sue and her
colleagues attended. However, they used the opportunity to review electronic
files and a video replay of the AGM. A key revelation from this video was the
presence of lawyers acting for two owners whose proxy forms had been rejected
by management. The sealed envelope provided by York Condo did not contain any
such forms bearing the names of those owners.
[17]          
The inspector eventually sat down with Mr.
Berger and interviewed him twice, with each session lasting two hours. Ms. Sue
concluded that Mr. Berger was responsible for the vote count anomalies and the
exclusion of dozens of valid proxy forms with votes cast in favour of
challenging candidates.
[18]          
After combing through the data tainted by Mr.
Berger’s methods, Eagle Audit concluded that the 2021 election of the board of
directors was the reverse of the result announced by Mr. Berger in an email
after the meeting. In other words, Ms. Ramos’ supporters had been elected.
[19]          
Eagle Audit’s cost of the report from this
investigation was $103,277.76. It consisted of $20,021.62 attributed to ordinary
AGM due diligence, and $83,256.14 “consequential to YCC 25’s conduct.”
[20]          
The release of Eagle Audit’s report evidently
caused a stir in the owners’ community, as well as a response from the board of
directors.
[21]          
In the run-up to the 2023 AGM, York Condo hired
Michael Clifton, a vice chair of the Ontario Condominium Authority Tribunal, to
chair the meeting. As a measure to diffuse the “turmoil at previous meetings,” as
York Condo’s factum described the situation, the independent chair proposed a
resolution to accept the results of the 2021 AGM, including the election of the
board of directors. In sum, the proposed response to the tabling of the Eagle
Audit report was to take aim at the court-appointed inspector’s findings and to
pretend Mr. Berger had done no wrong.
[22]          
Eagle Audit obtained a copy of the meeting
package and produced a supplementary report accusing the independent chair of
disseminating false and misleading information through the proposed resolution.
This report was over five pages long and cost $11,670.08 to prepare. York
Condo’s position is that this report was outside the mandate of its
appointment.
[23]          
York Condo then served the report of its own
expert, Mr. Duggan, which in turn prompted Eagle Audit to prepare a reply
report. In order to stem the battle of experts, Dow J. ordered on December 11,
2023, that the reply report of Eagle Audit be its final mandated report. York
Condo considered Eagle Audit to have been appointed by Ms. Ramos and not by the
court under s. 130. However, Eagle Audit did not appear ever to suffer such a
misapprehension. Ms. Sue clearly saw her duty to the court to report on the
subversion of a legally constituted AGM. When the York Condo ‘independent
chair’ and the current board sought effectively to obviate the purpose of the
s. 130 inspection, she was right to report on this development. When Mr. Duggan
cast doubt on Eagle Audit’s conclusions regarding the actual vote count, it was
not outside the inspector’s court-ordered mandate to defend the results of the
investigation.
[24]          
Mr. Duggan’s qualification for this task was
that he is a partner at a law firm advising and representing condominium corporations
and unit owners. He has chaired more than 100 unit owner meetings. Mr. Duggan cast
doubt on Eagle Audit’s conclusion that the election results were reversed.
However, he also opined that the Inspector’s concerns regarding Mr. Berger’s conduct
of the election “appear to be largely well-founded.”
[25]          
Mr. Duggan’s demurral regarding the inspector’s
conclusion of the election outcome was based mainly on discretionary and
conceptual issues. My impression is that between the fraud examiner’s expertise
and the lawyer’s, I would favour the fraud examiner. Ms. Sue rightly pointed
out that Mr. Duggan admittedly did not perform a full review of the
documentation. Given my decision regarding the declaratory relief, I need not
decide the relative validity of the two experts’ opinions regarding the outcome
of the 2021 AGM election. The only conclusion I can reach comfortably is the
consensus opinion that Mr. Berger’s misconduct made the result wholly
unreliable.
[26]          
In para. 70 of its factum, York Condo submitted
that “the appointment of the Inspector was completely useless,” because the
unit owners “affirmed the results of the election the applicant complains about
at a subsequent annual general meeting of owners.” In para. 71, York Condo
submitted that Maria Ramos “installed” Eagle Audit, and that Ms. Sue was
“clearly biased.” It then stated:
[27]          
As a matter of corporate governance, I accept
the concept that a corporate general meeting can pass a resolution ratifying
the decisions of a board of directors since the previous AGM. The court’s role
in this application is not to determine the actual or legal outcome of the 2021
election. York Condo’s allegation of bias against the court-appointed inspector
is strange. There is no support in the Duggan report for it. York Condo appears
to have relied on the opinion of the ‘independent chair’ appointed by its board
to discredit the Eagle Audit report. The next conclusion, that Eagle Audit was
a hired gun as part of Ms. Ramos’ strategy to avoid compliance with the consent
order for restoration of the common elements of her units, reveals a blindness
to the fact that its building manager had undermined the owners’ right to
participate in the governance of the condominium.
[28]          
Eagle Audit charged fees on a time and hourly
rate basis. Its motion record included evidence of its time sheets, calendar
entries, and other supports for the charges. Instead of filing objections to these
entries or pointing out how the services were not performed or took long to
complete, York Condo’s response to the number of hours spent was essentially
that the audit was too thorough. In its factum, York Condo submitted that
“Eagle Audit conducted itself as though it were performing a criminal
investigation.” Implicit in this assessment remains York Condo’s understatement
of the seriousness of Mr. Berger’s conduct. York Condo opposed to being
investigated and contended it was a ploy by Ms. Ramos to divert attention from
the lack of progress in the restoration of her units. The following paragraph
from the affidavit of its current property manager, Shawn Machado, brought
these themes together:
[29]          
This commentary is evidence of York Condo’s view
of the situation, but not of the reasonableness of the fees. It certainly does
not assist the court in the review of the inspector’s accounts. On its face, it
runs contrary to its acceptance under s. 130(2) of the Act of the bona
fides of the consent order for appointment. I also observe that the
“$190,000” is a round number for the entire amount invoiced, $192,308.79,
consisting of inspector’s fees of $166,044.98 and the inspector’s legal
expenses, amounting to $26,263.81. The concession of $20,000 toward the
inspector’s fees appears to have been based on the characterization of $20,021.62
as ordinary audit expenses before the examination of Mr. Berger’s conduct.
[30]          
I agree with York Condo’s submission that the
court has inherent jurisdiction to review the activities of court-appointed officers:
Leslie & Irene Dube Foundation Inc. v. P218 Enterprises Ltd., 2014
BCSC 1855, at para. 54. Both counsel advised the court that there is no reported
precedent for the assessment of the cost of a s. 130 inspector. They each cited
the fees of court-appointed functionaries such as receivers and monitors in
insolvency proceedings, such as in the Leslie case or in TNG
Acquistion Inc. (Re), 2014 ONSC 2754, at para. 13.
[31]          
In addition to the ordinary factors regarding
the proportionality and prudence of professional services and hourly rates
commensurate with experience and expertise, the insolvency cases rely heavily
on the commercial reasonableness of the services. For example, it cannot be in
the interest of the creditors of an insolvent estate for the fees to erode the
amount available for distribution beyond the cost of detailed work. At the end
of the day, creditors and debtors only care about the amount of the liabilities
and residue to be distributed. Receivers and monitors’ mandates entail economic
practicalities.
[32]          
In contrast to such court-appointed service
providers in insolvency cases, a s. 130 inspector’s role is investigation and
audit. Indeed, where warranted the order for appointment can clothe the
inspector with the statutory powers of a public inquiry: s. 130(3). That power
was not invoked here. However, the language of s. 130 contemplates a serious
inquisitorial function to examine a condominium’s affairs. Depending on the
nature of the investigation and the result, the findings can lead to court
enforcement under s. 134. Although not limitless and subject to the seriousness
of the infractions under investigation, a s. 130 investigation cannot be ruled
by commercial expedience or by the resistance of the party under investigation.
In a s. 130 appointment of an inspector, the investigation and uncovering of
facts have intrinsic value.
[33]          
A condominium is a community. Property rights
are obviously top of mind among the owners. However, the management of the
condominium corporation extends beyond unit owners’ use of their units but
extends to such matters as common elements and the imposition of common
expenses, security, and promotion of social interaction. As in any community
financially dependent on levies, the board and the manager owe fiduciary duties
to the corporation and its membership. The board has a responsibility to all
owners, including Ms. Ramos and her supporters who put themselves forward. The
rigging of an election discourages participation and degrades the health of the
community.
[34]          
Mr. Berger’s motive in electing the incumbents
without having counted votes was not clear from the evidence. The absence or
uncertainty of such motive does not detract from the fact that he violated the
rules by which the community elected its leadership. His conduct need not be
criminal to justify a serious investigation. The motive could have been as
simple as choosing not to have to work with new people. On the record before me,
especially the evidence of David Mendel, Mr. Berger would have opposed the
election of four allies of Ms. Ramos.
[35]          
Mr. Mendel’s evidence outlined the reasons for York
Condo’s contention that the candidates favoured by Ms. Ramos would have put the
board in conflict with its duty to enforce the 2019 compliance order against
her. There certainly was a strong theme of the ends justifying the means in the
evidence adduced by York Condo. While this may have been a valid reason for Mr.
Berger to favour the incumbents, it did not justify their re-election without a
proper count. The evidence of both Ms. Sue and Mr. Duggan demonstrated that,
whatever Mr. Berger’s motives, Mr. Berger as chair of the AGM did not perform a
full and impartial count of the votes and left a trail of unreliable allowed
and disallowed proxies, as well as those that were simply omitted.
[36]          
Against this backdrop, any reasonable observer
would sense York Condo and Mr. Berger’s hostility to being investigated. By
placing themselves in an adverse position to the mandate of the court-appointed
inspector, they justified the steps taken by Ms. Sue and her team in having to
approach the investigation in a methodical and forensic fashion. If it took
four hours for the inspector to interview Mr. Berger over the counting of votes
from a meeting of 252 attendees and proxies, it would have been negligence on
the part of the investigators to start the interviews without having first studied
the data.
[37]          
My review of the timesheets, the scope and
purpose of the inspector’s reports, and the seriousness of Mr. Berger’s
misconduct in the handling of the election, that the auditing and investigation
fees are generally in line with specialized professional services for the
examination of issues of the kind that faced the owners in 2021. The state in
which Mr. Berger left the records from the AGM were such that close analysis of
the voting documents entailed work not unlike the efforts of auditors who
testify in court on commercial, institutional, and family division disputes.  There
being no cogent evidence questioning the inspector’s fees, the court can only
examine the materials and exercise its discretion to approve the amounts
charged. The amounts charged are not out of the ordinary for the type of specialized
audit work involved in this case.
[38]          
With all due respect to Mr. Machado, the
consensus findings regarding Mr. Berger’s handling of the AGM must be a wake-up
call for the corporation. The attempt to avoid the deprivation of owners’
property and democratic rights by retrospectively ratifying the tainted vote invites
suspicion that York Condo requires a significant culture shift in its approach
to governance. Condominium corporations are not wholly private entities, in
that they are statutory governments of a community of co-owners. The attempt to
divert liability for payment to Ms. Ramos runs counter to the basic fact that
it was York Condo’s manager who, either intentionally or incompetently, failed
to count the votes in an election with a maximum of 252 votes. Since that
manager was an independent contractor, York Condo can seek its remedies
elsewhere but not against Mr. Ramos. Whatever animates York Condo’s opposition
to Ms. Ramos’ use of her units, including the suspected unlawful operation of a
rooming-house, those issues should not affect the assessment of the inspector’s
work and the value of the professional services engaged to complete it. Mr.
Berger’s conduct and York Condo’s refusal to take its governance seriously were
the direct causes of the inspection and the significant costs of conducting it.
[39]          
I therefore hold that York Condo is liable to
pay Eagle Audit the full invoiced amount of $192,308.79. Because of the
operation of the condominium, Ms. Ramos will end up paying her proportionate
share as a common expense.
[40]          
Maria Ramos originally brought her application
to obtain a reversal of the 2021 board election results regarding the four
incumbents and challengers. As between Eagle Audit and Mr. Duggan’s diverging
opinions on this subject, the main difference was that Mr. Duggan applied a
“permissive and subjective standard” (Ms. Sue’s words) to the evaluation of
proxy forms to qualify or disqualify the votes. Mr. Duggan’s evidence did not
support a finding that the 2021 board election reflected the correct vote
count, because he did not scrutinize all the voting forms.
[41]          
Section 52 of the Act permits votes at
owner meetings to be cast by a show of hands or by ballot, in either case by
the owner personally or through a proxy. It does not specify formal
requirements for the acceptance or rejection of votes. It is ultimately
difficult to resolve the difference opinion because it was not framed as a true
difference of opinion. If it were a criminal case, defence counsel could have
proffered Mr. Duggan’s opinion to establish reasonable doubt. On the civil
standard, the likely result on a balance of probabilities would be that the
Eagle Audit conclusion should be accepted because York Condo’s expert failed to
rebut it. It is hard to determine across the board whether Mr. Duggan’s approach
to ballot acceptance is preferable to Ms. Sue’s. Each potentially defective
ballot form must be evaluated on its unique characteristics. This Mr. Duggan
did not do.
[42]          
The likelihood of Eagle Audit’s conclusion
regarding the election does not necessarily dispose of the issue. On a
documents-based application, the court is not compelled to decide in a party’s
favour if the divergence in the evidence appears to be the lack of completeness
of one side. I appreciate that Ms. Ramos articulated a clear case which York
Condo failed to meet. Rule 38.10 allows the court to grant the relief or direct
that the issue proceed to trial. I also disagree with York Condo’s submission
that the court lacks jurisdiction to overturn the 2021 election because of the
2023 ratification. The jurisdiction under s. 134 would be toothless if the
court were limited to finding non-compliance and not order a party to remedy
it. What tips the scale against granting the relief are the uncertain utility
of a declaration and the fact that neither side were asking for a trial.
[43]          
A party seeking a declaration must establish
that the court has jurisdiction to hear the issue, that the question is real
and not theoretical, and the party has a genuine interest in its resolution. A
further restriction on the court’s jurisdiction is that the declaratory power must
have practical utility in resolving a ‘live controversy’: Daniels v. Canada
(Indian Affairs and Northern Development), 2016 SCC 12, [2016] 1 SCR 99, at
para. 11.
[44]          
Eagle Audit did not seek declaratory relief. It
sought approval of its reports and payment of its fees and expenses. Approval
in this context does not apply the court’s agreement with the findings, because
the adjudicative process does not entail the consideration of the reports as
part of judicial fact-finding. The use to be made of the report governs what
court approval entails: Target Canada Co. (Re), 2015 ONSC 7574, at paras
17-26. In the procedural context of Eagle Audit’s motion, it seeks court
approval essentially for the purpose of getting paid for the work. The utility
of the reports to the other parties lies in the shining of a light on the 2021
AGM. Whether incompetence, bias, or corruption was behind the mishandling of
the election, York Condo should not avert its eyes from what the light showed.
Ms. Ramos and the losing challengers can obtain some vindication that their
rights as owners were violated.
[45]          
I therefore decline to declare the 2021 AGM
invalid, but I do approve the Eagle Audit reports as reflecting the good faith
efforts of Ms. Sue and her team in getting to the bottom of the defective
election and as warranting an order that York Condo pay the invoices in full. The
procedural dispositions are that the application, at least what remained of it,
is hereby dismissed; and the motion by Eagle Audit is granted in full.
[46]          
Although I declined to issue a declaration
reversing the 2021 election result, Ms. Ramos’ application resulted ultimately
in a consensus between the experts that the vote had not been properly counted.
Procedurally, the application should be dismissed, but the condominium
community has benefited from Ms. Ramos’ intervention. I need not resort to
subrule 57.01(2) to award costs against York Condo, because the dismissal of
the application does not reflect the overall outcome of the case now that it is
over.
[47]          
York Condo’s refusal to pay the inspector’s fees
also exposed Ms. Ramos to the possibility of the court ordering her to pay
them. York Condo kept pressing the extraneous issue and insisted that she pay
the inspector’s fees, even though it had consented to the order appointing the
inspector.
[48]          
In exercising the court’s discretion to award
costs under s. 131 of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, rule
57.01 allows the court to consider several enumerated factors. The overriding principle,
however, is reasonableness, especially regarding the objective of access to
justice and the parties expectations: Apotex Inc. v. Eli Lilly Canada Inc.,
2022 ONCA 587, at para. 62, and Boucher v. Public Accountants Council for
the Province of Ontario, 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), at para 37. What is
fair and reasonable in the application of the rule 57.01 factors is inevitably fact
specific.
[49]          
I award Maria Ramos her costs of the application
on a substantial indemnity scale, in the amount of $75,000.00. After the
consent appointment of the inspector by Black J., York Condo should have
treated the ensuing process in a non-adversarial fashion. Instead, much of the
evidence and submissions opposing the approval of the inspector’s work,
fashioned to set up a request that Ms. Ramos pay for the investigation, risked
at times to resemble litigation with the court itself. That said, the demand of
$96,283.97 on a $106,982.19 legal expense appears too close to full indemnity
costs. The court must not allow the label of one scale to amount to the
granting of costs on another: Boucher, at para. 36. The amount of $75,000.00
is also more in line with the legal expenses of York Condo.
[50]          
I award Eagle Audit its full costs, inclusive
of fees, taxes and disbursements of $37,151.82, payable by York
Condo. A court-appointed expert should not be required to litigate for the payment
of its fees, especially where York Condo consented to the appointment. Had the
issue been limited to assessing the amount of the fees, the case would have
been much more restricted. As I indicated earlier, York Condo did not provide
cogent evidence or submissions directed at the timekeepers’ recorded time.
Instead, it chose to attack the utility of the work as connected to a plan by
Ms. Ramos to get out of her obligations under the 2019 compliance order. York
Condo remains at liberty to litigate what may be left of that issue with Ms.
Ramos. Eagle Audit should not be made to pay for York Condo’s attempt to
entangle the inspector in that separate issue.
[51]          
I therefore dispose of the application and the
motion thus: