[1]              
The plaintiffs bring a motion for:
[2]              
The plaintiffs scheduled their motion on the short motions hearing list,
with one hour allocated for oral submissions on the merits of the plaintiffs’
motion.
[3]              
The defendants seek an adjournment of the motion pending the hearing of
a cross-motion which they have brought seeking, inter alia, a stay of
this action pursuant to Rule 15.02(4) of the Rules of Civil Procedure:
[4]              
The defendants also submit that a long motion hearing date should have
been sought, with an allocation of a half day for the hearing of the motion and
cross-motion.
[5]              
The defendants have requested a case conference, which has been
scheduled for 8 January 2025, to obtain the court’s directions regarding the
motion and cross-motion.
[6]              
After hearing extensive submissions by counsel, I granted the
adjournment request and stayed the plaintiffs’ motion to amend, with reasons to
follow.  The plaintiffs withdrew their request for a finding of contempt.
[7]              
These are my reasons.
[8]              
The plaintiffs are the parents of the defendant Nanchun Chen and of the
proposed litigation guardian, Nan Chen.  The defendant Weidong Yang is the
husband of Nanchun Chen.
[9]              
The parties agree that the plaintiffs are currently incapable, and that
the appointment of a litigation guardian is necessary.
[10]          
The defendants assert that Nan Chen is not a suitable litigation
guardian for the plaintiffs and, in a separate proceeding, the defendants have
sought, inter alia:
[11]          
The defendants argue that an adjournment (and stay) of the plaintiffs’
motion is appropriate because the litigation guardian issue in this action, and
the separate guardianship application by Nanchun Chen, should be decided before
the amendments to the pleadings sought by the plaintiffs are made.
[12]          
The plaintiffs oppose the adjournment request.  They say, in essence,
that this action has already been unduly delayed by tactical manoeuvres that
have been orchestrated by the defendants and that further delay, particularly
in the face of Justice Somji’s order, is causing an injustice to the
plaintiffs.  They observe that to date, no motion materials have been served in
connection with the defendants’ pending motion for a stay (during the course of
argument, Mr. Wagner said that the defendants would be relying on the evidence
already filed as part of the record for this motion).
[13]          
Furthermore, the record indicates that in a costs endorsement of 17 May
2024, Justice Somji deemed an earlier motion by the defendants opposing the
appointment of Nan Chen as litigation guardian for the plaintiffs to have been
abandoned. She also determined that the separate application “raises issues
that are largely distinct and certainly more expansive than the issues raised
in the notice of motion”.
[14]          
Instead, the plaintiffs say that the amendment should be granted now,
pointing out that pursuant to Rule 7.02, court appointment of a litigation
guardian for parties under a disability is not necessary where there is a
guardian with authority to act as litigation guardian, or where the parties
under disability have an attorney under a power of attorney with authority to
act as a litigation guardian.  Accordingly, as provided for by Rule 26.01, the court
“shall grant leave to amend a pleading on such terms that are just, unless
prejudice would result that could not be compensated for by costs on an
adjournment”.
[15]          
I have found the following chronology of events instructive in my
efforts to place the current motion and request for an adjournment in
context:
[16]          
The record discloses that:
[17]          
While making no finding on the question of the plaintiffs’ capacity,
either to execute powers of attorney or to instruct counsel to commence these
proceedings, I do find that there is a genuine issue, based on the record I
have been provided with, as to whether the plaintiffs would have had the
capacity to execute the powers of attorney and/or to commence this action.
[18]          
There are also some important procedural principles to be borne in mind.
[19]          
Justice Somji was aware of the enmity between the siblings and the
dispute concerning the suitability of Nan Chen to act as litigation guardian. 
However, the draft timetable she was provided with by counsel did not make
provision for a motion to address the litigation guardian issue.  That said, an
obvious concern - one which Somji J. clearly had in mind - was that the
defendants have been responsible for “several delays” in moving this action
forward.  No doubt that influenced her willingness to make a timetabling
order.  I infer that she left it to counsel to sort out any other procedural
issues that were not addressed in the draft order, including the appointment of
a litigation guardian.
[20]          
A barrier to the implementation of Somji J.’s order is that the parties
have failed to resolve the litigation guardian issue.  Although Somji J. found
that the separate application brought by Nanchun Chen “raises issues that are
largely distinct and certainly more expansive than the issues raised in the [abandoned
motion to challenge the suitability of Nan Chen as litigation guardian]”, that
did not absolve the parties from dealing with the issue.  Having not done so,
instead of coming back to the court to seek an amended timetable, they failed
to comply with the order, choosing instead to bring this motion and the
cross-motion.
[21]          
The plaintiffs urge me to deny the adjournment request and to grant the
proposed amendment, which would have the effect of appointing Nan Chen as
litigation guardian, without prejudice to the defendants bringing a subsequent
challenge against his suitability.  They point to the decision of Perell J. in Kalia
v. Kalia, 2020 ONSC 935 in support of taking this approach.
[22]          
In that case, a mother had given one of her daughters a power of
attorney, which would have empowered the daughter to retain a lawyer on the
mother’s behalf to commence proceedings against another of the mother’s
daughters. After that action had been commenced, a motion was brought by the
mother’s lawyers for the appointment of the sister with the power of attorney
as the mother’s litigation guardian.  When the defendant daughter objected, the
law firm moved to have the Public Guardian and Trustee appointed as the
litigation guardian instead, and an order was made to that effect.  The
defendants then moved to have the plaintiff’s lawyers removed as lawyers of
record, because they had not been authorised to commence the action.  That
relief was denied.  At para. 64 of his decision, Perell J. observed that if the
defendant daughter believed that her sister’s power of attorney should be set
aside, or that her mother did not have the legal capacity to give the lawyer
instructions, “then the appropriate response would have been proceedings under
the Substitute Proceedings Act, 1992 or a motion to have a litigation
guardian appointed”.
[23]          
If anything, Perell J.’s decision in Kalia support the
defendants’ position.  Nanchun Chen has applied under the Substitute
Decisions Act, 1992 regarding the guardianship of her parents, and in this
proceeding, the defendants have urged the plaintiffs to seek the formal
appointment of a litigation guardian, indicating in the course of doing so that
they would agree to the PGT being appointed.
[24]          
In light of what I perceive to be genuine issues concerning Nan Chen’s
powers of attorney and his suitability to act as litigation guardian due to his
adverse relationship with his sibling and her husband, there are, in my view,
circumstances that militate against granting the proposed amendment of the
statement of claim at this time, which cannot be compensated for by an
adjournment or an award of costs.
[25]          
A motion to amend the title of proceedings to add a litigation guardian
in an action that has already been commenced is premature where it is known
that the appointment of the proposed litigation guardian is contested. Although
r. 7.02(1) renders court appointment of a litigation guardian for plaintiffs unnecessary
at the outset of litigation, r. 26.02(c) requires leave of the court to add or
substitute a party in proceedings that have already commenced if all of the
other parties to the action have not consented.  Read in conjunction with  r.
7.2(1.1), which contains specific provisions relating to who may act as
litigation guardian for a mentally incapable person and gives the court
discretion to “order otherwise”, a dispute over who should act as litigation
guardian should be resolved before leave to amend can be considered.
[26]          
Accordingly, I have concluded that the issues of the plaintiffs’
capacity to execute powers of attorney and to commence proceedings, and the
suitability of Nan Chen to act as litigation guardian, should be determined before
this action, and in particular any amendment that would name Nan Chen as
litigation guardian, proceeds further.
[27]          
So far as the contempt relief sought by the plaintiffs as a result of
the defendants’ non-attendance at examinations for discovery is concerned, my
inclination would have been to decline to make a finding that the defendants
are in contempt.  As the correspondence contained in the record makes clear,
the lawyers for the parties have both taken positions that meant non-compliance
with the timetable became almost inevitable.
[28]          
The issue became academic when counsel for the plaintiffs conceded that,
in the circumstances, the request for a finding of contempt against the
defendants should be withdrawn.
[29]          
For the foregoing reasons, the defendants’ request for an adjournment of
the motion to amend the statement of claim is granted.  I further order that
that motion should be stayed pending further order of this court.
[30]          
That having been said, it is incumbent on the defendants to move
expeditiously to advance both the application and their pending motion
concerning the appointment of the litigation guardian.  This should be part of
the discussion that occurs at the case conference on 8 January 2025, which is
scheduled to be presided over by Associate Justice Perron.
[31]          
I direct that in advance of the case conference, the parties shall endeavour
to agree on a procedural plan for the resolution of the issues of the
plaintiffs’ capacity to execute powers of attorney and to commence proceedings,
and the suitability of Nan Chen to act as litigation guardian.  If they cannot
agree on such a plan, each party should provide a succinct summary of how they
propose that those issues should be litigated and adjudicated.
[32]          
The adjournment requested by the defendants should have
been agreed to by the plaintiffs, perhaps on terms, given the concerns about
delay.
[33]          
Furthermore, and as a practical point, even had I not
considered that the motion to amend was premature, I would have allowed the
adjournment because a short motion hearing would have provided insufficient
time (indeed, even the plaintiffs’ original proposal was to seek a two hour
hearing).
[34]          
I fix the costs of the motion to adjourn at $2,500 all
inclusive, payable by the plaintiffs.  However, in light of the litigation
guardian and capacity issues, these costs will not become payable until an
order has been made appointing a litigation guardian for the plaintiffs, or the
conclusion of this action, whichever comes first.