[1]              
A jury found Aleth Duell guilty of one count of fraud
over $5,000 in relation to Tiffany Mann, one count of fraud over $5,000 in
relation to Mabel Scharf, and one count of money laundering.   The jury
acquitted Ms. Duell of fraud over $5,000 in relation to the complainant Wendy
Choi.
[2]              
Ms. Duell is a 72-year-old first offender.   She
is a mother to three, grandmother to three, and apart from the offences before
the court has led a productive and law-abiding life.   The defence argues that
given the mitigating factors in this case, the appropriate sentence is a
conditional sentence followed by two years probation.  While acknowledging that
denunciation and deterrence are the paramount sentencing objectives, she argues
that a conditional sentence can properly reflect these goals.
[3]              
The Crown counters that while a sentence in the
upper reformatory range is fit and proportionate, a conditional sentence would
fail to give proper weight to the primary sentencing objectives of denunciation
and deterrence.   He urges me to impose a sentence of two years less a day,
followed by two years probation.   He also seeks a free-standing restitution
order in the range of $60,000 to $80,000.  He further requests an order
pursuant to s. 380.2 of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 prohibiting
Ms. Duell from seeking, obtaining, or continuing any employment, or becoming a
volunteer in any capacity, that involves having authority over the real
property, money, or valuable security of another person.
[4]              
The frauds in this case were characterized as
“romance frauds.”     There are a multitude of ways in which such scams can
operate.   The targets are often vulnerable, but can present differently, with varying
ages, races, life experiences, and vulnerabilities.  In general, the
perpetrator approaches their target virtually, and learns about them through online
chats. The specifics of the scheme are designed to appeal to the particular
victim.
[5]              
At trial, the Crown argued that Ms. Duell
knowingly assisted in an on-going scheme to defraud the complainants by
receiving money that they sent and laundering it by purchasing gold, which was
then transferred to Bitcoin.   Ms. Duell’s position at trial was that she was
also a victim of fraud.  The defence maintained that Ms. Duell was an unwitting
dupe who honestly believed she was involved in a legitimate business.
[6]              
Each of the three complainants testified about
being approached online and scammed into sending large sums of money to various
people and accounts.   The first complainant, Ms. Choi, was contacted on
Facebook by a man named Charles.   After they had chatted online for a while,
he told her he was sending a package to her.   She then began receiving threats
over this package: Ms. Choi was told that she would be in trouble with the law
unless she sent money.   Over the course of several years, she sent payments to
various accounts and people that totalled over 1 million dollars.    She sent
some of the money to companies owned by Ms. Duell.  Ms. Duell then sent the
money to various companies in China.
[7]              
Ms. Duell testified that she dealt with Ms.
Choi’s money as instructed by Tom Milverton, a man she had met online.  While
they never met in person, she said they began a romantic relationship that evolved
into a business partnership.   Mr. Milverton was a consultant, and she believed
that the money Ms. Choi sent was for consulting fees and to purchase equipment. 
She tendered bank records showing that the sums she received from Ms. Choi were
forwarded to various businesses in China.
[8]              
Ms. Scharf testified that she was contacted by a
man named Anthony Davyyd on LinkedIn.    After they had been communicating on
the computer for a while, he told her that he had a reward for some work he had
done and was sending her the package.  He asked her to pay for shipment and
other costs.  He told her that she would be reimbursed and that he would give
her a diamond necklace for her troubles.    As instructed, she sent numerous bank
drafts and cheques to companies owned by Ms. Duell.   She spoke with Ms. Duell several
times to confirm shipping details.  During one of those conversations, Ms.
Duell asked Ms. Scharf if she would be interested in investing in a “lotions
and potions” business.
[9]              
The man Ms. Scharf was chatting with also
directed her to send money to a gold trading company, Gold Stock.   This was
not to buy gold, but to facilitate payment of various fees. Ms. Scharf said
that Ms. Duell served as a “business consultant” in dealing with Gold Stock.   
Ms. Duell said that she believed she was legitimately involved in assisting Mr.
Milverton’s business.   Mr. Milverton instructed her to use Ms. Scharf's funds
to notionally purchase gold, which was then converted to cash and subsequently
to Bitcoin. Ms. Duell sent it to various accounts as instructed.
[10]          
Ms. Mann testified that a man named Chan Lee
contacted her on Instagram.  After they chatted for a while, he told her that
he was sending her a gift.  She believed that Mr. Lee was going to move to her
area and was sending money so that he could buy a home, and they would live
together.  She was contacted by a shipping company and told to send payments to
cover things such as shipping, duties, and other fees.  At some point, she was
threatened that if she did not pay the fees, she would be in trouble with the
law.   She was also asked to send funds to Gold Stock, which she did.  Ms. Mann
testified that over the time she was defrauded, she sent about $300,000 to
various people and accounts. She sent Ms. Duell $40,000 payments twice.  Ms.
Duell then used the money Ms. Mann sent to notionally purchase gold at Gold
Stock, which was then converted to cash, further converted to Bitcoin, and then
sent to various accounts.  Again, Ms. Duell testified that she believed that
she was involved in a legitimate business and was simply following the orders
of her “boss”, Mr. Milverton.
[11]          
The jury acquitted Ms. Duell of the count in
relation to Ms. Choi.    Thus, they either believed her when she said was duped
into dealing with Ms. Choi’s money by the man holding himself out to be Tom
Milverton, or, were left in a reasonable doubt by her evidence.
[12]          
However, they reached a different conclusion in
relation to Ms. Scharf and Ms. Mann; each of whom, she dealt with some time
after Ms. Choi.   While the jury of course did not give reasons, the verdict
suggests that they found that Ms. Duell was wilfully blind by the time she was
dealing with Ms. Mann’s and Ms. Scharf’s money and converting it to Bitcoin. 
That is, by this point in time, she knew that she should inquire whether the
money was obtained by fraud, but she did not make the inquiry because she did
not want to know the truth.
[13]          
Ms. Mann declined to provide a victim impact
statement, explaining that she wants to move forward with her life and put this
matter behind her.  But having seen her testify, it was clear that the fraud
had a significant impact on her.   She lost a great deal of money and felt
embarrassed and upset that she fell for the scam.
[14]          
Ms. Scharf wrote a moving letter outlining the
substantial impact that the fraud had on her.   Ms. Scharf is a widowed senior.
She wrote that given her age, she cannot start a new career or job to financially
recover from the loss of funds. Because of the loss, she is being forced to
sell her house, and is haunted by nightmares of winding up homeless. Ms. Scharf
has lost her trust in people. She feels betrayed, bitter, and ashamed. She
wrote that she cannot talk to anyone about what happened as she fears she will
be seen as an “idiot” who fell for a fraudster. She feels that she has no
future.
[15]          
I was impressed with Ms. Scharf’s testimony at
trial. She came across as a vibrant, witty, and lovely woman. I sincerely hope
that she recovers from this incident. One thing that will help is getting some
of her money back. Setting aside the issue of restitution from Ms. Duell, I note
that Suleman Khaled, the individual Ms. Duell dealt with at Gold Stock, testified
that he still had $40,000 belonging to Ms. Scharf. For some unknown reason,
as of the sentencing hearing, he had not returned that money to her. The Crown
advised that efforts were being made to have that money returned to Ms. Scharf.
If that has not happened yet, I expect that action will be taken to ensure that
Ms. Scharf quickly receives this money back from Mr. Khaled.  While it is only
a portion of the money Ms. Scharf lost, it should help to some extent.
[16]          
Ms. Duell is 72 years old.   She is a first
offender.
[17]          
Ms. Duell was born in the Philippines.  She was
the eldest of two children.  Her father was a soldier with the United States
Army and died when she was only three years old.  Her mother owned and operated
a general store and remarried when Ms. Duell was young.  Thereafter, Ms. Duell
was primarily raised by her paternal aunts.
[18]          
Ms. Duell has three sons.  She had her first son
at the age of 25. The father was someone she met while vacationing in Manila. 
She did not tell him about her pregnancy and never sought financial assistance
from him. She raised her son with support from her family. At the age of 34,
Ms. Duell began a romantic relationship with a man living in Canda. He
sponsored her to come to Canada, and they married in 1988. A year later Ms.
Duell gave birth to her second son, and a third son in 1992. That same year,
Ms. Duell and her husband separated.  However, they have remained close and
have an amicable relationship. Ms. Duell is now the grandmother of three
children.  She lives with her two youngest sons.
[19]          
Before coming to Canada, Ms. Duell pursued
higher education.  Because of her father, Ms. Duell received financial
assistance from the U.S. Veterans’ program; this opportunity motivated her and
allowed her to achieve her educational goals. She obtained two degrees in the
Philippines: a Bachelor of Science in Liberal Arts and a Bachelor of Commerce
degree.
[20]          
After completing her studies, Ms. Duell obtained
her first job, working in a government office in Cebu City, doing
administrative work. Following that, she spent three years working as a customer
service representative for a private pharmaceutical company. She then spent
five years working for the Philippine government as a “field officer.”
[21]          
After immigrating to Canada, Ms. Duell attended
community college and completed academic upgrading courses, including refresher
math, english, and accounting.  She then started working in the financial
district in Toronto as a “Pension Administrator.”  She worked for various companies
until April 2018, when she retired at the age of 65.   By all accounts she was
a valued employee and was applauded by her employers for her “commitment and
loyalty.”
[22]          
Ms. Duell told the author of the Pre-Sentence
Report (“PSR”) that she now lives off funds from the Canada Pension Plan, Old
Age Security and Guaranteed Income Supplement, which totals about $2,000 a
month. Her son, however, advised that he has concerns that she is not receiving
that money, or has signed it away to someone.  He noted that she seems to have
no money and that he is required to help her with her finances, including
paying their rent.
[23]          
 Ms. Duell has a close and loving relationship
with her three sons.  They regularly attended her trial and sentencing hearing.
They each spoke to the author of the PSR. They described their mother as a
generous, caring, and loving woman. Her two youngest sons, Gerhard Tabada-Duell
and Anton Tabada-Duell, also wrote letters of support that were filed as
exhibits on the sentencing hearing.
[24]          
The author of the PSR noted that Ms. Duell
attended for four in person interviews. Each time she presented as “attentive,
respectful and professional.” The author noted that Ms. Duell would likely
benefit from individual counselling for any psychological issues and coping
with stress.  Her sons also emphasized that they believed their mother needs this
type of assistance.
[25]          
As noted in R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64,
at para. 58, the “determination of a just and appropriate sentence is a highly
individualized exercise that goes beyond a purely mathematical calculation.  It
involves a variety of factors that are difficult to define with precision.”
[26]          
Section 718 of the Criminal Code provides
that the “fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to
contribute ... to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful
and safe society...”   This is to be accomplished through the imposition of
just sanctions that have one or more of several objectives enumerated in ss.
718(a) to (f), including denunciation, general and specific deterrence, and
rehabilitation.
[27]          
Section 718.1 sets out the fundamental principle
of sentencing, which is that any sentence imposed “must be proportionate to the
gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.”
[28]          
The Criminal Code lists several other
principles to guide sentencing judges.  The parity principle is set out in s.
718.2(b) and provides that “a sentence should be similar to sentences imposed
on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances.” 
Given the highly individualized nature of the sentencing process, however, the
sentencing principle of parity remains secondary to proportionality:  R. v. 
Parranto, 2021 SCC 46, at para. 38.   Sentences imposed for offences of the
same type will not always be identical: R. v. Mann, 2010 ONCA 342, at para.
17; Lacasse, at paras. 53-58.
[29]          
The totality principle is addressed in s. 718.2(c)
of the Criminal Code, which provides that where consecutive sentences
are imposed, the combined sentence should not be unduly long or harsh. The
totality principle is important in this case, because Ms. Duell is to be
sentenced for several offences.
[30]          
The restraint principle is reflected in s. 718.2(d)
and provides that an offender should not be deprived of liberty if less
restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances.   Subsection
718.2(e) highlights the particular importance of restraint and requires that
“all available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the
circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community
should be considered for all offenders…”
[31]          
The various sentencing objectives and principles
often compete with one another, in that maximizing the denunciatory or
deterrent effect of the sentence may be contrary to the rehabilitation of the
offender and the principle of restraint, and vice versa. That said, the
competing objectives and principles must be balanced in a way that respects the
principle of proportionality. Even when denunciation and deterrence are the
paramount sentencing objectives, the sentencing judge retains discretion to
assign significant weight to other factors, such as rehabilitation, in giving
effect to the fundamental principle of proportionality: R. v. Friesen,
2020 SCC 9, at para. 104; R. v. Rayo, 2018 QCCA 824, at paras. 103,
107-8.
[32]          
Pursuant to s. 742.1 of the Criminal Code,
with some exceptions, if a person is convicted of an offence and the court imposes
a sentence of imprisonment of less than two years, the court may impose a
conditional sentence. A court may only do so if satisfied that allowing the
offender to serve their sentence in the community does not endanger the safety
of the community and is consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles
of sentencing.
[33]          
Since sentencing is highly individualized, the
determination of a just and appropriate sentence requires the court to assess
the aggravating and mitigating factors related to both the offence and the
offender.  Such an assessment is also mandated by s. 718.2(a) of the Criminal
Code, which states that a sentence should be increased or reduced to
account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to
the offence or the offender.  I turn now to the aggravating and mitigating
factors in the present case.
[34]          
Ms. Duell participated in a large-scale fraud
scheme. While she was neither the mastermind nor the architect of the scheme,
she played a key role in receiving money from the victims, and then converting
the funds into gold, and then into Bitcoin.
[35]          
Both Ms. Mann and Ms. Scharf suffered
significant financial losses.  While it appears that some of the funds they
sent went to other unknown accounts, a portion of their money went into
accounts held by Ms. Duell. The financial impact on Ms. Scharf, who is a
retiree, is particularly dire.
[36]          
Both victims have also suffered psychological
harm.  They feel betrayed and embarrassed.   Ms. Scharf’s victim impact
statement leaves no doubt about the profound impact that the fraud on her.
[37]          
While there was not a typical relationship of trust
with Ms. Scharf, Ms. Duell was trusted.  Ms. Scharf characterized Ms. Duell as
her “business consultant” in a letter she sent to Gold Stock.     Ms. Duell
violated the trust Ms. Scharf placed in her.
[38]          
Ms. Duell profited from her participation in the
scheme.   I accept the defence submission that it does not appear that she obtained
a significant financial benefit.    Apart from the small “commissions” she noted
in her ledgers, it does not seem that Ms. Duell made a lot of money from her
participation in the frauds.   She lived in quite modest circumstances and
there was no evidence of large sums of money being found in any of her
accounts.   But the fact remains, she did turn a profit from her assistance in
the frauds.
[39]          
Ms. Duell did not end the frauds on her own
volition. Rather, the frauds only came to an end after transactions were
flagged by a bank.
[40]          
The victims have not received any restitution.
[41]          
Ms. Duell had a trial.  Despite the jury’s
verdict, she continues to assert her innocence.  That is not aggravating.  But
it does mean that she does not have the mitigation in sentence that she would
have if she had pleaded guilty or if she accepted responsibility and expressed
remorse.
[42]          
Ms. Duell is a first offender.   She is 72 years
old, and apart from these offences has been pro-social.
[43]          
She has been on bail for several years without
incident, which supports that she has rehabilitative potential.
[44]          
She has a solid educational and work history.
[45]          
She is by all accounts a loving mother and
grandmother.
[46]          
She has strong family support, which will assist
her as she attempts to move forward from this incident.
[47]          
I turn now to my analysis as to what a fit and
proportionate sentence would be in this case.
[48]          
Both the Crown and defence submitted several
cases in support of their positions. What emerges from the authorities is that in
major frauds such as the one in this case, the paramount sentencing objectives
must be denunciation and general deterrence: R. v. Drakes, 2009 ONCA 560,
at para. 26; R. v. Garrick, 2014 ONCA 757, at para. 25. Large frauds are
generally planned and premeditated, and often committed by persons of otherwise
good character. Indeed, the good character of the perpetrator is often what
allows and enables the fraud to occur. Thus, while rehabilitation is still an
important objective, offender-based considerations are generally less important
in large frauds: R. v. Scholz, 2021 ONCA 506, at para. 24.
[49]          
As explained in Scholz, at para. 18,  given
the need to emphasise denunciation and deterrence, the general established
range for large-scale frauds is three to five years: see also R. v. Bogart,
2002 CanLII 41073 (ON CA), [2002] O.J. No. 3039
(C.A.), at para. 36, leave to appeal refused, [2002] S.C.C.A. No. 398; and R.
v. Davatgar-Jafarpour, 2019 ONCA 353, at para. 34. In some exceptional
cases, however, reformatory jail sentences of less than two years, and even
conditional sentences, have been imposed in large-scale, breach of trust frauds,
where particularly strong mitigating circumstances exist.
[50]          
The Crown fairly acknowledges that considering
Ms. Duell’s advanced age and previous unblemished record, her matter is one of
those exceptional cases where a sentence in the upper reformatory range, rather
than a penitentiary sentence, is warranted.   I agree with this reasonable
concession.
[51]          
Given that Ms. Duell will receive a sentence
below two years, a conditional sentence is an available sentence, subject to
two questions.  First, would a conditional sentence endanger the public? The
answer is clearly no. Ms. Duell has been on bail for several years without any
suggestion that she breached the terms of her release in any way. I am confident
that if she received a conditional sentence that she would abide by the terms
of the order.
[52]          
Second, would a conditional sentence be
consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing?  In my
view, regrettably, the answer must be no. Apart from her advanced years, Ms.
Duell does not have the mitigating factors that have occasionally led to the
imposition of conditional sentences on other offenders.  She did not plead
guilty: see in contrast, R. v. Campbell, 2005 ONCJ 286; R. v. Ari,
[2001] O.J. No. 3757 (S.C.).  She has not made any restitution: see in
contrast, Ari, at para. 7.  She does not have any serious health issues:
see in contrast, Campbell, at para. 30.
[53]          
While I agree with defence counsel that the jury
verdict suggests that they found Ms. Duell wilfully blind, that is not
mitigating.  There is little difference in the moral blameworthiness between
actual knowledge and willful blindness: R. v. Sidhu, 2009 ONCA 8, at para. 17; R. v. Downey, 2017 ONCA 789, at para. 10.
[54]          
Ms. Duell assisted in a large-scale fraud scheme
that had a devastating impact on her victims, Ms. Mann and Ms. Scharf. Her offending
was not isolated, but instead continued over many months and involved two
victims. Not only did she receive the money from the victims in her accounts,
but she then converted the money to gold and then Bitcoin – thereby helping to
ensure that the money cannot be traced and recovered. Considering the
aggravating factors, a conditional sentence would be inconsistent with the
fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing. A conditional sentence would
fail to give proper voice to the primary sentencing objectives of denunciation
and deterrence.
[55]          
Considering the pressing need to emphasize those
sentencing objectives, a custodial sentence is required. At the same time, I
agree that given the mitigating factors that a sentence below the range is
warranted. I have determined that a global sentence of two years less a day is
fit and proportionate. This sentence gives primacy to denunciation and
deterrence, while still giving weight the objective of rehabilitation and the
important principle of restraint.
[56]          
The sentence should be structured as follows:
[57]          
Following her sentence, I am placing Ms. Duell
on probation for two years. As the author of the PSR noted, Ms. Duell would
benefit from individual counselling. This observation is echoed by her sons,
who hope that she will be given the assistance she requires. The terms of the
probation order are attached as Appendix “A”.
[58]          
I turn now to consider the ancillary orders
requested by the Crown.
[59]          
First, the Crown is seeking a free-standing
restitution order of between $60,000 to $80,000.  Defence counsel is opposed,
noting that Ms. Duell has no means to pay restitution.   Ms. Duell is a 72-year-old
retiree, living on a fixed income of modest means.  She argues that the Crown has
not demonstrated a flow of funds in a quantifiable amount to Ms. Duell: R.
v. Ali, [2001] O.J. 3757 (S.C.), at para. 13.   Defence counsel highlights
that, at most, Ms. Duell appeared to earn small commissions for her role in the
scheme, and that she was not the party who significantly profited from the
frauds.
[60]          
In assessing this issue, I keep in mind that restitution
orders should be made with “restraint and caution": R. v. Robertson,
2020 ONCA 367, at para. 7; R. v. Zelensky, 1978 CanLII 8 (SCC), [1978] 2 S.C.R. 940.   When
assessing whether to make a restitution order, the court should look at all of
the circumstances. The court should consider the nature of the offence, and, when
money has been taken what has happened to that money:  R. v. Castro,
2010 ONCA 718, at para. 27. Although the offender's ability to make restitution
is not a precondition to making the order, it is an important factor which must
be considered: Castro, at paras. 26-27. Further, the impact of the order
on the offender's prospects of rehabilitation must be weighed and considered: Robertson,
at paras. 8, 11.
[61]          
 Balancing all of the factors, I have determined
that a restitution order would be inappropriate in the circumstances.  The
money sent by Ms. Mann and Ms. Scharf to accounts held by Ms. Duell does not
seem to have been kept by Ms. Duell, instead it seems she received a small
commission for her assistance in the frauds.  While Ms. Scharf trusted Ms.
Duell, this was not a classic breach of trust situation. Ms. Duell is a retiree
with limited income. She will be sentenced to a jail term of two years less a
day. She has no present ability to pay restitution and does not appear to have
any future prospects that would allow her to pay restitution.
[62]          
Second, the Crown is also seeking an order
pursuant to s. 380.2 of the Criminal Code, prohibiting Ms. Duell from
seeking, obtaining, or continuing any employment, or becoming a volunteer in
any capacity, that involves having authority over the real property, money or
valuable security of another person. I have determined that it is appropriate
to make this order for life.
[63]          
In reaching this conclusion, I keep in mind the
comment in R. v. Fishman et al., 2023 ONSC 5101, that a s. 380.2 prohibition
order excludes an offender from "participating in a wide variety of
otherwise lawful activities", including many forms of employment and can
result in "significant restrictions" on an offender's liberty and
security of the person: see also, R. v. Hooyer, 2016 ONCA 44, at para. 47.    That said, there are two factors
that lead me to conclude that the order is warranted in the circumstances of
Ms. Duell’s case. First, given that Ms. Duell is a retiree, the order will not
impact her employment. Second, Ms. Duell has not acknowledged any
responsibility for her participation in the frauds. Given her lack of insight
into her actions, the order is appropriate to ensure that the public is
protected.
[64]          
Finally, given that Ms. Duell will be serving a
sentence of two years less a day, and that she is a retiree with limited means,
defence counsel asks me to waive the victim surcharge. I am persuaded by the
defence submission and as a result I am prepared to waive the victim surcharge
as posing an undue hardship.