[1]              
The Crown has proceeded against the accused, Shan Latif
(Mr. Latif, Shan, or the accused), on a number of charges.
[2]              
The allegations relate to Mr. Latif’s dealings with S.B. and K.B.
between January of 2020 and January of 2021.
[3]              
The matter proceeded before me in April with submissions in August
regarding the outstanding charges.
[4]              
The matter was remanded to today’s date to render a decision. These are
my reasons.
[5]             
S.B. is 25 years old.  Her date of birth is [redacted for publication].
[6]             
In January of 2020, both S.B. and K.B. had been living together at S.B.’s
godmother’s place. S.B. had been working at No Frills. She had been struggling
to pay her bills. S.B. noticed that K.B. was able to pay her rent and make good
money. She knew that K.B. was working in the sex trade.  S.B. asked K.B. to
help her to get into the business.
[7]             
On January 15, 2020, K.B. took S.B. to 9471 Yonge St. It was a
commercial location/residential building. She believes it was on either the 5th
or 7th floor. She met with J. They talked about pricing and her
restrictions. J. and K.B. suggested S.B. use the name of Briana Blue. They took
photos of S.B. and posted the ads. They also dealt with texting clients. She
thought K.B. and J. were her pimps. S.B. saw two clients on the first day.
[8]             
She met the accused, Shan (Kush), the next day (January 16). S.B.
initially thought he was a paying client. He gave her $120. They were making
out, drinking Hennessy, and making dirty talk. He was whispering in her ear.
[9]             
As they talked, Shan explained that he was the “money maker” and she
would be making him a lot of money. He said he would be making the appointments
from now on. He mentioned the money they would make, the trips they would take.
He said he would take her to Dubai. She believed he was a pimp.
[10]         
After meeting Shan, he would usually be the one to handle the ads,
texts, pricing, messaging, etc.  When he would get tired of texting clients, J.
would take over. With J., she used Snapchat to communicate. With Shan, she used
“WhatsApp” and her cellphone to communicate with him.  Shan would also drop off
condoms, lube and weed.
[11]         
Shan would screenshot the text conversations with clients and send them
to her so she knew what to do. Usually, the clients paid by cash, but sometimes
e-transfer. They would usually pay cash, 20s, 50s, 100s. Shan would pick up the
money at the end of the shift or sometimes at the end of the week. She would do
overnights on occasion. She once did a weekend at St-Anne’s for 6k. Shan wanted
her to do it.
[12]         
She and Shan would socialize after work.  They would talk about taking
vacations together, and he talked about putting her in designer clothes. He
kept mentioning Dubai. She had feelings for Shan and saw him as more than a
pimp. She cared about him. He helped her get out of an abusive relationship.
[13]         
As they worked together, he taught her how to use Leolist. He taught her
how to make the ads punchier. How to make the ads stand out.
[14]         
She initially worked at the Richmond Hill Condo but then started working
and staying at the Yorkville Apartment. Shan told her she could stay in the
Yorkville Condo (January 2020 to June 2020). She wanted to pay rent.  The rent
was $3,200. She would pay $1,500-$1,700 when she could. After the lease in
Yorkville was up, she worked at a different unit in Richmond Hill in June or
July. S.B. identified Richmond Hill, Unit 703 as the second Unit (Exhibit 5).
[15]         
With the second Richmond Hill unit, Shan told her she could live there
as long as she was making money. The Lease to the Richmond Hill unit was for a
year. She was initially there alone, but B. moved in after.
[16]         
Initially, she was working 5-6 days a week, 10:00 a.m. into the next
morning.  It depended when clients were available. Shan would try and fill the
day.
[17]         
In Yorkville, Shan could not stay in the condo when she worked, as she
did not have a separate room for him to stay. He would wait downstairs and she
would bring him the money. When she started working in Richmond Hill again,
Shan would often be waiting in another room as the apartment was bigger.
[18]         
She was working longer hours to start but she began finding it more
difficult as time went on.
[19]         
Shan would text clients pretending to be her. He would sometimes offer
services she did not want to do. For example, one client had poor hygiene and
she had told him she would only give him oral sex with a condom on. But Shan
agreed to oral without a condom in the texts, so she had to do it.
[20]         
Shan would always push her to take more clients and remind her about the
rent having to be paid. When things slowed down during COVID, Shan was always
stressed about rent, and things getting paid.
[21]         
While she saw Shan every other day in January, she did not see him as
frequently as time went on. He was working with other girls as well. He would
just drop off supplies.
[22]         
As time went on, she began feeling used. He kept pushing for the money. She
had romantic feelings for him. But he was coming around less often. She wanted Shan
to move in. She was lonely. She didn’t have friends in Yorkville or in Richmond
Hill.  She felt pressured to keep working as the rent had to be paid.
[23]         
While working for Shan, she started taking anti-depressants and cocaine.
 Shan was against her using drugs so she would get her drugs from clients or
the other girls. She has not used cocaine since she stopped working with Shan.
[24]         
At some point, S.B. and K.B. had a falling out.  According to S.B., K.B.’s
boyfriend came on to her.  K.B. posted S.B.’s ad on Facebook to get back at her.  
S.B. then posted K.B.’s ad on Facebook.   K.B.’s friends then started posting S.B.’s
ads to other sites.
[25]         
At the end of March, Shan heard from one of the girls that K.B. was thinking
of going to Crimestoppers. Shan was so angry that he took a gun out and said he
was going to kick K.B.’s door down. The gun looked real to S.B. It looked like
it had weight to it.
[26]         
S.B. blocked Shan to prevent him from leaving the condo. Shan told her
if she didn’t move, he would shoot her. Shan pushed her out of the way into a
closet. She found the experience traumatizing. That was the only time he got
physical with her. It was also the only time she saw him with a gun. He had
told her he had been charged with firearm offences in the past, but she never
saw him with a gun before.
[27]         
She stopped working in September and moved into a basement apartment
with a friend. There were other girls staying at the apartment in Richmond Hill
during this period. She returned to work for a short while in December. The
last time she saw Shan was in December when he came to pick up money.
[28]         
After the search warrant, Shan got her to take the Leolist ads down. They
communicated by Wicker. She felt bad that Shan got arrested.
[29]         
In cross-examination, S.B. acknowledged that she had been trying to work
on her own through a website called “Seeking Arrangements” prior to ever
working with Shan.  She never mentioned this to the police.
[30]         
In cross-examination, S.B. acknowledged that she was asked for the texts
and her communications with Shan, but never provided them to police/the Crown.
According to S.B., she didn’t think the court case was going anywhere.
[31]         
K.B. is 24 years old (DOB – [redacted for publication]). In January 2020
she was working as an escort (sex trade) in Richmond Hill at 9471 Yonge St. by
the Hillcrest Mall. She cannot remember the exact unit number.
[32]         
In December, she was living in Brampton with her boyfriend and child. They
moved into S.B.’s godmother’s subsidized apartment. She stayed in S.B.’s godmother’s
apartment from January 2020 - June 2020.  Contrary to S.B.’s suggestion, she
did not move out before that.
[33]         
She met Shan (Batman) online. It was in November/December 2019. He was
pretending to be a Sugar Daddy. He mentioned that he ran a high-end escort
service. She was going through a lot at the time. She had financial issues, and
an abusive boyfriend. So she decided to meet up with him.
[34]         
They met up at Kelsey’s in Brampton. She could tell that Batman dressed
like a pimp. She could not describe his exact clothing, but he would dress like
a pimp (eg. bubble jacket, designer jewelry, hat).
[35]         
They talked for a while.  While they were together, she could see he was
posting ads for other girls on his phone. Batman offered to put her in the
Richmond Hill Condo for work. Batman said he had a guy who could get her a good
credit score and help her get a better place.  K.B. had been living in low-income
housing. Her son was 2 years old at the time. He promised to help her get a
place of her own. She wanted a better place for her family. They hung out for
about an hour and she agreed to do it. She needed money. She knew she would be
offering sexual services.
[36]         
She started working about 2 weeks later. The first time she met J. is
when K.B. and Shan picked her up. Batman and J. took her to the condo.  Batman told
K.B. it was J.’s condo. He helped her get it, but she did not want to live
there anymore. He helped her get a new penthouse.
[37]         
They talked prices, photos. He told her what to do. K.B. gave them her
restrictions. They would post the ads, deal with the clients, and then message
her when someone was there.
[38]         
She started working with them in December. With Shan, she always worked
out of the Richmond Hill condo. She preferred to deal with J. for photos and
ads. She didn’t want Batman to see her naked, or to get into any romance with
him. She saw he was in romances with a number of the girls. She did not want to
be “Romeo-pimped”.
[39]         
Clients would come in. They would put the money on the counter. She
would tell them to freshen up. She would put the money away and get on the bed.
[40]         
K.B. would work 4 or 5 days and took weekends off.   At the end of the
day, they would do the split.  Either J. or Batman would pick up the money. J. would
pick up the smaller amounts. Batman would only come to pick up the larger
amounts. Batman would usually drive her home at the end of the day.
[41]         
She did not do really late shifts. She would stop at midnight. Some of
the girls would work until 5:00 a.m.
[42]         
She did not have keys to the Richmond Hill unit. It was always open or J.
would let her in.
[43]         
K.B. made up the name “Batman”. She initially called him Bossman but did
not want to feel subordinate, so she changed it to Batman. She believed from
her dealings with him that Batman was in charge. She thought J. was a “bottom
girl”. She thought of J. as a friend.
[44]         
Shan made it clear it was his business, not J.’s business. She
remembered one time Batman and J. had a fight. He called her and told her to
hide the money because J. was coming to get it. J. took her to a gas station
and Batman showed up. They were fighting over who she would work for. They were
screaming at each other. K.B. just took an Uber home and left them there.
[45]         
As time went on, she noticed that S.B. and Batman were always together. First
they were just working. But after that, they started hanging out. It was like S.B.,
J. and Batman were in a love triangle. When S.B. and Batman were together, J.
would leave. S.B. even started helping out like J. would do. She was taking
photos of the new girls, and doing the texts.
[46]         
In May of 2020, K.B. was gradually trying to ghost Batman.  K.B. would
act like she was getting out of the business. She wanted to work for herself. She
was afraid of Shan coming after her if she did. She started using the name
Vanessa in a new account to get work on her own. She changed the colour of her
hair to blond so he would not find her and started working on Stewart Street. She
had to rent an Airbnb for 6k a month.
[47]         
She started working for herself after June 8. She left because of all
the drama. The threats, throwing girls out of the car. Shan made promises he
did not keep. She knew he was not going to help her get a place.
[48]         
After she left, Batman would reach out with fake calls trying to locate
her. He came to her Airbnb. She heard a bang, and she took off. She thought he
was going to break the door in.
[49]         
K.B. was shown various texts which have been filed as Exhibits 7, 8, 9
and 10. K.B. confirmed them to be from Batman. According to K.B., these texts
were from Batman’s personal phone. This was not the same phone they would use
to post ads or text clients.
[50]         
In cross-examination, K.B. acknowledged that she only brought up
“Batman” to police after she had been arrested on unrelated charges in Peel in
August of 2020.
[51]         
She also acknowledged that J. did the majority of the texting for her. According
to K.B., Batman would do S.B.’s texting because J. and S.B. did not get along
after the love triangle.
[52]         
She acknowledged in cross-examination that there was no quota set by
Batman and she doesn’t know for sure who posted the ads.
[53]         
According to K.B., Batman was intimidating. J. was more aggressive in
tone but would not make threats. Batman would threaten to tie people up or hurt
them.
[54]         
While she wasn’t being forced to work, in many cases, she chose to stay
longer to prove herself. She believed that working hard for Batman would be the
best way for her to get her condo.
[55]         
Working with Batman, she believes she made around $200,000.
[56]         
On November 26, 2020, police conducted surveillance on Mr. Latif’s home
at 10 Ladner Drive in North York.
[57]         
At 12:14, his vehicle went to gas station, and was observed attending at
a Shoppers. The vehicle then went in front of 9471 Yonge St. A female in the
passenger side of the vehicle gave two other females what looked to be
supplies.
[58]         
At 13:27, Mr. Latif was observed leaving the address in a grey Mercedes,
CCXK 580. The vehicle attended at 9471 Yonge St. A female approached the vehicle
and boarded it. Photos were tendered of the surveillance at Exhibit 1.
[59]         
On December 15, 2020, police executed a warrant at 10 Ladner Drive. Karithar
Khidir was inside the home. Photos taken at address were tendered at Exhibit 3
[60]         
A Warrant was also executed at 9471 Yonge St., Apartment 703. Three
females were located inside the residence.
[61]         
Mr. Latif is 41 years old. He has a brother and a sister. He currently
lives with his parents and brother. He has a record for possession of a firearm
dating back to February 2013. He was sentenced to 2 years jail and spent about
8 months in custody.
[62]         
He has been working for Rogers since April 2011 in customer retention. At
the time of the charges, he was a trainer.
[63]         
He went into custody in December 2016 and was in custody for about 8
months. He was released in July of 2017. When he was released, he was living at
his parents’ home.
[64]         
In 2019, he took a leave of absence. His girlfriend broke up with him in
2019 and he was very depressed. He was dealing with low self-esteem. He went on
Seeking Arrangements to find companionship. He did see a few girls from Leolist
in 2019.
[65]         
He met J. in the summer of 2019. He met her through the website “Seeking
Arrangements”. She would call him her “Splenda Daddy” because he was cheap. She
was living at 9471 Yonge St. in Richmond Hill.
[66]         
When he met J., she was not looking for a relationship. She was looking
for something transactional. He was not interested in that.
[67]         
He met K.B. in November 2019. He also met her on Seeking Arrangements.  She
was living in Brampton. They were messaging each other. She was looking for
something transactional as well. He was looking to travel and for
companionship. Neither K.B. nor J. wanted that. K.B. had a child. J. was not
looking to travel. She didn’t like going out. J. was about 26 and K.B. was
about 21. He was about 37 at the time.
[68]         
When he met K.B., she was looking for a place. He suggested that she
stay at J.’s condo. J. was subletting her place. He connected them on Snapchat.
K.B. moved into J.’s place in Richmond Hill. J. moved to a penthouse near
Fairview Mall.
[69]         
When J. moved, he loaned her $7,000 for her first and last month’s rent.
He was trying to help K.B. with work so she could pay J. and he could get his
money back. She started paying in March. He was paid by May.
[70]         
He denies that he was involved in their business or received money from
it. He just wanted to hang around the girls. He had self-esteem issues. He was
happy to have people see him with pretty girls after the break-up. He did not
get them into escorting. They had been doing it before. He was just their
errand boy, getting supplies, picking up money, dropping them home.
[71]         
According to Shan, he texted on occasion when they asked him to. He did
not set the schedules or tell the girls what to do. He would not make the ads
or take the photographs. He was not otherwise involved in the girls’ work.
[72]         
He left for Dubai in December of 2019 and came back at the end of January
2020 (after about 3 weeks). He got back from Dubai January 16, 2020. He was
sick, and he met S.B. for the first time about 2 weeks after coming back. S.B.
had already been working with K.B. and J. when he came back.
[73]         
When he met her the first time, they had sex. He never paid her. He and S.B.
had become very close and she showed him a lot of affection. He fell for her. He
thought she looked like Meghan Fox.
[74]         
S.B. moved into Shan’s Yorkville condo near the end of January/early
February. He had the Yorkville lease from September 2019 - August 31, 2020. She
would pay for the rent from her earnings.
[75]         
He had leased out the condo at Yorkville. He had initially planned to
live there during the week and live at home on the weekends and rent out the
condo. It was close to a job he was expecting to get downtown, but the job did
not work out as it required a criminal record check.   As he did not require
the apartment, he let S.B. stay there.
[76]         
In Yorkville, S.B. was working a lot. She was working throughout the day
with 2-7 clients a day. He was living with both J. and S.B. over that period.
When S.B. was working, he would stay with J.
[77]         
J. and S.B. had an arrangement as did J. and K.B. He knew it was 50/50. He
would hold S.B.’s money for her. She had a spending problem and she asked him
to hold it for her.
[78]         
When he and S.B. got close, it created some tension with J. S.B. and K.B.
also had a falling out because S.B. slept with her boyfriend. The falling out
with K.B. and S.B. was in March/April 2020. J. ended up working with K.B., and S.B.
was working more on her own, but Shan would help S.B. out.
[79]         
He would help out S.B. with texting. S.B. did not want J. doing it. According
to Shan, he texted on occasion, but it was still usually J. doing the texting. She
did not tell S.B. it was her. Before June 2020, he was rarely texting for S.B. J.
would get him to text for K.B. on occasion. He would text when J. was tired.
[80]         
After the falling out, S.B. asked him to get the phone (the “List”) from
J. While they were together, he wanted S.B. to get out of it. He told her she didn’t
have to work. He was trying to convince her to stop.
[81]         
Ultimately, S.B. went back with her boyfriend in October 2020.
[82]         
In cross-examination, various texts were shown to Mr. Latif (Batman)
which were referenced by K.B. in her evidence. These were texts from “Batman”
to K.B.
[83]         
According to Mr. Latif the texts were from S.B. and not him.  K.B. would
not text S.B. back, so she had to pretend to be him. Later on, he testified
that he could not say with certainty which texts in May were from him, and
which were S.B. as the phone was a shared one.
[84]         
According to Mr. Latif, the Iphone was not his. It had all the clients
on it. He would only use it for a few minutes a week to help with some texts.
[85]         
Mr. Latif testified that the Mercedes and Lamborghini were both in his
mother’s name. Their family intended to open a rental car company but things
did not work out. He would rent the vehicles on occasion for videos, or to
rappers.
[86]         
S.B. and he stayed friends even after his arrest. After his arrest, he
gave her $3k-4k for rent. She asked for more money for her breast job, but he
did not have any more funds. She was mad about that.
[87]         
Mr. Latif denied pointing a gun at S.B. He did push her towards the
closet once when he was trying to leave the apartment. But he never had a gun
when he was with S.B.
[88]         
Mr. Latif also denied going to K.B.’s Airbnb. He also denied threatening
K.B. with “sticks”.
[89]         
In cross-examination, Mr. Latif testified that he did not know who the white
Iphone belonged to, but it did not belong to him.
[90]         
He acknowledged that he bought the La Senza gift cards in his room at the
Ladner address. He would buy them as gifts for the girls.
[91]         
The Crown is seeking findings
of guilt on the following charges:
[92]         
Section 279.01(1) of the Code provides:
[93]         
This offence provision requires proof of two main
elements; the conduct and the purpose; see R. v. A.A., 2015 ONCA 558, at
para. 79 and R. v. Gallone,
2019 ONCA 663, at para. 17; R. v. McEwan, 2022 ONSC 4298 (CanLII).
[94]         
The purpose element requires proof that the defendant’s
conduct was for the purpose of exploiting or facilitating the exploitation of
the person trafficked. As explained in R. v. A.A., it “extends beyond
the intentional conduct that is the actus reus of the offence to what could
be described as the object an accused seeks to attain”: R. v. A.A.,
at para. 82.
[95]         
In order for the offence to be
established, it is not necessary that the defendant’s
conduct actually result in exploitation, see Gallone, at para. 54. It is
sufficient if exploitation or the facilitation of exploitation is the purpose
of the conduct: see R. v. A.A., at para. 85; McEwan,
at para. 91. As
explained in R. v. A.A., at para. 88:
[96]         
In R. v. Sinclair, 2020 ONCA 61, at paras. 10 to 14, the Court
of Appeal helpfully summarized the elements of ss. 279.01 and 279.04 into four
distinct requirements:
[97]         
Section 279.02 criminalizes receiving a financial or
other material benefit knowing that it was obtained
from the commission of an offence under s. 279.01 and/or 279.011. (Count 9). The elements of this offence are:
[98]         
Section 286.2(1) criminalizes procuring the receipt of a financial or
other material benefit knowing that it is obtained by or derived directly or
indirectly from the commission of an offence under subsection 286.1(1) (Count
2) - Obtaining sexual services for consideration.
[99]         
Section 286.4 makes it an offence to knowingly advertise or offer
to provide sexual services for consideration. (Count 3)
[100]      Finally,
the prohibited act of the procuring offence in Count
4 (section 286.3(1)) can be committed in two ways:
[101]     
Dealing with the first mode,
“procure” means “to cause, or to induce, or to have a persuasive effect upon
the conduct that is alleged”: see Gallone, at
para. 61.
[102]     
The second mode of
committing the actus reus of procuring shares language with
the human trafficking offence in s. 279.01(1): see Gallone,
at para. 62.
[103]     
The mens rea for the offence requires
that the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused intended
to procure a person to offer or provide sexual services for consideration. Alternatively,
the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused intended to do
any one of the enumerated acts in relation to a person who offers or provides
sexual services for consideration, and the accused
acted with the purpose of facilitating an offence under s. 286.1(1).
[104]      The defence submits that Mr. Latif should be
acquitted on all charges. The defence maintains that Mr. Latif’s account was
credible and should be accepted. Mr. Latif was nothing
more than an errand boy for J. and S.B., getting supplies, picking up money and
dropping them home. He wanted to be around the girls for their company. Mr.
Latif did not set the schedules or tell the girls what to do. He would not make
the ads or take the photographs. He was not otherwise involved in the girls’
work. He only texted on occasion when they asked him to do that. He did not
assist them for money.
[105]      The defence submits that J. was the main
player in the operation. K.B. and S.B. both
acknowledged that J. was actively involved in the listing, texting, and
collection of money. To the extent that they have
implicated Mr. Latif in their activities, the defence submits that their
evidence should be disbelieved.
[106]      Even if Mr. Latif’s evidence is not accepted, the defence submits
that the Crown has not proven the offences beyond a reasonable doubt.
[107]      The defence takes the position that the evidence of K.B. and S.B. is
both internally and externally inconsistent.
[108]      With respect to S.B., the defence submits that her evidence regarding
Mr. Latif was not credible for a number of reasons, including:
[109]      Similarly, the defence submits that K.B.’s evidence regarding Mr. Latif
should not be believed for various reasons including:
[110]      The
defence submits that any assistance Mr. Latif may have provided was not
directed at obtaining compensation/material benefit. Even if Mr. Latif is found
to have assisted S.B. and K.B. in the sale of sexual services to obtain
consideration, the defence submits Mr. Latif’s purpose would not be exploitive.
[111]      Both
S.B. and K.B. were involved in the sex trade prior to meeting Mr. Latif and
were involved in the sex trade voluntarily. Accordingly, even if the
facilitation offences have been made out, the human trafficking offences have
not been established.
[112]      I have considered the concerns raised by the defence with the
evidence of S.B. and K.B., including the inconsistencies alleged above. I have also considered the possible motives to lie
which have been advanced by the defence.
[113]      Despite the suggested weaknesses in their evidence, I am satisfied
that the accounts provided by both S.B. and K.B. were truthful.  Their testimony
regarding Mr. Latif’s conduct was credible, and clearly supported by the text
messages sent by Mr. Latif himself, the surveillance and the seizures.
[114]      
While there may have been issues regarding the
chronology of the events, and some of the minor details, this is understandable
given the passage of time. For example, I accept that S.B. was probably
incorrect as to when she first met Mr. Latif. I also accept that K.B. may have
been confused at times when being asked about the context of certain texts.
[115]      
That said, I do not view the alleged inconsistencies
in each of their accounts as being significant when considering their evidence as
a whole, nor are the alleged inconsistencies material to the issues that I must
decide.
[116]      
To “recruit” someone is
defined in the Oxford Dictionary as “persuading or helping someone to
do something”: See R. v. Lucas-Johnson, [2018]
ONSC 3953, at para. 225.
[117]      
In R. v.
Gallone, 2019 ONCA 663, 147 O.R. (3d) 225, at para. 47,
the Ontario Court of Appeal explained the meaning of “exercising influence” in
the following way:
[118]      I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Latif persuaded both K.B. and S.B. to work with him and provide sexual
services for money (recruitment), and also that he
clearly exercised influence over the manner in which both K.B. and S.B.
provided those services (exercised influence).
[119]      I accept that S.B. likely dealt with J./K.B.
at the outset for a couple of weeks prior to Mr.
Latif’s return. However, I accept S.B.’s account that when Mr. Latif became
involved, he presented himself as the person in charge.
[120]      I accept the evidence of both K.B. and S.B.
in terms of the working relationship each of them had with Mr. Latif. I find
that Mr. Latif was a principal in the operation involving S.B. and K.B. I
reject Mr. Latif’s explanation that he was merely an errand boy and exercised
no direction or influence over the complainants.
[121]      I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Latif would
routinely assist with the posting of ads, text clients and arrange for the services to be provided for both girls. He would also arrange and
pay the rent for condos (Richmond Hill/Yorkville), locations from which they
would provide the sexual services to clients. He would also receive a share of
the funds when their work was complete (50%).
[122]      J.
dealt primarily with K.B. and Mr. Latif dealt primarily with S.B. once the girls
had a falling out. However, Mr. Latif and J. still clearly continued to work
together. And Mr. Latif clearly continued to work with K.B. The texts messages by
Mr. Latif that were tendered at trial make this clear.
[123]      In
texts from February 26, 2020, “Batman”/Mr. Latif discusses money and the work
arrangements with K.B. moving forward tendered as Exhibit 7(c):
[124]      Similarly,
texts from March 3, 2020 discuss splitting the funds (Exhibit 7(f)):
[125]      Various
phone messages taken between “Batman” and K.B. on April 4, 2020 - Exhibit 8(a)
show Mr. Latif taking an active role in relation to both K.B. and S.B.:
[126]      Similarly,
phone messages taken from K.B.’s phone (Exhibit 9(c)) from May 24, 2020:
[127]      I
accept K.B.’s evidence that it was Mr. Latif sending the texts.  In context, it
is clear that Mr. Latif (“Batman”) was the person sending the texts. I reject
Mr. Latif’s claim that it was S.B. sending the texts pretending to be him.
[128]      I am also satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt that the conduct at issue was for the purpose of exploitation. As set out in s. 279.04, a person exploits another if they
cause that other person to provide labour by doing something that, in all the
circumstances, could reasonably be expected to cause the other person to
believe that their safety or the safety of a person known to them would be
threatened if they failed to provide the labour: s. 279.04 (1): see R. v.
A.A., para. 71.
[129]      The factors that may be relevant in assessing whether the accused’s conduct
could reasonably be expected to cause a complainant to
fear for her safety are set out in R. v. Sinclair, 2020 ONCA 61, at
para. 15 as follows:
[130]      As noted above, Mr. Latif clearly encouraged/influenced
(caused) S.B. and K.B. to provide the services.   Having regard to all the
circumstances, Mr. Latif also clearly engaged in conduct that could reasonably
be expected to cause both S.B. and K.B. to believe that their safety would be
threatened if they failed to provide the services.
[131]      K.B.
and S.B. were both much younger than Mr. Latif. While Mr. Latif did not make
direct threats to either of the girls during the working relationship, the
evidence demonstrates that he exercised a measure of psychological control over
both girls.  He managed the ads, texting and clients together with J. He
provided and controlled their place of work.  In the case of S.B., he even
controlled her living accommodations.  By his directive behaviour, Mr. Latif
let them know he was in control and that they were expected to work.
[132]      Given
their age, their financial circumstances and his control of their client base
and accommodations, both girls were placed in a position of significant vulnerability:
See R. v. Sinclair, 2020 ONCA 61
(CanLII), at para. 31; R. v. Crosdale, 2018 ONCJ 800.
[133]      Various
phone messages taken from K.B.’s phone from April 30 (Exhibit 8(j)) and June 8
(Exhibit 10 – produced below) also reflect the nature of the control exercised
by Mr. Latif over the operation:
[134]     
In making the assessment of
the evidence, I have not lost sight of the fact that the burden always remains
on the Crown to prove the allegations beyond a reasonable doubt.
[135]     
Where there is defence
evidence, including testimony from the accused as in this case, the court
must not assume that its verdict can be based on a choice between the
Crown’s evidence and the accused’s evidence. I must apply the rules set
out in R. v. W.D., [1991] SCR 742, as follows:
[136]     
I reject the evidence of
the accused. Nor am I left in doubt by it.
[137]     
On the basis of the evidence I accept, I am
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the offence of
human trafficking has been made out in relation to both S.B. and K.B. (Count 1
and Count 8). Given my findings above, I am also
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Latif received a financial or
other material benefit knowing it was from the provision of the services (Count
2 and Count 9). I am also satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the offences
listed in Count 3 (advertise sexual services) and Count 4 (procuring sexual
services) have been made out.
[138]     
Accordingly, I find the accused guilty of the
offences listed in counts 1, 2, 3, 4, 8 and 9 of the Indictment.
[139]     
I will hear submissions from counsel on the
issue of Count 4, and whether it should be stayed pursuant to R. v. Kienapple, 1974 CanLII 14 (SCC), [1975] 1 SCR 729.
[140]     
Mr.
Latif is charged with
pointing a firearm. For the offence to be made out, the Crown counsel must
prove each of these
essential elements beyond a reasonable doubt:
[141]     
A firearm is a weapon with a barrel that can
fire a shot, bullet or other projectile and can cause serious bodily injury or
death to another person.
[142]     
To point a firearm means to direct or aim it,
intentionally, not accidentally, absent-mindedly, or simply by chance. Pointing
involves a choice, an intentional act of directing the weapon towards a person
or object as a target. The firearm does not have to be loaded.
[143]     
In the circumstances here, I am not satisfied
that the offence has been made out. While I accept that an item resembling a
firearm may have been pointed at S.B., I am not satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt that the item was an actual or operating firearm.
[144]     
Accordingly, I find Mr. Latif not guilty of the
charge in Count 10.
[145]     
To make out the offence, Crown counsel must
prove:
[146]     
To decide whether the words used amount to a
threat, they must be considered from the perspective of a reasonable person. A
reasonable person is someone who is objective, fully informed of the
circumstances, right-minded, dispassionate, practical and realistic.
[147]     
Words spoken in jest were not
meant to be caught by the section. R. v. Clemente, 1994 CanLII 49 (SCC), [1994] 2 SCR
758.
[148]     
Would a reasonable person, fully aware of the
circumstances in which the words were uttered or conveyed, have perceived them
as a threat of death (or bodily harm) having regard to:
[149]      Cell
phone screen shots taken from K.B.’s phone from WhatsApp were tendered by the
Crown allegedly sent by Batman on June 8, 2020 (Exhibit 10) and form the basis
for the Crown’s allegation:
[150]     
In the circumstances here, I
am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt of each of the requisite elements:
[151]     
A person, fully aware of the circumstances in
which the words were uttered or conveyed, would have perceived them as a threat
of death (or bodily harm).
[152]     
Accordingly, I also find Mr. Latif guilty on
Count 5.