[1]              
Before me are two competing parenting motions
set as a special appointment proceeding.  The parties lived together from 2017
to 2019.  They did not marry.  This is the fourth motion of this nature.  The
other three were:
[2]              
The matter comes back to me today as Justice
Howard wisely determined that a review approximately three months after the
release of reasons (August 12, 2024) would be appropriate.
[3]              
I have the benefit of Justice Howard’s detailed endorsement,
which captures the history of the difficulties between the parties and the
impact of the applicant father’s alcohol abuse disorder on his ability to have
contact with the child.  I told counsel that I accepted Justice Howard’s
findings of fact and his credibility observations as well as his historical
review of the parenting issues.
[4]              
Adelle Elizabeth Ferguson, born June 27, 2018 is
now six and in grade one at Sacred Heart Catholic School in Sarnia.  All the
material before me indicates Adelle loves both parents and that they are a
positive force in her life.
[5]              
I also have the benefit of a 52 page s. 30
report, completed at the request of the applicant by Dr. Dilys Haner.  The report
is dated November 24, 2023.
[6]              
The order granted by Justice Howard in his
August 2024 endorsement is very detailed.  Some portions of the order came on consent,
others were the product of argument.
[7]              
Justice Howard created an environment which
allowed the applicant contact with Adelle while setting up a testing regime
which ensured Adelle’s safety and encouraged the applicant to achieve and
maintain sobriety.
[8]              
The applicant’s regular testing for alcohol has
confirmed his abstinence and so it is time now, on this review, to expand his
parenting time.  The parties agree that this is so but are at odds with many of
the details, including the extent of any proposed expansion.
[9]              
It is in Adelle’s best interests to expand
contact with her father but her safety and ensuring that the contact is
positive must be the Court’s overriding concern.
[10]          
Counsel have provided me with detailed facta
which draw upon the affidavits filed in support and the relevant legislation
and caselaw.  In this endorsement, I will confine myself to the issues
identified and argued before me.
[11]          
The parenting time of the applicant has required
supervision as a result of both the orders of Cook J. and Howard J.  It is
common ground that the applicant’s parents have supervised and transported
Adelle when it was the applicant’s responsibility.  While the respondent agrees
to parenting time expansion, including alternate weekend overnights, she argues
that supervision must remain in place until a hair follicle test result is
produced that is negative for alcohol and marijuana within 90 days.
[12]          
That argument is premised on the applicant’s
admitted recreational use of marijuana and Dr. Haner’s concern that the
applicant may substitute a dependency on marijuana now that alcohol is “off
limits”.
[13]          
The applicant argues that there is no evidence
of abuse of marijuana and no evidence that it has ever, or will ever, impact
his ability to care for Adelle.  It is suggested that this is a demand
inappropriately grounded in a hypothetical.  I agree with the applicant on this
issue.  Paragraph 12 of Justice Howard’s order will remain in place that
demands a total prohibition for alcohol consumption while prohibiting marijuana
use 24 hours before parenting time with Adelle, or any time during his contact
with the child.
[14]          
I find that while the applicant’s parents will
no doubt be a continuing source of assistance for the applicant, supervision by
them or anyone is unnecessary at this time and the continued presence of
supervision would detract from the applicant’s parenting experience both for
himself and Adelle.
[15]          
The applicant seeks to expand his Tuesday night
contact so that Adelle would remain in his care as follows:
[16]          
The respondent believes this expansion is
premature and that both regular Tuesday and Thursday parenting time should remain
as directed by Howard J. as follows:
[17]          
The applicant’s position is that the Tuesday and
Thursday access as presently created does not allow him any meaningful time
with his daughter after he comes home from work and it would be beneficial for
Adelle that the exchange on at least one of the mid-week visits take place in
the morning (Elaziz v. Wahba, 2017 ONCA 58, para. 3).
[18]          
The respondent’s position is that this is too
soon for such an increase in contact and that there is no plan for Adelle’s
transportation to school if Wednesday is a school day.
[19]          
I agree with the applicant’s position.  This
expansion makes contact more meaningful and allows Adelle to sleep over one
night during the week without an exchange at bedtime on both Tuesday and
Thursday.  The applicant’s parents have done much of the transportation and can
do so again for the Wednesday drop off.
[20]          
The applicant suggests that alternate weekend
parenting time be the following:
[21]          
The respondent’s position is set out below:
[22]          
The respondent argues that at no previous time,
even before the applicant’s alcohol issues surfaced, did he have overnight
weekend access until Monday morning.
[23]          
Here, I agree with the respondent. With the
increase in time I have directed on Tuesday/Wednesday of each week, it is in
Adelle’s best interest, at this time, to return to the respondent’s residence
on Sunday at 6:30 p.m. unless PA/PD days or holidays are in play as suggested
by the respondent.
[24]          
The applicant is off work on one Friday out of
every month.  Paragraph 2(c) of Justice Howard’s order allows for Happy Friday
parenting time for the applicant as follows:
[25]          
The respondent requests that the Happy Friday contact
always be followed by the applicant’s weekend parenting time.  She is concerned
that having Adelle returned to her on Friday at 6:30 p.m. cuts into the
respondent’s weekend with her daughter.
[26]          
The applicant wishes to have Happy Fridays on
the present schedule as the respondent’s plan means that there would be two
consecutive weekends where he will not have Saturday/Sunday contact.
[27]          
I agree with the applicant.  The Happy Fridays
will remain on the present schedule.  It allows for regular meaningful weekends
for both parties and for Adelle.  It minimally impacts the respondent’s time
with her daughter on those occasions when the Friday coincides with her weekend
and I believe creates a schedule that is consistent and easy to follow.
[28]          
Justice Howard directed that the parties come to
this review with a plan for Christmas to alleviate a further late motion.  The
parties have expended some effort in trying to agree on a plan for parenting
over the upcoming Christmas season.  Unfortunately, any extended parenting time
for the applicant could not be the product of those attempts.  The respondent
is concerned about “too much too fast” and wants to maintain the regular
schedule but for allowances for the time right around Christmas day.
[29]          
The applicant requests shared Christmas holiday
time with extended periods of contact with Adelle.
[30]          
With the Christmas season approximately six
weeks away, I agree with the respondent that a 50/50 sharing of time is
inappropriate at this time.  I do, however, see the merit in some extension of
the applicant’s contact, and I have decided upon a hybrid version of their
requests as being in the best interests of Adelle.
[31]          
Therefore, the Christmas 2024 parenting time for
the applicant will be the following:
[32]          
In addition, the materials suggested versions of
parenting time throughout future holiday and summer periods.  The order of
Justice Howard at paras. 3, 4 and 5 makes provision for future extended holiday
and vacations times.  I advised counsel that I was not prepared to entertain a
review of those paragraphs as I believe that exercise to be premature.
[33]          
The order of Justice Howard considered alcohol
testing for the Applicant at paras. 7 to 11 of the order as well as para. 20. 
Those paragraphs directed that the applicant utilize an app-based remote
alcohol monitoring service to test for alcohol at defined times and transmit
the results with photographic proof to the respondent.  Paragraph 20 required
the use of a breathalyzer key to start his vehicle if he was to transport
Adelle.  The order demands that the test results at all times register 0.00
blood alcohol content.
[34]          
To his credit, the applicant has submitted over
1800 BAC test results since December, 2023 as well as an Alcohol Hair Follicle
test that was negative for alcohol for 90 days prior to August 19, 2024.
[35]          
The parties have agreed that continuing to
demand tests at specific times becomes significantly difficult for the reasons
set out in their material.  Instead, they have agreed that the testing during the
day be submitted at intervals of no more than four hours.  Again, I have taken
the suggestions of both parties and created what I find to be a workable regime
of testing that I believe will create a safe environment.  Importantly, in
defining the start and stop time for testing, it is important to note that the
test result must be 0.00 BAC.  Therefore, small adjustments in time provide no
greater protection.
[36]          
My resolution of this issue at this time is as
follows:
[37]          
If the applicant, William Andrew James Ferguson,
generates a test result through the app-based remote alcohol monitoring service
that is positive for alcohol, meaning the result is more than 0.00% BAC, the
parenting schedule set out herein shall be suspended and the parenting
arrangements shall automatically revert to the parenting arrangements outlined
in paras. 2, 18 and 19 of the order of Justice Howard dated August 12, 2024 for
a minimum of 90 days.  If the applicant is then able to provide test results
through the app-based remote alcohol monitoring service, in accordance with the
schedule outlined herein, which are negative for alcohol, meaning that the
result is 0.00% BAC, for 90 days following the reduction in parenting time, the
parenting time provided for herein will resume.
[38]          
A test received by the respondent more than six
hours late shall be considered a missed test and as well considered positive
for alcohol and thereby a failed test.
[39]          
The respondent takes the position that the applicant
should now personally transport the child to and from all parenting time.  It
is the respondent’s position that this will indicate a show of commitment and
responsibility by the applicant.
[40]          
I do not understand the respondent’s argument
and I see no reason for requiring the applicant to effect all the
transportation.  The responsibility for transportation will remain as set out
in para. 6 of Justice Howard’s order.
[41]          
The parties will arrange with the trial
co-ordinator a settlement conference at least 90 days from the release of these
reasons.   A further review of the parenting time directed herein will be
undertaken at the settlement conference.
[42]          
Paragraph 2 of Justice Howard’s order of August
12, 2024 will be deleted and replaced by the following, which is effective
immediately upon receipt of these reasons:
[43]          
Paragraphs 7 and 11 of Howard J.’s order of
August 12, 2024 will be deleted and replaced by the following:
[44]          
Additionally, my order will include the
following:
[45]          
The balance of the terms in the order of Howard
J. dated August 12, 2024 remain in full force and effect.
[46]          
As was the situation when these issues were
litigated before Justice Howard, costs are in my discretion and since success
in my view is mixed, there will be no order as to costs.