[1]              
The
parties separated in 2010, when their son was 10 years old. From a young age, G.P.
was reported to be seriously delayed in his development and displayed
characteristics of autism. Throughout school, he had an individual education
plan and supports in place. G.P. is now 23, diagnosed with Autism Spectrum
Disorder, Bipolar Disorder, Persistent Depressive Disorder (moderate in
severity), Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, and Anxiety. Doctors have described
him as not being self sufficient or able to be independent. He requires some supervision
and help from his mother, and will need ongoing support, guidance, and
assistance for his daily needs.
[2]              
The
Applicant filed a motion to change the Final Order of Hood, J. dated September
29, 2017, seeking to increase table child support in accordance with the
Respondent’s increase in income since 2018, and retroactive arrears for
underpayments of table child support.
[3]              
The
Respondent opposed the Applicant’s motion and sought to terminate child support
and section 7 expenses. The Respondent was self-represented during the trial.
He retained counsel to assist with submissions at which time he conceded and
agreed G.P. remained a “child of the marriage” entitled to child support. Thereafter,
the Respondent requested an Order to i) reduce his child support obligations,
ii) find he has overpaid child support retroactive to January 1, 2019; iii)
recover the overpayments of child support from the Applicant, and iv) costs.
[4]              
The
issues to be determined are:
[5]              
The
parties were married for over 19 years and separated in 2010. G.P.’s primary
residence, after separation, has always been with the Applicant. The Applicant
is currently 59 years old, and the Respondent is 63 years old.
[6]              
The parties,
on consent, resolved corollary relief pursuant to a Final Order which addressed
child support, section 7 expenses, annual disclosure, and benefits for G.P. The
order requires the Respondent to pay table child support. In 2017, the
Respondent’s annual income was $77,297, and table child support was $703 per
month.
[7]              
The
Respondent is also required to make monthly contributions of $232 towards G.P.’s
section 7 expenses. The Applicant is permitted to allocate these funds towards
any special or extraordinary expenses for G.P. The Applicant must provide
receipts by December 31 of each year. The Final Order was clear this amount did
not include post-secondary expenses, medical, dental, and extended health
expenses not covered by any benefit plans in place for G.P. or any amounts not
covered by extended benefit plans.
[8]              
The
Order is specific that both parties are equally responsible for any costs of post-secondary
education expenses, medical, dental, and extended health expenses not covered
by benefit plans for G.P. The Applicant is required to provide receipts for all
these expenses to the Respondent.
[9]              
The
parties are required to exchange copies of their income tax returns, notices of
assessment/reassessment or other disclosure as requested for the previous year
by June 1.
[10]          
It
is not disputed the Respondent has paid monthly child support of $703 and
section 7 expenses of $232 since 2017, and the parties exchanged annual
financial disclosure.
[11]          
The
Order included the following term regarding subsidies at paragraph 16:
[12]          
The
Order set out that child support would terminate if the following occurred:
[13]          
The Applicant
loves G.P. very much and has been a strong advocate for him throughout his
life. She is aware and has explored available supports and subsidies for G.P.
over the years and provided him with security and stability before and after
the breakdown of the parties’ marriage. The discord between the parties remains
and was evident in this trial. Allegations of abuse, family violence, and
police involvement, continued as part of the narrative in these proceedings, as
the parties explained the path to where they are today.
[14]          
The
Respondent and his family have not had contact with G.P. since 2016. A series
of chance meetings and interactions with G.P. that summer resulted in the
police being contacted and extended family accused of stalking and/or harassing
G.P. Although no charges were laid, family members opted to not interact with G.P.,
or the Applicant based on advice from police. Two of the Respondent’s brothers
and one sister testified regarding their brief exchanges with G.P. and his
expressions of happiness upon seeing them. The exchanges were either described differently
by G.P. to the Applicant or mischaracterized or misunderstood by her, which led
to relations with G.P.’s paternal side of the family being non-existent for the
past 8 years.
[15]          
The
Applicant submits the Respondent and his family want nothing to do with G.P.
They are embarrassed by his disabilities and size. The Respondent disagreed
with this suggestion and argued the Applicant has created walls and obstacles
that included police involvement, which made things too difficult and risked
his and his siblings’ livelihoods and employment. Because of the Applicant’s
actions, he does not engage or send gifts or acknowledge birthdays or holidays
for fear of it being misconstrued.
[16]          
G.P.
did not graduate high school in June 2019, as he failed English and math. He
enrolled in an adult high school that September where he completed the two
courses and received his diploma. On advice of a guidance counsellor, G.P.
registered in a constructions trade program at a local college that began in
January 2020. This was a one-year program. G.P. struggled with portions of the
course but ultimately finished and received a certificate in December 2021.
After this program, he started an 8-month program at Humber College in
millwrighting. However, due to low marks and difficulties completing
assignments it was recommended he try something else. G.P. did try a welding
program offered at George Brown College, where G.P. once again struggled with
maintaining the required marks.
[17]          
 The
Applicant has encouraged and enrolled G.P. in the above post-secondary courses.
She has pushed G.P. in his education as she is concerned for his future. She
stated she requires financial support from the Respondent so G.P. can complete
his college. She provided receipts for initial deposits required for G.P. to
enroll and accept offers of admission to the above programs. She did not,
however, advise the Respondent that G.P. was in receipt of OSAP grants to assist
with his tuition, books, and supplies prior to the commencement of these
proceedings. Between 2021 to 2023, G.P. received a total of $24,799 in funding,
all but approximately $2,000 were grants. No evidence was adduced regarding the
exact amount or terms of repayment of this loan.
[18]          
G.P.’s
most recent attempt at education is the Transitions to Post-Secondary Education
program offered at George Brown College. It is a full-time Ontario College
Certificate, that takes one academic year at a minimum to complete. It consists
of three semesters and is funded by the Ontario Ministry of Health and
Long-Term Care and the Ministry of Training, Colleges, and Universities.
Students enrolled in this program are not eligible to receive OSAP, and the
program does not fund computers or transportation. G.P. began the program on
January 8, 2024.
[19]          
The
Applicant testified that G.P. has difficulties following instructions and
staying focused. This has affected his schooling and his part-time employment
at a local grocery store. The Applicant testified G.P.’s employment is through
a disability program. Due to G.P.’s inability to focus, the store has recently
been cancelling his scheduled shifts by calling G.P. to advise he is not
required.
[20]          
G.P.
has struggled with his mental health and well-being resulting in several trips
to the hospital in recent years due to attempts at self-harm and suicidal
ideologies, especially when overwhelmed. He has begun to exhibit more
aggressive behaviour, including causing damage within the apartment complex,
and to himself.
[21]          
The
Applicant testified that the parties have exchanged financial documents each
year. The Respondent’s income has increased over the years. The Applicant has
requested the Respondent increase monthly child support to accord with the Federal
Child Support Guidelines for his income and one child. The Respondent has
not increased monthly child support in accordance with the Guidelines
and his annual income but continued to pay the amount set out in the Final
Order.
[22]          
The
Applicant consulted a worker at the ODSP and confirmed receipt of child support
would not interfere or affect G.P.’s eligibility. The Applicant provided a
break down regarding the child support arrears she believes are owed to G.P.
from January 1, 2018, to the present.
[23]          
With
the assistance of the Applicant, G.P. began receiving ODSP on his 18th
birthday. He was approved for Passport funding commencing April 1, 2019. The
Applicant did not inform or advise the Respondent that G.P. began receiving
ODSP effective 2018 when he turned 18 years of age. Nor did she tell the
Respondent that G.P. was in receipt of Passport funds, a similar subsidy
previously received when G.P. was under 18, but for individuals over the age of
majority. The Respondent was only provided with this information after the
Applicant was ordered to do so by Kraft, J. on October 17, 2023.
[24]          
ODSP
income support is depended on basic needs and a shelter allowance. The basic
needs portion is to assist with the cost of food, clothing, and other personal
items. The shelter allowance is to assist with rent, heat, utilities, and
insurance. G.P. receives the full ODSP benefit rate as opposed to the “board
and lodge” rate which is less.
[25]          
The
Passport program is to assist adults with developmental disabilities
participate in their communities and live as independently as possible. It also
provides caregivers a break from their caregiving responsibilities. The program
provides reimbursement of eligible expenses up to a maximum of $5,000 per
annum. Eligible expenses include community participation supports and
activities of daily living such as programs, classes, and supports that
encourage and develop independence, communication, and life skills. It also
includes gym memberships, fees, and admissions to activities, transportation
costs to these activities, and hiring a support worker to assist with daily
living activities and/or to provide respite for caregivers.
[26]          
The
Respondent provided evidence the Passport program will cover funding up to
$3000 for laptops, tablets, cell phone and cell phone plans, internet fees,
amongst other training and skills classes as part of the $5,000. The Applicant
testified she was unaware that it covered phones and a computer, however, she
used the funding for respite. She hired support workers to care for G.P. to
provide herself with time to rest. This is an eligible or admissible expense.
[27]          
Despite
G.P. receiving monthly benefits from the ODSP, the Applicant maintains table
child support is critical to enable her to provide the necessities of life for G.P.,
his education, clothing, food, and living amenities. She testified she cannot
meet these expenses on her small income and acknowledged she buys or gives G.P.
whatever he wants without restraint. When asked whether she has put together a
budget for G.P. she said no, they just live as they go and if there is
something G.P. needs, she will buy it.
[28]          
Having
been diagnosed with bipolar disorder, some of the various medications have
caused G.P. to gain a significant amount of weight. The Applicant has consulted
dieticians and taken different steps to assist G.P. in controlling his weight. The
Applicant explained G.P.’s needs are greater due to his physical size. She
described G.P. as 6’4 and almost 400 pounds. He wears a size 16 shoe and 3X
clothing. The cost for G.P.’s clothing is more than double the cost for regular
size shirts and pants. The Applicant is required to shop at speciality stores
or online and tries to find clothing that is age and style appropriate for G.P.
His size requires some clothing to be custom made and shipped to their home.
[29]          
The
Applicant had worked at the Globe and Mail for approximately thirty years. Her
job was downsized, and she received a severance package. She relied on these
funds to provide for her and G.P. The Applicant has since found other
employment that permits her to work from home. It allows her to be present to
supervise or assist G.P. when needed. However, there is very little respite for
the Applicant, and she is exhausted and worn down. She testified that she is getting
older and has health issues of her own. It has been difficult for her
maintaining full time employment and caring for G.P. on her own.
[30]          
The
Applicant acknowledged her failure to provide annual receipts and proof of
payment for section 7 expenses including health and dental benefits, school
uniforms, and tuition.  She has maintained G.P. on her health and dental
benefits and told the court, he receives coverage for all dental, health, and
prescriptions through ODSP.
[31]          
Medical
evidence was called to establish G.P.’s diagnosis and prognosis. The doctors
were clear that while G.P. can function on his own and complete some tasks
unassisted, he still requires assistance and supervision. Examples of tasks G.P.
can do on his own included walking his dogs, being in public by himself,
ordering items from UberEATS, taking public transportation, attending school
and employment. Dr. Maragh testified G.P. requires organizational supports to
assist him with financial and personal care, and daily living. He can manage
the basic tasks of daily living but requires assistance with the more complex
tasks such as self-care.
[32]          
The
Respondent called evidence from family members to explain the discord and backdrop
of why he does not have an active role in G.P.’s life. He also presented
evidence regarding G.P.’s income from ODSP, Passport funding, OSAP, and
employment. Between 2019 to 2023, G.P. received income of $95,596.77 over the
five years.
[33]          
The
Respondent testified he has paid $56,100 from January 1, 2019 to December 31,
2023, in monthly child support of $703 and $232 for monthly section 7 expenses.
Although the Applicant is required to provide him with receipts every year, she
has failed to do so.
[34]          
The
Respondent identified that many of the items the Applicant provided him with
receipts for section 7 expenses are all items that are eligible for coverage
through Passport funding. The Respondent testified regarding his belief of
overpayments of child support and section 7 expenses and monies owed to him by
the Applicant. He expressed concerns of the Applicant mismanaging monies that
would be better spent on programming and skills training for G.P.
[35]          
Section
17(1) of the Divorce Act provides courts with the power to change the
terms of an order, either prospectively or retroactively; and can also suspend
or discharge the order, either in whole or in part, and on a prospective or
retroactive basis.
[36]          
The
parties agree there has been a material change of circumstances since the final
order of Hood, J. was made in 2017 but for different reasons.
[37]          
The
Applicant’s position is the Respondent’s income has increased by approximately
$40,000, however, there has never been a change to table child support or
section 7 expenses.
[38]          
The
Respondent’s position is G.P. is an adult and receives ODSP, Passport funding,
income from part-time employment, and received OSAP when attending school.
[39]          
   I
find that there has been a material change in circumstances as claimed by both
parties that warrants a variation of the final order regarding child support.
[40]          
Pursuant
to section 15.1 of the Divorce Act, entitlement to child support is
dependent on a child being a "child of the marriage". The definition
of "child of the marriage" is set out in section 2 of the Divorce
Act, which is as follows:
[41]          
This
was a key issue when the trial started as G.P. is over the age of majority.
After the evidence had been heard, the matter was adjourned for written and
oral submissions. The Respondent conceded “that the medical evidence presented
at trial establishes that G.P. remains “a child of the marriage” under the Divorce
Act”.
[42]          
As
both parties agree G.P. remains a child of the marriage, and is unable to
withdraw from parental charge, I do not have to determine this issue, but based
on the medical evidence and the testimony of two of G.P.’s doctors I would have
come to the same conclusion.
[43]          
Section
3(2) of the Federal Child Support Guideline provides for the following:
[44]          
The
parties agree G.P. is unable to withdraw from parental charge, and therefore I
must determine pursuant to s. 3(2) of the Guidelines how child support
should be calculated. Table child support will be ordered for a child
over the age of majority unless a court considers it “inappropriate”, in which
case the quantum of support shall be determined pursuant to s. 3(2)(b).
[45]          
The
party seeking to set aside the presumptive table amount as recommended by the Guidelines,
bears the burden of rebutting the presumption that the table amount is
inappropriate. See Francis v. Baker, 1999 CanLII 659 (SCC), [1999] 3 S.C.R. 250. If the
presumption in s.3(2)(a) is rebutted, child support can be set above or below
the table amount.
[46]          
The
Applicant argued child support should be calculated pursuant to s.3(2)(a) and
the Respondent required to pay full table child support commensurate with his
income effective January 1, 2018, including further contributions towards
section 7 expenses.
[47]          
The
Respondent argued table child support is inappropriate in the circumstances and
the court should determine child support based on G.P.’s condition, means,
needs, and other circumstances pursuant to s.3(2)(b). He relies on evidence
that demonstrates G.P. receives ODSP, employment income, and Passport funding.
Based on the government benefits, his child support contributions should be
reduced if not terminated.
[48]          
I
must now determine whether table child support as set out in the Guidelines
is appropriate and if not, how it should be calculated.
[49]          
The Ontario
Disability Support Program Act, 1997, S.O. 1997, c. 25, Sched. B. enshrines
the objective of creating a shared responsibility between government and
families in meeting the needs of adults with disabilities. The receipt of ODSP
benefits does not in and of itself lead to disentitlement to child support: see
Senos v. Karcz, 2014 ONCA 459, 120 O.R. (3d)
321; Chittle v. Chittle, 2019 ONSC 1433, [2019] O.J. No. 1382; Morden
v. Kelly, 2019 ONSC 4620.
[50]          
The
issue of whether the receipt of income support under the ODSP by an adult child
makes the presumptive “table” approach to child support inappropriate was
determined in Senos v. Karcz. Strathy, J.A., delivered the judgment of
the court, where they confirmed the purpose and intent of the ODSPA is
to provide income support, health benefits, and employment supports to people
with disabilities in financial need, and for society to share the
responsibility of caring for adults with disabilities (paragraphs 41 – 42). I
have emphasized the word “share” to be interpreted for its true meaning. The
financial responsibility for the costs for caring for disabled adult children
has not shifted solely to the state, but rather is to be shared with both
parents of the child. Courts have held there needs to be an equitable
balancing of financial responsibility.
[51]          
The
Applicant relied upon several articles and commentaries regarding child support
for a disabled adult. A “child” forever? Child Support for the Disabled
Adult discussed the decision in Coates v Watson, that struck down
the predecessor section 31 of the Family Law Act finding it violated
section 15 of the Charter. This led to Bill 177 which amended the
wording of section 31 to include the right to child support for adult children
with disabilities. For the issues in this case, this article does not assist as
the Divorce Act is the applicable legislation.
[52]          
The
article by Nicholas Bala and Brittany Chaput, written in 2015 before Bill 177, compared
the provisions of the Divorce Act and the Family Law Act and
identified the differences between the legislation and cases interpreting the
competing sections at that time. It discussed child support where an adult
child has a disability, and the obligation to continue support, and
acknowledged that social assistance and disability pensions will be considered
in setting the amount of this obligation. [Emphasis added.]  Chittle v.
Chittle, and Morden v. Kelly provide further guidance on how to
approach calculating child support for a disabled adult child.
[53]          
Both
courts considered and relied upon the general principles set out by the Ontario
Court of Appeal in Lewi v. Lewi, (2006), 2006 CanLII 15446 (ON CA), 80 O.R. (3d) 321 which outlined
the approach to calculate support for an adult child as follows:
[54]          
  As
set out by Braid, J. in Morden v. Kelly, 2019 ONSC 4620 at paragraph 50,
“The test for entitlement to support for adult children under the Divorce
Act allows for the exercise of considerable judicial discretion, and the
determination of entitlement is a fact-driven exercise in every case: see Laramie
v. Laramie, 2018 ONSC 4740, [2018] O.J. No. 4130; Whitton v. Whitton,
1989 CanLII 8868 (ON CA), [1989] O.J. No. 1002, 1989 CarswellOnt 265 (Ont. C.A.).
[55]          
Courts
have held that an adult child’s receipt of ODSP benefits is sufficient to
displace the “one-size-fits-most” approach in section 3(2)(a) of the Guidelines
in favour of the “tailor-made” approach in section 3(2)(b). There is a
potential for overlap between child support payments (which are intended to
assist the residential parent to cover the child’s needs relating to shelter,
food and clothing) and ODSP benefits paid to the recipient child which cover
similar needs. ODSP support reflects society’s commitment to sharing financial
responsibility for adults with disabilities; therefore, it makes little sense
to calculate child support on the basis that this responsibility falls only on
the parents. Section 3(2)(b) should be applied to achieve an equitable
balancing of responsibility between the adult child, his parents and society:
see Senos v. Karcz and Morden v. Kelly.
[56]          
G.P.
receives monthly benefits from the ODSP and has received Passport funding from
the provincial government since April 1, 2019. In addition, G.P. has maintained
a part-time job at a local grocery store for a maximum of four hours a week. G.P.
can contribute to his own living expenses and activities to a limited extent.
Therefore, child support should be calculated pursuant to section 3(2)(b) of
the Guidelines.
[57]          
Having
determined the standard Guideline approach for an adult child is
inappropriate, I must carefully consider the child’s unique condition, means,
needs and circumstances; and the ability of the parents to contribute to the
child’s support. The relevant legislative provisions provide a wide discretion to
determine the appropriate approach to calculating child support, the
contribution that the child should make to their own support, if any, and the
quantum of child support that each parent should pay, if any. The result of this
quantification analysis pursuant to section 3(2)(b) may still be a child
support award close to or identical to the Table amount: see Senos v. Karcz
and Morden v. Kelly. Courts have taken different approaches to quantifying
child support in different cases.
[58]          
The
Respondent proposed a budgetary approach and relied on percentages for rent and
other living expenses used in Morden v. Kelly. The Respondent invited
the court to calculate an appropriate budget using the Applicant’s financial
statement dated March 1, 2023. Upon determining an approximate calculation of G.P.’s
total average monthly living expenses, deducting his monthly disability
benefits, the shortfall should be apportioned between the parties to their
respective incomes. The Respondent argued this approach achieves a balancing or
sharing of the financial responsibility of G.P., his parents, and the state.
[59]          
No
separate budget was provided specific to G.P.’s monthly living expenses. The
Applicant testified that all household funds were deposited together and used
to cover their living expenses and needs. G.P. is provided funds by the
Applicant to a separate account for him to use for small expenditures or
purchases. She is unable to provide G.P. with the full quantum of his benefits
or he would spend it all immediately without regard for rent or other household
necessities. Using the Applicant’s March 2024 financial statement, I have
determined reasonable living expenses for G.P. as set out below.
[60]          
The
Applicant and G.P. reside in an apartment and the rent is $1750.72 and
insurance is $22.02. I have no evidence what the extra cost is attributable to
having G.P. live there. Therefore, I shall exercise my discretion and attribute
$600 to G.P. for monthly rent and insurance.
[61]          
In
the absence of evidence regarding the proportion of utility expenses
attributable to G.P., I have allotted 50% of the monthly costs to him included
on the Applicant’s statement for a total of $96.39. Likewise, I have
determined 50% of the transportation and health benefits should be attributable
to G.P. of $286.99 and $37.15 respectively.
[62]          
According
to the Applicant’s sworn Financial Statement of March 4, 2024, monthly
household expenses of $1,830 include $1,000 towards groceries. Based on the
evidence at trial, it would be unfair to divide the grocery budget equally. I
have budgeted $415 of the household expenses to G.P. in addition to $600 of the
grocery bill for a total of $1015.
[63]          
Under
other expenses, the Applicant included vacations, school fees and supplies,
clothing for children, children’s activities, debt payments, and other expenses
not included above. I have not allocated any amount for vacations as this is
not a basic living expense. Nor I have allocated the debt payments and school
fees and supplies. The latter can be calculated as a section 7 expense and the
former did not have a sufficient evidentiary basis to determine this is
attributable to G.P. I have no information what the other expenses of $200 is for
and therefore decline to assign a portion to G.P. The other items claimed for
clothing and children’s activities are clearly for G.P. of $337.
[64]          
Under
personal expenses, the Applicant included clothing, hair care and beauty,
entertainment, and gifts. I have not apportioned these expenses to G.P. as the
Applicant set out a monthly estimate for his clothing under other expenses. I
have budgeted a monthly amount of $150 for personal toiletries,
non-prescription medicines, entertainment, and haircuts for G.P.
[65]          
I
have concluded a reasonable monthly budget for G.P. is $2,521.53, or $30,258.36
per year.
[66]          
  G.P.’s
sources of revenue are his ODSP benefits and part time employment income. He
earned approximately $3,700 last year. The Applicant testified the store has
been cancelling his shifts this year. It is unclear if he will still receive
remuneration for the cancelled shifts. No evidence was called on this issue. If
I average out his income from the grocery store for the two most recent years,
it is approximately $3,500. On this basis, G.P. can anticipate receiving
revenue of approximately $18,833 this year or $1,569.17 per month.
[67]          
The
shortfall between G.P.’s current average monthly living expenses and his
current income or revenue source is $952.36. The amount of child support
payable by the parties shall be based on their respective incomes. If this is
the same as last year, the Respondent shall be responsible for $647.60 per
month. The Final Order makes clear that the parties must provide updated income
disclosure to each other by June 1.
[68]          
To
ensure the Respondent is informed of G.P.’s revenue each year, the Applicant
shall immediately disclose to the Respondent copies of G.P.’s income tax
returns, notices of assessment, T4s from employment, any changes in the amount
of G.P.’s ODSP benefits, OSAP, and Passport funding, including any increases to
annual limits, and copies of all claims she submits to Passport for
reimbursement.
[69]          
I
did not include the Passport funding in this calculation as it is only paid if
the expense is incurred and upon presentation of receipts. The Applicant
testified she relies upon this funding to obtain respite throughout the year.
The Respondent has no relationship with G.P. and does not have parenting time
with him. Therefore, the only break or relief the Applicant receives is from
neighbours, family, and through Passport.
[70]          
The
Respondent argued these funds should be used for transportation, activities,
cellphone, computers, and other items he has had to contribute to over the years.
It is not for the Respondent to direct how the available Passport funds are
used. Respite is a permissible expense and there is no reason it can not be
used for that purpose and considered a contribution by G.P. to his own special
and extraordinary expenses.
[71]          
The
Applicant argued G.P. is entitled to receive child support while in receipt of
ODSP and Passport funding. This is not disputed. She understood receiving these
benefits would not interfere with the child support. It does not, in the sense
that any child support G.P. is entitled to is not deducted dollar for dollar
from what he receives from ODSP. However, I have determined table child support
is inappropriate in this case, as G.P. receives ODSP. I have determined the
quantum each parent is to contribute pursuant to section 3(2)(b).
[72]          
The
Respondent made submissions regarding paragraph 16 of the Final Order and that
its interpretation should not apply to G.P.’s entitlement to ODSP. I agree. The
ODSP benefits are specific to daily living expenses including clothing, rent,
and groceries, all items specifically excluded under the Passport funding and
the Special Services at Home subsidy for children under the age of 18.
[73]          
Lastly,
the Final Order made clear the monthly $232 payable by the Respondent to the
Applicant was to be allocated towards any section 7 expenses for G.P. The
Applicant was permitted to use the funds for any such expenses and required to
provide receipts to the Respondent by December 31 of each year. The Applicant
acknowledged she failed to do this.
[74]          
Setting
a fixed amount for section 7 expenses is discretionary under s.3(2)(b). The
total amount of the annual receipts adduced at trial, were far less than the
amount the Respondent had been paying and would have resulted in a much higher
overpayment but for post-secondary expenses. I have decided to exercise my
discretion and not impose a set monthly amount.
[75]          
As
stated above, Hood, J. made clear this amount did not include any
post-secondary education expenses. This means any such expenses, including tuition,
books and supplies, and public transportation to attend school, not covered by
OSAP or other grants are to be shared equally between the parties.
[76]          
The
Respondent continued to pay monthly child support of $703 per month and $232 a
month towards section 7 expenses since 2017. The Applicant claims the
Respondent owes her arrears and the Respondent claims he has overpaid both
child support and section 7 expenses.
[77]          
The
Applicant filed receipts for each of the years 2018 to 2023. In her
calculations, she failed to deduct the monthly amount of $232 the Respondent
contributed to section 7 expenses, thus lowering any arrears he may have owed
her and instead creating an overpayment owed to him.
[78]          
In
2018, G.P. was still in high school and had not turned 18 until the end of the
school year. The Respondent’s income increased to $77,883 per annum. Table
child support was $725.77 per month. Therefore, the Respondent owes the
Applicant $273.24 in arrears for that year.
[79]          
Between
January 1, 2019, and December 31, 2023, the Respondent paid $13,920 towards
section 7 expenses. The receipts the Applicant introduced at trial, included
post-secondary expenses totalling $19,967.41 for that timeframe. It left a
shortfall of $6047.41. The parties are both required to contribute equally to
post-secondary expenses. For ease of calculations, I have shared the shortfall
between the parties for a total attributable to each as $3,023.70. Therefore,
the Respondent owes the Applicant $3,023.70. In coming to this conclusion, I
appreciate both parties are required to contribute equally, and I acknowledge
the Respondent has paid monthly section 7 expenses since 2017, and the
Applicant has failed to provide receipts each year as required.
[80]          
Had
the Respondent received receipts, he may have chosen to bring a motion to
change much earlier to reduce the section 7 expenses. Paragraph 13 of the Final
Order is hereby deleted and the requirement for the Respondent to pay the
monthly amount of section 7 special or extraordinary expenses is terminated. This
does not relieve the Respondent from paying his portion of section 7 expenses
pursuant to other terms in the Final Order.
[81]          
Having
determined arrears for the child support payable in 2018, and the section 7
expenses, I must now consider any over/under payments for 2019 to the present. For
simplicity, I opted to use the approach the Respondent took in his submissions
regarding calculations of calculation of child support. I have used the same
monthly budget for G.P. retroactive to January 1, 2019, as there is nothing to
suggest major fluctuations during this time. For ease of reference, I have set
out the following chart:
[82]          
Based
on the above, Applicant owes the Respondent $7,192.95 in overpayments for child
support less arrears owing to her for 2018 of $273.24 and less section 7
post-secondary expenses owed to her of $3,023.70. Therefore, the Applicant owes
the Respondent $3,896.01 in overpayments.
[83]          
Unless
the parties agree otherwise, the Applicant shall make monthly installments of
$100 until the balance is paid in full.
[84]          
As a
result of my decision, I urge the parties to discuss the issue of costs and recommend
each party be responsible for their own costs. Neither party achieved full
success. The Applicant was successful in having G.P. remain a child of the
marriage, an issue hotly contested by the Respondent until all the evidence was
complete. The Respondent obtained a degree of success insofar as the monthly
section 7 contributions have terminated. Neither party “won” regarding the
issue of arrears and quantum owing. At the end of the day, G.P. should be the
priority.
[85]          
If
the parties are unable to come to an agreement, they shall serve and file their
written submissions within twenty-one days of the release of this decision. Submissions
shall not exceed one page double spaced not including any offer to settle or
bill of costs.