[1]         
On September 4, 2024, the Court released its trial decision in the above
noted matter, 2551965 Ontario Ltd v. Warkentin, 2024 ONSC 4876.  The
trial decision outlines, in detail, the facts of the matter leading to the
dismissal of both the claim and the counterclaim.  The parties were invited to
make costs submissions.  Before the trial commenced, I had asked counsel to
provide me with sealed envelopes containing their costs outline, together with
copies of any r. 49 offers submitted.  I did this on the theory that, in
my experience, parties are much more reasonable about costs positions before
they know the trial outcome.
[2]         
Despite the dismissal of both parties’ claims, counsel for Mr.
Warkentin, quite rightly in my view, conceded that his client should pay something
towards the plaintiffs’ costs in this matter.  He suggested a net quantum
of $40,000.00.
[3]         
The plaintiffs submitted that a substantial indemnity award in
the order of $204,299, plus HST, plus disbursements of 12,857.12, inclusive of
HST, was appropriate in the circumstances.
[4]         
Having heard counsels’ submissions, reviewed their respective bills of
costs, and considered the various r. 49 offers exchanged by both
parties, I order that Harold Warkentin pay to 2551965 Ontario Ltd and Cabin
Country Realty Inc. (“CC” or “the plaintiffs”) the sum of $80,657.12, inclusive
of HST and disbursements, for the costs of the claim and defending the
counterclaim.  I say this for the following reasons.
[5]         
I agree with the plaintiffs’ submissions that when this case
reached trial, it was proceeding as a wrongful dismissal action.  The order of
the evidence at trial, with Mr. Warkentin testifying first, reflected the parties’
acceptance of this practical approach to the litigation.
[6]         
The action commenced by CC in April 2018 sought, among other relief, to
enjoin Mr. Warkentin’s post-employment actions.  This claim for relief was
based on an alleged non-compete covenant, plus allegations that Mr.
Warkentin had and was interfering with the contractual interests of the plaintiffs. 
On October 24, 2018, a consent order was issued by Newton J. containing nine
specific paragraphs of injunctive-type relief, which essentially required
Mr. Warkentin to stop working and promoting himself as a realtor in
Northwestern Ontario, and to refrain from soliciting clients from CC
until October 10, 2020.
[7]         
The pandemic intervened and this matter stayed dormant until 2022. 
Ultimately, the plaintiffs limited their claim for damages to a nominal amount,
though they maintained a claim for punitive damages through to trial. 
Accordingly, as the matter reached trial, the amounts being pursued by Mr. Warkentin’s
counterclaim exceeded the nominal amounts sought by the plaintiffs, and the claim
for punitive damages.
[8]         
This matter was subject to several trial management conferences
commencing in October 2022.  At trial, the parties had an agreed
statement of facts and an agreed document brief that greatly reduced trial
time.  I agree with the submission of counsel for the plaintiffs that this work
was done primarily by counsel for the plaintiffs.
[9]         
The r. 49 compliant offers exchanged between the parties are
significant in my decision to award costs payable by Mr. Warkentin.  On October
19, 2023, Mr. Warkentin offered to settle for a net payment of
$280,000.00.  The plaintiffs made two r. 49 compliant offers.  The first
on October 23, 2023, offered to pay Mr. Warkentin the sum of $100,000.00, less
deductions required by law, and inclusive of interest and costs.  The offer
provided that a portion of the net amount could be applied to Mr. Warkentin’s
reasonable legal fees.   Acceptance of the offer was contingent on Mr.
Warkentin signing of a full and final release.  The offer was open until the
commencement of trial.  It was not withdrawn.
[10]      A second
offer was also made, dated January 15, 2024.  It offered to pay Mr.
Warkentin the sum of $110,000.00, less deductions required by law, and
inclusive of interest and costs.  It went on to contain essentially the same
terms as the October 2023 offer.  It was also open until the commencement of trial
and was never withdrawn.
[11]      In
my view, the plaintiffs’ offer does not strictly fit within the provisions of r.
49.10.  It was a global offer that failed to differentiate how the
funds would be allocated between the plaintiffs offering to settle their claim,
while at the same time settling the counterclaim.  This may be a fine
distinction to make, but I do not think I can strictly apply the results
mandated by r. 49.10 in this situation.  That said, the offer is a
factor I can consider under r. 57.01, in an exercise of discretion for
awarding costs.  Section 131(1) of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O.
1990, c. C.43, provides the court that discretion.  Had Mr. Warkentin accepted
either of the plaintiffs’ offers, he would have been much further
ahead than he is currently, having unsuccessfully pursued his
counterclaim at trial.  I note that his bill of costs indicated partial
indemnity costs of $108,005.40 for his counsel, inclusive of HST, plus
disbursements of $3,998.58, also inclusive of HST.
[12]      The
plaintiffs seek costs for four lawyers and one student.  In my view, at least
up until trial, principles of proportionality, reasonableness, and fairness
dictate that Mr. Warkentin only be responsible to pay the costs of one opposing
counsel.  At trial, there is no doubt that counsel for the plaintiffs were of
assistance to both their clients and the court, in expediting the trial and
having it proceed efficiently.  In my view, Ms. French was lead counsel for the
plaintiffs at trial.  Coincidentally, her partial indemnity hourly rate of
$360/hr. for a 2002 call was the same as that of Mr. Markowitz, being a 2000
call.  The hourly rate was reasonable for both counsel.  I appreciate that
fixing costs is more than a mathematical exercise of taking hours and applying them
to an hourly rate.  However, it is useful to assess the general reasonableness
of the quantum of a particular claim.
[13]      It
appears from the bill of costs that the vast majority of the work for
this file was put in post-discovery, following delivery of the first offer to
settle in October 2023.  I calculate that Ms. French expended
approximately $40,000.00 in time, on a partial indemnity basis, for the period
from pretrial to trial.  Mr. West, as plaintiff’s co-counsel, recorded
approximately $20,000.00 in time for attendance at the trial.
[14]      Success
was divided in this matter, as both sides had their claims dismissed.  That
said, much of this could have been avoided had Mr. Warkentin accepted one of
the reasonable offers put forward by the plaintiffs.  I am persuaded that the
plaintiffs, despite a lack of strict compliance with r. 49.10 in terms
of success, did make a realistic and reasonable offer.   The trial outcome for
Mr. Warkentin indicated that it was unrealistic for him not to have accepted one
of the plaintiffs’ offers.
[15]      In
my view, a reasonable, proportionate, and fair quantum of partial
indemnity costs for this matter, to be paid by Mr. Warkentin to the plaintiffs,
is $60,000.00 plus HST.
[16]      While
the accommodation portion of the disbursements was significantly higher for the
plaintiffs, two lawyers were involved.  Overall, I accept that the
disbursements, as submitted, of $12,857.12 inclusive of HST were reasonable and
should be paid by Mr. Warkentin.
[17]      Accordingly,
I find that Harold Warkentin shall pay the plaintiffs, 2551965 Ontario Ltd. and
Cabin Country Realty Ltd., a total sum of $80,657.12 for costs, inclusive of
HST and disbursements forthwith.