[1]             
The court heard the Applicant (Father)’s application under The Hague
Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction, 1343 UNTS 89,
Can TS 1983 No 35 [“the Convention”].
[2]             
The Father is seeking the return of the parties’ child:  Miraya Devi
Chawla born May 12, 2024, to Champaign, Illinois, USA on the basis that this is
her habitual residence, and she has been wrongfully retained by the Respondent
(Mother) in Ontario since September 16, 2024.
[3]             
Miraya was born in Champaign, Illinois.  The parties were residing with
Miraya in a home that they purchased in March 2024 until August 28, 2024, when
they came to Canada for a visit with family.  They intended to return to
Champaign on September 16, 2024, as the baby had a medical appointment.
[4]             
The parties’ marriage had been difficult.  The Respondent
(Mother) alleges that she was subjected to emotional, physical and financial
abuse throughout, and that the Father’s abuse had escalated to include Miraya.
[5]             
The parties discussed separating on September 10, 2024.  On September
12, 2024, the Father called the police to his parent’s home where the parties
were staying.  The Mother left with Miraya and has since refused to return with
her to Illinois.
[6]             
The Father was criminally charged by the Peel Regional Police on October
11, 2024, with assaulting the Mother and the child.  The Father was not
permitted contact with the Mother or the child except through subsequent order
of the Family Court.  He was permitted to return to the U.S. where he works as
a doctor.
[7]             
The Mother’s position is that Miraya’s habitual
residence is Ontario and Champaign, Illinois is only a secondary residence. 
The Mother asserts that it has always been the plan for her and Miraya to live
in Ontario.
[8]             
The Mother argues in the alternative that if it is found that Miraya’s
habitual residence is in Illinois, the child should not be returned to that
State as the child will be at grave risk of being exposed to physical or
psychological harm from the Father and/or that Miraya will be placed in an
intolerable situation if the Mother’s immigration status in the U.S. is
terminated.
[9]             
The parties are both Canadian.  They grew up in the Greater Toronto Area
(GTA).
[10]         
They met in 2021 and started dating.
[11]         
The Father has been working in the U.S. as a doctor since 2013.  The
Father also works with medical students at the University of Illinois.
[12]         
The Mother works for TD Bank Group (TD) in Toronto as a business process
analyst. She is currently on maternity leave until May 2025.
[13]         
The Mother had an apartment in Toronto which she gave up in 2020 at the
beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. When the parties started dating, the Mother
was living between her sister’s home in Claremont and her parents’ home in
Pickering.
[14]         
The Father also has family in the GTA including his parents who live in
a home owned in part by the Father in Brampton.
[15]         
The Father generally works seven days on and seven days off at the
hospital.  He would come to Ontario on his weeks off to spend time with the
Mother when they were dating.  Around October 2021, the Mother started to spend
time with him in Illinois.
[16]         
The parties married on September 7, 2022.  They later learned that their
officiant was not properly licensed, and they applied to the court in Ontario
to have their marriage validated.   Following what the parties referred to as
their religious marriage, the Mother started spending more time in Champaign. 
She was able to work remotely, and the Father suggested that her employer was
likely not aware that she was not located in Toronto.
[17]         
The Mother was stopped at the border in June 2023 and flagged.  On the
advice of their U.S. immigration lawyers, the parties went through a civil
ceremony at the City Hall in Champaign on July 3, 2023.  The Mother obtained a U.S.
spousal visa.
[18]         
There is some evidence that in 2022 and late 2023, both parties were
dissatisfied with life in Champaign and were discussing options.
[19]         
In the summer of 2023, the parties briefly looked at condominiums in
Toronto.  The Mother stated that they had agreed that Toronto would be their
home as it was closer to her office at TD even though she was still working
remotely at that time.
[20]         
In September 2023, the parties started to look at buying a home in
Champaign.
[21]         
In October 2023, the parties announced that they were pregnant with
Miraya.
[22]         
The parties’ marriage continued to be troubled.  In early December 2023,
the parties had some disagreement.  Neither party provided details of what
transpired but the Father was recently criminally charged in relation to  two incidents,
one of which took place on December 1, 2023.
[23]         
On December 6, 2023, the Mother told the Father that she was “done”,
would be heading back to Canada, and that she would be “continuing to work in
Canada going forward”.  On December 10, 2023, the Mother advised that she would
be seeing out the balance of her pre-natal care in Canada as she did not feel
“loved or safe” with the Father.  The Father stated: “we can go see a divorce
attorney and please feel free to live anywhere in the world you want, Anisha….with
the baby, we also need to figure out more”.
[24]         
The parties appear to have repaired their relationship after this and
continued to investigate purchasing a large home to host family and friends in
Champaign. In March 2024, the Father purchased the house at 4405 Trostshire
Circle, Champaign.
[25]         
Miraya was born on May 14, 2024.
[26]         
The Father took a six-week leave from work.
[27]         
The maternal and paternal grandmothers were present for the birth and
stayed on to help the parties.  The grandmothers created tension that led to
serious conflict in the home.  The Mother’s sister, Sirisha Marakani, was also
present around the time of Miraya’s birth.
[28]         
Miraya had some issues with maintaining her weight and she was seen
regularly by her pediatrician in Illinois.
[29]         
The parties travelled to Ontario on August 28, 2024, so that the rest of
the family could meet Miraya with a plan to return to Illinois on September 16,
2024, in time for a doctor’s appointment on September 18, 2024.
[30]         
The parties’ relationship deteriorated during the trip culminating in
their separation.  The Father called the police on September 12, 2024, and the
Mother left with Miraya for her parents’ home where they have remained.
[31]         
The Convention has been adopted into the law of Ontario by virtue
of s. 46(2) of the Children’s Law Reform Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.12.
Since “the purpose of that section is to implement the underlying convention,
this Court must adopt an interpretation consistent with Canada’s obligations
under it: see Pushpanathan v. Canada (Minister of Employment &
Immigration),
1998 CanLII 778 (SCC), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 982 (S.C.C.), at para. 51.”:  Office of the Children’s
Lawyer v. Balev, 2018 SCC 16, [2018] 1 SCR 398, at para. 31.
[32]         
 Article 1 of the Convention states:
[33]         
Article 3 of the Convention states:
[34]         
The “rights of custody” are defined in Article 5 of the Convention
as including “rights relating to the care of the person of the child and, in
particular, the right to determine the child’s place of residence.”  The
“rights of access” include “the right to take a child for a limited period of
time to a place other than the child’s habitual residence.”
[35]         
Article 12 of the Convention directs that:
[36]         
Article 13 of the Convention sets out certain limited exceptions
that apply after a finding that a child is habitually resident in a Contracting
State and has been wrongfully removed/retained:
[37]         
The role of the court in an  application under the Convention is in:
[38]         
Articles 2 and 11 of the Convention require that the Contracting States
adopt procedures for the expeditious return of children.  If the judicial
authority has not reached a decision within six weeks from the date of
commencement of the proceedings, the applicant or the Central Authority of the
requested State can request a statement of the reasons for the delay.
[39]         
 The normal practice is to make the necessary order based on a summary
application: Korutowska-Wooff v. Wooff, 2004 CanLII 5548 (ON CA), 2004 ONCA 5548, 242 D.L.R. (4th)
385 leave to appeal to SCC ref’d [2005] SCCA No. 132, at para. 19; and Katsigiannis
v. Kottick-Katsigiannis, 2001 CanLII 24075 (ON CA), 55 O.R. (3d) 456, at para. 59.
[40]         
The Convention directs that Contracting States use the most
expeditious procedures available to implement the objects of the Convention.
Speed is the goal, not protracted proceedings:  Beairsto v. Cook, 2018
NSCA 90, 430 D.L.R. (4th) 26, at para. 85.
[41]         
In this case, Leef J. as the case management judge set out conditions
limiting the volume of affidavit evidence to be filed by each party. She set
deadlines for the materials and fixed a time limit for cross-examinations such
that this case could proceed in a timely manner consistent with the court’s
obligations under the Convention.
[42]         
The Mother did not comply with these directions and filed materials
exceeding the page limits.  The parties re-attended before Leef J. who issued revised
directions including that the Mother was not permitted to rely on certain
affidavits.
[43]         
The court must first make a finding with respect to ‘habitual residence’
as this is the “sole connecting factor triggering the child’s return”: Jackson
v. Graczyk, 2007 ONCA 388, 86 O.R. (3d) 183, at para. 27.
[44]         
There is no definition of ‘habitual residence’ in the Convention.
 In Balev, the Supreme Court of Canada confirmed that the approach to
determining habitual residence is a hybrid one that focuses not just on
parental intention but on the child’s factual connection to the countries in
question:  Balev, at paras. 64-65.
[45]         
The Court in Balev set out some of the following principles
applicable to the determination of habitual residence using the hybrid approach:
[46]         
Habitual residence is determined immediately prior to the wrongful
removal or retention per Articles 3 and 4 of the Convention:  Balev, at
para. 67; Korutowska-Wooff, at para. 13.
[47]         
The Court of Appeal in Ludwig v. Ludwig, 2019 ONCA 680, 437
D.L.R. (4th) 517, set out a helpful analytical framework to implement
the hybrid approach per Balev, that I have followed below.
[48]         
The first step is to determine the date of the wrongful removal/retention
and then assess where the child(ren) were habitually resident immediately prior
to that date: Balev, at para. 36; Ludwig, at para. 23.
[49]         
This date is “central to the analysis because the court assesses in
which country the child was habitually resident immediately prior to this date.
A child’s attachment to a country that is developed after the date of alleged
wrongful removal or retention is only relevant to the Article 12 “settled in”
exception: Balev, at para. 67”:  Ludwig, at para. 24; Ellis v.
Wentzell-Ellis, 2010 ONCA 347, 102 O.R. (3d) 298, at paras. 27 and 30-35.
[50]         
The parties do not dispute that the date for this analysis is September
16, 2024, when the parties were scheduled to return to Illinois with Miraya.
[51]         
The Father’s position, again, is that immediately prior September 16,
2024, Miraya’s habitual residence was in Champaign, Illinois.
[52]         
The Mother’s position is that Miraya’s habitual residence is intimately
tied to her as the child’s primary caregiver and that her primary place of
residence has remained Ontario whereas Illinois was only a secondary residence.
[53]         
Miraya was born in the hospital in Champaign.  She is a U.S. citizen and
has a U.S. passport.  She also has Canadian citizenship by virtue of her
parents pursuant to the Citizenship Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-29, s. 3.
[54]         
In her affidavit sworn October 25, 2024, the Mother stated: “I planned
to remain in Ontario as of December 2023 so I could have the baby at home.”   In
cross-examination, the Mother denied wanting to ensure that the baby was born
in the U.S.  She said that this was something that the Father was passionate
about.  I did not find the Mother’s evidence on this point credible.
[55]         
It was clearly important to both parties that Miraya be born in the
U.S.  In two different text exchanges with friends, the Mother described racing
to get back to the U.S. at 35 or 36 weeks pregnant to make sure Miraya was born
in the U.S.  The Mother stated in one text exchange that Miraya would be “the
first American Citizen in both our families” followed by a smiley emoji.  The
Father noted as part of one of these same conversations “[n]o waiver or visas
needed!”.
[56]         
Miraya lived from her birth, in Champaign with both of her parents in a
home purchased by the Father earlier in March 2024.
[57]         
Since Miraya’s birth, the Mother has been on maternity leave and was
actively, if not primarily, caring for Miraya.
[58]         
The Father took a six-week leave to be home with the Mother and child. 
Although the Mother asserts that he was primarily focused on himself, going to
the gym etc., I find that he was also involved in Miraya’s care.  In a group
text message exchange the Mother states that the Father has “[b]een stepping
into this like he’s done this his entire life!”.
[59]         
The maternal and paternal grandmothers were also staying with the family
which led to conflict.
[60]         
Miraya’s pediatrician is in Illinois.  The Mother initially denied this
fact under cross-examination but later clarified that in October 2024, she
arranged for a pediatrician in Ontario for Miraya.  Miraya was being monitored
on a monthly basis by her doctor in Illinois in relation to concerns about low
weight.
[61]         
Miraya has a nursery set up in the home in Champaign.
[62]         
The Mother stated that the Father outfitted the nursery against her
wishes.  The Mother stated that it was unnecessary for Miraya to have a nursery
in Champaign as she would have a fully furnished nursery at the maternal
grandparents’ home in Pickering which was her “primary residence”.  The
Mother’s sister was going to hand down items from her children’s nursery.  The
Mother did not introduce pictures of the arrangements at her parents’ home.  When
cross-examined, the Mother stated that both her sister’s home and her parents’
homes were being baby proofed for Miraya suggesting that she did not have one
fixed home for Miraya in Ontario.
[63]         
The Father introduced pictures of a fully furnished nursery in the home
in Champaign.  He produced a text exchange between the parties on December 18,
2023 (after the early December argument) wherein the Mother gives him a lengthy
list of items to purchase for the baby’s arrival including a crib, bathtub,
changer, diaper caddy and other items. In cross-examination, even having
received the Father’s reply affidavit with this evidence, the Mother continued
to insist that he purchased items against her wishes including a crib and
dresser.  She stated that she was not “privy to any of these items that he
purchases from a financial standpoint, nor do I have any ability to comment on
what he purchases.” This last comment is not supported by the text
exchange.  The Mother continued to insist that these items were not for the
home in Illinois and provided a lengthy, somewhat rambling explanation.
[64]         
I find that the parties had established a nursery for Miraya at their
home in Champaign.
[65]         
 In Balev, the court noted that parental intention may have
greater significance in cases involving very young children.  Again, the focus
is on the circumstances preceding the wrongful retention/removal.
[66]         
The Mother states that she has “always been and continues to be resident
in Ontario”.
[67]         
The Mother used to have an apartment in Toronto that she gave up in 2020
at the beginning of the pandemic.  After that time, when in Ontario she would
stay at either her sister’s home or her parents’ home in one of their bedrooms.
[68]         
The Mother’s position was that the parties had been planning on living
in Ontario.  She pointed to the fact that the parties had looked at
condominiums in Toronto in the summer of 2023 as she did not want a long
commute to her job at TD bank and, according to her, the Father agreed that
“this could be [their]home”.  This is denied by the Father who states that on
one day they looked at some condominiums as a possible investment property. 
His evidence is that the Mother felt there was “no point” wasting money on a condominium
as they were intending to live long term in the U.S.  There is no evidence that
the parties were considering acquiring property in Canada after June 2023.
[69]         
The Mother was spending time with the Father in Champaign in his rental apartment. 
The Father added her name to his lease.  She spent increased time in Illinois
following the parties’ religious marriage in September 2022.
[70]         
The parties were working with immigration lawyers in the U.S. in
relation to the Mother’s status.  In an e-mail dated June 22, 2023, the Father
advised the lawyers that the Mother had been living in Canada since the
(religious) wedding and he was in the U.S. and that they “have both been
commuting across borders, on [their] non-working days to spend time together”. 
This correspondence was written around the same time that the Mother was
stopped at the border and questions regarding her status were raised.
[71]         
The parties were married in a civil ceremony in Illinois on July 5, 2023,
and the Mother obtained an H4 spousal visa.
[72]         
The Mother still regularly spent time in Canada with her family without
the Father.  The Mother stated that “it was always a battle for me to spend
time at my parents’ or my sister’s house”.  However, she did not elaborate
on this and there was no independent evidence to support the contention that
the Father had objected to or interfered with the Mother spending time in
Canada with her family.
[73]         
In 2023, the Mother may have spent more time in Canada
than she did in the U.S. According to an I-94 printout showing entry and exit
to the U.S., the Mother was in Canada from March 20-28, 2024, and then from
April 10-May 3, 2024, prior to giving birth to Miraya.
[74]         
The parties have medical and dental professionals in both jurisdictions. 
They both continue to have coverage under OHIP.  They have access to medical
and dental care in Canada.
[75]         
The mother primarily accessed medical care in Illinois during her
pregnancy and she is covered under the Father’s Blue Cross plan.  The Mother’s OB-GYN
was in Champaign.  The Mother was part of a mid-wifery clinic in Illinois
starting in September 2023.
[76]         
The Mother stated that the plan was “always” to stay at
her parents’ home with Miraya where they had a nursery set up and as it was
easier for her to commute to Toronto for work.  However, when the parties came
to Toronto on August 28, 2024, they did not plan to and did not stay at all
with the maternal grandparents.
[77]         
The parties began looking for a home to purchase in Champaign as early
as September 2023. The Father stated that the parties wanted a large home where
they could host friends and family after the baby arrived.
[78]         
On November 24, 2023, in a chat conversation with her mother-in-law,
Shipra Chawla, the Mother says that they don’t need a house as they can just “rent
a two bedroom in Champaign for a little more space when the baby comes…he likes
to provide, I understand…but not at this cost”.  The cost was in the
context of the EB5 investment visa that the Father had been considering which
could cost $1 million CAD. The Father stated that they stopped pursuing the EB5
visa after they got legally married in favour of purchasing a home for their
family.  The Mother’s message supports the contention that the plan was for the
child to live in Champaign.
[79]         
On December 6, 2023, the Mother and Father had a text exchange in which the
Mother stated that after she saw the doctor in Champaign she was “done” and
would be “heading back to Canada”.  She stated that she did not “want to be
part of the EB5” and would be “continuing to work in Canada going forward”. 
The Father told her to spend time with her mother “whom [she] came to see” and
they would discuss the visa and other things once he was back.
[80]         
A few days later, in a WhatsApp chat dated December 10, 2023, the Mother
told the Father that she would not be returning to the U.S. and planned to “see
the rest of [her] care out in Canada”.  The Mother outlined a number of
concerns with the Father including that he had repeatedly lied to her, drove in
an unsafe manner and made poor financial decisions.  She goes on to say:  “I
will no longer reside with you in America”.  The Father responded that “[w]e
can go see a divorce attorney and please free to live anywhere in the world you
want, Anisha.  With the baby, we need to figure out more.”
[81]         
The parties did not separate after this argument, rather they continued
to plan their lives together.
[82]         
In a group chat exchange with friends two days later on December 12, 2023,
the Mother stated “we are committed to a lifetime in chambana”.  It was not
disputed that “chambana” is slang for the combination of Champaign and the
nearby city of Urbana, Illinois.
[83]         
The parties put in an offer on a home in Illinois on January 15, 2024,
that was not accepted.  In March 2024, the parties purchased a large home on
Trostshire Circle in Champaign.
[84]         
The Mother asserted that she only went along with the purchase of the
home as she wanted to minimize stress during her pregnancy.  The evidence
suggests otherwise.
[85]         
The Father paid for the home and title is in his name alone, but the
Mother participated in the process.  The Mother initially stated that the
Father was responsible for creating a chat group with their realtor but then
admitted that she created a Whatsapp chat group for her, the Father and their
real estate agent, Kimberly Clark, as this was the Mother’s preferred method of
communication.
[86]         
 In a Whatsapp chat dated March 8, 2024, addressed to Ms. Clark, the
Mother says:
[87]         
The Mother had a convoluted explanation as to why this message did not
contradict her narrative that she never intended Champaign to be her home
including that the Father directed her not to offend the real estate agent who
lived locally and that she was really more excited about the candle that the
real estate agent bought them as a gift.
[88]         
The Father introduced an affidavit from a friend of the couple, Roukaida
Senthil who lives in Ontario which included an excerpt from a group chat dated
May 16, 2024, in which the Mother says “why don’t you guys plan a visit and
better yet, a permanent move to America”.  Ms. Senthil and her husband also
messaged the Mother about to set a date for dinner during their recent trip to
Ontario; the Mother confirmed that they were planning to head back to Illinois
on September 16, 2024.  There is no mention of a plan to return to Ontario
thereafter.
[89]         
The maternal grandmother, Sunita Marakani stated that the plan was for
her “to stay in Champaign only until Anisha and Miraya were able to travel back
to Ontario as I was going to take care of them at my home.”
[90]         
The Mother did not produce any contemporaneous corroborating evidence
such as text messages or e-mails for the period after December 2023 to support her
position that her primary residence and that of Miraya would be in a location other
than in Champaign.
[91]         
Sirisha Marakani refers to having a conversation with the Mother about
living in her home or at maternal grandparents’ home in December 2023 which
would be consistent with the Mother’s messages to the Father on December 6 and
10, 2023.  Sirisha Marakani and Amol Chiplunkar, do not confirm the Mother’s
position that she planned to return to live in Ontario  after Miraya’s four-month
vaccination.
[92]         
The Mother stressed that she always intended to return to work at TD at
the end of her maternity leave in May 2025 and that this supports her
proposition that Ontario is her habitual residence and therefore Miraya’s as
well.
[93]         
The Mother has worked at TD bank since 2014.  She was on short term
disability leave from TD when she met the Father.  She returned to work remotely
in November 2021 to June 14, 2023, which enabled her to work while staying with
the Father in Illinois.  The Mother went back on to short term disability from
June 14, 2023, to September 26, 2023.  She then received an accommodation to
work remotely due to complications of her pregnancy that carried forward to
February 2024.   She then went back on short term disability due to issues with
the pregnancy until she started her maternity leave.
[94]         
She is currently on maternity leave and receiving top-up pay from the
bank.
[95]         
Amol Chiplunkar attests to conversations that he had with the parties
about how they were going to juggle their respective work commitments.  One
such conversation was in June 2023 and the other on October 31, 2023, when they
announced that they were pregnant with Miraya.  Amol Chiplunkar was surprised
to learn in December 2023 that the Father was looking for a large home to
purchase in Champaign so there would be space for friends and family to visit.
[96]         
The Mother’s close friend Shaira Rahimi swore an affidavit.  Ms. Rahimi
also works at TD bank with the Mother.  Ms. Rahimi stated that she “understood
that the Mother would be returning to her position at TD” and that the
Mother never mentioned that staying in the U.S. was a permanent plan.
[97]         
Despite her stated commitment to her job in Canada, the Mother applied
for a work visa in the U.S. on March 22, 2024, with the help of immigration
lawyers.
[98]         
The Mother suggested that the Father was the one primarily engaging with
the immigration lawyers.  In cross-examination she stated that she had only
applied for the work visa “under duress” as she “never had any
intention to work in the U.S.”.  However, the Father introduced an e-mail
exchange over a number of months between the Mother and the two immigration
lawyers starting on February 5, 2024, in relation to the Mother’s work visa. 
On May 31, 2024, the Mother e-mailed Jyoti Kaur asking about the current status
of her application and wondering if “there’s a way to expedite the process”. 
The Mother stated that this e-mail was actually sent by the Father from her
account.
[99]         
In a WhatsApp chat message with Roukaida Senthil on May 2, 2024, the
Mother says: “I need that green card”.
[100]    
I prefer the Father’s evidence that the Mother was actively pursuing a
permit to work in the U.S. rather than planning to return to her job at the TD
bank.  It was not surprising that the Mother was maintaining her employment
with TD and taking the position that she intended to return to the bank as she
is receiving maternity leave top-up benefits.
[101]    
The Father has practiced medicine in the U.S. since 2013.  He has lived
in Champaign, Illinois since 2020.  He works as an internal medicine physician
at the OSF Heart of Mary Medical Centre in Urbana, Illinois.  He also works
with associate faculty at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign.
[102]    
The Mother asserts that the Father had looked into practicing medicine
in Canada as part of their plan to raise Miraya here.  The Father opened an
application in Canada at a time when Canada was permitting foreign licensed
doctors to work to address shortages.  He went through a criminal background
check for the license in December 2023.  However, he did not take further steps
to obtain his qualifications in Ontario.
[103]    
The Father had also explored options to work in Dallas, Texas and in Indiana.
[104]    
The Mother’s position is that there has been no “move” as the child has
always been habitually resident in Canada.
[105]    
It is not disputed that the family travelled to Ontario on August 28,
2024, for a time limited trip to introduce Miraya to friends and family, and
that they intended to return to Champaign on September 16, 2024, as Miraya had
an appointment with her pediatrician due to issues with weight gain.
[106]    
The parties brought the baby and what they needed with them for a
limited time stay.  The Mother states that they intended to return to Champaign
to pack up the remainder of the home for their stay in Canada.  There was no
corroborative evidence (such as e-mails or texts) to support this contention.
[107]    
When the parties arrived in Ontario they first stayed with the Mother’s
sister, Sirisha Marakani at her home in Claremont.  On September 6, 2024, the
parties went to stay at the paternal grandparents’ home in Brampton as planned.
[108]    
The parties’ relationship started to deteriorate, the details of which
shall be discussed further below.
[109]    
On September 10, 2024, the Mother told the Father that she wanted to
amicably separate.
[110]    
On September 12, 2024, the Father called the police to his parents’
home.  The police interviewed both parties.  No charges were laid at that
time.  The Mother took Miraya to her parents’ home.
[111]    
The Mother refused to return Miraya to Illinois on September 16, 2024,
as originally planned.
[112]    
The Father commenced proceedings in the court in Illinois shortly
thereafter.  The Mother responded and filed a request for an emergency order
permitting her to re-locate with Miraya to Canada.
[113]    
The Father commenced this application under the Convention on
September 27, 2024.
[114]    
Miraya is a Canadian citizen by virtue of her parents.  She does not
have a Canadian passport.
[115]    
Miraya’s only other connections to Canada are through her parents.
[116]    
The parties both grew up in the Greater Toronto Area of Ontario.  The
Mother’s sister, Sirisha Marakani lives in Claremont with her husband, Amol
Chiplunkar and two children.  The maternal grandparents live in Pickering.  The
Father’s parents live in Brampton.  Both parties have other extended family
living in Ontario.
[117]    
The Mother and Father maintain close connections to Ontario.
[118]    
The Mother remains employed by the TD Bank Group in Toronto.
[119]    
The parties both maintain their Ontario drivers’ license and have OHIP
coverage.
[120]    
The Mother continues to have a Toronto area cell phone number.  The
Father asserts that this is because she does not want her employer to know that
she is not living in Canada.
[121]    
The Mother has bank accounts in Ontario.
[122]    
The Father has an interest in the home where his parents reside in
Brampton.
[123]    
I find that Miraya’s habitual residence is in Champaign, Illinois.
[124]    
The Mother and Father both wanted to ensure that Miraya was born in the
U.S. rather than in Canada and she is consequently a U.S. citizen.
[125]    
The focal point of Miraya’s life immediately prior to the wrongful
retention was her Mother and her Father who were living together at their home
in Champaign, Illinois along with her two grandmothers for a period.  I find
that both parents were actively participating in Miraya’s day to day care
albeit with the Mother taking on a greater role.  Both parents were actively
involved in Miraya’s medical care.
[126]    
The parties have both spent time in Ontario throughout their
relationship.  The Mother in particular spent significant periods of time in
Ontario in 2023.  At certain points in time, the intentions of the parties in
terms of a permanent residence were unclear.  This was illustrated by the
conversations initiated by Amol Chiplunkar who queried how they were going to
make things work.
[127]    
In early December 2023, some sort of serious incident took place. 
Neither party provided details but the Father was criminally charged in
relation to something that occurred on December 1, 2023.  The Mother told the
Father on December 10, 2023, that she did not intend to return to America. 
However, the parties repaired their relationship, and the evidence overwhelmingly
supports a finding that they intended to and did make Champaign their home
thereafter.
[128]    
The Father purchased a home large enough to host their large family and
friends. The Mother described this as her “dream home”. The Mother encouraged
their friends from Oakville, Ontario to visit them or even consider moving.
[129]    
The Mother applied for a work permit with help from lawyers.  The Mother
told a friend that she needed “that green card”.
[130]    
The Mother filed an Answer in this proceeding dated October 11, 2024. 
In the initial pleading, she does not assert that she or Miraya are habitually
resident in Ontario.  Her claim was based on the Article 13(b) exception and
her experience of abuse.  I granted leave for the Mother to file an Amended
Answer in which she essentially withdraws the earlier admissions.  However, I
did not find the Mother’s evidence credible that Champaign was simply her
“secondary” residence and that she had always intended to live with her parents
in Pickering as soon as Miraya was vaccinated.
[131]    
Miraya was habitually resident in Champaign, Illinois and travelled to
Canada for a time limited trip with her parents. The parties intended to return
to Illinois on September 16, 2024, with Miraya as she had a doctor’s
appointment two days later.
[132]    
I find that when the parties separated, the Mother’s intentions about
living in Champaign changed.
[133]    
The Mother referred me to a number of decisions involving the
determination of the habitual residence of very young children in support of
her case.  Per the principles set out in Balev, the hybrid analysis is
fact specific and does not rely on presumptions.  However, I have addressed
some of these decisions below and noted how they are distinguishable from the
case before me.
[134]    
In Beairsto, the parties lived together prior to the
child’s birth in Washington State where the child was born.  When the baby was
approximately one month old, the mother left the matrimonial home after an
incident of domestic violence with the father pushing the mother while she was
holding the baby.  There was a risk that the father would be charged which
could impact his employment.  The parties agreed that the mother would
take the child to Nova Scotia where she was originally from.  There was no set
return date.  The Nova Scotia Court of Appeal found that the trial judge had
erred by dismissing the father’s application solely on the basis that the
removal was not wrongful as he had consented to it rather than engaging in the
hybrid analysis per Balev. The Court of Appeal undertook the hybrid
analysis and found that the date of the wrongful retention was June 2017 at
which point the mother and child had been residing in Nova Scotia for six
months – the majority of the child’s life.
[135]    
In Parmar v. Flora, 2022 ONSC 3079, aff’d 2022 ONCA 869.  The
mother lived and worked in Toronto and the father lived and worked in Florida. 
The parties travelled back and forth during their relationship.  The child was
born in Toronto and spent the first nine months of her life there.  The mother
travelled with the child to Florida to visit the father and was there when the
COVID-19 pandemic hit, and quarantine restrictions were put in place.  The
mother opted to “shelter in place” in Florida and as soon as the restrictions
were lifted, she returned with the child to Toronto.  The father’s Hague
application was dismissed.
[136]    
In Ow v. Ling, 2024 ONSC 6043, a recent unreported decision, the parties
were both from Singapore.  They came to Canada with their oldest child in
2022.  They parties were both employed in Canada although the mother was on
short term disability and the father was initially on short term disability and
later left his job.  The parties agreed that they would benefit from family
support and returned to Singapore where their daughter was born.  Daurio J.
dismissed the father’s application finding, among other factors, that even
though the youngest child had never been to Canada, Canada was the habitual
residence of the children as the parties’ older child was an anchor to this
jurisdiction for his baby sister.
[137]    
 All of the above  cases can be distinguished on their facts from the
case at hand.
[138]    
 The Father stressed that the Mother had attorned to the jurisdiction of
Illinois.  However, “attornment to a jurisdiction cannot confer jurisdiction to
this court on matters relating to a child if that child is habitually resident
in another jurisdiction”:  Singh v. Wander, 2018 ONSC 1206, at para. 26;
Ow, at paras. 159 and 162-164.  See also Husid v. Daviau, 2012
ONSC 547, aff’d 2012 ONCA 655, at paras. 126-127.
[139]    
The evidence with respect to the entirety of the circumstances on a
balance of probabilities supports the finding that Miraya’s habitual residence
just prior to the retention was Champaign, Illinois.
[140]    
 In Thomson, it was held at para. 48:
[141]    
 I did not receive expert evidence with respect to the law of Illinois,
but the parties agreed that the Father had custody rights under the State of
Illinois.
[142]    
The court should approach the analysis of whether custody rights are
being exercised liberally, bearing in mind that the court is not deciding the
merits of a custody claim:  Wedig v. Gaukel, 2007 CanLII 13522 (ON SC), 38 R.F.L. (6th) 60, at
para. 63, citing Friedrich v. Friedrich, 78 F.3d 1060 (U.S. C.A. 6th
Cir. 1996).
[143]    
The Mother asserts that she has been the child’s primary caregiver since
birth.  Although the Father took a six week leave after Miraya’s birth, her
evidence is that he spent the time on himself rather than the baby.  The Mother
also notes that since being criminally charged, the Father has not sought
parenting time with Miraya.  However, the Mother agrees that for the purpose of
this analysis the Father was exercising his custody rights at the time of the
removal/retention.
[144]    
The Mother does not take the position that the Father consented or
acquiesced to Miraya remaining in Ontario nor does the evidence support that. 
The Father moved quickly to commence a proceeding in the court in Illinois and
to commence this application.
[145]    
For all of these reasons, I find that the child, Miraya was habitually
resident in Illinois and as of September 16, 2024, and that she has been
wrongfully retained by the Mother in Ontario in breach of the Father’s custody
rights.
[146]    
If it is determined that the retention of the child in Ontario was
wrongful and none of the exceptions apply, it is not discretionary but
mandatory that the child be returned to her habitual residence: Article 12 of
the Convention; Balev, at para. 76; Zafar v. Azeem, 2024
ONCA 15, 97 R.F.L. (8th) 3, at para. 42.
[147]    
The Mother submits that the exception under Article 13(b) of the Convention
is applicable on two bases.  The first is that she and Miraya have been
subjected to domestic violence at the hands of the Father and Miraya would be subjected
to grave risk of harm if she was required to return to Illinois.  The second is
that she has uncertain immigration status as her spousal visa is tied to the
Father and may be terminated if he obtains a divorce; this could lead to her
being separated from Miraya and create an intolerable situation for the child.
[148]    
The onus is on the Mother to demonstrate that the Article 13(b)
exception applies:  Husid v. Daviau, 2012 ONCA 655, 21 R.F.L. (7th) 336,
at para. 20, leave to appeal refused, Husid v. Daviau, [2012] S.C.C.A.
No. 485.
[149]    
 The high threshold for the application of Article 13(b) was set out in Thomson
at para. 82:
[150]    
 The Mother argues that her immigration status in the U.S. is
tied to the Father’s.  If the Father obtains a divorce, this will terminate her
legal status to live in the U.S. and could separate her from Miraya.
[151]    
The Father submitted that while he has sought a divorce in the Illinois
proceeding, this relief would not be considered until the conclusion of the
case.
[152]    
The Father agreed to an undertaking that he would not pursue a divorce
in Illinois subject to any order of the court in Illinois.
[153]    
In Paschel v. Paschel, 2017 ONCA 972, 1 R.F.L. (8th) 404, Pardu
J.A. declined to stay the order of the Applications judge that the children
(ages 1 and 11 months at the time of the appeal) be returned to Tennessee even
though the mother was barred from entering the U.S. having resided there
illegally.  The father was barred from entering Canada as he had a dated
criminal record.  There was an ongoing proceeding in Tennessee and the Court of
Appeal found that the mother could participate in that proceeding virtually. 
The Court specifically held at para. 18:
[154]    
Even
if I were to find that the risk to the Mother’s immigration status constituted
a grave risk of harm to Miraya, this is mitigated by his
undertaking not to pursue the divorce.
[155]    
 The Mother also argues that she has been
subjected to longstanding and varied domestic abuse from the
Father, that Miraya has been present for some of the abuse, and that the Father
has abused the child.
[156]    
A grave risk of harm to a child’s mother can establish a risk to the
child as well: Cannock v. Fleguel,
2008 ONCA 758, 303 D.L.R. (4th) 542, at para. 41;  Zafar v. Saiyid,
2018 ONCA 352, 421 D.L.R. (4th) 184, at para. 18.
[157]    
In Hassan v. Garib, 2017 ONSC 7227, at para. 9 Engelking J. adopted
the three-part test for determining if the high threshold under Article 13(b)
has been met in situations of domestic violence as set out in Achakzad v.
Zemaryalai, 2010 ONCJ 318:
[158]    
The Mother cites a long history of domestic violence summarized in
paragraph 5 of her affidavit sworn October 25, 2024:
[159]    
The Father, both in his affidavit evidence and under cross-examination,
vehemently denied these allegations.  He stated in cross-examination that “I have
never touched or I’ve never physically assaulted any woman, my wife, my daughter
or my mother-in-law.  Any woman, any man ever.  I’ve never laid hands on anybody”.
[160]    
In his reply affidavit, the Father provided responding details to some
of the specific allegations made by the Mother but did not always repeat the
denial of the specific allegation.  In this case, where there was a
comprehensive umbrella denial, I do not draw an adverse inference from his
failure to repeat the denial for each specific instance.
[161]    
I have outlined in some detail the allegations made by the Mother and
the evidence she adduced in support, as well as the Father’s specific responses
that were applicable.
[162]    
The Mother alleged that the Father demanded she undergo an abortion as
he did not want to have a child out of wedlock.  The Mother stated that she
repeatedly told the Father she did not want to terminate the pregnancy, but he
made the appointment at Planned Parenthood and drove her to the clinic.  The
Mother suffered psychological and physical complications from this process
including bleeding, pain, postpartum depression and anxiety.
[163]    
The Mother included a text message dated December 30, 2021, in which she
says “I don’t want to terminate.  I won’t mentally be okay at the end of
that”.  The next message from the Father is 1.5 hours later simply includes
details of a trip to Hawaii.
[164]    
The Father denies that the choice to have an abortion was anything but
the Mother’s.  He states that she pursued this on her own as she wanted more
time focused on the two of them.
[165]    
Undergoing the abortion was a traumatic experience for the Mother and it
led to significant emotional and physical repercussions for her.  However, I am
unable to find on the evidence that the Father forced her to undergo this
procedure.
[166]    
The Mother stated that she revealed to one of the Father’s colleagues,
Dr. Alina Paul that she had an abortion but not about the other abuse as she
did not want Dr. Paul to contact the authorities.  The day after this, the
Mother states that the Father came home and started choking her for sharing
family information.  According to the Mother, he said, “I will let you live
this time”.
[167]    
The Mother asserted that the Father engages in reckless, aggressive
driving and that he drives while impaired.  This is denied by the Father.
[168]    
Sometime in November 2022, the Mother  says the Father went into a ditch
while driving impaired.  She called his family and colleagues as she wanted to
determine his whereabouts.  The Mother alleges that when he came home, he
pinned her up against the wall and choked her because she had dared to speak
about this to his family.
[169]    
The Mother stated that the Father was calling her names.  The Mother
disclosed to the Father’s mother that she had an abortion in December 2021. 
When the Father’s mother asked him about this, the Father slapped the Mother. 
He then left and went to her Mother’s home and returned with Sunita Marakani.
[170]    
Sunita Marakani stated that the Father was using foul language to both
her and the Mother.  She and the Mother took an Uber to return to her home and
on the drive the Mother told her that the Father had slapped her.
[171]    
The Mother’s sister, Sirisha Rao Marakani, described herself as having a
close relationship with her sister: “we are each other’s confidantes”.  The
Father stated that the Mother, her sister and her brother-in-law, Amol
Chiplunkar have a WhatsApp chat group called “Third Wheelin” that they use
regularly to communicate.
[172]    
There is no reference to this incident in Sirisha Marakani’s affidavit.
[173]    
The Mother states that the Father was leaving for work and took his
passport, her passport and the condo keys.  The Mother asked for her items
including the condo keys so she could leave.  The Father grabbed and pushed her
and she was bleeding.
[174]    
The Father’s evidence is that the Mother would not let him leave to go
to work.  He “never once touched her”.  He states that he ended up calling an
Uber to go to work and left the car keys at home.  In cross-examination, the
Father denied ever taking the Mother’s things.
[175]    
The Mother included a text exchange with the maternal grandmother the
same day at 3:42 p.m.  The Mother was also speaking with her sister, Sirisha on
the phone during this exchange.  The Mother says she is emotionally hurt, and
Sunita Marakani tells her “no human or woman should take abuse.  You are an
educated person.  Live with respect.  Please don’t waste time with Siri…”.  The
earlier part of the text exchange with the maternal grandmother was not
included.
[176]    
The parties then exchanged text messages starting at 3:49 p.m. that
afternoon wherein each accuses the other of being “physical”, calling names,
and the other denying this.
[177]    
Later that evening, Sunita Marakani asks the Mother about her pain, she
says that anxiety and stress are not good and tells her to come here
(presumably Ontario) and that she will get the Mother a good gynaecologist. 
The Mother reports to her mother that the Father is home and has told her he
will take her to the hospital.
[178]    
There is no mention of this event in the affidavit of Sirisha Marakani.
[179]    
The Mother asserted that the Father had gotten extremely intoxicated and
ended up sleeping at another woman’s home.  When the Mother told his parents
what had happened, the Father told her she was “deluded”, “a bitch” and
“insecure” and punched her in the stomach.
[180]    
The Father acknowledges he was out drinking with a male friend and
stayed at his friends’ apartment rather than driving.  According to the Father,
the Mother falsely accused him of staying at another woman’s apartment.
[181]    
The parties were both in Canada on March 31, 2023, according to the I-94
printout produced by the Mother.
[182]    
The Mother alleges that the Father again became so intoxicated while out
that he did not know his whereabouts.  He was at a friend’s home and the
friend’s girlfriend sent a picture of the Father passed out on the stairs.  The
photo of the Father shows him sprawled along the stairs with someone I assume
to be his friend pulling his arm as though trying to get him up.
[183]    
When the Mother showed the picture to the Father’s parents, he punched
her and pulled her hair.
[184]    
The Father asserts that he was not intoxicated but rather became very
ill during dinner (not due to intoxication) and his friend took him home by
Uber and stayed with him.  The Father says that his friend and his friend’s
girlfriend tried to explain this to the Mother, but she accused him of having
an affair.
[185]    
The parties were in Canada on June 10, 2023.
[186]    
The Mother describes the events of July 1, 2024, as follows:
[187]    
 Sunita Marakani also describes this incident in her affidavit sworn October
25, 2024.  She states that the Father was withholding the baby from her and the
Mother.  The Father was upset when the baby started crying and he “slapped
and shook” the baby.  When the Mother was finally able to extract the baby,
he slapped her as well.  The Father demanded that the maternal grandmother
leave or she would “never see [her] daughter and granddaughter alive again”.
[188]    
The Mother booked the next flight out for the maternal grandmother on
July 3, 2024.  The Father stayed home with Miraya while the Mother drove her
mother to the airport.
[189]    
The Father states that the Mother’s description of these events is
“entirely false”.  The Father’s evidence is that the two grandmothers had an
altercation while he and the Mother were out at a fundraiser on June 29, 2024. 
He tried to de-escalate things between them when they got home and ensure that
the baby was alright.   The maternal grandmother stayed in her room in
retaliation until the Father’s family left the next day.  The Mother sent, what
the Father described as, a series of hurtful messages while he was at work. 
When he got home, the Mother and maternal grandmother became verbally
aggressive and argumentative with him.  He packed an overnight bag and left to
de-escalate the situation.  He specifically denied all of the allegations.
[190]    
The Father includes a text exchange later the same day in which the
Mother apologizes for her rude and harsh messages.  She states that she has
“never thought” of keeping the child away from the Father and that he is a
“very good one”.  The Father says “I completely trust your ability to be a
mother.  You’ve been a damn amazing one so far.  Sorry I don’t say that enough”. 
The Mother ends the exchange by saying “I do have mental health issues, I
tried my best to be honest about it.  I am not currently fit to be watching
her.  I am not in the best state of mind.  Neither is my mom.   I don’t know
where to go or what to do or who to even call.  My phone won’t even work for
any outgoing calls.”
[191]    
The Mother introduced a text exchange between the Father and her aunt
and uncle that took place on July 2, 2024.  The Father had advised them that he
was going to bow out of an upcoming wedding due to his argument with Sunita
Marakani who continued to blame him for her heart attack.  Naresh says that he
can speculate as to what happened and goes on to encourage the Father to work
things out.  The Father says in this same exchange:
[192]    
In support of her assertion that the Father had pushed the maternal
grandmother to the ground, the Mother produced two undated photos attached as
Exhibits to Sunita Marakani’s affidavit showing a diffuse round bruise about
the size of loon coin, green at the edges on her mother’s shoulder and another
similar bruise on what appears to be her inner arm although it is not clear
from the photo.  There were no details of when the photos were taken or by
whom.
[193]    
The Father states that the maternal grandmother is on blood thinners
following her heart attack.  She began to notice bruises on her body while
staying with them.  The Father encouraged her to see a doctor, but she did not
want to pay for appointments.  Eventually, the Father made an appointment with
her at the hospital on June 26, 2024, so that she could receive bloodwork and
be evaluated.
[194]    
The Mother was cross-examined on this point.  When asked if her mother
was on blood thinners, the Mother responded that “she was not a doctor and
could not speak to her mother’s meds” although she thought she was taking baby
aspirin.  When asked if the Father was concerned about her mother’s bruising as
a side-effect of blood thinners in June 2024, the Mother responded “[n]o that
never happened”.  The Mother then agreed that they had taken her mother to the
hospital on June 26, 2024, but denied that was because the Father was concerned
about the bruising rather, she said it was because the Father was a
“controlling person”.
[195]    
The Mother’s close friend, Shaira Rahimi, stated that on one occasion in
July 2024, the Mother had called her extremely upset as the Father had just
pushed her while she was holding the baby.  Shaira Rahimi stated that she was
fearful for the Mother “as she had not described physical abuse to me much
before this time, but with the baby and Hitanshu’s actions, I was worried for
both their safety.”
[196]    
Sirisha Marakani was also present for the birth of Miraya.  She said
that the Father and his family made her, and the maternal grandmother feel
unwelcome and that his mother in particular created a hostile environment.
[197]    
Sirisha Marakani states that the Mother did not tell her about “the full
extent of the abuse until September 2024”.
[198]    
The Mother states that when they were at the paternal grandparents’ home
in Brampton after September 6, 2024, the Father would only permit her to leave
the home for food.  He would aggressively scream at her often while she was
holding Miraya. The Mother alleged that the paternal grandmother was in possession
of her and the child’s passport.
[199]    
The Mother states that the parties were attending a wedding together on
September 8, 2024, and started arguing.  The argument escalated during the
drive home and the Mother states the Father was screaming and yelling.  He
refused to pull over so that she could attend to the baby who was crying.  When
they got home, the argument continued with the Father continuing to berate her
and calling her a “whore” and saying “you are only good for spreading your
legs”.  Later in the evening, the Mother was preparing a bottle for the baby
and the Father shoved her into the kitchen island and grabbed the child.  When
the baby started crying, she shook her and shouted at her.
[200]    
The Father states that he disputes entirely these allegations which he
is defending in the criminal proceeding.
[201]    
The Mother introduced an audio recording of the argument with the Father
which sadly took place in the presence of Miraya who can be heard in the
background.  There was also a translation for those parts of the recording that
were in the Hindi language.  For much of the conversation, the Father repeats
over and over again that the Mother should take the child and call 911.  The
Mother appears to try to engage the paternal grandfather who she calls “pappa” who
was also present.  The paternal grandfather interjects softly on occasion
encouraging one or other of the parties to eat and to stop fighting.  The
Mother tries to engage the paternal grandfather asking if he has ever spoken to
his wife like this.  At one point the baby is heard crying briefly.  The Mother
says that her mother is ten minutes away and the Father responds by encouraging
the Mother to leave or to call her mother and accuses the Mother of making
empty threats.  He calls her a “chickenshit”.  The Mother says: “you are so
insecure…look at you”.  The Mother says to the Father toward the end of the
recording words to the effect of “look at your face…look how angry you are”.
[202]    
The Father was using foul and demeaning language, but I do not find that
he threatens the Mother in this conversation.   He repeatedly tells the Mother
to leave with the child and to call 911.  The Mother’s tone in calling the
Father insecure or pointing out how angry he is, did not, to my ear, indicate
fear. The behaviour of both parties in exposing their young daughter to this
level of conflict was concerning.
[203]    
According to the Father, the Mother told him on September 10, 2024, that
she wanted to amicably separate, but later her behaviour changed.  He indicates
that Sirisha was also party to these conversations, and she also encouraged
them to amicably separate.
[204]    
The Mother does not provide specific details of what occurred on
September 11 and 12, 2024, except that it was a continuation of the Father not
allowing her to leave the home except for food.  She also reported that the
Father would scream at her aggressively while holding the child as she begged
him to stop.  Her mother-in-law held her passport.
[205]    
The Mother’s evidence was that her family were worried as they were not
hearing much from her and on September 12, 2024, her sister and brother-in-law
drove to the home to do a wellness check on her.
[206]    
Sirisha Marakani stated that she had conversations with the Mother on
September 10 and 11, 2024, in which she could hear the Father yelling at the
Mother in the background using foul language similar to that described above. 
The Mother put her sister on speaker phone and Sirisha Marakani told the Father
not to treat the Mother that way and he should be letting her feed the baby. 
In a call on September 11, 2024, Sirisha heard the Father tell the Mother to
“get back into the bedroom”, “you have no business stepping out” “stay where
you belong”, “get the fuck upstairs”.  The Mother according to her sister was
begging the Father to stop screaming while he had the baby in his arms.
[207]    
The Father states that the Mother refused to leave her room and he cared
for the child during the day while checking on her and bring food and water. 
Their friends, Richard and Rebecca came over for dinner later in the day.  When
they left he went over to Walmart to get more formula for Miraya.
[208]    
The Mother’s sister, Sirisha Marakani and brother-in-law, Amol
Chiplunkar came to see her on September 12, 2024.  When they arrived, the
Father locked her out of the home with Miraya still inside and called the
police.
[209]    
The police report filed by the Father states that “there were no threats
or allegations made and no physical altercation occurred.  There is a clear
misunderstanding between the two parties… All parties stated they understood.” 
In her cross-examination, the Mother disputed the contents of this police
report and said she had requested body cam footage from one of the attending
officers.
[210]    
This was the first time that the police had been involved with the
parties in any jurisdiction.  It was not disputed that child protective
services had not been contacted in any jurisdiction prior to this time.
[211]    
The Mother and Miraya have remained at her parents’ home since that time.
[212]    
The Father commenced a proceeding in the court in Illinois shortly thereafter
seeking the return of Miraya to the State of Illinois.  The Mother then filed a
petition for “Emergency Motion for Temporary and Permanent Relocation of the
Minor Child” in the Illinois proceeding.
[213]    
The Father commenced the within Application on September 27, 2024, and
served the Mother on October 1, 2024.
[214]    
The Mother made a report to the Durham Children’s Aid Society on October
2, 2024, about Miraya being in the Father’s care.  In a letter dated October 4,
2024, the Society indicated that it was still investigating, and it had
concerns that there are “presenting concerns that this partner relationship is
effecting [sic] what is best for Miraya”.  The Father had not yet been
interviewed at the time of the Society’s letter.
[215]    
The parties attended before Leef J. on October 7, 2024, who ordered on
consent that the Father would have parenting time every day while in Canada for
three hours.  The parenting time was not required to be supervised (not on
consent) although the Mother was permitted to have someone present.
[216]    
On October 11, 2024, the Father was charged by the Peel Regional Police
with three counts of assault two allegedly occurring on September 8, 2024, and
one on December 1, 2023.  The Mother did not include details in her affidavit
evidence of an assault taking place on December 1, 2023.
[217]    
The Mother alleges that the Father was controlling over all aspects of
her life.  She was not allowed to meet with certain people without him
present.  He also held onto her travel documents and demanded access to her
phone.  She was unable to document his behaviour due to his strict monitoring
of her phone.  If he found pictures she had taken of a bruise, he would “inflict
more violence [on her] and he would delete the pictures”.
[218]    
The Mother’s friend, Shaira Rahimi, said that the Mother would “often
call her from the closet or bathroom” from the parties’ condominium in
Champaign and would whisper to her friend that the Father was yelling again,
and she did not know what to do.  Shaira Rahimi felt that the Mother was
clearly fearful of the Father.
[219]    
The Father stressed that the Mother had a key to his condominium and the
code for keyless entry to the house.
[220]    
I find the Mother’s assertion that the Father was isolating her from
friends and family difficult to reconcile with the Mother’s frequent and
lengthy trips to Canada some of which were without the Father.   The Mother
also kept in regular contact with her family via WhatsApp while in Champaign.
[221]    
 The Mother also alleged that the Father was financially controlling of
her.  He would not allow her to view his finances and he immediately took
control over her finances after marriage.
[222]    
The Mother’s own evidence to some degree contradicts this broad
statement.  In paragraph 24 of her affidavit, she outlines the various bank and
investment accounts that she has at Canadian banks.  She states that their
wedding money was deposited into a joint account that she opened at RBC in
Ontario and after she found out that the Father was taking money out without
her knowledge, she closed the account and transferred the funds to her sole
account.
[223]    
The Father confirms that the Mother transferred the wedding money into
her own account after an argument.
[224]    
The Mother also stated that she was forced to rely on her Canadian debit
and credit cards which caused her significant conversion fees after the Father
drained her U.S. bank account through the ATM machine.  However, she does not suggest
that she was without access to funds.
[225]    
I am being asked to weigh these serious allegations in the context of
relatively short affidavits followed by brief cross-examinations.  Much of the
parties’ evidence on the issue of abuse is completely contradictory.
[226]    
The Mother sets out a lengthy list of very serious incidents involving
physical violence and threats.  Few are supported by other contemporaneous
evidence.   I am mindful that people who are subjected to domestic violence can
often be reluctant to share information even with those close to them due to
fear, shame, cultural pressures, or a litany of other reasons.  See Barendregt v. Grebliunas, 2022 SCC 22 at
paras. 143-145.  It is for that same reason that I would put little
weight on the fact that neither the police nor child protective services was
called before September 12, 2024.
[227]    
I have concerns about the Mother’s credibility arising from her evidence
on the issue of habitual residence.  I also have concerns with the credibility
of some of her evidence and that of maternal grandmother on the issue of
abuse.  For example, I have concerns about the evidence of the
maternal grandmother’s bruises being put forward as evidence of abuse.  The
Mother did not have details of the dates of the photographs or who took them. 
She belatedly agreed with the Father’s evidence that they had taken her mother
to the hospital a few days before the alleged assault.  Overall, I prefer the
Father’s evidence that the maternal grandmother’s bruises were a result
of her blood thinners rather than because she was thrown to the ground more
than once by him.  These concerns are such that I find I am unable to resolve
the conflicting evidence in the Mother’s favour without some independent
corroboration.
[228]    
I found the evidence of Sirisha Marakani and Amol Chiplunkar more
balanced and careful.  The Mother’s sister and brother-in-law have a close
relationship with her.  The Mother has lived with them and participated in
caring for their children. Sirisha Marakani described herself as having a close
relationship with the Mother – they are confidantes.  The Mother and Father stayed
in the Marakani/Chiplunkar home at times when they were visiting Ontario.  It
is for this reason that I have noted the absence of evidence from Sirisha
Marakani to corroborate some of the Mother’s allegations.
[229]    
The evidence suggests that the Father has at times tried to extricate
himself from conflict with the Mother.  In the January 9, 2024, argument, the
Father drove over to the maternal grandmother’s home and brought her back to
his parents’ home.  The Mother and maternal grandmother later left together. 
In the July 1, 2024, incident, the Father packed an overnight bag and left the
home leaving the Mother and baby at home with the maternal grandmother.  During
the argument on September 8, 2024, while the Father made denigrating and foul
comments to the Mother in the course of their argument, I do not find he
threatened her.   He repeatedly told her to call 9-1-1 and to take the baby.
[230]    
I do find that the Father used foul and demeaning language during
arguments with the Mother.
[231]    
With reference to the test in Hassan, I am unable to find on the
balance of probabilities, in what is necessarily a summary proceeding, that
there has been severe or life-threatening past violence or that violence is
likely to recur.  There is no evidence that the Father has not been amenable to
control by the justice system.  The Mother did not suggest that he has failed
to follow his criminal release terms or the family court orders.
[232]    
The Mother referred me to Husid in which the Ontario Court of
Appeal upheld the trial judge’s decision not to return the child to Peru
pursuant to Article 13(b).  The trial judge had evidence that the father (who
carried a gun) had threatened to kill the mother as had his cousin.  There was
evidence of physical injuries to the mother in the form of a legal medical
certificate.  The father had attempted to physically take the child from the
mother in the presence of the police.  It was also noted that the mother was at
risk of being arrested upon her return to Peru which would suddenly remove the
child from the care of the mother.
[233]    
As Fairburn, A.C.J stated in Zafar at para. 40:
[234]    
In Paschel v. Paschel, 2017 ONSC 6952, aff’d 2017 ONCA 972, the
application judge held at para. 89:
[235]    
In Thomson, LaForest J. held at para. 86:
[236]    
The Father has undertaken not to pursue a divorce to the extent that
will impact the Mother’s immigration status in the U.S.
[237]    
When the Father was charged, he flew back to Illinois (as permitted by
his release conditions) leaving the Mother with the family car.  In the court
in Illinois, he offered to vacate the Trostshire home so that the Mother could
reside there, and he repeated that undertaking before me.  He also agreed to
pay the carrying costs on the home, the car expenses and to pay the Mother a
sum of money for ongoing support all without prejudice.
[238]    
These undertakings are appropriate to ensure that Miraya’s return to her
habitual residence can occur in a manner that keeps both parties safe and
minimizes this young child’s exposure to further conflict.
[239]    
There is already a proceeding before the court in Illinois.  The parties
have a date set for November 18, 2024.  I accept that the court in Illinois
along with the associated social services organizations in that state are
capable of providing the Mother with the necessary protection and support.
[240]    
For all these reasons, I find that the Mother has not met the burden of
demonstrating on a balance of probabilities that to order Miraya’s return to
Illinois would expose the child to physical or psychological harm or otherwise
place Miraya in an intolerable situation.
[241]    
As the Ontario Court of Appeal noted in Ellis at para. 50, I am
not ordering that the Mother return to live with the Father.  This would be
contrary to the Father’s criminal release terms in any event.  I am requiring
the child to be returned to Illinois so that the court in that state can
properly deal with the issues in the proceeding that has already been commenced
there.
[242]    
The parties had raised the possibility of Leef J.’s temporary order for
parenting time continuing pending further order by the court in Illinois.  I
have declined to make an order for parenting time to take place once Miraya is
returned to Illinois as the court in Illinois can make the appropriate order. 
I have provided the Mother with a few days to get organized for the trip back
to Illinois.  Miraya must be returned to Illinois by November 17, 2024.  If the
Father is in Ontario prior to that time, Leef J.’s order shall apply so that he
can continue to enjoy parenting time.