1.     
This is a motion by Vince and Colleen
Battista (the “Landlord”) seeking an Order declaring that the stay pursuant to
section 69.3 of the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act (the “BIA”) does not
apply to certain paragraphs of the Order of the Landlord and Tenant Board (“LTB”)
made July 24, 2024 (the “LTB Order”). In particular, the Landlord seeks an
Order that the stay does not apply to provisions in the LTB’s Order requiring
Mr. Stevenson to vacate the unit and deliver possession to the Landlord and
compelling the Sheriff to enforce the eviction.
2.     
The Landlord recognizes that the
provisions from the LTB’s Order requiring that certain amounts be paid by Mr.
Stevenson are subject to the stay of proceedings triggered by the insolvency
filing.
3.     
Mr. Stevenson’s tenancy commenced on or
about September 18, 2023 pursuant to a residential tenancy agreement. Mr.
Stevenson stopped paying rent and certain utilities on February 1, 2024.
4.     
The Landlord commenced an Application at
the LTB on February 27, 2024. The LTB hearing took place on June 27, 2024.
5.     
The LTB Application was determined on July
24, 2024 by Member Rachel Gibbons. In her order, Member Gibbons set out
deadlines for certain amounts to be paid and provided that if payment was not
made pursuant to the LTB Order, Mr. Stevenson was required to vacate the unit
by September 15, 2024. If the unit was not vacated by September 15, 2024, the
LTB Order provided that the Landlord could file the Order with the Sherriff for
enforcement.
6.     
Mr. Stevenson applied for a review of the
LTB Order on August 23, 2024.  That review was denied on August 26, 2024. No
further appeal was made from these orders.
7.     
Mr. Stevenson did not make any of the
payments required by the LTB Order and did not vacate the unit by September 15,
2024. Despite Mr. Stevenson’s failure to pay any rent since February 2024, the
Landlord continues to incur carrying and maintenance costs for the property (i.e.
mortgage, taxes, insurance) and also pays for the water utilities.
8.     
The Landlord took steps to file the LTB
Order with the Sherriff on September 16, 2024 and the Sherriff scheduled an
attendance at the unit for October 4, 2024 for purposes of evicting the tenant. 
Mr. Stevenson was served with the Notice to vacate by the Sherriff’s office on
September 25, 2024.
9.     
Mr. Stevenson made an assignment in
bankruptcy on September 25, 2024.
10. 
The Sherriff’s office refused to carry out
the eviction on account of the bankruptcy filing and takes the position that an
order lifting the stay in bankruptcy is required prior to it carrying out the
eviction.
11. 
The Landlord has therefore brought the
within motion seeking an Order that the stay does not apply or alternatively,
seeking an Order lifting the stay.  The Landlord’s position is that as they are
only seeking to enforce the provisions of the LTB Order that require that they
have possession of the unit, and as that claim is not a “claims provable”
pursuant to section 121(1) of the BIA, the stay under section 69.3 is not
triggered.
12. 
Section 121 (1) of the BIA defined “claims
provable” as:
13. 
The LIT does not take a position on the
motion.
14. 
Mr. Stevenson opposes the motion.  He
acknowledged that he has not taken steps to appeal the LTB Order (or to appeal
the order denying his request to review the decision). He also acknowledges
that he has not paid any rent to the Landlord, although he indicated that he
had recently received advice that he should pay rent to the LIT for the LIT to
hold in trust pending further determinations and that he intends to do so.  As
of the date of the motion, Mr. Stevenson has not paid any such amounts to the
LIT as he is awaiting the outcome of the motion.
15. 
Mr. Stevenson advised that a further
application has been scheduled for hearing before the LTB in January 2025.  It
appears that this application deals with: outstanding rent arrears after the
filing in bankruptcy as well as ongoing and additional maintenance issues
raised by the tenants.  When asked to provide clarifications of any “new”
maintenance issues arising after the date of the LTB Order, Mr. Stevenson
indicated that these maintenance issues were all related to an aggravation of
the mice issue in the rental unit.
16. 
In her reasons for decision at paragraph
13, Member Gibbons expressly considered the mice issue raised by Mr. Stevenson
at the LTB hearing as well as other maintenance issues raised by him despite
the fact that disclosure of those issues was only made to the Landlord the day
before the hearing.  The LTB Order was therefore made notwithstanding the maintenance
issues raised by Mr. Stevenson. The LTB Order, and findings made in its
reasons, cannot be ignored or revisited by this Court and is subject to the
principle of res judicata (Paterson v City of Oshawa, 2023
ONSC 2287[1]
at paragraph 31).
17. 
The Landlord only seeks to enforce the
provisions of the LTB Order that entitle them to possession of the unit.  The provisions
of an order providing for eviction and possession of a rental unit is not an
order for “debts and liabilities” and is therefore not a “claims provable”
pursuant to section 121(1) of the BIA (In the Matter of the Bankruptcy of
Sylvie Marie Lafond (AKA Jane Lafond) of the City of Ottawa, in the Province of
Ontario, 2023 ONSC 4065[2]).
18. 
In addition, this is not a case where a
landlord seeks to terminate a lease on account of non-payment of rent. The
Landlord’s application to terminate the lease for non-payment occurred
approximately 7 months prior to the bankruptcy filing. The LTB Order was made 2
months prior to the bankruptcy filing. Therefore, section 84.2 of the BIA which
prohibits termination of leases based upon claims provable in an insolvency
does not apply to this matter.
19. 
Therefore, the stay pursuant to section
69.4 of the BIA does not apply to the provisions of the LTB Order that relate
to the tenants’ eviction and the Landlord’s right to possession of the rental
unit.
20. 
This is also a case where I would have
alternatively granted an order lifting the stay pursuant to section 69.4 of the
BIA.  Just like in the Lafond matter, the lifting of the stay does not
affect the rights of Mr. Stevenson’s other creditors and as the Landlord
continues to incur expenses in connection with the unit, it would be just and
equitable to lift the stay (see Lafond at paragraph 20; Paterson
v City of Oshawa, 2023 ONSC 2287 at paragraphs 32 and 42).  I also note
that despite the fact that he has not paid rent since February 2024, Mr.
Stevenson has falsely claimed in his Statement of Affairs to be paying rent in
the amount of $2,400 which was also the case in the Paterson decision.
21. 
For the reasons above, the motion is
granted and an Order will go as requested.
22. 
As the Landlord was successful on the
motion, I also find that it is appropriate for the Landlord to have its costs
of the motion on a partial indemnity basis in the amount of $2,215.50 payable
within 30 days.