[1]              
The Moving Party Plaintiff, Giuseppe Lisozzi (“Lisozzi”), asks for an
Order that the Defendant, Montana Holdings Limited (“Montana”), provide a full
accounting of its Power of Sale transaction. Lisozzi seeks documentary proof
for the deductions and expenses Montana claimed in its Statement of Proceeds,
dated August 3, 2023, and that it pays out the proper residual funds.
[2]              
Montana consents to an order for an accounting but brings a
cross-motion for security for costs as a term of the order for an accounting.
[3]              
Montana relies on rule 56.09 which provides for the exercise of this
court’s discretion to order security for costs as a term of the requested Order.
[4]              
Montana submits the Court should exercise its discretion to order
security for costs for the following reasons:
[5]              
Lisozzi defaulted on his mortgage to Montana in the amount of $550,000
(the “Mortgage”).  The term of the Mortgage was one year.
[6]              
Montana commenced power of sale proceedings after the default.  The
Property was sold under power of sale on June 5, 2023.  This action was
commenced on August 31, 2023.  The Statement of Claim alleges there was an
improvident sale of the Property.  The Statement of Defence denies all the
allegations in the Statement of Claim.
[7]              
Montana’s assessment is that a trial of the
issues involved in the action would take from 5 to 10 days.
[8]              
Motions for security for costs are usually brought
under rule 56.01(1) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990,
Reg. 194.  The Court has discretion to make the Order if a
Plaintiff in an action is a corporation or nominal Plaintiff with insufficient
assets in Ontario to pay the Defendant’s legal costs, or, if there is good reason
to believe the action is frivolous and vexatious and the Plaintiff has
insufficient assets in Ontario to pay the Defendant’s legal costs.  These
motions are brought before an Associate Judge.
[9]              
However, Montana brings this motion under rule 56.09
which provides:
[10]          
Montana submits that this is an appropriate case for
the Court to exercise its discretion. It submits that although the surplus of
sale proceeds will provide Lisozzi with sufficient funds to finance this litigation,
it is reasonable to believe those funds may be dissipated by the time the
action comes to trial in two or three years.  There is no evidence to support
this submission.
[11]          
Lisozzi denies he is impecunious. This position,
however, is alleged to be directly contradicted by his own submissions at the
July 10, 2023 case conference, in which his counsel wrote:
[12]          
Montana submits its Statement of Defence discloses a strong prima
facie case that it will be successful in this litigation.  This, however,
does not satisfy the test on regular motions for security for costs.
[13]          
As well, Montana points out that the mortgage terms stipulate
that it is entitled to substantial indemnity costs arising from the power of
sale, and it is therefore entitled to claim such costs from Lisozzi.
[14]          
There is insufficient evidence to support Montana’s submission
that the Court can draw an inference from the actions of the parties and their
counsel to date.  Montana submits that it has tried to meet its legal
obligations in a manner that is expeditious and fair to both parties.  In
return, Lisozzi has failed to engage in a way that similarly increases
procedural efficiency; Lisozzi’s conduct has resulted in lengthy delays and
unnecessary Court costs.
[15]          
Montana estimates legal costs for a 5-10 day trial from $59,990.24 to $82,307.74
(inclusive of disbursements and HST) on a partial indemnity basis. If awarded
on a substantial indemnity basis, the cost estimates rise accordingly.  Montana asks for an
order that $50,000 be set aside as security for costs.
[16]          
Montana refuses to release any of the surplus funds to the Plaintiff
from the Power of Sale without mandatory conditions. The Plaintiff has not
agreed to such conditions and the funds have thus not been released.
[17]          
The Plaintiff submits that mortgage enforcement and the determination of
Montana’s costs are not critical aspects in the action for improvident sale.  I
agree.
[18]          
There has been no accounting for the costs and expenses set out in the Statement
of Proceeds.
[19]          
I agree that the Plaintiff is entitled to be paid a sum in excess of
$250,000.00, subject to the accounting.  For this reason, I find that the
evidence does not support a finding that he is impecunious.
[20]          
The order Montana requests is discretionary and would be imposed as a
term or condition of the order for relief that the Plaintiff seeks.  It must be
reasonable to impose this particular term or condition. I do not find that imposing
an order for security for costs constitutes a reasonable term or condition of
the Plaintiff’s order for an accounting.  The Defendant agreement to granting the
Plaintiff’s order is contingent upon an order for security for costs. However,
I find that the Plaintiff had no improper motive for bringing the request for an
order for an accounting. Montana agreed that he is entitled to that order.  The
accounting request is also not directly related to the Plaintiff’s claim of an
improvident sale.  Instead, the order for an accounting seeks to determine the
basis for the Defendant’s claim to an entitlement to deduct costs. This
information would allow the Plaintiff to evaluate whether the Defendant has the
right to withhold those amounts from the surplus proceeds of sale.  The
Plaintiff can then identify and pursue appropriate means of obtaining proper
surplus payments.
[21]          
For these reasons, I therefore grant the attached Order.
[22]          
The Plaintiff is the successful party on this motion and the costs he
submitted during the hearing are appropriate and reasonable. I order that the
Defendant pay costs on a partial indemnity basis in the agreed upon amount of
$13,000. However, if the parties are unable to agree on costs that arise as a
result of the rules of Offers to Settle, the Plaintiff may make
submissions of no more than two pages, double spaced, sent to the Defendant,
uploaded to CaseLines, and with a copy sent to my assistant Roxanne Johnson at
Roxanne.johnson@ontario.ca by December 23, 2024.  The Defendant may make
submissions of no more than two pages, double spaced, sent to the Plaintiff,
uploaded to CaseLines, and with a copy sent to my assistant by January 6, 2025. 
No reply submissions will be accepted.  If no submissions are received by January
6, 2025, costs will be deemed to be settled.