[1]              
In this action the Plaintiff Puri Professional Corporation (“Puri PC”) seeks
coverage under an errors and omissions insurance policy relating to a lawsuit
arising out of tax advice which it gave to one of its clients.
[2]              
The Defendants Lloyd’s Underwriters and The Sovereign General Insurance
Company (the “Insurers”) move for summary judgment dismissing Puri’s claim.
[3]              
Puri brings a cross motion for summary judgment for a declaration that it
is entitled to insurance coverage for the client’s negligence claim.
[4]              
The Insurers’ motion for summary judgment is granted. Puri PC’s motion
for summary judgment is dismissed.
[5]              
Puri PC is an accounting firm and Amit Puri (“Mr. Puri”) is its
principal.
[6]              
Mr. Puri provided tax services and tax advice (the “Advice”) to Shahyad
Farzaneh Ghoschaninejad (the “Client”). The Advice concerned the Client’s tax
free savings account (“TFSA”).
[7]              
The uncontested timeline is as follows:
[8]              
On May 28, 2020 the Client sent a demand letter giving Puri PC notice of
a potential claim (“the Demand Letter”). The Demand Letter alleges that Puri PC
gave poor tax advice and service to the Client from 2014 to 2019 resulting in
the client having to pay an advantage tax due to over contributions to the
Client’s TFSA.
[9]              
On September 15, 2020 the Client commenced an action against Puri PC
alleging that it had failed to advise of potential tax consequences related to
the TSFA contributions in the 2016 taxation year, which resulted in the Client
being audited by the CRA (the “Client’s Negligence Claim”).
[10]          
Puri PC had an insurance policy for errors and omissions coverage for
accountants with policy number AT00556-0 (the “Policy”) from the Insurers with
a policy period from April 9, 2020 to April 9, 2021.
[11]          
The policy includes coverage subject to any exclusions. One of the
exclusions is entitled Retroactive Date and it excludes any actual or alleged
wrongful act by the Insured (the Plaintiff) committed or alleged to have been
committed prior to the retroactive date stated on the declaration page of the
Policy.
[12]          
Puri PC submitted a claim for coverage to the Insurers for defence and
indemnity relating to the Client’s Negligence Claim.
[13]          
The Insurers denied coverage based on the Retroactive Date exclusion.
[14]          
The Insurers say that there is no coverage because the wrongful acts
alleged in the Client’s Negligence Action occurred before the Retroactive Date.
[15]          
Puri PC says the Policy was valid when Mr. Puri made the claim and there
are no applicable exclusions.
[16]          
The Insurers argue, in the alternative, that even if the Retroactive
Date exclusion does not apply, Puri PC is not entitled to coverage because a
trial is needed to determine if another exclusion applies. This other exclusion
is based on Puri PC’s knowledge of a potential claim at the time it applied for
coverage. Puri PC argues that there is sufficient evidence for the court to
grant summary judgment.
[17]          
There are two issues as follows:
[18]          
Rule 20.04(2)(a) provides: “The court shall grant summary judgment if
the court is satisfied that there is no genuine issue requiring a trial with
respect to a claim or defence”.
[19]          
Rule 20.04(2.1) sets out the court's powers on a motion for summary
judgment as follows:
[20]          
In determining under clause (2) (a) whether there is a genuine issue
requiring a trial, the court shall consider the evidence submitted by the
parties and, if the determination is being made by a judge, the judge may
exercise any of the following powers for the purpose, unless it is in the
interest of justice for such powers to be exercised only at a trial:
[21]          
In Hryniak v. Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 87, at para.
66, the Supreme Court of Canada established a road map outlining how a motions
judge should approach a motion for summary judgment:
[22]          
[T]he judge should first determine if there is a genuine issue requiring
trial based only on the evidence before her, without using the new fact-finding
powers. There will be no genuine issue requiring a trial if the summary
judgment process provides her with the evidence required to fairly and justly
adjudicate the dispute and is a timely, affordable, and proportionate
procedure, under Rule 20.04(2)(a). If there appears to be a genuine issue
requiring a trial, she should then determine if the need for a trial can be
avoided by using the new powers under Rules 20.04(2.1) and (2.2). She may, at
her discretion, use those powers, provided that their use is not against the
interest of justice. Their use will not be against the interest of justice if
they will lead to a fair and just result and will serve the goals of
timeliness, affordability, and proportionality in light of the litigation as a
whole.
[23]          
There is no genuine issue requiring a trial when the court is able to
reach a fair and just determination on the merits of the motion. This will be
the case where the process (1) allows the court to make necessary findings of
fact, (2) allows the court to apply the law to the facts, and (3) is a
proportionate, more expeditious, and less expensive means to achieve a just
result: Hryniak, at para. 49; Moffitt v. TD Canada Trust, 2023
ONCA 349, 483 D.L.R. (4th) 432, at para. 39.
[24]          
The court is entitled to assume that it has all the evidence that would
be available at trial related to the matters at issue: Portuguese Canadian
Credit Union v. Pires, 2011 ONSC 7448, at para. 11, aff’d 2012 ONCA 335.
[25]          
The parties agree that this is an appropriate case for summary judgment
on the issue of the Retroactive Date Exclusion. The facts are largely
undisputed. I am satisfied that I can come to a fair and just result. The
determination of this issue is appropriate for summary judgment.
[26]          
A “duty to defend” policy is one in which the insurer is required to
provide a defence for the insured in the insured litigation if there is a
"possibility" that the insurance policy will have to respond to the
substantive claims against the insured in that litigation. If a claim falls
within the terms of coverage and is not clearly and unambiguously excluded,
then, by definition, there must be a “possibility of coverage”: Progressive
Homes Ltd. v. Lombard General Insurance Co., 2010 SCC 33, at para. 51.
[27]          
The Policy is a “claims made” policy meaning it provides coverage for
claims made within the policy period. The policy period is April 9, 2020 to
April 9, 2021.  On June 5, 2020 Puri PC notified the Insurers of a potential claim.
As set out above the Client’s Negligence Claim was issued on September 15,
2020.  The parties agree that the claim was made within the term of the policy.
[28]          
The analysis is as follows:
[29]          
There is no issue that the Policy was in effect in June 2020 when the
Demand Letter was reported to the Insurers and the claim was made.  The issue
is whether an exclusion applies.
[30]          
Under the heading “EXCLUSIONS”, the Policy states:
[31]          
The Policy’s declarations page states that the retroactive date is April
9, 2020.
[32]          
Generally, coverage provisions are interpreted broadly and exclusions
are interpreted narrowly. The insurer must prove that the loss is excluded. Contra
proferentem is applied to remove a doubt, not to create a doubt or magnify
ambiguity: Kelly Panteluk Construction Ltd. v Lloyd’s Underwriters, 2022
SKKB 227 at paras 14 and 17; MDS Inc. v Factory Mutual Insurance Co.,
2021 ONCA 594 at para 45.
[33]          
I find that the Policy covers errors and omissions which occurred during
the term of the policy. The Retroactive Date Exclusion clearly and
unambiguously states that the Policy does not cover wrongful acts, negligent
acts, negligent errors or negligent omissions committed or alleged to have been
committed before the retroactive date in the Policy.
[34]          
The Policy’s declarations page is also clear and unambiguous; it states
that the  retroactive date is April 9, 2020.
[35]          
Mr. Puri concedes that the Client’s allegations in the Negligence Action
are that Puri PC and Mr. Puri were negligent before April, 2020.
[36]          
In his oral argument counsel for Puri PC relied on Backyard Media
Inc. v. HDI Global Specialty SE, 2021 ONSC 2341. In Backyard, the
definition of “retroactive date” was “not written in grammatically scannable
English” and the exclusion for claims of which the insured was aware  as of the
inception of the policy was “hopelessly ambiguous”; Backyard at paras.
43 and 64.  Backyard is distinguishable because in present case the
retroactive date is not ambiguous; rather, it is a clear and specific date:
April 9, 2020.
[37]          
Puri PC has made an argument that there was a clerical error or “typo” which
was a mistake that I should rectify. Some background about the application
process is necessary.
[38]          
Puri PC’s insurance broker Multirisk Insurance Broker (the “Broker”) who
is not a party to this action arranged for the Policy through Premier Canada Assurance
Managers Ltd. (“Premier”) who is the managing general agent with delegated
authority to bind the Insurers.
[39]          
On February 25, 2020 Mr. Puri completed an application with Multirisk
for errors and omissions insurance for Puri PC (the “Application”). The
retroactive date on the Application is April 9, 2020.
[40]          
On April 8, 2020 Multirisk emailed an underwriter to bind the policy
effective April 9, 2020 with the same retroactive date.
[41]          
In the Application there is a question about prior insurance coverage.
[42]          
From 2019-2020, Puri PC was insured with ENCON Group Inc. (“ENCON”) with
an errors and omissions policy from April 6, 2019 to April 6, 2020.
[43]          
In the Application on the third page the answer to question 21 about
prior coverage states that the “retroactive date” for the ENCON Policy is
“April 9, 2020”, when in fact it was April 6, 2020. Puri PC says that the
“April 9, 2020” date is a clerical error, a “typo”, and the answer ought to
have been “April 6, 2020”. Puri PC says it did not know that this error was made.
[44]          
On June 5, 2020, after Puri PC received the Demand Letter, Multirisk wrote
to Premier advising that Puri PC had been able to locate its prior insurance
policy and asked the retroactive date of the Policy be changed.  Premier
advised that they could not offer retroactive coverage due to the three day gap
in coverage between April 6, 2020 (the end of the ENCON policy) and April 9,
2020 (the start of the policy).
[45]          
Multirisk told Premier that the gap was due to confusion about the date
of the expiry of the ENCON policy and asked them to provide coverage. Premier
said they could not backdate coverage. After Multirisk asked Premier again to
provide retroactive coverage, Premier said that to obtain retroactive coverage
there should be no gap in coverage and “[as] such, as we are not able to backdate
cover, retroactive cover would not be available too”.
[46]          
Puri PC submits that the three day gap in coverage triggers the
Retroactive Exclusion and is the cause of the Insurers’ denial of coverage for
the Client’s claim. I do not agree. I do not read the denial letter this way.
The denial letter says that coverage is denied because of the Retroactive Date
Exclusion set out above and because Puri PC was aware of circumstance that could
give rise to a claim and the policy does not provided coverage for
circumstances known at inception.
[47]          
Prior to issuing the Policy Premier said:
[48]          
In its factum Puri PC says:
[49]          
Puri PC submits that by asking about what insurance coverage Puri PC had
in the past, the Application suggested that the Insurers might have agreed to
provide coverage going back for five years.
[50]          
I do not need to decide whether the Insurers might have agreed to
provide retroactive coverage had there been no gap in coverage. The point is
that they did not do so. Rectification will not assist Puri PC.
[51]          
It was not the responsibility of the Insurers to ensure there was proper
coverage for Puri PC. The Insurers owed no duty to Puri PC because an
experienced broker Multirisk was acting on behalf of Puri PC. The Insurers’ only
obligation was to issue a policy in accordance with the Application submitted: Drader
v Sebastian, 2009 SKCA 44, para 47; Broudreau v Ontario Soccer Assn.,
2012 ONSC 4461, para 25.; Ostenda et al. v Bahena Miranda et al., 2012
ONSC 7346, para 47.
[52]          
In this case the Application provided for a retroactive date of April 9,
2020. The Insurers met their obligation to provide insurance coverage in
accordance with the Application. Even if the “typo” was corrected, the
retroactive date would be April 6, 2020.  This correction would not assist the
Plaintiff because the alleged acts did not occur during the three day gap, they
occurred well before April, 2020.
[53]          
Given my decision that there is no coverage for Puri PC with respect to
the Client’s Negligence Claim because the Retroactive Date Exclusion applies, I
do not need to decide the issue of whether another exclusion relating to the
circumstances known by Puri PC at the time it applied for the Policy applies.
[54]          
The Insurers’ motion for summary judgment is granted.  Puri PC’s cross
motion for summary judgment is dismissed.
[55]          
The parties have agreed that if the Insurers are successful, they are
entitled to costs in the amount of $35,000 inclusive of HST and disbursements.