[1]              
The accused, Prince Graham, and the Crown apply
to change the venue for this first degree murder trial from Gore Bay to Toronto
or to Sudbury, respectively.
[2]              
This is the second time the accused and the
Crown have applied this year for a change of venue. At the time of the first
applications in July 2024, there were six accused on the indictment. Shortly
after argument of those applications, the five other co-accused reached a
resolution of their matters with the Crown and their change of venue
applications became moot.
[3]              
This substantially changed the landscape for the
remaining change of venue applications, because one of the main arguments
originally advanced related to the inability of the Gore Bay courthouse to
accommodate a jury trial for six in-custody accused. At the direction of the court,
the Crown and the accused filed updated materials and submissions were heard on
November 12, 2024.
[4]              
This is my decision on the two outstanding
change of venue applications.
[5]              
Jerome Fuller, Saijeth Kamaraj, Umainesan
Manuel, Warren Mills and Jeromie Simon (the five co-accused) were jointly
charged with first degree murder in the death of Brandan Brooks, who was shot
and killed in the First Nation community of M’Chigeeng, on Manitoulin Island. 
The five co-accused had a preliminary hearing that was conducted remotely from
Sudbury. They were committed to stand trial for first degree murder.
[6]              
Prince Graham was charged in a separate information.
He did not have a preliminary hearing.  The Crown preferred a direct indictment
against Prince Graham and joined him with the five co-accused in an indictment
preferred by the Deputy Attorney General on March 06, 2024.
[7]              
Gore Bay is the judicial seat for the Manitoulin
District, which encompasses Manitoulin Island. Indictments on matters
originating in the Manitoulin District are filed in Gore Bay, where the
proceedings are heard. There is a permanent courthouse in Gore Bay which
includes a jury courtroom and jury deliberation room. However, the Manitoulin
District does not have a jail. The Sudbury District Jail, where prisoners are
normally held for matters arising in the Manitoulin District, is approximately
a two-and-a-half-hour drive from Gore Bay.
[8]              
The Sudbury District abuts the Manitoulin
District to the east. Indictments are filed in the Sudbury District Courthouse
on Elm Street, where the proceedings are heard. The Sudbury District Jail is
immediately adjacent to the Sudbury District Courthouse. The buildings are
connected by a secure underground tunnel, which is used for the transportation
of prisoners between the buildings.
[9]              
The province is divided into eight judicial regions.
The Manitoulin District and the Sudbury District are both in the Northeast
Region: Courts of Justice Act, RSO 1990, c. C. 43, s 79(1), RRO 1990, Reg
186, s 1. The judicial region of Toronto is located approximately six hours’
drive from Gore Bay and four hours’ drive from Sudbury.
[10]          
The accused’s trial is scheduled to start the
week of January 13, 2025. Jury courtrooms in Gore Bay and Sudbury are available
to host this trial. Ten weeks were set aside in the schedule for this trial
because it originally involved six co-accused. Counsel agree less time will be
required. It is reasonable to assume half that time will be saved.
[11]          
It is a well-established principle that criminal
trials should be heard in the community in which the alleged crime took place: R.
v. Suzack, 2000 CanLII 5630 (ON
CA) at para. 30; R. v. Sandham, 2008 CanLII 84099 (ON SC) at para. 13.
In some cases the interests of the accused and/or the community will require
the trial take place in another venue, where it appears “expedient to the ends
of justice”: Suzack, at para. 30; Criminal Code, RSC 1985, c. C. 46,
para. 599(1)(a).
[12]          
Regional Senior Judges are delegated by the
Chief Justice as the administrative authority to determine the proper venue for
a trial: Courts of Justice Act, s 75(1); R. v. Jeffries, 2010
CarswellOnt 601 (ON SC) at para. 61.
[13]          
The parties jointly submit Gore Bay is not the
proper venue for this trial. They argue the lack of a jail in the Manitoulin
District will negatively impact the accused’s ability to meet with counsel
during the trial because of the daily five hours of travel back and forth from
the Sudbury District Jail. They remind the court this trial is scheduled to
take place during possibly the worst time for winter travel in this region,
which would imperil the accused’s daily commute.
[14]          
Prince Graham submits Toronto is the proper
venue. He argues he needs to be close to family and counsel in Toronto for
support and to properly prepare for his trial. He submits the conditions at the
Sudbury District Jail currently prevent him from meeting with counsel and it is
too expensive for his counsel to travel to Sudbury from Toronto to meet with
him in person. He states he is sleeping on the floor and has been the subject of
physical attacks and threats. He further states the jail is infested with
vermin, the water is unfit to drink and as a Muslim he is not provided with
culturally appropriate meals. He submits only Toronto and the jails located
there can provide him with a “reasonably serene environment” in which his trial
can take place. In the alternative, the accused asks that if the trial remains
in the Northeast Region, it should be transferred to North Bay where he has had
a more positive experience in the local jail.
[15]          
The Crown argues Sudbury is the proper venue, in
large part because it is closest to Gore Bay and the Sudbury District Jail is
next door to the courthouse. Having the trial in Sudbury would better respect
the principle that trials should take place in the community where the crime is
alleged to have occurred. It would also, the Crown argues, accommodate the
accused’s need to meet with counsel during the trial. For example, the Greater
Sudbury Police Service can accommodate counsel visits within the courthouse on
trial days.
[16]          
I begin my analysis by finding it is “expedient
to the ends of justice” that the trial take place outside the Manitoulin
District. This will be a lengthy trial, likely five weeks. The cumulative
effect of the daily travel for the accused from Sudbury to Gore Bay and back,
and the consequential impact it has on other aspects of his trial, will be
extremely difficult. The travel will also take place during the worst part of
winter, when storms can close the highway, or make it very hazardous to
navigate, causing delays. In these circumstances, trial fairness, efficiency,
and the safety of the applicant and police will best be achieved in another
venue.
[17]          
The party seeking a change of venue bears the
onus of establishing on a balance of probabilities that a change is “expedient
to the ends of justice”: Suzack, at para. 43. This is a unique
situation. Most cases involve either the Crown or the accused applying to
change the venue. Here, I agree with the parties that the venue needs to be
changed. For the purposes of these applications, each party has the onus of
establishing the appropriate venue.
[18]          
In my view, Sudbury is the appropriate venue for
this trial.
[19]          
Sudbury is the closest judicial district and
would be the shortest distance for witnesses to travel from Manitoulin Island.
It is also closer to the community in which Brandan Brooks was killed. The jail
where the accused will be housed for the trial is next door to the Sudbury
courthouse. The large jury courtroom in Sudbury is available for this trial on
the dates that have been set. The Greater Sudbury Police Service can
accommodate within the courthouse private visits with counsel every day the
court sits. Holding the trial in a neighbouring district also better preserves
the principle that local cases be tried locally: Sandham, at paras
13-16.
[20]          
These factors far outweigh the arguments put
forward by the accused. It is evidently more convenient to the accused that the
trial be held in Toronto. It is his home community, where he can receive the
support of family and friends and where his counsel has an office. However, out
of region counsel are routinely retained on criminal matters in the Northeast
Region. They arrange to see their in-custody clients in person and/or remotely.
[21]          
Meeting with in-custody clients, even for local
counsel, can be difficult at times. Lockdowns and staff shortages can lead to
disruptions in scheduling or completing appointments. The accused filed an
affidavit setting out difficulties his counsel had scheduling meetings with him
in April 2024. The most recent affidavit filed for this application suggests
his counsel “has suffered huge difficulties in securing her access to Mr.
Graham.” In submissions, he also relied on the evidence filed on behalf of some
of the co-accused in the earlier change of venue applications. Jeromie Simon
missed nine of fifteen scheduled meetings (eight of which were in 2023).
Umainesan Manuel missed one scheduled meeting. Jerome Fuller missed six out of
ten scheduled meetings between January and May 2024.
[22]          
The accused submits, without evidence, that the
problems he has experienced in the Sudbury District Jail would be alleviated by
a transfer to a Toronto Region jail. These include meeting with counsel,
sleeping on the floor, having culturally appropriate food, and experiencing
physical violence and threats of violence.
[23]          
The accused further argues a fair trial can only
be achieved in Toronto because it will afford him a “reasonably serene
environment” for the hearing. This phrase, found in the change of venue
jurisprudence, is tied to the accused’s right to a fair trial before an
impartial jury. It was first used by Fish J.A. (as he then was) in R. v.
Charest 1990 CanLII 3425 (QC CA) in the following passage at para. 117:
[24]          
But the accused urges the court to expand this
phrase to include the conditions of his pre-trial incarceration and the
proximity of his family and counsel, relying on R. v. Mearow 2015 ONSC
7149 (CanLII). In that case, logistical concerns such as the size of the
courtroom, the number of counsel tables and a multi-person prisoner’s dock
were, in the court’s view, insufficient to support a change in venue. However,
the main concern was the potential impact on the applicants’ fair trial
interests caused by their notoriety in the community and the “extensive graphic
media attention concerning the mutilation of the deceased”: Mearow, at para.
16.
[25]          
There is no evidence in this application that
the accused cannot have an impartial jury in Sudbury. I decline to apply Charest
in the broad way suggested by the accused. This would stretch its meaning well
beyond its purpose. Even applying an expanded view of Charest, I am not
persuaded the accused’s stated pre-trial conditions and distance from his
family and his counsel’s office impair his fair trial interests. The accused’s
bare assertions about the conditions and his safety in the Sudbury District
Jail are not supported by any other evidence on this application.
[26]          
In oral argument the accused further suggested
North Bay as an alternative venue to Toronto, submitting the North Bay Jail is
more appropriate. Again, the accused’s stated preference for where he should be
held, alone, does not tip the scales in favour of moving the venue to another
judicial district, an hour and a half east of Sudbury, and even further from
Manitoulin Island, from where witnesses must travel.
[27]          
In closing, I note that while this trial can start
in Sudbury in less than two months’ time, I am advised by the office of the
Regional Senior Justice for Toronto that the earliest date it could start on a
list in Toronto is November 03, 2025. I am also advised by the Local
Administrative Judge in North Bay that a five-week jury trial would require a
special sitting of the court that could only be scheduled in 2026. There is a
strong interest for the accused and the community in having this matter
determined on its merits sooner rather than later.
[28]          
For these reasons, the accused’s application is dismissed
and the Crown’s application is granted. I accordingly order the trial on the
indictment shall take place in Sudbury, in the Northeast Region.