[1]          The case
before me represents the epitome of what this Court has often referred to as
“motions culture”, being the use of procedural motions by parties to drive up
costs and delay the proceeding.[1]
Such motions “clog the already taxed judicial system”, and waste time, money,
and judicial resources.[2]
Instead of resolving matters “in a practical way” with a short conversation, parties
are left to pursue the “lengthy formal process of a motion”.[3]
It seems that the Court’s repeated requests that lawyers follow the Three C’s
of cooperation, communication and common sense has fallen on deaf ears.
[2]          In this
case, the Plaintiff brings a motion to validate service of the statement of
claim on the Defendant, Shakil Ahmad. The Plaintiff alternatively seeks an order
for substituted service of the claim, or to dispense with service of the claim.
[3]          The issue
at the heart of this motion is the refusal by Mr. Ahmad’s lawyer to accept
service of the claim on his behalf.
[4]          The action
was commenced on June 7, 2024. The Plaintiff attempted to personally serve Mr.
Ahmad at two addresses known to the Plaintiff, which were both business
locations. The Plaintiff’s process server was informed that Mr. Ahmad was not
at either address. At one location the process server was told that Mr. Ahmad
had not been there for two years, but that he was still getting mail sent to
the address.
[5]          On August
2, 2024, the Plaintiff’s lawyer received an e-mail from Anthony
Appadoo, who advised that “our office has been retained by Shakil Ahmad in relation
to court file #CV-24-00085970-0000”. That is this proceeding.
[6]          The e-mail went on to discuss substantive issues in the action, and
how Mr. Ahmad should not be held liable for the claims. The e-mail includes
extracts from a share purchase agreement to support Mr. Ahmad’s position.
[7]          In that same e-mail, Mr. Ahmad’s lawyer did the following: (a) asked
for a waiver of defence; (b) asked counsel to take no steps to note Mr. Ahmad
in default without advanced notice; and (c) stated that “this email does not
constitute acceptance of service on behalf of our client. Kindly provide a copy
of your Affidavit of Service”.
[8]          It is difficult to comprehend how Mr. Ahmad’s lawyer could ask for
indulgences in the same email where he was not offering to accept service on
behalf of Mr. Ahmad.
[9]          In the weeks that followed, the Plaintiff’s lawyer and Mr. Ahmad’s
lawyer engaged in a without prejudice call, and the Plaintiff’s lawyer
repeatedly asked Mr. Ahmad’s lawyer to accept service of the claim. Mr. Ahmad’s
lawyer refused to do so, saying he did not have instructions to accept service.
He reiterated his view in an email dated September 25, 2024 that the Plaintiff
must personally serve Mr. Ahmad.
[10]      The Plaintiff discovered email
addresses for Mr. Ahmad at a different company, and sent the claim to Mr. Ahmad
using those addresses. One of the addresses was a generic accounting department
email address.
[11]      This company’s mailing address is
one of the addresses where the Plaintiff attempted to personally serve Mr.
Ahmad, and the server was informed that Mr. Ahmad did not work there.
[12]      The Plaintiff was required to
bring its motion before me today. The Plaintiff served Mr. Ahmad and Mr.
Ahmad’s lawyer with the motion records and factum by email.
[13]      Mr. Ahmad served a responding motion
record, which has an affidavit sworn by a law clerk. A copy of the statement of
claim was included in the motion record as an exhibit.
[14]      In the affidavit, the firm takes
issue with the fact that the motion was brought without counsel to the
Plaintiff conferring about the return day. They say that the Plaintiff has
failed to adhere to the principles of fairness and courtesy, and acted
unreasonably by sending a copy of the motion record to Mr. Ahmad’s employer. Mr.
Ahmad has apparently faced negative repercussions and inquiries from his
employer as a result. Mr. Ahmad argues that no costs should be awarded against
him, as “it is well-established that the rules regarding service must be
strictly adhered to”.
[15]      In the words of the law clerk, Mr.
Ahmad “has acted reasonably in raising and addressing the issue of proper
service. The Defendant’s objection to the manner of service is reasonable…the
Defendant’s rights in contesting service should be protected…It is the
Plaintiff’s responsibility to ensure proper service is carried out in
accordance with the Rules”.
[16]      In an email dated November 12,
2024, Mr. Ahmad’s lawyer claimed that Mr. Ahmad was not evading service, that
the Plaintiff had failed to follow the proper procedure, and suggested that Mr.
Ahmed may have to bring a lawsuit against counsel to the Plaintiff “for an
unlawful interference with his economic interests” because of the email service
to Mr. Ahmad’s employer.
[17]      This motion was scheduled for 50
minutes of court time. It never should have been before the Court.
[18]      Mr. Ahmad’s lawyer should have
accepted service of the claim on his behalf when the request was first made on
August 2, 2024. If he had done so, he would have been adhering to the general
principle that the rules are to be “construed to
secure the just, most expeditious and least expensive determination of every
civil proceeding on its merits”.[4]
[19]      Mr. Ahmad’s lawyer cannot rely on
the argument that he “had no instructions to accept service”. Lawyers are
officers of the court. They are not free to act on whatever instructions they
have received from their client. They are obliged by the Law Society of
Ontario’s Rules of Professional Conduct to:
[20]      I believe Justice Myers’ comments
in Strathmillan Financial Limited v. Teti regarding default proceedings are equally applicable to
matters relating to service. Service issues should not be used by lawyers for
tactical purposes. Using the service rules for tactical advantage just sets the
parties down the path of unnecessary motions.[5]
[21]      Where a lawyer has been retained
by a defendant to represent him in an action, such counsel should consent to
accept service of the statement of claim as a matter of professional courtesy.
It is not in the interests of justice, or in the interests of any stakeholders
accessing the judicial system, to require plaintiffs to bring motions to
validate service and effectively compel counsel to accept service of the claim.[6]
[22]      As a result, I am granting the
Plaintiff’s motion to validate service of the statement of claim. It is hereby
validated as of today’s date.
[23]      The Plaintiff seeks costs on a substantial
indemnity basis in the amount of $1,800 all inclusive. It argues that elevated
costs are warranted, as the Plaintiff had to go to the expense of bringing the
motion due to Mr. Ahmad’s refused to have his lawyer accept service.
[24]      Mr. Ahmad’s lawyer served a costs
outline seeking approximately $2,690 all inclusive on a substantial indemnity
basis.
[25]      Costs of
a step in a proceeding are in the discretion of the Court, as set out
in section 131 of the Courts of Justice Act. Rule 57.01
of the Rules of Civil Procedure sets out factors that the
court may consider in exercising such discretion. Those factors include “(0.b) the amount of costs that an
unsuccessful party could reasonably expect to pay in relation to the step in
the proceeding for which costs are being fixed; (e) the conduct of any party
that tended to shorten or to lengthen unnecessarily the duration of the
proceeding; (f) whether any step in the
proceeding was improper, vexatious or unnecessary; (g) a party’s denial of or refusal to admit anything that should have
been admitted”.”
[26]      The
overarching objective is to fix an amount of costs that is objectively
reasonable, fair and proportionate for the unsuccessful party to pay in the
circumstances.[7]
[27]      In my
view, a costs award on a substantial indemnity basis is warranted in these
circumstances. The conduct of Mr. Ahmad in refusing to have his lawyer accept
service unnecessarily lengthened this proceeding and was completely
unnecessary. This motion was wholly unnecessary, and the conduct warrants costs
on a substantial indemnity basis.[8]
[28]      The
amount sought by the Plaintiff is reasonable, as it is less than the amount
that would have been sought by Mr. Ahmad if he had been successful with his
arguments.
[29]      As a
result, I hereby fix costs in the amount of $1,800 all inclusive payable by Mr.
Ahmad to the Plaintiff within 30 days.
[30]      Order to
go as electronically amended and signed by me.