[1]              
Dentons Canada LLP and Philip Rimer (collectively, "Dentons")
commenced an omnibus Third Party Claim on April 2, 2024 (the "Third Party
Claim") in the context of litigation initiated by the plaintiff
("CERIECO") against various defendants, including Dentons.
[2]              
The litigation arises out of losses CERIECO allegedly suffered on
advances it made to Mizrahi Commercial (The One) LP (“MCLP”) totaling more than
$200 million pursuant to a June 2017 contractor’s loan (the “Loan”) for a
proposed mixed-use construction project in Toronto marketed as “The One” (the
“Project”). Dentons was the lawyer for CERIECO at all material times.
[3]              
In its Fresh As Amended Statement of Claim (the "Statement of
Claim") CERIECO sues Dentons for negligence, breach of fiduciary duty, and
breach of contract arising out of Dentons’ role in connection with various
agreements. Those agreements resulted in the subordination and/or loss of
CERIECO’s security over the Loan, including certain subordination agreements
which CERIECO denies having authorized.
[4]              
In 2017, the Loan was guaranteed pursuant to a joint and several limited
guarantee and indemnity agreement in favour of CERIECO (the "Guarantee")
by the following defendants: Coco Paving, Sprott Bridging Income Fund LLP, Sam
M. Inc. and Mizrahi Development Group (The One) Inc. (collectively, the
"Guarantors"). In 2021, CERIECO entered an amendment to a Supplier
Credit Agreement ("SCA Amendment") that included a release of the
Guarantee in exchange for the payment of $7.5 million (the
"Release").
[5]              
CERIECO's Statement of Claim alleges, inter alia, that the
Release and the associated fee were fraudulent because Bosco Chan
("Bosco") did not have authority to execute documents on behalf of
CERIECO and the Guarantors knew or ought to have known that.  Further, the $7.5
million Release fee paid by or on behalf of the Coco Defendants (Jenny Coco,
Coco Paving and 12823543 Canada Ltd.) was paid to Bosco and Sam Mizrahi ("Mizrahi")
or his corporate entities (the "Mizrahi Defendants"), not CERIECO.
[6]              
Avril Lavallee and McCarter Grespan Beynon Weir Professional Corporation
acted as the escrow agent ("Escrow Agent") in respect of the $7.5
million Release fee eventually paid to Mizrahi and Bosco. They were the lawyers
of the Mizrahi Defendants. Another lawyer, Peter Liston ("Liston"),
who is said to have sometimes represented CERIECO and sometimes represented
Bosco, is alleged to have been involved in the improper payment of the Release
fee to Bosco as well.
[7]              
CERIECO alleges specifically that Dentons knew that only Long Hai Wang
(“Wang”), a director of CERIECO, was authorized by CERIECO to enter into
agreements on its behalf and bind CERIECO. Dentons is alleged to have
wrongfully accepted and acted on instructions given by Richard Yu
("Yu") and Kevin Chen ("Chen") purportedly given on behalf
of CERIECO. As their employers, Raymond James Ltd. ("RJ") and 2694128
Ontario Inc. ("269") are said to be vicariously liable for the
actions of Yu and Chen, respectively.
[8]              
When construction financing was obtained in late August 2019 from a
Korean lender named Meritz Securities Co., Ltd. ("Meritz"), CERIECO's
debenture that was registered against title to the project lands was
subordinated to that of Meritz. CERIECO alleges that it was unaware of, and did
not agree to, the subordination of its security to Meritz.
[9]              
Dentons were not the only lawyers acting for CERIECO at this time. Barry
Rotenberg at Chaitons LLP (the "Chaitons Third Parties") prepared the
initial commitment letter for this loan and was advising CERIECO about it.
[10]          
Dentons statement of defence and counterclaim in the main action
("Defence and Counterclaim") asserts, among other things, that
CERIECO is responsible for its own losses. Dentons has cross-claimed against
some of the other named co-defendants for contribution and indemnity, including
the Coco Defendants and the Mizrahi Defendants. They have similarly
cross-claimed against Dentons for contribution and indemnity.
[11]          
The primary theory of Dentons' Defence and Counterclaim in the main
action is that the plaintiff should be held contributorily responsible,
including for the misfeasance (alleged misrepresentations, negligence and
breaches of duties) of the Third Parties to the extent the Third Parties were acting
as the plaintiff's agents and their actions caused or contributed to the
plaintiff's losses. This same theory of contributory responsibility applies to Dentons'
defence to the crossclaim by the Coco-Defendants against Dentons, in which
Dentons seeks to hold the Coco-Defendants (plaintiffs by crossclaim)
responsible for the misfeasance (alleged negligence and breaches of duties) of
their lawyers and agents, the Third Parties Nina Perfetto and Fogler Rubinoff
(the "FR Third Parties").
[12]          
In the Third Party Claim, Dentons repeats and relies upon its primary
Defence and Counterclaim in the main action, including allegations of
misfeasance against the Third Parties for which Dentons maintains that CERIECO
bears responsibility (under the counterclaim). Dentons concedes that it cannot
claim contribution and indemnity from the Third Parties for matters that are the
plaintiff's own responsibility and that form part of Dentons' Defence and
Counterclaim (or Defences to Crossclaims) in the main action.
[13]          
However, Dentons also seeks contribution and indemnity from the Third
Parties for any damages awarded against Dentons in the main action or in any
crossclaims (including the cross-claims against it by the Coco Defendants and
the Mizrahi Defendants). It maintains that, if the Third Parties are found not
to have been acting as the plaintiff's agents and their negligence falls
"outside of the scope of the agency"(or outside the scope of any other
capacity for which the plaintiff can be held contributorily responsible for
their actions), then the Third Party Claim raises the possibility of an
independent claim in tort against some of the Third Parties as joint
tortfeasors who may have caused or contributed to CERIECO's claimed losses. Dentons
also has asserted direct claims for misrepresentation and breach of warranty of
authority against the Yu and Chen Third Parties and Wang, if it turns out that
they did not have the authority to give instructions and/or sign documents on
behalf of CERIECO.
[14]          
All of the Third Parties except China Machinery Engineering Corporation
("CMEC"), the parent company of CERIECO in China, have brought
motions under r. 21 to strike the Third Party Claim in its entirety, without
leave to amend.
[15]          
There are seven motions in total. At the court's request, the Third
Parties have prepared a road map of the nature of the claims and issues
applicable to each. The following summary of the grounds upon which the Third
Parties seek to strike the Third Party Claim has been extracted from that very
helpful road map, which set the stage for these motions.
[16]          
 The primary arguments advanced by the Third Parties are that Dentons
has not pleaded sufficient material facts to establish misrepresentations, negligence
or other breaches of duty committed outside the moving parties' roles as the
plaintiff's agents (in which capacity they say the plaintiff would be
responsible for their actions or inactions and they cannot be sued).
[17]          
The specifics of each of their arguments vary depending on the Third Party's
alleged role or relationship with the plaintiff who have asserted claims
against Dentons (CERIECO and plaintiffs by crossclaim in the main action). Their
roles, as alleged by Dentons, are as follows:
[18]          
The Third Parties also each raise additional arguments for striking Dentons'
claims on the basis that the pleading is speculative and lacking in particulars
of material facts or essential elements of the asserted causes of action, as
follows:
[19]          
 The Third Parties say that Dentons' direct claims against them are
speculative and have been pleaded without the necessary foundation of
supporting material facts, despite having had many months to supplement or
amend them, and that these claims must be presumed to be incapable of rectification,
or they would have been supplemented by now.
[20]          
CERIECO takes no position on these motions.
[21]          
The issues to be decided on the motions are:
[22]          
The identified issues (and any related sub-issues) will be addressed in
turn. Where the claims against individual (or groups of) Third Parties are
different and give rise to different considerations, they are addressed
separately as applicable. Each aspect of the analysis has been undertaken under
the general purview of the test on a r. 21 motion.  Given the number of motions
and parties, passages from the relevant pleadings have been repeated in this
endorsement. While this is someone cumbersome and has added to the length of
this endorsement, it was determined to be the most convenient way to orient the
analysis where different considerations may apply.
[23]          
Despite the different considerations, the same test applies to each
motion. Rule 21 permits a court to strike a pleading that fails to disclose a
reasonable cause of action. That will occur if the allegations do not give rise
to a recognized cause of action, the claim fails to plead the necessary
elements of a cause of action, or if it fails to plead material facts in
support of a cause of action, as required by Rule 25.06(1). The material facts
provide the foundation upon which the possibility of success of a claim will be
evaluated against each defendant: see Burns v. RBC Life Insurance Company,
2020 ONCA 347, 151 OR (3d) 209, at paras. 16 – 19.
[24]          
The test on a Rule 21.01(1)(b) motion to strike is well established:
[25]          
Under the Negligence Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. N.1,
where two or more individuals have jointly caused or contributed to the damages
suffered by the plaintiff, those individuals are jointly and severally liable
for the damages (s. 1). Between themselves they may each seek indemnity from
the other to the extent that they are liable, such that each individual is only
liable for their respective portion of the damages (s. 1). Where the plaintiff
only sues some but not all of the individuals responsible for the damages, any
of the individuals being sued has the right to add an individual not already
being sued to the litigation in order to seek the contribution and indemnity
they are entitled to under s. 5.
[26]          
The relevant mechanism for
adding another party to the litigation in such cases is a third-party claim
under r. 29.01(a), which permits defendants to commence claims against
individuals who are not already parties to the litigation where such
individuals are liable or "may be liable to the defendant for all or part
of the plaintiff's claim". The cause of action in such cases is a claim
for contribution and indemnity under the Negligence Act: see Hengeveld
v. The Personal Insurance Company, 2019 ONCA 497, 146 OR (3d) 182, at para.
19.
[27]          
The Third Parties are all alleged by Dentons to have
been either agents of, or advisors to, CERIECO (the plaintiff in the main
action) or to the Coco Defendants and Mizrahi Defendants (plaintiffs by
crossclaim in the main action).
[28]          
Dentons' primary Defence and Counterclaim in the main action is
that the individuals it was providing information and advice to, taking
instructions from and otherwise dealing with, were all acting as agents for
CERIECO, or were acting in capacities for which CERIECO is responsible. If the
acts or omissions of those agents resulted in the loss or dilution of some of
CERIECO' security (e.g., as a result of the Release of the Loan Guarantees and/or
subordination of its security to the Meritz loan), Dentons contends that CERIECO
is itself entirely or contributorily responsible.
[29]          
The same primary defence is raised by Dentons in response to the
crossclaims by the Coco Defendants and the Mizrahi Defendants with respect to
the acts or omissions of their lawyers (the FR Third Parties for the Coco
Defendants, and the MG Third Parties for the Mizrahi Defendants), for which it
seeks to hold the Coco Defendants and the Mizrahi Defendants (who are
plaintiffs in the crossclaims) contributorily responsible, respectively.
[30]          
The Third Parties argue that the defences raised
by Dentons seeking to hold CERIECO responsible for the acts and omissions of
the Third Parties who were acting on its behalf render the Third Party
Claim impossible of success. This position is based on a body of caselaw that has developed in the context of third-party
claims brought by a defendant against someone who is the plaintiff's lawyer, or
some other type of professional advising the plaintiff. The development of the
law in this area was recently summarized by the Court of Appeal for Ontario in Hengeveld,
at paras. 30-35 and 41-44.  Much of the focus of the submissions of the Third
Parties was on this argument.
[31]          
Two lines of case law have
emerged, both of which have been recognised as good law; see Hengeveld,
at paras. 30-35 and 41-44. In the first line of cases, the professionals
(typically lawyers) have been found to be acting as agents to the plaintiff,
and as such the third party claims have been struck. In the second line of
cases, the professionals have been found to be acting in some advisory capacity
to the plaintiff but not as their agent, and as such the third party claims
have been permitted to continue.
[32]          
Under the first line of cases
originating with Adams v. Thompson, Berwick, Pratt & Partners (1987),
1987 CanLII 2590 (BC CA), 15 B.C.L.R. (2d) 51 (C.A.), a third-party claim is not available against
someone acting as an agent to the plaintiff because the defendant can avoid
paying more than their share of the damages by raising a contributory
negligence defence against the plaintiff under the Negligence Act (in
Ontario, s. 3). The key question in this first line of cases is whether the
actions of the third party can be attributed to the plaintiff. Where the
actions of the third party fall entirely within the scope of an agency
relationship between the third party and the plaintiff, they will be
attributable to the plaintiff and will not provide a basis for a third-party
claim as they can be raised as a defence: see Hengeveld at para. 31
citing Adams at pp. 55-56. Where the plaintiff takes steps to expressly
distance themselves from responsibility for, or the consequences of, the
actions of the third party, that could militate against the existence of an
agency relationship in this context: see: Davy Estate v. Egan, 2009 ONCA
763, 97 O.R. (3d) 401, at para. 23 citing Macchi S.p.A. v. New Solution
Extrusion Inc., 2008 ONCA 586, at paras. 1-2 ("Macchi C.A.");
Hengeveld at paras. 36-37, 42.
[33]          
If the plaintiff is held to
be contributorily negligent for the actions of the third-party agent, the defendant
can only be held liable for its respective portion of the plaintiff's damages. That
leaves nothing for them to seek indemnity in respect of and therefore leaves no
cause of action for a third-party claim (under ss. 2 and 5 of the Ontario
statute): see Adams, at pp. 55-56; Hengeveld, at paras. 23-25 and
29-32; Taylor v. Canada (Attorney General), 2009 ONCA 487, 95 O.R. (3d)
561, at para. 20.
[34]          
The second line of cases applies to circumstances where
the third party is not alleged to be acting as the plaintiff's agent. In such
cases, the third party's negligence is not directly attributable to the
plaintiff. Therefore, the door is left open for a defendant to bring a
third-party claim against them seeking contribution and indemnity where that
has been properly pleaded: see 478649
Ontario Ltd. v. Corcoran (1994),
1994 CanLII 219 (ON CA), 20 O.R. (3d) 28 (C.A.), at p. 35; Hengeveld, at
paras. 43-44; see also Cardar Investments Ltd. v. Thorne Riddell (1989),
1989 CanLII 4183 (ON SC), 71 OR (2d) 29 (Div. Ct.).
[35]          
The key question in this
second line of cases involving professionals engaged by a plaintiff is whether
the third party was providing advice to the plaintiff, as opposed to dealing
with others on behalf of the plaintiff. The Court of Appeal distinguished Corcoran
from Adams and Macchi (C.A.) on this basis, in Hengeveld
(at para 44):
[36]          
There is a nuanced exception
in the second line of cases that was recognized in both Adams (at p. 57)
and Hengeveld (at pars. 32, 39-40). Where a lawyer acts in an advisory
role, not as an agent involved in the creation of the original loss, but gave
negligent advice to the plaintiff with respect to mitigating their loss, the
proper course is for the defendant to raise the issue as a defence in the main
action. Since it is the plaintiff's obligation to mitigate its loss, a failure
to mitigate (even if due to negligent advice from a third party) is still
attributable to the plaintiff. In such circumstances, where the lawyer's
negligence will be accounted for in the aspects of the defence dealing with the
plaintiff's duty to mitigate there is, like in the first line of agency cases,
no basis for a third-party claim. If the plaintiff has a claim against the
professional for bad advice regarding mitigation, that is a separate matter
between them.
[37]          
In summary, where the fault
of a third party will necessarily be imputed to the plaintiff and can be
accounted for in the apportionment of responsibility to the plaintiff by way of
a defence or counterclaim, there is no foundation for a third-party claim. In
such circumstances, it can be said in the context of a r. 21 motion that any
such Third Party Claims, as they stand or may reasonably be amended, disclose a
question that is "doomed to fail": see Atlantic Lottery Corp. Inc.
v Babstock, 2020 SCC 19, [2020] 2 SCR 420, at para. 90, (per Karakatsanis J.
dissenting in part, but not this point), cited in PMC York Properties v.
Siudak, 2022 ONCA 635, 473 DLR (4th) 136, at para. 32.
[38]          
As previously noted, Dentons' primary defence to
CERIECO's claims (also adopted in its Third Party Claim) is that the Third
Parties, Wang (CERIECO's director), the
Yu and Chen Third Parties (Yu and Chen as conduits for advice to and
instructions from Wang, and their employers alleged to be vicariously liable), were
agents of the plaintiff.
[39]          
If those were claims being asserted by Dentons against
those Third Parties then the Third Party Claim they would have no basis in law,
and would be "doomed to fail" under the first line of Hengeveld
cases. That would be grounds to strike the Third Party Claim as against them
since Dentons has (or could) raise the allegations against those third-party
agents of the plaintiff as part of Dentons' Defence and Counterclaim and
Defence to Cross-Claim, which seeks to hold the plaintiff contributorily
responsible under the Negligence Act for any of the losses that the
plaintiff (or its agents) caused itself.
[40]          
However, this is not the end of the analysis. Dentons maintains that it
has repeated the agency assertions in the Third Party Claim for context and as
a springboard for its Third Party Claim in the alternative. Dentons pleads and asserts,
in the alternative (as r. 25.06(4) permits it to do) that if these Third
Parties were acting in non-agency, advisory or other capacities that cannot be
attributed to CERIECO (or apportioned to its own contributory negligence) and
its primary defence (by which it seeks to hold CERIECO contributorily
responsible for the actions of any of the Third Parties that Dentons has
asserted were the plaintiff's agents) is not successful, then Dentons seeks
contribution and indemnity under the Negligence Act directly from those
Third Parties as joint tortfeasors who owed duties to CERIECO and whose
negligent acts, omissions or advice caused or contributed to its losses. Thus,
these alternative third party claims are not ipso facto precluded by the
first line of cases.
[41]          
Although the pleadings are different given the
different roles of each of the Third Parties, in each case the Third Party
Claim alleges that the Third Parties breached duties they owed to the plaintiff
(e.g. acted without the plaintiff's authority, provided negligent advice,
breached other duties owed to the plaintiff), and in some instances
misrepresented to Dentons their authority to act on behalf of the plaintiff. Those
are alleged to constitute independent tortious acts that caused or contributed
to the plaintiff's losses but for which the plaintiff itself might not be held
to be contributorily responsible.
[42]          
The clearest example of this alternative liability
scenario is found in the Third Party Claim against the Yu and Chen Defendants,
that asserts:
[43]          
These Third Parties contend that there is no scenario in which they
could owe a duty to CERIECO and not be acting as CERIECO's agent vis a vis
others, which takes them right back to the agency based first category of Hengeveld
cases, that would hold CERIECO responsible for their actions (under the indoor
management rule) and preclude claims against them. The difficulty with this is
that CERIECO is alleging that they did not have its authority to deal with
Dentons (or others) on CERIECO's behalf.
[44]          
Yu and Chen were not directors, officers or employees of CERIECO but
they did have advisory roles. The alternative theory of liability of the Yu and
Chen Third Parties is predicated on the possibility that CERIECO may
successfully establish (as it asserts in its Reply in the main action) that Yu
and Chen were not its fully authorized agents with authority to make and
implement decisions on CERIECO's behalf in all respects and were not in regular
communication with Wang or authorized to receive advice and transmit instructions
on CERIECO's behalf. CERIECO also denies that the subordination of its security
to Meritz was discussed in the telephone call that took place on the eve of
closing the Meritz financing, but does not deny that Yu and Chen were on the
call.
[45]          
These are examples of CERIECO "distancing" itself from the Yu
and Chen Third Parties (see Macchi C.A., at paras. 2-3). If CERIECO
succeeds in distancing itself from the actions of Yu and Chen so as to avoid being
held contributorily responsible for their actions, then Dentons seeks to hold
the Yu and Chen Third Parties jointly and severally liable as joint tortfeasors
who contributed to the same losses CERIECO claims from Dentons.
[46]          
It cannot be said based on the pleadings as they stand that the
negligence or breaches of duty of Yu and Chen will necessarily be imputed to
CERIECO. Put another way, it cannot be said the pleadings and alleged facts do
not give rise to the possibility of a claim for which the plaintiff might not
be responsible: see Federal Pioneer Ltd. v. Montreal Trust Co. of Canada,
1997 CarswellOnt 865 (Div. Ct.), at para. 3.
[47]          
The Third Party Claims against the Yu and Chen Defendants cannot be said
to have no chance of success based on the first line of Hengeveld cases.
[48]          
The pleading against Wang in the Third Party Claim is different than the
pleading against the Yu and Chen Third Parties. It alleges that:
[49]          
The agency relationship between Wang and CERIECO is not directly pleaded,
but it is necessarily implied given his role as a director. The true position of directors is that of agents for the
company: see Mutual Construction v. Hardwick, 2009 BCSC 117, at paras.
50 and 51.
[50]          
Unlike Yu and Chen, no party (including either CERIECO or Dentons) has
asserted that Wang was acting in any capacity other than as a director of
CERIECO. Counsel for CERIECO confirmed during the hearing that its position is
that Wang was at all times acting in his capacity as a director of CERIECO and
there is no allegation by CERIECO that his acts or omissions were improper or
outside the bounds of his role at CERIECO. In other words. there is no
misalignment between the positions of Wang and CERIECO. Consistent with this, Wang
is CERIECO's proposed discovery witness.
[51]          
A director acting in that capacity on behalf of a corporation is a quintessential
agency relationship, where the principal is bound by the conduct of the agent
when the allegations against the individual are in his capacity qua director:
see Renegade v. Hees, 1994 CarswellOnt 2249 at paras. 20 and 23.
[52]          
Further, in such circumstances, Wang's alleged misconduct while acting
with the apparent or ostensible authority of CERIECO would be attributable to
CERIECO under the indoor management rule codified in s. 18 of the CBCA. 
Not only has CERIECO not done so, it would be prevented by this rule from disclaiming
the actions of Wang based on something other than the outward representations
it made to Dentons about his authority.
[53]          
Based on the current pleadings, taken as true, everything currently alleged against Wang (whether it be
negligence for not verifying who was signing documents on CERIECO's behalf and
that they had the requisite authority, or that he misrepresented his authority
or the authority of others), involved actions he carried out qua
director that would necessarily be imputed to CERIECO. On this basis, I find
that the Third Party Claim against Wang has no chance of success since it falls
squarely under the first line of Hengeveld cases. Wang's motion to
strike the Third Party Claim against him is granted.
[54]          
Dentons counters that, just because CERIECO is not presently alleging
that Wang acted outside the scope of his authority, that does not mean that
CERIECO will not later make that allegation. It contends that if that occurs
and the plaintiff seeks to distance itself from Wang and disclaim that he was
CERIECO's agent, Dentons will claim contribution and indemnity in respect of
any negligent acts or omissions of Wang that are found to have been carried out
outside of his role as a director/agent of CERIECO. However, this alternative
scenario is not expressly pleaded, unlike how it is pleaded in paragraph 36 of
the Third Party Claim in relation to the Yu and Chen Defendants. Wang maintains
that this alternative scenario has not been pleaded, and cannot be, because it
is too speculative.
[55]          
Dentons also argues that because it has alleged that Wang breached his
fiduciary obligations to CERIECO, that takes its Third Party Claim against him
outside of the agency scenario. They rely on Federal Pioneer, at paras. 3-4,
where a crossclaim against a director alleged to have breached his fiduciary
duties was allowed to stand. That case does not provide the details of the
pleading, but a bald assertion of breach of fiduciary duty that has absolutely
no evidentiary foundation will not save the Third Party Claim against Wang from
being struck in this case. Further, Federal Pioneer was dealing with a
crossclaim so the director was already a party to the action which might have
had some influence on the outcome.
[56]          
Dentons has also pleaded direct claims against Wang for misrepresentations
and breach of warranty of authority which are discussed later in this
endorsement.
[57]          
Speculative pleadings are not an answer to a r. 21
motion to strike. Litigants cannot make
bald, injurious assertions that have no foundation. Miguna v. Ontario (Attorney General) (2005), 2005 CanLII 46385 (ON CA), 262 DLR (4th) 222 (C.A.), at para. 18 is instructive on this point:
[58]          
This passage is particularly
apt in relation to Dentons' position in relation to its Third Party Claim
against Wang, which has absolutely no foundation based on the current pleading.
It does not, however, overrule the possibility of a non-agency relationship in
other circumstances where this has been recognized.
[59]          
Dentons points to Cardar and
Corcoran to support their proposition that a degree of speculation
is acceptable where the question of agency cannot clearly be settled on the
facts as pled. Specifically, they point to the fact that in both cases the
third-party claims were allowed to proceed, not because it was established that
the third parties were not agents of the plaintiffs, but because the facts as
pled disclosed that they may not have been, or there were circumstances that
made it uncertain whether they were: see Corcoran, at p. 35; Cardar,
at p. 33-34.
[60]          
The following quote from Adams
at p. 56, further supports the idea that where there is uncertainty in whether
the third party was an agent of the plaintiff, the claim should not be struck:
[61]          
The contingent alternative claims against the Yu and
Chen Defendants, dependent upon the agency analysis, are inherently speculative
at the pleadings stage. While their allegedly negligent acts or omissions or
breaches of duty may be the same whether they were acting as agents of CERIECO
or in some other capacity, the material facts that would confirm whether these Third
Parties were, or were not, acting as an agent of the plaintiff (or in some
other capacity for which the plaintiff bears the responsibility) may not be
established until at least the discovery stage. The agency question in the context of this pleading is an
ancillary procedural matter that is relevant at this stage to determine whether
it is open to bring the Third Party Claim, or only as a defence to the main
action. Cardar and Corcoran allow for a certain degree of
speculation within the pleading about the possibility that the agency relationship
may not be established.
[62]          
There is a sufficient foundation for
the alternative claims in CERIECO's reply (for example when it pleads
affirmatively that only Wang, and therefore by necessary implication, not Yu
and Chen, had the authority to act on CERIECO's behalf) and in the Third Party Claim against them to raise the
possibility that their agency may not be established. These alternative non-agency
based claims against the Yu and Chen Third Parties that fall under the second
line of Hengeveld cases have an inherent, but acceptable, degree of
speculation.
[63]          
The Third Party Claim against the MG Parties in their capacity as the
Escrow Agent begins with reference to the contractual agency relationship
between the Escrow Agent and the plaintiff (and others). However, this
pleading, reinforced by Dentons' submissions on this motion, makes it clear
that Dentons does not rely on the term 'agent' in this context to signify that the
MG Third Parties acted as CERIECO's agent, meaning that their breach of duty
would reduce CERIECO's recovery.
[64]          
Rather, Dentons relies upon this contractual relationship to set up a
different claim against the Escrow Agent: for breach of its duties as an ad
hoc fiduciary. This claim is discussed in the next section of this
endorsement dealing with impossible or insufficiently pleaded claims. It is
mentioned here only to clarify that, just because the Escrow Agent is an agent,
Dentons' Third Party Claim against the Escrow Agent is not predicated upon
breaches of the Escrow Agreement per se (a contractual claim that would
not, in any event, fall under the Negligence Act in any event).
[65]          
Dentons has also claimed contribution and indemnity
from two other lawyers who it pleads were lawyers acting for the plaintiff (the
Chaitons Third Parties and Liston), and from two other lawyers who were acting
for the co-defendants/plaintiffs by crossclaim (the FR Defendants for the Coco
Defendants, and the MG Defendants for the Mizrahi Defendants). For purposes of
this analysis, references to "plaintiff" or "plaintiffs"
includes CERIECO as well as the co-defendants/plaintiffs by crossclaim who have
asserted crossclaims against Dentons in the main action.
[66]          
Dentons pleads that these Third Parties gave negligent advice to their
clients, the plaintiffs, or were negligent by their action or inaction, or
breached fiduciary or other duties. Dentons alleges that these parties'
negligence caused or contributed to the same losses that those plaintiffs are
seeking to recover from Dentons, and for which Dentons can, in turn, seek
contribution and indemnity under s. 5 of the Negligence Act by its Third
Party Claim under r. 29.01(a).
[67]          
The allegations against these Third Party lawyers are not that they were
acting as agents for their clients; the allegations are that they were
negligent or breached duties they owed to their clients.  For this reason,
Dentons argues that it does not matter that CERIECO, the Coco Defendants and
the Mizrahi Defendants are not alleging that these other lawyers gave them
negligent advice or were negligent or breached fiduciary or other duties. This
is because the court only need consider whether there is a "distancing"
between the lawyer and client if the starting point is an agency relationship,
such as in Davy (reaffirming Macchi, see Hengeveld, at
para. 42), to raise the spectre of a possible non-agency scenario. These claims
fall within the second line of Hengeveld cases to begin with, so they
would not be considered to be ipso facto doomed to fail
on the agency theory.
[68]          
I agree. These Third Party Claims fall within
the second category of cases discussed in Hengeveld that, unlike the
first category of cases, cannot be said to have no chance of success if the
pleading is taken to be true.
[69]          
If Dentons' claims against these Third Parties
are going to be struck, it will not be on the basis of the first line of Hengeveld
cases involving agency claims. The determination of whether these
alternative Third Party Claims can survive a r. 21 motion is dependent upon the
other/additional grounds that the Third Parties have raised in support of their
r. 21 motions, with respect to the sufficiency of the pleading or other obstacles
that might render the claims against these Third Parties untenable for other
reasons (discussed below).
[70]          
 "The bar for striking a pleading is very high". This high
standard applies to factual matters, and to questions of law, and mixed fact
and law. The facts that are pleaded are treated as true, unless they are
manifestly incapable of being proven. Drafting deficiencies are to be
accommodated. The purpose of motions to strike is to weed out clearly untenable
causes of action that have no chance of success: see PMC York Properties,
at paras. 31 and 34.
[71]          
The Third Parties have raised various other arguments for striking
Dentons' Third Party Claim against each of them.
[72]          
Some of the Third Parties have identified other grounds of impossibility
of success of Dentons' claims against them.
[73]          
The Escrow Agent relies upon the contractual terms under which it was
appointed, which are incorporated by reference into the Third Party Claim that
makes express reference to the Escrow Agreement. The terms for the payment of
the accommodation release fee under that contract are not alleged to have been
breached. While Dentons asserts that the payments made by the Escrow Agent to
Bosco and Mizrahi were not authorized by it, it does not assert that the terms
for release of funds under the Escrow Agreement were not satisfied. Further,
other provisions of the Escrow agreement expressly stipulate that the Escrow
Agent shall have no liability or responsibility for claims relating to the
Escrowed Funds. That agreement also contains a provision that the parties are
required to indemnify the Escrow Agent except for losses flowing from its gross
negligence, which is not alleged.
[74]          
The Escrow Agent contends that its relationship to CERIECO is
inextricably tied to a contract that governs their relationship. Contribution
and indemnity under the Negligence Act (for tort claims) is not
available for concurrent liability in contract. Escrow agents do not generally owe
fiduciary duties, especially where their liability is restricted by the terms
of the Escrow Agreement, as in this case: see Loeppky et al v. Taylor
Mccaffrey LLP et al (2002), 2023 MBCA 101 at para. 60; Plant Technology
International Inc. v. Peter Kiewet Sons Co. (2002), 15 C.P.C. (6th) 84
(Ont. S.C.), at paras. 80-81.
[75]          
To get around this, Dentons asserts that the Escrow Agent also owed, and
breached, a non-contractual ad hoc fiduciary duty to CERIECO and can be
held contributorily responsible through that cause of action. It pleads as
follows:
[76]          
The concept of an ad hoc fiduciary is not novel. However, it
cannot arise simply by virtue of someone being appointed Escrow Agent. This
seems trite, which might explain why the Court of Appeal decision in 417217 Ontario Inc. v. River Trail
Estates Inc., 2024 ONCA
491, was not cited by the parties. Since that case makes this point
directly, I have cited it in the interests of completeness:
[77]          
Material facts supporting the existence of an ad hoc fiduciary
duty owed by the Escrow Agent outside of the relationship created and governed
by the Escrow Agreement have not been pleaded. The bald assertion of an ad hoc
fiduciary relationship is not sufficient to disclose a reasonable cause of
action against the Escrow Agent (in that specific capacity). For these reasons,
the Third Party Claim against the Escrow Agent is struck. The Third Party
Claim against the MG Third Parties, acting as the lawyers for the Mizrahi
Defendants (and not as Escrow Agent), is discussed in the next section of this
endorsement.
[78]          
Dentons' primary defence to the crossclaim by the Coco Defendants is to
assert that they relied on the advice of their own lawyers, the FR Third
Parties, that Dentons owed the Coco Defendants no duty of care and they did not
rely on Dentons' advice. This aspect of Dentons' defence goes to the issues of
reliance (duty of care) and causation, more so than to raise a point of
contributory negligence against those plaintiffs by crossclaim.
[79]          
In the Third Party Claim, Dentons asserts that the FR Third Parties were
negligent and breached duties to their clients and that caused or contributed
to the same loss that the Coco Defendants are claiming Dentons caused them in
their crossclaim. For example, the loss of the benefit of the Release if it is
found not to have been duly authorized by CERIECO and to be invalid. In other
words, it was the FR Third Parties who owed a duty to the Coco Defendants to
ensure that they received a duly authorized and valid release.
[80]          
Dentons' primary defence to the crossclaim by the Mizrahi Defendants is
essentially the same, as it relates to their lawyers, the MG Third Parties.
[81]          
The allegations against these Third Party lawyers arise entirely in
their capacity as legal advisors to those plaintiffs by crossclaim, not for
acts they undertook as agents for them. These Third Parties are alleged to have given negligent advice and breached duties to those plaintiffs
by crossclaim, thereby causing or contributing to their clients' losses.
[82]          
The FR Third Parties argue that Dentons cannot allege they breached
duties to their clients that the clients are not alleging were breached. They
emphasize that their solicitor-client relationship has not been fractured. However,
that argument fails to account for the distinction drawn in Macchi (S.C.)
between the situation in that case, where the client was unable to distance
himself from the actions of his solicitor who was simply acting as a creditor's
agent for purposes of registering a security interest), and the situation in Corcoran,
where the possibility existed that the client would not be responsible for the
negligence alleged by a third party against his solicitor who failed to give
proper advice to the client about the terms of an agreement of purchase and
sale that may have contributed to the client's loss: see Macchi s.p.a. v.
New Solution Extrusion Inc., 2007 CanLII 48653 (ON SC) at paras. 19-23
("Macchi (S.C.)").
[83]          
Davy is similarly distinguishable since it involved a defence
that the plaintiff failed to mitigate, in which the third party claim against
the plaintiff's solicitor was struck because the failure to mitigate, even if
due to the negligence of the lawyer, was an obligation that the plaintiff could
not avoid by distancing himself from his lawyer's bad advice regarding
mitigation.
[84]          
The nature of the alleged negligence of the FR
Third Parties and the MG Third Parties is more akin to the situation in Corcoran.
The possibility exists that those Third Parties (the clients) would not
be responsible for the negligence and breaches of duty alleged by Dentons
against the Third Parties' own lawyers, that those other lawyers failed to do
the very things or give their clients advice about the very same matters that
form the basis of the plaintiffs' (the other lawyers' clients) claims against
Dentons.
[85]          
This leads into the second argument raised by
the FR Third Parties and MG Third Parties, which rests upon the:
[86]          
However, this policy argument raised by the FR
Third Parties and the MG Third Parties again fails to account for the
qualification in the very next sentence of the Davy case (at para. 28),
that: "[t]hese policy reasons cannot prevail in cases like Corcoran where
the defendant has a valid legal claim against [sic] solicitor for
contribution and indemnity, but in a case such as the present one, the policy
coincides with the strict letter of the law."
[87]          
Dentons' Third Party Claims against the
lawyers for the plaintiffs by crossclaim do not come out of the blue. They are
grounded in assertions made by those plaintiffs, the other lawyers' clients,
against Dentons. It is not surprising, given the nature of the allegations of
these other lawyers' clients against Dentons that it would allege that those
parties' own lawyers might share some or all of the responsibility for the
losses of their own clients.
[88]          
It was noted that the continuation of the
Third Party Claim against the FR Third Parties may present a problem for them
continuing to act for the Coco Defendants in defence of this action and the
pursuit and defence of crossclaims, because they also must now defend the Third
Party Action and they may have diverging interests from their clients about
matters such as waiver of privilege and the disclosure of the advice that was
sought and received. If that is the case, then it is better that this be
addressed now at this early stage of the proceeding.
[89]          
The Chaitons Third Parties and Liston are alleged by
Dentons to have given negligent advice and breached duties owed to CERIECO as
its lawyers, thereby causing or contributing to its losses:
[90]          
These Third Party lawyers for the plaintiff CERIECO raise similar
arguments and policy concerns associated with a third party inserting itself
into, and invading the sanctity of, their relationship with their clients or
former clients. Their arguments face similar challenges. These particular
allegations by Dentons are in relation to their advisory (non-agency) roles and
the possibility that exists that the plaintiff may not be held contributorily
responsible for their negligent advice that may have contributed to the
plaintiff's loss.
[91]          
The Chaitons Third Parties also have raised an additional impossibility
argument predicted on timing and causation. Their retainer to prepare the
commitment letter on behalf of CERIECO for the Meritz financing was in July
2019 and pre-dated negotiation and drafting of Meritz financing documents. They
contend that they could not have provided negligent advice to CERIECO in July
2019 about documents that were not negotiated, drafted and signed until
afterwards, in August 2019. They assert that CERIECO retained other counsel
(including Dentons) after the Meritz loan commitment was signed, who advised
CERIECO about the risks of this transaction and implications for CERIECO's
security. This is alleged to have broken the chain of causation between the
Chaitons Third Parties and CERIECO, without which there can be no claim for
contribution and indemnity.
[92]          
This causation argument is said to be based on admitted (pleaded) facts
by Dentons: Dentons admits that it was retained in late July or early August
2019 to document the Meritz Financing (Defence, paras. 75 and 79). Dentons also
pleads that on August 28, 2019 CERIECO received advice from Bennett Jones LLP
regarding the risk; and Bennett Jones LLP, inter alia, opined that
CERIECO would subordinate its security to $890 million in security in favour of
Meritz. Both of these retainers are subsequent to the July 17, 2019 Commitment
Letter and prior to the finalization of the Meritz Financing and the
subordination of CERIECO's security (Defence, paras. 85, 86 and 89).
[93]          
In Crawford-Montaque v. Benjamin, 2017 ONSC 6729, at paras. 20-22,
the plaintiff's action against his former lawyer was dismissed on the basis
that "the causal connection was broken by the retainer of new counsel",
following Nicolardi v. Daley, 2009 CanLII 2918 (ON SCDC), at paras.
11-13. If the Chaiton Third Parties' alleged negligence did not cause any loss
to CERIECO, then there can be no claim for contribution and indemnity by Dentons
under the Negligence Act.
[94]          
Dentons' response to this argument is that it is not something that can
be determined on a r. 21 pleadings motion. I agree.  Whether or not the advice
and recommendations of the Chaitons' lawyers regarding the Meritz financing
caused or contributed to any of the losses associated with that financing
suffered by CERIECO cannot be determined based on the pleadings. Among other
things, it might be dependent on the extent to which the retainers and advice
of the different lawyers overlapped, were qualified in any way and/or continued
to be relied upon. Despite what is in the pleading and can be taken to be true
or "admitted", these other aspects of the causation analysis are not
addressed in the pleading and this issue cannot be finally decided at this
stage without an evidentiary foundation.
[95]          
Liston relies upon the arguments made by the other lawyers to the extent
they apply to him; but none have resulted in the Third Party Claim being struck
against the other lawyers and they will not lead to it being struck as against
Liston. Liston raised a number of arguments that go to the merits of the claims
against him. Primarily, the argument that Liston advanced on his own behalf is
that he was not acting as CERIECO's lawyer in respect of the release of the
Guarantees and that the assertions made against him are factually incorrect. However,
it is not open to the court to consider anything other than what is alleged in
the pleading on a r. 21 motion, that must be accepted as true for the purpose
of the motion.  Given how many lawyers were involved and the various capacities
in which they appear to have bene involved, it is not manifestly unreasonable
at this stage to accept Dentons' pleading, that Liston was acting as the lawyer
for CERIECO as alleged.
[96]          
Liston also argues that Dentons is impermissibly suing him to gain
discovery about his solicitor-client dealings with another defendant to the
main action, Bosco: see Galligan v. Angoss, 2019 ONSC 1603, at paras. 27-28.
There is no foundation for this assertion.
[97]          
I am mindful of the challenges that allowing Dentons' claims against the
Third Party lawyers will raise for the conduct of these proceedings. However,
Dentons is facing a massive claim and was not the only lawyer involved in the
matters that the plaintiffs are complaining about. As a matter of policy, Dentons'
ability to pursue all available avenues of contribution and indemnity should
not be compromised because of the inconvenience and complications that are
anticipated in having to navigate privilege and other issues associated with
the addition of counsel for other parties.
[98]          
The moving parties point to
several authorities which stand for the proposition that a claimant cannot
allege anything in their statement of claim which they do not know or believe
to be true, thereby precluding the possibility of speculation in a pleading:
see Miguna, at paras. 18, 22; RWDI
Air Inc. v. N-SCI Technologies Inc., 2015 ONCA 817, at para. 14; Cottage Advisors of Canada v. Prince
Edward Vacant Land, 2020 ONSC 6445, at para. 22.
[99]          
The Court of Appeal in Miguna
was dealing with bald, speculative pleadings, but also considered (at para. 21)
the essential question of whether "[t]he
factual assertions gleaned from the statement of claim and outlined above,
however – together with certain others not mentioned – if proved, could give
rise to the essentials of the causes of action".
[100]       This attack on the Third Party Claim in directed to the
alleged insufficiency of the
material facts and elements of the pleaded direct causes of action
(malfeasance) against the Third Parties, for misrepresentation, breach of warranty
of authority, as well as to the claims for contribution and indemnity. Dentons
maintains that this bar remains low and has been satisfied.
[101]       Dentons
insists that its Third Party Claim pleads with sufficient specificity all of
the material facts and elements of the causes of action against each of the
Third Parties, with one exception that it concedes and seeks leave to amend
for: Raymond James Ltd., argues that the allegation that it is vicariously
liable for Mr. Yu's wrongs is not adequately pleaded because there is no
allegation that Mr. Yu was acting in the course of his employment. He was an
employee of Raymond James at all material times and virtually all his
communications emanated from his employer's email server. If there is any
deficiency in the third-party claim in this respect, it is easily remedied with
a minor amendment and is not a 'radical defect' of the sort that justifies
striking the claim. The same would be true with respect to Mr. Chen's
one-person corporation.
[102]       The
claims against the lawyers for other parties also raise specific considerations
when it comes to examining the particulars of the alleged negligence. These
claims are necessarily at this stage somewhat speculative and general because,
until there is disclosure of the advice sought and received, Dentons as a
plaintiff outside of the solicitor-client relationship would have no
particulars of these allegations. Essentially, the same allegations made
against Dentons are made against these other lawyers in relation to the advice
that they provided, or did not provide, to their clients who are suing Dentons.
[103]       Those
lawyers know whether they did, or did not provide advice about the matters that
Dentons is being accused of doing, or not doing. I do not consider any further
particulars to be required for those other lawyers to defend the Third Party
Claim.
[104]       Certain
of the Third Parties are alleged to have direct liability to Dentons. For example,
Dentons alleges that the Yu and Chen Defendants negligently misrepresented
their authority to receive and transmit advice, and to provide instructions and
sign documents on behalf of CERIECO. Dentons also pleads breach of warranty of
authority against these Third Parties. These are independent causes of action: see
Mahendran v. 9660143 Ontario Inc., 2022 ONCA 676, at para. 10 and Attis
v Ontario (Minster of Health), 2011 ONCA 675 at para. 18.
[105]       Dentons
seeks contribution and indemnity from them for contributing to the same loss
that CERIECO is seeking to recover from Dentons for Dentons' alleged negligence
in not ensuring that those individuals had the requisite authority from
CERIECO. It has already been determined that these claims are not doomed to
fail on grounds of impossibility. However, they must be properly particularized
in order to disclose a reasonable cause of action.
[106]       On
a preliminary point, Dentons' written submissions made reference to the fact
that no demand for particulars was delivered by the moving Third Parties. The
moving parties rightly point out that if the Third Party Claim is devoid of
essential material facts in support of the pleaded causes of action, the
appropriate course was a motion to strike and not a demand for particulars. This
was addressed by Perell J. in Pennyfeather v Timminco Limited, 2011 ONSC
4257, at para. 51: "The material facts are to be
stated concisely, which is to say that they should be set out with precision
and clarity. If a material fact necessary for a cause of action is omitted, the
Statement of Claim is bad and the remedy is a motion to strike the pleadings,
not a motion for particulars."
[107]       The
actions of the Third Parties said to give rise to their liability, whether as
agents to the plaintiff or as independent tortfeasors, are the same.  This part
of the analysis is focused on the independent torts. The Yu and Chen Third
Parties argue that the Third Party Claim does not plead a representation made by
them to Dentons that was false, which is an essential element to both claims
for negligent misrepresentation and for breach of warranty of authority.
[108]       Dentons
alleges they negligently misrepresented they had authority to speak on behalf
of CERIECO but provides no particulars of when or to whom such representations
were made to Dentons, and provides no link to specific work that Dentons did
for CERIECO in reliance upon those representations that is the subject of the
main action (e.g. no causation, another essential element of these causes of
action, pleaded). Strictly speaking, these material facts and essential
elements of the independent torts have not been pleaded.
[109]       While
maintaining its position that the causes of action in negligent
misrepresentation and breach of warranty of authority were sufficiently
particularized in the Third Party Claim, Dentons filed a clerk's affidavit
attaching a selection of emails said to be examples of the constant
communications between Dentons, Yu, Chen and Wang, which Dentons claims are
incorporated by reference into the Third Party Claim (in the section dealing
with allegations against Wang), at para. 23:
[110]      
 Under r. 21.01(2)(b), no
evidence is admissible on a r. 21.01(1)(b) motion to strike out a pleading.
This is because on such a motion, the allegations in the statement of claim are
presumed to be accurate, unless they are patently ridiculous or incapable of
proof: see PMC York Properties, at para. 31; Nash v. Ontario
(1995), 1995 CanLII 2934 (ON CA), 27 OR (3d) 1, at p. 6.
[111]      
However, the courts have
affirmed that where a document or statement is incorporated into a pleading by
reference within the meaning of r. 25.06(7), it may be relied on in a r.
21.01(1)(b) motion: see McCreight, at paras. 30-32, citing Montreal
Trust Co. of Canada v. Toronto Dominion Bank (1992), 40 C.P.C. (3d) 389
(Ont. S.C.); see also Web Offset Publications Limited v. Vickery (1999),
1999 CanLII 4462 (ON CA), 43 OR (3d) 802 (C.A.) at p. 803. In such cases, the document is admissible
because it is not considered evidence, but rather forms part of the pleading in
question and therefore must be considered in assessing whether to strike the
pleading out.
[112]      
Incorporation by reference
for the purpose of a r. 21 motion is limited to incorporating such documents
which form an integral part of the factual matrix of the allegation in the
pleading, and excludes those which are merely evidence of those facts: see McCreight,
at para. 32; Montreal Trust, at paras. 4-5. Such documents must be
specifically referred to and relied on in the pleading in order to be
incorporated by reference: see Web Offset, at p. 803; Sauer v. Canada
(Attorney General), 2005 CanLII 35783 (ON SC), at para. 7.
[113]      
Dentons says these emails
demonstrate the "advisory" roles played by Yu and Chen (to Wang) and
their central role in the August 2019 construction financing transaction – they
transmitted the authorizing resolutions. The existence of these emails
demonstrates that more could be specified if it is determined that the existing
plea is too general (and if the emails themselves are too specific).
[114]      
The Yu and Chen Defendants
(and Wang, although the Third Party Claim is being struck against him for other
reasons) object to Dentons' reliance on these emails as particulars of the
claims against them, arguing that the reference to the emails in the pleading
lacks the requisite level of specificity for incorporation by reference. It is
also noted that the selected emails are not, as described, emails between Wang
and/or Yu and Chen (although Dentons pleads in its Defence and Counterclaim and
the Third Party Claim that it was Wang's practice to send documents he signed
to Yu and Chen to forward to Dentons).
[115]      
The selected emails,
(described by Dentons as a miniscule sampling of the thousands of emails) from
among many that might be captured by the broad pleading in paragraph 23 of the
Third Party Claim, are merely some of the evidence that supports the assertion
that there were ongoing communications concerning the plaintiff's investment in
The One among Dentons, Chan, Chen and Yu. They cannot all be fairly considered
to comprise the factual matrix or essential elements of the causes of action
pleaded against the Yu and Chen Third Parties. Accordingly, these select emails
are not properly before the court for consideration on the r. 21 motions and I
have not taken them into account in the analysis of whether Dentons' claims
against the Yu and Chen Third Parties are pleaded with sufficient specificity
to survive a r. 21 motion to strike.
[116]       Reading the Third Party Claim as a whole, and in the context
of the pleadings in the main action, the allegations by Dentons can be fairly
read to be that these individuals generally held themselves out to and dealt
with Dentons on the premise that they had CERIECO's authority and were its duly
authorized representatives. The broad assertion is that Dentons relied upon
this in accepting their instructions and the signatures that they provided (for
example, in connection with the SCA Agreement and Releases), and in
transmitting its advice to CERIECO through them (for example, in relation the
Meritz financing).
[117]       For reasons indicated earlier, even though the
Third Party Claims against the Yu and Chen Third Parties may be generally
understood, the pleading does not sufficiently connect the dots about Dentons'
reliance upon the authority that they represented and warranted to have, in
terms of the specific advice Dentons says it provided to CERIECO through
the Yu and Chen Third Parties (that they may be found not to have been
authorized to receive and/or to have failed to pass along to CERIECO), and
specific instructions that it says it received from them on behalf of CERIECO regarding
the SCM Agreement and Release of the Guarantees and the subordination of its
security to the Meritz financing that form the basis of CERIECO's claims.
[118]       There is the further issue with the Third Party
Claim against RJ, arising from Dentons' acknowledged failure to properly plead
the essential elements for holding RJ vicariously liable for Yu's conduct. Dentons
it concedes that the allegation that RJ is vicariously liable for Mr. Yu's
wrongs is not adequately pleaded because there is no allegation that Mr. Yu was
acting in the course of his employment/
[119]       For reasons discussed in the next section of this endorsement, leave
is granted for Dentons to amend its Third Party Claim to provide the missing material
facts or constituent elements to the independent (alternative) direct causes of
action against the Yu and Chen Third Parties (including but not limited to any
that may be discerned from the emails that the court has not admitted into the
record on this motion) within 30 days of this endorsement.
[120]       The
Third Parties raised another argument that they say is dispositive.  They argue
that Dentons had a professional obligation to "know its client"
(CERIECO), and an obligation to have a record of who it was authorized to
accept instructions from under Rule 3.2-3 of the Law Society of Ontario's
Rules of Professional Conduct (the "LSO Requirements"). The
argument made is that this is the only representation of authority that Dentons
could reasonably rely upon in providing advice to and accepting instructions
and signatures from CERIECO’s representatives. Since it has not pleaded this to
apply to the Yu and Chen Third Parties (or Wang, for that matter) it should be
presumed that it did not have that authority in writing and that is an
essential missing element of these independent torts.
[121]       While
the LSO requirements may prove to be a relevant fact in the ultimate
determination of whether Denton's reliance on the authority of CERIECO's
representatives, this is a defence (lack of authority) and is not a basis for
striking the Third Party Claim, which pleads that these individuals represented
that they did have this authority through their dealings and conduct with
Dentons. Even if this rule of professional conduct is the standard, and even if
Dentons fell below that standard and did not have a record of everyone who was
authorized to instruct on behalf of CERIECO, if they represented that they did
have this authority, they may still be found to have contributed to CERIECO's
loss.  These LSO requirements are not dispositive of the Third Party Claims
against the Yu and Chen (or any other) parties at this pleadings stage.
[122]      
Insofar as deficiencies have
been identified in the Third Party Claim's specificity and articulation of the
necessary elements of the pleaded causes of action against the Third Parties
leading to it being struck, the usual result would be to grant leave to amend
where the defect can be cured. Leave is to be denied only in the clearest of
cases: see Asghar v. Toronto Police Service, 2019 ONCA 479, at para. 9; South
Holly Holdings Limited v. Toronto-Dominion Bank, 2007 ONCA 456, at para. 6.
[123]      
Where deficiencies are identified, the court should
"always" consider if they can be addressed through an amendment,
because "cases should be determined on their merits based on the evidence
presented before judges at trial": see PMC York Properties, at
para. 31. Generally speaking, leave should
only be denied in the clearest of cases, where the plaintiff cannot properly
allege further material facts to establish their causes of action: see Miguna,
at paras. 18-22; RWDI Air, at para. 14; Filler Depot v. Copart
Canada Inc., 2024 ONSC 466, at para. 19.
[124]       The Third Parties rely upon TSCC
Corporation No. 2123 v. Times Group Principals, 2018 ONSC 4799 (at para. 88) for their contention that:
[125]       In
the few instances (above) where the court has determined that further
particulars are needed and leave to amend should be granted, that has been
considered and determined on the basis that there is reason to believe that the
Third Party Claim can be improved by the amendment.
[126]      
The Third Parties contend that, since Dentons
has not, to date, proposed an Amended Third Party Claim and sought leave to
amend it to include the missing essential elements of the baldly asserted
causes of action, it should be presumed that they are unable to do so. That
logic does not follow. To the contrary, there is a line of authority in this
court that considers it to be generally
impermissible for a responding party to serve an amended statement of claim in
response to a motion to strike as the motion must be decided based on the facts
as they existed at the time the motion was served: see Brent Hillier and
Maverick Paintball Inc. v. Craig (Sandy) Hutchens et al, 2012 ONSC 5988, at
paras. 14-15. The reasoning behind this is that, if the courts were to consider
amendments made to statements of claim after a motion to strike was brought, it
would invariably prejudice the rights of moving parties: see Rooney et al.
v. Woodland Park et al., 2011 ONSC 6758, at para. 12.
[127]      
This court has recognized
that there is an inherent conflict between the general principle that motions
should be argued based on the facts as they existed at the time the motion was
brought, and r. 26 which allows parties to amend their statements of claim
without leave before the close of pleadings: see Vale Canada Limited v.
Solway Investment Group Limited et al., 2021 ONSC 7562, at paras. 29-31. After
considering (at paras. 16-28) various cases in this area (including Hillier,
Family Delicatessen Ltd. v. London (City), 2006 CanLII 5135 (ON CA), at
para. 1; Piedra v. Copper Mesa Mining Corporation, 2011 ONCA 191, 332
DLR (4th) 118, at para. 97; and PaineWebber Mortgage Acceptance Corp.
(Trustee of) v. Mundi, [2004] O.J. No. 6173), the court in Vale
concluded (at paras. 22 and 30-31 and 44) that, while not required, if a party
responding to a motion to strike seeks leave to amend their statement of claim,
the court may determine the leave motion before the motion to strike.
[128]       Dentons
did not bring a motion for leave to amend, or ask the court to consider a
proposed amended pleading before the r. 21 motions were argued. However, it did
ask for leave to amend any aspects of its Third Party Claim found to be
deficient, with the benefit of the court's guidance regarding any areas of
deficiency. In the instances where the court has found the pleading to be
deficient in the sufficiency of the particulars of the claims against the Yu
and Chen Third Parties, I have determined that it is appropriate for leave to
be granted to Dentons to amend its Third Party Claim against them to remedy
these deficiencies.
[129]       As
Roberts JA stated in PMC York
Properties stated (at para. 34): "long
gone are the days where proceedings could be terminated at the early pleadings
stage on mere technicalities that can be cured by amendment unless it would
result in non compensable prejudice to the opposing party or the administration
of justice." No such prejudice has been argued or demonstrated in this
case and leave should be granted for any necessary amendments to be made to plead,
with proper specificity, the causes of action that have been struck.
[130]       Conversely, the Third Party Claims against Wang
and the Escrow Agent (in that capacity) are not struck on grounds of mere
technicality, but rather on grounds that they are deficient in respects that
could only be remedied at this time by assertions that would be wholly
speculative.  Accordingly,
[131]        The
following determinations were made (above):
[132]       It
is expected that there may be some timetabling implications arising out of this
order. These may be addressed at the next scheduled case conference, or at a
further case conference to be scheduled before me in the normal course to
address any timetabling issues that the parties are unable to resolve or that
require adjustments to the court ordered timetable.
[133]      
The parties have uploaded their costs outlines into Case Center but have
not yet had the opportunity to make any cost submissions. At the conclusion of
the hearing, the court was advised that the parties agree that partial
indemnity is the appropriate scale of costs. Now that the outcome of these
motions is known, the parties shall meet and confer to determine if an
agreement can be reached regarding the costs of these motions, failing which a
case conference may be arranged for further directions regarding any cost
submissions that the parties wish to make.