[1]         
The Defendant, Chen Wang, moves to
discharge the Certificate of Pending Litigation (the “CPL”) obtained by the
Plaintiff, Zhuo Zuo, against the Defendant’s property located at 256 Park Home
Avenue, in Toronto, Ontario (the “Property”). The Defendant seeks an order for
security for costs, as the Plaintiff is not resident in Canada and has no
assets here.
[2]         
The Plaintiff now also asks the
Court for a Mareva injunction. The Defendant opposes the granting of this
Mareva injunction.
[3]         
In 2022, Justice Nightingale
refused to grant the Plaintiff a CPL (following a motion brought without notice
to the Defendant) as the only evidence of a connection between the alleged debt
to the Plaintiff and the Property, was the Plaintiff’s allegation that some of
her money was used to acquire the Property.
[4]         
The CPL was later granted on June
23, 2022, by Justice Broad. The second motion was on notice, and the Defendant
appeared, unrepresented.
[5]         
The evidence before Broad J. was
the hearsay evidence of the Plaintiff, who swore that she had reason to believe
that her lawful money was used by the Defendant in the purchase of the
Property. There was no supporting documentary evidence presented, and thus the
order was granted without prejudice to the Defendant to bring a motion to
discharge.
[6]         
The Defendant has shown cause to
discharge the CPL.
[7]         
The Plaintiff has not shown that
she is entitled to a Mareva injunction.
[8]         
There shall be an order for
security for costs against the Plaintiff, in the amount of $50,000.
[9]         
The parties agree that the Court
must find the Plaintiff has provided some evidence to support the assertion
that some of her funds were used in the purchase of the Property, its
renovation, or otherwise directly in relation to the Property.
[10]      This court described the test for granting a CPL
(which also covers the test for discharging a CPL) in Perruzza v.
Spatone, 2010 ONSC 841, at para. 20 as follows:
[11]      A court may discharge a CPL where the party, in whose
favour it was issued, does not have a reasonable claim to any interest in the
land, see s. 103(6)(a)(ii) of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.
C. 43:
[12]      The onus is on the person opposing the CPL to show
that there is no triable issue about the claimant’s interest in the land:  Boal
v. International Capital Management Inc., 2018 ONSC 2275, at para. 64 - “On a motion to discharge the certificate, the court should
examine the evidence and without deciding disputed issues of fact and
credibility, determine whether the plaintiff’s case makes a reasonable claim to
an interest in land.”
[13]      The history between the Plaintiff and the Defendant is
complicated. The Plaintiff alleges that she and the Defendant were involved in
an illegal lending arrangement in China, wherein the Plaintiff borrowed money
against her real estate, at a rate of interest in the range of 6-8%, and then loaned
that money to the Defendant at the highest lawful rate of interest in China,
24%. The Plaintiff’s allegation is that the Defendant thereafter loaned the
money at a higher than 24% rate of interest, to third parties. The Plaintiff
admits that in this arrangement she was a party to the illegal lending she
attributes to the Defendant.
[14]      Although the particulars of their business dealings
are not for me to untangle in this motion, the Plaintiff’s evidence suggests
that the dealings between them may not have been lawful. This impacts the
Court’s consideration in granting equitable remedies.
[15]      The Defendant flatly denies most of the Plaintiff’s
alleged facts, including any participation in an illegal lending scheme and
owing any debt whatsoever to the Plaintiff.
[16]      Some facts are not in dispute. The Plaintiff and the
Defendant were friendly in China.
[17]      The Defendant’s son attended university in Canada and
the Defendant came to Canada with his wife from time to time to visit their
son. The first such visit to Canada was in 2012. After that the Defendant
returned to Canada annually.
[18]      In March of 2017, during a visit to his son in Canada,
the Defendant purchased the Property for a total purchase price of $2,828,000,
taking a mortgage of $1,555,400. It is inferred that the Defendant paid the
balance of the purchase price of $1,272,600 with non-mortgage funds.
[19]      The Defendant has provided evidence that a deposit of
$1,485,000 was made to his CIBC account on February 9, 2017, from his wife’s
bank account in China. There is no evidence presented as to how his wife
obtained these funds.
[20]      The Plaintiff claims that she loaned money to the
Defendant over a period of time, on the understanding that it was to be used by
him in re-loaning to third parties. She alleges that, at some point in 2017,
the Defendant had fallen behind in the repayment of loans. The Plaintiff
travelled to Canada in October 2017. The Plaintiff claims that the Defendant
signed a refunding plan during that visit. Pursuant to that plan the Defendant
agreed to pay his debt to the Plaintiff, which had by that point reached $1.958
Million Canadian and was collecting interest at 2% monthly.
[21]      The parties agree that in 2018 the Defendant became aware
that several of his business associates in China had been arrested. The
Defendant’s property was seized, and his wife was detained and restricted from
leaving China. The Defendant later learned that his company’s building had been
demolished and that many of his assets had been forfeited. The Defendant made
the decision not to return to China. Instead, in September 2018, he applied for
Refugee status in Canada. In 2022, the Defendant was granted Refugee
protection.
[22]      Also in 2018, the Plaintiff sued the Defendant in
China. That action appears to have resolved in December 2019, wherein the
Plaintiff obtained judgment against the Defendant in an amount that is the
equivalent of approximately $1.9 Million Canadian.
[23]      The Plaintiff now seeks to recover the $1.9 Million
Canadian debt from the Defendant and brings an action against him in Ontario.
[24]      The only evidence available in regard to the CPL is
the Plaintiff’s assertion and speculation in respect of what the Defendant did with
the money she loaned him. The Plaintiff swore three affidavits in support of
these motions, and has not articulated any concrete basis for her speculation
that the Plaintiff’s funds were used in the purchase of the Property, its
renovation, or that they were used otherwise directly in relation to the
Property.
[25]      In fact, the Plaintiff’s own description of the
illegal lending scheme provides an alternate explanation as to the use she
believed, and expected, her funds were put to - the re-loaning of those funds
at illegal rates of interest.
[26]      The translated decision from the Chinese court action reviews
the position the Plaintiff took there.  She argued that the Defendant had improperly
used the funds she loaned him to pay off business debts, and other debts he had
accumulated, rather than for lending, as had been agreed. There is no
suggestion within those reasons that the Plaintiff alleged that the Defendant
had transferred her funds to Canada to purchase a house.
[27]      Neither the Plaintiff’s affidavits, nor her production
of the Chinese judgment, support her current contention that any of her money
was used directly in relation to the Property. Her position in the Chinese
litigation does not accord with the granting of the CPL.
[28]      In this motion, the Plaintiff alleges that the
Defendant smuggled her funds into Canada, and that he used her funds to
purchase the home. She alleges that the funds came from China to Canada via an
underground bank, in about February 2017, from the Defendant’s wife’s bank
account in China. There is no evidence as to the source of the funds that were
in the Defendant’s wife’s account – only the speculation of the Plaintiff that
those were the funds she had lent to the Defendant.  This does not support the
argument in favour of retaining the CPL.
[29]      The Plaintiff acknowledges that the Defendant had many
other creditors, and she alleges that he was earning money illegally. Upon
review and consideration of the entirety of the portions of the record produced
in English, including the translated portions of the Chinese record, there is
no evidentiary support for the Plaintiff’s contention that the funds she claims
to have loaned the Defendant were used in relation to the Property.
[30]      The CPL is ordered discharged.
[31]      As per Chitel v. Rothbart (1983), 1982 CanLII 1956 (ON CA), 39 O.R. (2d)
513 (C.A.), to obtain a Mareva injunction, the Plaintiff must establish that
they both (1) have a strong prima facie case, and (2) that there is a risk of
imminent removal or dissipation of assets. As affirmed by the Supreme Court of
Canada in Aetna Financial Services Ltd. v. Feigelman, 1985 CanLII 55 (SCC), [1985] S.C.J. No.
1, there are five traditional criteria that must be established to make out a
case for a Mareva injunction – these are as follows:
[32]      Oftentimes, as in Avanew Inc. v. Hossain et. al.,
2023 ONSC 3619, the balance of convenience ‘injunction’ question (from RJR-MacDonald
Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General), 1994 CanLII 117 (SCC), [1994] 1 S.C.R. 311), is also considered
within the Mareva injunction framework – i.e., does the balance of convenience
favour granting a Mareva injunction?
[33]      The test for granting a Mareva injunction is onerous,
more onerous than that required for granting injunctive relief generally: see Laliberte
v. Monteith, 2018 ONSC 7032, at para. 32; and Bradley J. Grant
Investments Inc. v. Nestig Inc., 2023 ONSC 4373, at para, 37, citing to Canadian
Imperial Bank of Commerce v. Credit Valley Institute of Business and Technology,
[2003] O.T.C. 7, (S.C.). A Mareva injunction is an extraordinary
remedy. It is a general principle of common law that there should not be
execution before judgment. A Mareva injunction is both an exception to this
general principle, and an exceptional exercise of the court’s jurisdiction to
grant interlocutory relief: see Salna v. Lotfi-Noushad (2007), 2007 CanLII 16643 (ON SCDC), 224
O.A.C. 147 (S.C.). A Mareva injunction should be granted sparingly and in the
clearest of cases.
[34]      As per Justice Perell, in Sherwood Dash Inc. v.
Woodview Products Inc., [2005] O.T.C. 1061 (S.C.), at paras. 51-53, an
“injunction is an equitable remedy” and is thus “subject to the principles that
govern the grant of equitable decrees and orders. One of those principles is
the maxim that ‘one who comes to equity must come with clean hands.’”
[35]      The clean hands principle, specifically in relation to
a Mareva injunction, is better specified in R. v. Consolidated Fastfrate
Transport Inc., 1995 CanLII 1527 (ON CA), [1995] O.J. No. 1855 (C.A.), at para. 133:
[36]      Such a link between the clean hands principle, and the
Mareva injunction, is affirmed both in Royal Bank v. Boussoulas, 2012 ONSC 2070 (Div. Ct.) and Buduchnist
Credit Union Limited v. 2321197 Ontario Inc.,
2024 ONCA 57.
[37]      There are many factual disputes between the parties on
the most basic of issues. The thousands of pages of documents will require
further translation, and viva voce evidence to assess and interpret. An
assessment of credibility and findings of fact will be required. At this stage,
I find that it is impossible to determine that the Plaintiff has a strong prima
facie case.
[38]      By way of example, the parties dispute whether the Plaintiff
loaned funds to the Defendant and whether any debt exists between them. The parties
dispute whether the Defendant was aware of the proceedings the Plaintiff
brought against him in China and ignored them, or whether he was duped by the
Plaintiff as to the nature and intent of those proceedings. The Plaintiff
claims that she came to Canada and that the Defendant willingly signed an IOU,
agreeing that he owed her the $1.9 Million (Canadian equivalent) plus 24% per
annum interest. The Defendant claims that the Plaintiff made him aware that his
company and assets were under attack in China, and that she offered to assist
him to preserve his assets in China by the bringing of a fictitious lawsuit.
The lawsuit would have the result of causing his assets to be frozen, thereby
putting them out of reach of the authorities. The Defendant alleges that he
signed blank documents so that the Plaintiff could obtain whatever
authorizations were necessary to assist him. The Defendant alleges that the IOU
was obtained fraudulently and that he does not in fact owe the Plaintiff any
money.
[39]      The Defendant makes bald denials of many of the
Plaintiff’s allegations.
[40]      The current state of the documentation, being
thousands of pages largely in an unspecified Chinese dialect, much of which is
not accompanied by any explanatory evidence, makes it impossible to determine
that the Plaintiff has a strong prima facie case. The onus to show as
much is on the Plaintiff, and she has not succeeded.
[41]      While I need not consider the rest of the Mareva
injunction test, having determined I cannot conclude that the Plaintiff has shown
a strong prima facie case, the following constitutes a brief overview of
my conclusions regarding the balance of the Mareva injunction inquiry, which
includes the risk of the Defendant removing assets from the jurisdiction, and
the Plaintiff’s undertaking as to damages.
[42]      The Defendant is a refugee in Canada. His son is here.
He owns at least one property in Canada, which has been subject to the CPL. The
materials suggest that he may have acquired other real property in Canada. The
Plaintiff alleges that the Defendant was a gang member and criminal in China,
and that he had to flee the country. There is no evidence presented to suggest
that the Defendant has ties to or assets in any other country. Instead, the
evidence supports that all his remaining assets in China were seized by the
authorities, and that he would be in danger of arrest and imprisonment were he
to return to China. There is some evidence, including the allegations of the
Plaintiff, suggesting potential illegal activity, which might in turn suggest a
greater likelihood to move or hide assets. However, such is largely supported
by  bald allegations and therefore cannot support any finding of fact that I
might consider in this assessment.
[43]      The Plaintiff appears to be of means, notwithstanding
her submissions suggesting otherwise. She was borrowing and re-loaning money to
the Defendant and her own evidence is that she has since been able to pay back
all her debts. It appears she owns several properties in China. She was able to
pursue litigation against the Defendant in China, and now in Ontario. She has
been able to travel to Canada with some frequency.
[44]      Finally, given that she is a foreign national with no
property or assets in Canada, and that she claims she is not able to deposit
security for costs (see below), there is no other evidence before me that
suggests she could make a viable undertaking regarding damages.
[45]      A Mareva injunction is an extraordinary remedy that
should only be granted in the clearest of cases. I am not satisfied that this
standard has been met in all of the circumstances known to me at this stage in
the proceedings.
[46]      I have found that the Plaintiff has not met the test
to be granted the extraordinary remedy of a Mareva injunction. Further, even if
she had met the test, her own evidence is that the debt came about by way of
her involvement in the Defendant’s unlawful lending scheme. As such, I would
exercise my discretion and refuse to grant an equitable remedy in the circumstances.
[47]      In addition to her position that she borrowed money
and loaned it to the Defendant, so that the Defendant could loan the same money
at illegal rates of interest, as detailed in para. 20 of her October 18, 2023,
affidavit, the Plaintiff swears that it is illegal in China to earn more than
100,000 CNY from the re-loaning of bank money. The Plaintiff’s evidence is that
she entered into a fake tenancy agreement with the Defendant as a means to mask
excessive earnings (this entire factual explanation is denied by the
Defendant). The Plaintiff’s position, if it is accepted, makes her a party to a
fraudulent tenancy agreement intended to hide illegally earned interest.
[48]      In considering all of the evidence on the motion,
alongside the Plaintiff’s sworn evidence as to how the debt arose (i.e., from
the loaning of money at illegal rates of interest and hiding the profits made
from illegal activities, through to the signing of artificial tenancy
agreements), the Plaintiff by her own evidence does not come to the Court with
clean hands, and as such, even in the event that she had met the other
criteria, she would not be entitled to the exceptional equitable remedy she
seeks.
[49]      On a motion for security for costs, the initial onus
is on the defendant to establish that the case falls within one of the branches
of r. 56.01 of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.S.O. 1990, C. 43. Once
that is established, the onus shifts to the plaintiff to show that ordering
security would be unjust by demonstrating: (a) the plaintiff has sufficient
assets in Ontario or a reciprocating jurisdiction to satisfy any costs award;
(b) the plaintiff is impecunious and the claim is not plainly devoid of merit;
or (c) the plaintiff is neither impecunious nor has sufficient assets to post
security, but does have a good chance of success on the merits: see 2311888
Ontario Inc. v. Ross, 2017 ONSC 1295, 69 C.L.R. (4th) 40.
[50]      The Defendant argues that the Plaintiff should be
required to deposit security for costs because she is a Chinese national, she
lives in China, and because she does not own any property in Canada.
[51]      The Plaintiff swears that she will be forced to
forfeit the litigation if I order her to pay security for costs. Notwithstanding
this claim, the Plaintiff’s materials reference the fact that she owns more
than one property in China. In her July 6, 2023, Affidavit, she swore to the
fact that she had repaid the money that she borrowed against her properties
for the loans to the Defendant. She indicated that, prior to repaying the
loans, she had been unable to borrow against her properties for
four years. I conclude that the Plaintiff is not impecunious and that she does
in fact own properties in China.
[52]      In 2018 alone, the Plaintiff travelled to Canada four
times to meet with the Defendant. These facts further suggest that she is not
impecunious.
[53]      The issues between the parties appear to have the
potential to lead to complex and expensive litigation. I am unable to assess
the strength of the Plaintiff’s case. Much of the information the Plaintiff
relies on is in not in English and will have to be both certified and
translated. This is not a matter which can be heard via simplified procedure. 
The credibility issues and the factual disputes will mandate a full trial.
[54]      The uncontradicted evidence before me is that the
Plaintiff is a foreign national, who does not reside in Canada, and who does
not own any assets in this country. Further, there is no credible evidence
before me that the Plaintiff is impecunious. Rather, the evidence leads to the
opposite conclusion. In the circumstances, I consider that it is just to
require the Plaintiff to post security for costs.
[55]      The Defendant provided a draft bill of costs,
estimating after trial costs of $159,567.45 ($113,271.35 on a partial indemnity
basis).
[56]      It is not necessary to address the full potential for all
costs which might be incurred, and the merits of the case may be more easily
assessed when the matter is more substantively underway. Rule 56.07 allows for
the security for costs amount to be increased or decreased at any time. At this
stage, upon a review of the current record before me, I order the Plaintiff to
deposit $50,000 as security for costs of the action.
[57]      The Defendant further argued that the Plaintiff’s
motion materials do not conform with Rules 4.06(1)(e), and 4.06(8) of the Rules
of Civil Procedure, or s. 125(2)(b) of the Courts of Justice Act, and
that they are therefore inadmissible or should be given no weight. In her
answers to undertakings, the Plaintiff admits that the person who swore one of
her affidavits, in July of 2023, was not appointed as a commissioner under the Commissioners
for Taking Affidavits Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C. 17.
[58]      The Defendant makes an additional argument that the
majority of the evidence tendered by the Plaintiff is inadmissible, in that it
does not include a certification of translation in the jurat, or that it is not
translated from Chinese to English. The Plaintiff, in her submissions, admitted
that these allegations are true. The Plaintiff submits that meeting all the
translation requirements would be prohibitively expensive, and that the court
has the discretion to admit her documents as they are.
[59]      I agree with the Defendant, if the Court did not
consider the Plaintiff’s evidence that fails to meet the evidentiary
requirements for translation, then the court would have concluded that the did
not meet her burden regarding either the CPL or the granting of a Mareva injunction.
I also agree that the requirements for certification and translation are
substantive and not minor procedural requirements. However, given my decision
herein, and having taken the Plaintiff’s evidence at its highest, including a
consideration of some of the translated materials, it is not necessary to determine
this issue of conformity/inadmissibility here.
[60]      It may indeed be prohibitive and may not be reasonably
required that all documents be translated. If the Plaintiff pursues the action,
no doubt the issue of what documentation will be necessary to translate will
have to be determined before trial, either by agreement between the parties, or
by separate motion to this court.
[61]      The CPL shall be discharged.
[62]      The motion for a Mareva injunction is dismissed.
[63]      The Plaintiff shall deposit $50,000 prior to taking
any further steps in this action, and in any event within 90 days of this Order.
Upon providing the security, the Plaintiff shall forthwith give notice of
compliance pursuant to r. 56.08 of the Rules of Civil Procedure.
[64]      I would urge the parties to agree on costs. If the
parties are unable to agree, then costs submissions may be made as follows.