[1]         
This
case conference relates to two separate proceedings in which Gaurav Tewari is
the Plaintiff. For ease of reference, I will refer to the first as the
“Desiccare action” and the second as the “Cargill action”.
[2]         
While
there are two separate actions, the Plaintiff in both actions, Mr. Tewari,
wants to examine two of the defendants in the Desiccare action - Thomas D.
McIntyre and Marcus Dukes – with respect to a motion in the Cargill action.
[3]         
As a
result, these two actions have been case conferenced together.
[4]         
The
first case conference was nearly 3 years ago on January 15, 2022, where I
issued the following direction regarding several motions:
[5]         
The
Desiccare jurisdiction motion (Step 1 above) proceeded before Dunphy J. on
October 31, 2022. In oral reasons, Dunphy J. dismissed the Plaintiff’s action
for want of jurisdiction in Ontario. The Plaintiff’s cross motions to examine
non-parties were dismissed on the same basis. Partial indemnity costs of
$119,724.56 were ordered in favour of the Defendants and, in part on a
substantial indemnity basis, costs of $52,401 in favour of Matthew Gibney, a
non‑party who was the focus of the Plaintiff’s motion to examine.
[6]         
On
September 22, 2023, the Court of Appeal dismissed the Plaintiff’s appeal, and
ordered costs in favour of the Respondents of $90,000 and $32,000 to Mr.
Gibney: Tewari v. McIntyre, 2023 ONCA 628.
[7]         
Leave
to appeal was dismissed with costs by the Supreme Court of Canada on May 9,
2024: Gaurav Tewari v. Ted McIntyre, et al., 2024 CanLII 40772 (SCC).
[8]         
None
of these costs awards have been paid.
[9]         
I
held another case conference on December 19, 2022, but this was before the
Court of Appeal had heard the appeal from Dunphy J.’s decision, so Steps 2 and
3 of my January 15, 2022 direction were kept on hold while the Desiccare
jurisdiction motion wound its way through the appellate process.
[10]      As indicated in Step 2
of my January 15, 2022 direction, I had hoped that the Court’s decision in the
Desiccare jurisdiction motion would resolve McIntyre
and Dukes’ concerns about voluntarily attorning to Ontario’s jurisdiction.
[11]      This was, unfortunately,
not to be. On December 22, 2022 – just 3 days after the December 19, 2022 case
conference – Mr. Tewari commenced another action against eleven defendants,
including Desiccare Inc., Ted McIntyre and Marcus Dukes, as well as Cargill
Limited and Matthew Gibney (Court file #CV-22-4015). That Statement of Claim is
not the subject of this case management Endorsement, but it means that McIntyre
and Dukes’ concerns about voluntarily attorning to Ontario’s jurisdiction
remain extant. Most importantly, Dr. Tewari continues to take the position that
if McIntyre and Dukes oppose his motion to examine them in the Cargill action,
or bring a motion for security for costs under Rule 56.01(c), they have
attorned to the jurisdiction and can no longer dispute Ontario’s jurisdiction
in his latest case against them. Whether Mr. Tewari’s position is correct is a
complex issue that cannot be addressed at a case conference.
[12]      While we are now ready
to proceed with Steps 2 and 3, an outstanding issue is whether the two steps
will proceed on the same day or separately. As noted on December 19, 2022, Dr.
Tewari asks that Steps 2 and 3 remain separate, so that he will get a decision
on his summons motion before the court hears Cargill’s jurisdiction motion.
[13]      Cargill, however, takes
the position that Steps 2 and 3 should be combined so that they are heard on
the same day before one judge. This will promote judicial economy. Moreover,
the Cargill jurisdiction motion has been outstanding for nearly four years, and
they want to avoid the delay that two motion dates will entail.
[14]      In my December 19, 2022
case conference direction I stated, at para. 11, that “we will revisit this
issue when we return for another case conference following the release of the
Court of Appeal’s decision in the Desiccare jurisdiction motion. At that point
we will be in a better position to assess the most efficient and fair way of
proceeding. Whether there are outstanding costs orders will be taken into consideration”.
[15]      In my view, given the
passage of time and the outstanding costs orders against the Plaintiff, these
two motions should be heard at the same time by one judge. That will be the
most efficient use of judicial resources. It is unfair to the Defendants to
permit the Plaintiff to bring multiple motions in circumstances in which he has
not paid previous costs orders.
[16]       I am also mindful of
Lax J’s decision in Schreiber, where she stated, at para. 11: “I am of
the view that to order an examination of Mr. Mulroney before jurisdiction is
decided would be putting the cart before the horse. It would presume the very
jurisdiction that is in issue. I would refuse the order on this basis…”
[17]      In making this Order, I
understand that the judge hearing the two motions may conclude that the
Plaintiff should be permitted to examine non-parties, including McIntyre and
Dukes, before he or she decides the jurisdictional issue. The judge hearing the
two motions together will have heard both the summons motion and the jurisdiction
motion, and will be best placed to make that determination.
[18]      Mr. Tewari reminds me
that, in one of his other actions (Tewari v. Hillyer, CV-22-374), I
permitted him to bring his motion to cross-examine two of the parties (Hillyer
and Helin) prior to the jurisdiction motion. This case is different. Firstly,
Hillyer and Helin were parties to that action. McIntyre and Dukes are not
parties to the Cargill action. Second, Mr. Tewari’s motion to examine Hillyer
and Helin was dismissed: Tewari v. Hillyer, 2024 ONCA 705, at para. 2.
[19]      In summary, I concluded
that Steps 2 and 3 should proceed together, with the summons motion and the
jurisdiction motion being heard by the same judge. The judge hearing the
motions will give directions with respect to the order of the motions. The
parties will have to schedule a long motion – I estimate ½ day – for the motions
to be heard.
[20]      Long motions are
scheduled by the Triage judge. An appointment before the Triage judge can be
scheduled through Calendly at: