[1]              
This endorsement concerns two related putative class proceedings. The
first of these was commenced by the plaintiff Alga Adina Bonnick against the
defendant Lawrence Krimker, and certain corporations, which I refer to as the Krimker
action. The second was commenced later, by Alga Adina Bonnick against the
defendant People’s Trust Company. I refer to the second action as the PTC
action.
[2]              
In this endorsement, I:
[3]              
These actions arise out of agreements for leased equipment, including
water and air filters, entered into between class members and different
corporate entities that are alleged to be related or part of a common scheme.
The agreements were originated by door-to-door salespeople. In many cases,
Notices of Security Interests were registered on title to the class members’
homes, in amounts that appear to far exceed the value of the equipment
installed, and at least sometimes in amounts that do not appear to relate to
the value of the contracts. There are allegations that the cost of the
equipment under the contracts are out of all proportion to the value of the
equipment leased.
[4]              
The plaintiffs allege that the agreements are predatory and
unconscionable. They allege causes of action grounded in breach of consumer
protection legislation, conspiracy, unconscionability, slander of title, and
unjust enrichment.
[5]              
As I noted above, the Krimker action was commenced first. I scheduled a
summary judgment motion to be heard together with the certification motion.
However, before the motions could be heard, certain of the defendants to the
Krimker action became insolvent, and involved in proceedings under the Companies’
Creditors Arrangement Act (“CCAA”), commenced by People’s Trust
Company, a creditor of the insolvent companies.
[6]              
The plaintiffs allege that during the CCAA proceedings, they
learned information that led them to believe that People’s Trust Company is a
party to the alleged conspiracy that is pleaded in the Krimker action. The
plaintiffs thus commenced the PTC action.
[7]              
The stay in the CCAA proceedings was lifted to allow the summary
judgment motion and certification motion in the Krimker action to proceed. The
stay has also been lifted for the purpose of bringing the motions I adjudicate
herein.
[8]              
The certification and summary judgment motions began before me, but before
they were completed, the parties advised that they had reached a settlement,
subject to approval of the class proceedings case management judge (me), and
the CCAA judge (Conway J.). The settlement contemplates a global
resolution of all issues between all parties, including the parties to be added.
[9]              
The parties thus seek orders amending the PTC claim to, among other
things, add parties; consolidating the Krimker and PTC claims; certifying the
consolidated claim for purposes of settlement; and approving of the notice plan
and notices of the settlement approval hearing. These reasons address those
motions.
[10]          
The plaintiffs seek to make allegations of conspiracy involving the
proposed new defendants and People’s Trust Company. They allege that they
discovered the material facts underlying the conspiracy in the course of the
CCAA proceedings, and that the added parties are proper parties.
[11]          
The plaintiffs also seek to consolidate the PTC action with the Krimker
action, so that the consolidated proceeding can be certified and the settlement
approval hearing take place.
[12]          
The PTC action and the Krimker action arise out of the same subject
matter, and many of the parties overlap.
[13]          
People’s Trust Company and the proposed new defendants consent to the
order on the basis that, if the action is not consolidated with the Krimker
action, the consolidated action is not certified, or the settlement is not
approved or otherwise terminates, the stay of proceedings in place in the CCAA
proceeding shall automatically resume, and any actions taken that would have
been subject to the stay shall be null, void, and of no effect.
[14]          
In other words, the parties agree to the orders sought in this
endorsement for purposes of moving towards a settlement approval hearing. If
the settlement is not approved or otherwise terminates, all of the procedural
steps taken to set up the settlement will be unwound.
[15]          
In these circumstances, I grant the order to amend pleadings, add,
parties, and consolidate the PTC and Krimker actions which shall continue under
court file no. CV-21-00665193-00CP with a new style of cause, as follows:
[16]          
The parties seek to certify the consolidated action on consent for
purposes of settlement.
[17]          
Pursuant to s. 5(1) of the Class Proceedings Act, 1992, S.O.
1992, c. 6, CPA, the court shall certify a class proceeding if: (a) the
pleadings or the notice of application disclose a cause of action; (b) there is
an identifiable class of two or more persons that would be represented by the
representative plaintiff; (c) the claims or defences of the class members raise
common issues; (d) a class proceeding would be the preferable procedure for the
resolution of the common issues; and (e) there is a representative plaintiff
who would fairly and adequately represent the interests of the class, has
produced a workable plan for the proceeding, and does not have an interest in
conflict with the interests of other class members.
[18]          
Where certification is sought for the purposes of settlement, all the
criteria for certification must still be met, although compliance with the
certification criteria is not as strictly required: Waheed v. Pfizer Canada
Inc., 2011 ONSC 5057, at para. 36; Nutech Brands Inc. v. Air Canada,
[2008 CanLII 11643, at para. 9. The representative plaintiff must provide a
certain minimum evidentiary basis for certification order: Hollick v.
Toronto (City), 2001 SCC 68, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 158, at para. 24.
[19]          
Certification will not be denied under s. 5(1)(a) unless it is plain and
obvious that the pleadings disclose no cause of action: Hollick, at
para. 25.
[20]          
For the purposes of the settlement approval, the defendants do not
dispute, and I accept, that the pleadings disclose a cause of action in (i)
breach of consumer protection law; (ii) conspiracy; (iii) unconscionability;
(iv) slander of title; and (v) unjust enrichment, for which facts are
sufficiently pleaded.
[21]          
In determining whether there is an identifiable class, the court asks
whether the plaintiff has defined the class by reference to objective criteria
such that a person can be identified to be a class member without reference to
the merits of the action. The class must be bounded, and not of unlimited
membership, or unnecessarily broad, and have some rational relationship with
the common issues: Hollick, at para. 17, Cloud v. Canada (Attorney
General) (2004), 2004 CanLII 45444 (ON CA), 73 O.R. (3d) 401 (C.A.), at para. 45.
[22]          
For purposes of settlement, the plaintiffs seek to certify the following
settlement class:
[23]          
I am satisfied that the class is defined by reference to objective
criteria, is bounded and bears a rational relationship with the common issue
which I discuss below.
[24]          
When considering whether a claim raises a common issue, the court asks
whether it is necessary to resolve the issue in order to resolve each class
member’s claim, and whether the issue is a substantial ingredient of each of
the class members’ claims. The issue is a substantial ingredient of each claim
if its resolution will advance the case or move the litigation forward, and if
it is capable of extrapolation to all class members: Vivendi Canada Inc. v.
Dell’Aniello, 2014 SCC 1, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 3, at para. 46.
[25]          
The plaintiff must prove that there is some basis in fact that the
asserted common issues actually exist, and they are common to the entire class:
Kuiper v. Cook (Canada) Inc, 2020 ONSC 128, at paras. 26-33.
[26]          
The plaintiffs propose to certify the following issue, common to the
settlement class:
[27]          
I am satisfied that this question is common to all settlement class
members, and the resolution of this question at a common issues trial would
advance the action for all class members, avoiding the need for each class member
to prove the issue in individual trials.
[28]          
Moreover, I am satisfied that the plaintiffs have adduced evidence
providing some basis in fact that the proposed common issue exists, including
evidence of non-disclosure of the lease value of the class members’ leases
which is alleged to be at the core of the defendants’ business model.
[29]          
This branch of the test requires that the court be satisfied that a
class proceeding would be the preferable procedure for the resolution of the
common issues. This inquiry is directed at two questions: first, whether the
class proceeding would be a fair, efficient, and manageable way to advance the
claim, and second, whether the class proceeding would be preferable to other
procedures for resolving the common issues. Section 5(1.1) of the CPA adds
two further criteria for the court to consider: superiority and predominance.
In Banman v. Ontario, 2023 ONSC 6187, Perell J. found that the
preferable procedure analysis involves determining:
[30]          
Preferable procedure is addressed through the lens of the three goals of
class proceedings, that is, access to justice, behaviour modification, and
judicial economy: Hollick, at para. 27; Banman, at para. 313.
[31]          
In the context of the settlement, courts have recognized that a class
proceeding is a fair, efficient, and manageable method for advancing the class
members claims and is preferable to other procedures. As Perell J. held in Waheed,
at para. 27, where there is a cause of action, an identifiable class, common
issues, and a settlement, there is a strong basis to conclude that a class
proceeding is the preferable procedure because certification would serve the
primary purposes of the CPA: access to justice, behaviour modification,
and judicial economy.
[32]          
I am satisfied that, in the context of the proposed settlement, a class
proceeding is the preferable procedure to resolve the common issues. The action
is manageable as a class proceeding. Given the settlement, a class proceeding
is superior to all other reasonable available means to address the defendants’
conduct. Moreover, in view of the settlement, there are no individual issues to
address, and the proposed common issues predominate.
[33]          
I also note that, given the ongoing CCAA proceedings and the
limited agreement to lift the stay in that proceeding, the consolidated class
proceeding is the only procedure available to the class to pursue their claims
against the insolvent defendants.
[34]          
I conclude that a class proceeding is the preferable procedure in this case.
[35]          
The evidence before me indicates that the proposed representative
plaintiffs, Alga Adina Bonnick, Goran Stoilov Donev, and Sarah-Jane Shah, are
adequate representative plaintiffs. They have each played an active role in the
action, including filing affidavit evidence on the original contested motions
for certification and summary judgment, and will continue to do so. They have
no known conflict of interest with other class members. They have proposed a
workable plan to move towards the approval of the settlement agreement.
[36]          
In conclusion, I certify the consolidated action for the purposes of
settlement.
[37]          
The plaintiffs propose a notice plan including a digital banner, and a
long and a short form notice. The plan includes direct notice to the class
members who have registered with class counsel for updates; publication on
class counsel’s website, and the administrator’s website; advertising on social
media; and display on a news outlet with national reach (excluding Quebec) to
be selected with advice from the administrator. It includes limited notice in
French and resources to assist any French-speaking class member.
[38]          
I am satisfied that this notice plan is appropriate and will bring the
terms of the settlement, the opt-out procedure, the right to object to the
settlement, and the details of the settlement approval hearing to the attention
of class members.
[39]          
I am satisfied that the content of the notices proposed is appropriate.
I note in particular the fact that the notices make clear that, if settlement
approval is obtained in the consolidated class proceeding, approval must still
be obtained in the CCAA proceeding.
[40]          
I grant the order sought with respect to the notice plan.
[41]          
In conclusion, I:
[42]          
The orders arising out of this endorsement shall go in the form of the
drafts I have signed.