[1]              
On October 24, 2022, Mr. Williams has pleaded
guilty to multiple counts of human trafficking, procuring a person for sexual
services, receiving a material benefit in relation to sexual services, and
assault.   After a significant delay of almost two years, I heard the
application on October 1, 2024.  I dismissed the application on October 4,
2024.  I stated:
[2]              
What follows are my reasons for dismissing the
application.
[3]              
Mr. Williams pleaded guilty before me to
offences on two different indictments.  He pleaded guilty to the following
offences on an indictment in relation to S.B.:
[4]              
S.B. met Mr. Williams in August 2019.  She was
19 years old.  She was living in a group home.  She connected on a dating app
with someone she believed to be a woman.  She was hoping to meet another woman
for a same-sex relationship.  In fact, Mr. Williams was pretending to be
someone else.  S.B. explained that she was broke and needed money.  In the
guise of “Aliyah”, whose name was Z.A., he offered to let her live at a condo. 
Mr. Williams encouraged her to believe that she could make money by escorting. 
S.B. did not understand at first that escorting meant prostitution.  She agreed
to meet at the condo and bring lingerie.  She met Mr. Williams and Z.A. at that
point.  Z.A. took sexualized photographs of S.B. and discussed the costs for
her services.  She began to see clients.  Z.A. had been an escort for Mr.
Williams.  She explained to S.B. what kind of services she would perform and
explained that she had no choice about some things.  She saw 5-10 clients per
day for Z.A. and Mr. Williams for about three weeks.  One customer demanded
anal sex.  She refused and the customer anally raped her.  At the end she
returned to the group home.  Mr. Williams and Z.A. tried to stop her from
leaving.  Eventually counsellors at the group home called the police.  S.B. was
supposed to receive half of the earnings from her work as an escort, but Mr.
Williams and Z.A. kept virtually all the money.  The police arrested Mr.
Williams in September 2019.
[5]              
Mr. Williams pleaded guilty to the following
offences on an indictment in relation to Z.A.:
[6]              
Z.A. has been the target of human trafficking
investigations, where she is co-accused with Mr. Williams.  She also was on
bail conditions to have no communication with Mr. Williams but appears to have
breached that bail.  In the course of being arrested for one of the other human
trafficking investigations, Z.A. told investigators that she was a victim of
human trafficking by Mr. Williams.  She indicated that they met in summer 2017
when she was staying at Covenant House.  He offered to let her stay in his
condo in North York when she was kicked out or disobeying the curfew.  She met
up with him again in November or December 2017 when she was homeless.  She
agreed to escort for him and to split her earnings 50/50.  They went to North
York.  Z.A. saw customers in Toronto and Niagara Falls.  She saw 4-5 customers
per day on weekdays and 7-10 customers per day on the weekends.  Mr. Williams
made all the arrangements.  She made about $8000 during one trip to Niagara,
but the total amount over the course of four years was much larger.  All her
earnings were turned over to Mr. Williams.  He paid for food, clothing, other
necessities, and the hotel rooms.  He also held on to her documents and debit
card.  Mr. Williams assaulted Z.A. during the years she was with him.  Mr.
Williams met other young women online and had Z.A. introduce them into the sex
trade.  One of them was S.B.  Z.A. also felt that Mr. Williams did not protect
her, as he did nothing when a customer robbed her.
[7]              
On September 8, 2022 Mr. Williams commenced a
trial in the Ontario Court of Justice in Newmarket before Justice Dwyer on
human trafficking-related chares.  Those charges are separate from the charges
he faced in Toronto.  On September 30, 2022, Justice Dwyer convicted Mr.
Williams of the following charges:
[8]              
Royland Moriah represented Mr. Williams on both
the Newmarket and the Toronto charges.  According to the affidavit filed by Mr.
Moriah’s legal assistant, Mr. Williams gave Mr. Moriah instructions to pursue a
global resolution of the Toronto and Newmarket charges.
[9]              
As noted, Mr. Williams entered pleas on October
24, 2022, before me.  Mr. Moriah, his counsel, indicated that he went through
the plea inquiry with Mr. Williams.  I then indicated that I would ask some
questions before accepting the plea.  The transcript reads, in part:
[10]          
The plea proceeded.  Mr. Williams was
arraigned.  The facts were read in.  He agreed that they were correct. 
Findings of guilt were entered.  The sentencing hearing was adjourned.
[11]          
On January 11, 2023, Mr. Moriah indicated in
court that there had been a breakdown in communications, and he would apply to
be removed from the record.  On March 3, 2023, Mr. Moriah indicated that Mr.
Williams would be seeking new counsel to bring an application to withdraw his
pleas of guilty.  I agreed to remove Mr. Moriah.  Mr. Williams subsequently applied
for a new legal aid certificate to retain Mr. Gill to represent him on the
application.  Legal Aid turned him down.  Throughout 2023 he went through the
Legal Aid appeal process.  He eventually applied for “Rowbotham” funding
(state-funded counsel) through a pilot project.  That was approved.  Mr. Gill then
brought the application on behalf of Mr. Williams to strike the guilty pleas.
[12]          
Mr. Williams swore an affidavit on April 30,
2024.  He also testified on the application.  He is a permanent resident of
Canada.  There are deportation proceedings against him by the immigration
authorities.  His appeal to the Immigration Appeal Division of the Immigration
And Refugee Board has been adjourned pending the outcome of his criminal
matters.
[13]          
In his affidavit, Mr. Williams stated that he
had been advised that Mr. Moriah would not be available to conduct his
Newmarket trial as scheduled.  Mr. Moriah was representing a client in a
Superior Court matter that had been going longer than expected.  The Superior
Court matter would overlap with the Newmarket trial.  Mr. Moriah gave Mr.
Williams several choices, including seeking an adjournment of the Newmarket
matter.  Mr. Williams preferred to proceed.  Mr. Moriah recommended that his
trial be conducted by George Gray, another criminal defence counsel.  Mr.
Williams agreed.  Mr. Williams stated in his affidavit that he was unhappy about
Mr. Gray’s representation.  He felt that Mr. Gray could have done a better
job.  He did not discuss appealing with Mr. Gray or Mr. Moriah. (Mr. Gray filed
an affidavit indicating that he had no communications with Mr. Williams after
the convictions.)  Mr. Moriah, he stated in his affidavit, indicated that his
best course of action would be to globally resolve his matters for the shortest
possible sentence.  In contrast, in his viva voce evidence on the
application, he stated that he discussed appealing the Newmarket convictions
from a criminal point of view.  He did not discuss the immigration consequences
of not appealing his Newmarket convictions with Mr. Moriah or anyone else.  He
testified that he believed that he would be automatically deported.  He
testified that he learned that if he appealed the Newmarket convictions and won
then he would not be deported and could be successful in his immigration
appeal.
[14]          
Mr. Williams has been assisted by the Legal Aid
Ontario Refugee Law Office.  In his affidavit, Mr. Williams indicated that on
August 29, 2022, prior to his Newmarket trial, counsel at the Refugee Law
Office informed him that if he were convicted in Newmarket that would result in
his deportation without the right of an appeal to the Immigration Appeal
Division.
[15]          
Mr. Williams stated in his affidavit that he was
unaware that if he successfully appealed the Newmarket convictions, he would
have been able to continue his appeal before the Immigration Appeal Division. 
He stated that Mr. Moriah did not make him aware of that.  He was proceeding on
the basis that his status in Canada was a “lost cause”.  He entered the pleas
before me believing that his immigration status was a foregone conclusion.  He
agrees that during my plea inquiry he acknowledged that he knew he would be
deported.  He stated in his affidavit that had any of this been properly
explained, he would not have entered a plea on the Toronto indictments.  He
says that he would have appealed his Newmarket convictions and gone to trial on
the Toronto indictments.
[16]          
In his examination in chief, Mr. Williams
testified that he came to Canada at age 7.  He had been living with his
grandmother in Jamaica.  His father was living in Toronto.  He lived with his
father from age 7 to age 9.  He became a Crown ward in the care of the
Children’s Aid Society until he was 21 years old.
[17]          
Mr. Williams’ criminal record was put to him in
cross-examination.  It is a significant one.  Between 2006 and 2010 he
accumulated multiple youth convictions.  In 2006 he was convicted of assault as
a youth and put on probation for 12 months.  In 2007 he was convicted of fail
to appear court and again put on probation for 12 months.  That year he was
also convicted of robbery, obstruct peace officer, and fail to attend court again. 
On the robbery he received his first custodial sentence – 20 days in addition
to 25 days in pre-sentence custody, and more probation.  In 2008 he received
convictions for uttering threats, escape lawful custody, fail to comply with a
disposition, and obstructing a peace officer.  That year he was also convicted
three times for assault.  He received multiple custodial sentences.  In 2009 he
was convicted of breaking and entering, for which he received 8 months in
custody, 4 months community supervision, and probation.  In 2010 Mr. Williams
was convicted of possession of a loaded prohibited firearm, possession of a
firearm contrary to a prohibition order, fail to comply with a recognizance,
and carrying a concealed weapon.  He was sentenced to 117 days in custody and
49 days community supervision, in light of 228 days of pre-sentence custody. 
He was also sentenced to more probation.
[18]          
In 2011 Mr. Williams began accumulating adult
convictions.  In 2011 he was convicted of possession of a schedule 1 substance
for the purpose of trafficking.  He received 9 months and 18 months probation
in light of 6 months and 18 days pre-sentence custody.  In 2011 Mr. Williams
was convicted of failure to comply with a probation order.  In 2012 Mr. Williams
was convicted, again, for two counts of failure to comply with a probation
officer, two counts of obstruct peace officer, fail to comply with
recognizance, assault, assault with intent to resist arrest, and disarming a
peace officer.
[19]          
And, of course, Mr Williams was convicted of
human-trafficking related offences in 2022 by Justice Dwyer, as I have
mentioned.
[20]          
Section 36(1) of the Immigration And Refugee
Protection Act states that a permanent resident is inadmissible on the
grounds of serious criminality after having been convicted in Canada of an
offence punishable by ten years or more in prison, or for an offence for which
more than six months has been imposed.  Mr. Williams met those conditions when
he was convicted of drug trafficking in 2011.
[21]          
In cross-examination, Mr. Williams agreed that
he had a lot of experience in the criminal justice system.  He testified that
he went to trial sometimes, and pleaded guilty sometimes, but – except for the
trial before Justice Dwyer – he always felt that the outcomes were the right
outcomes.  If he went to trial, it was because he wanted the Crown to prove the
charges.  He could not remember which convictions were the result of pleas and
which came after trial.  He testified that he went to trial at least 80% of the
time.
[22]          
Mr. Williams further agreed in cross-examination
that he knew many times that he could have appealed.  He did not because he
thought the outcome was fair.  He did appreciate, from a criminal standpoint,
that if he appealed and another court said the judge was wrong that any orders
made by the sentencing judge would no longer apply.  He also agreed that he
understood from 2016 on that if he was convicted of some offences there would
be immigration consequences, including deportation.  He knew that because from
2016 on he was subject to a removal order.  He also knew that there would be a
difference between being convicted on a minor offence, such as theft, and being
convicted of a serious offence, such as human trafficking.  He also agreed that
he understood that if he successful appealed the Newmarket and Toronto cases
that he could stay in Canada.  Mr. Williams then denied that he did understand
that.
[23]          
Mr. Williams also agreed in cross-examination
that he discussed his immigration situation many times with two immigration
lawyers, Ms. Bitton and Mr. Kim.  He pleaded to the Toronto charges because he
figured it did not matter.  He knew that if he were convicted in relation to
either the Toronto or the Newmarket cases that he would be deported.
[24]          
Mr. Moriah is an experienced criminal defence
lawyer.  He filed an affidavit on the application.  Mr. Moriah stated that he
was originally retained by Mr. Williams in relation to the human trafficking
charges in Newmarket and in Toronto.  He learned that Mr. Williams was not a
Canadian citizen.  He was also aware that Ms. Bitton from the Refugee Law
Office represented Mr. Williams.  When Ms. Bitton left the office, Mr. Kim took
over Mr. Williams’ file.  Mr. Moriah did not provide any advice to Mr. Williams
on the impact of his criminal cases on his immigration status.
[25]          
Mr. Moriah explained how Mr. Gray came to
represent Mr. Williams during the trial before Justice Dwyer.  Mr. Moriah had
been in a Superior Court trial that went beyond the time allotted in 2022 due
to actions taken by the Crown in that case.  That meant that Mr. Moriah would
not be available for the Newmarket trial.  They discussed various options.  Mr.
Williams was anxious for his trial to proceed and did not want to adjourn it on
account of Mr. Moriah’s unforeseen availability.  Mr. Moriah found that George
Gray, another criminal defence lawyer, was available and willing to represent
Mr. Williams on the Newmarket case before Justice Dwyer.  Mr. Williams agreed.
[26]          
Mr. Moriah met with Mr. Williams after the
trial.  As noted, Justice Dwyer convicted Mr. Williams of several offences. 
The trial took place in April 2022.  Prior to September 30, 2022 Mr. Williams
had indicated to Mr. Moriah that he wished to appeal.  Mr. Moriah did discuss
the trial issues with Mr. Gray in contemplation of a possible appeal.  On
September 20, 2022, however, Mr. Williams changed his instructions and
instructed Mr. Moriah to pursue a global resolution that included the Toronto
charges.  Mr. Williams did not want to spend any more time in custody than was
necessary prior to his deportation.  On subsequent days in September and
October 2022, Mr. Moriah discussed a potential appeal with Mr. Williams.  Mr.
Moriah explained that much of the case depended on credibility findings by the
trial judge, and that it was difficult to appeal such findings.  He advised
that Mr. Williams should discuss a potential appeal with appellate counsel.  He
offered to put Mr. Williams in touch with appellate counsel.  He also informed
Mr. Williams that he would be unable to proceed with a global resolution if he
also appealed.
[27]          
Mr. Moriah indicated in his affidavit that in
dealing with his immigration matters, his role was limited to keeping
immigration counsel informed.  Mr. Moriah provided his emails and they do
indicate that he was in regular contact with immigration counsel.  The emails
indicate that Mr. Moriah kept immigration counsel informed of trial updates and
the possibility of a global resolution.  Mr. Moriah provided a copy of the
unsigned instructions that he provided to Mr. Williams.  Mr. Williams did sign
them but the original signed copy was lost during an office move.
[28]          
In cross-examination, Mr. Moriah agreed that Mr.
Williams was not shy about expressing his views.  His notes capture some very
candid discussions about the strength and weaknesses of the various charges
against Mr. Williams.  Mr. Moriah confirmed that if Mr. Williams wished to appeal
there was no prospect of a global resolution.  He never advised Mr. Williams
not to appeal or advised him that there was no point in appealing.  There was
never any doubt in Mr. Moriah’s mind that Mr. Williams understood the
immigration consequences of a conviction for serious criminality.  Mr. Moriah
was aware that Mr. Williams was subject to a removal order but that the order
had been stayed pending the outcome of the trial.  In Paragraph 11 of his
affidavit, Mr. Williams asserted that:
[29]          
Mr. Moriah testified that he never told Mr.
Williams that.  He never told Mr. Williams that he could not appeal.
[30]          
Mr. Kim is a lawyer practicing at Legal Aid
Ontario Refugee Law Office.  He was assisting Mr. Williams at the time of the
Newmarket convictions in September 2022.  He reviewed all the file notes.   He
stated in his affidavit:
[31]          
In cross-examination Mr. Kim agreed that Mr.
Williams was aware that there were serious immigration consequences because of
being found guilty.  He understood that he was aware of his 2016 removal
order.  He also understood that he could be removed from Canada because of the
convictions in Newmarket.  Mr. Kim testified that if Mr. Williams appealed, it
could hold up the lifting of the stay.  Mr. Kim testified that it was the
possession of a schedule 1 substance for the purpose of trafficking that
triggered the removal order, but that when the Immigration Appeal Division
makes a decision about whether to permit a person to stay in Canada on
humanitarian and compassionate grounds, they review the entire history.
[32]          
A guilty plea cannot be accepted by a court
unless it is voluntary, unequivocal, and informed: R. v. Wong, 2018 SCC
25 at para. 43.  A plea may only be withdrawn if an accused demonstrates that:
[33]          
The test is “robust”.  The burden is on the
applicant: R. v. Francis, 2023 ONCA 760 at para. 28.  In that case,
Fairburn A.C.J.O. stated at para. 30:
[34]          
The accused must demonstrate that not only were
they unaware of the relevant consequence, but that he or she has also suffered
subjective prejudice.  The accused must therefore demonstrate that there is a
reasonable possibility that they would not have pleaded guilty (or would have
pleaded guilty with different conditions) had they known of the consequences: Francis,
supra, at para. 31.
[35]          
Mr. Williams argues that his plea was not fully
informed and that he therefore meets the Wong test.  He states that he
was not aware that he had the right to appeal his conviction.  He was not, he says,
aware that if he successfully appealed the convictions in his Newmarket case
that he could have continued his Immigration appeal.  Mr. Moriah, he says, did
not make him aware of that.  He pleaded guilty to the Toronto charges believing
that his deportation was going to take place.   He would have gone to trial and
contested the Toronto charges.
[36]          
I do not accept Mr. Williams’ assertion that his plea was
not fully informed.  He was well aware that he had the right to appeal.  He
discussed a possible appeal extensively with Mr. Moriah.  I reviewed Mr.
Moriah’s notes of his conversations with Mr. Williams.  The notes are detailed
and thorough.  It is clear from the notes Mr. Williams had a sound
understanding of his predicament.  I also do not accept Mr. Williams’ assertion
that Mr. Moriah advised him that it would be best if he wrapped up all his
charges in light of his likely deportation.  I do not find that assertion
credible.
[37]          
In contrast, Mr. Moriah was entirely credible.  I accept his evidence
without hesitation.  Mr. Moriah’s advice was sound.  His detailed notes and his
extensive email correspondence with immigration counsel indicate that he
conscientiously kept Mr. Williams informed of the criminal consequences of the
convictions and that he was careful not to give immigration advice, which would
have been beyond his expertise.  I also accept Mr. Moriah’s evidence because it
makes sense in the circumstances.
[38]          
Moreover, it is also clear that Mr. Williams did access advice from
immigration counsel.  It is true that Mr. Kim states that he has no note about
advising Mr. Williams on the consequences of a successful appeal of the
Newmarket charges.  No doubt there is no note because no discussion was
necessary.  It would have been obvious – as Mr. Williams testified – that a
successful appeal would have meant that the conviction was reversed.  That is
entirely the point of an appeal.  It is not credible that Mr. Williams did not
understand that.
[39]          
I thus do not accept that Mr. Williams did not understand that if he
successfully appealed the Newmarket convictions that he would have kept his
immigration appeal alive.  Throughout his examination and cross-examination Mr.
Williams demonstrated a reasonable understanding of how the justice system
works.  He agreed in cross-examination that a successful criminal appeal of the
Newmarket convictions meant that Justice Dwyer’s orders and findings would no
longer apply.  Mr. Williams understood what an appeal meant.  He discussed the
pros and cons with Mr. Moriah.
[40]          
In other words, Mr. Williams understood he could have appealed the
Newmarket convictions.  Mr. Williams was also aware that if he did appeal
successfully so his immigration appeal would have remained outstanding. 
Further, he understood he already had a removal order as a result of the 2011
drug conviction – and that he was deportable regardless of what happened on the
Newmarket or Toronto human trafficking charges.  He also clearly knew that if
he was convicted of one set of human trafficking charges but acquitted of
another set then he still would have been liable to deportation under s. 36(1)
of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act.
[41]          
I accept Mr. Moriah’s evidence that Mr. Williams chose not to appeal
because he wanted to minimize his time in custody before the deportation.
[42]          
I therefore find that Mr. Williams’ plea before me was fully informed. 
He understood that it was to be part of a global resolution.  He made an
informed choice to forgo an appeal of his Newmarket charges so he could
preserve a global resolution and minimize his time in custody.  Mr. Williams
has not met his onus on this application.
[43]          
The application is dismissed.  Mr. Williams will
proceed to sentencing.