[1]              
The applicant is charged with a number of offences including human
trafficking, firearm offences, kidnapping and uttering a threat in relation to
the complainant.
[2]              
A judge-alone trial is set to commence on January 20, 2025.
[3]              
On October 2, 2024, I ruled in R. v. Bryan, 2024 ONSC
5466, that s. 276 of the Criminal Code applies to this case
notwithstanding that it does not apply categorically to every case of alleged
human trafficking.
[4]              
On October 8, 2024, I granted the Defence’s s. 276 application at
Stage 1 and directed it to Stage 2 with certain stipulations: R. v. Bryan,
2024 ONSC 5466.
[5]              
On October 31, 2024, at Stage 2, I heard submissions from the
Defence, Crown and complainant’s counsel.
[6]              
This is my ruling with respect to Stage 2 on the question of the
admissibility at trial of evidence concerning the complainant’s prior sexual
activity.
[7]              
Since s. 276 applies, the evidence of the complainant’s prior sexual
activity is only admissible if: (a) it does not engage the “twin myths”
identified in s. 276(1) namely, that a complainant is more likely to have
consented to the sexual activity in question, or is generally less worthy of
belief because of that prior sexual activity; and (b) it satisfies the
requirements for admissibility identified in s. 276(2), in that (i) it must be relevant
to an issue at trial; (ii) it must be of specific instances of sexual activity;
and (iii) it must have significant probative value that is not substantially
outweighed by the danger of prejudice to the proper administration of justice.
[8]              
Section 276(3) requires the judge making the determination of
admissibility to consider a number of factors. A s. 276 application must set
out “detailed particulars of the evidence that the accused seeks to adduce and
the relevance of that evidence to an issue at trial.”
[9]              
For the reasons that follow, I grant the application with certain
stipulations.
[10]          
The accused was arrested and charged on April 20, 2022 with a number of
offences in relation to the complainant. On the preferred indictment, the following
12 charges remain:
[11]          
The complainant provided two videotaped statements to the police on
March 1, 2021 and March 31, 2021. The video statement transcripts were made
available to me.
[12]          
The details of the complainant’s allegations are detailed in paragraphs
12 to 16 of the applicant’s Stage 2 factum.
[13]          
In summary, the complainant alleges that she
met the accused sometime in July 2020 through Tinder. She told police that she
had met the applicant for a simple ‘hook up’ but that they continued to go on
several dates; that at some time in the Summer of 2020, she and the accused
worked together (escorting) for one week before the complainant left due to the
accused being controlling; that the accused found her in the Fall or Winter of
2020 by setting up a fake date (sexual service appointment) with her after
locating one of her ads; that the accused (a Black male) used a White male to identify
himself at the door so the complainant would let him in, and then proceeded to
threaten her with a gun and forced her to provide sexual services against her
will; that the complainant made $50,000 during this time; and that the
complainant escaped and continued to work independently for some time.
[14]          
Further, the complainant alleges that
on February 28, 2021, the accused found her, and took her with an unknown
female in a white BMW SUV to the Niagara Falls area and forced her to provide
sexual services against her will until the next morning on March 1, 2021. While
driving to Niagara Falls, the accused allegedly used the complainant’s phone to
create a new LeoList ad and the unknown female responded to and set up
appointments with prospective clients. The complainant made $600 and gave the
money to the accused and unknown female. The accused and unknown female brought
the complainant home, at which point the complainant’s aunt and cousin
intervened and called police.
[15]          
On January 14, 2022, the investigating
officer, Detective Constable (DC) Vandekerckhove,
upon receiving results of the “tower dump” production orders, discovered that
there were 46 communications between the number suspected to belong to the
applicant and the complainant. The communications started on February 26, 2021,
and ended at 7:49 p.m. on February 28, 2021. Most of the communications were
text messages, but the last contact was a 14-second phone call.  Another
officer, Officer Zeppiere, conducted a ‘ping’ on the complainant’s cellphone and
was advised that the phone was not active and that it was last online on
February 28, 2021 at 8:10 p.m.
[16]          
On January 25, 2022, DC Vandekerckhove
showed the complainant a photo of the applicant. DC Vandekerckhove noted at the
time that the complainant was involved in five police investigations of
trafficking involving numerous persons.
[17]          
The unknown female alleged to have
kidnapped the complainant with the applicant has not been identified.
[18]          
At Stage 2, the applicant provided an affidavit in support of his s. 276
application:
[19]          
At trial, it is anticipated that the Defence will argue that the
complainant engaged in sex work on her own before and during the time the
applicant met with her, with no influence or control by the applicant.
[20]          
It is anticipated that the credibility and reliability of the
complainant, motive to fabricate, and animus towards the applicant will be
central issues at trial.
[21]          
The applicant seeks to lead the following evidence through
cross-examination of the complainant at trial, and through the calling of viva
voce evidence should the Defence elect to call evidence:
[22]          
The applicant submits that the proposed evidence of other sexual
activity is relevant, and necessary, to understand the applicant’s version of
events including his characterization of the nature and duration of his
relationship with the complainant; and to impeach the specific credibility of
the complainant on certain aspects of her anticipated evidence.
[23]          
The applicant submits that the proposed evidence is relevant to
challenging the complainant’s assertion that the applicant forced her to work
at the relevant times, the timeline and nature of the relationship, to
establish an alternative basis for the complainant’s knowledge of how the sex trade
operated other than the applicant exerting control and direction over her
activities, that the applicant and unknown female used the complainant’s phone
to post and respond to the Niagara Falls ad, the pattern and style of ads
posted, and how the applicant found her.
[24]          
With respect to “evidence that the complainant worked in the sex trade
prior to, during, and in between the two incidents involving the applicant
(September to December 2020 and February 28 to March 1, 2021)”, the applicant
submits that such evidence is admissible because the central question at trial
will be whether the complainant was forced to provide sexual services due to
the applicant’s control, direction and influence, or whether she voluntarily
and independently did so at the material times specified in the indictment. The
applicant argues that the “prior to” period is relevant because the applicant
claims that the complainant told him that she worked in the sex trade when they
first met.
[25]          
The applicant’s rationale for wanting to explore whether the complainant
was engaged in sex work during the time that she was allegedly being
exploited by the applicant, is to delineate the sexual services the complainant
provided independently from the sexual services, if any, that she purportedly
provided due to the exploitation of the applicant.
[26]          
Relatedly, the applicant submits that evidence about what the
complainant was doing in the sex trade between the two incidents goes to
an anticipated difference between the applicant and complainant about the
nature and timeline of their relationship. For instance, the applicant suggests
that the proposed evidence about the complainant’s sex work will go to such
“non-sexual” aspects as how the applicant found her in the Fall/Winter of 2020,
the amount of money she was making and providing to the applicant, and whether,
how and when an unknown female created and responded to an ad (about the
complainant’s sexual services) between February 28 and March 1, 2021.
[27]          
Next, the applicant submits that three of the areas of the proposed
evidence will also touch on the complainant’s prior or “other” sexual
activities. However, the purpose of introducing such evidence is to permit the
applicant to demonstrate that there was little to no difference between the
time when the complainant was engaged independently in the sex trade, and the
time that she was allegedly being controlling or exploiting by the applicant.
The exploration of this evidence could raise a reasonable doubt as to whether
the applicant was controlling or exploiting the complainant at all, or at least
to the degree alleged by the Crown.
[28]          
The three areas are:
[29]          
The final area of proposed evidence is the relationship between the
applicant and the complainant, and their sexual history in particular. The
applicant claims that the reason is not to explore the details of their sexual
activities but rather to determine if the character and duration of the
relationship was as “casual” as the complainant has claimed. The applicant
suggests that this goes to the complainant’s credibility. This might involve
questions of how often the parties “hooked up”, over what period, and how and
why the relationship ended. The applicant argues that the complainant’s
animosity at the end of the relationship could have fueled the complainant’s
motive to fabricate the allegations of control, abuse and exploitation upon
which the criminal complaint is based.
[30]          
At the Stage 2 hearing of this s. 276 application, the Crown conceded
that the trial judge could be advised that the complainant was a sex worker at
the time she met the applicant and that her method of getting clients was
through online advertisements. The complainant does not object to the Crown’s
revised position. However, both Crown and complainant argue that this does not
permit evidence to be elicited about what sex work the complainant engaged in
before she met with the applicant. The Crown and complainant remain opposed to
the introduction of the rest of the proposed evidence.
[31]          
The Crown and complainant note that the Defence is fully entitled to
cross-examine the applicant in areas that do not touch on her sexual
activities. But s. 276 no longer permits that same unrestricted approach in
regard to evidence of prior or other sexual activity. The Crown submits that,
notwithstanding the applicant dressing up the application in the garb of a
non-sexual rationale for the inclusion of the proposed evidence, the effect
would be the same namely, to introduce “myth-based” reasoning into the trial
along the lines that because the complainant was engaged in the sex trade, she
was likely to have consented to the sexual activity in question, or is
generally less worthy of belief when she says that she was trafficked,
exploited and abused.
[32]          
I will begin with the proposed evidence that “the complainant worked in
the sex trade prior to, during, and in between the two incidents involving the
applicant.” (para. 25(a) in the applicant’s Stage 2 factum).
[33]          
The Crown has conceded that it is permissible for the trial judge to
know that the complainant was a sex worker at the time she met the applicant
and that she obtained clients through online advertising. The question remains
to what extent further questioning of the complainant about her activities as a
sex worker is permitted under the s. 276 regime.
[34]          
I am prepared to permit the applicant some limited questioning of the
complainant about her prior and ongoing involvement in the sex trade as it
relates to (a) her mobility; and (b) the timeline of her involvement with the
applicant. Beyond that, I am concerned that a deeper dive into the
complainant’s involvement in the sex trade will risk twin-myth thinking that,
because she was already involved in the industry, she was not susceptible to
being trafficked or abused by the applicant, and that she is less capable of
belief because of her status or former status as a sex worker. In this area of
the proposed evidence, I find that without some ability to explore the
complainant’s mobility and timeline it will impede the trial judge from
understanding the competing narratives from the Crown and Defence.
[35]          
Next, I move to the three areas, namely “evidence of the complainant’s
use of websites” (para. 25(b)), “evidence of how much money the complainant
approximately made, etc.” (para. 25(c)), and “evidence that the complainant
worked for other individuals” (para. 25(d)). I agree with the applicant that
the purpose of introducing such evidence is to permit the applicant to
demonstrate that there was little to no difference between the time when the
complainant was engaged independently in the sex trade and the time that she
was allegedly being controlled or exploited by the applicant. The applicant
submits that his argument will never be that, because the complainant was independently
working as a sex worker, that she could not be a victim of trafficking.
However, that should not preclude the applicant from dealing with evidence
demonstrating that he was not the one controlling or trafficking her and that
when he was with her, her activities were no different than what she was doing
independently. The exploration of this evidence could raise a reasonable doubt
as to whether the applicant was controlling or exploiting the complainant at
all, or at least to the degree alleged by the Crown. I anticipate that a
discussion of such evidence may implicate the complainant’s sexual activities
because it would touch on what sexual services or related restrictions were
described in the websites. Relatedly, a discussion of how much money the
complainant made would likely involve a discussion of what payments were made
in relation to which sexual services. I find that this evidence is admissible
because:
[36]          
I would not permit an examination of whether the complainant provided
sexual services after the 911 call that resulted in the police
involvement. I cannot see how that would be relevant to the issues at trial.
[37]          
The final area of proposed evidence is the relationship between the
applicant and the complainant, and their sexual history in particular. I am
prepared to allow evidence that touches on how often the parties “hooked up”,
over what period, and how and why that relationship ended. I agree with the
defence that such evidence could shed light on the character and duration of
the parties’ relationship and whether it was as “casual” as the complainant has
claimed. With respect to the proposed evidence that, “the accused received
fellatio from the complainant on two occasions in his car”, if the parties are
unable to reach agreement on this area in an Agreed Statement of Facts, I would
allow some limited questioning to the extent it pertains to the complainant and
applicant disagreeing that they had a sexual relationship, as this could go
towards the complainant’s credibility.
[38]          
The central debate about the merits of allowing evidence of the sexual
aspects of the relationship to be explored are as follows. The Crown argues
that, on the defence theory of the case, the complainant has brought forth
these trafficking allegations because he no longer wished to have a romantic
relationship with her. The Crown argues that whether or not the complainant and
applicant had sex makes no difference or a negligible difference, and the
defence theory is simply a variation of the classic “woman scorned” trope that
has long been criticized. The defence disagrees and argues that specifying what
happened during the relationship including the applicant’s version of two
sexual encounters with the complainant qualifies and colours the competing
versions of the relationship. In other words, even though prior sexual activity
is being raised, its purpose is not “twin-myth” based reasoning, but rather to
test the competing narratives which goes to a central issue – what kind of
relationship the parties had and how it ended.
[39]          
I tend to agree with defence and find that, notwithstanding that the
content of the evidence about the relationship may include some sexual
components, excising this will represent a distortion to a proper understanding
of the relationship between the applicant and complainant.
[40]          
The s. 276 application is allowed in part for the reasons provided.