[1]              
The Applicant, The Body Shop
Canada Limited (TBS Canada), brings two companion motions seeking orders:
[2]              
Defined terms in this Endorsement
have the meaning given to them in prior Endorsements made in this CCAA Proceeding,
the motion materials filed in respect of this motion, and/or the Second Report
of the Monitor dated December 10, 2024 or the Supplement thereto dated December
12, 2024, unless otherwise stated.
[3]              
The Service List has received the
motion materials. To the extent not already on the Service List, TBS Canada has
provided notice of this motion to all parties who hold a security registration
or a Court-ordered charge against the assets of the Company, to landlords in
respect of leased locations, material contract counterparties, and other
identified affected parties.
[4]              
The relief sought today is
unopposed. It is supported by the UK Purchaser, the proposed Purchaser of TBS
Canada and the represented employees of TBS Canada. It is strongly recommended
by the Court-appointed Monitor. The WEPPA relief is not opposed by the
Attorney General of Canada represented by the Department of Justice, provided
that certain amendments to the draft order were made, and those amendments were
agreeable to all parties and in particular, TBS Canada and the employees.
[5]              
The background and context for these
motions is fully set out in earlier Endorsements, and in the Reports of the
Monitor.
[6]              
TBS Canada is a wholly owned
subsidiary of TBSI Realizations Limited, the UK Parent (formerly called The
Body Shop International Limited). TBS Canada has historically relied on the UK
Parent for accounting and cash management services.
[7]              
TBS Canada has now entered into a
definitive agreement with 1001072685 Ontario Inc. (685), the proposed
Purchaser, pursuant to which, if approved, the Purchaser would acquire
substantially all of the assets of TBS Canada as a going concern.
[8]              
At the conclusion of the hearing
of these motions, I granted the relief sought, as amended, with reasons to
follow. These are those reasons.
[9]              
In the main, the proposed APA Transaction
offers various benefits to the Company and its stakeholders, including but not
limited to the continuation of a significant number of the retail stores of TBS
Canada as operating locations and the continued employment of at least 400 of
the Company’s employees and approximately 100 of its seasonal employees, the
preservation of relationships with landlords, and the continuation of “The Body
Shop” business in Canada as a going concern.
[10]          
I previously approved the Sale Process
in this proceeding. That Sale Process was complicated by the fact that TBS
Canada did not own “The Body Shop” trademark or associated intellectual
property, but rather had a licence to sell trademarked products through a
distribution and franchise agreement with the UK Parent. That was in turn
complicated by the fact that a separate process was ongoing in the UK to find
potential buyers for the UK Parent’s business or assets.
[11]          
Once the UK Sale Process was completed
and the UK Purchaser had closed its transaction for the UK Parent, the UK
Purchaser advised that it intended to transition the Canadian business into a
franchise. The Monitor in this proceeding therefore advised interested parties
of the deadline for submitting offers.
[12]          
The Monitor and TBS Canada engaged
with over 55 parties to solicit interests, 21 of which executed a non-disclosure
agreement and received certain diligence materials. The Monitor and TBS Canada
also engaged with the franchise team of the UK Parent and the UK Purchaser,
with respect to the terms of a potential franchise arrangement.
[13]          
As noted, the UK factors
complicated this Sale Process given the issues of intellectual property rights,
inventory, pricing, the unsettled terms of a necessary franchise agreement and
the provision of shared services to Canada by the UK Purchaser principally
related to accounting and IT services.
[14]          
Ultimately, the Monitor received
four bids, two of which were deemed to be Qualified Bids. Thereafter, the
proposed Purchaser settled franchise terms with the UK Purchaser and was
prepared to enter into a Master Franchise Agreement and other related or
ancillary agreements, and the proposed Purchaser (through an affiliate)
finalized a term sheet with TBS Canada.
[15]          
A final complication has related
to franchise law obligations in Canada such that the parties have been unable
to enter into the proposed Franchise Agreement due to the need to satisfy
certain disclosure requirements which is not possible within the required time
frame for the Transaction to proceed. TBS Canada cannot defer the closing of
the Transaction without significantly (and negatively) impacting recoveries for
creditors.
[16]          
For all of these reasons, the
parties agreed to finalize the Asset Purchase Agreement (APA) and the Franchise
Agreement on the understanding that TBS Canada would bring a motion for
approval of the APA and related agreements, and a separate motion seeking
relief in respect of the franchise disclosure issues, all of which are
returnable before me today. On that basis, TBS Canada entered into the APA with
the Purchaser on December 6, 2024.
[17]          
The APA Transaction is scheduled
to close on December 16, 2024. The Purchaser will acquire substantially all of
the assets of TBS Canada on an “as is, where is” basis, including a significant
number of leases for TBS Canada retail locations, the inventory at Purchased Locations
and the inventory at stores that are not Purchased Locations. The Purchaser is
not acquiring Excluded Assets such as claims against the UK Parent, and the
leases to Excluded Locations.
[18]          
The APA contemplates that TBS
Canada will liquidate the inventory at Excluded Locations and the proceeds will
be payable to the Purchaser. TBS Canada and the Purchaser will provide certain
transition services to one another, to assist with the transition of The Body
Shop business, the liquidation of inventory at Excluded Locations, and the
administration of these CCAA proceedings.
[19]          
Consideration for the purchase price
payable under the APA is comprised of cash and the assumption of certain
liabilities.
[20]          
The Purchaser will offer
employment on December 11, 2024 to those employees it has identified and who
accept the Purchaser’s offer of employment, on terms and conditions similar to
those in effect immediately prior to the Closing Date, including the
recognition of accumulated service. The Purchaser will assume all liabilities
of TBS Canada relating to those Transferred Employees arising after the Closing
Date.
[21]          
The granting of the
contemporaneously sought declaratory relief in respect of the franchise
disclosure obligations is a key closing condition for the APA Transaction. That
declaratory relief is discussed further below.
[22]          
The Transaction provides a very
favourable outcome for stakeholders of TBS Canada, some of which are
highlighted above. It will preserve at least 400 store level and head office
jobs and an additional 100 seasonal jobs, and ensure the continued operation of
a significant number of Purchased Locations, with the minimization of business
disruption.
[23]          
This Court has the jurisdiction to
approve the sale of assets outside the ordinary course of business pursuant to
section 36 of the CCAA. Section 36(3) sets out the relevant factors to be
considered, which are to be evaluated alongside the Soundair Principles.
The section 36(3) factors are neither exhaustive nor mandatory: Target
Canada Co. (Re), 2015 ONSC
2066 [Commercial List] at .
[24]          
I am satisfied that all relevant
factors have been satisfied here. The Sale Process was reasonable. The market
was thoroughly canvassed in a fair, transparent manner that optimized the
chances of securing the best price for the assets. There was integrity
throughout the process.
[25]          
The corollary assignment order is
appropriate in order that certain leases associated with the Purchase Locations
and related material agreements can be assigned to the Purchaser. A number of
those agreements require consents to assignment from the respective
counterparties. If third-party consents cannot be obtained, it is a closing
condition of the APA that TBS Canada obtain an order pursuant to section 11.3
of the CCAA assigning the relevant leases and contracts to the
Purchaser.
[26]          
TBS Canada has been working, and
continues to work, with the relevant counterparties of the Material Agreements
to obtain any required third-party consents. However, due to timing
constraints, TBS Canada seeks to minimize the risk that the APA Transaction
cannot close on time by seeking the proposed Assignment Order that would apply
to all Material Agreements.
[27]          
I am satisfied that that relief is
appropriate.
[28]          
Section 11.3 of the CCAA
provides this Court with the authority to make an order assigning the rights or
obligations of a debtor company under an agreement. Section 11.3(3) sets out
the non-exhaustive list of factors for the Court to consider when determining
whether it is appropriate to grant such relief. I am satisfied that those
factors are met here. The Monitor supports this relief: s. 11.3(3)(a).
[29]          
In addition, section 11.3(4) of
the CCAA provides that the Court may not make an assignment order unless
it is satisfied that all monetary defaults in relation to the agreement to be
assigned, other than those arising by reason only of the debtor company’s
insolvency, the commencement of CCAA proceedings, or the debtor
company’s failure to perform a nonmonetary obligation, will be remedied. That
requirement, also, is satisfied here.
[30]          
Pursuant to the APA, TBS Canada
has agreed to pay all monetary defaults in relation to Material Agreements that
are leases for the Purchased Locations, and the Purchaser has agreed to pay the
monetary defaults under the balance of the Material Agreements other than those
arising by reason of the insolvency of TBS Canada, the commencement of this CCAA
Proceeding, or the failure by TBS Canada to perform a non-monetary obligation.
[31]          
The AVO will authorize TBS Canada
to change its legal corporate name in order to avoid confusion with the “The
Body Shop” brand that will continue to be operated by the Purchaser following
the closing of the Transaction. This is appropriate and practical. TBS Canada
will change its name to “OLD TBS Canada Limited”.
[32]          
That corporate name change is
approved. In corresponding fashion, it is appropriate to amend the title of
proceedings in this CCAA proceeding to reflect that name change, and the
title of proceedings in this Application is accordingly amended.
[33]          
TBS Canada seeks sealing relief in
respect of the unredacted copy of the APA, a summary of the bids received in
the Sale Process, and the liquidation analysis prepared by the Monitor which
provides a comparative analysis of recoveries if the Transaction proceeds and
in the alternative scenario of a likely bankruptcy and liquidation.
[34]          
The proposed sealing relief is
limited, both temporally (to be in effect only until the closing of the APA
Transaction or further order of this Court), and in scope (it is limited to the
materials identified above). In particular, all salient terms of the proposed
APA Transaction, including which locations will be assumed and which will not,
and the nature and terms of the proposed Transaction generally, are all public
in order that affected parties and stakeholders can understand the key scope
and terms of the proposed transaction.
[35]          
In the circumstances, I am satisfied
that the proposed sealing relief is appropriate. The salutary effects of the
proposed sealing order outweigh any deleterious effects that may exist in the
circumstances. In particular, and if the Transaction does not close, and the
assets and/or business of TBS Canada need to be re-marketed and sold, the
disclosure of the information sought to be sealed at this time will have a
serious and negative impact on the integrity and outcome of any future sales
process and a correspondingly negative impact on recovery for stakeholders, and
the outcome for other affected parties, including but not limited to employees.
[36]          
For all of those reasons, I am
satisfied that the factors articulated by the Supreme Court of Canada in Sierra
Club and refined in Sherman Estate have been satisfied here,
with the result that the sealing orders are approved pursuant to section 137(2)
of the Courts of Justice Act.
[37]          
The proposed Ancillary Order will
expand the powers of the Monitor, enable former employees of TBS Canada to
access benefits under WEPPA, and extend the stay of proceedings to and
including March 31, 2025. I am also satisfied that this relief is appropriate.
Jurisdiction to grant the relief flows from sections 11 and 23(1)(k) of the CCAA.
[38]          
With respect to the expansion of
the powers of the Monitor, upon the resignation of the directors and officers
of TBS Canada immediately following the closing of the Transaction, TBS Canada
will no longer have directors or officers to make decisions in respect of the
Applicants, including those relative to winding down these CCAA
Proceedings. The proposed relief would grant the Monitor the necessary powers
to facilitate the effective and efficient administration of TBS Canada as
necessary to complete these CCAA Proceedings and wind down TBS Canada.
The Monitor supports this relief and is prepared to exercise the powers
associated with such an expanded role.
[39]          
With respect to the WEPPA relief,
TBS Canada terminated approximately 220 employees shortly after it commenced
the NOI Proceeding. In connection with the closing of the Transaction, TBS
Canada will terminate the remaining employees, with many being offered
employment by the Purchaser. As a result, there are two categories of
terminations: the first includes employees offered employment by the Purchaser;
and the second includes employees not offered employment but retained by TBS
Canada to liquidate Excluded Locations.
[40]          
TBS Canada therefore seeks a
declaration that the Company meets the criteria prescribed by section 3.2 of
the WEPP Regulations enabling its eligible former employees to receive
benefits such as wages, termination and severance pay to which they may be
entitled under WEPPA following the termination of their employment.
[41]          
The Monitor supports this request.
I am satisfied that it is appropriate. In particular, I am satisfied that TBS
Canada is a “former employer, all of whose employees in Canada have been
terminated” for the purposes of section 3.2 of the WEPP Regulations.
[42]          
The Attorney General of Canada,
representing Service Canada and the Wage Earner Protection Program, does not
oppose the relief sought, provided that the Applicant agrees not to seek
additional relief originally sought in respect of a declaration and order to
the effect that the former employees of the Applicant are eligible to receive
payments in accordance with WEPPA. The parties, and including in
particular, the Applicant, the represented employees and the Purchaser are in
agreement that this relief ought not to be sought, and the Monitor supports
that position.
[43]          
I agree. Pursuant to WEPPA,
the Minister of Labour is designated to be responsible for determining whether
an individual is eligible for a WEPP payment, and also the amount that
employee may be eligible to receive (see ss. 9 and 10). It is appropriate that
the Minister can determine if an applicant under WEPPA is eligible to
receive a payment: Attorney
General of Canada c. Former Gestion Inc., 2024 QCCA 1441 (CanLII), at para. 16.
[44]          
With respect to the proposed stay
of proceedings, the current stay expired on December 13, 2024. I am satisfied
that the stay of proceedings should be extended through to and including March
31, 2025. That additional time is necessary to allow the Monitor on behalf of
TBS Canada to perform all post-closing obligations under the APA, and advance
the necessary matters towards a termination of the CCAA Proceeding and a
wind down of the Company.
[45]          
I am satisfied that TBS Canada has
acted, and continues to act, in good faith and with due diligence in these CCAA
Proceedings and has given notice to its stakeholders, including landlords,
employees, vendors and counterparties to Material Agreements.
[46]          
The Monitor and the Purchaser
support the proposed stay extension. The cash flow forecast appended to the Second
Report of the Monitor reflects that TBS Canada anticipates that the Proceeds
from the Transaction will provide sufficient liquidity through the extended
stay period.
[47]          
The stay extension is approved
pursuant to section 11.02(2) of the CCAA.
[48]          
As described above, 685, an
affiliate of Serruya Private Equity, is the Purchaser under the proposed APA
Transaction, having been identified as the successful bidder through the Sale
Process. The principal of the Purchaser is Michael Serruya (Serruya). He has
been involved in many franchise arrangements in his career, including Yogen Früz, Cold
Stone Creamery and Pinkberry, among others.
[49]          
As part of the Sale Process, the
Purchaser led by Serruya and supported by legal and financial advisors,
conducted extensive due diligence on the business of TBS Canada. The Purchaser
was advised and clearly understood that to operate “The Body Shop” business in
Canada or sell any branded inventory, any purchaser of the assets and business
of TBS Canada would need to settle the terms of a franchise or other agreement
with the UK Purchaser who owns the intellectual property and who would be the
source of inventory for the Canadian operations.
[50]          
Accordingly, the Purchaser
received a significant amount of information regarding the proposed franchise
or other arrangement. In particular, the Purchaser:
[51]          
The Purchaser settled franchise
terms with the UK Purchaser on November 25, 2024 and was therefore prepared to
enter into the Franchise Agreement to allow “The Body Shop” business to
continue to operate in Canada.
[52]          
The complicating factor is that
under franchise laws in six Canadian provinces in which retail stores of TBS
Canada are located, a franchisor (i.e., the UK Purchaser) must provide to a
franchisee (i.e., the Purchaser), a franchise disclosure document at least 14
days before the earlier of the franchise agreement being signed, and the
payment of any consideration to the franchise or relating to the franchise.
[53]          
The franchise disclosure document
must include all material facts, financial statements and copies of proposed
franchise agreements, all for the purpose of assisting a franchisee make an
informed decision about whether or not to invest in a franchise.
[54]          
The challenge here is that the UK
Purchaser is unable to provide the required franchise disclosure document in
advance of the required closing date of the APA Transaction, given the limited
time available. The evidence in the record is to the effect that the financial
disclosure document would take several weeks or months to prepare and deliver
here.
[55]          
To require the UK Purchaser to
prepare and deliver the franchise disclosure document would delay the closing
of the Transaction by at least several months, and perhaps indefinitely, if TBS
Canada cannot maintain operation of the Canadian business in the interim.
[56]          
Absent an exemption from
application of the governing statute, or an exemption from the requirement to
deliver the franchise disclosure document, if the UK Purchaser fails to provide
the franchise disclosure document or provides a franchise disclosure document
that is deficient, the Purchaser may have the right to rescind the Franchise
Agreement and claim damages: in this case against the UK Purchaser, TBS Canada
and the Monitor.
[57]          
For these reasons, and given the
associated potential exposure, the parties have not yet executed the Franchise
Agreement, notwithstanding that it is a condition to the closing of the
Transaction.
[58]          
The Purchaser has confirmed in an
affidavit sworn by Michael Serruya and filed in the record, that it has all of
the important and material facts and documents needed to make an informed investment
decision, that it does not require any additional disclosure in the form of a
franchise disclosure statement or otherwise, and that such will not improve its
understanding of TBS Canada or affect its decision to proceed with the
Transaction or sign the Franchise Agreement.
[59]          
The Purchaser intends to enter
into the Franchise Agreement with the UK Purchaser prior to the closing of the
Transaction to satisfy the closing condition. The Purchaser does not intend to
exercise any potential right it may have to rescind the Franchise Agreement as
a result of the inability of the UK Purchaser to deliver a financial disclosure
document.
[60]          
Moreover, the Purchaser is
agreeable, as a condition precedent to the Transaction closing, to provide TBS
Canada, the Monitor and the UK Purchaser, with a release from any known claims
that may be available to the Purchaser under Canadian franchise law arising
from the failure of the UK Purchaser to provide Serruya Private Equity and the
Purchaser with a franchise disclosure document in connection with the execution
of the Franchise Agreement by the Purchaser. The Purchaser has received
independent legal advice with respect to the release and particularly with
respect to the relief requested on this motion.
[61]          
In all of these circumstances,
which are somewhat unusual, I am satisfied that the requested relief should be
granted. It is consistent with the purpose of the requirement for franchise
disclosure and with the legislative intent behind the relevant statutory
provisions. That intent is directed towards protecting franchisees and
addressing what is a typical power imbalance as between a sophisticated
franchisor on the one hand, and a proposed franchisee on the other hand, all
with a view to ensuring there is sufficient disclosure such that a franchisee
can make a properly informed decision about whether or not to invest in a
franchise.
[62]          
In this case, the Purchaser is the
affiliate of a highly sophisticated commercial party, and one with particular
and extensive experience with franchises, including as a franchisor. The
Purchaser has specifically confirmed that it is equipped and able to make an informed
investment decision, and that it does not require further disclosure. It has
gone even further and agreed to provide a release with respect to any possible
claims related to deficient franchise disclosure. No stakeholder will suffer
prejudice as a result of the requested relief, which is supported by the
Purchaser, the UK Purchaser and recommended by the Court-appointed Monitor.
[63]          
The declaratory relief sought is a
condition precedent to the proposed APA Transaction. Without it, the
transaction will not close, at least in the foreseeable future, with the result
that over 400 full-time jobs and 100 seasonal jobs, as well as numerous
commercial leases with landlord counterparties, will be put in immediate
jeopardy. Recoveries for stakeholders of TBS Canada will be negatively
affected, and TBS Canada may be required to commence a liquidation process.
[64]          
The proposed closing date for the
Transaction of December 16, 2024 cannot be deferred without significantly
impacting the economics of the Transaction. One of the relevant factors here is
that the highest revenues for the Company are generated during the holiday
season, and there will be significant difficulty in identifying a going concern
transaction in the new year.
[65]          
Moreover, a number of the
Company’s leases expire at the end of 2024 and in the first quarter of 2025,
and there is a risk that landlords may look to replace the Company as the
tenant at those locations. In addition, the Company will lose access to certain
of the shared services historically provided by the UK Parent, including IT
services and point-of-sale systems, after December 31, 2024.
[66]          
Finally, the Company does not have
sufficient inventory for the 2025 calendar year, without which it will be
unable to operate, and that in turn requires new inventory and the negotiation
of new agreements with the UK Purchaser.
[67]          
For all of these reasons, I am
satisfied that it is not a realistic option to defer the Closing Date of the
Transaction to permit the UK Purchaser to comply with the requirement to
deliver a franchise disclosure statement. Most fundamentally, all of the
parties who are affected by this particular head of relief sought, and in
particular, the Purchaser whose ability to make claims related to any alleged
non-disclosure would be affected by the relief, have specifically and expressly
consented, all with the benefit of independent legal advice.
[68]          
I am satisfied that this Court has
the jurisdiction to grant the requested relief pursuant to section 11 of the CCAA.
While, in my view, it follows that I do not need to resort to the doctrine of
paramountcy, application of the doctrine would, in the particular circumstances
of this case, support the exercise of the discretion granted to this Court
under the CCAA over the Arthur Wishart Act (Franchise Disclosure)
2000, in any event.
[69]          
For all of these reasons, the
motions are granted.
[70]          
The orders signed by me are
effective immediately and without the necessity of issuing and entering.