[1]              
Nockeem Peck was charged with possession of heroin for the purposes of
trafficking.  He brought an application to exclude the heroin from the evidence
at trial on the grounds that it was obtained as a result of an arbitrary
detention in violation of his Charter rights.  Although originally
electing a jury trial (which was scheduled for seven days), on the morning of
trial he re-elected to be tried by judge alone.  The Charter application
and trial proper proceeded before me, on a blended basis, for two days, at the
conclusion of which I dismissed the application, found the evidence admissible,
and convicted Mr. Peck of possession of heroin for the purposes of
trafficking.  My reasons for those conclusions are set out below.
[2]              
I heard testimony from all three Peel Regional Police officers involved
in Mr. Peck’s arrest: S. Sgt. Thomas Morrow; D.C. Kevin Clayton; and D.C. Shawn
Galbraith.  All three officers were on the Break and Enter team.  On October 7,
2022, they were on the evening shift, in plain clothes, and in three separate
unmarked vehicles.  Their focus that evening was to conduct surveillance in the
area of a hotel in Etobicoke, which was known to have connections to stolen
cars, including cars used in a string of break and enters in the Brampton
area.  At 8:15 p.m., while stationary in his car in the hotel parking lot, D.C.
Clayton saw a Toyota Sierra van pass through the lot at an excessively slow
speed.  He could see a driver, nobody in the second row of seating, and one
person seated in the third row of seating.  Both the driver and the passenger
were wearing balaclavas.  After passing out of his view, the van returned,
making a second pass through the lot in the same manner.  D.C. Clayton
considered this to be suspicious behaviour.   He contacted his supervisor, Det.
Morrow (now a Staff Sergeant), who agreed it was suspicious.  Det. Morrow
decided that the three officers would follow the vehicle to see what was going
on.  There can be no issue with this decision.  It is good policing.
[3]              
The Toyota Sierra travelled through neighbouring streets until it
reached the parking lot of a nearby junior public school about one kilometer
away.  It was dark, and the parking lot was deserted apart from a row of parked
school buses.  The three officers took up observation posts in their cars at
various locations outside the school parking lot.  Initially, the Sierra was
parked in one spot, but shortly afterwards it moved and parked between two
school buses, with the front end of the car pointing towards a perimeter
fence.  Det. Morrow had eyes on the Sierra from his vantage point on a side
street.  The officers waited in place for a considerable period of time
(estimated to be up to 45 minutes), but nothing happened.  Det. Morrow remained
concerned that the vehicle and its occupants were suspicious.  He was also
aware that there had been recent break-ins into schools in the area and school
computers had been stolen.  He decided that before just leaving the area, they
would walk past the car to see what was going on.  He testified that if the two
occupants were just sitting there talking or eating dinner or anything else
innocuous, the officers would simply leave.
[4]              
Det. Morrow was concerned about officer safety.  He instructed the other
two officers to put on their police vests, clearly identifying them as police
officers, and told them not to walk behind the vehicle.  He also told them that
if the vehicle drove away, they should simply let it go.  He said they had no
discussion about detaining the two people in the van.
[5]              
 The three officers headed toward the Sierra on foot.  Det. Morrow
approached toward the driver’s side.  D.C. Clayton approached on the passenger
side.  Det. Morrow could not recall where D.C. Galbraith was.  However, D.C.
Galbraith testified that he also approached from the passenger side, but that
he was about ten feet behind the other officers.  D.C. Clayton also recalled that
D.C. Galbraith was behind him, to his right.
[6]              
All three officers noted that the interior lights within the Sierra were
on.  D.C. Clayton was closest to the Sierra.  He said both occupants had their
heads down and did not see the officers approach.  What would have been a
second-row bench seat had been removed from the van.  According to D.C.
Clayton, one of the occupants was sitting on the floor of the area where the
second-row seat would have been and the other was sitting on the third-row
passenger seat.  D.C. Galbraith also testified that both men had their heads
down.  However, he said both were sitting on the third-row bench seat.
[7]              
D.C. Clayton testified that when he reached the side window and was
about one foot from the vehicle, he could see that the two occupants appeared
to be removing drugs from two larger plastic bags and putting them into small
dime bags.  He immediately alerted the other two officers that the occupants of
the vehicle were arrestable for drugs.  He pounded on the window of the van,
announced that they were police, told the two men they were under arrest, and
ordered them to step out of the van.  At that point, Det. Morrow was still ten feet
away from the vehicle, as was D.C. Galbraith.
[8]              
When D.C. Clayton made this observation, he had clear grounds to arrest the
men in the van based on his belief that he was witnessing a crime in progress. 
He subjectively believed that the two men were in possession of illicit drugs
for the purposes of trafficking.  Any reasonable person would come to that same
conclusion.  The arrest was lawful.
[9]              
This is not disputed by the defence.  However, the defence position is
that the actions of the officers in approaching the van as they did constituted
a detention, that the detention was arbitrary, and that the officers thereby
breached the rights of the accused under s. 9 of the Charter.  I
disagree.  There was no detention, much less an arbitrary one.  There was an
immediate arrest, which was lawful, upon witnessing a crime being committed. 
No Charter rights were violated.
[10]          
The law is clear that not every police interaction with a member of the
public is a detention.  In this case, there had not even been an interaction
with the police at the point where defence counsel argues Mr. Peck was
arbitrarily detained.  Prior to the lawful arrest, two of the officers had not
yet reached the vehicle, none of them had spoken a word to the occupants, and
neither of the men in the van knew the officers were there.  The Supreme Court
of Canada held in Grant that a detention occurs when an individual has
been taken “into the effective control of the state authorities”.[1] 
Clearly, there was nothing about the police officers walking toward a vehicle,
unbeknownst to its occupants, that can be characterized as those individuals
being “taken into the effective control of the state authorities”.
[11]          
There can be situations where the police actually stop people and ask
them questions, without those individuals being “detained” within the meaning
of s. 9 of the Charter.  As stated by the Supreme Court in R. v. Mann:
[12]          
In R. v. Suberu, the Supreme Court reiterated that position,
stating:
[13]          
In this case, the accused was not stopped, he was not interviewed, he
was not delayed, and he was not kept waiting.  Nothing at all had happened to
him in relation to the police.  The police were merely walking towards the car
in which he was a passenger.  This kind of police action cannot possibly be
characterized as a “significant physical or psychological restraint.”  If the
mere fact that police are approaching you means that you are detained, then
police would never be able to walk about or drive around in the community. 
Everybody in their immediate area would be “detained” and entitled thereby to
be immediately advised of their rights to counsel.  This is an absurd
proposition.
[14]          
It is not always easy to pinpoint the precise point at which a detention
within the meaning of s. 9 of the Charter has taken place.  The obvious
situation is where the person is actually physically restrained by police
without being arrested.  However, many detentions do not fall into that obvious
category.
[15]          
In 2009, the Supreme Court simultaneously released two decisions (Grant
and Suberu) clarifying the parameters of what constitutes a detention. 
The factors to be taken into account were summarized in Grant as
follows:
[16]          
In Grant, a police officer approached Mr. Grant as he was walking
along the sidewalk, stepped into his path, and made general inquiries.  The
Court held that at this point, Mr. Grant was not detained.  However, the
officer then told Mr. Grant to keep his hands in front of him so that he could
see them.  Two other officers then took up what the Court referred to as
“tactical adversarial positions” immediately behind Mr. Grant.  At the same
time, the nature of the questioning became more focused, not merely surrounding
background information, but specifically asking Mr. Grant if he had anything on
his person that he should not.  The Court held that at this point, Mr. Grant,
although not physically restrained, was effectively detained, stating:
[17]          
However, in the companion case of Suberu the Court found there
was no detention.  The facts in Suberu illustrate that the Supreme Court
recognized the importance of not unduly restricting the ability of the police
to investigate and to interact with the public without triggering the Charter
rights of those individuals with whom they speak.  In that case, police
officers in Cobourg received information about the use of a stolen credit card
at a local LCBO store.  The first officer to arrive alerted the second officer
by radio that there were two male suspects in the store.  When the second
officer arrived, he saw his colleague engaged with LCBO staff and a male
customer.  Mr. Suberu walked past the second officer and proceeded out of the
store towards his car.  As Mr. Suberu was getting into his minivan, the officer
said, “Wait a minute.  I need to talk to you before you go anywhere.”  The
officer then asked him some general questions about where he was from, the name
of his friend in the store, and the name of the owner of the car.  As he was
speaking to Mr. Suberu, the officer received information on his radio that
there had been a similar fraudulent use of a credit card in a nearby town, and
the description and license plate of the minivan involved.  At this point, the
officer saw shopping bags in the minivan and concluded he had grounds to arrest
Mr. Suberu, which he immediately did.  He then advised him of his rights.  The
issue in this case was whether Mr. Suberu was detained prior to the arrest,
such that he should have been advised of his rights earlier.  The majority of
the Supreme Court of Canada held that there was no detention when the officer
told Mr. Suberu that he needed to speak to him before he could leave, and then
proceeded to ask him some questions as he sat in the driver’s seat of his car.
[18]          
  In coming to that conclusion, the Court considered the three factors
established in Grant.  The first factor involved a consideration of the
circumstances giving rise to the encounter, as reasonably perceived by an
individual in Mr. Suberu’s position.  The Court reasoned that the officer was
in the process of orienting himself to the situation as it was unfolding and
attempting to “sort out the situation.”  The Court held that this factor
supported a finding that there was no detention, noting that, “In our view, it
would also be unreasonable to require that the right to counsel be given the
moment the police approach any suspect in the process of sorting out the
situation.”[6]
[19]          
The second factor referred to in Grant relates to police
conduct.  Although the Court accepted that the officer’s words could be
interpreted as an order not to leave, it noted that these same words could also
be understood as the officer simply wanting some information.  The officer made
no attempt to obstruct Mr. Suberu’s movement, but merely stood by the side of
his vehicle for a brief time asking him questions.  The Court held that, “Taken
as a whole, the conduct of the officer viewed objectively supports the trial
judge’s view that what was happening at this point was preliminary questioning
to find out whether to proceed further.”[7]
[20]          
The Court in Suberu also found that there was nothing about these
circumstances that would have caused a reasonable person to believe that he
could not leave.
[21]          
I note that the interaction between the officer and Mr. Suberu was
markedly more directive than anything the officers in this case did.  There was
no interaction or encounter whatsoever between them and Mr. Peck prior to his
arrest.  Likewise, the officers in Grant boxed in the suspect and were
asking him pointed questions about criminality while requiring him to keep his
hands in front of him.  Nothing like that happened in this case.
[22]          
Defence counsel argued that physical restraint is not required for there
to be a psychological detention.  That is clearly true, as has been determined
in long-standing jurisprudence, including the Supreme Court’s seminal decision
in Grant.  However, it is police conduct that must give rise to
the psychological restraint, not the mere fact that the police are walking by.
[23]          
Defence counsel before me relies primarily on the Court of Appeal
decision in R. v. Thompson.[8] 
In that case, a man was sitting in his parked car at a shopping plaza at
night.  Police had received an anonymous tip about drug dealing from a car in
the plaza, but had no reason to believe it was this particular car.  The police
parked two cruisers behind Mr. Thompson’s car, which the Court of Appeal
described as “boxing in the appellant so he could not drive away.”[9] 
The Court of Appeal held that as soon as the police blocked the car, preventing
the accused from leaving, the accused was detained and entitled to be advised
of his rights.  The police did not advise the accused of his rights at that
time.  Having blocked his escape, they approached the car, one officer on each
side of the vehicle, and shone powerful flashlights inside. They directed the
passenger to roll down her window and ordered both occupants to produce
identification and vehicle ownership documents.  In the course of doing that, the
officers saw that both the accused and his passenger had been smoking marijuana
(which was illegal at the time) and arrested them.  They then searched the car
and found a scale, 29 grams of cocaine, 5 grams of marijuana, 8 grams of hash
oil, 12 grams of hash, and approximately $18,000 in cash.  The accused was
charged with possession of cocaine for the purposes of trafficking.  There was
evidence at trial that the accused did not know his car was blocked in until
the flashlight was shone into the window.  However, the Court of Appeal held
that the test for determining whether a detention had occurred is an objective
one, based on what a reasonable person in those circumstances would believe.  The
question to be determined is whether a reasonable person would conclude that he
was not free to leave and had to comply with the police direction or demand.[10]
[24]          
In Thompson, the Court of Appeal considered the three factors
established in Grant as quoted above.  In considering the first factor
(the circumstances giving rise to the encounter), Jamal J.A. held that the
initial act of the police approaching the car was fairly characterized as
“general neighbourhood policing”, as they thought it was suspicious for a car
to have its engine running in a parking lot late at night.[11] 
However, once the police physically obstructed the car, a reasonable person
would conclude that he was being detained.[12]
[25]          
On the second factor, Jamal J.A. characterized the police conduct as
being “authoritative from the outset.”[13]
He held:
[26]          
Finally, the Court in Thompson held that the third factor in Grant
also supported a finding that the individual was detained, referring to the
reasonable belief of a black man sitting in his car at night when his car is
obstructed by two police officers without apparent reason.  The circumstances
of the accused is the only factor that this case has in common with Thompson,
and also Grant.  Mr. Peck was a young black man.
[27]          
The defence has fastened on the Thompson decision as applicable
to the case before me mainly because the accused in that case did not know that
the police had blocked in his car.  Applying the objective test, the Court of
Appeal held that this did not mean he could not have been detained.  That is
not this case.  Here, the police did not block in Mr. Peck’s vehicle.  They
could have done so.  They had three vehicles.  Instead, they merely walked
toward the vehicle.  Unlike the situation in Thompson, these officers
did not order the two occupants in the car to do anything and did not demand
identification.  They had no interaction with them whatsoever and did nothing
to block the vehicle.  They were merely present, while wearing police vests.
[28]          
I strongly reject the suggestion by the defence that the presence of
police vests was in some way intimidating.  The police acted absolutely
appropriately in donning those vests.  It is important for police safety, and
it is important for the protection of the public.  Most people, in particular
those not engaged in criminal activity, would be reassured upon seeing the
vests.  Police officers clearly identifying themselves as such must not
be taken as being a tactic of intimidation.
[29]          
Defence counsel argued that the intention of the officers in approaching
the van should be taken into account.  He further argued that I should accept
the evidence of D.C. Galbraith on this point, rather than the evidence of the
other two officers.  Defence counsel submitted in argument that D.C. Galbraith
testified that the plan was to speak to the occupants, get their
identification, and then run their names on the police CPIC system.  I do not
agree that the intention of the officers was relevant, and, in any event, defence
counsel’s recollection of D.C. Galbraith’s evidence is mistaken.
[30]          
D.C. Clayton testified that the plan was to walk up to the vehicle to
see what it was doing there and that, if it was not involved in criminality,
they would walk away.  Det. Morrow, who was in charge and who decided what the
plan would be, testified that they would approach the vehicle to have a look at
what its occupants were doing.  He said if they were just sitting there talking
or eating dinner, the officers would leave.  When asked in cross-examination if
he would necessarily need to talk to the occupants, Det. Morrow disagreed.  He
agreed, however, that he was prepared to speak to them, depending on the
circumstances, and this was one of the reasons it was important for the
officers to be wearing their police vests.
[31]          
I do not find D.C. Galbraith’s testimony to be materially inconsistent
with that of the other two officers.  Because my own notes and recollection of
D.C. Galbraith’s testimony differed from that of defence counsel, I obtained
the audio recording and listened to it again.  In chief, he testified that the
plan was to investigate the people in the van and speak with them.  He
confirmed that in cross-examination, stating that the plan was to investigate
by approaching the vehicle and speaking to the occupants.  When asked if there
was a plan to get their names, he hesitated and stated that he did not make the
initial observation and was there more as an officer in a safety role.  When
asked if he “expected” someone would get their names, he again hesitated and
said that there could be “an escalation to where you would ask somebody’s
name.”  He went on to explain that if two people were just talking, an officer
might not ask for their name.  He said he might ask “what’s going on” and if
there was no problem, he probably would not ask for a name.  He said he did not
recall any plan in this case to ask for their names.  Then, when specifically
asked if he “expected” they would get names and run them on CPIC, he said he
did not want to speculate.
[32]          
I do not consider anything D.C. Galbraith said to be materially
inconsistent with the evidence of the other two officers.  All of them agreed
that the plan was to approach on foot to see what was going on with the van. 
If there was a non-criminal explanation for what the van was doing there, they
would simply leave.  If the van drove away, they would not try to stop it. 
This was a fluid situation.  Depending on what they found when they got to the
van, they might or might not speak to the occupants.
[33]          
In any event, the officer’s intention is not relevant to whether there
was a detention.[15]
[34]          
Defence counsel also cited the Court of Appeal decision in R. v. Tutu
as supporting his argument.[16] 
That decision basically just applies the Thompson decision.  In Tutu,
the police officer blocked off a car with his own cruiser.  He then knocked
on the car window, told the occupants to turn down the music, demanded their
identification, and told them to stay in the car while he returned to his car
to run a check on the information provided.  This was found to constitute a
detention.  Nothing like that happened in this case.
[35]          
Finally, the defence also relies on the Supreme Court of Canada decision
in R. v. Le. In that case, five young black males were gathered in the
backyard of a private residence.[17] 
They were doing nothing wrong, merely talking.  Three police officers arrived
and entered the fenced backyard without a warrant and without seeking
permission to enter.  One officer proceeded to question the accused, demanding
that he produce identification and asking him about the contents of a satchel
he was carrying.  The police ordered him to keep his hands where they could see
them.  The Supreme Court found that this constituted a detention.  In coming to
that conclusion, the Court emphasized the conduct of the police in coming onto
private property without permission as an action that was authoritative and
intimidating and went beyond what could be considered as community policing.  I
would distinguish this case on its facts.  Here, the accused and his companion
were not on their own private property.  They had been driving around in the
community wearing balaclavas on their faces and then had parked at a deserted school
parking lot for about 45 minutes.  This was suspicious behaviour and warranted
investigation.  The police did not act in a threatening manner, did not intrude
into the personal space of the accused, and did not make any demands of the
accused.  They were merely walking towards the car in the parking lot.  This is
completely different from the surrounding circumstances and the police conduct
in Le.
[36]          
In my view, there was nothing about the police conduct in this case that
could be construed as a detention.  They did not block the vehicle.  They made
no demands.  They asked no questions.  They were engaged in appropriate
community policing.  This vehicle was observed driving in a suspicious manner
in an area being staked out by police because of criminal-related activity in
the area.  The crime being investigated was break and enters.  Both occupants,
in early October, were wearing balaclavas.  That was also suspicious.  The
vehicle then went to a deserted school parking lot at about 8:30 p.m., parked
between some school buses, and simply sat there for 45 minutes.  For the 1 hour
and 23 minutes the police had the car under surveillance, it had travelled only
one kilometer, and nobody had gotten out or gotten in.  There had been
break-ins at schools in the area, with the thieves targeting computer
equipment.  In my view, the officers at that point were duty-bound to
investigate further in the interests of crime prevention.  Had the police
officers in this situation boxed in the Sierra van and investigated the men
inside to see if they were planning a break-in, I would likely have held this
to be a lawful detention, not an arbitrary one.  However, the officers
deliberately did not do that, but rather merely walked up to the vehicle, their
weapons holstered, to see what it was doing there.  That was, quite simply,
good and conscientious policing.  It would have been irresponsible of the
officers to have simply ignored these suspicious circumstances.  If the
officers had merely asked the individuals in the van what they were doing
there, I would not have found that to be a detention.  That would be equivalent
to what the officer did in Suberu.  But the officers in this case did
not even do that.  D.C. Clayton saw the drugs in the van before they got to the
point of being able to ask any questions.
[37]          
I find there was no detention right up to the point that there was a
lawful arrest.  The application is therefore dismissed and the evidence seized
is admissible.
[38]          
In the alternative, if I had found there to be a detention, I would
nevertheless have admitted the evidence at trial, applying the Grant test
with respect to the analysis under s. 24(2) of the Charter.  To the
extent there was a detention, it could only have been for a matter of seconds. One
police officer had barely reached the car, at which point he could already see
the drugs.  The earliest point in time when the persons detained could have
been advised of their rights was at the very same time that they were told they
were under arrest.  The police were acting in good faith in investigating
suspicious activity and were using their best efforts not to overstep their
duty to investigate.  They could have blocked in the car.  They could have
drawn weapons.  Instead, they merely walked toward the car.  The seriousness of
any state intrusion on the rights of the accused was at the low end of the
spectrum.  Further, the impact on the rights of the accused was minimal.  If
there was a detention, I do not consider it to have been arbitrary, but rather
supported by an objectively reasonable suspicion of illegal activity.  There
was no time to provide the accused with his rights upon detention, because he
was placed under arrest simultaneously.  Finally, this was a large quantity of
heroin.  The public interest strongly favours including the evidence and
deciding the case on its merits. In my view, after weighing these factors in
the balance, if such evidence was excluded in these circumstances based on the
police conduct involved here, a right-thinking and informed member of the public
would be justifiably appalled.
[39]          
The accused did not testify, as is his right.
[40]          
According to the testimony of D.C. Clayton, he saw Mr. Peck dealing
physically with the heroin in the large bags and transferring it into small
bags suitable for street level trafficking.  If I accept that evidence, Mr.
Peck is clearly guilty of possession of heroin for the purpose of trafficking. 
Only D.C. Clayton saw Mr. Peck actively involved with the heroin packaging. 
The other two officers were too far away.
[41]          
The defence urges me to reject the evidence of D.C. Clayton as being
wholly unreliable, internally inconsistent, and inconsistent with other
evidence.
[42]          
I found the evidence of D.C. Clayton to be compelling, truthful, and
reliable.  That is not to say there were no inconsistencies.  It would be an
extraordinarily rare case for three witnesses to provide the exact same
evidence with respect to the details of what happened in a dynamic situation. 
I will deal with the inconsistencies highlighted by the defence.
[43]          
There was one other inconsistency not mentioned by the defence.  D.C.
Clayton testified that when he observed the van in the hotel parking lot, both
men were wearing balaclavas.  He said he communicated that to the other two
officers over the police radio.  Det. Morrow confirmed that was the information
he received.  However, D.C. Galbraith testified that his recollection was they
were wearing masks, which he clarified to mean surgical masks.  Nothing was
made of this discrepancy at trial, and I agree it is trivial.  However, I
mention it here for the sake of completeness.
[44]          
I do not find any of these minor inconsistencies to be significant in my
overall assessment of D.C. Clayton’s evidence that he saw the two men, one of
them being Mr. Peck, with their hands in the large heroin bags, and
transferring the drugs from there to the small baggies.  I note that the presence
on the floor of the van of two larger bags of heroin, two digital scales, and a
quantity of dime bags is corroborative evidence of the repackaging being a
joint effort.
[45]          
Defence counsel also points to the less than thorough search of the van
performed by D.C. Clayton as further evidence supporting his position that D.C.
Clayton’s testimony should be rejected as unreliable.  Again, I do not accept
that position.  I agree that a more careful search could have been done and
also that D.C. Clayton could have been more careful about labeling the evidence
bags in which he placed the drugs for transport to the police station.  Defence
counsel noted that the two balaclavas described by D.C. Clayton were not
found.  That may be attributable to the less than thorough search, or it may be
that the driver of the car who escaped the scene had them on his person.  D.C.
Clayton also did not photograph the entire van and its contents.  He did not
seize the small white spoon.
[46]          
In a perfect world, a better search would have been done and more
extensive photographs would have been taken.  However, my function is not to
grade D.C. Clayton on his performance as a Scenes of Crime Officer.  The
question is whether his evidence is reliable and credible as to his
observations of Mr. Peck handling the drugs while in the back seat of the van. 
I find that it is both.  I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that D.C.
Clayton made the observations he described in his evidence.
[47]          
Defence counsel would not concede the continuity of the exhibits seized
by D.C. Clayton.  Because these three officers were with the Peel Regional
Police and the arrest was made within the geographical boundaries of the
Toronto Police Service (TPS), Mr. Peck was transferred to them for booking, as
were the drugs seized.  Based on the testimony of the officers from the TPS who
were called to testify, I am fully satisfied that the heroin and scales seized
by D.C. Clayton from the floor of the van were properly transferred, identified,
and logged into the property locker system at 23 Division of the TPS. The
defence did concede that these substances were duly tested and were confirmed
to be heroin.  The total weight was approximately 105 grams, which is conceded
to be consistent with possession for the purpose of trafficking.
[48]          
The defence argues that the Crown has failed to prove that Mr. Peck had
control of the heroin on the floor of the back seat of the van.  He made much
of the fact that Mr. Peck was not the driver, and that the driver had fled the
scene, leaving his property behind.  There were other drugs seized in the car, with
personal items belonging to an individual named Kevin Wilson, with an address
of 104 Lexington Avenue.  The Sierra van was registered to an individual with
the same surname, who also resided at 104 Lexington Avenue.  This means
nothing.  It was known that there was a second person in the car, and Mr. Peck
was never said to be the driver.  Defence counsel argues that Mr. Peck’s mere
presence in a vehicle where there are drugs is not sufficient to place him in
control of those drugs.  That is a correct proposition of law, but an incorrect
characterization of the facts.  The defence relies on the decision of R. v. Ali
which is readily distinguishable on its facts and of no assistance on this
point.[20] 
In this case, the Sierra van was parked at the school for close to 45 minutes. 
A very large quantity of drugs in open bags and two digital scales were on the
floor right in front of where Mr. Peck was seated.  Those drugs were in the
process of being packaged into smaller dime bags for sale.  That would be sufficient
to find that Mr. Peck was in possession of those drugs.  However, there is more
in this case.  Based on the evidence of D.C. Clayton, which I accept, Mr. Peck
was actively involved himself in this repackaging exercise.
[49]          
Accordingly, I find Mr. Peck guilty of the sole count on the indictment
– possession of heroin for the purposes of trafficking.