[1]              
The court-appointed
receiver, Rosen Goldberg Inc. (“the Receiver”), makes this motion seeking an
Approval and Vesting Order and an Administration Order concerning lands and
premises, municipally located at 253 Queen Street East, Brampton (“the
Property”), owned by 253 Queen Street Inc. (“the Debtor”).
[2]              
The Receiver requests
the court to approve the sale of the Property to a numbered company (“the
Purchaser”), pursuant to a signed Agreement of Purchase and Sale, dated August
15, 2024 (“the APS”) (“the Transaction”), and for related relief.
[3]              
The two secured
creditors, Homedale-Eagle Corporation (“Homedale-Eagle”) and Sky Mortgage
Corporation (“Sky Mortgage”) support the Transaction as proposed by the
Receiver.
[4]              
The Transaction
is opposed by the Debtor and some of its equity holders, 2830064 Ontario Inc.,
2830068 Ontario Inc., Mixed-Use Developments (Ontario) L.P. (“Mixed-Use LP”),
and Wasaga Developments and Infrastructure 2021 L.P. (“Wasaga LP”).
[5]              
2830064 Ontario
Inc. and 2830068 Ontario Inc. (“the TriDelta General Partners”) are general
partners to Mixed-Use LP and Wasaga LP. The TriDelta General Partners were
formerly controlled by Mohammad Mahdi Tajbakhsh (“Mr. Tajbakhsh”).
[6]              
Mr. Tajbakhsh
is the sole officer and director of the Debtor.
[7]              
The TriDelta
Fixed Income Fund and the TriDelta High Income Balanced Fund are limited
partners of, and contributed capital to, Mixed-Use LP and Wasaga LP.
[8]              
The Debtor is
the registered owner of the Property.
[9]              
The Debtor
purchased the Property in May 2018 for $15,150,000, with the intention to redevelop
it and construct a multiphase mixed-use development consisting of three
residential towers, office space and retail space.
[10]          
The funds to
purchase and redevelop the Property primarily came from two mortgages: a
first-ranking $10 million vendor take-back mortgage in favour of
Homedale-Eagle; and a second-ranking $2 million charge held by Sky Mortgage.
[11]          
The remaining
funds came from the purchase of special, non-voting shares in the Debtor by Mixed-Used
LP and Wasaga LP (collectively “the Mixed-Use and Wasaga Partnerships”). The
Mixed-Use and Wasaga Partnerships invested approximately $9 million in shares
of the Debtor; Mixed-Use LP owns 6,750,000 special shares, and Wasaga LP owns
2,250,000 special shares. The rights associated with the special shares are set
out in the Articles of Amendment for the Debtor, dated April 25, 2018. The
special shares provide an entitlement to receive dividends from the net
proceeds, if any, flowing from the redevelopment and sale of the Property. The
holders of the special shares are not entitled to vote or otherwise
participate.
[12]          
For this
motion, Sky Mortgage filed a copy of an executed commitment letter, dated April
5, 2022, respecting its loan to the Debtor for $2,000,000 (“the Commitment
Letter”). The joint and several guarantors of the loan commitment were Mr.
Tajbakhsh (as personal guarantor) and Mixed-Use Development (Ontario) GP Inc.
(as corporate guarantor). The Commitment Letter was accepted by the Debtor on
April 7, 2022.
[13]          
Commercial
tenants have been occupying the Property pursuant to various commercial lease
agreements, carrying on business and paying rent to the Debtor.
[14]          
On September
29, 2023, the City of Brampton passed Zoning Bylaw 152-2023, which approved the
Property for a mixed-use development with 1,001,043 buildable square feet
consisting of three towers with heights of 33, 38 and 32 stories.
[15]          
By Order of
Valente J., dated February 8, 2024, pursuant to s. 243(1) of the Bankruptcy
and Insolvency Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. B-3, and s. 101 of the Courts of
Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, the Receiver was appointed receiver and
manager of the Property and the business carried on by the Debtor thereon and
all proceeds thereof (“the Receivership Order”).
[16]          
In February
2024, as part of its regular monitoring of the Property, TriDelta discovered
the Receivership Order. TriDelta filed a notice of appearance in the proceeding
on March 22, 2024.
[17]          
By Notice of
Motion dated June 14, 2024, the Receiver made a motion seeking, among other
things, approval of its First Report, dated June 14, 2024 (“the First Report”),
and of the Receiver’s proposed marketing and sale process with respect to the Property.
The Debtor, 2830064 Ontario Inc., 2830068 Ontario Inc., Mixed-Use LP and Wasaga
LP were served with the Receiver’s motion materials in this regard, including a
copy of the unredacted broker proposals (which included opinions of value), and
an appraisal that had been previously obtained by the Debtor.
[18]          
The Receiver’s
motion was heard on June 27, 2024. None of the interested parties who received
notice of the motion opposed the relief being sought therein. By Order of
Hilliard J., made that day, the marketing and sale process described in the
First Report was approved and the Receiver was authorized to engage CBRE
Limited to list the Property for sale (“the Sale Process Order”). The approved
marketing and sale process reads as follows:
[19]          
The approved
marketing and sale process directed that the listing would be “unpriced”.
[20]          
The preparation
steps contemplated in weeks 1-2 of the marketing and sale process were
undertaken by CBRE prior to the granting of the Sale Process Order. As a
result, the marketing campaign was launched to the public on July 3, 2024.
[21]          
The marketing
activities of CBRE included:
[22]          
A total of
three offers were submitted which ranged in price; each was conditional upon
due diligence.
[23]          
The two highest
bidders were invited to re-submit their bids and, on August 3, 2024, they both
did so. One bidder, the Purchaser, re-submitted its offer for a reduced price
but with conditions removed. The other bidder increased its price but the price
was still lower than the Purchaser’s re-submitted offer.
[24]          
After
negotiations, the Receiver and the Purchaser entered into the APS on August 15,
2024, the terms of which include:
[25]          
The Receiver
and the Purchaser subsequently agreed to extend the time for court approval of
the proposed sale to November 30, 2024.
[26]          
In early August
2024, TriDelta was advised by the Receiver that an offer had been received on
the Property that the Receiver was proposing to accept. The Receiver met with
representatives of TriDelta on August 7, 2024, after offers had been submitted.
At that meeting, TriDelta expressed its disappointment with a deal in the range
that was being negotiated. Between August 9 and 13, 2024, counsel for TriDelta
and counsel for the Receiver exchanged correspondence regarding TriDelta’s
concerns. TriDelta requested that the sale process be extended, however, the
Receiver did not agree to that request.
[27]          
The Receiver
advises that, on August 14, 2024, it communicated with Mr. Tajbakhsh and
advised him of the results of the sale process.
[28]          
On August 15,
2024, the Receiver spoke by telephone with representatives of TriDelta. Ian
Hunt, Senior Vice President at CBRE, participated in the call. Mr. Hunt shared
his view of market conditions and that further marketing of the Property would
not result in a better outcome.
[29]          
On August 16,
2024, Mr. Tajbakhsh was provided with details of the offers that were submitted
and a copy of the APS. By letter dated August 23, 2024, counsel for Mr.
Tajbakhsh wrote to the Receiver’s counsel raising concerns about the sale
process and price.
[30]          
Neither
TriDelta nor Mr. Tajbakhsh submitted offers to purchase the Property during the
sale process.
[31]          
Around the time
the Debtor purchased the Property, it entered into a full and final release and
indemnity in respect of past environmental contamination on the Property (“the
Environmental Indemnity”).
[32]          
The
Environmental Indemnity was part of a settlement agreement originally executed
in September 2009 and subsequently amended, involving Homedale-Eagle, United
Technologies Corporation, Lear Corporation and Lear Corporation Canada Ltd.
(collectively “UTC”) (“the Settlement Agreement”). UTC was a tenant of the
Property when it was owned by Homedale-Eagle. Under the terms of the Settlement
Agreement, the law firm Ritchie, Ketchison, Hart & Biggert LLP, acts as
escrow agent in connection with UTC’s funding of the remediation and monitoring
costs associated with the Property; sixty percent of the remediation costs are
payable to the Debtor.
[33]          
The Receiver
advises that a copy of the Settlement Agreement documents is in the public
record as they were attached to the First Report, and they have been available
for viewing on the Receiver’s website as part of the Property’s sale process.
[34]          
In Royal
Bank of Canada v. Soundair Corp., 1991 CanLII 2727 (ONCA), the Ontario
Court of Appeal affirmed the principles that govern the approval of sale
agreements in a receivership context. By those principles, a court must
consider the following:
[35]          
In Soundair,
the Ontario Court of Appeal cautioned that a court “should not proceed against
the recommendations of its Receiver except in special circumstances and where
the necessity and propriety of doing so are plain.” The Court of Appeal cited
the decision in Crown Trust Co. et al. v. Rosenberg et al., 1986 CanLII
2760 (ON SC), 1986 CarswellOnt 235, at para. 77, wherein Anderson J. explained that
it is only in an exceptional case where a court will intervene and not proceed
in accordance with a receiver’s recommendation, if satisfied that it has acted
prudently and not arbitrarily. Anderson J. further cautioned, at para. 84:
[36]          
I address each
of the Soundair factors in the context of this case later on below.
[37]          
The Receiver
submits that the principles established by Soundair have been satisfied,
and recommends that the Transaction be approved and the requested Approval and
Vesting Order be granted, for the following reasons:
[38]          
The Receiver
obtained opinions confirming that the mortgages held by Homedale-Eagle and Sky
Mortgage are valid and enforceable charges against the Property.
[39]          
TriDelta has
not produced any legal agreement between the Mixed-Use and Wasaga Partnerships
and the Debtor evidencing a requirement on the part of the Debtor to obtain the
consent or approval of the Mixed-Use and Wasaga Partnerships to mortgage the
Property. TriDelta has also not explained how Homedale-Eagle or Sky Mortgage
should have known of such a requirement, if it exists.
[40]          
The court must
look at the Receiver’s conduct in light of the information it had when it made
its decision to enter into the APS on August 15, 2024. Given the unfavourable
market conditions and the few offers received by the Receiver, the Transaction
was the best option available to the Receiver at the time. The Receiver made a
sufficient effort to obtain the best price and closely adhered to the approved
marketing and sale process. Accordingly, despite the concern regarding the sale
price, the Transaction should be approved.
[41]          
Upon completion
of the Transaction, the Receiver seeks authorization to distribute sufficient
proceeds to satisfy the Homedale-Eagle and Sky Mortgage mortgages in full.
[42]          
The following
issues are to be determined by this motion:
[43]          
The main reasons
given by the opposing parties for why this court should not approve the
Transaction are the following:
[44]          
I now consider
the Soundair principles that govern the approval of sale agreements in
light of these three stated concerns.
[45]          
The Debtor and
the other opposing parties believe that the purchase price set out in the APS
is too low. It is their position that the Receiver has rushed the sale process
and so the proposed sale price for the Property is much lower than the
Property’s estimated value, which prejudices the Debtor and its shareholders.
[46]          
The Debtor
submits that the sale process undertaken by the Receiver was not fair since the
Receiver and its agent, CBRE, only used approximately half of the contemplated
listing time to promote the Property which reduced the Property’s exposure to
the market. The APS was then signed less than six weeks later at a
“dramatically depressed sale price”. The depressed price alone is a sufficient
enough reason for the court to decline to approve the Transaction. There were
four brokerage proposals that estimated the Property’s value much higher than
the sale price set out in the APS. The Receiver did not consider the interests
of the Debtor, its shareholders or its principal, Mr. Tajbakhsh, and is trying
to sell the Property at a price that is well below market value so that the
secured creditors can be paid.
[47]          
Pursuant to the
Sale Process Order, the Property was listed on an “as is, where is” basis,
unpriced, and sought a cash offer. It appears to have been marketed over at
least a 5-week period – July 3 to August 12 (the date CBRE’s listing activity
summary was created) – to inquire into current interest in the Property.
[48]          
The marketing
and sale process used was similar to what the other brokerage proposals envisaged.
Two of the proposals also intended an “unpriced” listing. Of the four
proposals, two planned a 4-week marketing period, the third a 4-6 week
marketing period, and the fourth, a 6-week one.
[49]          
While the
timeline for accepting a bid and negotiating an offer was somewhat truncated due
to the Receiver/CBRE’s accepting of offers as of July 30, 2024, I am satisfied
that the marketing and sale process undertaken was in compliance with the
intent and spirit of the Sale Process Order. According to the letter of that
Order, if week 1 commenced June 30th, the marketing was to have continued
until the end of week 7, being August 17th. To the extent the APS
was signed on August 15th, this means that there were 2 days wherein
the Receiver could no longer consider any further offers that may have been
received. There is no evidence of any further offers being received other than
the three identified bids, however.
[50]          
Through its
agent, CBRE, the Receiver engaged in extensive marketing by both regular mail
and electronic campaigns and by directly contacting potential bidders. CBRE’s
process involved providing prospective purchasers with access to relevant data
(with due diligence materials – including environmental, geotechnical and
hydrogeological reports – being made available for interested parties who
signed a confidentiality agreement), a time period to assess the bids received,
negotiation with qualified bidders, time for performance of due diligence,
final bid assessment, and court approval of the successful bid. The marketing
process utilized by CBRE was very similar in nature to those proposed by the
other brokerages who had bid for the opportunity to market the Property.
[51]          
Ultimately
three parties submitted bids. The Receiver’s rejection of the lowest bid and
its request that the other two bidders re-submit their bids, and the subsequent
negotiation that was engaged in with the ultimate purchaser, shows the
Receiver’s attempts to obtain the best price and act providently. Acting
providently in this context included a consideration of the benefits of
accepting an unconditional, cash offer in a timely manner that would reduce the
ongoing expenses and accruing interest.
[52]          
The only
evidence relied upon by the opposing parties to support their allegation that
the APS purchase price is too low is the four valuations contained in the
Receiver’s motion record. Such evidence is insufficient on its own to show that
the sale was improvident. One of the valuations showed an anticipated value
range that captures the APS price, while another’s low end is in the ballpark. I
find the remaining two are not comparable: one did not appear to factor in any potential
environmental contamination component, and also based its valuation on the
options of a joint venture arrangement and a vendor take-back mortgage being
available; and the other was based on a completed condominium project and a
potential vendor take-back mortgage.
[53]          
Mr. Tajbakhsh’s
evidence is that, in its online listing for the Property, CBRE stated the
“price is negotiable” and he had never “seen such language in the context of an
unpriced listing”. In answer to a written interrogatory posed by the Debtor,
the Receiver responded that advertising that the price is negotiable, in the
context of an unpriced listing, was intended to stimulate interest. I find that
this is an acceptable reason.
[54]          
Neither the
Receiver nor its agent, CBRE, believes that additional marketing would result
in a higher purchase price or a better offer. There is no evidence in the
record to support that further exposure to the market would generate a higher
price. There is also no evidence to support that marketing of the Property right
up until August 17th (the last day of the 7th week) would have
resulted in any different offer. This is not a situation where there was a
substantially higher bid, or a new and higher bid, that was left on the table
or ignored by the Receiver.
[55]          
The Debtor
relies on Bank of Montreal v. On-Stream Natural Gas Ltd. Partnership,
1995 CanLII 1882 (BC SC), in support of its argument that a depressed price is
reason enough for the court to decline a proposed sale. I find that case to be
distinguishable. In On-Stream, the Bank of Montreal had obtained default
judgment against a limited partnership for failure to pay a debt secured by a
debenture that had been assigned to the Bank. The Bank appointed a
receiver-manager in respect of the assets of the limited partnership and to
realize on the security of certain promissory notes. Litigation ensued between
the parties concerning the authority of the general partner to pledge the
promissory notes to the Bank, among other things. A trial was held three years
later. Subsequent to that proceeding, the receiver-manager made a motion for
directions. By the time that motion was heard, the face value of the notes
exceeded the balance outstanding on the Bank’s loan. While it had originally
supported the sale, the receiver-manager no longer did so arguing that the
contract had been frustrated, that the sale was no longer prudent, and that it
originally agreed to sell the whole of the limited partnership’s interest in
the notes, and not just that of the bank, as it was now being requested to do.
The court ultimately held that the contract had not been frustrated but it was
imprudent and should not be approved. The suggested discount on the sale of the
notes, 86 per cent, was too deep. The court found that, by its failure to seek
a variation in the price to reflect the increasing value of the notes as time
passed with the litigation unresolved, the receiver had not acted prudently.
That is not this case. Here, Hilliard J. approved the marketing and sale
process on June 27, 2024, the marketing of the Property commenced on July 3,
2024, and the APS was signed on August 15, 2024. There is no unaccounted-for
time lag that has impacted on the value of the Property.
[56]          
In my view,
none of the concerns expressed about the sale process being rushed or the sale
price being too low support an improvident finding. The Property was marketed
for 5 weeks, as contemplated by the Sale Process Order. It was listed on an “as
is, where is” basis and sought a cash offer; both of which factors can serve to
reduce a prospective purchase price. Unconditional offers also can result in
reduced prices being offered by prospective purchasers. I am satisfied that the
Property was listed for sale on the open market and the purchase price set out
in the APS is the “best evidence” of fair market value: see Lash v. Lash,
2022 ONCA 361, at para. 42.
[57]          
I find that the
Receiver made a sufficient effort to obtain the best price and that it has
acted providently.
[58]          
The Debtor
contends that the Receiver’s failure to have the Purchaser assume the
Environmental Indemnity is unfair to the interests of the Debtor and its
directors and officers. Apart from this, Mixed-Use LP and Wasaga LP argue that
the Receiver failed to recognize their beneficial interests in the Property. I
deal with both of these issues separately.
[59]          
First, the
Environmental Indemnity. The Debtor submits that this is a crucial issue. The
Debtor argues that it was made clear to the Receiver, early on in the process,
that the associated release and indemnity obligations needed to be assumed by
any prospective purchaser, just as the Debtor had assumed them from Homedale-Eagle
(the previous owner who granted the vendor take-back mortgage) when it
purchased the Property. There is a real risk of personal liability for
corporate directors and officers in respect of claims arising from
environmental contamination. The Debtor and Mr. Tajbakhsh expected that the
release and indemnity obligations associated with the Environmental Indemnity
would be assumed by any eventual purchaser of the Property. However, the APS
provides that the Purchaser will indemnify only the Receiver for environmental
contamination claims. This shows a clear disregard for the interests of the
Debtor and its directors and officers in favour of the Receiver’s interests. Given
the failure of the Receiver to properly account for the Environmental Indemnity
in the Transaction, it ought not to be approved.
[60]          
I do not agree with
the Debtor’s position for the following three reasons.
[61]          
First, the
Debtor and Mr. Tajbakhsh were informed of the Receiver’s motion seeking the
Sale Process Order. They did not oppose the motion, nor did they request that
the terms of that order include provision that any prospective purchaser of the
Property must assume the Environmental Indemnity.
[62]          
Second, there
are provisions in the Settlement Agreement and related documents that account
for what could happen in the event of a sale of the Property. Significantly, the
Amended and Restated Settlement Agreement, dated May 2, 2018, wherein the Debtor
assumed the burden of and receives the benefit of the original settlement
agreement, including the Environmental Indemnity, does not require the
assumption of same in the event of the sale of the Property. Rather the Amended
and Restated Settlement Agreement contains the following relevant provisions:
[63]          
And, the
Amended Escrow Agreement, also dated April 16, 2018, provides in paragraph
5(e):
[64]          
Third, by
virtue of Article 9 of the Commitment Letter, the Debtor assumed responsibility
for the remediation of the Property. Article 9 reads:
[65]          
Given this
provision in the Commitment Letter, the Debtor’s (and its guarantors) liability
and indemnity for the Environmental Indemnity survives foreclosure on the Sky
Mortgage mortgage. In my view, this disentitles the Debtor and Mr. Tajbakhsh
from claiming that the Receiver ought to have ensured that the Purchaser
assumed the Environmental Indemnity in any purchase of the Property. There was
no law provided to me setting out an obligation on a receiver to obtain an
assumption of liability from the prospective purchaser on behalf of a debtor.
[66]          
It is the
position of 2830064 Ontario Inc., 2830068 Ontario Inc., Mixed-Use LP and Wasaga
LP that the Receiver has no authority to sell the Property without consent from
TriDelta as the general partner of Mixed-Use LP as beneficial owner. It is
submitted that Mixed-Use LP has had a beneficial interest in the Property since
it was purchased in May 2018, pursuant to a Declaration of Trust Agreement,
dated November 14, 2017, signed between Mixed-Use and U Real Estate Group Inc. (“the
2017 Declaration of Trust”). TriDelta submits that, while it was aware of the
2017 Declaration of Trust as of December 2023, it only recently became aware of
documents that support the beneficial interest claims of both Mixed-Use LP and
Wasaga LP, when it received the responses to written interrogatories. Those
documents are the Commitment Letter, and certain director’s resolutions
executed by Mr. Tajbakhsh, dated May 2, 2022, each of which purport to
authorize the execution of documents relating to the Sky Mortgage mortgage for
both Mixed-Use LP and Wasaga LP (“the Director Resolutions”). The Director Resolutions
contain the following language:
[67]          
Mixed-Use LP
argues that the Receiver’s proposed terms of the sale fail to recognize that it
holds an unencumbered beneficial ownership interest in the Property. The
Receiver is not empowered to sell Mixed-Use LP’s beneficial interest since
Mixed-Use LP is not part of the Receivership Order. A receiver is only entitled
to exercise control in respect of the property of the debtor in respect of
whose debt the receiver is appointed. This principle is reflected in s. 243(1)
of the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act. The Receivership Order does not
include the Mixed-Use and Wasaga Partnerships as respondents and, therefore,
does not purport to extend the Receiver’s power to include their property. It
is well-established that a mortgagee is only entitled to sell what interest is
subject to the mortgage and cannot sell third-party unmortgaged interests in the
same land: Blue Note Caribou Mines Inc., (Re), 2010 NBQB 91, at para.
60; and 1565397 Ontario Inc., (Re), 2009 CanLII 32257 (ON SC), at para.
68. As a result, the court cannot approve the Transaction.
[68]          
Mixed-Use LP
further submits that, to the extent the Receiver purports to “vest out” its beneficial
interest in the Property as part of the vesting order, such a vesting out would
be inappropriate as the test established by the Ontario Court of Appeal in Third
Eye Capital Corporation v. Dianor Resources Inc., 2018 ONCA 253, at paras.
110-111, is not met. Mixed-Use LP’s beneficial interest in the Property is
clearly an ownership interest in the Property itself, rather than a monetary
charge such as a mortgage. There is no evidence showing that the Mixed-Use and
Wasaga Partnerships have consented to the vesting out of their interest. Since
the Receiver was not appointed in respect of the property of the Mixed-Use and
Wasaga Partnerships, the proposed vesting order cannot purport to sell their
beneficial interest in the Property nor to extinguish it.
[69]          
Mixed-Use LP
argues that, even apart from the 2017 Declaration of Trust, the fact that the
Mixed-Use and Wasaga Partnerships paid the purchase price for the Property is
sufficient to establish their beneficial interest. In this regard, it claims a
purchase money resulting trust in the Property.
[70]          
The 2017
Declaration of Trust is a written agreement made as of November 14, 2017,
between Mixed-Use LP, as the Beneficiary, and U Real Estate Group Inc., as the
Nominee. The relevant portions of the 2017 Declaration of Trust read as
follows:
[71]          
With respect to
the Director Resolutions, it is contended that they confirm and reflect the
fact that Mixed-Use LP and Wasaga LP were beneficial owners of the Property at
the time of both the Homedale-Eagle and Sky Mortgage mortgages, by virtue of
the language stating that the relevant partnership “has a direct or indirect
beneficial interest” in the Property.
[72]          
Based on the
record before me, I am not prepared to find that Mixed-Use LP (or Wasaga LP) is
a beneficial owner of the Property.
[73]          
I address first
the purported trust documents themselves. As the Ontario Court of Appeal held in
White v. Gicas, 2014 ONCA 490, at para. 37:
[74]          
I find that the
asserted trust has not been properly declared. The language used in the 2017
Declaration of Trust does not identify with certainty that Mixed-Use LP has, in
fact, a beneficial interest in the Property as opposed to an entitlement to
derive economic benefits from the loan provided by Sky Mortgage. Further, it is
not conclusive that U Real Estate Group Inc. actually invested the $250,000 identified
therein into the purchase of the Property.
[75]          
Additionally, I
find that the asserted trust has not been properly constituted since title to
the Property was never transferred to U Real Estate Group Inc., the trustee.
[76]          
In my view, the
2017 Declaration of Trust only establishes that U Real Estate Group Inc. holds
the amount of $250,000 in trust on behalf of Mixed-Use LP.
[77]          
Next, I address
the purchase money resulting trust argument. In Nishi v. Rascal Trucking
Ltd., 2013 SCC 33, at paras. 1 and 21, the Supreme Court of Canada
described this type of trust as follows:
[78]          
The Supreme
Court of Canada further explained in Nishi, at para. 29, that in
“the context of a purchase money resulting trust, the presumption is that the
person who advanced purchase money intended to assume the beneficial interest
in the property in proportion to his or her contribution to the purchase price”.
[79]          
In B&R
Development Corp. v. Trail South Developments Inc., 2012 ABCA 351, appl’n
for lv to appeal dismissed [2013] S.C.C.A. No. 34, the Alberta Court of Appeal
held, at para. 60, that:
[80]          
The primary problem
with Mixed-Use LP’s argument that there was a purchase money resulting trust is
that there is insufficient evidence that U Real Estate Group Inc., as trustee,
has title to the Property. Rather, the registered owner of the Property is the
Debtor only. Further, as noted earlier, there is no evidence establishing that
the identified $250,000 was actually used to purchase the Property and not for
other purposes.
[81]          
The Director Resolutions
are insufficient evidence upon which to make findings of a purchase money resulting
trust impacting the Property.
[82]          
In the result,
I decline to find that Mixed-Use LP (or Wasaga LP) is a beneficial owner of the
Property.
[83]          
Based on the
foregoing, I find that none of the concerns raised by those who oppose the
within motion are sufficient reasons for the court not to approve the
Transaction being recommended by the Receiver. I am satisfied that the
interests of all parties who would have an interest in the process were
considered by the Receiver based on the information that was available to it,
as of the date of signing the APS.
[84]          
I have already
declined to find a beneficial ownership interest in favour of Mixed-Use LP (or
Wasaga LP). In the event I am wrong in this regard, I will consider the
alternative arguments made on behalf of Mixed-Use LP.
[85]          
Mixed-Use LP
makes the following alternative argument, in the event the court is inclined to
approve the Transaction: that the court’s order must recognize that the sale of
the Property to the Purchaser is one of the registered interest only and that
the beneficial interest and all related rights are preserved. In the further
alternative, Mixed-Use LP submits that all of the sale proceeds must be
delivered to it as beneficial owner of the Property: New Solutions Financial
Corporation v. 952339 Ontario Limited, 2007 CanLII 183 (ON SC), at para.
22.
[86]          
With respect to
these alternative arguments, I accept the Receiver’s argument that ordering
that the sale is one of the registered interest only and/or that all of the
sale proceeds must be delivered to Mixed-Use LP as beneficial owner would be
improper, since it would constitute a collateral attack on the Sale Process
Order: see KingSett Mortgage Corporation v. 30 Roe Investments Corp.,
2023 ONCA 219, at paras. 35-36. The Order granted by Hilliard J. authorized the
Receiver to market the Property without any limitations. The Mixed-Use and
Wasaga Partnerships had the 2017 Declaration of Trust in hand at the time the
Receiver’s sale process motion was heard. They were aware of the motion and did
not oppose the order being sought therein. Nor did they appeal the Sale Process
Order after it was made. The doctrine of collateral attack prevents a party
from undermining a prior order of the court which order has not been appealed,
varied or set aside.
[87]          
I am also
satisfied that Homedale-Eagle and Sky Mortgage were bona fide mortgagees
whose registered mortgages trump any unregistered beneficial interest.
[88]          
Section 93(1)
of the Land Titles Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L.5, provides that a registered
owner has the right to grant a mortgage over his or her land.
[89]          
Section 62 of
the Land Titles Act addresses trusts and provides that any person
dealing with an owner of land as a trustee has no duty to make inquiries as to
the owner’s power in respect of the land and the owner may deal with the land
as if it was not described as a trustee. Subsections 62(1) and (2) read:
[90]          
The Divisional
Court in 1168760 Ontario Inc. v. 6706037 Canada Inc., 2019 ONSC 4702, at
paras. 60-62, discussed the purpose of s. 62(2), being to ensure certainty of
title, as follows:
[91]          
In DiMichele
v. DiMichele, 2014 ONCA 261, the Ontario Court of Appeal affirmed that s.
62(2) of the Land Titles Act is a “complete answer” to a beneficial
interest argument. In that case, a group of investors who were involved with
Antonio DiMichele in a real estate investment scheme that had failed,
successfully sued him. In the course of that litigation, Antonio had agreed to
a charge being placed on a property that had been left to him and his two
brothers under his mother’s will as security for monies owing under any
judgment obtained. Under the mother’s will, Antonio was named the estate
trustee and the brothers were each given an equal share in the residue of the
estate. The applicants brought an application against Antonio and his brothers
to recover on the judgment and sought the sale of the property. Roberto
DiMichele, the brother who had lived in the property both before and after his
mother’s death, brought a counter-application disputing the applicants’ right
to seek the sale of the property and asserting his entitlement to sole
ownership of it. One of Roberto’s grounds for opposing the application to sell the
property was his assertion that the creditors, by virtue of the property
register (which they had before they entered into the mortgage), had notice of
the fact that Antonio was holding the property in the capacity of a Trustee
with a Will. Therefore, they had actual notice of the will and should not have
simply accepted the mortgage as security for the property without first
inquiring into whether Antonio could lawfully mortgage the property.
[92]          
At first
instance, the trial judge in DiMichele concluded that the mortgage was
valid but that, because the brothers’ beneficial interests in the property had
vested by the time that Antonio granted the mortgage in 2008, Antonio could
only have granted a mortgage against his interest in the property. The trial
judge further found that because the 2002 action was against Antonio
personally, and not in his capacity as the estate trustee, he could only give
as security that which he owned in his personal capacity. Accordingly, the
trial judge held that the mortgage was enforceable only against Antonio’s
one-third interest in the property. On appeal, however, the Court of Appeal
rejected Roberto’s argument. At paras. 67-70, the Ontario Court of Appeal
confirmed that, even though the parcel register showed Antonio as owner but in
the capacity of “TWW” (Trustee With a Will), s. 62(2) provides that an owner
may deal with the land as if the description as a trustee had not been
inserted, subject to the registration of any caution or inhibition. The Court
of Appeal concluded that, since there was no registered caution or inhibition,
there was no duty on the mortgagees to make any inquiry as to Antonio’s power
as the registered owner to charge the property. There was no misapprehension
that Antonio was the owner; the mortgage was not obtained or granted
fraudulently and was not invalid. The Court commented that the respondents may
have recourse against Antonio for what appeared to be a breach of his
obligation as the estate trustee.
[93]          
Here, there was
no registered caution or inhibition. There is also no evidence before me that
notice of a valid trust in favour of Mixed-Use LP was given to Homedale-Eagle
or Sky Mortgage before the making of the loans.
[94]          
Based on the
holdings in 1168760 Ontario Inc. and DiMichele, I find that
Homedale-Eagle and Sky Mortgage, as mortgagees, were entitled to rely on the
power of the Debtor to charge the Property.
[95]          
In signing the
Commitment Letter, the Debtor represented and warranted to Sky Mortgage that it
had the consent of any beneficial owners. Specifically, paragraph 10 reads:
[96]          
Accordingly, to
the extent that the Debtor did not, in fact, have the consent of any beneficial
owners that may have been required, then any remedy would be as against the Debtor.
[97]          
The Ontario
Court of Appeal in DiMichele, at paras. 107-109, further affirmed that a
mortgage is valid as against the whole of the property, stating:
[98]          
Finally, I note
the decision in Walshe v. Citizens Bank of Canada (2003), 8 R.P.R. (4th)
273, 2003 CarswellOnt 922 (Ont. S.C.J.). In that case, two couples – one from
Manitoba, the Walshes, and one from Ontario, the Crillys – purchased an
investment condominium property in Ontario as 50 per cent co-owners. Since the
Walshes were unable to attend the signing of the closing documents, the Crillys
took title “in trust”. A trust agreement was executed but not registered on
title. The Crillys subsequently re-mortgaged the property without the Walshes’
knowledge or consent. The same lawyer acted for the Crillys and the defendant
bank on the transaction, but failed to indicate on the mortgage agreement that
the couple were joint tenants “in trust”. The Walshes unsuccessfully applied
for a declaration that their 50 per cent interest in the condominium was free
and clear of the encumbrance to the defendant bank. The court held that the
defendant bank was under no obligation to inquire into the particulars of the trust
under which the Crillys held the property. The bank was entitled to, and did,
rely on the Crillys’ assertions that there were no limitations affecting title
to or interest in the property. The bank was entitled to security on the whole
of the property, not just the Crillys’ 50 per cent interest. The court further
held that, even if the bank’s lawyer had an obligation to inquire into the
trust agreement on behalf of his client, he had no obligation to the cestui
que trust, the Walshes, to inquire into the terms. He did not act for them
and had no obligation to protect their interests. I find that the same
reasoning applies to the case before me.
[99]          
In my view, the
criticisms voiced by the opposing parties about the marketing and sale process
conducted by the Receiver do not affect its efficacy and integrity. There is no
basis for a new court-supervised bidding process. Requiring a new sale process
would undermine the integrity of the Receiver’s process. As noted by McKinlay J.A.,
in agreement with Galligan J.A., in Soundair, at para. 72, it is “most
important that the integrity of procedures followed by court-appointed
receivers be protected in the interests of both commercial morality and the
future confidence of business persons in dealing with receivers”.
[100]       Further, I am cognizant that the
court is “not to sit as on appeal from the decision of the Receiver, reviewing
in minute detail every element of the process by which the decision is reached.
To do so would be a futile and duplicitous exercise.”: Crown Trust Co.
v. Rosenberg, at para 65.
[101]       As discussed above, the marketing
and sale processes proposed by the three other brokerages who bid on the
opportunity to market the Property were very similar in nature to that which
was ultimately used by the Receiver, by its agent, CBRE, including the estimated
timing to complete the process. The Sale Process Order was complied with. The
Receiver made the relevant documentation available for prospective purchasers
to review for their due diligence purposes. The Property was being sold “as is,
where is” and prospective purchasers were responsible to perform their own due
diligence. An APS was signed for a purchase price that is fair and reasonable.
[102]       I find that the process adopted by
the Receiver in this case was an effective, efficient and honest one.
[103]       The court has a responsibility to
decide whether the working out of the process was fair: Soundair, at
para. 49. However, in Crown Trust, Anderson J. cautioned, that when
reviewing a receiver’s proposal, the court should not become involved in making
“business decisions”. At paragraph 66, Anderson J. held:
[104]       The main objections raised by those
opposing the Transaction’s approval have been considered and substantially
addressed above and so I will not repeat them.
[105]       The Receiver was entitled to make
its decision based on the information it had as of the date the APS was entered
into. The Receiver was aware of the Settlement Agreement and the Amended and
Restated Settlement Agreement, and had made them publicly available; they were not
concealed. The Receiver owes its duty to all interested parties. Insisting on a
prospective purchaser assuming a liability from one of the interested parties
could negatively impact on the ability of the Receiver to obtain the best offer
for the sale of the Property. The Receiver is entitled to make a business
decision based on what it believed would obtain the best offer for the
Property.
[106]       There is no certainty that if a new
sale process was ordered that a higher or better offer would transpire or that
a purchaser would agree to assume the Environmental Indemnity. What is certain
is that the subject mortgages would continue to be in default and interest
would continue to accrue, potentially reducing the level of equity in the
Property ultimately available for the stakeholders.
[107]       I find that no party has
demonstrated unfairness on the part of the Receiver, in the working out of the marketing
and sale process for the Property, sufficient to justify not accepting the
Receiver’s recommendations.
[108]       For all of the foregoing reasons, I
conclude that this case is not an exceptional one warranting the court to
reject the Receiver’s recommendation. I find that the principles established in
Soundair have been satisfied, that the Transaction should be approved,
and that the requested Approval and Vesting Order should be granted.
[109]       By the requested Administration Order,
the Receiver seeks: (i) approval of the Second Report of the Receiver, dated
October 4, 2024, and the activities of the Receiver described therein; (ii)
approval of the Receiver’s interim Statement of Receipts and Disbursements for
the period February 8, 2024 to September 30, 2024; (iii) authorization for the
Receiver to redact from the Second Report served on the parties in the service
list copies of CBRE’s listing activity summary, the summary of offers submitted
to the Receiver, and the APS; (iv) a sealing order for the unredacted version
of the Second Report; and (v) authorization for the Receiver to distribute the sale
proceeds in accordance with the Second Report.
[110]       I find that the Receiver undertook
its activities in furtherance of its duties and those activities were
consistent with its powers as set out in the Receivership Order. The Receiver
has acted reasonably and in the best interest of all of the stakeholders. The
court has the inherent jurisdiction to approve such activities. The interim
Statement of Receipts and Disbursements is a fair reflection of the funds that
have passed through the Receiver’s hands.
[111]       The Receiver has requested a
temporary sealing order that it submits is necessary to avoid suppressing
realization if the Transaction is not approved and/or completed and the
Property has to be marketed for sale again.
[112]       In applying the test for a
restriction on court openness as set out in Sherman Estate v. Donovan,
2021 SCC 25, at para. 38, I am satisfied that the Receiver has established
that: (i) public disclosure of CBRE’s listing activity summary, the summary of
offers submitted to the Receiver, the APS, and the unredacted version of the
Second Report, poses a serious risk of adversely impacting the future
marketability of the Property, and a potential unfair advantage to potential
bidders, in the event that the Transaction does not close; (ii) there is no
reasonable alternative to a temporary sealing order of those parts of the Second
Report that contain the asset value and pricing information; and (iii) the
benefits of maximizing recoveries for the creditors by sealing that information
outweigh any negative effects on the open-court principle. Accordingly, the
requested sealing order is granted.
[113]       In the result, I find that the requested
Administration Order is appropriate and reasonable.
[114]       For all of these reasons, the
Receiver’s motion is granted. Orders to go in the form of the Approval and Vesting
Order and the Administration Order as submitted and signed.
[115]       The opposing parties requested
that, if the Receiver’s motion was granted, I endorse that the Debtor and 2830064
Ontario Inc., 2830068 Ontario Inc., Mixed-Use Developments (Ontario) L.P., and
Wasaga Developments and Infrastructure 2021 L.P. reserve their rights with
respect to the allocation of costs of the Receiver and the mortgagees as
between them, if they wish. Accordingly, I so endorse.