[1]              
This litigation involves two claims. The first claim
(the “Fabco claim”) arises out of an aborted Agreement of Purchase and Sale dated
July 9, 2016 (the “Fabco APS”) with respect to the property at 130 St. John’s
Sideroad East in Aurora (the “McKenzie property”). The second claim (the “title
claim”) arises out of a claim for damages for slander of title/injurious
falsehood related to the McKenzie property.
[2]              
The Plaintiffs, Gary McKenzie and Jennifer
McKenzie, are spouses, who jointly owned the McKenzie property between May 14,
2004 and April 20, 2018.  Before that time, the McKenzie property had been
owned by Gary’s parents and, earlier, by his grandparents.
[3]              
The Defendant, Fabco Holdings Inc. (“Fabco”), is
a duly incorporated entity whose principal was at all material times Fabrizio
Lucchese (“F.L.”). The Defendant, Jaymor Specialty Housing General Partner Inc.
(“Jaymor”), is a related corporation principally owned and controlled by F.L.
[4]              
The Defendant, Gerald Anthony (also known as
Gerald Van Erp, but referred to in this litigation as “Anthony”) is the
registered owner of property at 202 St John’s Sideroad East (the “Anthony
property”), which abuts the McKenzie property to the east.
[5]              
Throughout the relevant time giving rise to the
claims, the Plaintiffs were represented by solicitor, John Peddle (“J.P.”).
[6]              
The evidence establishes the following
chronology pertaining to the abutting McKenzie and Anthony properties:
[7]              
The Plaintiffs became interested in marketing
the McKenzie property in or around 2012.  They retained realtor, Lynn Knowles
(“L.K.”), to act as listing agent in the process. Following a series of
abandoned or unsuccessful offers from unrelated parties, the Plaintiffs were
approached by F.L., who expressed an interest in purchasing the McKenzie
property on behalf of Fabco.  F.L. gave the Plaintiffs a letter of intent on
June 10, 2016. On July 9, 2016, the Plaintiffs and Fabco entered into the Fabco
APS for a purchase price of $4,500,000.  The key terms of the APS were as
follows:
[8]              
The APS failed to close.  In March 2017, the
Plaintiffs re-listed the property and entered a subsequent APS with Rocco
Marcello on November 5, 2017 (the “Marcello APS”) for the purchase price of
$2,875,000 with a closing date of December 11, 2017. The closing date for the
Marcello APS was extended on consent, with the deal ultimately closing on April
20, 2018
[9]              
The Fabco claim sounds in breach of contract.
The Plaintiffs seek damages for the difference in the purchase price between
what they would have received under the Fabco APS and what they received under
the Marcello APS, as well as the expenses and damages they incurred due to
Fabco’s breach. The Plaintiffs also seek a declaration that the $200,000
deposit paid by Fabco and held in trust by their real estate agents has been
forfeited and should be paid out to them as part of any damages award.
[10]          
The Plaintiffs concede that Fabco should be
credited for the difference between the commission they would have paid under
the Fabco APS ($152,500) and the commission they actually paid under the
Marcello APS ($97,462.50). That difference is $55,037.00.
[11]          
The title claim is based on the twin torts of
injurious falsehood and slander of title. It derives from Anthony’s attempt to
claim an interest in a certain portion of the McKenzie property (the “disputed
acreage”) by way of adverse possession. The disputed acreage encompassed the approximately
4 to 5 acres surrounding a pond on the eastern edge of the McKenzie property.
[12]          
Damages sought in the title claim include loss
of bargain on the Fabco APS, loss of interest income on the VTB, interest
charges on a TD line of credit (“the line of credit”), together with the
carrying costs incurred arising out of both the aborted Fabco APS and the delayed
closing of the Marcello APS.
[13]          
Section 51 of the Land Titles Act, R.S.O.
1990, c. L.5 reads as follows:
[14]          
The evidence establishes that the following key
events occurred following the execution of the Fabco APA:
[15]          
It is against this factual background that the
disputes before me must be considered. This was not an opportunity to
re-litigate the Anthony claim or the adverse possession issue.  The conclusions
of this court as found in the judgment, and affirmed by the Court of Appeal,
are binding on me.
[16]          
The Fabco claim turns mainly on the issue of
whether the Plaintiffs could convey good and marketable title to the McKenzie
property on the date of closing (November 30, 2016).
[17]          
The law is clear (and the parties agree) that an
agreement of purchase and sale is breached when a purchaser fails to complete
the purchase of a property due to the purchaser’s own reasons: see Azzarello
v. Shawqi, 2018 ONSC 5414, at para. 32.
[18]          
It is clear to me that the Plaintiffs were able
to convey good and marketable title and were entirely blameless for the Fabco
APS not closing.  I find that Jaymor, as Fabco’s assignee, repudiated the APS
for its own reasons and not because of any claim to adverse possession by
Anthony.
[19]          
The facts which underpinned the judgment are as
clear today as they were before the motions judge. Objectively, no reasonable
person – Fabco, Jaymor, and F.L. included – could have given the adverse
possession claim any credence.
[20]          
Fabco adduced no evidence to suggest that Anthony’s
assertions ever had any reasonable basis. Those assertions were baseless and
unsubstantiated. There was no caution, caveat, or application registered on
title prior to closing.  Fabco was represented by counsel, who must have
understood that due to the LTQ and the LTA characteristics of the respective
properties, the adverse possession claim was without merit. Fabco had the
Avanti survey. They were furnished with the Fulton declaration. There is no
evidence that Fabco’s solicitors took any investigatory steps to discover
whether the adverse possession claim was legitimate.
[21]          
Fabco’s real reason for wanting to escape from
the obligations in the Fabco APS can be discerned from contemporaneous
exchanges between various important actors, including Murray Palmer (“M.P.”),
who was retained to act on behalf of Fabco in respect of the development of the
McKenzie property and by the conduct of F.L., Fabco, Jaymor and their advisers
in the aftermath of the August 24, 2016 discussion between F.L. and Anthony.
[22]          
Certainly, nothing that Anthony might have said
to F.L. at the August 24, 2016 meeting deterred Fabco from moving ahead with
the Fabco APS.
[23]          
Fabco’s lawyers never contacted Anthony to
ascertain the nature, extent, or propriety of the Anthony claim. I find it highly
improbable that competent real estate solicitors of a client involved in a multi-million-dollar
purchase would not have made immediate and thorough inquiries of any legitimate
claimant in these circumstances.
[24]          
On August 31, 2016, Fabco retained MMM Group
(“MMM”) to investigate whether the McKenzie property could support additional
development. MMM embarked on an investigation to ascertain whether the
floodplain could be altered.
[25]          
On September 30, 2016, Fabco went ahead to pay
the second $100,000 deposit. I find that had Fabco seriously believed that
Anthony had a proprietorial claim to any portion of the McKenzie lands, it
would have declined to make the second deposit.
[26]          
On October 17, 2016, a funding partners’ meeting
was held in respect of Fabco’s purchase of the McKenzie property. There is no
evidence that any of the funding partners were advised about the adverse
possession claim or expressed the least bit of concern about the issue.
[27]          
On October 19, 2016, a preliminary executive
summary was prepared by M.P. concerning the potential development of the
McKenzie Property. There was no mention of any title or adverse possession
issue.
[28]          
On November 11, 2016, Fabco assigned the Fabco
APS to Jaymor. While this was a non-arm’s length transaction, it demonstrated
that Fabco still believed that the APS was viable and that its assignee
anticipated receiving good and marketable title from the Plaintiffs.
[29]          
Some time between November 7 and November 21,
2016, Steve Van Haren advised M.P. that MMM’s investigation had led to the
conclusion that the McKenzie property could not support “further
intensification.”
[30]          
In an email from M.P. to Steve Van Haren dated
November 21, 2016, the McKenzie property is described as “undevelopable”.
[31]          
The inescapable inference to draw from these
developments and communications, which postdate the alleged disclosure of
Anthony’s possessory claim, is that F.L. and, by extension, Fabco, Jaymor and
their solicitors, gave no real weight to the adverse possession claim. Rather,
as F.L. came to understand that the development potential of the land was
limited and possibly nonexistent, he needed to find grounds to resile from an APS
wherein he had agreed to accept the property “as is, where is”. This made it
necessary to seize upon the adverse possession claim as a way out of what was
now a bad deal for F.L., Fabco and Jaymor.
[32]          
Fabco turned to something that went to the very
heart of title. This was nothing more than a tactic which sought to obscure the
reason for Fabco not closing the APS (frustrated development plans) and instead
to promote the notion of the Plaintiffs’ inability to convey good and
marketable title.
[33]          
The evidence satisfies me that Fabco/Jaymor’s
true reason for not closing the APS was its discovery, realization, or
acceptance that the McKenzie property was unsuitable for the development they
had envisioned. It was not the inability of the Plaintiffs to convey good and
marketable title; and it was certainly not Anthony’s baseless adverse
possession claim.
[34]          
Fabco and Jaymor cannot rely on the  “reasonable
threat of litigation” line of cases to justify the repudiation of the APS. In Gajasinghe
v. Dewar, 2007 CanLII 37682 (Ont. S.C.), the purchasers refused to close on
the basis that there was a cloud over title, with potential litigation by a
neighbour being one of the alleged factors clouding title.  This case stands
for the proposition that not only must there be a real threat that a suit would
be brought but that the suit, if brought, would be based on substantial rather
than idle grounds: Gajasinghe at para. 41; see also Logan v. Stein,
[1958] O.J. No. 471 (C.A.).
[35]          
That logic and reasoning apply here. I do not
accept F.L.’s evidence that he believed that Anthony’s assertion of adverse
possession was meritorious or even rational.  Indeed, the judgment makes it
clear that there was no objectively reasonable basis to believe that a suit
would be brought on substantial grounds.
[36]          
The Fabco APS was repudiated by Fabco/Jaymor
when it refused to close the transaction on November 30, 2016. That amounts to
a breach of contract. The repudiating party is therefore responsible for
damages that flow from that breach.
[37]          
On November 11, 2016, Fabco assigned its rights
and obligations as purchaser under the Fabco APS to Jaymor.  In doing so, it
invoked the assignment clause contained in the Fabco APS at Schedule A3, which states:
[38]          
The Plaintiffs assert that Fabco breached the
Fabco APS by failing to close on November 30, 2016. The transfer of the APS to
Jaymor 20 days before closing amounted to an exercise in bad faith, and Fabco
should not be able to rely upon it to insulate itself from liability for breach
of contract.  The Plaintiffs add that the duty of good faith and honest
performance in a contractual setting requires that the parties act reasonably,
candidly, and honestly in the performance of the contract: see Bhasin v
Hrynew, 2014 SCC 71, [2014] 3 S.C.R. 494, at paras. 65 and 66.
[39]          
The Plaintiff relies on the decision of the
Supreme Court of Canada in Wastech Services Ltd. v. Greater Vancouver
Sewerage and Drainage District, 2021 SCC 7, [2021] 1 S.C.R. 32. In Wastech,
the court determined that a party must exercise contractual discretionary
powers in good faith and in a manner consistent with the purposes for which the
discretion was granted in the contract and not in a capricious fashion.  The
Plaintiffs contend that the timing and manner in which the assignment was made was
not consistent with Jaymor having the willingness and the ability to close the
transaction or to bear damages if the contract was breached.
[40]          
Doubtless, assigning the APS to Jaymor was a way
to shelter Fabco from any liability for breach of contract. In my view,
however, it did not represent a breach of contract, an exercise in bad faith,
or any kind of unconscionable transaction.
[41]          
The assignment option was contained in a
separate schedule in the APS, and it referenced Jaymor as possible assignee. 
The assignment clause was plainly worded and unambiguous.  It appears in the
same schedule and next to the “as is, where is” clause, which the Plaintiffs
now rely upon to seek damages on a loss of bargain basis.
[42]          
There was no requirement of consideration for
the assignment. Moreover, the wording of the assignment clause makes it clear
that upon assignment, “the Buyer hereinbefore named shall stand released from
all further liability hereunder.”  It must have been apparent to the Plaintiffs
and their solicitor that the assignment would relieve Fabco from legal
liability. Yet, no attempt was made to seek a larger deposit, to insert
conditions or terms upon which the assignment could be invoked, or to reserve
liability to Fabco in the event of any breach by its assignee.
[43]          
The assignment clause complied with all the formalities;
it contained the stipulations called for in the APS schedule. There is no
evidence that the assignment was motivated by bad faith; nor is there evidence
that Jaymor is judgment-proof or any less capable of paying a damages award
than Fabco.  Both were closely held numbered companies, either of which were
contractually entitled to take beneficial ownership of the McKenzie property.
[44]          
Moreover, there is no evidence that the
Plaintiffs or their counsel (including litigation counsel) raised any issues
about the assignment at the time, despite receiving notice of it. Indeed, the
Plaintiffs and their counsel admitted that they expected the APS to be assigned.
J.P. conceded that Fabco did not breach the APS because of the assignment. J.P.
contemporaneously accepted the assignment and drafted the closing documents
with Jaymor as purchaser. Two days following the aborted closing, J.P.
confirmed in writing that the Plaintiffs had accepted Jaymor’s breach of the
Fabco APS.
[45]          
It is not the function of this court to rewrite
the bargain reached between the parties.  Setting aside the assignment or
implicating Fabco in a judgment for breach of the APS would be tantamount to
doing so.
[46]          
Therefore, while there was a breach of the Fabco
APS, it was not a breach by Fabco. In assigning the APS to Jaymor in advance of
closing, per the terms of the APS, and upon notice to the Plaintiffs, Fabco contractually
divested itself of its obligations under the APS in favour of its assignee, Jaymor.
[47]          
It follows that Jaymor, being the assignee and
breaching party without a reasonable excuse for not closing the Fabco APS, must
be responsible for the damages suffered by the Plaintiffs.
[48]          
I would award damages in favour of the Plaintiffs
as follows:
[49]          
I find that the Plaintiffs are entitled to
recover their damages attributable to Jaymor’s breach of the Fabco APS in the
total amount of $1,747,633.15 ($1,802,670.65 less the $55,037.50 credit) from
the Defendant, Jaymor.
[50]          
Since Jaymor was the assigned purchaser that
repudiated the APS, the $200,000 deposit is forfeited and should be applied
towards the satisfaction of judgment for the above damages.
[51]          
Slander of title is a specific form of the tort
of injurious falsehood: Hornstein v. Kats et al., 2020 ONSC 870,
24 R.P.R. (6th) 107, at paras. 235 and 236; Raimondi v.
Ontario Heritage Trust, 2017 ONSC 3389, 84 R.P.R.
(5th) 221, at para. 152.  As the Plaintiffs
submissions address both slander of title and injurious falsehood, I will be
considering the tests for both torts in my analysis.
[52]          
In order to succeed in its claim for slander of
title, the Plaintiffs must prove that:
[53]          
The test for the tort of injurious falsehood is
similar. It was concisely set out by the Court of Appeal in Lysko v. Braley
(2006), 2006 CanLII 11846 (ON CA), 79 O.R. (3d) 721 (C.A.), at para. 133, and requires the Plaintiffs to
prove that:
[54]          
The law is clear that a publication may include
a bilateral act by which a publisher makes available to a reader, listener, or
observer in a comprehensible manner the defamatory information: Raymond E.
Brown, Law of Defamation: Canada, United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand,
United States, 2nd ed. (Toronto: Carswell, 1994) (loose-leaf updated 2024,
release 2024-4), §7.2.  In my view, Anthony’s oral assertion to F.L. of his
claim for adverse possession was sufficient to constitute a false statement to
a listener reflecting adversely on the Plaintiffs’ ability to convey marketable
title to their property. Anthony’s subsequent registration of a caution and an
application containing a description of his claim for adverse possession was a
publication of false statements adversely affecting the Plaintiffs’ property.
[55]          
Was the false statement made with malice?  There
can be no better indication of Anthony’s true intent than the Anthony note of
June 23, 2017.  It is clear from the tone, content, and timing of the Anthony
note that its author was bent on obtaining an advantage out of his phantom
interest in the disputed acreage.  I find that the “win-win” points he
enumerates were nothing more than a poorly veiled attempt to extract a cheap conveyance
of the disputed acreage from the Plaintiffs. While Anthony does not specify
what a “nominal but fair price” would amount to, it is obvious that he wanted
something for nothing or for very little and was prepared to intimidate his
neighbours with the threat of “litigation costs.”
[56]          
Even before the Anthony note, however, I find
that one of Anthony’s aim was to dissuade prospective or committed purchasers
from buying the McKenzie property. Anthony was aware of Fabco’s interest in the
McKenzie property by the time of his conversation with F.L. in August 2016.  Anthony
was reminded of this when he was asked to sign the release by J.P. on November
29, 2016. From these interactions, Anthony would have understood that F.L. and
Fabco were interested in developing the McKenzie property and that any cloud on
title or compromise to the integrity of the McKenzie property might delay or
prove fatal to an APS. A few days before he was asked to sign the release, Anthony’s
lawyers received the Fulton declaration, which clearly contradicted any notion
that his predecessor in title had encroached on the McKenzie property. Thus, at
a critical hour, Anthony was provided with the clearest evidence that his claim
could not succeed. He was then afforded the opportunity to withdraw the false and
recklessly released information he disseminated in August, right up to the APS
closing date.  Yet he persisted in his untenable position, as evidenced by his
refusal to sign the proffered release.
[57]          
There is no evidence or possibility of bona
fides on the part of Anthony. He had no independent verifiable information
to support his claim. The Avanti survey showed no encroachment. Although the
boundary line was fixed by the R-plan, Anthony never asked to see it and did
not visit the registry office to view it. Anthony never investigated the actual
boundaries of his property and never commissioned any survey to support his
position.  Even though Anthony was provided with the Fulton declaration, he did
nothing to withdraw his spurious claim. There is also no evidence that Anthony sought
legal advice about his phantom possessory claim before raising it with F.L. He
must have known that his property was under LTA and either understood what that
entailed or turned a blind eye to it.
[58]          
I find that it was Anthony’s intention to
prevent both Fabco and prospective purchasers after Fabco from dealing with the
Plaintiffs or their property.  This was his intention when he spoke to F.L. and
when he refused to sign the release proffered by J.P. It remained his intention
when he sent the Anthony note to the Plaintiffs, engaged with L.K. about
prospective purchasers and then registered the caution and application on
title. The third prong of the test is easily satisfied.
[59]          
The Plaintiffs’ claim, as it pertains to the damages
flowing from the breach of the Fabco APS, must however founder upon the fourth prong,
which is the requirement for direct or natural damages to flow from the
injurious falsehood or for damages to result from the slander of title.  I am
unable to find a direct or natural connection between Anthony’s “publication”
to F.L. and the damages suffered by the Plaintiffs arising out of the aborted
Fabco APS.
[60]          
My reasoning above pertaining to Fabco/Jaymor’s
true basis for resiling from the APS is applicable here.  Any claim Anthony had
to the McKenzie property was without legal or factual foundation.  Only a
highly naïve or gullible person (and F.L. was neither) would have believed
Anthony. At the very least, the prospect of an adverse possession claim, however
flimsy, should have prompted F.L. to have his lawyers investigate it.  His
company was, after all, knee deep into a real estate deal for $4.5 million. 
Instead, it is reasonable to infer that F.L., and by extension Fabco and
Jaymor, simply used Anthony’s meritless assertions as a pretext to escape an
otherwise valid and legitimate deal for the purchase of the McKenzie property.
[61]          
That being the case, there is no direct or
natural connection between Anthony’s assertion of August 2016 and the damages
suffered by the Plaintiffs on the Fabco claim.  A legitimate connection cannot
be established. It follows that the Plaintiffs are not entitled to any award of
damages for slander of title or injurious falsehood relative to the Fabco APS
as against Anthony. The Plaintiffs must look solely towards the assigned party,
Jaymor, to recover those damages.
[62]          
The same is not true for the period after
December 11, 2017.   The losses suffered by the Plaintiffs after that date are
directly and solely attributable to Anthony. His tortious conduct caused the
delay of the Marcello APS and the accompanying damages.
[63]          
Anthony’s claim to an interest in the disputed
lands was no better after the repudiated Fabco APS than it was before.  Yet he
persisted in his designs on those lands and went as far as to register first
the caution, then the application on title.   Anthony did so knowingly, without
legal foundation or factual justification. He did so in bad faith.
[64]          
Slander of title or injurious falsehood may be
found based upon the registration of documents against title that are based on false
grounds: International Sausage House Ltd., at para. 206; see also Almas
v. Spenceley (1972), 1972 CanLII 609 (ON CA), 25 D.L.R. (3d) 653, at p. 657.   In the case at
bar, I find that first the caution and then application were registered on
title without bona fide grounds, in bad faith, and as part of a campaign
to oblige the Plaintiffs to accede to Anthony’s demands for a “resolution”
without which a clean sale of the property was ever going to be possible.
[65]          
The evidence establishes that the Marcello APS
was legitimately delayed by both parties while the Plaintiffs set about taking
steps to rid the property of these registered clouds on title.   There is no
evidence to suggest that the Marcello deal would not have closed on December
11, 2017, but for Anthony’s adverse possession claim and the illegitimate and
unwarranted registered clouds on marketable title.  There can also be no
suggestion that the parties to the Marcello APS acted unreasonably in delaying
the closing.
[66]          
In registering both the caution and the
application on title to the McKenzie property, Anthony was solely responsible
for creating a landscape, which left the Plaintiffs ability to convey clear
title questionable. Moreover, it fully justified the parties to the Marcello
APS to negotiate an extension of the closing date.
[67]          
Unlike the context of the Fabco closing, where
there was no real and palpable cloud on title and no legitimate concern whether
clear marketable title could be conveyed, the parties to the Marcello closing
were faced with an actual registration of a legal process, which needed to be
addressed and responded to before the deal could close.
[68]          
Most importantly, Marcello never attempted to
rescind the APS on flimsy grounds; rather, he worked together with the
Plaintiffs and their lawyer to extend the date for closing. This was done
reasonably and proportionately.
[69]          
Nonetheless, the Plaintiffs sustained damages because
of this delay.
[70]          
The Plaintiffs may therefore look to Anthony for
recovery of their damages flowing from the delayed closing of the Marcello APS.
[71]          
There were 130 days between when the Marcello
APS was due to close on December 11, 2017 and the actual Marcello closing of
April 20, 2018.  The Marcello APS would have closed on December 11, 2017 but
for the tortious conduct of Anthony. I would allow damages against Anthony for
the delays related to the Marcello closing as follows:
[72]          
The allowable damages against Anthony for slander
of title/injurious falsehood total $57,790.88.
[73]          
Failure to mitigate is an affirmative defence. 
The party asserting this defence bears the onus of proving that the party
seeking damages failed to reasonably mitigate: see Syncrude Canada Ltd. v.
Babcock & Wilcox Canada Ltd., 1997 ABCA 179, 51 Atla. L.R. (3d) 1.
[74]          
I am not persuaded that the Plaintiffs failed to
mitigate their losses stemming from the repudiated Fabco APS.  The Plaintiffs
re-listed the property for $4,900,000 as recommended by L.K. in March 2017. 
This was reasonable timing since legitimate efforts were made to salvage the
Fabco APS in the weeks following its repudiation. The re-listing price was well
over the $4.5 million sale price on the Fabco APS.
[75]          
L.K. re-listed the property and expanded the
listing to the residential and commercial divisions of the Toronto Real Estate
Board.  This was accompanied by renewed signage, discussions with other real
estate agents, newspaper advertising, and brochures.  The decision to reduce
the listing price first to $4,499,000 on May 13, 2017, and then to $3,500,000
on July 26, 2017, was neither precipitous nor ill-advised considering market
conditions and comparable properties.
[76]          
Nor was it unreasonable for the Plaintiffs to
only entertain unconditional offers and to insist upon significant
non-refundable deposits during the time between the repudiated Fabco APS and
the execution of the Marcello APS.  The Plaintiffs had learned that offers with
financing conditions or due diligence clauses would tie up the McKenzie
property and take it off the market for months at a time.  The Plaintiffs also
would have understood that modest deposits did not serve as a deterrent to
prospective purchasers prepared to resile from agreements.
[77]          
As stated in Lecco Ridge Developments Inc. v.
Vaquero, 2022 ONSC 6547, at para. 23, “a Plaintiff is not required to act
perfectly, nor take all possible steps to reduce its loss, so long as it acted
reasonably in view of [the] circumstances at the time.”
[78]          
I find that the Plaintiffs effectively and
meaningfully mitigated their damages sustained as a result of Jaymor’s breach. The
Plaintiffs attempted to revive the Fabco APS before re-listing the McKenzie
property in line with their realtor’s advice and market realities. The
Plaintiffs reasonably held firm to the twin stipulation that due diligence
conditions would not be entertained and that significant deposits must
accompany offers.
[79]          
Mitigation was not pleaded in the statement of
defence to the title claim, nor was there any evidence led that would establish
that defence.
[80]          
There is no basis for any counterclaim. The
Plaintiffs did not breach the Fabco APS. They were ready, willing, and able to
close and convey good and marketable title to the McKenzie property on November
30, 2016.  The Defendants counterclaim is hereby dismissed.
[81]          
In the result and for the foregoing reasons, the
Plaintiffs claims are allowed in both the Fabco claim and the Title Claim.
[82]          
The Plaintiffs shall have judgment against the
Defendant, Jaymor in the amount of $1,747,633.15 plus pre-judgment interest to
be agreed upon or determined.  The $200,000 on deposit is forfeited by
Fabco/Jaymor and is to be paid out to the Plaintiffs in partial satisfaction of
the judgement.
[83]          
The Plaintiffs shall have judgment against the
Defendant, Gerald Anthony (also know as Gerald Van Erp) in the amount of $57,790.88
plus pre-judgment interest to be agreed upon or determined.
[84]          
There shall be judgement to go accordingly.  If
the parties are unable to agree upon the form and content of any judgment or
upon the issue of costs and/or pre-judgment interest, they shall take out an
appointment through the Trial Coordinator to appear before for me to address
these remaining issues.