[1]         
T.G. is accused on a single indictment of committing
sexual offences, including sexual assault, against three complainants. Two of
the complainants are his sisters. They allege that they were sexually assaulted
by the accused between 1983 and 1996. The third complainant is the accused’s
granddaughter. She alleges she was sexually assaulted by the accused between
2012 and 2020.
[2]         
The accused applies under s. 591(3) of the Criminal
Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, for an order severing the charges into three
separate trials or, in the alternative, into two trials, one relating to the
older charges and one relating to the newer ones.
[3]         
For the following reasons, the application is
dismissed.
[4]         
The accused is now 70 years of age.
[5]         
In April 2022, his granddaughter, J.M., and his
daughter, T.M. (J.M.’s mother) attended a police station in New Brunswick to
report that the accused had sexually assaulted J.M. According to the Crown,
although T.M. did provide a statement to the police at that time, she did not
disclose that she herself had been assaulted. Instead, one month later, T.M.
advised the police that she had also been sexually assaulted by the accused and
that her sister, C.R., might also have been a victim.
[6]         
About one week later, C.R. provided a statement
to the police that she had also been sexually assaulted by the accused. T.M.
provided a statement to the same effect a few days after that.
[7]         
The details of the allegations are relevant
because they bear on several of the factors the court must consider, as I will
set out later in these reasons. Unfortunately, I have only an outline of those
details.
[8]         
J.M. alleges that, when she was seven years old,
the accused would bring her into his bedroom, pull off his pants, and make her
touch his penis. She alleges that, on two such occasions, the accused also
undressed her. J.M. alleges that on one of those occasions, the accused also
licked her ear.
[9]         
Although it is not clear from the materials on
which occasion or how many times it happened, J.M. recalls that the accused
rubbed his penis on her stomach and vagina during these assaults in the bedroom.
[10]     
J.M. also alleges that, when she was nine years
old and they were in a pool house, the accused took off her pants, bent her
down, and rubbed his penis on her buttocks.
[11]     
The most recent of J.M.’s allegations occurred
when she was in middle school and involved the accused massaging her buttocks
while she was laying down.
[12]     
J.M. alleges that the accused told her not to
tell anybody, otherwise he would hurt or kill others, and it would wreck the
family.
[13]     
C.R. alleges that she was sexually assaulted in
increasingly invasive ways.
[14]     
C.R. alleges that, when she was in grade one,
the accused would rub her buttocks at nap time. She alleges that, when she was
in grades two or three, the accused took out his penis and made her rub it. She
also alleges that the accused would make her lie down on a bed, pull her pants
down, and rub her vagina.
[15]     
C.R. further alleges that, when she was in grade
seven or eight, the accused took his underwear off and rubbed her up and down
on his body until he ejaculated. She also recalls an incident during which the
accused came into the bedroom she shared with her sister and touched T.M. while
T.M. was in the top bunk.
[16]     
T.M. alleges that the accused also began to assault
her when she was in grade one, or thereabouts. She alleges that the accused
made her take off her clothes, touched her vagina, rubbed her with his penis,
and touched her all over.
[17]     
T.M. also alleges that the accused inserted his
fingers and the tip of his penis into her vagina. On other occasions, she says
that he would rub his penis on her vagina and ejaculate on her. On others, he
would rub his penis on her lips and face, trying to get her to give him oral
sex.
[18]     
T.M. alleges that the accused would make her sit
on him while she was wearing a nightgown and make her rub back and forth until
he ejaculated.
[19]     
T.M. also says that the accused would come into
her bedroom at night and digitally penetrate her. He would also pin her down at
times and insert his tongue into her vagina.
[20]     
Finally, T.M. alleges that the accused told her
that, if she told anybody about what he was doing, she would be disowned by the
family and never be loved by anyone again.
[21]     
The accused submits that the interests of
justice weigh in favour of either severing the charges involving each
complainant into a separate trial or, in the alternative, severing the counts
involving J.M. from the counts involving C.R. and T.M.
[22]     
Under s. 591(1) of the Criminal Code, the
Crown has wide latitude to join counts in an indictment: R. v. Last,
2009 SCC 45, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 146, at para. 1. Trying an accused on more than
one offence or set of offences on one indictment has the potential to save time
and deliver justice in a cost-effective way. However, joining such counts runs
the risk that evidence admissible on some counts will influence the verdict on
unrelated counts:  Last, at para. 16. For that reason, s. 591(3) of the Criminal
Code gives the court broad discretion to sever counts “where it is
satisfied that the interests of justice so require”. The onus of showing that a
severance is required in the interests of justice is on the accused, who must
satisfy the court on a balance of probabilities: R. v. Jeanvenne, 2010
ONCA 706, at para. 26.
[23]     
In Last, at para. 18, the Supreme Court
of Canada provided the following helpful non-exhaustive list of factors that courts
can consider when determining whether the interests of justice require that
counts be severed where there is a single accused:
[24]     
The court is required to consider the cumulative
effect of these factors: Last, at para. 44.
[25]     
Counsel have based their submissions on the list
of factors set out above and I propose to do the same in my analysis before
returning to consider the factors as a whole.
[26]     
As mentioned earlier, trying different sets of
offences in one indictment gives rise to the risk that evidence on some counts
will influence the verdict on unrelated counts. This risk arises from two types
of prejudice: “reasoning” prejudice and “moral” prejudice: R. v. Handy,
2002 SCC 56, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 908, at para. 31. Reasoning prejudice refers to
the risk that a trier of fact will place unjustified weight on evidence
relating to the offence in question because of the presence of evidence
relating to another offence; moral prejudice refers to the risk that the trier
of fact will use the evidence on one count as propensity evidence in support of
another: Handy, at para, 31.
[27]     
The accused concedes that the risk of either
type of prejudice is significantly attenuated by the fact that this case will
be tried by a judge alone and not by a jury: R. v. M. (J.), 2010 ONCA
117, at para. 88; R. v Norris, 2020 ONCA 847, at para. 24. However, on
behalf of his client, Mr. Bingham submits that there is still a possibility of
“credibility cross-pollination”: Last, at para. 44.
[28]     
That may be true. However, unlike the situation
in Last, as I will develop in the analysis that follows, there are
compelling countervailing reasons for having a joint trial.
[29]     
The concept of legal nexus refers to whether
there are substantially overlapping transactions or essential elements in
common as between counts, so as to give rise to the risk of inconsistent
verdicts or the possible application of the principle of res judicata if
the counts are severed: R. v. Ticknovich, 2003 ABQB 597 (CanLII), at
para. 70.
[30]     
Neither the Crown nor the accused contend that
there is any legal nexus between the counts. I agree.
[31]     
The Crown submits that there is a factual nexus
relating to the substance of the historic allegations of C.R. and T.M., which I
will call the “sisters’ allegations”, and the manner in which they came to make
those allegations. I agree with this submission, as well.
[32]     
As the allegations relate to the sisters, C.R.
was a witness to T.M. being touched. C.R.’s evidence in this regard overlaps
with that of T.M. As the allegations relate to J.M., which I will refer to as
the “granddaughter’s allegations”, T.M.’s evidence as to how J.M.’s allegations
came to the attention of the police is potentially admissible as narrative. The
evidence of how J.M.’s allegations came to the attention of the police is also
potentially admissible as narrative evidence relating to how the sisters’
allegations came to be made.
[33]     
The factual nexus between the counts, therefore,
weighs in favour of trying them together, especially as the evidence relates to
the counts involving the sisters’ allegations.
[34]     
The parties agree that there is no particular complexity
to the evidence associated with any count. Again, I agree.
[35]     
Therefore, this factor is neutral.
[36]     
On behalf of the accused, Mr. Bingham advises
that there is a “very real possibility” that his client will testify on some
counts but not on others. As I understand Mr. Bingham’s submissions, Mr. G.
might not wish to testify regarding the sisters’ allegations because of the
effect of the passage of time on the strength of the Crown’s case.
[37]     
Of course, an accused cannot be forced to
testify at his own trial. Therefore, he cannot be held to his stated intention
to testify. For that reason, in Last, the Supreme Court of Canada held
that an accused’s stated intention on a severance application to testify on
some counts but not on others must be both subjectively and objectively
rational. An objectively rational basis for the accused’s stated intention
gives the court some degree of confidence that the accused's stated intention
will become reality at the trial. In Last, the court held, at para. 26:
[38]     
I accept that the accused’s intention to testify
on the granddaughter’s but not on the sisters’ allegations has both a subjective
and an objective rationale. However, as the Supreme Court held in Last,
at para. 27:
[39]     
As I will come to, there are several other
factors that weigh significantly in favour of a joint trial.
[40]     
Neither party submits that this is a relevant
factor in this case. Again, I agree.
[41]     
The accused submits that this factor is neutral
because there is little overlap in the evidence between witnesses and,
therefore, roughly the same amount of time would be spent in separate trials as
would be spent on one trial. I am unable to agree.
[42]     
I have already explained that the evidence of
the witnesses overlaps as it relates to how the allegations of the complainants
came to light and as it relates to T.M.’s allegations of being touched by the
accused while she was in bed. On this basis alone, this factor weighs in favour
of joinder.
[43]     
I turn now to how the evidence might overlap in
other ways.
[44]     
The possibility that the evidence in support of
one or more counts might be admissible in support of one or more other counts
is a significant factor in favour of keeping the counts together: Last,
at para. 33.
[45]     
In response to the accused’s application to
sever, the Crown filed a similar fact application (“SFA”). I do not understand
the Crown to be asking for a ruling on the SFA at this stage. Nor would I be
inclined to give one in the absence of more evidence or information about the
evidence: Last, at para. 34. The question at this stage is whether the
anticipated SFA has some possibility of success or whether it is reasonable to
consider that it might succeed: R. v. R.C., 2020 ONCA 159, citing R.
v. Blacklaws, 2012 BCCA 217, at paras. 43-44, per Finch C.J.B.C.
(dissenting), aff’d. at 2013 SCC 8, [2013] 1 S.C.R. 403 (SCC).
[46]     
Notwithstanding Mr. Bingham’s able argument to
the contrary, I believe that there are sufficient similarities between the
evidence of the three complainants to give the SFA a real possibility of
success. Those similarities include the ages of the complainants at the time
the sexual touching began (all pre-pubescent), the fact that the accused was in
a position of trust in relation to all three complainants, and the fact that
the accused either rubbed himself on the complainants or rubbed the
complainants on him as one means of satisfying himself. Another similarity,
although not uniform throughout all three sets of allegations, is the evidence
of J.M. and T.M. that the accused threatened their relationships with the
family if they told anyone about his conduct.
[47]     
On behalf of the accused, Mr. Bingham submits
that the SFA is not likely to succeed given the possibility of collusion among
the complainants. Although I do not have the transcript before me, Mr. Bingham
read from the cross-examination of J.M. at the preliminary hearing to the
effect that the accused had “groomed” both her mother and her aunt. While I
agree that the fact that J.M. would know this shows that she has acquired
knowledge of the allegations of T.M. and C.R., it also seems from the materials
I have before me that J.M. told her mother about the alleged abuse before
J.M. learned about the allegations of T.M. and C.R.
[48]     
It must be borne in mind that, although the onus
is on the Crown in an SFA, the onus is on the accused in this severance
application: R. v. Arp, 1998 CanLII 769 (SCC), [1998] 3 S.C.R. 339, at para. 52; Last,
at para. 33. At this stage, given the similarities to which I have referred, I
am not persuaded that the SFA has no chance of success.
[49]     
Therefore, this factor weighs rather strongly in
favour of joinder.
[50]     
The accused submits that this factor is a
neutral one in the analysis. Again, I am unable to agree.
[51]     
At present, the trial is scheduled to take four
days. If a severance was granted and the evidence that I view as overlapping
has to be called on more than one occasion, the trials will take longer in
total, although only marginally.
[52]     
As such, this factor weighs slightly in favour
of joinder.
[53]     
As anyone who has appeared in North Bay’s
criminal assignment court over the past four years or so knows, we have a very
significant backlog of criminal cases. This backlog began because of the
COVID-19 pandemic, but has been perpetuated by an unprecedented rise in the
number of criminal charges laid in our region since 2022 and the lack of
judicial resources needed to meet that increase: https://www.ontariocourts.ca/scj/news/annual-reports/2019-2023-EN.pdf.
[54]     
Our criminal sittings for 2025 were filled in
January and February of 2024. We will not be able to schedule any further
criminal jury trials until January 2025, once our 2026 sittings are set. While
it is easier to schedule a judge-alone trial of less than five days, as the
trials would be in this case, there would still be a significant delay. As of
November 15, 2024, we had only 3.5 judge days left for 2025. Therefore, it is a
certainty that the accused’s right to be tried within a reasonable time under
s. 11(b) of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms would be negatively
impacted if there was a severance.
[55]     
Mr. Bingham advises that his client is prepared
to waive his s. 11(b) rights with respect to a second or third trial on the
charges presently included on the indictment. However, although it does not
rise to the level of a constitutional right, society in general, and the
complainants in particular, also have an interest in a timely trial of the
allegations in this case: R. v Jordan, 2016 SCC 27, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 631,
at paras. 22-28.
[56]     
For this reason, I do not place much weight on
the accused’s willingness to waive his s. 11(b) rights in my analysis on the
issue of severance.
[57]     
Having considered all of these factors cumulatively,
I am not persuaded that a severance is required in the interests of justice in
this case. The admissibility of C.R.’s evidence relating to the abuse of T.M., the
potential admissibility of T.M.’s and J.M.’s evidence as narrative, and the
possibility of a successful SFA making the evidence of each complainant
admissible in support of the evidence of the others all weigh strongly in
favour of trying the allegations together.
[58]     
For that reason, the accused’s application is
dismissed.