1                   
We constantly tell parents
not to bring motions too early.  (“Shouldn’t this wait for a Case
Conference?”)
2                   
Maybe we also need to tell
them not to bring motions too late.  (“Another motion after all this
time?  Why haven’t you arranged a trial by now?”)
3                   
Earlier this week I released
a decision in another file in which I explained how unfair it is for parents to
let their family court case sit in limbo for a huge amount of time, and then
suddenly bring a flurry of urgent motions for more temporary orders --
even though they could have had final order by now if they had paid
better attention.
4                   
The message:
5                   
That was this week’s earlier
case.
6                   
Today’s case is worse.
7                   
The earlier case, Sham v
Lee 2024 ONSC 6598, involved a bitter parenting dispute about children ages
12 and five.
8                   
Now, if deliberately putting
your case on hold for 18 months strips you of moral authority to suddenly bring
a complicated “urgent” motion – how about letting your court application sit
dormant for almost six years?  And then insisting that weighty parental
decisions have to be made instantly, based upon hundreds of pages of disputed
and untested affidavit material?
9                   
I will briefly summarize the
timelines and issues on today’s motion concerning the parties’ almost
nine-year-old daughter.
10               
December 2015:  The parties’ daughter was born.  The parents
had an unmarried, turbulent relationship but never lived together.  The child
always resided with the mother.
11               
August 2017:  The parties’ relationship broke down
completely.
12               
2018:  The father commenced this application.
13               
February 2019:  The parties had a Case Conference.
14               
June 22, 2019:  There was an incident while the father was
visiting the child.  The father ended up being charged with assaulting the
mother.
15               
July 29, 2022: At a contested motion Justice Bingham granted
a temporary without prejudice order which included:
16               
Justice Bingham noted that a
Settlement Conference was just two months away, September 20, 2022.
17               
October 11, 2024: More than two years later, with no intervening
steps in the main application, the father brought an urgent motion seeking a
variation of the July 29, 2022 temporary order.  His requests included:
18               
October 11, 2024: The father executed a 114-page affidavit. 
Numerous letters and supervision observation notes were attached.
19               
October 16, 2024: The father prepared a 10-page factum.
20               
October 18, 2024: The mother filed a 14-page affidavit including
exhibits.
21               
October 20, 2024: The father executed a 63-page affidavit,
including 56 paragraphs of narrative and numerous letters exchanged between
lawyers.
22               
October 25, 2024: Both parties were present with counsel for the
first return of the father’s motion.  Justice Brown’s endorsement included the
following:
23               
October 28, 2024: The parties attended for a Settlement
Conference with Justice Brown.  They consented to a temporary-temporary without
prejudice order granting the father parenting time:
24               
November 20, 2024: The father brought a further urgent motion
alleging the mother had withheld his parenting time as set out in the October
28, 2024 consent order.  His requests included:
25               
November 20, 2024:  The father’s supporting affidavit was 16
pages long.
26               
November 22, 2024:  The mother filed a Notice of Change of
Representation, indicating that she would be representing herself.
27               
So altogether, on a court
file which is six years old and nowhere near trial – with no apparent
inclination by the parties to try to reach a final resolution – I was presented
with hundreds of pages of untested motion documents, with the parents advancing
diametrically opposed versions of events.  And the father wanted me to decide
all of this within a one-hour timeslot on my list with five other motions.
28               
The father’s narrative
includes the following:
29               
The mother’s narrative
includes the following:
30               
The father’s November 20,
2024 affidavit includes the following narrative:
31               
The father’s contested
urgent motion came before me on November 27, 2024.
32               
Clearly, this is a very
complex, difficult, high-conflict file, involving serious allegations of
domestic violence and emotional trauma to a young child.
33               
It is also a file which,
according to the court docket, is 2,231 days old.
34               
2,231 days!  And in all that
time – despite their years of escalating allegations back and forth – these
parents haven’t taken a single step toward a final resolution.  In fact, they
went out of their way to avoid making progress.  The court kept scheduling
conferences to try to help them resolve issues and defuse tensions.  The
parents kept adjourning those conferences, and ultimately they adjourned their
case to the timelines.   Their somnolent approach gave no indication that
either parent felt there was any urgent need to address any problem.
35               
It is perhaps easier to
speculate why the mother was less concerned about delay.  The parent who
likes the status quo is rarely in a hurry to create opportunities for change.
36               
But the father’s litigation
behaviour is more difficult to reconcile.
37               
I want to be clear about
the significance of the enormous delay on this file.
38               
The real problem is the
procedural way in which the father has decided to suddenly – and very aggressively
– re-activate his claims.
39               
The volume of material
filed by the father is far beyond what could realistically be addressed on a
regular motions list.
40               
But apart from the quantity
of evidence on this motion, the main concern is the quality and sufficiency
of the evidence.
41               
Complex, bitterly contested motions
based on incomplete and untested affidavits usually make it impossible to make
necessary credibility and factual determinations -- let alone fully understand the
personal situation and needs of each parent and each child.  Affidavits simply
don’t give judges all the information we need to make proper determinations.
42               
In Sham v. Lee I
described how late-stage motions to re-argue
temporary parenting orders do a disservice to children who deserve proper
consideration of all the best interest factors, based upon a thorough
presentation and testing of all relevant evidence at an oral hearing:
43               
At paragraph 9 I explained
why the court needs to be vigilant in discouraging late-stage motions presented
by parties seeking a cheap or quick alternative to a trial:
44               
Starting at paragraph 30
I suggested a general approach where litigants deliberately allow their main
application to sit dormant, and then suddenly bring “urgent” motions:
45               
I make no comment or
prediction about how this case is going to ultimately resolve.
46               
But judges have the
authority – and the obligation – to protect children by ensuring that
appropriate procedural and evidentiary standards are maintained, when parenting
issues are decided.
47               
Which means that despite
the father suddenly deciding he’s in a hurry, we’re going to have to
take the time to do things properly, and in a manner which neither abuses
parental rights nor judicial resources.
48               
The deliberate and prolonged
inactivity on this file has seriously prejudiced this child, and undermined the
court’s ability to make necessary factual and credibility determinations in a
timely way.
49               
Now that the parents have
decided to participate, the court system is here to do everything it can – everything
it could have done all along – to identify and promote the best interests
of this child.
50               
But the father’s belated,
unwieldly and needlessly aggressive motion does not assist the court with this
important task.  To the contrary, the damage caused by his inattentiveness is
now being compounded by an inflammatory “sledgehammer” approach to his motion,
which shows little child-focus or parental insight.
51               
Dragging your feet for
six years and then suddenly demanding the cops force your little girl to come
with you is not a helpful start.
52               
Before I decide what –
if anything – to do with the father’s motion, I need to address the mother’s
request for an adjournment, to allow her to respond to his latest allegations. 
If the father insists on proceeding, the mother should be permitted time to
respond.  I question, however, whether this child would be better served if the
parents put this cumbersome motion on hold, and focus on our case management
stream which is well-suited to assist families with these types of problems.
53               
(And in this respect, I
declined the father’s ironic request in his most recent motion that he now
wants to adjourn the January 22, 2025 Settlement Conference which he agreed to
just last month.  Justice Brown was trying to finally get this file moving forward. 
But the father wants an emergency order today, and then adjourn the Settlement
Conference until at least March 2025.   Isn’t adjourning conferences exactly
how we got into this mess?)
54               
Finally, the one obvious
thing that’s changed during six years of inactivity on this file is that the
child is now almost nine years old.  Old enough that the court needs to know a
lot more about her, including her experiences, relationships, views,
preferences, and comfort level.  For example, it’s bad enough that the parents
have selected a police station as an exchange location (the worst possible
option).  The father’s materials didn’t even touch upon the child’s likely
emotional response if police become involved to force parenting exchanges.
55               
The mother agreed with
my suggestion that we consider the involvement of the Office of the Children’s
Lawyer.  The father felt such intervention might be premature.  I think OCL
involvement is desperately needed.
56               
Today’s order:
57               
There is a time and a
place for temporary orders.  But don’t try to do by motion what you should be
doing at a trial.