[1]              
Diesel Freight Forwarders
Ltd. (“DFF”) seeks to enforce minutes of
settlement which have been breached by AYS Holdings Inc. ( “AYS”). AYS accepts that it did not abide by the terms of the
minutes of settlement but argues that the court ought not to enforce the strict
terms of the agreement.
[2]              
The facts are not in dispute. The
parties entered into a settlement agreement to resolve ongoing litigation. The
settlement was not pursuant to a Rule 49 offer, but an agreement reached
between the parties with the assistance of counsel.
[3]              
The resolved litigation
was one in which the plaintiff claimed $215,000. The parties settled for
$100,000, of which the AYS was liable for $50,000. As set out in the executed minutes
of settlement (the “Minutes of Settlement”), AYS agreed pay to an initial
payment of $5,000 within 60 days of the date of signing the Minutes of
Settlement and thereafter pay to DFF the sum of $45,000 over 48 months in 48
equal instalments of $937.50 each.
[4]              
The first monthly
payment was to be made on April 15, 2024, with each subsequent payment to be
made on the 15th of each month. The Minutes of Settlement provided for a 14-day
cure period for any default in payment (the “cure period”).
[5]              
In the event of default by AYS, the
Minutes of Settlement provided that DFF would be entitled to $60,000, being an additional
$10,000, less any amounts paid, plus pre-judgment interest and post-judgment
interest at the rates prescribed by the Courts of Justice Act., R.S.O
1990, c. C.43 (“CJA”). On default, there was an acceleration provision in the
Minutes of Settlement. All amounts owing were to be paid immediately upon
default.
[6]              
AYS failed to make the
lump-sum payment of $5,000 within the 60-days of executing the Minutes of
Settlement. The payment was approximately two weeks late. AYS also failed to
make the monthly payments in accordance with the timeline stipulated in the
Minutes of Settlement. In respect of the initial installment payment, due April
15, 2024, AYS provided a post-dated cheque dated May 5, 2024, which was not
only late but beyond the cure period.
[7]              
Both the May and June
payments were not remitted in a timely fashion. On July 27, 2024, AYS provided
a cheque to cover the months of June, July, August, September and
October. The cheque omitted the payment for May and no payment has been made
for November.
[8]              
The plaintiff brought
this motion for enforcement in September 2024 at which point the plaintiff had remitted
the July cheque which included amounts not yet due, albeit with the
curious absence of the May payment. In a brief affidavit, AYS explained its
earlier failure by stating it “unexpectedly encountered cash flow issues
resulting from a customer defaulting on payment” but that it intended to make all
payments as required in the Minutes of Settlement.
[9]              
Counsel for AYS
accepted that AYS had failed to meet the earlier payment dates but pointed out,
that at the time that the plaintiff brought the motion, that AYS was in a
surplus position, having prepaid the later months. It was noted by DFF’s
counsel that prior to the motion material being exchanged there was no mention
by AYS of any financial difficulty.
[10]          
As noted, this was not
a Rule 49 offer but rather a breach of Minutes of Settlement. In such
circumstances, the court may enforce the terms of a settlement, including any
negotiated consequence set out in the Minutes of Settlement, as it would any
contract: Haider v. Rizvi, 2023 ONCA 354; see comments in dissent of Laskin J. but not on this
point in Capital Gains Income Streams Corporation v. Merrill Lynch
Canada Inc., 2007 ONCA
497 (CanLII), at para. 62.
[11]          
In this case, it is accepted
that there was clearly a breach of the terms of payment. The negotiated
consequences involve an increased payment of $10,000 and an
immediate acceleration of all remaining amounts owing.
[12]          
AYS relies on the case
of Milios v. Zagas 38 D.R. (3d) 218 [ 1998 CanLII 7119 (ON CA), 1998] O.J. No. 812 to submit that
this Court has discretion not to enforce the Minutes of Settlement if it
operates to prejudice AYS. In that case, the Court of Appeal was addressing a Rule
49 offer where the defendant argued that the offer was accepted by mistake. The
Court of Appeal held that in considering whether to enforce the settlement, the
motions judge should not only examine the law of mistake but ought to have
considered any prejudice to the defendant in enforcing the settlement. In
particular, the Court noted:
[13]          
The facts in Milios v. Zagas
are distinguishable. It addressed a motion and settlement under Rule 49. Rule
49.09(b) expressly permits a court “to conclude that despite the existence of
an accepted offer to settle, the matter should proceed ‘as if there has been no
accepted offer’ ": Capital Gains Income Streams Corporation v. Merrill Lynch Canada Inc., at para. 18. I do not read Milios v. Zagas as providing jurisdiction to the
court to refuse to enforce an agreed upon settlement which is not subject to
Rule 49, simply because the negotiated consequences may be prejudicial to the
defendant. Even if Milios v. Zagas applied, AYS does not seek to terminate
the Minutes of Settlement and continue the proceedings that are now settled.
Rather, AYS seeks relief from the consequences of its breach but does  not seek
to set aside  the benefit of the settlement and reinstitute the proceeding.
[14]          
Here, there is no question that
there was a settlement by way of agreement as set out in the Minutes of
Settlement. AYS does not resile from the agreement, rather as noted it seeks to
be relieved from the consequence of its breach. I was directed to no authority
that would permit me to do so where the settlement in not pursuant to Rule 49. To
be clear, AYS did not seek relief from forfeiture under section 98 of the CJA.
In my view, absent a request for relief from forfeiture, the terms of the
Minutes of Settlement are enforceable.
[15]          
If I am wrong and prejudice to the
defendant is to be considered, there is extraordinarily little evidence that
would allow the court to make any determination of prejudice. It was suggested
that AYS was having a difficult financial time and that the acceleration clause
along with the increase of $10,000 would cause prejudice to AYS. However, the
affidavit evidence does not establish any grave prejudice to AYS in abiding by
the default terms of the Minutes of Settlement, rather it refers to one
customer delaying payment to AYS. In my view, to establish prejudice, more
would be required.
[16]          
The plaintiff is entitled to
judgment of $49,375, being $60,000 less the payment amounts of $10,625 plus pre
and post judgment interest in accordance with CJA.
[17]          
On the issue of costs, the
plaintiff has submitted a bill of costs of $8,102 plus $310 in disbursements. When
one cuts away the legal argument, this motion involved a dispute over the sum
of $11,562, being the $10,000 additional amount and the current outstanding
payments for May and November. $8,102 is not proportionate to the amount in
dispute and is not a reasonable amount to expect the defendant to pay for this straightforward
motion where all the facts were agreed upon. By comparison, AYS submitted a
bill of costs for $2,300.
[18]          
In the circumstances, I accept
that a reasonable partial indemnity cost award is the amount in the AYS’s bill
of costs plus the disbursements. I award the all-inclusive sum of $2,610. In my
view, this is a proportionate amount that an opposite party should expect to
pay on a motion such as this: see Boucher v. Public Accountants Council for
the Province of Ontario, 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA).
[19]          
The plaintiff shall have judgment
in the amount of $49,375 plus pre- and post-judgment interest in accordance
with the CJA and costs in the amount of $2,610 plus post-judgment interest in
accordance with the CJA.