1.                 
The Borrowers, Calogero Sferrazza and
Carmela Romano, move for an order:
2.                 
First Swiss was registered under the Mortgage
Brokerages, Lenders and Administrators Act, 2006, S.O. 2006, c. 29 (“MBLAA”)
until May 4, 2023, when its mortgage brokerage licence was revoked. First Swiss
was a private mortgage lender. It lent funds typically secured by second
mortgages on residential properties in Ontario and British Columbia. When it
approved a mortgage application, First Swiss would raise funds from one or more
investors, and in some cases it advanced the funds to the borrower and registered
a mortgage on the subject property. First Swiss earned an upfront fee and/or a
spread on the interest charges on the mortgages.
3.     
On March 15, 2023, First Swiss was
assigned into bankruptcy. The Chief Executive Officer of the Financial Services
Regulatory Authority of Ontario (“FSRA”) brought this Application for, among
other things, the appointment of a Receiver pursuant to section 37 of the MBLAA
and section 101 of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43
("CJA").
4.     
The Application to appoint the Receiver
was precipitated by complaints made to the FSRA by certain investors, including
allegations that First Swiss:
5.                 
The Receiver was appointed by court order
made March 17, 2023. Its powers were subsequently expanded by court order dated
May 19, 2023. The principal purposes of the receivership were to allow the
Receiver to investigate allegations of wrongdoing against First Swiss and its
principals by investors, and to take possession and control of the property of
First Swiss to maximize recoveries for investors and other creditors.
6.                 
This motion arises as a result of conduct
by First Swiss that is consistent with the allegations that precipitated the
receivership in the first place. The Borrowers here paid out the Mortgage in
full to First Swiss. First Swiss had assigned the Mortgage to Olympia, but when
the Mortgage was paid out, First Swiss did not remit the funds to Olympia.
Since Olympia and the investors who bought the Mortgage (or at least one of those
investors) were not paid out, they have refused to consent to the discharge.
7.                 
In short, this motion is a dispute between
different parties about who should bear the loss arising out of the misappropriation
of the funds by First Swiss.
8.                 
The Borrowers rely on the Affidavits of
the following individuals and the exhibits thereto:
9.                 
The motion is opposed by Olympia and one of
the two investors who purchased the Mortgage, Loucks. Loucks and Olympia rely on
the following evidence:
10.             
The Receiver for the regulator, the FSRA,
agreed the discharge was fair and reasonable but takes no position on this
motion.
11.             
For the reasons that follow, the motion is
granted.
12.             
The Borrowers, the moving parties,
borrowed the sum of $107,990 from First Swiss on September 20, 2019. That debt
was secured by the Mortgage registered on the same day against title to the
Property (the Borrowers’ residence) ranking in second priority to an existing first
mortgage.
13.             
The Mortgage reflected a principal owing
equal to the debt: $107,990, and an interest rate of 12.99%. The Mortgage had a
term of one year with the last payment date on which the entire balance was due
on October 1, 2020. Standard Charge Terms were described as 200033. As is
typical, those Standard Charge Terms entitled the Borrowers to a discharge
after payment of all amounts due.
14.             
Five days later, on September 25, 2019,
First Swiss assigned the Mortgage to Olympia, and registered a transfer of
charge for consideration of two dollars. This was done without notice to or knowledge
of the Borrowers.
15.             
Thereafter, and unaware of the assignment
of the Mortgage, the Borrowers continued to make all mortgage payments to First
Swiss.
16.             
Approximately one year later, on September
29, 2020, the Borrowers completed a refinancing of the Property with the
Toronto Dominion Bank (“TD”). The Borrowers obtained a new first mortgage from
TD in the amount of $485,000. They used those funds to pay out both the prior
ranking first mortgage and the second ranking (First Swiss) Mortgage at issue
here.
17.             
The Borrowers first learned that First
Swiss had assigned the Mortgage to Olympia in connection with the TD
refinancing. Their mortgage broker, Salerno, arranged for the TD refinancing for
the Property, which included both the first mortgage in favour of Computershare
and the second ranking Mortgage that is the subject of this motion. Salerno had
been involved throughout the life of the Mortgage; she had also been involved
in obtaining the Mortgage for the Borrowers in 2019.
18.             
When the original loan was advanced and
the Mortgage registered in 2019, Salerno dealt with the Vice President of
Credit and Underwriting at First Swiss, Yana Papanyan ("Papanyan").
Papanyan requested various documents from Salerno to complete the transfer of
funds. Salerno delivered those documents, First Swiss advanced the funds, and the
Mortgage was registered. It had a one-year term with the due date of October 1,
2020.
19.             
In advance of that maturity, in September
of 2020, Salerno set about to arrange for refinancing. As she had done the previous
year, Salerno contacted Papanyan.
20.             
First Canadian Title ("First
Canadian") was the proposed title insurer for TD, the new mortgagee. First
Canadian conducted a routine title search that reflected the transfer of the
Mortgage to Olympia as noted above.
21.              
As a result, on September 19, 2020[1], and to facilitate the TD
refinancing, Salerno contacted Papanyan at First Swiss to inquire as to who (as
between First Swiss and Olympia) would provide the payout statement required. Papanyan,
the lead underwriter for First Swiss, responded on September 21, 2020 to the
effect that the request for a payout statement must be sent to First Swiss. That
request for a payout statement, effective October 1, 2020, was made of First
Swiss on behalf of TD (as the new mortgagee) by TD’s agent, First Canadian, on
October 1, 2020.
22.             
Salerno's evidence is that she advised
Melissa Thurston, then a Title Officer with First Canadian, to advise that the
payout statement was to be requested from First Swiss and not Olympia. On September
28, 2020, Salerno wrote again to Papanyan advising that the title officer
(i.e., Thurston) was insisting that the mortgage had been transferred to
Olympia. Salerno’s evidence is that she spoke with Thurston a few days later
and Thurston confirmed she had spoken with Papanyan who had confirmed that
Olympia and First Swiss were affiliated, and that First Swiss took care of all
payout statements.
23.             
Salerno understood that all mortgage
payments had been made to First Swiss, and therefore it was in the usual course
of business as a mortgage broker to deal with the servicing agent who had been
collecting all payments, despite the transfer on title.
24.             
This is consistent with the evidence of
Lisa Comtois of First Canadian who was the Lead Officer involved in the
Mortgage. She, too, understood that First Swiss and Olympia were related. Among
other things, she states the following in her affidavit:
25.             
Finally, Comtois states that it was common
in her many dealings with mortgage administrators over her career with First
Canadian to place mortgages on title in favour of an administrator, and it was
common to pay out those mortgages to the administrator. Similarly, she states
that it was standard to receive payout statements from the administrators or
agents of the mortgage.
26.             
On October 2, 2020, First Swiss provided the
Borrowers with the mortgage payout statement reflecting a payout amount of
$108,389.73 and stated that: “Funds are payable to First Swiss Mortgage Corp.
by wire transfer ONLY. Below please find the wire instructions to our account.”
The statement included wire instructions to that same effect, in the name of First
Swiss.
27.             
The Borrowers’ funds were paid to First
Swiss on October 6, 2020, as directed.
28.             
Almost three years later, on March 17,
2023 (as noted above), the Receiver was appointed over the property of First
Swiss. Initially, and upon reviewing the books and records of First Swiss, the
Receiver requested of the Borrowers (and all other First Swiss mortgagors) that
all payments due and owing to First Swiss be remitted to the Receiver. Upon
confirming that the Mortgage had already been paid out, however, the Receiver
confirmed same to the Borrowers and consented to a discharge of the Mortgage.
Olympia, however, did not.
29.             
On March 30, 2023, the Borrowers received
a Notice of Default from (or on behalf of) Olympia, alleging that the Mortgage
had gone into default on January 3, 2023, and advising that if full payment was
not made, Olympia would commence legal action.
30.             
It was then discovered by the Borrowers that
although the payout funds had been received by First Swiss approximately three
years earlier, First Swiss had failed to remit that payout amount to Olympia and
instead continued to send (fictitious) monthly payments to Olympia purportedly
in respect of the Mortgage, until the end of 2022, notwithstanding that the
Mortgage had, according to its terms, come due and matured in October, 2020.  When
those payments to Olympia ceased to be made, and shortly thereafter First Swiss
was placed into Receivership, Olympia sent the Notice of Default.
31.             
The Receiver does not oppose the relief
sought on this motion. However, it advised the Borrowers that since the
Mortgage had been transferred to Olympia, the Land Registry Office required
that the Discharge be provided by Olympia.
32.             
When the draft Discharge was sent to
Olympia with proof of payment, it refused to execute the Discharge on the basis
that, as a bare trustee, it required the consent of both beneficial investors
who had bought the Mortgage.
33.             
There are two such investors, William
Loucks and Alex Bernard. Of the original principal amount of the Mortgage,
Loucks’ investment was $65,990, and Bernard’s investment was the balance, being
$42,000. Bernard has consented to the discharge and the relief sought by the
Borrowers on this motion; Loucks has not.
34.             
Loucks’ position, joined completely by
Olympia, is that the Borrowers paid the funds to First Swiss through their own
error and no fault of his. Since Olympia did not receive the funds[2], Loucks maintains that he
is not required to consent to the Discharge.
35.             
The principal submission of Loucks is that
the Borrowers (or their agents) deviated from what Loucks submits are “standard
best practices” for discharging mortgages in Ontario by:
36.             
The Borrowers take the position that they
paid First Swiss in full and are entitled to a discharge since First Swiss was
entitled and authorized to issue a payout statement and sign the discharge, as
it had done previously. Moreover, they argue that, to the extent that the
consent of Olympia was required, First Swiss acted as the agent of Olympia and
bound its principal. I agree.
37.             
Reliance on previous conduct of the
parties flows from an earlier mortgage on the same Property registered in 2014.
The Mortgage that is the subject of this motion was not the first mortgage
transaction involving First Swiss and the Borrowers. Nor was it the first
mortgage of the Borrowers to be transferred or sold by First Swiss.
38.             
Five years earlier, in 2014, Borrowers
obtained a loan for $85,000 from First Swiss. First Swiss registered a second
mortgage against Property on January 21, 2014 (the “2014 Mortgage”).
39.             
Two days later, on January 23, 2014, a
transfer of charge was registered from First Swiss to Olympia. As with the
Mortgage at issue here, Olympia held the 2014 Mortgage in trust for an
investor.
40.             
The 2014 Mortgage was discharged
approximately nine months after it had been registered, on September 3, 2014.
In the declaration associated with that discharge, the Vice President, Loan
Servicing and Administration, confirmed: “This document is not authorized under
Power of Attorney by this party. The party giving this discharge is the
original chargee and is the party entitled to give any effective discharge”.
41.             
The Borrowers submit that First Swiss and
Olympia worked together, First Swiss had authority to act on behalf of Olympia
in receiving mortgage payment funds, and by dealing directly with the Borrowers
without any constraints or limits on its authority imposed by Olympia. They
base that submission on the 2014 Mortgage generally, and specifically the
manner in which it was discharged in favour of the Borrowers upon payout by
First Swiss notwithstanding the fact that it had been assigned to Olympia as
bare trustee for an investor. Again, I agree with this submission.
42.             
The evidence of the Borrowers with respect
to the 2014 Mortgage is supported by the evidence of their mortgage broker and
First Canadian.
43.             
In 2014, as in 2019, the Borrowers made
all required mortgage payments, including the payout of principal, to First
Swiss. As noted above at para. 21, in 2020, the Borrowers’ broker, Salerno,
contacted the lead underwriter for First Swiss, Papayan. Papayan advised
Salerno that First Swiss handled all administration, including payouts, and
that Salerno was required to send a request on behalf of the Borrowers for the
payout statement to First Swiss, which Salerno did.
44.             
After Salerno discovered that there had
been a transfer of charge in favour of Olympia registered on title, Papayan
continued to insist that, notwithstanding the transfer, First Swiss had the
authority to deal with all administration matters. Salerno on behalf of the Borrowers
complied, and as directed addressed the payout statement request to Olympia (on
which First Canadian, acting on behalf of TD, insisted), care of the address of
First Swiss.
45.             
That payout statement required funds be
made payable to First Swiss. First Swiss provided wire instructions. The Borrowers
paid the funds to First Swiss in accordance with those instructions.
46.             
It is not contested that the Borrowers
paid the amount in accordance with the payout statement, and that the amount
was sufficient to pay out the Mortgage principal and all accrued interest in
their entirety.
47.             
The Borrowers submit that First Swiss and
Olympia Trust are in fact related, and that First Swiss had actual and apparent
authority to act as an agent of Olympia. They point to the fact that the 2014
Mortgage reflected First Swiss as lender. Two days later, that mortgage was
transferred to Olympia Trust for consideration of (only) two dollars. Olympia
held that mortgage in trust for an RRSP investor just as it did with respect to
the Mortgage at issue here.
48.             
When the 2014 Mortgage was discharged
approximately nine months later, on September 3, 2014, the formal Discharge was
executed by First Swiss, not by Olympia, and the circumstances are precisely
analogous to those surrounding the Mortgage that is the subject of this motion.
49.             
The Borrowers submit that First Swiss had
the authority to act on behalf of Olympia Trust, and in fact did so with
respect to the 2014 Mortgage discharge. They submit that First Swiss and
Olympia were working together, and that First Swiss had the authority to act on
behalf of Olympia and deal directly with the Borrowers as the agent and
administrator of Olympia. Finally, the Borrowers submit that by accepting the
payout funds, the actions of First Swiss bound Olympia Trust.
50.             
First Swiss was the Borrowers’ only point
of contact, including in respect of all payments, the payout statement and
payout funds. First Swiss even provided wire instructions to receive the payout
funds, and the funds were delivered in accordance therewith on October 6, 2020.
51.             
As noted above, the Borrowers were not
notified until March 30, 2023, almost three years later, that Olympia had not
received the funds paid by the Borrowers to First Swiss. Even then, that
notification came by way of a demand letter in respect of the alleged default
as of January 3, 2023.
52.             
Also as noted above, Olympia and the
investors were aware of the maturity of the Mortgage in 2020: that was clear
according to its terms. It was only a one-year mortgage. Yet Olympia and the
investors (including Loucks) received and accepted monthly payments for almost
two years thereafter without question or inquiry. Even on this motion, neither
Olympia nor Loucks offered any explanation for this.
53.             
In his affidavit, Loucks himself
acknowledged the October 2020 date of maturity and the fact that he “actively
received” deposits of interest-only payments on a monthly basis until those
payments “suddenly stopped” in or around February, 2023. Notwithstanding his
acknowledgement of the October, 2020 maturity date, his affidavit does not
explain why he never questioned the fact he continued to receive monthly
payments for two years thereafter.
54.             
The only evidence on behalf of Olympia is
that of Revol, the Executive Vice President, Mortgages, Investment Account
Services. While Revol’s affidavit speaks to general practices at Olympia, it
makes no reference whatsoever to Olympia receiving mortgage payments for almost
two years after the Mortgage matured according to its term, nor to why it did
so without inquiry.
55.             
There are no written agreements between
Olympia and First Swiss which would explain and define the nature of the
relationship between those two parties, if it was not one of agency. Yet, that
evidence is completely absent from the record.
56.             
There are, however, two relevant agreements
directly between Loucks and First Swiss as described below.
57.             
Loucks opened a self-directed RSP account
with Olympia. The intention was to use it to invest in mortgages with First
Swiss in respect of which Olympia would be a bare trustee and Loucks a
beneficial owner.
58.             
I pause to observe that this fact alone is
inconsistent with the submission that there was no relationship whatsoever
between the investors in First Swiss, whatever it may have been. On the
contrary, and by Loucks’ own admission, the very purpose of his account with
Olympia was to facilitate investments in First Swiss mortgages.
59.             
In respect of each First Swiss mortgage
into which Loucks invested, he executed both a Mortgage Loan Servicing Agreement
and a Trust and Beneficial Ownership Agreement. Loucks acknowledges that the Mortgage
Loan Servicing Agreement was valid during the material times.
60.             
The parties to the Mortgage Loan Servicing
Agreement are Loucks and First Swiss (not Olympia). That Agreement provides, in
relevant part, that the “Servicer” shall issue statements to the borrower,
issue payout demands, and demand, receive and collect all loan payments, and
“execute and deliver on the Owners’ behalf any documents required to exercise
any rights or duty which an Owner may have under any Loan or Deed of Trust …”
61.             
The “Servicer” is First Swiss. Loucks is
an “Owner”. The Agreement further provides that “the Owners derive their
beneficial ownership of Loans by the terms of a trust agreement … between the
Servicer as Bare Trustee and the Owners as Beneficiary …” and that “the
Servicer will act on behalf of the Owners in the capacity as manager and
administrator of the Loans”.
62.             
The Trust and Beneficial Owner Agreement
is consistent with the Mortgage Loan Servicing Agreement in all material
respects. The parties to the Trust and Beneficial Owner Agreement also are
Loucks and First Swiss (again, not Olympia).
63.             
The Trust and Beneficial Owner Agreement
provides that First Swiss as Trustee agreed to manage and administer the
Mortgages on behalf of and for the benefit of the Beneficial Owner (Loucks).
Loucks agreed to indemnify and hold harmless First Swiss and its successors in
respect of all costs, damages, expenses, claims, proceedings and demands in
respect of the Mortgages.
64.             
Moreover, and pursuant to the Trust and
Beneficial Owner Agreement, Loucks as Beneficial Owner “hereby ratifies,
confirms and authorizes the acquisition, preparation or execution by the
Trustee … of any and all documents or instruments which have heretofore or may
hereafter be provided relating to any of the Mortgages”.
65.             
Loucks understood all of this. He is a
Certified Professional Accountant and describes himself as “the managing
partner at the largest CPA firm in the Municipality of Chatham-Kent for many,
many years”. He says that his “understanding of financial institutions and the
operation of trust accounts is strong”.
66.             
Accordingly, I am satisfied that First
Swiss was entitled and authorized to act on behalf of Loucks. As noted above,
the two agreements to which Loucks was a party at the relevant time were with First
Swiss, not Olympia. Their terms are clear.
67.             
Ironically, as noted there are no written
agreements between Olympia and First Swiss. Olympia’s evidence, in the Revol
Affidavit, is that Olympia is “an order taker with respect to its clients’
Self-Directed Accounts” and further that when Olympia accepts the transfer of a
mortgage into its name, it does not notify the borrowers and is not required to
do so.
68.             
While Olympia facilitates the discharge of
mortgages for which it is registered, “the exact process that Olympia Trust
follows in this regard differs depending on the context.” Olympia further
acknowledges that a mortgage administrator or agent like First Swiss may be
authorized to collect mortgage payments from a borrower.
69.             
The Revol affidavit makes no reference
whatsoever to either of the two Agreements referenced above to which its
investor, Loucks, was a party. The Revol affidavit makes no reference to the
express authority that Loucks grants in those Agreements authorizing First
Swiss to issue statements to the Borrowers and collect all loan payments, among
other things. The Revol affidavit offers no explanation as to how its position
on this motion that First Swiss had no authority, apparent or actual, can
succeed as against the express terms of those two Agreements.
70.             
Finally, the Revol Affidavit makes no
reference to the fact that, in connection with the 2014 Mortgage, First Swiss
had represented that it had authority to discharge that 2014 Mortgage to these
same Borrowers and for the same Property (other than to simply state that the
2014 Mortgage was discharged without the knowledge or authorization of Olympia),
and nor did Olympia notify the Borrowers that any payout request had to be made
to Olympia (either in respect of the 2014 mortgage or this Mortgage).
71.             
For all of these reasons, I am satisfied
that First Swiss was the agent of Loucks for relevant purposes.
72.             
Even if Loucks and First Swiss had not
been parties to the two agreements, an agency relationship may be created by
the conduct of the parties, even without anything having been expressly agreed
as to terms of remuneration, etc. The assent of the agent may be implied from
the fact that the agent has acted intentionally on behalf of another and may be
implied where the circumstances clearly indicate that the principal has given
authority to another to act on his or her behalf: GHL Fridman, Canadian
Agency Law, 3rd ed. (Markham: LexisNexis, 2017) (“Fridman”) at §2.10 and
2.12.
73.             
In addition, a principal may ratify the
earlier actions of an agent, even if previously unappointed, upon which the
agent is treated as having been authorized at the time the act was performed: Hunt
v. TD Securities Inc. (2003), 2003 CanLII 3649 (ON CA), 66 OR (3d) 481, at
paras. 67-68.
74.             
Valid ratification requires three
elements:
75.             
A principal is bound by the acts of its
agent acting within the scope of its actual or apparent authority: Boma
Manufacturing Ltd. v. Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, 1996 CanLII 149 (SCC), [1996] 3 SCR 727,
at para. 101.
76.             
Actual authority may arise from explicit
authorization through an agreement for a particular purpose, or from implied
authority for actions that do not have explicit consent but are necessary by
reasonable implication. When the agent has actual authority, but it is subject
to limitations, the onus is on the principal to prove that the limitations were
conveyed to the third party who relied on the agent: Kohn v. Devon Mortgage
Ltd., 1985 ABCA 10, (“Kohn”) at para. 3. Here, that onus was on
Loucks.
77.             
In particular, a mortgage administrator
may be deemed to have actual or apparent authority conferred by a principal if
there is evidence showing that the mortgage administrator was dealing with all
aspects of the mortgage. Courts will consider factors such as the agent’s
direct involvement in negotiating the mortgage, its exclusive communication
with the third party, and the placement of the agent by the principal as the
designated contact for mortgage matters. A principal cannot escape from
liability where a principal enables an agent to provide third parties with
payout documents consistently with apparent authority respecting administration
of the mortgage, and without alerting third parties to any limitation on the
authority of that agent: Toronto-Dominion Bank v. Currie, 2017 ABCA 45, (“Currie”)
at paras. 6 – 7.
78.             
The observations of the Court in Currie
at paragraph 12 are particularly apt to the circumstances of this case, given
what occurred with the 2014 Mortgage and the Mortgage at issue here:
79.             
As in Currie, the initial financing
and Mortgage were negotiated by a licenced mortgage broker (i.e., First Swiss) through
whom all of the contact and communications were conducted. When the mortgage
matured, the mortgagors (i.e., the Borrowers) paid over funds sufficient to
entitle them to a discharge. The funds were misappropriated by the mortgage
broker (i.e., First Swiss). The mortgagee (i.e., Loucks) denied authorizing the
broker to receive any payments directly on his behalf. The Court in Currie
held that the authority of the broker to deal with the mortgage was evident
from his direct participation in the original transaction, his exclusive
communication with the mortgagors, and the designation of the broker by the
mortgagee as the primary contact for mortgage matters.
80.             
Here, and to the extent that Olympia’s
consent was required, it ratified the actions of First Swiss through
acquiescence and its activities. Olympia allowed and authorized First Swiss as
its mortgage agent to collect payments and to deal with the Borrowers. Moreover,
that authorization was completely consistent with the express authorization of
Loucks, the beneficial owner of (a proportion of) the Mortgage for whom Olympia
acted only as a bare trustee.
81.             
While Olympia’s affiant, Revol, asserts
that Olympia did not authorize its mortgage administrators to independently
respond to a payout statement or effect the mortgage discharge and that Olympia
retains that authority which it is not delegated without express consent,
again, there is no evidence of any agreement between Olympia and First Swiss to
this or any other effect.
82.             
On the contrary, Revol states in her
affidavit at paragraph 14 that “while there was no specific agreement between
Olympia Trust and First Swiss setting out Olympia Trust’s requirements
pertaining to the discharge of First Swiss-sourced mortgages, these
requirements were consistent with its general mortgage discharge requirements.”
The absence of such an agreement is remarkable in the circumstances of this
case where there was such a close relationship, over many years and relating to
many mortgages, between First Swiss and Olympia. As noted above, investing in
First Swiss' mortgages was the very purpose for Loucks’ Olympia self-directed
RSP account in the first place.
83.             
In her affidavit, Revol also speaks to
those general practices of Olympia referred to above relating to mortgage
discharge requirements (see paras. 7 – 11). Revol states that while a mortgage
administrator or agent “like First Swiss” “may be authorized” to collect
mortgage statements from the borrower and pass them on to Olympia, that does
not authorize them to independently respond to a payout statement request or
effect the discharge of the mortgage, which authority it does not delegate
without its express and specific consent.
84.             
Yet, as stated above, that is exactly what
happened with respect to the 2014 Mortgage. It is also exactly what is
contemplated in each of the two Agreements between Loucks and First Swiss. In
this regard, Revol states simply that “[the 2014 Mortgage] is not
representative of Olympia Trust’s discharge practices and requirements
pertaining to First Swiss-sourced mortgages.”
85.             
In my view, the bald statement, again in
the absence of any agreement between First Swiss and Olympia, that the manner
in which the 2014 Mortgage was discharged (by First Swiss, allegedly without
the consent or agreement of Olympia) is not consistent with its general
practice, is not sufficient.
86.             
To the extent that the statements may be
accurate of Olympia, they are not consistent with the terms of the two Agreements
between Loucks and First Swiss, the most relevant excerpts of which are
reproduced above. In my view, and in addition to the clear terms of those Agreements
including the express authority given to First Swiss, the evidence relevant to
the discharge of the 2014 Mortgage amounts to apparent authority for First
Swiss to consent to the discharge on behalf of Olympia.
87.             
I reject the submission of Loucks that the
Servicing Agreement cannot be relied on by the Borrowers since (and despite
Loucks signing that Agreement with First Swiss as he acknowledges), there is no
evidence that the Borrowers or their agents were aware of the Servicing Agreement
at the time of the TD refinancing.
88.             
This submission is, in essence, a
submission that there was in fact actual authority (which a plain reading of
the Agreements reflects), but the Borrowers cannot rely upon that authority
even in the face of the apparent authority arising from the discharge of the
2014 Mortgage, because the Borrowers did not have a copy of the agency
agreement (i.e., the Servicing Agreement) at the time.
89.             
To the express knowledge of Loucks,
Olympia’s only involvement was that of bare trustee and order taker. Loucks’ agreement
is with First Swiss. Olympia never administered the mortgage, collected
payments from the Borrowers or indeed had any interaction or communication with
the Borrowers at all. To the contrary, its position was that it had no
obligation to have any communication with them (i.e., even to advise them of
the assignment of the mortgage or seek their consent). There was no limitation
on the authority of First Swiss in respect of the administration of the
Mortgage; there was not even a written agreement between those two parties.
90.             
All of that is consistent with the
Declaration of Trust governing the relationship between Olympia and Loucks,
which specifically references at Article 30 “your properly authorized agent”.
In this case, that properly authorized agent of Loucks was First Swiss.
91.             
Given my findings with respect to both
actual and apparent agency powers, the sealed contract rule relied upon by
Loucks and the caselaw related thereto is of no assistance.
92.             
As stated above, it is not disputed that
Olympia did not provide notice of the assignment of the Mortgage to the
Borrowers. To be effective, express notice in writing of the assignment must be
given to the mortgagor: s. 53(1) of Conveyancing and Law of Property Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. C.34.
93.             
Loucks submits that, notwithstanding the
statutory requirement, the Court has equitable discretion to grant relief from that
failure and conclude that the assignment is valid as against the original
mortgagor and that registration of the assignment on title is legal notice: Hanna
v. Fercan Developments Inc., 2012 ONSC 5776, at para. 70.
94.             
Olympia and Loucks should have noticed, or
did notice and elected to stay silent and continue to accept, that the monthly
payments (I make no determination as to which it was) for almost two years after
the mortgage had matured and was not renewed. They could and should have
contacted the Borrowers at that time to demand payout as was due upon maturity,
in doing so would have put the Borrowers on notice of the assignment and
brought the whole issue to light.
95.             
In my view, and whether or not Olympia and
Loucks had a legal obligation to take some action following the maturity of the
one-year closed term Mortgage, the fact that they did not do so is a factor
that weighs against the exercise of equitable discretion in their favour.
96.             
Finally in this regard, I cannot accept
the submission of Loucks (factum, para. 50) that equity favours his position
since the Borrowers have not suffered a loss in the circumstances. He argues
that the Borrowers suffered no loss since the refinancing of the TD mortgage
did in fact occur. That submission is incongruent with Loucks’ fundamental
position necessitating this motion in the first place: he will not consent to
the discharge of the Mortgage unless and until he is paid out his principal and
interest in full, in circumstances where it is uncontested that the Borrowers
have already paid all principal and interest owing.
97.             
I recognize that this is a difficult case,
since, in a very real sense, the dispute is between two parties affected by the
misappropriation of funds at the hands of First Swiss. In my view, and for all
of the reasons expressed above, equity does not support the relief sought by
Loucks in the particular circumstances of this case.
98.             
Given my findings above, I have found the
expert report of Robert Aaron to be of no assistance here. To be admissible,
expert evidence must meet all four elements of the Mohan test for
admissibility:
99.             
In my view, the proposed expert evidence
is not necessary, with the result that I need not consider the other three
elements, nor any gatekeeping function, such as was set out by the Court of
Appeal in R. v. Abbey, 2009 ONCA 624 at para. 76.
100.         
 Mr. Aaron is a very experienced lawyer,
and indeed one with significant expertise in real estate, but he is not a
mortgage administrator. Most fundamentally, his opinion, even if accepted, does
not address the express Agreements by Loucks authorizing First Swiss to provide
payout statements, accept all mortgage payments and take other actions on his
behalf. Nor does it address any of the circumstances regarding the discharge of
the 2014 Mortgage which, as I have noted above, inform the consideration of the
circumstances regarding the Mortgage at issue on this motion.
101.         
Rather, his evidence is to the effect that
there are no regulations that specify the process to be followed during a
mortgage advance when a prior private mortgage is to be discharged in Ontario,
but that “best practices” have evolved, and they would have required (among
other things) consent from Olympia in these particular circumstances.
102.         
Given my factual findings as set out
above, the proposed opinion evidence, and particularly Mr. Aaron’s ultimate
opinion (which the Borrowers submit amounts to advocacy for a result) that:
“[B]y allowing [First Canadian] to pay out the mortgage to a stranger to the
property, without any written authorization from the registered lender, TD is
the source of its own wrongdoing and must bear the consequences”,  is not
necessary in the context of this dispute as between Loucks and the Borrowers as
that concept is considered in J-L.
103.         
Finally, Loucks submits that this Court
lacks the jurisdiction to determine this matter. Clearly, the Superior Court
has the jurisdiction to determine such matters, but the submission here is that
it ought not to be determined as a motion within the First Swiss receivership
and rather as a separate action or application since neither he nor Olympia are
parties to the receivership proceeding in that neither has a debtor creditor
relationship with First Swiss.
104.         
I reject the submission for a number of
reasons.
105.         
First, the hearing date for this motion
was fixed by order of Steele J. dated November 30, 2024. The parties filed aide
memoires and made submissions with respect to the objection of Olympia to the
matter being scheduled within the receivership proceeding. Steele J. concluded,
based on the limited information material, that the motion appeared to be
related to the [receivership] proceedings, and that the motion would be
scheduled, but that the issue could be raised before the judge hearing the motion.
106.         
No appeal or challenge was taken from that
decision.
107.         
I agree with the preliminary conclusion of
Steele J. that the matter was properly brought within the receivership
proceeding. Indeed, this Application arises entirely out of that receivership proceeding
in that it was brought by the FSRA, the regulatory authority engaged
specifically to address matters, flowing from the misconduct leading to the
suspension of the mortgage brokerage licence for First Swiss.
108.         
First Swiss, as the Respondent in the Application,
was and is a relevant and necessary party. Documents in its possession, control
or power, as well as the conduct of its representatives, were and are centrally
relevant to the matters to be determined, and the consent of First Swiss to the
relief sought (or opposition thereto) was entirely within the carriage of the
Receiver, on behalf of First Swiss.
109.         
Second, as noted above, the only two
Agreements to which Loucks was a party were with First Swiss.
110.         
Finally, if the investors wish or wished to
seek recovery for their losses from their contractual counterparty, First
Swiss, such claims would necessarily have to be brought and prosecuted as
creditor claims within the receivership proceeding. That is the very purpose of
that proceeding.
111.         
It would have been entirely inefficient,
impractical and unwieldy to have this proceed as a matter outside the
receivership proceeding.
112.         
I do not accept the submission of Loucks
that “the Borrowers are mis-using the FS receivership proceeding to shift their
own error-induced loss onto Mr. Loucks and Olympia”. To the extent that I
understand the submission, the issue on this motion, properly briefed and
argued as it was, has not resulted in the shift of any onus of proof or
ultimate liability whatsoever. Rather, the issue was briefed and argued as it
would have been in the context of a separate application.
113.         
I similarly reject the submission of
Loucks that he ought not to be classified as a creditor in the First Swiss Receivership
requiring him to file a claim, qua creditor, to recover the funds paid
to First Swiss. He expressly asserts (at para. 80 of his factum) that “the
Borrowers are creditors of FS”. That is completely inconsistent with his
principal submission and position on this motion that the Borrowers are in fact
creditors of his, and not First Swiss, as a result of the assignment which he
maintains is valid.
114.         
In addition, and as noted above, any claim
he may assert against First Swiss should, in my view, be brought in the
receivership proceeding in any event. The very purpose of that (and any
receivership) proceeding is to identify, call for, and then evaluate all such
claims, and then distribute whatever assets remain in the estate of First Swiss
in accordance with proven claims and priorities, all in an orderly, transparent
manner that is fair to all creditors.
115.         
Second, there is no prejudice or
unfairness worked on any party, and in particular, Loucks, by the manner in
which this matter proceeded. Loucks (and all affected parties), were given a
full opportunity to participate, respond to the motion, file materials, and
cross-examine on affidavits filed by other parties if considered to be necessary.
Loucks and Olympia filed materials, including the expert report referred to
above, as well as evidence of fact witnesses, and had the opportunity to fully
present their respective positions.
116.         
Finally in this regard, Loucks submits
that TD and First Canadian are necessary parties with the result that this
motion is premature. I disagree. The record on this motion includes the
evidence of the two employees of First Canadian involved with this matter. If
the investors wished (or wish) to advance a claim against either of those two
entities, they were and are free to do so (subject to limitations issues). The
stay granted in the receivership proceeding had no application to those
parties.
117.         
The other investor (Bernard) does not
oppose the discharge and declined to participate,
although he had the ability to do so. When the matter came on for hearing,
it was fully briefed. No party, and particularly Loucks, requested an
adjournment or the ability to file further materials, add parties or take other
steps. In my view, Loucks is in precisely the same situation he would be in if
the matter had proceeded outside the receivership proceeding.
118.         
Finally, I am satisfied that the relief
sought is not statute barred as a result of the expiry of the two-year
limitation period found in the Limitations Act, and that the ten-year
limitation period (provided for in both sections 23(1) and 43(1) of the Real
Property Limitations Act, R.S.O. 1990 c. L.15) applies: see The
Equitable Trust Company v. Marsig, 2012 ONCA 235, at para. 27, where the
Court of Appeal for Ontario observed that: “Put simply, the Limitations Act,
2002 was enacted to deal with limitation periods other than those affecting
real property.” See also Fulton v. 802048 Ontario Ltd., 2012 ONSC 3215
at para. 25. In my view, the position of the Borrowers and their prayer for
relief in the form of a discharge is not based on a claim of negligence.
119.         
In any event, and even if I am in error
with respect to the applicable limitation period, the relevant date of
discovery and discoverability was no earlier than the date on which the
Borrowers received the Notice of Default on March 30, 2023, with the result
that the applicable limitation period had not expired.
120.         
The Borrowers have been successful on the
motion. They are presumptively entitled to their costs.
121.         
Pursuant to s. 131 of the CJA,
costs are in the discretion of the court, and the court may determine by whom
and to what extent the costs shall be paid.
122.         
Rule 57.01 provides that in exercising its
discretion under s. 131, the court may consider, in addition to the result in
the proceeding (and any offer to settle or contribute), the factors set out in
that Rule.
123.         
The overarching objective is to fix an
amount that is fair, reasonable, proportionate and within the reasonable
expectations of the parties in the circumstances: Boucher v.  Public
Accountants Council for the Province of Ontario (2004), 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R. (3d) 291
(C.A.), at paras. 24-26.
124.         
Rule 57.03 provides that, on the hearing
of a contested motion, unless the court is satisfied that a different order
would be more just, the court shall fix the costs of the motion and order them
to be paid within 30 days.
125.         
The Borrowers seek their costs from
Olympia and Loucks and have submitted a Costs Outline that reflects actual
costs of $53,104.16, substantial indemnity costs of $48,008.75 and partial
indemnity costs of $34,981.88.
126.         
Loucks has also submitted a Costs Outline
and Bill of Costs reflecting that, if successful, he would seek substantial
indemnity costs of $50,401.07, or partial indemnity costs of $32,760.70.
127.         
Olympia has submitted a Costs Outline
reflecting full costs of $43,214.59, substantial indemnity costs of $38,893.14
and partial indemnity costs of $25,928.75.
128.         
All amounts are inclusive of disbursements
and HST.
129.         
In my view and having considered all of
the Rule 57 factors as applied to this case, there is no basis to award costs
on the elevated scale of substantial or full indemnity, and costs should be
awarded on a partial indemnity scale.
130.         
The motion was opposed by both Loucks and
Olympia. The other investor for whom Olympia was a trustee (Bernard) consented
to the discharge of the mortgage. Olympia made separate submissions, but
largely adopted the position and evidence of Loucks.
131.         
A fair and equitable costs award in favour
of the Borrowers is $30,000 inclusive of fees, disbursements and HST. That
amount is payable to the Borrowers by Loucks as to $20,000 and Olympia as to
$10,000 within 30 days.
132.         
Order to go in accordance with these
reasons.