[1]              
KSV Restructuring Inc. is the Court-appointed receiver and manager (the
"Receiver") of certain real property (the "Lands") and
other property of Mapleview Developments Ltd. ("Mapleview"), Pace
Mapleview Ltd. ("Pace") and 2552741 Ontario Inc. (together with
Mapleview and Pace, the "Debtors").
[2]              
KingSett Mortgage Corporation ("KingSett"), the applicant in
the within application, is the principal secured creditor of the Debtors.
KingSett holds a mortgage that was registered against title to the Lands on
December 8, 2022 (the "2022 KingSett Mortgage") in respect of which,
as of July 26, 2024, it was owed approximately $50.3 million.
[3]              
The Receiver is the moving party on this motion.
[4]              
A number of entities registered construction liens against the Lands in
the total amount of $19,704,333.28. The first lien on the Lands arose on
December 5, 2016. Certain lien claimants contend that their liens have full
priority over the 2022 KingSett Mortgage and, therefore, must be paid. These
lien claimants are responding parties on this motion. At the hearing, submissions
were made by two sets of counsel for lien claimants upon which other lien
claimants relied.
[5]              
The issue on this motion is whether (i) the construction liens have
priority over the 2022 KingSett Mortgage for their full amounts and constitute
"Priority Payables" under a Sale Agreement for the Lands that was
approved by this Court by Order dated May 30, 2024, or (ii) the 2022 KingSett
Mortgage has priority over the construction liens except to the extent of any
deficiency in the holdbacks required to be retained by Mapleview under the Construction
Act.
[6]              
For the following reasons, I conclude that the 2022 KingSett Mortgage
has priority over the construction liens except to the extent of any deficiency
in the holdbacks required to be retained by Mapleview under the Construction
Act.
[7]              
Prior to the commencement of these receivership proceedings, the Debtors
were collectively engaged in developing a residential townhome project on the
Lands.
[8]              
KingSett and Mapleview entered into several commitment letters under
which KingSett agreed to provided financing for land servicing, land
development and construction on the Lands to be secured by two mortgages. On
October 17, 2019, KingSett registered a first mortgage on title to the Lands
securing the amount of $87,000,000 and a second mortgage securing the amount of
$19,000,000. These two mortgages were later discharged.
[9]              
All advances made under these mortgages were between October 17, 2019
and February 17, 2022. All of the funds advanced by KingSett were used for
improvements to the Lands.
[10]          
On December 8, 2022, pursuant to an amended and restated commitment
letter dated September 23, 2022, KingSett registered the 2022 KingSett Mortgage
against title to the Lands. The original KingSett mortgages were discharged
from title on December 9, 2022.
[11]          
At the time of and following registration of the 2022 KingSett Mortgage,
no advances were made by KingSett to Mapleview.
[12]          
The Receiver's motion is supported by the affidavit of Daniel Pollack,
an Executive Director, Portfolio Management, of KingSett. Mr. Pollack's
evidence is that KingSett had taken the original mortgages with the intention
to secure financing of an improvement to the lands, which financing was then
made available to the Debtors through advances and used for such purposes.
[13]          
Mr. Pollack's evidence is that the purpose of the amended and restated
commitment letter was to consolidate the prior commitment letters and to
include certain additional charged lands as security (to be used for Part VI of
the Project) for which a new mortgage was required to be registered. Mr.
Pollack's evidence is that the original mortgages were deleted (after
registration of the 2022 KingSett Mortgage) due to a desire by all parties for
the updated debt stack to be clearly reflected on title to avoid multiple
mortgages on title securing the same indebtedness which would have complicated
certain subordination agreements agreed to among the parties.
[14]          
On March 21, 2024, the Receiver was appointed over the Lands, among
other property of the Debtors. This Court approved a sale agreement (the
"Sale Agreement") and a sale process for the Lands and other property
by order dated May 30, 2024. The Sale Agreement was deemed to be the successful
bid in that sale process.
[15]          
Under the terms of the Sale Agreement, a portion of the purchase price
is equal to the sum of the "Priority Payables", which is defined as:
[16]          
The "Assumed Mortgages" are mortgages held on behalf of, or
directly by, Aggregated Investments Inc. The 2022 KingSett Mortgage has
priority over the Assumed Mortgages on the Lands.
[17]          
The purchase price under the Sale Agreement includes the amount secured
under the 2022 KingSett Mortgage and the amount outstanding in respect of any
Priority Payables on the closing date.
[18]          
The Receiver previously proposed to retain a reserve in respect of any
claims in relation to the statutory holdback deficiency. The holdback reserve
was to be held by the Receiver from the cash proceeds of the transaction,
pending a determination of the amounts that may be owed to lien claimants. The
Receiver calculated the maximum potential holdback claim owing to each lien
claimant which was used to determine the amount of the holdback reserve.
[19]          
On July 26, 2024, the Receiver served motion materials for (i) an
approval and vesting order approving the sale transaction which contemplated
the holdback reserve; and (ii) a distribution order approving a distribution of
the proceeds of the sale transaction to KingSett as secured creditor.
[20]          
On August 1, 2024 one of the objecting lien claimants filed materials
objecting to the proposed distribution to KingSett on the basis that the lien
claimants have priority under the Construction Act for the full extent
of their liens. This lien claimant asserted that the holdback reserve was
insufficient and the Receiver should retain the full amount of the lien claims
(approximately $19.7 million) as a potential Priority Payable. Several other
lien claimants also indicated that they would be objecting on the same basis.
[21]          
On August 2, 2024, the Court adjourned the relief sought, and determined
that the portion of the motion pertaining to the distribution and priorities
issue should be heard and determined at a separate hearing.
[22]          
KingSett has been paid in full from the proceeds of the sale transaction
contemplated by the Sale Agreement. At this hearing, the Receiver seeks
determination of the priority between the 2022 KingSett Mortgage and the liens
which determination is relevant to calculation of the purchase price with the
purchaser, Dunsire Homes Inc., under the Sale Agreement.
[23]          
The Receiver submits that the 2022 KingSett Mortgage has priority over
liens, except to the extent of deficiencies in the holdbacks required to be
retained by Mapleview under s. 78(2) and s. 78(6) of the Construction Act.
[24]          
The issue on this part of the Receiver's motion is whether (i) as the
lien claims contend, the full amounts of the liens of the lien claimants,
including amounts in excess of the deficiency in the holdback required to be
withheld by Mapleview under the Construction Act, have priority over the
2022 Kingsett Mortgage and constitute Priority Payables under the Sale
Agreement, or (ii) as the Receiver contends, the 2022 KingSett Mortgage has
priority over liens except to the extent of a deficiency in the holdbacks.
[25]          
Section 78(1) of the Construction Act provides:
[26]          
Section 78(1) of the Construction Act establishes the general
rule that all liens arising from an improvement have priority over all
mortgages affecting the owner's interest in the premises. This rule is subject
to any applicable exception otherwise provided under s. 78. See Parkland
Plumbing & Heating Ltd. v. Minaki Lodge Resort 2002 Inc., 2009 ONCA
256, at para. 77.
[27]          
The Receiver relies on s. 78(2) and s. 78(6) of the Construction Act
which, it submits, apply as exceptions to the general rule in s. 78(1).
[28]          
Section 78(2) of the Construction Act provides:
[29]          
The lien claimants submit that s. 78(2) is not an exception to the
general rule in s. 78(1) and it does not grant priority to a building mortgage
ahead of liens arising from an improvement. They submit that, instead, s. 78(1)
applies generally to give liens arising from an improvement priority, and s.
78(2) and s. 78(5) grant a special priority (or what might be thought of as a
"super priority") to lienholders with respect to holdbacks. The lien
claimants rely on the wording of s. 78 and point to subsections 78(1), (2), and
(5) which, they submit, use consistent and affirmative wording to grant
priority to liens while subsections 78(3), (4) and (5) use consistent and
affirmative wording to grant priority to mortgages. They submit that an
interpretation of s. 78(2) as providing for a mortgage to acquire priority over
liens, or to restrict the priority to be given to liens under s. 78(1), would
lead to anomalous results and would make the words "[s]ubject to subsection
(2)" as they are found in subsections 78(3), (4), and (6) unnecessary and
redundant.
[30]          
Alternatively, the lien claimants submit that the 2022 KingSett Mortgage
does not qualify as a "building mortgage" because the advances were
made prior to registration of that mortgage and, therefore, s. 78(2) has no
application.
[31]          
I first address the main submission of the lien claimants.
[32]          
In Bianco v. Deem Management Services Limited, 2021 ONCA 859, the
Court of Appeal for Ontario heard an appeal from the order of the motion judge
who determined that the liens of lien claimants had priority over a registered
mortgage. The decision of the motion judge is reported at Dal Bianco v. Deem
Management Services et al., 2020 ONSC 1500.
[33]          
The motion judge in Dal Bianco found that all funds secured by the
mortgagee's mortgage were advanced without security having been registered. The
funds advanced were intended to be used, and were used, to finance an
improvement to the real property. The motion judge held that the general intention
of s. 78 of the Construction Act is to give priority to lien claimants
over mortgages, subject to certain defined exceptions. The mortgagee relied on
s. 78(2) and s. 78(6) as exceptions to the general priority given in s. 78(1)
of the Construction Act. The motion judge, at para. 39, in addressing s.
78(2), held that s. 78(2) "denotes a future intention on the part of a
mortgagee; an intention to secure financing". The motion judge held that
the required intention was not shown because the funds were advanced without
security and the mortgage was registered afterwards. The motion judge decided
that the mortgagee had failed to prove that its mortgage fell within the
exception in s. 78(2) of the Construction Act.
[34]          
On appeal, the Court of Appeal considered the motion judge's decision in
respect of both s. 78(6) and s. 78(2) of the Construction Act. With
respect to s. 78(2), Nordheimer J.A., writing for the Court, at paras. 29-31,
held:
[35]          
In Bianco, as these paragraphs show, Nordheimer J.A. held that s.
78(2) is a statutory exception to the general rule in s. 78(1) of the Construction
Act. He held that where the statutory requirement in s. 78(2) ("a
mortgagee takes a mortgage with the intention to secure the financing of an
improvement") is satisfied, the effect is "to restrict the priority
of the lien claims relating to that improvement solely to any deficiency in the
holdback amount, and not over the mortgage generally".
[36]          
This decision of the Court of Appeal in Bianco directly conflicts
with the submission made by the lien claimants that s. 78(2) of the Construction
Act is not an exception to the general rule in s. 78(1) and does not
restrict the priority of liens arising from the improvement over a mortgage
taken by a mortgagee with the intention to secure the financing of an
improvement, but grants a special priority to such liens to the extent of a
deficiency in the holdbacks.
[37]          
The lien claimants submit that the statements made by Nordheimer J.A.,
at para. 29, describing the thrust of s. 78(2), are obiter dicta because,
in the result, he held that the mortgage was not a building mortgage to which
s. 78(2) applied. They submit that this part of the Court of Appeal's decision
is incorrect and I should decline to follow Bianco in this respect.
[38]          
I disagree that the decision of the Court of Appeal in Bianco, at
para. 29, is obiter dicta. This paragraph is an integral part of the
reasoning of Nordheimer J.A. by which he (i) held that s. 78(2) provides for an
exception to the general rule in s. 78(1) of the Construction Act, (ii)
decided the statutory effect of this exception if it applies, and (iii) having
done so, went on to address and decide whether the appellant had brought itself
within that exception.
[39]          
I am bound by the decision of the Court of Appeal in Bianco. I follow
this decision and conclude that s. 78(2) of the Construction Act
provides for a statutory exception to the general rule in s. 78(1) and, where
it applies, the effect is to grant priority to the mortgage over liens except
to the extent of any deficiency in the holdbacks required to be retained by the
owner under the Construction Act.[1]
[40]          
I now turn to the alternative submission made by the lien claimants.
[41]          
Section 78(2) of the Construction Act requires for this
subsection to apply that a mortgagee must take a mortgage "with the
intention to secure the financing of an improvement".
[42]          
The lien claimants submit that s. 78(2) does not apply to the 2022
KingSett Mortgage because KingSett has failed to establish that it took the
2022 KingSett Mortgage with the intention to secure the financing of an
improvement. The lien claimants submit that because the advances secured by the
2022 KingSett Mortgage were made prior to registration of that mortgage, s.
78(2) has no application.
[43]          
In support of this submission, the lien claimants rely on Bianco
which, they submit, stands for the proposition that the mortgage for which
priority is being sought under s. 78(2) must be registered before the funds
secured by the mortgage are advanced.
[44]          
In Bianco, there was a priority contest between a third mortgagee
and lien claimants. The third mortgagee had advanced funds between 2012 and
2015 without security having been registered. The third mortgage was registered
in 2018 to secure previously unsecured advances. Nordheimer J.A. considered
whether the mortgagee had brought itself within the exception in s. 78(2) and,
at para. 30, held:
[45]          
When Nordheimer J.A. held that the mortgagee's intention "does not
operate retrospectively, that is, to secure financing of an improvement that
has already been made", he did so in the context of an evidentiary record
where the mortgage was registered to secure previously unsecured financing of
an improvement that had already been made through prior advances.
[46]          
In contrast to the factual circumstances in Bianco when advances
were made, KingSett took the original mortgages with the intention to secure
the financing of an improvement, which financing would then be made through
advances secured by registered mortgages. All advances were made by KingSett
with this intention, which operated prospectively when the original mortgages
were taken and, I find, continued to the time when the 2022 KingSett Mortgage
was registered.
[47]          
The lien claimants submit that when KingSett took and registered the
2022 KingSett Mortgage, new mortgage terms were made including an increase in
the amount secured, a change in the method of calculation of interest, and a
charge over new land (Phase VI of the Project) which was not charged by the
original KingSett mortgages. KingSett submits that at least in respect of the
charge over the Phase VI lands, the factual situation is the same as that in Bianco.
The lien claimants submit that given these new terms, s. 78(2) does not apply
for the same reasons that it was held not to apply in Bianco.
[48]          
Mr. Pollack deposes that in respect of Phase VI (described in the
amended and restated commitment letter as being raw land zoned for 81 town
houses) neither servicing nor construction has yet begun.
[49]          
Section 78(2) provides that where it applies, the liens have priority
over that mortgage, "and any mortgage taken out to repay that
mortgage", to the extent of any deficiency in the holdbacks. There is no
statutory requirement that the terms of the mortgage taken out to repay the
mortgage (one taken with the intention to secure the financing of an
improvement) must be the same as the terms of the mortgage which is repaid. If
a new mortgage had been taken out to repay the original KingSett mortgages, and
the take-out mortgage had different terms, and even charged additional lands,
s. 78(2), by its plain wording, would still apply.
[50]          
Unlike in Bianco, when KingSett registered the 2022 KingSett
Mortgage, even though this mortgage charged additional raw land, KingSett did
not take security for previously unsecured advances. KingSett intended that its
advances, that had previously been secured by its original mortgages, would
continue to be secured by the 2022 KingSett Mortgage. KingSett's intention did
not operate retrospectively with respect to previously unsecured advances, as
did the mortgagee's intention in Bianco. This is a key distinction
between the factual situation in Bianco and the factual situation shown
by the evidence before me.
[51]          
I conclude that Kingsett has established that it took the 2022 KingSett
Mortgage with the intention to continue to secure the financing of an
improvement, an intention that KingSett maintained from the time of
registration of the original KingSett mortgages. The exception in s. 78(2) of
the Construction Act applies with the result that the 2022 KingSett
Mortgage has priority over the liens, except to the extent of any deficiency in
the holdbacks required to be retained by Mapleview under the Construction
Act.
[52]          
KingSett also submits that the 2022 KingSett Mortgage has priority over
the liens pursuant to s. 78(6) of the Construction Act.
[53]          
Section 78(6) of the Construction Act provides:
[54]          
The 2022 KingSett Mortgage was registered after the date when the first
lien arose and is, therefore, a subsequent mortgage.
[55]          
Section 78(6) provides for priority of a subsequent mortgage where the
requirements in s. 78(6) are met. The priority of a subsequent mortgage under
s. 78(6) of the Construction Act is subject to s. 78(5) which provides
that where a subsequent mortgage is registered, the liens arising from the
improvement have priority over the mortgage to the extent of any deficiency in
the holdbacks required to be retained by the owner under Part IV.
[56]          
The lien claimants submit that KingSett does not have priority over
liens under s. 78(6) of the Construction Act because there was no advance made
in respect of the 2022 KingSett Mortgage.
[57]          
In support of this submission, the lien claimants cite several
authorities.
[58]          
In XDG Ltd. v. 1099606 Ontario Inc., 2004 CanLII 15997, a
mortgage was given by the owner of property as collateral security with respect
to its guarantee of prior indebtedness owed to the mortgagee by an entity
related to the mortgagor. A trial was held to determine the priority as between
the lien claimants and the mortgagee. The trial judge held that no advance was
made to the mortgagor nor did it benefit from the prior advances in any manner
whatsoever. The trial judge noted that the statutory provisions refer to
amounts advanced, not amounts secured. The trial judge found that there was no
advance under the mortgage and, therefore, the lien claimants have priority
under s. 78 of the Construction Act. The trial judge's decision was
upheld by the Divisional Court: XDG Ltd. v. 1099606 Ontario Ltd., 2004
CanLII 15997. The Divisional Court, at para. 33, concluded that there was no
demonstrable error shown in the factual findings of the trial judge and he
applied the correct legal principles to those facts.[2]
[59]          
In Jade-Kennedy Development Corporation (Re), 2016 ONSC
7125, the application judge was called on to determine the relative priorities
of the lien claimants and mortgagees asserting interests in the lands of the
owner. The mortgagee took a collateral mortgage which secured a guarantee of a
loan to another entity. The application judge held, at para. 52, citing XDG,
that a collateral mortgage given to secure a guarantee of a loan to another
party does not give rise to "an advance made in respect of that
mortgage" within the meaning of s. 78(6) of the Construction Act.
[60]          
The application judge in Jade-Kennedy also addressed the question
of whether the phrase "in respect of" provides a priority to a
collateral mortgagee where an advance is made pursuant to the underlying loan,
rather than the collateral mortgage, after delivery of the collateral mortgage.
The application judge, at para. 55, held that he was not persuaded that, absent
special circumstances, an advance under a mortgage loan or a secured loan
facility constitutes an advance made in respect of a collateral mortgage given
to secure a guarantee of a third party of a borrower's obligations under the
mortgage loan or secured loan facility.
[61]          
The decision of the application judge in Jade-Kennedy was upheld
on appeal to the Divisional Court which held, at para. 15, that s. 78(6) refers
to amounts "advanced" not amounts "secured" and a purely
collateral mortgage under which no advance has been made will not have priority
over construction liens. See Dircam Electric v. Am-Stat Corp., 2017 ONSC
3421, at para. 16.
[62]          
The lien claimants also rely on 561861 Ontario Ltd. v. 1085043
Ontario Inc., 1998 CarswellOnt 2935. In that case, the motion judge was
called on to determine the priority position of a mortgagee in relation to
construction lien claimants in the context of a bankruptcy proposal. The
mortgagee loaned her brother money to purchase his estranged wife's interest in
the matrimonial home. The brother gave his sister a mortgage on that property
which she registered. As a result of the transfer of title following the
brother's purchase of his estranged wife's interest, there was a merger of the
titles of the matrimonial home with the adjacent land owned by the brother. The
brother negotiated for the sale of his lands to 1085403. On closing of this sale,
the land was conveyed to 1085403 and the mortgage held by the sister as
mortgagee was discharged. The purchaser, 1085403, gave a second mortgage to the
sister. After this, construction liens were registered against title to the
property. The motion judge considered the Construction Lien Act
provisions and held that he was satisfied on the evidence that the sister did
not advance any funds to 1085403 (all monies were advanced to her brother on
the prior mortgage, which was discharged) and, as such, her mortgage would not
be entitled to priority over the liens of lien claimants.
[63]          
In Bianco, the Court of Appeal addressed s. 78(6) of the Construction
Act and held:
[64]          
In Bianco, the Court of Appeal, at paras. 24-27, addressed the
decisions in Jade-Kennedy and XDG and concluded that these
decisions are consistent with the effect of the plain wording of s. 78(6), that
is, that a mortgage will only be given priority to the extent that any advances
are made "in respect of" the mortgage. The Court of Appeal held that
the factual situations in those cases, and the factual situation in Bianco,
were such that that the advances were not made "in respect of" the
mortgage.
[65]          
The lien claimants submit based on these authorities that the KingSett
advances under its original mortgages were not made "in respect of"
the 2022 KingSett Mortgage and, therefore, KingSett cannot establish that it
has priority to the liens under s. 78(6) of the Construction Act.
[66]          
KingSett relies on Mr. Pollack's evidence that the 2022 KingSett
Mortgage is fundamentally a continuation of the original KingSett mortgages
which secures and consolidates the loan facilities that were secured under the
original KingSett mortgages. KingSett submits that the evidence shows that
registration of the 2022 KingSett Mortgage and the deletion of the original
mortgages was a purely procedural step which was taken to reflect the
consolidation of the prior commitment letters, to reflect on title the updated
debt stack and avoid complicated subordination agreements, to avoid multiple
mortgages securing the same indebtedness, and to facilitate the adding of
additional lands to the security which required a new mortgage.
[67]          
XDG and Jade-Kennedy, which involve collateral mortgages,
are distinguishable in that the mortgage in each of those cases secured a
guarantee given by the mortgagor to the mortgagee of indebtedness owed by a
separate entity. In those cases, no advance was made to the mortgagor/guarantor
at any time. In Jade-Kennedy, the application judge, at para. 52, noted
that his conclusion that a collateral mortgage given to secure a guarantee of a
loan to another party does not give rise to "an advance made in respect of
that mortgage" within the meaning of s. 78(6) of the Construction Act
follows from the absence of any advance, rather than an interpretation of the
meaning of the phrase "in respect of".
[68]          
In 561861, the mortgage in respect of which priority was sought
was not given by the brother, who received the sister's loan advance, but by a
different mortgagor, the purchaser of the brother's lands. There was no advance
made by the sister in respect of the mortgage given by the purchaser. 561861
is distinguishable on the same basis as are XDG and Jade-Kennedy.
[69]          
In Bianco, Nordheimer J.A. relied on the factual circumstance
that the advances secured by the mortgage were made on an unsecured basis,
without mortgage security, long before the mortgage for which priority was
sought was registered. In this factual situation, he held that it could not be
said that the advances were made "in respect of" that mortgage.
[70]          
Unlike in Jade-Kennedy and XDG, the 2022 KingSett Mortgage
is not a collateral mortgage securing a guarantee obligation in respect of
which no advance was made. Unlike in Bianco, the advances secured by the
2022 KingSett Mortgage were made with the intention that they were secured by
registered mortgages.
[71]          
In R. v. Nowegijick, 1983 CanLII 18 (SCC), the Supreme Court of
Canada, at para. 39, addressed the meaning of the words "in respect
of" as they were used in a federal statute providing for exemption from
taxation. The Court held that these words are "words of the widest
possible scope" which "import such meanings as 'in relation to',
'with reference to' or 'in connection with'". The Court held that this
phrase "is probably the widest of any expression intended to convey some
connection between two related subject matters". In Sino-Forest
Corporation (Re), 2012 ONCA 816, the Court of Appeal, at para. 41,
considered the meaning of the words "in respect of" as they are used
in the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act and cited Nowegijick and
other jurisprudence from the Supreme Court of Canada as authority for the
conclusion that these words are "words of the broadest scope that convey
some link between two subject matters".
[72]          
The evidence shows that there is a close connection and link between the
advances made by KingSett to Mapleview that were secured by the original
KingSett mortgages and the 2022 KingSett Mortgage that was taken from the same
mortgagor and secured repayment of the same advances to the same debtor. The
factual situation shown by the evidence before me is unlike factual situations
where the mortgage does not secure any indebtedness created by an advance to
the mortgagor, such as a collateral mortgage.
[73]          
I conclude that in this factual situation, the advances secured by the
2022 KingSett Mortgage were made in respect of the 2022 KingSett Mortgage,
within the meaning of s. 78(6) of the Construction Act.
[74]          
At the times of the advances secured by the 2022 KingSett Mortgage,
there were no preserved or perfected liens against the Lands. There is no
evidence that prior to the times when advances were made, KingSett had received
written notice of a lien.
[75]          
The exception in s. 78(6) of the Construction Act applies such
that, subject to subsections (2) and (5), the 2022 KingSett Mortgage has
priority over the liens of the lien claimants.
[76]          
The Fuller Landau Group Inc. its capacity as court-appointed receiver for
a lien claimant operating as Quality Sterling Group (the "QSG
Receiver") submits that the Receiver, a court-appointed officer with a
fiduciary duty to all interested parties, has acted inappropriately by taking
up the cause of one secured creditor, KingSett (and the purchaser of the Lands)
on this motion, to the detriment of other secured creditors. QSG submits that
in so acting, the Receiver has disregarded its neutrality and its obligations
to the lien claimants. As a result, the QSG Receiver submits that I should give
no weight to the submissions of the Receiver.
[77]          
I do not accept the submission by the QSG Receiver that the Receiver
acted inappropriately by taking up the cause of one secured creditor, KingSett,
to the detriment of other secured creditors, the lien claimants. KingSett has
been paid and does not have an interest in the outcome of this motion. This
motion is brought for determination by the Court of a legal question of
priority, which is relevant to determination of the purchase price under the
court-approved Sale Agreement. The Receiver is required by the March 21, 2024
appointment order to "deal with any lien claims … which arise in respect
of the Property", and to make any required distribution(s) to any contractor
or subcontractor of the Debtors …". The Receiver brings this motion in
discharge of its duties under the appointment order.
[78]          
A receiver may be required to take a position on a motion to discharge
its duties to stakeholders and to assist the court. See, for example, Royal
Bank of Canada v. Atlas Block Co. Limited, 2014 ONSC 1531 where a
court-appointed receiver moved for approval of a proposed distribution of net
sale proceeds from the sale of the debtor's assets to two secured creditors
based on an allocation of the net sale proceeds. One secured creditor supported
the receiver's motion and one opposed. The motion was decided by D.M. Brown J.,
as he then was, and there was no suggestion that the receiver had acted
inappropriately by taking a position on the motion. As noted in 2403177
Ontario Inc. v. Bending Lake Iron Group Limited, 2016 ONSC 199, at para.
102, "the fact that a receiver recommends a course of action does not mean
that it has lost its neutrality".
[79]          
I am satisfied that the Receiver has not acted inappropriately by taking
a position on this motion.
[80]          
As a result of my decision on the priority issue, it is not necessary
for me to address the Receiver's submissions with respect to the doctrine of
equitable subrogation.
[81]          
For these reasons, I declare that the 2022 KingSett Mortgage has
priority over the liens claimed by the lien claimants and that the lien claims
are not Priority Payables under the Sale Agreement except with respect to any
deficiencies in the holdbacks required to be retained by the owner under Part
IV of the Construction Act.
[82]          
If the parties are unable to resolve costs, they may make written
submissions in accordance with a timetable to be agreed upon by counsel and
approved by me (with reasonable page limits).