[1]          This is a
motion by the plaintiff, Cristiana Ilicea, for an Order amending the statement
of claim to: (i) correct the name of the defendant, Toront Transit Commission
(TTC), to “Toronto Transit Commission (TTC)”; and (ii) add the
proposed defendants, Kai Bong Tong (“Proposed Defendant Kai Bong”) and Po-Chun Eleana Tong (“Proposed Defendant Po‑Chun”), as defendants to the action, and to remove the defendant John Doe
from the action.
[2]          TTC takes
no position on the motion.
[3]          The
plaintiff’s position in its factum and in its initial submissions at the
hearing of the motion was that there is no bar under the Limitations Act,
2002, S.O. 2002, c. 24, Sched B. (the “Limitations Act”) to the
addition of the proposed defendants and, alternatively, that misnomer applies
to both proposed defendants.
[4]          The proposed
defendants’ position in their responding factum was that they both opposed the
motion. In responding submissions at the hearing of the motion, the Proposed
Defendant Po‑Chun maintained the position that the proposed amendments to
add her to the action should not be permitted because they are statute barred
under the under the Limitations Act,, and that misnomer is not available
to the plaintiff in the current circumstances. However, the Proposed Defendant
Kai Bong conceded that misnomer applies to him.
[5]          In the plaintiff’s
reply submissions at the hearing of the motion, the plaintiff conceded that misnomer
does not apply to the Proposed Defendant Po‑Chun and that leave to amend to
add the Proposed Defendant Po‑Chun is only available if the claim against
her is not statute barred under the Limitations Act, 2002.
[6]          In light
of the modified positions of the proposed defendants and the plaintiff at the
hearing of the motion: (i) the proposed amendment to correct the name of the
TTC defendant proceeded on an unopposed basis; (ii) the proposed amendment to
add the Proposed Defendant Kai Bong on the basis of misnomer and in place of
the defendant “John Doe” is unopposed; and (iii) the parties joined issue and made
submissions on whether leave to amend the statement of claim to add the
Proposed Defendant Po‑Chun should be denied on the basis that the claim
against her is statute barred under the Limitations Act.
[7]          For the
reasons that follow, the plaintiff’s motion is granted.
[8]         
This action arises from a motor vehicle accident
that occurred on June 21, 2021, at or near the intersection of Finch Avenue
East and Kenneth Avenue, in Toronto, Ontario.
[9]         
The statement of claim alleges that the plaintiff
was a passenger on a bus operated by the TTC that was struck from behind by a passenger
vehicle. Following the accident, the plaintiff was transported to hospital by
ambulance.
[10]      On May 31, 2023, a law clerk working with the previous lawyers for
the plaintiff made a phone call and sent an email to the Accident Benefits
Adjuster for the TTC. In the call and email, the law clerk requested a copy of
the police report or any third party information available with respect to the subject
accident. After the law clerk received an absence alert in response to the
email to the TTC Accident Benefits Adjuster, she sent a follow-up email to the
general email address for TTC accident benefits claims.
[11]      On May 31, 2023, the law clerk
also attempted to retrieve the motor vehicle accident report through the
Ministry of Transportation website, but she was unsuccessful.
[12]      On June 1, 2023, the law clerk sent
correspondence by regular mail to the Freedom of Information Office of the TTC,
requesting the complete file and motor vehicle accident report with respect to
the accident.
[13]      There is no evidence that a response
was provided to any of the above inquiries.
[14]      The plaintiff commenced this
action by statement of claim issued on June 12, 2023 naming Toront Transit
Commission (TTC) and John Doe as defendants. John Doe was described as the
individual who at all material times was the driver of a motor vehicle that rear-ended
the TTC bus on the date of the subject accident. The name of the TTC was
misspelled as “Toront Transit Commission (TTC)” rather than “Toronto Transit
Commission (TTC)”. The statement of claim was served on the TTC on June 14,
2023.
[15]      On June 29, 2023, the plaintiff’s
former lawyer received email correspondence from a lawyer with the TTC legal
department indicating that he had been assigned to respond to the plaintiff’s claim
against the TTC. The email indicated that the TTC bus had been rear-ended by a
motorist who the TTC believed was at fault. The motor vehicle accident report
for the accident was attached to the email and it identified the operator and
owner of the vehicle that struck the TCC bus as “Kai B. Tong”.
[16]      The plaintiff retained new lawyers
in 2024. On March 28, 2024, the plaintiff’s new lawyers sent a notice letter by
regular mail to the Proposed Defendant Kai Bong at the address provided in the motor
vehicle accident report. The letter notified the Proposed Defendant Kai Bong that
a civil action would be commenced against him for the damages arising from the June
21, 2021 accident.
[17]      On the same date, the plaintiff’s lawyers
sent a notice letter to the Bodily Injury Department of Aviva Insurance Company
notifying Aviva that they had been retained by the plaintiff and that a civil
action for damages would be commenced against their insured and driver of the
vehicle, Kai B. Tong.
[18]      On March 28, 2024, the plaintiff’s
lawyers sent email correspondence to the TTC lawyer confirming that they had been
retained by the plaintiff, advising that they would be bringing a motion to add
the driver and owner of the third-party vehicle and driver of the TTC bus to
the statement of claim, and requesting the incident report or video footage
regarding the incident.
[19]      On April 1, 2024, the plaintiff’s
lawyers obtained an MTO 3 Year Driver Record with Address search based on the
driver’s licence of the driver listed in the motor vehicle accident report. It
showed the driver’s full name as Kai Bong Tong and his registered address as
131 McCabe Crescent, Thornhill, Ontario, L4J 2S6.
[20]      Also on April 1, 2024, the
plaintiff’s lawyers obtained an MTO Plate/VIN by Date with Address search of
the licence plate listed on the motor vehicle accident report showing the
registered owners of vehicle involved in the accident were Kai Bong Tong and
Po-Chun Eleana Tong, both of whom had a registered address at 131 McCabe
Crescent, Thornhill, Ontario, L4J 2S6.
[21]      In light of the modified positions
of the parties, the only issue to de determined on this motion is whether the claim
against the Proposed Defendant Po‑Chun is statute barred under the Limitations
Act.
[22]      Subrule 5.04(2) of the Rules of
Civil Procedure provides for the addition of parties during a proceeding:
[23]      Section 21(1) of the Limitations
Act prohibits the addition of a party to a proceeding where the limitation
period has expired:
[24]      Sections 4 and 5 of the Limitations
Act provide as follows:
[25]      The Court of Appeal has explained
the applicable principles with respect to a motion to add a party to a
proceeding after the expiry of the presumptive limitation period as follows:
[26]      As explained in Morrison,
in order to overcome the presumption under s. 5(2) of the Limitations
Act, the plaintiff must lead evidence as to the date the
claim was actually discovered, which evidence can be tested and contradicted by
the proposed defendant. For this part of the test, the plaintiff does not have
the onus to show due diligence to rebut the presumption under s. 5(2).[2]
[27]      Here, the
evidence is that the actual discovery of the claim against the Proposed
Defendant Po‑Chun occurred on April 1, 2024 when the plaintiff’s lawyers
obtained the results of an MTO Plate/VIN search showing that the
Proposed Defendant Po‑Chun was one of the registered owners of vehicle
involved in the accident. Absent any contrary evidence from the Proposed
Defendant Po‑Chun, this satisfies the first part of the test under Morrison
and displaces the presumed limitation period under s. 5(2).
[28]      On a motion to
amend to add a party, the parties’ rights in relation to the limitation period
crystalize on the date the motion is served.[3]
Here, the plaintiff served the motion record seeking an order for leave to
amend her claim to include the Proposed Defendant Po‑Chun on July 22, 2024,
which crystalized the parties’ rights in relation to the
limitation period. Working backwards, the plaintiff’s claim against the Proposed
Defendant Po‑Chun would be statute-barred if the plaintiff discovered it
before July 22, 2022.
[29]      On this motion, the April 1, 2024 date
of actual discovery that the Proposed Defendant Po‑Chun was one of the
owners of the vehicle involved in the accident would bring the claim within the
limitation period. As the proposed defendant relies on “reasonable
discoverability” to contend the claim was brought outside the prescription
period, I must determine under s. 5(1)(b) when “a reasonable person with the
abilities and in the circumstances of [the plaintiff] first ought to have known
of the matters referred to in clause (a)”.[4]
[30]      The plaintiff acknowledges that she
had the information necessary to determine ownership of the vehicle involved in
the subject accident once the motor vehicle accident report became available.[5]
The motor vehicle accident report listed the plate number of the subject vehicle,
and with that information a routine MTO Plate/VIN search was a readily
available means of determining the identity of the owner(s). Based on this acknowledgement
by the plaintiff, reasonable discoverability would not extend beyond June 29,
2023, the date plaintiff’s counsel received the motor vehicle accident report.
Thus, the question to be determined is whether the plaintiff ought to have
known that the Proposed Defendant Po-Chun was a co-owner of the vehicle
involved in the accident before June 29, 2023. In making that determination,
I must assess whether the plaintiff has provided a reasonable explanation on
proper evidence as to why the claim could not have been discovered earlier through
the exercise of reasonable diligence.[6]
[31]      The Proposed Defendant Po-Chun
argues that:
[32]      I accept that this is not a case
where it was initially unknown to the plaintiff that there were potential
tortfeasors other than the TTC.[7]
However, this is also not a case in which, based on the information available
to the plaintiff at the time of the accident, the identity of the tortfeasor,
namely the owner(s) of the vehicle involved in the accident, could be
determined through a public or routine search mechanism.[8]
In order for the plaintiff to be in a position to determine the name of the
owners of the vehicle involved in the accident , she needed the motor vehicle
accident report that identified the licence plate number of the vehicle. Therefore,
in this case, the assessment of the plaintiff’s due diligence turns on the
conduct of the plaintiff to obtain the motor vehicle accident report that
contained the licence plate information.
[33]      Relying on this court’s decision
in Reimer, the Proposed Defendant Po‑Chun submits that timely and
repetitive inquiries to the TTC would have allowed the plaintiff to identify
the Proposed Defendants Po‑Chun within 30-60 days after the loss. In her
factum, the Proposed Defendant Po‑Chun argues that the plaintiff
“negligently did not request a motor vehicle accident report until 3 weeks
before the limitation period was set to expire”.
[34]      I do not accept these arguments on
the facts before me. The motor vehicle accident report was in the possession of
the TTC. No public or routine search was available to the plaintiff to obtain
it. The plaintiff’s former lawyer requested a copy of the motor vehicle
accident report from the TTC several weeks before the expiry of the presumptive
limitation period. There is no evidence of a response to those inquiries. The
defendant did not cross-examine the plaintiff to determine if a response was
eventually received, and there is no evidence that the TTC sent a response or
would have provided a response to the plaintiff within a certain time period following
an inquiry. The means by which the plaintiff obtained the information was by
commencing this action and serving it, and it is not clear that the necessary
information would have been provided by the TTC prior to the service on it of a
statement of claim.
[35]      As the Court of
Appeal has explained, on a motion to amend to add a defendant, the evidentiary
threshold is low and the plaintiff’s explanation should be given a “generous
reading” and considered in the context of the claim.[9] In my view,
considering the explanation given in the context that there was no simple
procedure to ascertain the identity of the owner(s) of the vehicle involved in
the accident, there is a genuine issue for trial concerning the running of the
limitation period and the application of the discoverability rule that should
be left to the trial judge.[10]
It would not be appropriate in the circumstances of a motion to amend to
determine that the plaintiff’s counsel ought to have made additional inquiries
or started the inquiries of the TTC sooner to obtain the motor vehicle accident
report.[11]
As Chown J. stated in Zeppieri:
[36]      In the result, I find that there is
an issue of credibility or fact involved in the determination of whether the
amendment was sought within two years of the claim being discovered, and it is
not plain and obvious that the limitation period has expired.[13]
Therefore, the date of reasonable discovery cannot be
determined at this stage and should be determined at a later stage in the
proceedings.[14]
In these circumstances, leave should be granted to the plaintiff to
amend the statement of claim to add the Proposed Defendant Po-Chun, and leave should also granted to the defendant to plead a limitation
defence.[15]
[37]      For the
reasons outlined above, the plaintiff’s motion is granted.
[38]      With respect to costs, the parties
agreed that costs should be fixed and payable to the successful party in the
amount of $2,500, inclusive of disbursements and taxes.  As the plaintiff was successful
on this motion, the Proposed Defendants, Kai Bong Tong and Po-Chun Eleana Tong,
shall pay the plaintiff costs of the motion fixed in the amount of $2,500,
inclusive of disbursements and taxes.
[39]      I order as follows: