[1]         
Mr. Watson was before me on December 4, 2024 for sentencing following
his conviction by a jury on October 21, 2023 on charges of kidnapping (Criminal
Code, s. 279).  The sentencing hearing for Mr. Watson has been considerably
delayed, initially for health reasons and most recently due to Mr. Watson’s
decision to change counsel.
[2]         
I delivered Mr. Watson’s sentence following a hearing on December 4,
2024.  I sentenced Mr. Watson to 15 years less net pre-sentence credit of four
years and 46 days with more detailed reasons to follow.  These are those
reasons.
[3]         
I reviewed the circumstances of this offence and the impact of this
crime upon its victims in detail in my reasons for sentencing of Mr. Watson’s
co-accused Mr. Zeyu Zang released on March 6, 2024.  The evidentiary foundation
of those reasons was the jury verdict, the trial evidence and the victim impact
statement all of which are part of the evidentiary record here and I adopt
those sections of my detailed reasons here without repeating them at length.  Findings
of fact regarding the circumstances of the offence and aggravating
circumstances are all made on a beyond reasonable doubt standard of proof.
[4]         
In a very summary way, after several weeks of detailed planning, Mr.
Wenbo Jin was kidnapped from his downtown Toronto condominium apartment by two
intruders in the early morning hours of January 21, 2020.  After being
blindfolded and bound, Mr. Jin was held for several hours in his apartment
while attempts were made to drug him so that he might be carried unconscious to
the van waiting to transport him.  When he failed to lose consciousness, Mr.
Jin was conveyed by his captors to the waiting van bundled into a hockey bag
under dire threats and eventually transported in the back of the van to the
house in Richmond Hill that had been rented and prepared in advance to receive
him.  The house had boarded windows and a surveillance camera to keep watch over
the door to his room.  It had also been provided with a large bucket to serve as
a toilet and chains and blindfolds to secure him.  There he was held in degrading
and inhumane conditions, blindfolded and shackled, with an ever-present team of
watchers while ransom demands were conveyed.  This state of affairs persisted until
the afternoon of February 2, 2020 when he was rescued by Toronto Police
Services.  The ransom demand made upon his father was to have been paid in
Bitcoin with a value at that time of approximately $5 million.
[5]         
While Mr. Zang was the mastermind, Mr. Watson was unquestionably his
principal lieutenant.  Mr. Watson was recruited by Mr. Zang in the planning
phase of this crime more than a month prior to the kidnapping and it was he who
Mr. Zang relied upon to identify, recruit and supervise the team that would
kidnap Mr. Jin, transport him to the prepared house in Richmond Hill and then
hold him in captivity until the ransom was paid.  While a junior partner in the
enterprise, Mr. Watson was clearly acting in a supervisory role throughout.  He
negotiated with Mr. Zang for himself and his “team” and remained in a
close-support role while the abduction was being effected.
[6]         
Mr. Watson’s role included an initial December planning meeting with Mr.
Zang, recruiting the kidnap team and setting up a temporary headquarters in a
Scarborough townhouse rented by Mr. Zang for the purpose.  The Scarborough
townhouse was used for planning sessions attended by Mr. Watson and others on
the team and as a staging location for a first unsuccessful kidnap attempt and
then the successful attempt the following day.  Mr. Watson was present on site
in a stake-out location during the actual kidnapping which lasted for several
hours while the “inside” team waited for the stupefying drugs to take hold.
[7]         
Mr. Watson’s motive was money.  There can be no question that he knew
all material details of the plan which he participated in developing, remaining
close by the scene while Mr. Jin was being kidnapped, drugged and transported
to the waiting van and was in communication with Mr. Zang throughout.  His
participation in the on-going enterprise was cut short only by his apprehension
by police on unrelated (to the kidnapping) charges along with another
accomplice in the kidnapping scheme several days prior to Mr. Jin’s liberation. 
His was a central planning and supervisory role in a sophisticated,
meticulously planned criminal operation.  There is no direct evidence that Mr.
Watson played any role in selecting or administering the stupefying agent to
Mr. Jin - an offence with which he is not charged although two other members of
the group (Mr. Matthews and Mr. Zang) were.  This last feature of the
kidnapping is not an aggravating feature of the crime that can be attributed to
Mr. Watson.
[8]         
Mr. Watson is 41 years of age at the present time and was 36 years of
age when the offence was committed.  He was raised in Toronto.  His parents
separated when he was five years old.  He was the only child of that
relationship and was raised primarily by his mother with whom he had a very
difficult relationship while living with her and has maintained no contact with
her as an adult.  His father passed away approximately 20 years ago.  All of
these issues have undoubtedly contributed to challenges in his youth.  He
attended several schools before finally leaving school after Grade 10 and, as
shall be discussed further below, his criminal involvement began in youth court
in his late teens.
[9]         
Mr. Watson has a number of half-siblings from both his mother’s and
father’s side respectively (six paternal half-siblings and four maternal
half-siblings).  It does not appear that he is close to any of his
half-siblings, a fact that the pre-sentence report attributes in substantial
part to their frustration at his criminal involvements over the years.  He is
unmarried.  According to the pre-sentence report, he has four children from
prior relationships.  There is some conflict between the enhanced pre-sentence
report prepared for the defence and the pre-sentence report ordered by me as
regards the degree of relationship Mr. Watson has maintained with his children. 
There seems little doubt that he has little to no relationship with two or
possibly three of them, but the enhanced pre-sentence report found evidence of
a fairly close relationship – albeit long distance – with one of them.  There
are indications in the pre-sentence report of anger management issues impacting
his sometimes-violent relationships with prior domestic partners.
[10]       There
can be little doubt that the challenging circumstances of Mr. Watson’s youth
played a role in Mr. Watson’s ultimate life choices, an observation that does
not suggest inevitability or a lack of agency in any way.  Mr. Watson’s siblings
were similarly situate – not identically situate – to him.  There were various
points of distinction between them – age, different father or mother, etc. - but
the fact that he alone among his siblings slid into a life dedicated to crime
to the degree his life has been suggests that the environmental influences on
his formation were important but far from determinative.
[11]       Since
leaving high school, Mr. Watson has worked doing home renovations after leaving
school until a few years ago.  More recently he has been self-employed in
various capacities such as buying and selling liquidation goods, operating a
party-rental business and an events planning business in addition to sporadic
work in the music business.
[12]       Mr.
Watson is facing very severe health challenges.  He is currently wheelchair
dependent for the most part.  He was diagnosed with Multiple Sclerosis in 2016
and with Myasthenia Gravis in 2021.  From the materials before me, both of
these conditions wax and wane in their symptoms and their intensity.  These
shall exert an influence on his quality of life to a greater or lesser degree
but for the rest of his life.  Over the time he has been before me for trial
and then sentencing, there has been a visible degree of decline.  It seems very
likely that he will need a considerable amount of medical attention while in
custody for any sentence that may be handed down.  Indeed, a portion of the
delay in sentencing can be attributed to Mr. Watson seeking treatment for his
condition following a significant flare-up in late 2023.
[13]       Mr.
Watson also has a very lengthy criminal record which begins in his teen years
and continues quite unabated and with few material breaks to the present time. 
There do not appear to be any years from 2000 to the present time where
Mr. Watson has not spent 30 or more days in custody and/or been on probation. 
The longest sentence prior to this incident was five years for armed robbery
and possession of a prohibited or restricted firearm with ammunition.  The most
common entries on his record are for assault and failure to comply with
probation orders.
[14]       Mr.
Watson attributes at least some of the attention he drew from police in his
early years to racial profiling by police due to the relatively high crime in
the Rexdale neighborhood he then lived in, his black skin colour and the fact
that he looked relatively mature for his age.  He reported that his experience
with police has left him fearful of them.
[15]       In
the immediate time-frame of the planning and kidnapping of Mr. Jin (December
2019 - January 2020), Mr. Watson appears to have stepped up his criminal
activities in terms of seriousness and violence.  Mr. Watson was found guilty
and is awaiting sentencing (in January 2025) for two brutal home invasions –
one in Oakville in early November, 2019 and one in Scarborough in January 2020
just over a week prior to the abduction of Mr. Jin.  Mr. Matthews, one of the
team convicted for his role in the kidnapping of Mr. Jin participated in both
home invasions with Mr. Watson and pled guilty to his role in this kidnapping
and those two home invasions (receiving an aggregate sentence of fifteen years
for the kidnapping and five years for the two home invasions).  Both home
invasions involved victims being terrorized in their own homes and bound with duct
tape and zip ties (as was the case with Mr. Jin in the present case).
[16]       I
find that the following aggravating circumstances have been proved beyond
reasonable doubt:
[17]       There
is little in the way of mitigating circumstances disclosed in the sentencing
record.  Mr. Watson has expressed no remorse for his role in this crime beyond
expressing to the author of the pre-sentence report a degree of fatalism and self-pity
at the probable consequences of his crime.  The view he expressed that his own
role in the kidnapping was “minimal” shows no indication that Mr. Watson has
acquired any degree of insight into the gravity of this crime and his
responsibility for it and suggests little hope that he will undergo any metamorphosis
in the foreseeable future.
[18]       It
is fair to observe that Mr. Watson’s deteriorating health has resulted in the
impact of detention falling somewhat more harshly upon his shoulders when
compared to a detainee not so impaired.  While not strictly speaking a
mitigating circumstance since unrelated either to the gravity of the offence or
Mr. Watson’s degree of responsibility for it, Mr. Watson’s deteriorating health
unquestionably amounts to a collateral consequence of his incarceration that will
fall more heavily on his shoulders than might be the case for another similarly
situated offender not so handicapped.  While pre-sentence hardship can be
broadly viewed and taken into account as a mitigating factor on the authority of
R. v. Duncan[1],
post-sentence hardship of this sort must logically be characterized as a
personal circumstance that may impact the assessment of proportionality and
parity where there is a material difference in the impact of incarceration on
an offender compared to others.  I see little practical difference between
these two ways of viewing the impact of pre vs post sentencing conditions.  The
mitigating impact of this consideration must be balanced and cannot override
other sentencing objectives and its application requires evidence that extends
beyond mere speculation.
[19]       The
defence filed letters from treating physicians at St. Michael’s hospital as
well as Mr. Watson’s family doctor at Central Clinics directed at explaining
the impact of his medical condition to me.  The Crown offers no dispute of the
diagnosis of Mr. Watson’s condition referenced in those letters (Relapsing
Remitting Multiple Sclerosis and Myasthenia Gravis.  The most recent of the
four letters (September 20, 2024) contains a fair summary of the prior three:
[20]       What
I conclude from this correspondence is that Mr. Watson suffers from a variety
of apparently incurable medical conditions which are on a worsening trend but
which do not progress in an even or straight line.  He requires and will
continue to require fairly extensive medical treatment the intensity of which
is likely to increase over time, once again, not on a straight-line basis.  There
is also a very real risk of Mr. Watson’s health being impaired materially if
deprived of proper treatment including access to physiotherapy and there have
been instances – particularly where Mr. Watson was in short-term detention
after being arrested for alleged breaches of release conditions – where he was
not given access to the necessary aids (walking braces and the like).
[21]       What
I do not derive from this – and cannot presume to infer – is that custodial authorities,
properly alerted to his condition, would be unable to provide the
requisite access to care, medication and therapy.   Indeed, he has been
receiving care since his re-incarceration in July 2024 and the letter of Dr.
Kassardjian does not suggest that he has not been able to be treated since his
most recent arrest.  He has continued to receive care while in custody after
his arrest, including several periods of extended hospitalization outside the
detention centre.
[22]       The
Crown is not suggesting in this case that Mr. Watson be ineligible for parole
for an extended period of time.  The Parole Board has the ability to monitor
his treatment while in custody, to assess any deterioration in his health and to
consider whether necessary treatment and therapy can be better provided in a
parole setting as compared to incarceration and to consider all of these
factors in connection with potential early release or statutory release dates.
[23]       I
conclude that his medical condition is entitled to consideration in the overall
Duncan analysis of unduly harsh pre-sentence custody and must also be
given consideration in the context of parity and proportionality of sentence in
relation to the time frame post-sentencing.  However, the degree of weight of
this factor must not be such as to overwhelm the other primary sentencing
goals.
[24]       Mr.
Watson’s rehabilitation prospects can only be described as poor to non-existent
given his extensive criminal record.  Hope springs eternal but there can be no
realistic assessment of his rehabilitation prospects as being anything other
than minimal.
[25]       The
Crown does not oppose the application of the 1.5:1 maximum pre-sentence custody
credit prescribed by s. 719(3.1) of the Criminal Code.  The prescribed
maximum has long become the de facto floor subject to additional Duncan
credit discussed earlier.  I do not propose to interfere with that long-established
practice here.
[26]       The
parties have come to an agreement on the aggregate pre-sentence credit to be
granted to Mr. Watson for the period from his arrest on January 28, 2020 until
the date of his sentencing (at which point he shall commence serving the
sentence pronounced by me).  In effect, Mr. Watson is “using” all his
pre-sentence custody time for the purposes of this sentence and will not be
able to claim it again at his subsequent sentencing hearing in January (or in
respect of the July 2024 charges should he be convicted of those offences in
future).
[27]       While
I would not normally apply a specific number of days to the Duncan
mitigating circumstance since no other mitigating circumstances are subjected to
such a numerically precise calculus.  I am prepared to do so in this case where
the parties have come to a specific agreement on the point.
[28]       The
parties have agreed to give Mr. Watson credit for a total of four years and forty-six
days of pre-sentence custody inclusive of s. 719(3.1) and any Duncan
considerations from January 28, 2020 until the present time.  I am so
ordering.
[29]       The
Crown seeks a global sentence of 20 years and filed extensive written
submissions outlining the reasons for this position.
[30]       The
defence had a different view of the appropriate sentencing range and where Mr.
Watson ought to be considered to fall within it having regard to his unique characteristics. 
The defence urged a sentence of between 13 years to not more than fifteen
years.
[31]       Both
positions were expressed as the “gross” sentence prior to the application of
the agreed 4 years and forty-six days of pre-sentence credit.
[32]       I
reviewed the applicable sentencing principles in the reasons for decision on
the sentencing of Mr. Zang and I shall adopt my comments in that decision
without repeating them here.
[33]       Clearly
the paramount sentencing objectives in the case of kidnapping are denunciation
and deterrence.  This category of crime corrodes society’s collective sense of
security in a very deep and fundamental way.  In R. v. Wong & Poon,
2008 BCCA 64 (CanLII), Frankel J.A. remarked (at para. 27):
[34]       The
prescribed penalty in the Criminal Code is up to life in prison which
reflects the particularly serious nature of this crime and there is
considerable jurisprudence supporting sentences at or near the maximum end of
the range in circumstances quite analogous to those present here.
[35]       Mr.
Watson’s lengthy and persistent criminal record, particularly viewed in the
context of the sharp upward bend in the seriousness of the most recent offences,
suggests that weight must also be given to separating this offender from
society and to the promotion of a sense of responsibility in the offender and
an acknowledgement of the harm done to the victims and the community.
[36]       Proportionality
has been described by our Court of Appeal as a “lodestar” sentencing principle: 
R. v. Morris, 2021 ONCA 680 at para. 59.  In considering the principle
of proportionality, it is clear that the crime of kidnapping must be considered
at or near the most serious end of the spectrum.  Within the spectrum of grave
kidnapping cases, the criteria described by the British Columbia Court of
Appeal in R. v. Brar, 2014 BCCA 175 (CanLII) at para. 23 is often
referred to as a guide to considering the gravity of an offender’s conduct in
the context of a kidnapping charge.  Mr. Watson’s participation in this offence
was central and not peripheral.  The kidnapping was carried out for ransom and
carried out in the dead of night in the victim’s home.  There was extensive
planning and premeditation.  The confinement of the victim was both long
(approximately two weeks) and particularly harsh.  It only ended when police
discovered where the victim had been hidden and executed a coordinated extraction. 
These circumstances place both the gravity of the offence and the degree of Mr.
Watson’s responsibility for it near the very serious end of the spectrum.
[37]       I
reviewed the sentencing range for kidnapping of this sort in my decision in the
Zang matter.  As well, I am indebted to Forestell J. for her review of the
precedents in this area in her decision on the sentence of Mr. Matthews, one of
the participants in this crime brought in by Mr. Watson: R. v. Levy,
2024 ONSC 1452 (CanLII).
[38]       The
parity principle requires me to look not only at precedents from other cases,
but precedents from this case.  Mr. Zang received a sentence of 20 years
reflecting his central role as mastermind but also the aggravating circumstance
of responsibility for administration of a noxious substance.  While Mr. Watson
was not charged with the administration of a noxious substance, Mr. Zang’s
prior criminal record is comparatively minor relative to the decades-long
consistent record of Mr. Watson.  As well, Mr. Matthews was sentenced to 14
years for kidnapping – reduced by a year to reflect the harsh conditions of his
pre-trial detention – plus a further two years consecutive for administering
the noxious substance to Mr. Jin.  Mr. Matthews participation in this crime was
certainly more kinetic than that of Mr. Watson, but Mr. Matthews was
fundamentally an order-follower rather than an order-giver and he had the sentencing
benefit of remorse, a willingness to address his addiction problems and a
guilty plea.
[39]       Having
regard to the sentencing objectives discussed, to the range of sentences handed
down in other comparable cases, cases at the more serious end of the spectrum,
to the sentences handed down to Mr. Zang (who did not plead guilty) and to Mr.
Matthews (who did plead guilty and expressed remorse) but also recognizing that
these two were also convicted of administering a noxious substance, it is my
view that a sentence of 15 years is a fit and proper sentence that achieves a
proper balancing of the sentencing objectives.
[40]       When
considering any sentence, I must also bear in mind the totality principle to
ensure that the overall sentence does not exceed the overall culpability of the
offender.  Mr. Watson is before me for sentencing on a single charge.  I have
made some reference here to numerous prior convictions for which he has been
sentenced over the years but also to the three matters which are currently
pending for trial and/or sentencing.  I have done so for the purpose of context
and primarily in connection with assessing his prospects for rehabilitation
(which I have assessed as exceptionally poor given the persistence of his
criminal behaviour over time and its most recent trajectory).  I am not taking those
three recent matters into account for any other purpose, including totality.  I
understand Mr. Watson is to be sentenced on the two home invasion matters in
January and is awaiting trial on the July 2024 matter.  What impact, if any, the
sentence I hand down today may have upon those other matters in connection and
the application, if any, of the principle of totality to those proceedings will
be for those sentencing judges to assess and determine.  I consider the
sentence I have fashioned in this case for this offence to be appropriate
having regard to the single conviction before me and all of the applicable
sentencing principles for the reasons discussed.
[41]      
For the foregoing reasons, I sentence Mr. Watson
as follows:
[42]      
The following ancillary orders shall be made:
[43]      
Orders accordingly.