[1]              
This matter concerns the ongoing insolvency proceedings involving JTI-Macdonald
Corp. (“JTI”), Imperial Tobacco Canada Limited and Imperial Tobacco Company Limited
(collectively, “Imperial”) and Rothmans Benson & Hedges Inc. (“RBH”). This
endorsement relates to all three applicants.
[2]              
The representative counsel for the Pan-Canadian Claimants seeks interlocutory
injunctive relief against Actis Law Group and its principal, Andrea Grass
(together, “Actis”). For the reasons that follow, the injunction is granted.
[3]              
In March 2019, JTI, Imperial and RBH commenced insolvency proceedings
under the Companies' Creditors Arrangement Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-36 (the
“CCAA Proceedings”). The CCAA proceedings were precipitated by a class-action
judgment rendered in Québec for over $13.5
billion.
[4]              
Since that time, JTI, Imperial, RBH (collectively, the “Tobacco
Companies”), their respective monitors, the claimants, and The Honourable Warren K. Winkler, K.C., the Court-appointed
Mediator, have spent thousands of hours in hundreds of court-ordered mediation
sessions.
[5]              
These negotiations culminated in proposed CCAA
plans for each of the Tobacco Companies. Under these proposed plans, the Tobacco
Companies would collectively pay more than $32.5 billion to be divided among
several parties, including class-action plaintiffs and each of the
provinces and territories. In exchange for these payments, the Tobacco
Companies would be granted a full and final release and emerge as going
concerns.
[6]              
Meeting Orders and Claims Procedure Orders
were issued on October 31, 2024. Pursuant to the Meeting Orders, creditors
meetings to vote on the CCAA plans are scheduled for this Thursday, December
12.
[7]              
On December 9, 2019, Wagners was appointed as class counsel for the
Pan-Canadian Claimants (PCC) to represent their interests in connection with these
proceedings. The Pan-Canadian Claimants are individuals, excluding the Québec Class-Action
plaintiffs in relation to the claims in the Québec Class-Action, who have
asserted or may be entitled to assert a claim related to, among other things,
the development, design, manufacture, production, marketing, advertising,
distribution, purchase or sale of tobacco products.
[8]              
The Respondent Actis published a website purporting to offer
representation in the “Canadian Tobacco Class Action Settlement”. This website encouraged
individuals to submit their information in order to participate in the class-action.
It stated that Actis offers its services on a contingency fee basis. The
website was taken down before this hearing, but Actis asserts that there is
nothing improper in offering its services in this way.
[9]              
Wagners, in its capacity as class counsel seeks an interlocutory
injunction until the Court renders its decision on any sanction orders in the
proceedings.  They ask that Actis be required to:
[10]          
I am satisfied that the test for an
interlocutory injunction has been met, pursuant to s. 101 of the Courts of Justice Act and Rule
40.01 of the Rules of Civil Procedure.
[11]          
Section 101 of the Courts of Justice Act provides that an
interlocutory injunction or mandatory order may be granted where it appears to
a judge of the court to be just or convenient to do so.
[12]          
The test for an interlocutory injunction is set out by the Supreme Court
of Canada in RJR MacDonald Inc. v. Canada (Attorney-General), at 334.
The test requires the moving party to demonstrate that:
[13]          
This analysis must be contextualized by the ongoing CCAA proceeding. The
CCAA creates a single proceeding model to promote the “equitable and orderly
resolution of insolvency disputes”. This approach is “intended to mitigate the
inefficiency and chaos that would result if each stakeholder in an insolvency
initiated a separate claim to enforce its rights”: Peace River Hydro
Partners v. Petrowest Corp., 2022 SCC 41, 475 D.L.R. (4th) 1, at paras.
54-55.
[14]          
To this end, this Court is empowered under s. 11 of the CCAA to “make
any order it considers appropriate in the circumstances”.
[15]          
The threshold to satisfy this requirement is low. So long as the claim
is not frivolous or vexatious, this factor of the test will generally be
satisfied: RJR-MacDonald, at 335.
[16]          
I am satisfied that this low threshold is met. Whether an order should
be granted under s. 11 of the CCAA presents a serious issue.
[17]          
The interests of the PCC are represented in this proceeding by the
court-appointed class counsel. If the CCAA plan is approved by the creditors and
sanctioned by the Court, the PCC will require no additional legal
representation. They will be entitled to assert their claims under the PCC
Compensation Plan with the support of Wagners and its agents.
[18]          
By advertising legal services and soliciting retainers, Actis stands to interfere
with the equitable and orderly resolution of the CCAA proceedings. It risks confusing
the claimants and interfering with their representation by the court-appointed
class counsel at a critical point in the proceedings. Claimants may be led to
mistakenly believe that they must sign up for Actis’s services to obtain their
entitlements. They may also fail to sign up to receive information from the
court-appointed class counsel on the mistaken belief that they have taken the
necessary steps to receive such information.
[19]          
The second element of the RJR-MacDonald test is whether the
moving parties will suffer irreparable harm if the injunction is not granted. What
must be established on this part of the test is whether refusing to grant an
injunction will cause harm that cannot be remedied at some later stage: RJR-MacDonald,
at 341.
[20]          
I am satisfied that allowing Actis to advertise legal services and
solicit retainers in connection with the CCAA proceedings poses a risk of
irreparable harm. The CCAA proceedings are in a critical stage, with Creditors
Meetings taking place on December 12. The court-appointed class counsel requires
the ability to make timely and effective communications with the members of the
class it represents. By interposing itself between class counsel and the PCC,
Actis can interrupt this communication and risk introducing confusion which may
undermine the equitable and orderly conduct of the CCAA proceedings.
[21]          
Additionally, Actis’s participation in this proceeding would interfere
with the CCAA Plans as they will be presented to creditors on December 12. It
may be appropriate in some claims processes for lawyers to offer their services
to help claimants pursue their claims. However, these proceedings and these
claims processes are unique.
[22]          
As counsel to the Province of Ontario noted, the process to file claims
has been streamlined and claimants are not responsible for the compensation of PCC
Counsel.
[23]          
Ontario supported the position of PCC Counsel as did The Canadian Cancer
Society.
[24]          
In my view, the offering of Actis, on a category fee basis at this stage
of the proceedings, is not desirable in this case.
[25]          
The claimants in this matter are vulnerable, and some have waited over
26 years to realize their claims. The PCC Compensation Plan is specially
crafted to meet these unique circumstances and to reduce any further hardship
for the claimants. It is specifically designed to eliminate any need for the
services Actis proposes to offer. Wagners has procured an agent to manage its
communications with potential claimants and to support them in making their
claims. Offering such services for a fee, when the PCC are entitled to receive them
at no cost, would undermine the very purpose of important aspects of the CCAA
Plans.
[26]          
In the context of these CCAA proceedings, which are uniquely complex and
span over five  years, such harms cannot be remedied once inflicted.
[27]          
The third factor, the balance of convenience, considers which of the
parties will suffer the greater harm from the granting or refusal of an
interlocutory injunction. I must also consider the public interest at this
stage: RJR-Macdonald, at 348-49.
[28]          
I am satisfied the balance of convenience favours granting the
injunction. Absent an injunction, there is a serious risk that the PCC’
interests and their representation by class counsel will be undermined due to
confusion caused by Actis’s advertising and soliciting activities. Such
confusion in turn risks undermining the orderly and equitable resolution of the
insolvency proceedings.
[29]          
On the other hand, Actis purports to offer services that are within the mandate
of class counsel. It proposes to help potential claimants determine their
eligibility to make a claim in the proceeding. These are services that class
counsel are mandated to provide under the PCC Compensation Plan. In the unique
circumstances of these CCAA proceedings and these Compensation Plans, Actis’s
legitimate interest in offering such services is limited at best.
[30]          
Rule 40.02 of the Rules of Civil Procedure specifies that an
interlocutory injunction granted without notice may not exceed a period of 10
days. However, the Court may dispense with compliance with any rule in the
interest of justice: r. 2.03. Moreover, the Supreme Court of Canada has
recognized that procedural flexibility is a “hallmark” of insolvency law: Peace
River, at para. 64.
[31]          
I am satisfied that notice should be waived in this case. Actis attended
the hearing and made submissions on its behalf. The CCAA proceedings are at a
critical stage, and it is vital that matters proceed as set out in the Meeting
Orders and the Claims Procedure Orders. To that end, it is necessary that Actis
be enjoined from advertising legal services or soliciting retainers from
claimants until a decision is rendered on any sanction orders in this matter.
[32]          
Rule 40.03 of the Rules of Civil Procedure provides that, on a
motion for an interlocutory injunction, “the moving party shall, unless
the court orders otherwise, undertake to abide by any order concerning damages
that the court may make if it ultimately appears that the granting of the order
has caused damage to the responding party for which the moving party ought to
compensate the responding party.”
[33]          
The court retains discretion to waive this requirement where appropriate,
for instance where the motion is brought by a representative on behalf of a
class: Li et al. v. Barber et. al.,
2022 ONSC 1176, at para. 38. I am satisfied that it is appropriate to waive the
requirement for an undertaking in these circumstances. If compensation is owed
to Actis, I am satisfied that it can be adequately addressed when this Court
makes a decision regarding any sanction orders.
[34]          
The injunction is granted.
[35]          
As an Officer of the Court, Ms. Grass – the principal of Actis – will
not be required to provide evidence of confirming destruction of all copies of
the “Actis List” as defined in the order.