[1]              
Cortland Credit
Lending Corporation (“Cortland”) seeks a declaration that the claims of Final
Bell Holdings International Ltd. (“Final Bell”) against the Applicants are
subordinate to Cortland's claims against the Applicants. Specifically, Cortland
seeks an order that any potential entitlement of Final Bell to a constructive
trust in relation to assets of the Applicant or the proceeds of the sale
thereof is subordinate to the security interest of Cortland over those assets
and its corresponding charge, and to Cortland’s entitlement to a distribution
of such proceeds.
[2]              
The relief
sought by Cortland is supported by the Applicants. Cortland and the Applicants
submit that this motion on the threshold issue of whether the constructive
trust claim now advanced by Final Bell can prime Cortland’s super priority
security interest should be heard and determined now. In their submission,
unless the answer to that threshold issue is “yes”, the trial of Final Bell’s
claim will very likely be moot as there will be no cash proceeds available to
which the constructive trust could attach. They submit that a determination of
the threshold issue first is efficient, will minimize costs to the benefit of
all stakeholders, and will not prejudice Final Bell.
[3]              
Final Bell
opposes the motion and submits that it ought to be entitled to the opportunity
to prove its fraudulent misrepresentation claim, and that factual issues to be
determined as part of that claim are relevant to the threshold issue sought to
be determined on this motion.
[4]              
Defined terms
in this Endorsement have the meaning given to them in the motion materials
and/or my earlier Endorsements made in this proceeding, unless otherwise stated.
[5]              
Of particular
relevance is my Endorsement dated August 12, 2024, scheduling this threshold
motion for the reasons set out in that Endorsement, all of which are
incorporated herein.
[6]              
For the reasons
below, the motion is granted.
[7]              
Final Bell, its
Canadian subsidiary Final Bell Canada Inc. (“FBC”), and BZAM entered into a
Share Exchange Agreement on December 5, 2023, pursuant to which Final Bell sold
to BZAM FBC, in exchange for equity and unsecured debt[1]
in BZAM. The Share Exchange Agreement closed on January 5, 2024. Both Final
Bell and BZAM are in the cannabis business.
[8]              
Cortland was
already the existing lender to BZAM through a credit agreement with BZAM’s
subsidiary, The Green Organic Dutchman Ltd. On January 8, 2024, three days
after the Final Bell transaction closed, BZAM and Cortland entered into a
further amended and restated credit agreement (“the Second ARCA”) to add the
Final Bell parties[2]
and their assets to the collateral already pledged to Cortland by BZAM. The
Cortland operating credit facility was already almost exhausted: of the $34
million in available credit, $27.5 million was already outstanding.
[9]              
The Final Bell
parties each executed a general security agreement in favour of Cortland and
provided other security. Cortland filed Personal property Security Act
registrations against both Final Bell entities.
[10]          
Cortland
submits that it made the credit advances as a bona fide purchaser for
value without notice of the claims of Final Bell, and that in any event, the
vast majority of the pre-filing advances also predated the Share Exchange
Agreement with Final Bell with the further result that there could have been no
claims in any event.
[11]          
Thereafter,
Cortland made available to BZAM pursuant to the Second ARCA (and after the
Share Exchange Agreement) revolving advances totalling another $18 million (approximately).
[12]          
It is the
position of Cortland that the Final Bell assets then owned by BZAM formed part
of the collateral pledged in its favour. Final Bell submits that BZAM made
fraudulent misrepresentations to it that it relied on in entering into the
Share Exchange Agreement, and that Cortland had constructive knowledge of those
fraudulent misrepresentations.
[13]          
On February 28,
2024, BZAM and the other Applicants (which include the Final Bell entities)
were granted protection under the Companies’ Creditors Arrangement Act, R.S.C.,
1985, c. C-36 (the “CCAA”) according to the terms of the Initial Order
made that date.
[14]          
Cortland agreed
to provide a debtor-in-possession (“DIP”) credit facility in accordance with
the DIP Facility Agreement of the same date.
[15]          
In granting the
Initial Order, the Court approved the DIP Agreement and, as is usual in CCAA
proceedings, granted the DIP Lender (Cortland) a super priority charge on the present
and after-acquired property of the Applicants (again for greater certainty,
including the Final Bell entities) (the “DIP Lender’s Charge”).
[16]          
In addition,
the DIP Agreement provided that amounts advanced under the DIP Facility were to
be used by BZAM to fund its working capital needs. This included restructuring
expenses and any pre-filing obligations permitted by Court order and approved
by the Agent, not including the funding of any Cortland pre-filing obligations.
Further, the DIP Agreement required that, following the CCAA filing, all
post-filing collections would be applied against the Applicants’ pre-filing
obligations owing to Cortland.
[17]          
As observed in
my Endorsement in respect of the February 28, 2024 first day hearing, the DIP
Charge did not secure any obligation that existed prior to the granting of the
Initial Order. I observed that this Court has previously approved DIP
facilities that authorize use of receipts from operations, post-filing, to
repay pre-filing amounts (often described as “creeping roll-up facilities”),
pursuant to the jurisdiction found in section 11.2(1) of the CCAA[3].
[18]          
The Initial
Order was sought and granted without notice to creditors except Cortland. As
required by the CCAA, the relief granted in an initial order cannot,
given the ex parte nature of the initial hearing, extend beyond 10 days,
and the relief granted is limited to that which is reasonably necessary for the
initial 10-day period. There is a mandatory comeback hearing on notice to
affected stakeholders at which time an extension of the stay of proceedings and
additional relief is usually sought. That comeback hearing is also an
opportunity for those affected creditors to challenge any of the requested
relief.
[19]          
That comeback
hearing was held on March 8, 2024, on which date the Court granted the Amended
and Restated Initial Order (the “ARIO”). Final Bell received notice of and was
represented at that comeback hearing.
[20]          
The ARIO
affirmed the approval of the DIP Agreement and Cortland’s super priority charge
over all existing and after-acquired BZAM assets (including the Final Bell
assets). Further, and consistent with the terms of the Commercial List Model
Order, the ARIO confirmed the priority of that super priority charge over,
among other things, all trusts.
[21]          
Importantly for
the purposes of this motion, Final Bell did not oppose the approval of the DIP
Agreement, the granting of the DIP Lender’s Charge, or the fact that, as fully
disclosed[4],
post-filing collections would be used to repay the pre-filing secured
indebtedness owing to Cortland. In any event, and as noted above, virtually all
of the prefiling indebtedness had been extended before the claims of Final Bell
could have come into existence, as they predated the Share Exchange Agreement.
[22]          
The ARIO also
approved a proposed sales and investment solicitation process (“SISP”) for the
business and assets of BZAM. That SISP included a stalking horse bid agreement which
in turn provided that the only cash proceeds that would be available would be
equal to the amount required to pay Cortland’s priority debt in full.
[23]          
As reflected in
my Endorsement in respect of the comeback hearing dated March 8, 2024 (and
particularly paragraphs 24, 25 and 26), Final Bell was not opposing any of the
relief sought, particularly including approval of the SISP or its terms. It
advised the Court that it was in the process of investigating whether it would
be bringing a motion to seek relief which could have an impact on the SISP.
Specifically, Final Bell advised that it was considering bringing the
fraudulent misrepresentation claim referred to above and, importantly for the
purposes of the SISP, that it may seek rescission of the Share Exchange
Agreement on the basis of that fraudulent misrepresentation claim.
[24]          
I noted in the March
8, 2024 Endorsement that if it did so, that issue may well have to be
determined before any bids in the SISP were finalized, since bidders would need
to know whether the pool of assets on which they were bidding included the Final
Bell assets or not. However, and in respect of the other relief granted on that
date, Final Bell did not oppose the relief sought or purport to reserve any
rights. That relief included the approval of the DIP Agreement, the granting of
the DIP Lender’s Charge and the corresponding super priority of that DIP
Lender’s Charge, and the nature and structure of the stalking horse bid
agreement.
[25]          
Cortland
thereafter made advances under the DIP Agreement and in reliance on the super
priority status of the DIP Lender’s Charge. As at the end of July 2024,
approximately $33,715,000 of principal and interest was owing under the DIP
Loan. Except for nominal pre-filing expenses of $709.12, all of the amounts
currently owing to Cortland as of the hearing of this motion were advanced
under the DIP Agreement and in reliance on the DIP Lender’s Charge. It follows
that the position taken by Final Bell that the priority now sought to be
continued by Cortland relates to pre-filing debt is almost completely moot: the
amounts owing to Cortland were advanced subsequent to the commencement of this
proceeding, and in reliance on the DIP Lender’s Charge.
[26]          
Moreover, and
as noted above, the use of proceeds and the nature of the DIP Facility were
fully discussed in the Pre-Filing Report of the (then proposed) Monitor (see
para. 91) and expressly disclosed in the Affidavit of Matthew Milich sworn February
28, 2024 in support of the Application (see para. 112).
[27]          
Final Bell then
did as it had advised it was considering doing and brought a motion in the CCAA
proceeding seeking rescission of the Share Exchange Agreement which, if
granted, would have had the effect of removing the Final Bell assets from the
property of BZAM. Given the urgency in light of the pending SISP, the matter
was scheduled to proceed to a summary trial on an expedited timeline agreed to
by the parties, with the hearing set to commence on April 22 and 23, 2024.
[28]          
While Final
Bell’s misrepresentation claim was advanced against BZAM, Cortland responded to
the motion, taking the position that the relief sought would inevitably
prejudice Cortland, an innocent party, and ought not to be granted since it
would be unjust to Cortland in the circumstances of this matter as Cortland had
relied on the unchallenged super priority DIP Lender’s Charge to continue to advance
new funds into the insolvent BZAM.
[29]          
Two business
days before the summary trial was set to proceed, Final Bell sought an
adjournment of the trial as a result of the late production of certain tax
filing documents by BZAM, the timing of which prejudiced Final Bell. I granted
the adjournment to permit Final Bell an opportunity to consider the documents
and its corresponding position at the summary trial.
[30]          
Final Bell then
amended its notice of motion (i.e., its claim) on May 6, 2024 in important
respects. It abandoned its plea for the remedy of rescission. It sought instead
equitable damages and the imposition of a constructive trust over the property
of BZAM and the proceeds thereof to the extent of the value of the Share
Exchange Agreement.
[31]          
BZAM, supported
by Cortland, moved for security for costs. In my Endorsement granting security[5],
I observed the following at paras. 37 and 41:
[32]          
In my view, the
declaratory relief sought by Cortland should be granted, and granted now,
rather than deferred to a hearing of Final Bell’s fraudulent misrepresentation
claim against BZAM on the merits, for a number of reasons.
[33]          
First, the
constructive trust claim now advanced by Final Bell is inescapably a collateral
attack on the ARIO and specifically the approval of the DIP Loan Agreement and
the super priority DIP Lender’s Charge in favour of Cortland that secures the
DIP Loan.
[34]          
The DIP Loan
represented “new funds in” to BZAM, on a Court-approved basis pursuant to the
ARIO, which funds were expressly required to keep BZAM operating as a going
concern to the benefit of all stakeholders, including creditors and employees.
[35]          
As noted, Final
Bell was specifically given notice of the comeback hearing, and indeed attended
at the hearing resulting in the ARIO. It did not oppose the relief sought.
[36]          
If Final Bell
sought to oppose the priority afforded to Cortland through the DIP Lender’s
Charge, or in particular, the structure of the DIP Term Sheet, that was the
time to do so. As noted in the Pre-Filing Report of the Monitor, BZAM would
still require additional financing, and the DIP Facility effectively provided
for approximately $7 million of additional liquidity beyond the existing Credit
Agreement. Cortland was the senior secured creditor of the Applicants in any
event, such that the Court-appointed Monitor was of the view that the structure
would not materially prejudice the creditors of the Applicants. Put differently,
there was no other alternative source of funding to provide the required
liquidity (and none was proposed by Final Bell).
[37]          
Cortland then
relied on its super priority DIP Lender’s Charge, and advanced over $33 million
in DIP funding. That charge, as is typical in CCAA proceedings,
specifically and expressly had priority over all trusts (i.e., including any
constructive trust, such as is now sought by Final Bell).
[38]          
It would be
inequitable, unjust, and contrary to the basic principles of CCAA restructurings
to allow Final Bell to have elected to not oppose that relief when granted on
notice, then later advance a claim for rescission, then abandon that claim for
rescission in the face of the pending SISP deadlines, and then later still
advance a claim for a constructive trust over those same assets and seek a
corresponding priority over the DIP Lender’s Charge that had been in place for
months.
[39]          
Such a
constructive trust inescapably undermines the ARIO, a seminal order in most CCAA
restructurings because it sets out the framework within which the restructuring
will proceed, and the imposition of a constructive trust would inevitably
reverse the priorities established and confirmed by the ARIO.
[40]          
In this
Application, like many CCAA restructurings, one of the fundamental
milestones early in the proceeding is the approval of DIP financing. If no DIP
financing is available, or none is available on appropriate terms, the
restructuring may almost immediately become a liquidating CCAA as the
debtor company ceases to be able to carry on operations and continue as a going
concern. There may be a complete shutdown and a resulting bankruptcy.
[41]          
But where a lender,
as a source of DIP funding, steps forward (and proposed DIP lenders are often existing
lenders who have familiarity with the debtor company and its operations), all
stakeholders are given notice of the proposed terms of the DIP financing and
the opportunity (usually at the comeback hearing) to make submissions about
whether those terms should be approved.
[42]          
As the Supreme
Court has confirmed, there is nothing unusual or inappropriate about a court-ordered
financing charge that has priority over “all other security interests, trusts,
liens, charges and encumbrances, statutory or otherwise”: see Sun Indalex
Finance, LLC v. United Steelworkers, 2013 SCC 6, [2013] 1 SCR 271, at para.
60; Canada v. Canada North Group Inc., 2021 SCC 30, [2021] 2 SCR 571, at
para. 25 (“Canada North”).
[43]          
Where that
occurs, as it did here, another stakeholder cannot bide its time while the DIP
lender advances funds in reliance on its security, and the debtor continues as
a going concern as a result thereof, and then come forward months later when
DIP funds have been advanced and assert a priority in the form of a
constructive trust that would prime the court-approved DIP Lender’s Charge.
[44]          
This is exactly
the sort of collateral attack that affects the fairness and integrity of the
justice system, since the moving party seeks to circumvent the effect of a
decision previously rendered when the party did not avail itself of the direct
attack procedures open to it: see Canada (Attorney General) v. Telezone Inc.,
2010 SCC 62, [2010] 3 SCR 585, at paras. 60-62.
[45]          
The doctrine of
abuse of process is to the same effect, in relevant part, and permits the court
to exercise inherent jurisdiction to preclude litigation which “would
nonetheless violate such principles as judicial economy, consistency, finality
and the integrity of the administration of justice”. All of this is consistent
with protecting the principal of finality: see Toronto (City) v. C.U.P.E
Local 79, 2003 SCC 63, [2003] 3 SCR 77, at paras. 37-38.
[46]          
Specifically,
within restructuring proceedings the courts will not allow a modification of
the initial order that would impermissibly change the dynamics between the DIP
lender and the objecting stakeholder: Collins & Aikman Automotive Canada
Inc., Re, 2007 CanLII 45908 (ON SC), at paras. 105-107.
[47]          
Such would be,
as observed by then Regional Senior Justice Morawetz in Target Canada Co.,
Re, 2016 ONSC 316, contrary to the “building block” nature of sequential
orders made in CCAA proceedings. As the Court stated in that case at paras.
81 and 85:
[48]          
This is
consistent with the observations of Justice Côté, writing for the majority of the Supreme Court in Canada
North at para. 30:
[49]          
Here, Final
Bell elected not to oppose the ARIO. Nor did it appeal the order once made.
Moreover, like all Initial Orders and ARIOs, and consistent with the Model
Orders of the Commercial List, the ARIO contained what is commonly referred to
as the “comeback clause”. That clause expressly enabled any affected party to
seek to amend, vary or vacate the order, and to do so rapidly where required,
on seven days’ notice. Final Bell never sought any such relief. Nor did it seek
at the ARIO hearing to adjourn the motion for approval of the DIP Facility
until a later date if it wished to consider its position (leaving aside what
effects such an adjournment may have had on the restructuring and the continued
operations of BZAM).
[50]          
Final Bell
submits that it did not take any of these steps because, as of March 8, 2024,
it did not have the knowledge and therefore the ability to advance the
constructive trust claim on which it now relies. Cortland disagrees, and I
accept the position of Cortland in this regard.
[51]          
First, Final
Bell clearly knew the nature of the misrepresentations upon which it then based
and still bases its entire claim. Final Bell’s basic claim has three components:
that BZAM intentionally misrepresented its financial circumstances and solvency
(including but not limited to the fact that it was current in its excise tax
filings and remittances), that Final Bell relied on the misrepresentations, and
that it would otherwise not have entered into the Share Exchange Agreement.
[52]          
Second, Final
Bell was also seeking rescission of the Share Exchange Agreement as soon as it
advanced its claim as a result of those alleged misrepresentations.
[53]          
Finally, Final
Bell knew, as of that date on which it first advanced its claim (and in fact it
knew as of the date of the CCAA filing of BZAM and the evidence of
insolvency filed in support of that Application), that it needed to prime the
DIP Facility and therefore obtain a priority over the DIP Lender’s Charge in
order to succeed on its claim. Yet, it took no steps to do so either at the
comeback hearing or at any time thereafter. It failed to avail itself of the
seven day “comeback clause” in the ARIO, bring any motion to amend the ARIO, or
seeking urgent relief as the Commercial List routinely accommodates from
parties in appropriate circumstances.
[54]          
I also cannot
accept the submission of Final Bell that Cortland knowingly and willingly took
the risk that it might lose its super priority merely as a result of the fact
that Final Bell was claiming rescission. Final Bell submits that the fact of
its rescission claim constituted an event of default pursuant to the terms of
the DIP Facility, with the result that Cortland could have terminated the DIP
Facility, but did not do so.
[55]          
In my view,
that is an unreasonable position in the circumstances of this case. Cortland
continued to make advances under the DIP Facility based on its super priority
DIP Lender’s Charge which had not been challenged and was not thereafter
challenged by any party. It was reasonable for Cortland to rely on that
Court-ordered Charge to continue to fund the ongoing operations of BZAM,
precisely as that Charge was intended to allow for. All stakeholders, including
but not limited to Cortland, relied on that set of circumstances, and the
continued operations of BZAM, which in turn depended on the liquidity resulting
from the DIP Facility and Charge.
[56]          
It follows
that, in the face of multiple and continuing opportunities to challenge the
priority of the DIP Lender’s Charge, the subsequent collateral attack on the
ARIO cannot succeed.
[57]          
There is a
second principal reason that Final Bell’s claim, even if ultimately successful,
cannot rank in priority to the super priority DIP Lender’s Charge of Cortland. The
claim of Final Bell is an “equity claim” as defined in the CCAA. As
such, the claim of Final Bell ranks behind the claims of all creditors, not
just creditors with court-ordered priority charges.[6]
[58]          
Subsection 6(8)
of the CCAA is clear that equity claimants are not entitled to share in
assets of an insolvent corporation until the claims of all ordinary creditors
have been paid in full. “Equity claim” is defined in s.2(1) as “a claim that is
in respect of an equity interest, including a claim for, among others, … (d) a
monetary loss resulting from the ownership, purchase or sale of an equity
interest or from the rescission, or, in Québec, the annulment, of a purchase or
sale of an equity interest.”
[59]          
That is
precisely what Final Bell’s claim is: it bought an equity interest in BZAM in
exchange for its Canadian subsidiary. It did not supply goods or services, and it
was not an employee. It is a party to an agreement pursuant to which it
acquired shares. In Nelson Financial Group Ltd., 2010 ONSC 6229, 75 BLR
(4th) 302, Pepall, J. (as she then was), held that “equity claims” as defined
in s. 2(1) of the CCAA include, among other things, a claim for
rescission of the purchase of an equity interest (para. 27), and that
fraudulent misrepresentation claims advanced by a shareholder seeking to
recover their investment were considered equity claims subject to ss. 6(8) and
22.1 of the CCAA (para. 26, citing with approval Blue Range Resource
Corp., Re, 2000 ABQB 4, 15 C.B.R. (4th) 169).
[60]          
In asserting
its late-breaking claim for a constructive trust, Final Bell is seeking to
elevate what is inescapably an equity claim into a claim of not only a
creditor, but a first-ranking creditor with priority over the Court-ordered
super priority DIP Lender’s Charge. Such is expressly not permitted under the CCAA,
within which the definition of “equity claims” should be given an expansive
interpretation: Sino-Forest Corporation (Re), 2012 ONCA 816, 114 O.R.
(3d) 304, at paras. 40-45.
[61]          
To be clear, in
my view, my findings above that the position now taken by Final Bell is a
collateral attack on the ARIO, and that the claim of Final Bell is an equity
claim within the meaning of the CCAA, are sufficient to dispose of this
motion and I need not make any determination about the merits of Final Bell’s
fraudulent misrepresentation claim against BZAM. All I am determining on this
motion is whether, even if such a claim were successful, it would rank in
priority to Cortland’s super priority DIP Lenders Charge.
[62]          
I accept that
the practical reality, resulting from the likely fact that there will be no
assets available to unsecured creditors, that Final Bell may determine that it
does not wish to pursue its fraudulent misrepresentation claim in those
circumstances. Again, I am simply determining that even if such a claim
succeeded, (or, put differently, assuming for the purposes of this motion that
the claim was valid), Final Bell would not be entitled to a priority over
Cortland by way of a constructive trust rather than damages.
[63]          
None of my
findings above are dependent on any finding of credibility of any BZAM or
Cortland witness, but rather turn on the relevant provisions of the CCAA
and the earlier orders made in this proceeding.
[64]          
For these
reasons, I also reject the submission of Final Bell that this motion is in fact
a motion for partial summary judgment on its claim. It is not. It is a motion
for declaratory relief to confirm the existing priority of the DIP Lender’s
Charge over a subsequently advanced claim in equity for a constructive trust,
without any determination about the validity of the underlying claim based on
fraudulent misrepresentation.
[65]          
It follows that
there is no prejudice to Final Bell in having the threshold issue determined on
this motion, as opposed to dismissing this motion in having the priority issue
determined as part of the summary trial of its claim. All of the relevant
evidence was before the Court on this motion. As noted, almost all of it turns
on the relevant statutory provisions in the terms of earlier Orders made in
this proceeding, and the credit agreements (second ARCA and DIP Facility) with
Cortland anyway.
[66]          
Conversely,
there is, in my view, significant prejudice to BZAM, Cortland, and all other
stakeholders, including but not limited to employees of BZAM, in deferring this
matter, which would further delay the progress of this restructuring with
attendant additional costs, accrual of interest and continuing uncertainty.
[67]          
Nor do I find
it necessary to determine whether Cortland in fact had actual or constructive
knowledge of the fact that the representations made to Final Bell in the Share
Exchange Agreement were inaccurate and fraudulently so. I also accept the
submission of Cortland that the position now advanced by Final Bell is
inconsistent with the position it took on the security for costs motion where it
was expressly clear, in both its factum and oral submissions, that it was not
alleging any wrongdoing against Cortland. In amending its notice of motion to
assert a constructive trust claim that ranks in priority to Cortland’s super
priority DIP Charge, Final Bell now asserts (for the first time only recently) that
Cortland knowingly received the proceeds of fraud.
[68]          
I reject that
submission also, not only because it is inconsistent with the previous
admission of Final Bell that Cortland was not alleged to have committed any
wrongdoing (which admission is not sought to be withdrawn), but substantively because
there is no evidence upon which I could make such a finding in any event.
[69]          
Final Bell
submits in its claim that BZAM made representations and warranties in the Share
Exchange Agreement to the effect (among other things) that it was current in
its excise tax filings and remittances, when in fact it was not.
[70]          
I accept the
submission of Cortland that it would be commercially absurd, unrealistic and
unreasonable to impose a duty on it (as a third party lender to BZAM) to do the
following:
[71]          
In sum, it
would be entirely destabilizing to grant Final Bell a priority over the DIP
Lender’s Charge at this point. It would be fundamentally inconsistent with the
objectives of the restructurings that the CCAA was intended to
facilitate, and to the “building block” approach endorsed by now Chief Justice
Morawetz in Re Target.
[72]          
For all of
these reasons, the motion is granted.
[73]          
Cortland has been
successful on the motion. It is presumptively entitled to its costs.
[74]          
Cortland has submitted
a Bill of Costs attached as Exhibit 11 to the Affidavit of Jonathan Shepard
sworn April 24, 2024, reflecting partial indemnity costs of $344,990.58 and
substantial indemnity costs of $517,240.21. Final Bell has submitted a Costs
Outline reflecting partial indemnity costs of $61,255.67 and substantial
indemnity costs in the amount of $90,252.04. All amounts are inclusive of fees,
disbursements and HST.
[75]          
Pursuant to s.
131 of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, costs are in the
discretion of the court, and the court may determine by whom and to what extent
the costs shall be paid.
[76]          
Rule 57.01
provides that in exercising its discretion under s. 131, the court may
consider, in addition to the result in the proceeding (and any offer to settle
or contribute), the factors set out in that Rule.
[77]          
The overarching
objective is to fix an amount that is fair, reasonable, proportionate and
within the reasonable expectations of the parties in the circumstances: Boucher
v.  Public Accountants Council for the Province of Ontario (2004), 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R.
(3d) 291 (C.A.), at paras. 24-26.
[78]          
In my view,
there is no basis here to award costs on an elevated scale and they should be
awarded on a partial indemnity basis. Taking into account the factors set out
in Rule 57 and considering them in the particular circumstances of this case,
in my view, an appropriate award of costs is $150,000 inclusive of fees,
disbursements and HST. I recognize that this is not an insignificant sum.
However, this was a complex case, the issues were prepared, briefed and
litigated on an expedited timetable, the amounts at issue were significant, numerous
contested Court appearances and motions were necessitated, and various steps
were undertaken all as described above.
[79]          
Rule 57.03
provides that, on the hearing of a contested motion, unless the court is
satisfied that a different order would be more just, the court shall fix the
costs of the motion and order them to be paid within 30 days.
[80]          
Accordingly,
that amount is payable by Final Bell to Cortland within 30 days.
[81]          
Order to go in
accordance with these Reasons.