[1]              
The plaintiff applied for a license to practise law in October 2017. He
successfully passed the solicitor examination on his third attempt, but failed
the barrister examination four times. As a result, in accordance with its
bylaws, on October 1, 2020, the defendant Law Society of Ontario advised Mr. Shaulov
that his application for a license was deemed abandoned.
[2]              
Mr. Shaulov commenced proceedings against the LSO and three other
defendants, Performance Assessment Group, John Braham and Michael Williams (the
non-LSO defendants). The non-LSO defendants are consultants who were involved
with the design of the LSO’s licensing examinations.
[3]              
The claims against the non-LSO defendants were struck as disclosing no
reasonable cause of action. After an extensive procedural history which I shall
review in relevant part below, Mr. Shaulov brought this motion under rules
5.03, 5.04(2) and 26.02 to amend his statement of claim to re-add the non-LSO
defendants. The responding parties oppose the motion.
[4]              
For the reasons that follow, the motion is dismissed.
[5]              
Mr. Shaulov commenced judicial review proceedings against the LSO. At
his request, the Divisional Court ordered the matter to be transferred to the
Superior Court to proceed by way of action. On April 6, 2021, Mr. Shaulov
issued a statement of claim against the LSO and the non-LSO
defendants.
[6]              
I will not review the entire history of the proceedings, but will limit
myself to a focused review of steps that are relevant to this motion.
[7]              
In Shaulov v. Law Society of Ontario, 2022 ONSC
2732, Vermette J., the former case management judge, struck out the claim
against the non-LSO defendants without leave to amend on three bases. First, she
found that the human rights allegations against the non-LSO defendants
disclosed no cause of action because there was no separate actionable wrong
alleged, apart from the human rights complaint. The proposed action therefore
ran afoul of s. 46.1(2) of the Human Rights Code, RSO 1990, c.
H.19, which provides that a person may not commence an action based solely on
an infringement of a right under Part 1 of the Code. Second, any Charter
claims Mr. Shaulov wished to make against the non-LSO defendants would be precluded
by virtue of s. 32 of the Charter and the fact that the non-LSO
defendants are private actors not performing governmental activities. Third,
she rejected Mr. Shaulov’s arguments based on rule 5 that the non-LSO
defendants were necessary parties to enable the court to adjudicate effectively
and completely on the claims that may be validly alleged against the LSO.
Relevant evidence could be obtained from them without making them parties.
[8]              
Mr. Shaulov appealed that decision. On February 10, 2023, the Court of
Appeal released its decision upholding Vermette J.’s order striking the claim
against the non-LSO defendants without leave to amend. At the same time, the
Court of Appeal allowed Mr. Shaulov’s appeal in part in respect of Vermette
J.’s orders striking some of the claims against the LSO: Shaulov v. Law
Society of Ontario, 2023 ONCA 95. In its reasons in relation to the non-LSO
defendants, the Court of Appeal referred specifically only to the Human
Rights Code portion of Vermette J.’s reasoning. Nonetheless, it upheld the
striking of the claim against the non-LSO defendants without leave to amend.
[9]              
Following the release of the Court of Appeal decision, the Plaintiff
served an amended statement of claim that still included the non-LSO defendants. 
While the amended statement of claim did not seek any relief against the non-LSO
defendants, Mr. Shaulov took the position that he could keep the non-LSO defendants
as parties pursuant to subrules 5.03(1) and (4) of the Rules of Civil
Procedure. Justice Vermette fixed a timetable for written submissions on
this issue (and an unrelated issue). After the defendant delivered written submissions,
the plaintiff served a “re-amended statement of claim” seeking a declaration that the non-LSO defendants “were negligent
and misrepresented the nature of the Examinations and thus negligently and
intentionally mislead [sic] the Plaintiff.”  That pleading also claimed damages
against the non-LSO defendants “for their negligent misconduct, intentional bad
faith misrepresentation and misleading the plaintiff.”
[10]          
Justice Vermette found the two amended claims
did not comply with her order regarding the non-LSO defendants, as upheld by
the Court of Appeal. In Shaulov v. Law Society of Ontario, 2023
ONSC 5242 she stated in part as follows:
[11]          
Justice Vermette ordered that the plaintiff serve, within 30 days, an
amended statement of claim that does not include any claims against the non-LSO
defendants and that strikes out their names in the title of proceedings.
[12]          
Mr. Shaulov sought to appeal that decision to the Court of Appeal:  Shaulov
v. Law Society of Ontario, 2024 ONCA 263. The Court of Appeal quashed the
appeal, stating in relevant part as follows:
[13]          
Mr. Shaulov then sought an extension of time to seek leave to appeal the
decision of Vermette J. to the Divisional Court. On October 18, 2024, the
Divisional Court granted an extension of time to seek leave to appeal the decision
but denied the motion for leave, with costs to the respondents.
[14]          
Mr. Shaulov then brought this motion seeking leave to amend his
statement of claim to allege negligence against the non-LSO participants.
[15]          
Mr. Shaulov argues that he should be entitled to add the non-LSO
defendants and plead negligence against them as set out in the “Re-Amended
statement of claim”. In that pleading, Mr. Shaulov proposes to:
[16]          
Mr. Shaulov’s theory is that the non-LSO defendants misrepresented
themselves as experts in testing. He argues that “the PAG Defendants are the
mastermind, directing mind, designers, developers and the manufacturer of the
impugned Examination whereas the LSO Defendant is only the user”, and that, as
mastermind, they are necessary parties. He relies on Schembri v. Way 2012
ONCA 620 for this proposition.
[17]          
Mr. Shaulov claims he has only recently discovered facts about the
non-LSO defendants that support his negligence cause of action. He relies on
IAP Claimant H-15019 v Wallbridge, 2023 ONSC 3945; Abrahamovitz v.
Berens, 2018 ONCA to argue that parties may be added as necessary parties
even when no cause of action is pleaded against them. Mr. Shaulov contends that
the non-LSO defendants are necessary parties because their rights will be
affected by the litigation. Further, he does not wish for their discriminatory practices
to be visited on other bodies for which they prepare examinations.
[18]          
Mr. Shaulov argues that because the amended pleading “arise[s] out of
the same facts or factual matrix that was pleaded in the original statement of
claim and can reasonably be seen as falling within the four corners of the existing
claim, they should be permitted unless they will inflict non-compensable
prejudice: Farmers Oil and Gas Inc. v. Ontario (Natural Resources), 2016
ONSC 6359 at paras. 22 and 31. The claim should be read generously and need
only propose a cause of action in relation to which success is not clearly
impossible. There is no prejudice to the defendants. The refusal to amend
should be exercised rarely.
[19]          
The responding parties argue that the proposed amendments are an abuse
of process. The issue of whether Mr. Shaulov is able to plead a reasonable
cause of action against the non-LSO defendants and the issue of whether they
are necessary and proper parties are issues that have already been decided. Indeed,
the latter issue has been decided twice.
[20]          
The responding parties argue that had Mr. Shaulov wished to raise a
claim of negligence, he could and should have done so at the time of the motion
to strike. He should not be permitted to circumvent the decision that struck his
claim without leave to amend by pleading a new cause of action. In any event,
the claim for negligence against the non-LSO defendants is statute-barred. Further,
the proposed amendments do not disclose a reasonable cause of action against
the non-LSO defendants, and they are not necessary and proper parties.
[21]          
Mr. Shaulov responds to the responding parties’ argument that the claim
is statute-barred, with two arguments. First, he only recently discovered the facts
that would give rise to a negligence claim; the limitation period did not start
to run until he discovered these facts. In the alternative, the facts
supporting negligence were properly pled in his initial claim; he is merely adding
a cause of action based on these facts, which is permitted.
[22]          
The issue of whether the non-LSO defendants should be added as necessary
parties under Rule 5 has been twice decided by the court. Vermette J. addressed
this argument and dismissed it in her initial decision of May 6, 2022 (2022
ONSC 2732) . This decision was upheld by the Court of Appeal. I do not accept
Mr. Shaulov’s argument that because the Court of Appeal did not specifically refer
to Rule 5, it did not uphold Vermette J.’s dismissal on this basis. The Court
of Appeal clearly upheld Vermette J.’s decision that the action against the
non-LSO defendants was dismissed without leave to amend. Vermette J.’s decision
that was the subject of the appeal clearly found that the non-LSO defendants
were not necessary parties under Rule 5. The appeal from that decision was
dismissed.
[23]          
Then, at Mr. Shaulov’s request, Vermette J. addressed the issue a second
time in her endorsement of September 18, 2023, (2023 ONSC 5242) at paragraphs
45 and 46, reproduced at paragraph 10 above.
[24]          
The court has an inherent jurisdiction to prevent an abuse of its
process, including a misuse of its procedure. This includes precluding relitigation
where allowing the litigation to proceed would “violate such principles as judicial
economy, consistency, finality and the integrity of the administration of
justice”:  Toronto (City) v. C.U.P.E., Local 79, 2003 SCC 63, [2003] 3
SCR 77 at para. 37. The doctrine can apply not only to matters that have been
raised, but that could have been raised: Wright v. Urbanek, 2019 ONCA
823 at paras 8-9.
[25]          
Mr. Shaulov raises the same arguments under Rule 5 that he made twice to
Vermette J. and once to the Court of Appeal. I agree with the responding
parties that this issue has been finally determined, and it is an abuse of
process to raise it again.
[26]          
I turn now to the negligence claim against the non-LSO defendants and
whether it is statute -barred. Mr. Shaulov argues that he had neither actual
nor constructive knowledge of the material facts upon which a plausible
inference of liability in negligence against the non-LSO defendants could be
drawn until recently, and that as soon as he knew those facts he sought to
amend his pleading:  Grant Thornton LLP v. New Brunswick, 2021 SCC 31 at
para. 42.
[27]          
 I do not accept Mr. Shaulov’s discoverability argument. His complaint
about the non-LSO defendants has been, from the outset, that they manufacture
discriminatory examinations, and that they are not qualified to prepare proper
examinations. I note that on December 3, 2020, less than three months after he
received notice from the LSO that his application for a license was deemed
abandoned, and several months before his first statement of claim was issued
against all the parties, Mr. Shaulov wrote to the LSO as follows:
[28]          
This was one of the reasons Mr. Shaulov sought the LSO’s consent to
convert the application into an action.  When the claim was issued, the non-LSO
defendants were named as defendants. He knew that the non-LSO defendants were engaged
in preparing the examination.  Mr. Shaulov states that he received confirmation
after the release of Mirza et al. v. Law Society of Ontario, 2023 ONSC
6727 that the LSO was a user, not the manufacturer, of the examination.
Confirmation does not equate to discovery, however.  It is clear he discovered
this fact by December 2020, before his initial claim was issued. He knew the
identity of the party that the LSO retained for the examination. A description
of the non-LSO parties is included in his April 2021 claim against them. A
corporate profile report of the corporate defendant is referred to. Although he
wrongly identified Mr. Braham, he pled that neither Mr. Braham nor Mr. Williams
was a registered psychologist, a position he maintains. He alleged that the
parties relied on incorrect or inapplicable standards in creating the examination
and that they failed to follow safeguards, the same arguments he seeks to put
forward now.
[29]          
Mr. Shaulov claims that as time went on, he learned more and more facts
that support a claim in negligence, including that the non-LSO personal
defendants are not registered psychologists. However, it is clear that the
material facts on which he wishes to put forth his claim in negligence were
known to him prior to the issuance of his first claim.
[30]          
I do not accept that he did not have the facts until recently that would
have permitted him to plead negligence. I therefore do not give effect to his
argument that the discoverability principle extends the limitation period in
this case.
[31]          
In the alternative, Mr. Shaulov argues that all the facts supporting his
negligence claims were previously pled. As he is merely attaching a new cause
of action to those facts, the limitation period does not bar the new case of
action from being added. Reading the statement of claim generously and with
some allowance for drafting deficiencies, the new cause of action was supported
by the original facts: Di Filippo v. Bank of Nova Scotia,  2024 ONCA
33at paras 38, 40-42; Klassen v. Beausoleil, 2019 ONCA 407 at
paras. 28-30.
[32]          
The difficulty with this argument is that Mr. Shaulov does not
have an existing claim against the non-LSO defendants. That claim has been
struck. There is no live claim against the non-LSO defendants that can be
amended to assert a new cause of action based on existing facts pled against
them. Therefore, s. 21 of the Limitations Act 2002, SO 2002, c 24, Sch B
applies: “21(1) If a limitation period in respect of a claim against
a person has expired, the claim shall not be pursued by adding the person as a
party to any existing proceeding”: Joseph v. Paramount Canada's Wonderland,
2008 ONCA 469, (2008), 90 O.R. (3d) 401. Even using the date of June 16, 2023,
the date on which Mr. Shaulov first served the proposed amended statement of
claim, as the date of commencement of the claim (and not the date on which Mr.
Shaulov filed his motion for leave to amend, in June 2024), Mr. Shaulov was
well past the limitation period set out in s. 4 of the Limitations Act when
he sought to commence the negligence claim against the non-LSO defendants.
[33]          
Mr. Shaulov further argues he wishes to obtain discovery against
the non-LSO defendants, and they are therefore a necessary party. He relies on Sataur
v. Starbucks Coffee Canada Inc., 2017 ONCA 1017 in support of this
proportion. That case does not assist him. There, the Court of Appeal stated:
[34]          
The opposite is true here. There is no proper cause of action pleaded
against the non-LSO defendants.
[35]          
Neither does Schembri assist the plaintiff. There, the Court of
Appeal considered when personal liability might attach to a corporation’s
director, as the corporation’s directing mind. The present case is about
whether there is a reasonable, non-statute barred, cause of action against any
of the non-LSO defendants, including the corporate defendant.
[36]          
Therefore, on the bases of the of the abuse of process in relitigating
the issue and the limitation period in respect of the proposed negligence claim,
I conclude that no amendment to the pleading to add the non-LSO defendants back
to the pleading shall be permitted.  Mr. Shaulov’s motion to amend the pleading
to add the non-LSO defendants is dismissed.
[37]          
The responding parties seek costs in the amount of $5,906.76 on a substantial
indemnity scale. Mr. Shaulov argues against the responding parties being
awarded costs because the costs orders are being used to discourage him from
litigating. In the alternative, Mr. Shaulov asks that costs not be immediately payable.
He further argues that the costs sought are excessive. Regarding the last
argument, I note that Mr. Shaulov, were he successful, sought compensation for costs
on what he described as a partial indemnity scale of $6,528.60, calculated at
an hourly rate of $162 hourly.
[38]          
I see no reason to depart form the usual practice of awarding costs to
the successful party and ordering that they be paid immediately following the
step in which they are ordered. The responding parties’ costs are reasonable
and proportionate to the complexity of the matter. Given Mr. Shaulov’s own costs
outline, the amount sought by the responding parties should have been in his contemplation
to pay should he be unsuccessful.
[39]          
The respondents argue that the motion was frivolous and unnecessary, and
costs should be awarded on an elevated scale.  Had the arguments been limited
to, or largely focused on, the rule 5 issue I would have agreed. Given that a
significant focus of the motion was negligence and discoverability, I exercise
my discretion to order costs on a partial indemnity
scale in the amount of $4,430.39, to be paid within 30 days.
[40]          
The motion to amend the pleading to add the non-LSO defendants is dismissed.
Mr. Shaulov shall pay costs of $4,430.39 to the responding parties on a partial
indemnity scale within 30 days.