[1]              
On November 3, 2024, during the South Asian
festival of Diwali, Sikh nationalists seeking an independent Khalistan protested
at the Hindu Sabha Temple in Brampton. A clash with pro-India
counter-protesters ensued and turned ugly. Mob violence instigated by some
leaders of the protest and by counter-protesters inflicted personal injuries
and property damage. The object of the protest was the involvement of officials
from the Consulate General of India in holding an event called a consular camp,
for the issuance of Life Certificates to pensioners. The protest disrupted the
consular activities and the religious activities of devotees attending the
temple as a place of worship.
[2]              
The Life Certificates, attesting that the
bearers are alive on that date, are necessary for elderly Indian nationals to
continue receiving their state pensions while resident abroad. Indian law
requires these certificates to be completed on or before November 30 every
year, failing which pension payments are suspended.
[3]              
Because of the violence and advice from local
police, as well as widely publicized social media posts by protest organizers,
the Kalibari and Triveni Mandirs, other temples in the Greater Toronto Area,
cancelled their consular camps for November 16 and 17, 2024. Attempts by Halton
Regional Police to host a camp on behalf of the Vaishno Devi Temple in Oakville
failed, after the police force assessed the security threat too serious.
[4]              
The applicant is a temple operated by the Hindu
Cultural Society, a Canadian registered charity in Scarborough. The consulate
has announced that the camp at this temple will take place on November 30,
2024. The pro-Khalistan protest organizers have now called on their
sympathizers to assemble at the applicant’s temple on that date. That is almost
certain to prompt counter-protesters to meet them. The applicant therefore brought
a motion without notice for an interlocutory injunction against holding a
protest within 100 metres of its temple, to allow its consular camp to proceed
and to allow safe entry for congregants.
[5]              
The protesters are Sikh nationalists seeking the
creation of Khalistan, a separate Sikh enclave in India. The stated rationale
for targeting the consular camps appeared in a social media post included in
the supporting affidavit, claiming the cancellation of the Triveni Mandir event
“a Victory for Pro Khalistan Sikhs because Indian Consular Camps Are Not Life Certificate
Camps but Death Certificate Camps.” Elaborating on this claim, the authors
alleged that consulates were found by the RCMP and CSIS to have recruited
“Proxies and Foot Soldiers to Spy on and attack Pro Khalistan Sikhs during
community events.” The stated purpose of the protest campaign was to persuade
the Canadian government to close Indian consulates in Toronto and Vancouver. According
to the media reports filed in the motion record, the effect of the protests
have had the opposite effect. They have attracted condemnation of the
protesters from the Prime Minister, the Brampton mayor, and other politicians.
[6]              
To illustrate the complexity of the situation, Canada’s relations with
India have been strained because of reporting of Canadian officials’ statements,
included in the motion record, that Indian diplomats spy on Canadian Sikhs and
are responsible for the assassination on Canadian soil of a supporter of the
Sikh separatist movement. Whatever the truth of this contention, the
characterization of the Life Certificate Camps as “Death Certificate Camps”
appears tied to the belief that the Indian government ran an intelligence
operation concluding with the individual’s murder. One can therefore find at
the root of the protests the raw ingredients of political speech protected by the
Canadian constitution and, in some respects, aligned with the Canadian
government’s diplomatic protest lodged with its Indian counterpart. The
counter-protesters’ activities, also to be enjoined, are also political in
nature and are protected if conducted in a peaceful manner.
[7]              
The problem with the protests is that the political interests are
emotionally charged, and the coming together of the protesters and
counter-protesters has proven to lead to violent behaviour.
[8]              
The core issue in this motion does not require
the court to consider, even if it could, the ethnic and religious politics between
the advocates of an independent Khalistan and the Indian state. Moreover, the
diplomatic tensions between Canada and India, as reported in the background
content to the news reports filed in the motion evidence, do not impact the
reasoning except, as stated above, that the root messages of the protest and
counter-protest are political in nature. Rather, as the discussion of the
appropriate legal test will establish, the court must determine the extent to
which the protesters’ freedom of expression can be allowed to impede the temple
operators’ ability to host the consular officials in the administration of a
vital service to pensioners in the community and the religious activities of
worshipers unconnected to the camps.
[9]              
For the reasons that follow, I have concluded
that the 100-metre cordon is justified to protect the participants in the
consular camp and congregants while not unduly limiting the ability of the
protesters to communicate their message to the participants and to the larger
public. Even if the consular events are part of an Indian government scheme to
spy on Canadian residents or to recruit operatives – somewhat of a stretch when
one considers the advanced age of the participants and the very public nature
of the events – monitoring of foreign diplomatic staff is the remit of Canada’s
security services and not that of provincial superior courts. Despite the
geopolitical intrigue that could very well be occurring, consulates do exist to
provide ordinary but important regular services to nationals abroad. The fact
that the applicant’s temple is also a place of worship means that there are
competing Charter rights in play.
[10]          
The court may grant an interlocutory injunction,
in accordance with s. 101 of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.
C.43. The general test for interlocutory injunctions, including injunctions made
on motions without notice, were the three RJR MacDonald and American
Cyanamid criteria of (a) a serious issue to be tried, (b) irreparable harm
to the applicant if the court does not issue the injunction, and (c) the
balance of convenience: R. v. Canadian Broadcasting Corp., 2018 SCC 5,
[2018] 1 SCR 196, at para. 12.
[11]          
Ontario rule 40.03 also requires an undertaking
for damages, but the court can relieve the applicant of that requirement where,
as here, the persons being restrained are unlikely to suffer damages. As a
precaution, the applicant has filed such an undertaking. Similarly, the 10-day
restriction of an order made on a without-notice motion under rule 40.02 is of
no application, because the order will expire by the end of the same day it
comes into effect.
[12]          
The issue between the applicant and the
unidentified but expected protesters and counter-protesters is the conflict
between, in the applicant group, the rights of the consular camp participants
to hold their event and of the worshipers to attend temple, and in the
respondent group, the rights of protesters to express their views and assemble
near the temple. On the general test, the first condition is clearly satisfied.
[13]          
Cancellation of the event could lead to
pensioners having their benefits suspended and their right to assembly
frustrated. While there are other avenues for obtaining Life Certificates, many
will miss out. These are vulnerable people dependent on pension income. Waiting
for months to have their pensions reinstated could lead to rental evictions and
inability to buy necessaries. The knock-on socio-economic effect of missed
pension payments cannot be dismissed as transitory. The rights of worshipers is
also self-evident and cannot be quantified as reparable. Overall, I am
persuaded that there would be irreparable harm if the injunction is not
granted.
[14]          
The balance of convenience likely favours the
applicant. It is not seeking a blanket curtailment of the protesters’ ability
to make their views known, whereas protest impinging on the space around the
temple could discourage pensioners from entering to get their Life Certificates
processed and worshipers seeking spiritual comfort and religious services. The
moving party has therefore met the ordinary criteria for an interlocutory
injunction.
[15]          
In cases involving restraint of free speech, the
Supreme Court has held that the ordinary RJR MacDonald and American
Cyanamid criteria are not wholly appropriate, because the person whose
expression is in issue usually does not have an interest beyond free speech. The
ordinary criteria, developed in the commercial context, “stack the cards
against the non-commercial speaker where there is no tangible, immediate
utility from the expression other than the freedom of expression itself”:
Canada (Human Rights Commission) v. Canadian Liberty Net, 1998 CanLII 818
(SCC), [1998] 1 SCR 626, at para. 47.
[16]          
In those instances, the balancing test gives way
to a more stringent requirement of reserving injunctive relief to the clearest
of cases. Unlike commercial speech deemed to be of “low- to no- value,”
political speech protected by s. 2 of the Charter is of intrinsic value:
See Canadian Broadcasting Corp., para. 20.
[17]          
There are also additional restrictions on the court’s
jurisdiction to grant quia timet injunctions to prevent activity even
though no harm has yet been suffered. Quia timet is a Latin phrase meaning
‘because he fears.’ The party seeking such an order must prove
a high probability that the feared harm will in fact occur. “Quia
timet injunctions, particularly those restraining expression, should
not be issued ‘to be on the safe side’”: 40 Days for Life v. Dietrich,
2023 ONSC 5879, at paras. 47 and 53. Although the applicant has yet to suffer
harm, the rights of pensioners and congregants in other temple communities have
already been prejudiced.
[18]          
The motion therefore turns on two issues: (1)
whether the basis for the injunction is clear, and (2) whether there is a high
probability that the harm will occur if the court does not issue the
injunction. The issues may ostensibly bleed into each other. The difference is
that the first one applies to all cases involving the impairment of a Charter
right such as freedom of expression and assembly, whereas the second issue
arises from requests for injunctions against future activity.
[19]          
Both parties have or represent parties with
fundamental rights which are starkly opposed. The protesters’ rights to free
speech and assembly potentially infringes the rights of the temple and its
congregants to freedom of assembly and religion. The pensioners’ right is not
intrinsically a Charter right, because the access to consular services
is not of itself connected with a democratic activity. Strictly speaking, that
access relates to property and economic rights. That said, those rights are protected
by tort laws restraining trespass and interference with economic interests. Despite
the religious nature of the applicant, the consular camps do not engage freedom
of religion because the activities do not entail religious activities. However,
the applicant operates a temple of worship whose devotees’ freedom of religion
will be impacted if they are blocked by a protest.
[20]          
Whether characterized as a conflict between
opposed Charter rights or between a Charter right and private law
rights, the dispute is a clearly defined one and must be reconciled in a proportionate
manner. The proportionate balancing must robustly give effect to the Charter
protection to its fullest extent and not simply rely on a “literal”
application of the limitations on fundamental rights justifiable under s. 1. A
decision having a disproportionate impact on a Charter right is not
reasonable: Law Society of British Columbia v. Trinity Western University,
2018 SCC 32, [2018] 2 SCR 293, at paras. 79-80.
[21]          
In the administrative law context, the Supreme
Court has stated that Charter rights could also engage a proportionality
analysis if the rights conflict with Canada’s international obligations: Lake
v. Canada (Minister of Justice), 2008 SCC 23, [2008] 1 SCR 761, at para. 27.
Despite the political tensions between Canada and India, this country has
diplomatic relations with India, and residents of Indian origin whose access to
consular services must be protected as a matter of international law.
[22]          
In this case, the nature and medium of the
speech must also inform the legal standard. In the case of press or media
publication, where the issue is restraint of “pure” speech, injunctions would
stifle expression altogether. The applicant is not seeking to restrain the
protesters’ ability to post their opinions online, speak to reporters, or even
to protest. They instead seek a zone of safety around the temple to allow
pensioners to meet with consular officials to process their Life Certificates,
and for congregants to attend temple. What the protesters do beyond the 100-metre
cordon, including the use of megaphones to be heard, is not to be subject to
court order.
[23]          
I therefore conclude that the order the
applicant requests clearly delineates how the court should balance the
competing rights in a manner that gives effect to the protesters’ freedom of
expression and assembly, while preserving the temple’s ability to welcome the
consular officials and the pensioners accessing their services and to serve
congregants. Even at 100 metres, undoubtedly some pensioners could be deterred,
either because of the noise and voices or because of their own political
sympathies with the protesters’ cause. Such interference might not be
avoidable. However, in the circumstances, the order requested is reasonable and
has considered the protesters’ right to engage in protest in a peaceful manner.
[24]          
In this case, it is possible the next protest
will not involve violence, especially because the police are on alert and some
of the leaders have been arrested. However, the harm does not end with
violence. Intimidation of elderly persons attending the temple for
administrative consular services and for worship is harm to them and to the
community the temple represents. Given the evidence filed by the applicant of
social media and other communications by the protest organizers to prevent the
consular camps from taking place, there is a high probability that the aim of
the protest is to create harm by affecting participation in the consular camps.
[25]          
The B.C. Supreme Court has recently granted a quia
timet injunction in very similar circumstances, citing the risk of harm
based on prior conduct and threats: Khalsa Diwan Society v Doe, 2024
BCSC 2072, at para. 25. A similar pattern of events justified an injunction
against protesting at the B.C. Parliament Buildings in Victoria: British
Columbia (Legislative Assembly) v John Doe, 2020 BCSC 301.
[26]          
In this case, two facts establish the high probability
of harm.
[27]          
First, reports of the November 3 incident involved
actual personal injuries and property damage. The perpetrators were arrested and
are subject to bail conditions. Whether others will fill their shoes is
somewhat of an imponderable, and the court must be wary of painting all
protesters with the same brush. The press clippings filed by the applicant also
included a report that “the Canadian PM, RCMP have acknowledged that Indian
diplomats spy on Canadian Sikhs and are responsible for the assassination of [Sikh
nationalist] Shaheed Nijjar.” This arc of intrigue is broad enough to include the
possibility of agents provocateurs helping to stoke the protest to turn
Canadian public opinion against the secessionists. The Indian government, in
fact, can benefit by bad publicity for Sikh separatists in Canada. These
current events have stoked considerable sectarian and ethnic strife in
otherwise peaceful South Asian communities in Canada.
[28]          
The second pertinent fact is the cancellation of
other consular camps because of the risk assessment by the local police and the
actual threats by the protest organizers. The violence on November 3 has therefore
informed both law enforcement and reasonable facility operators of the need to cancel
the events for the sake of public safety. The protesters’ de facto
interdiction of lawful consular services to pensioners from the Indian
community by the threat of conduct intended to prevent participation amounts to
harm that will occur if the court does not push back against the threats already
made. Although an apparent afterthought, the congregants of the temples also
find themselves as collateral damage in the conflict.
[29]          
I therefore conclude that there is a high
probability of at least some harm if the court refused to grant the injunction.
Accordingly, the injunction should issue in a manner that least disrupts the protesters
and counter-protesters’ freedoms of speech and assembly.
[30]          
On the balance of probabilities, the applicant
has satisfied the elevated requirements of a motion for an injunction
restraining the protesters from encroaching the 100-metre perimeter of the
applicant’s temple. Since it will expire on the same day it is operative, there
is no need for a further attendance to extend its duration or scope.
[31]          
Pursuant to rule 57.03(3), the court does not
award costs of the motion. Due to the urgency of releasing this decision, it is
released today. The need for any minor or editorial changes should be brought
to my attention, if necessary.