[1]              
Neeraj Monga, the Applicant (“Mr. Monga” or “the
father”)), met Dimple Bahtia, the Respondent (“Ms. Monga” or “the mother”)), on
a virtual dating site. He went to meet her in person in India, and a few days
later, they married on November 27, 2004. Mr. Monga sponsored his new wife to
Canada, and she arrived in Toronto in April 2005.
[2]              
The parties have two children: a daughter, S.,
17 years old, and a son, A., who is 13 years old. The parties separated without
the possibility of reconciliation on February 28, 2022.
[3]              
This case involves the parents’ relationship
with the children, including decision-making and parenting time. It also involves
the resolution of the financial aspects of the end of their marriage, that is,
equalization and spousal support. Finally, many post-separation issues must be
addressed to determine what each spouse owes the other.
[4]              
This was a high-conflict litigation and a very
emotional trial.
[5]              
After providing a brief history of the family,
the general position of the parties and the history of the litigation, I will
address the various issues in three broad categories: relationship with the
children, end-of-marriage financial issues, and post-separation adjustments.
[6]              
Mr. Monga is a forensic accountant and financial
analyst. He has several university degrees, one from Indore University in India
and an MBA from the Ivey School of Business at Western.
[7]              
Ms. Monga has a Master’s Degree in Political
Science from the University of New Delhi. She was a trainee at American Express
in New Delhi when she married Mr. Monga.
[8]              
Until 2014, for the first nine-and-a-half years
of the marriage, Mr. Monga was a partner at Veritas Investment Research
Corporation (“Veritas”). The family enjoyed a very comfortable lifestyle. Ms.
Monga began studies in Canada, but she did not work outside the home until 2013
or 2014. The parties had their two children. The family travelled often and purchased
a house in an expensive neighbourhood in Toronto.
[9]              
Ms. Monga was very active in her children’s
activities. She got involved in the school that they attended, including being the
assistant librarian. She was also very active in the Indian community and in
her faith.
[10]          
Mr. Monga was also an involved parent,
supporting the children’s activities. Both parents cared for and are ambitious
for their children.
[11]          
Through his work at Veritas, Mr. Monga became involved
in an investigation of the Indiabulls Group of Companies, in India, that
resulted in a very critical report of the Bank of India. In retaliation to the
criticism, Mr. Monga and one of his Veritas partners were charged with criminal
libel.
[12]          
To this day, Mr. Monga cannot return to India
because he would be arrested. Interpol had a mandate for his arrest, which he
successfully challenged. He is now able to travel internationally, just not to
India.
[13]          
In April 2014, Mr. Monga decided to sell his
shares in Veritas. He sold his interest for $1,000,000 on April 11, 2014. He
continued to work for Veritas for 12 months and then worked solely for his own
company, Antya. There is disagreement between the parties as to whether Mr.
Monga’s departure from Veritas was voluntary or whether he was fired (Ms.
Monga’s theory). This dispute is not relevant since it is acknowledged that Mr.
Monga formed a new company, Antya, which is now the vehicle through which he
earns his livelihood.
[14]          
At about the same time, Mr. and Ms. Monga
started another company, Kala Designs Inc. (“Kala Designs”), which was to be
directed and owned by Ms. Monga. Kala Designs imports scarves made in India for
resale in Canada and the U.S. There is much dispute about the role and
profitability of Kala Designs.
[15]          
The family lived on the $1,000,000 from the sale
of Mr. Monga’s interest in Veritas, and Mr. Monga added a home equity line of
credit (“HELOC”) to their residence.
[16]          
With Kala Designs costing more than expected and
Antya growing slowly, the family overextended itself for several years. The
family continued maintaining an elevated lifestyle. It contributed generously
to the children’s RESP and sent the older daughter to a private school. It did
not significantly pay down its mortgage or the HELOC.
[17]          
This financial crunch drove Mr. Monga to want to
sell the matrimonial home and move to Oakville, which Ms. Monga was reluctant
to do. This prompted many disagreements. Ms. Monga accused Mr. Monga of
extramarital affairs. The couple separated in 2018, with Mr. Monga renting his
own apartment.
[18]          
The couple reconciled, but in 2019, there was an
incident of family violence for which Mr. Monga was charged. He again left the
matrimonial home.
[19]          
The parties reconciled again in November 2021,
after Mr. Monga received an absolute discharge for the family violence episode.
However, after a Diwali party, when Ms. Monga accused Mr. Monga of flirting
with other women, ignoring her and treating her in a humiliating fashion, Ms.
Monga said that Mr. Monga hit her again. Mr. Monga denies that he did.
[20]          
This was the end of the relationship. Ms. Monga did
not press charges against Mr. Monga. She left to go to India to stay with her
family for six weeks.
[21]          
When Ms. Monga returned from India, she stayed
in the matrimonial home and Mr. Monga, as he had done before, left on May 1,
2022.
[22]          
The parties agree that the date of separation is
February 28, 2022.
[23]          
Mr. Monga continued to pay the mortgage on the
matrimonial home, but did not formally pay child or spousal support. He would
send Ms. Monga money on an ad hoc basis. When she asked for more money
for Kala Design, he refused and she cashed in her RRSPs.
[24]          
The parties have different views about the relationship
and its ending. Mr. Monga presents a story of his patiently working to save the
marriage but being unable to sustain the emotional toll the mother was putting
on the family. In his view, Ms. Monga cannot control her emotions, and life
with her is chaotic. The acrimonious disagreements between the parties affected
the children.
[25]          
Mr. Monga maintains that he shared financial
information with his wife throughout the marriage and that any insinuation that
he has hidden funds, accounts, or money is fanciful.
[26]          
Ms. Monga describes a relationship where she was
completely vulnerable and abused psychologically and physically. She arrived
from India on the promise of a good marriage with an intelligent and
accomplished husband. She relied on him to manage the family’s finances since
it was his profession. She described her husband as sometimes generous, sometimes
giving her the silent treatment. According to her, he was controlling, quick to
anger, a lady’s man, and one who repeatedly undermined her and called her names
throughout the marriage, even in front of the children, often questioning her
intelligence.
[27]          
Ms. Monga believes that Mr. Monga lied to her about
the family’s finances. She says that Mr. Monga threatened to have her declared
insane and leave her penniless and without her children. She believed him.
[28]          
The litigation has had a devastating effect on
both parties, financially and emotionally.
[29]          
Mr. Monga filed his application in November
2022. His impetus was to have the matrimonial home sold.
[30]          
On July 21, 2023, at a case conference in front
of Justice Vella, the parties agreed to a temporary, without prejudice order requiring
Mr. Monga to pay $6,000 per month in uncharacterized support effective August
1, 2023, with the children residing primarily with the mother.
[31]          
The parties also agreed as part of Justice Vella’s
Order that a Voice of the Child Report be sought.
[32]          
After the Case Conference, after a trip that Ms.
Monga took in August 2023 to Atlanta for a fashion show for Kala Design, during
which the children resided with Mr. Monga, the children decided not to return
to their mother’s home and refused to speak to her.
[33]          
After the children’s refusal to move back with
Ms. Monga, a further case conference dealing with parenting issues was held. On
October 17, 2023, at the Case Conference in front of Justice Rhinelander, the
parties agreed to an order which includes the following terms:
[34]          
Shortly after the Case conference of October 17,
2023, the Voice of the Child Report was completed and provided to the
parties. The children in the report are said to prefer to stay primarily with
their father.
[35]          
On November 23, 2023, a long motion before Justice
Faieta was heard to determine child and spousal support. Pursuant to Justice
Faieta’s decision:
[36]          
It is not debated that the orders were generally
ignored. No shared parenting took place, and the children continued to reside
mostly with the father. The father did not pay all the child support ordered,
and the mother did not contribute to the expenses of the matrimonial home. The
mother also described the father in negative terms to the children.
[37]          
On February 7, 2024, Justice Kraft found that
Ms. Monga had not satisfied her disclosure obligations and also ordered that
the family attend reintegration therapy with Richard Theoduloz, who eventually
ended the therapy in the following terms: “Given the litany of allegations made
by both parent’s [sic], outpatient family therapy is not advisable at
this time. This family may wish to obtain further direction from the court and
consider an open and evaluative process to investigate the allegations raised
before any therapeutic support can be embarked upon”.
[38]          
On February 9, 2024, Justice Diamond assigned
Justice Shin Doi as the Case Management Judge.
[39]          
On April 30, 2024, Justice Sharma varied Justice
Rhinelander’s Order to provide parenting time mirroring the Voice of the
Child Report, namely that the children would reside primarily with the
father and have parenting time with the mother on weekends starting Saturday at
noon.
[40]          
On an interim basis, Justice Sharma declined to
make any order on decision-making and adjourned to the trial the allegations of
alienation advanced to support a setting aside of the Voice of the Child
Report. He declined to vary the child support orders since this relief was not requested.
He ordered costs against Ms. Monga in the amount of $13,000.
[41]          
On September 27, 2024, Justice Horkins heard a
motion brought by Ms. Monga to adjourn the trial date, which she dismissed. The
trial proceeded on October 7, 2024.
[42]          
The matrimonial home has now been sold. It will
be transferred to third parties on January 6, 2025.
[43]          
The issues before me include decision-making,
parenting time, child support, equalization, spousal support and various
post-separation adjustments, including child and spousal support arrears. I
will deal with the issues in three different sections: Relationship with the Children,
End of Marriage Financial Issues, Post-separation Adjustments and Arrears.
[44]          
Under this part, there are five issues before
me:
[45]          
For ease of reading in this part, I will refer
to Mr. Monga as “the father” and Ms. Monga as “the mother”.
[46]          
The shared parenting orders were never
implemented. At trial, the father explained that he thought the Voice of the
Child Report validated his position that the children preferred living with
him and were unsettled at their mother’s place, and that he ought not to upset
them and should attend to their wishes when, as he states, they call him to
leave their mother’s home. He eventually brought a motion in front of Justice
Sharma in April 2024, who agreed with him on a temporary basis.
[47]          
The unchallenged evidence is that over time, the
children have spent several nights a month with their mother, and the daughter has
spent more time with her mother than her brother has.
[48]          
The father says that the Voice of the Child
Report relays the wishes of the children and should be implemented. On an interim
basis, Justice Sharma made the same order. The mother objects to the Voice
of the Child Report, which, she claims, was completed once the children had
already been alienated from her by the father. She also claims they were “bribed”
and that the father purposely offered them gifts, jewellery for the daughter
and shoes for the son, such that the children felt a sense of gratitude and
enhanced loyalty toward their father.
[49]          
The Voice of the Child Report provides a
complex series of affirmations on the part of the children. Although the
preferences expressed indicate that they want to live mostly with their father,
they profess a love for their mother and want to spend time with her as well. There
are many statements in the Report that must be assessed in the context in which
they were given.
[50]          
A Voice of the Child Report is a summary
of the children’s wishes at the time that they were sought, that is, in the
fall of 2023. As stated in the Report, “No other contextual information was gathered
for the purpose of the report, and no recommendations to the court are made”. A
Voice of the Child Report is a mechanism to obtain evidence from the
children without subjecting them to a courtroom.
[51]          
The children were interviewed twice, on
September 27, 2023 and on October 3, 2023.
[52]          
The daughter, S., who was then 16 years old,
expressed her preference for her father to have sole decision-making and for
parenting time with her mother on weekends from Saturday at noon to Sunday at 7:00
p.m., and the rest of the time with her father.
[53]          
The daughter expressed a variety of
contradictory emotions toward her mother. She says “she (the mother) can be a
great mom sometimes and would give good advice”. She described her mother as
really “nice and social at first”, that she (the daughter) laughed and made jokes
with her mother. Her criticism of her mother involves the way in which the
mother relates to the father. S. blames the mother for harassing her father,
for treating him like a “slave”, and generally for talking negatively about the
father since separation and “going crazy when she is mad”.
[54]          
The daughter is critical of her mother’s faith,
which she says prevents her from recognizing her children’s accomplishments by
attributing them to Guru-ji. The daughter is also critical of her mother’s work
and constant travel to India. She feels her mother has not demonstrated enough
interest in her daughter’s life.
[55]          
 With respect to her father, the daughter welcomes
his advice and support on schoolwork. This academic support is important to the
daughter as she prepares to apply to universities and wishes to attend Stanford
University.
[56]          
Despite her expressed preference for living with
her father, there was evidence at trial from Mr. Monga that S. now visits her
mother often during weekends and spends several nights at her mother’s place
when she does.
[57]          
The son A was twelve years old when he was
interviewed in the fall of 2023. He also expressed deep resentment and sadness about
his parents’ discord and intense disputes, particularly the current legal
proceedings. He resents his mother disparaging his father.
[58]          
The son also expressed a preference for living
with his father “because his (the father’s) residence is closer to his school
and tutor … 5 minutes away from his swimming location compared to 15 minutes
from his mother’s residence. In addition, his basketball sessions are 10
minutes away from his father’s residence compared to the 30 minutes from his
mother’s residence”.
[59]          
Such reasons are not compelling.
[60]          
The son was not happy to return to the
matrimonial home where the mother lived, which reminded him of the constant
conflicts between his parents.
[61]          
The son preferred a flexible schedule with the
liberty to attend whichever residence he chose at any point in time, including
the option of going to his mother during the week and his father during the
weekends. He wanted to spend Halloween, Thanksgiving and the first two days of
Diwali with his mother, the last two days with his father, generally weekdays with
his father and weekends with his mother, extending into Monday drop off at
school.
[62]          
At trial, the evidence was that A. spends more
time with his father than with his mother. When he goes to his mother, he
sometimes calls his father to pick him up. The mother explains that the
children fight and that when they do, A. wants to return to his father’s place.
[63]          
The mother’s evidence was that the Voice of
the Child report was biased because the children had received gifts from
their father prior to their attendance. Mr. Monga did testify that he told the
children not to ask money from their mother.
[64]          
The mother argued that the Report should be set
aside on the basis that it was obtained when the children had already been
alienated from her by the father. The evidence on this issue was not
convincing. It is not necessary for me to find that the children were alienated
to assess the weight to be given to the Report on a final basis, after having
heard the entire trial evidence.
[65]          
A Voice of the Child Report is not
binding on the Courts. It is not the Voice of the Court. It is one element to
consider in assessing the best interests of the children.
[66]          
The Voice of the Child Report is based on
two interviews in the midst of a very high conflict dispute between the parents
where the children were caught in the middle. Neither parent was particularly
skilled at sparing the children from the conflict and its financial and
emotional impact. The daughter was able to read the legal materials on her
father’s computer since it was not secured and she had his general password.
The mother was quite vocal about her feelings about the father and the
litigation with both children.
[67]          
I conclude from the Report that in the fall of
2023, both children were tired, saddened and distressed about the level of
conflict between their parents. They blamed their mother for the intensity of
the conflict. They preferred to stay at their father’s place during school days,
because it was closer to the school (the son) and provided access to academic
help (the daughter). It was also a calmer place for them.
[68]          
The Divorce Act provides that all decisions
relating to the children must be made with their best interests in mind. It
states:
[69]          
The parties agree that they should have joint
decision-making authority with respect to the now 14-year-old son, A., and that
any disagreement should be resolved through mediation.
[70]          
As for the daughter, S., she is 17, and will
turn 18 in February 2025.
[71]          
According to the Voice of the Child
Report, S. would prefer that her father have sole decision-making authority.
[72]          
At trial, the father nuanced this position as he
recognized that both he and the mother are important figures in S.’s life and
that the daughter can benefit from the advice and support of both of her
parents. In his final submissions, the father suggested that he make the final
decision after consultation with the mother.
[73]          
The mother seeks joint decision-making for S.
[74]          
I agree with the mother. Considering all factors
pursuant to Section 16 (3) of the Divorce Act, I find that the mother
can provide valuable support to S. She is also the parent who can provide
access to her maternal side of the family. The mother was an important part of
the children’s care throughout their life prior to separation.
[75]          
Despite the daughter’s indications that there
are conflicts between mother and daughter, the daughter chooses to go and spend
time with her mother regularly. The daughter complains about her mother’s
religious beliefs and her emotional character. Neither of these traits are
described as harmful. Rather, they are described as disappointing or annoying.
[76]          
Despite their different personalities and
disagreements, the parties shared an unbounded love for their children. They
both participated in the children’s activities and rejoiced in their children’s
successes. They were ambitious for their children and spoiled them at times.
Their genuine commitment to the children sustained them for many years.
[77]          
Although it is unlikely that major decisions
will need to be taken before February 2025, when S. turns 18, I find that joint
decision-making is in the best interests of S. Joint decision-making for both
children is in their short and long-term best interests. Both children should
have access to their parents’ different strengths.
[78]          
One issue that will arise is the possibility of
international travel with the children. Both parties are content that
international travel should be done with the consent of the other parent, and
that consent will not be unreasonably withheld.
[79]          
The father has indicated that he does not wish
for the children to travel to India because he fears that the children could be
withheld as a ploy to have him come to India and, hence, submit himself to the
arrest warrant that is still outstanding against him. Because the mother is
travelling often to India, she might eventually want to take the children to
India. She has asked to be able to travel internationally without the father’s
consent.
[80]          
This may be an issue that will have to be
mediated. With appropriate legal guarantees and safeguards to protect A., as a
minor child, from being detained at the border, it might be appropriate to
offer the children the possibility of visiting India and their extended
families who live there.
[81]          
I will not make an order on that point since the
issue is not live. S. will be eighteen in a few months and A. may or may not be
interested in visiting India in the coming years. A fuller record of the legal
risks would have to be considered.
[82]          
In the Voice of the Child Report, both
children indicate that they want to spend weekdays with their father and spend time
with their mother over the weekends, although the son wishes the schedule to be
more flexible and that he could decide when he wants to go to which house.
[83]          
It seems clear that the children are the
decision-makers and the parents exercise little control. The children move
between the two households at their leisure. In his testimony, the father
explains that his son A. often calls him when he is at his mother’s house for
the father to pick him up. In Mr. Monga’s assessment, A. spends at most 4 to 7
nights per month at his mother’s house.
[84]          
At some point in his testimony, the father
suggested that if the matrimonial home did not sell, he would buy the mother
out and live with the children in the matrimonial home, fulfilling the threat
that the mother fears the most, that she would end up with nothing: no home and
no children.
[85]          
The fact that the father presented this option
to the Court speaks to his reflex to push the mother aside and diminish her
role in the children’s lives.
[86]          
As described above, the children, through the Voice
of the Child Report, identified that they love both of their parents and
that they know that both parents love them.
[87]          
It may appear futile to make a parenting time
order, in light of S.’s age and A.’s strong preferences for flexibility and
being allowed to move freely between the two households.
[88]          
I find that there is value in reinforcing the
obligations of both parents to support the other parent’s role in their
children’s lives and not attempt to undermine it. In this respect, the mother’s
role needs to be re-emphasized.
[89]          
I find the mother credible in her recounting of
the father undermining her intelligence in front of the children. Because
academic success is highly valued by the family, and particularly by the
father, such negative assessment of the mother in front of the children motivated
them to choose to stay with their father, particularly during school days when
they can seek his help.
[90]          
Once the vitriol of the current proceedings dissipates
and the mother no longer lives in the matrimonial home, she may be in a more convenient
location for the son. It will then be easier for the children to maintain a
healthy relationship with their mother. The son should spend at least 40% of his
time with the mother.
[91]          
The parenting time order below should be used as
a guide, to ensure that the children are supported in developing a meaningful
relationship with both parents. It should be used as a flexible tool,
considering that both parents may travel for work.
[92]          
Holidays should be split equally between the
parents.
[93]          
A. should be encouraged to spend generally Monday
night to Thursday morning with his father and Friday night to Monday morning
with his mother. Every second week, he shall spend Thursday night with his mother.
[94]          
This should be flexible, as A. may want to spend
some weekends with his father and more weekdays with his mother.
[95]          
This schedule does not provide weekends with the
father. I believe that the children on their own will want to organize weekend events
with their father.
[96]          
The Order will be that parenting time for A.
shall be:
[97]          
I decline to make a fixed parenting time order
for S. She will continue to manage her own schedule. She should also be
encouraged to spend time with her mother, including weekends and holidays. For
the purposes of calculations of child support, I assess that she will mostly
reside with her father until she goes to university.
[98]          
I am conscious that any parenting orders may be disregarded
as previous orders were. I make the order for two reasons. First, it is in the
best interests of A. that he has a meaningful relationship with his mother and
her side of the family. Without an order, the father may attempt to minimize
the mother’s role. Second, a parenting time order is material to the child
support issue.
[99]          
I will reiterate orders on proper language of respect
for each parent. The mother must understand that she cannot display her negative
feelings toward Mr. Monga in the presence of the children. The order requires
that Ms. Monga stop disparaging Mr. Monga in front of the children. It is a
responsibility that she must take seriously, and it comes with the role of a parent.
If she is unable to provide the children with a home free of recriminations,
the children will choose to spend less and less time with her.
[100]      
In light of my findings regarding parenting
time, section 9 of the Federal Child Support Guidelines (“Child Support
Guidelines) is applicable.
[101]      
Section 9 provides:
[102]      
Section 9 of the Child Support Guidelines invites
the Court to assess whether set-off child support (that is, an assessment of
child support owing for each parent and a calculation of the amount owing once
the lesser amount is deducted from the higher amount owed) is appropriate. I
find that this is a case where it is in the best interests of A. that set-off
child support be ordered.
[103]      
During her testimony, the mother said that she
did not want child support from the father.
[104]      
Child support is the right of the child. In the
present circumstances, there is great economic disparity between the two
households. A child support set-off order recognizes that children should not
choose where to live based on one parent’s wealth or financial advantages. Child
support will be needed to ensure that the mother can provide comfortable
surroundings for the children in her residence.
[105]      
Pursuant to Section 9 of the Child Support
Guidelines, I must first consider the amounts set in the applicable tables for
each spouse. To do so, I must establish each spouse’s income.
[106]      
The father admits that his annual income is $396,634,
which his expert calculated as the proper income for support calculations. I am
satisfied that this is the proper income to be used.
[107]      
The parties disagree as to the income to be
imputed to the mother. The father argues that an annual income of $100,000
should be imputed to the mother. The mother argues that an annual income of
$35,000 should be attributed to her.
[108]      
Section 19 of the Child Support Guidelines
provides that a court may impute “such amount of income to a spouse as it considers
appropriate in the circumstances” when a spouse is intentionally “underemployed”.
The court must have evidence to impute income and cannot choose an arbitrary
number: Drygala v. Pauli (2002), 2002 CanLII 41868 (ON CA), 61 O.R. (3d) 711 (Ont. C.A.), at para.
44.
[109]      
The wife never worked outside of the home until
she began Kala Designs. She has never been employed in Canada. She does
recognize that she has an obligation to become self-sufficient, and provide for
her children, but, understandably, she is worried about her ability to do so.
[110]      
The parties disagree as to the impetus for starting
Kala Designs. The father testified that he wanted to support the mother’s dream
of owning a business and encouraged the venture. According to his testimony, he
acted as the company’s CFO for a few years, then concentrated on his own
business and resigned from Kala Designs.
[111]      
The mother testified that the business was built
on her creative strengths. She testified that the father was involved
throughout and that she relied on him for contacts, financial information and
help.
[112]      
Eventually, the father decided that Kala Designs
was costing too much to the family and was not a good investment. A loan
agreement was signed by the mother whereby she acknowledged that she (through Kala
Designs) owed $350,000 at an annual rate of 12% interest accruing.
[113]      
The parties have different narratives with
respect to this loan. The father testified that Kala Designs cost too much for
the family, and he wanted to protect the family’s assets by ensuring the mother
repaid the loan. In his testimony, the father was critical of Kala Design’s
business model of selling scarves made in India, which, in his view, was not a
good business plan as scarves can be made much more cheaply in China. The
mother described the process of signing the loan agreement as made under
duress. She testified that the father threatened to divorce her if she did not
sign and that she would be left penniless.
[114]      
The loan agreement was signed by the mother and
the father. The mother received no legal advice prior to signing it. Although
the father maintains that a 12% interest rate was a competitive rate for a
business that could not be eligible for a bank loan, it would have been more
compelling if there was evidence of attempting to secure a proper loan for Kala
Designs.
[115]      
In his application, the father sought repayment
of the full $350,000 from the mother. At trial, the father conceded that he was
no longer seeking the enforcement of the loan agreement.
[116]      
There is also evidence from the father that the
mother asked him for money for Kala Designs after the separation. He refused,
and she cashed in her RRSPs to support the business.
[117]      
The mother eventually expanded and diversified
her business beyond scarves to include women’s clothing more generally. She now
operates a different company, Trident Buying House.
[118]      
The father is seeking to impute $100,000 per
year of income to the mother on the basis of her business income from Kala Designs
and her new company (post-separation), Trident Buying House.
[119]      
I find that Kala Designs began mostly as a hobby
business, and was never intended to provide for a steady living wage. It offered
the mother the opportunity to travel to India and the United States, and deduct
the expenses, which may have suited the father at the time. At best, the father
probably wished that Kala Designs would break even and not require as much
infusion of capital as it eventually required.
[120]      
The father cannot have it both ways. On the one
hand, he criticizes the business model and the mother’s business acumen in
starting a scarf business and spending excessively on the company. On the other
hand, he seeks to impute her an annual business income of $100,000.
[121]      
The evidence before me is that Kala Designs
never made substantial profits. It has never paid enough for the mother to be
able to live on its profits.
[122]      
The mother concedes that an income of $35,000
per year (the minimum wage income), should be imputed to her. I agree. Justice
Faieta imputed an income of $30,000 for the purposes of his determination of interim
child and spousal support in the fall of 2023. In her testimony, the mother
acknowledges her duty to become self-sufficient. She has started another
business and gives herself a year to see whether it will be profitable. If it
is not profitable, the mother agrees that she will have to reinvent herself and
find other employment.
[123]      
For one child in a shared arrangement (more than
40% of the time) and the other child residing primarily with the father, child
support calculations on the basis of $396,634 for the father and $35,000 for
the mother lead to the following conclusions: table monthly amount of $3,075 is
payable by the father to the mother, and table monthly amount payable by the
mother to the father is $532, for a final tally of $2,543 payable by the father
to the mother.
[124]      
I find that child support in the amount of $2,543
per month is owed by the father to the mother for the child, A., on a set-off
basis, based on an annual salary of $396,634 for the father and an imputed
annual income of $35,000 for the mother.
[125]      
Pursuant to the Child Support Guidelines, the
parties must disclose their income annually and calculate the child support
that is due.
[126]      
I am concerned that the parties will not comply
with this provision. I order that the father shall provide an updated letter
from his valuator by June 30th of every year. The mother shall
provide the income tax information for all of her corporations, Kala and
Trident and any employment income that she has secured by June 30th of every
year. If either party fails to comply, income increases of 10% per year will be
deemed to have taken place. For example, if Ms. Monga fails to provide
financial information by June 30, 2025, Mr. Monga shall presume that her income
is $35,000 + 10%, equaling $38,500, and for every year thereafter. Either party
may bring the issue back to court if they believe that the other is earning
more than a deemed increase of 10% and is not complying with the disclosure
obligations.
[127]      
Section 7 of the Child Support Guidelines
provides for the shared contributions of parents to children’s “extraordinary
expenses”. The parties have agreed that such expenses include private school
fees, university education, driving lessons and other extracurricular expenses
up to $2,000 per year for each child.
[128]      
Based on annual incomes of $396,634 for the
father, and $35,000 for the mother, each parent’s share is 92% for the father and
8% for the mother.
[129]      
The financial issues arising out of the end of
the marriage involve two main issues: equalization and spousal support.
[130]      
The Family Law Act provides for the
equalization of the net family properties of the spouses. The purpose of the
Act is to implement the public policy objective that married couples should
share equally in their increased wealth accumulated during marriage. The Family
Law Act recognizes that during marriage, couples make different
contributions to the well-being of the family and that at the end of the
marriage, the couple should share equally in the increase in value of their
respective assets.
[131]      
Mr. Monga’s calculations lead him to suggest
that he owes Ms. Monga an equalization payment of $32,074.49.
[132]      
Ms. Monga initially claimed an unequal division
of assets. She is no longer claiming an unequal division of assets. However, she
argues that she is entitled to $258,752.69 as an equalization payment.
[133]      
For reasons below, I find that Mr. Monga owes
Ms. Monga $32,074.49.
[134]      
The issues raised by the parties with respect to
the equalization calculations are as follows:
[135]      
Ms. Monga is no longer pursuing her claim for
unequal division. However, she testified that Mr. Monga had hid assets
throughout the marriage and that this should be taken into account. Her
allegations of the dissipation of assets on the part of Mr. Monga rest on the
suspicion and belief that Mr. Monga is hiding money or assets in India or
sending money to his family. Although there were discrepancies between the
different financial statements filed by Mr. Monga, the evidence supporting the
allegation of funds being siphoned out of Canada is insufficient for me to find
that there was dissipation of assets.
[136]      
I found that Ms. Monga was generally credible. She
testified in an emotional way about the impact the marriage and the litigation
has had on her and her family. Her knowledge of the family’s finances,
according to her own testimony, was limited. During the marriage, the parties
did not communicate well. Financial matters were an area of dispute between the
parties. Although she acknowledged that Mr. Monga complained that money was
tight and that Ms. Monga was overspending, I find that Ms. Monga was kept
mainly in the dark. She saw herself as needing permission to spend Mr. Monga’s
money, and she said that “she never spent his money without his permission”. She
testified that Mr. Monga was often very generous, and she grew accustomed to a
very high standard of living.
[137]      
I find that, purposely or not, Mr. Monga made
financial decisions without Ms. Monga’s input because he believed this was his
expertise, and he did not value Ms. Monga’s opinion on such issues. Because she
had been excluded from financial decision-making, Ms. Monga grew suspicious
that she was being lied to.
[138]      
Ms. Monga was truly surprised by the level of
indebtedness and the lack of financial resources available to the parties and
this prompted her suspicion of dissipation of assets.
[139]      
Ms. Monga has not established that significant
income was dissipated.
[140]      
I found Mr. Monga credible on this issue. I find
that Mr. Monga may have given some money to his family, but he was not in a
position to support them substantially. When times were good, the family had a significant
capacity to spend money. However, his company Antya was not immediately
profitable and certainly Kala Designs was never so. The family lived beyond its
means for a few years.
[141]      
Ms. Monga argues that Mr. Monga should not be
entitled to any deduction at the time of marriage. Mr. Monga provided evidence
of his contribution of $70,000 to an RRSP as well as a valuation of his shares
in Veritas at the time of marriage. The reason why spouses get credit for
assets they own at the date of marriage is that the marriage allows a couple to
jointly share in the increase in value of the assets, not a complete
sharing of all assets that either spouse owns.
[142]      
Ms. Monga married Mr. Monga partly because he
presented as a successful forensic accountant. He had assets before he married
her. He has provided proof of the value of such assets at the time of marriage.
Such values are properly deducted from his Net Family Property.
[143]      
I find that Mr. Monga is entitled to claim the
deductions to his Net Family Property for his RRSPs accumulated before marriage
and the value of his shares in Veritas at the time of marriage.
[144]      
Ms. Monga claims that Mr. Monga’s savings in
various bank accounts should be split at the source and that she should be
entitled to half of every account that he had at the date of separation.
[145]      
The Family Law Act is not a joint
ownership of assets regime. The Act provides for a sharing of the accumulation
of wealth by each party. Parties retain their properties, value them and share equally
in the increased value, which they then pay to the other spouse.
[146]      
Ms. Monga’s position reflects her belief that
the parties’ finances were intermingled throughout the marriage. There is
evidence that Mr. Monga used the HELOC on the home to finance the parties’
lifestyle, his business, and Ms. Monga’s business.
[147]      
If Ms. Monga was correct in her interpretation
of a joint venture, she would have to similarly share all of her accounts and
participate in the debt load. She cannot have it both ways.
[148]      
The parties are heavily in debt. There is a
significant HELOC on the matrimonial home. This debt was the mechanism Mr.
Monga used to finance investment in his business and in Ms. Monga’s business,
and to support the couple’s daily expenses.
[149]      
Even if Ms. Monga was not consulted on the debt
load, she benefitted from it. She cannot avoid the reality of the debt load.
[150]      
The HELOC is a debt that belongs to both
parties.
[151]      
The BMW is registered in both parties’ names but
it is used exclusively by Ms. Monga. Mr. Monga has purchased another vehicle
for himself.
[152]      
Ms. Monga may have to sell the car and it should
be formally transferred to her. I find it appropriate to include the value of
the car in her assets.
[153]      
Mr. Monga included $11,000 worth of jewelry as
part of Ms. Monga’s assets. I am satisfied that Ms. Monga owns jewelry that was
given to her either as a marriage present or throughout the marriage. It was
her burden to provide a value to the jewelry. Since she did not, I must rely on
the approximation of $11,000.
[154]      
I conclude that Mr. Monga owes Ms. Monga $32,074.49.
[155]      
There are three issues to be decided arising out
of the claim for spousal support:
[156]      
The parties agree that the wife is eligible for
spousal support. They disagree on the income to be imputed to her, the range of
quantum applicable, and the duration of the support.
[157]      
I find that Ms. Monga is entitled to spousal
support on a compensatory basis as she looked after the children and the house
for the first 10 years of the marriage. Although both parents were actively
involved with the children, Ms. Monga acted as the primary caregiver, was
involved in the school, and took the kids to their medical appointments.
[158]      
I also find that Ms. Monga is entitled to
spousal support on a needs basis. She requires a significant transition period
to be able to provide for herself in a way resembling the lifestyle that she
enjoyed during the marriage. This may no longer be possible and she may have to
adapt to a different life than that which she has enjoyed and that she expected
when she left India.
[159]      
To determine quantum (the amount of spousal
support), courts look to various factors: the strength of the compensatory
claims, the level of the recipient’s needs, the impact of the property
division, the needs and ability to pay of the payor, and the capacity for self-sufficiency:
Mason v. Mason, 2016 ONCA 725, 132 O.R. (3d) 641.
[160]      
Ms. Monga has a significant compensatory claim.
She was the dependent spouse throughout the marriage. She did not work outside
of the home until she began her business and did not have employment in Canada.
[161]      
There is a great discrepancy between the
parties’ income levels and their capacity to earn an income. Mr. Monga can
generate an income of close to $400,000, while I am satisfied that Ms. Monga’s
earning potential is presently at the minimum wage level. It could be that her
new business will become very successful, or that she will have to find other
employment to support herself and the children.
[162]      
The property division to which she is entitled
is not generous in light of the debt load carried by the parties. Mr. Monga’s real
asset is his earning capacity.
[163]      
I find that Ms. Monga is entitled to spousal
support toward the upper end of the mid-range Spousal Support Advisory Guidelines
(“SSAG”), in amount of $8,500 per month.
[164]      
Ms. Monga will have to work hard to become
completely self-sufficient. She will require support for several years to do so.
[165]      
The parties disagree as to the duration of
spousal support. Mr. Monga proposes that the parties review the spousal support
arrangements in five years on June 30, 2028. He further proposes that his
obligation to pay spousal support terminate on June 30, 2033, in nine-and-a-half
years.
[166]      
Ms. Monga proposes that the review take place in
June 2027. She proposes that after sharing financial information, if the
parties are unable to reach an arrangement, the matter be mediated or
arbitrated. Ms. Monga further suggests that her entitlement should terminate on
June 30, 2036.
[167]      
Ms. Monga is 49 years old. The marriage lasted
17 years and three months, since it began in November 2004. The “rule of 65” is
that when the length of the marriage plus the age of the recipient amount to
more than 65, the entitlement to spousal support should be unlimited. Ms. Monga
is content to have her entitlement terminate on June 30, 2036, at a time when
Mr. Monga will himself turn 65.
[168]      
I find that the date of June 30, 2036 is more in
line with the caselaw on spousal support for a marriage of close to 18 years, even
in light of the fact that there were intermittent separations during the
marriage.
[169]      
This matter was high conflict. Both parties
changed counsel. Ms. Monga had much difficulty complying with her financial
disclosure obligations, which she never completely fulfilled. I find that it is
not in the interests of the parties nor of their children to have this matter
relitigated early.
[170]      
I order that barring a material change in
circumstances, loss of employment or serious illness of either party which
would materially impact their earning capacity, the renegotiation of spousal
support shall take place not earlier than June 30, 2028, at which time parties
shall exchange financial information. If they are unable to agree, their
dispute shall be mediated or arbitrated.
[171]      
There is disagreement between the parties as to
the basis upon which the post-separation adjustments should be calculated. In
particular, the issue of child support arrears presents particular difficulties
in light of the fact that court orders were ignored.
[172]      
Mr. Monga is claiming child support arrears from
Ms. Monga on the basis that his son A. lived mostly with him from the summer of
2022 to present and that the daughter has lived mostly with him since the
summer of 2023, despite the Orders of Justices Vella, Rhinelander and Faieta
which ordered or were premised on a shared parenting arrangement.
[173]      
Mr. Monga claims that his son has lived with him
mostly since July 2022. Ms. Monga claims that both children were mostly with
her until the summer of 2023.
[174]      
Mr. Monga continued to pay the carrying costs of
the matrimonial home and the children’s expenses. He provided Ms. Monga with
some funds on an ad hoc basis. However, he refused to help her with her
business, and she had to cash in her RRSPs to invest in her business and pay
her bills.
[175]      
At the first case conference, Mr. Monga agreed
to pay $6,000 per month in indiscriminate support.
[176]      
Mr. Monga agrees that his income should be fixed
at $396,634 for the years 2022 onwards until the proposed review in 2028. I have
found that an income of $35,000 is to be imputed to Ms. Monga. This imputed
income is higher than what Justice Faieta used in his calculations on an
interim basis.
[177]      
Ms. Monga has agreed to spousal support being
fixed at $6,713 per month for the year 2022 and $7,263 for 2023. I have used
these amounts.
[178]      
I have given credit to Mr. Monga for the amounts
proven to be received by Ms. Monga.
[179]      
The table below describes the calculations for arrears
of spousal support.
[180]      
The following calculations are made using my
findings with respect to the factual and legal parenting arrangements between
the parties.
[181]      
From May 1, 2022 until July 2022, the children
lived with the mother in the matrimonial home. The father should have paid
child support, which I calculate on the basis of his agreed upon income of
$396,634.
[182]      
From July 1, 2022 until August 1, 2023, there is
disagreement between the parties about the children’s situation. The father
claims that his son A. moved in with him in July 2022 and never returned to his
mother. This claim does not coincide with his application materials filed in
November 2022 in which he states that both children are living with both
parents and states that the children live at least one-half of the time with
the Applicant on a flexible schedule. I find that informal shared parenting was
taking place during that time.
[183]      
From August 1, 2023 until October 27, 2023, the
children lived with the father.
[184]      
On October 27, 2023, on consent, the parties
agreed to a shared parenting arrangement which was never implemented. From
October 27, 2023, until April 20, 2024, the legal framework was that of a
shared parenting arrangement, but the reality was otherwise. The mother claims
that during that time, the children were alienated from her.
[185]      
The mother now concedes that the children did
not live with her. Child support is due for that period.
[186]      
On April 30, 2024, Justice Sharma amended
Justice Rhinelander’s Order to implement a parenting arrangement where the
children spend most of their time with the father and see their mother during
the weekends. This arrangement has again been varied in practice with the
daughter spending more time with her mother than prescribed in the order. For
the purposes of calculating child support, I conclude that for the period
between May 1, 2024 and December 1, 2024, the children resided primarily with
the father, and the mother owes child support calculated on the basis of an
imputed income of $35,000.
[187]      
The following table reflects calculations of
child support arrears.
[188]      
As Justice Faieta ordered, it is appropriate to
require Ms. Monga to contribute to the carrying costs of the matrimonial home in
light of the retroactive spousal support ordered. I find that she owes: $47,691.44
(50% of the carrying costs of the home and repayment of the car lease) and $7,000
(50% of the staging costs incurred for the house to be put up for sale), for a
total of $54,691.44.
[189]      
Mr. Monga also claims that Ms. Monga owes an
additional $30,000 (50% of the interest owing on the line of credit). I decline
to order this reimbursement. The evidence in front of me was not clear that
this amount was spent solely on the matrimonial home and not to service other
debts or business investment.
[190]      
Ms. Monga has agreed that she owes $46,000 in
occupancy rent. She also owes $13,000 in costs and $40,000 which were advanced
to her to pay for the valuation of Kala Designs which was not completed.
[191]      
The Table below is the summary of the
post-separation adjustments:
[192]      
The parties agree to an uncontested divorce.
They have been separated for more than one year. The parties disagree as to who
should pay for it. I find it appropriate to order that the costs be borne by
the party initiating the divorce.
[193]      
Success was divided. Ms. Monga was successful in
her claims for her imputed income. Mr. Monga was successful in his claims for
equalization. Neither was completely successful on the parenting issues.
[194]      
Each party should bear their own costs.
[195]      
The following Order will issue: