[1]              
Following a trial, a jury found Mr. Guevara
guilty of possession of a loaded firearm, contrary to s. 95(2) of the Criminal
Code of Canada, and possession of cocaine, a controlled substance, contrary
to s. 4(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act.
[2]              
On March 4, 2022, Mr. Guevara was driving his
girlfriend’s car after leaving a nightclub and was stopped by York Regional Police.
[3]              
After questioning, the officer conducted a
search of the vehicle that he was driving and found cocaine and a loaded
prohibited firearm in the centre console of the car.
[4]              
I shall accept as proven facts, the findings, express
or implied, that are essential to the jury’s finding of guilt.
[5]              
I accept therefore, that the jury found that Mr.
Guevara was in possession of cocaine and that Mr. Guevara knew that the
substance was illegal.
[6]              
I also accept that the jury found that Mr.
Guevara knew that he was in possession of a loaded firearm and that he did not
have the required license or authorization to possess the firearm and did not
have the required registration certificate.
[7]              
At trial, Mr. Guevara maintained that he loaned
the car to an acquaintance who he referred to only by an initial. He told the
court that he did not know that the gun and the cocaine were in the car. By its
verdict, the jury clearly rejected Mr. Guevara’s assertion that he had no
knowledge of the gun and the cocaine being in his girlfriend’s car.
[8]              
Mr. Guevara and his girlfriend Brittany Pearce
told the court that this acquaintance borrowed the car from him in Toronto
where he lived and worked, and that Mr. Guevara arranged to pick up the car
from him in Richmond Hill at the nightclub, even though Mr. Guevara did not
expect to be sober enough to drive home.
[9]              
It was admitted at trial that the firearm taken from the car was
examined by D/C Mark Hoekstra, a Firearms Officer, and determined to be a fully
functioning Taurus G2C handgun, which is a prohibited firearm. D/C Hoekstra
also examined the ammunition seized from the firearm (8 x 9 mm cartridges). The
ammunition was determined to fit the Taurus G2C and was fully functional.
[10]          
In respect of the cocaine, it was agreed that during the traffic
stop of Mr. Guevara, police seized 0.04 grams of cocaine from the vehicle. A certificate
of analysis confirmed that the drug seized was cocaine.
[11]          
Mr. Guevara is a 38-year-old man and committed
these offences when he was 36.
[12]          
He is a Canadian citizen. He has a criminal
record which is dated. The record contains 2009 convictions for armed robbery, forcible
confinement, and failure to comply with a recognizance. The record reflects
that he breached a conditional sentence order and that the order was suspended.
[13]          
The pre-sentence report filed at the sentencing
hearing sets out that Mr. Guevara’s father has not been in his life for the
last 17 years.
[14]          
Mr. Guevara describes physical and psychological
abuse at the hands of his father and that his father was  physically and sexually
abusive towards his mother and youngest sister. He has excellent relationships
with his mother and two sisters.
[15]          
He has struggled with anger. Ms. Pearce told the
Probation Officer who authored the PSR that when she lived with Mr. Guevara, he
often would spend weeks not being able to get out of bed and that he lacked
motivation. She believes that he may have been suffering from depression. They
were together for six years but are no longer together.
[16]          
Mr. Guevara is a boxer and is supported by his
boxing coach/employer. Mr. Guevara worked for him as a personal trainer and
boxing coach also worked part-time for a cannabis retailer as a team lead. His employers
both provided good reports about his work habits, responsibility, and
attendance.
[17]          
Mr. Guevara describes having some anxiety and
mental health issues and is working with a social worker engaging in
psychotherapy.
[18]          
He asks that upon being sentenced that he be
able to continue with his psychotherapy while in custody. He appreciates that
he will be the subject of a jail term.
[19]          
In the pre-sentence report, Mr. Guevara admits
to having the gun and drugs in the car with him but told the probation officer
that the gun did not belong to him.
[20]          
The use of illegal firearms constitutes a serious
threat to the peace, justice, and safety of our community. They are used to
threaten, maim, and kill.
[21]          
As noted by the Court of Appeal for Ontario in R.
v. Morris, 2021 ONCA 680, at para. 68:
[22]          
There is no real dispute between the parties
that the firearm offence attracts the higher sentence and that the range is
three to five years. The parties also agree that the appropriate Summers credit
is 29 days. The parties disagree on the impact of the restrictiveness of bail
conditions with the Crown asserting that a Downes credit be limited to 3
months and the Defence arguing for a 300-day (10-month) credit.
[23]          
The Crown seeks a global sentence of four years
and ancillary orders. The Crown argues that the bottom range of the sentence is
not appropriate as it is generally available to persons with no criminal record
or who have pled guilty.
[24]          
The Crown asserts that despite the age of the criminal
record, a sentence in the range proposed by the Crown is appropriate.
[25]          
The Defence argues that three years is a fit
sentence. Relying on R. v. Barreira, 2024 ONSC 4682, the Defence asserts
that first offenders are who unlawfully possess a restrictive firearm are often
in the maximum reformatory range and that those with prior criminal records
tend to receive sentences of three years imprisonment, where possession is
associated with no other criminal activity,
[26]          
The Defence requests that I recommend that Mr.
Guevara should be able to continue psychotherapy and asks he be able to pursue
a welding certificate.
[27]          
Mr. Guevara has support from friends and family alike.
He has been engaged in pro-social activities from the time of his last offences
in 2009 and has been a productive member of society through his work, boxing,
and personal training endeavours.
[28]          
Mr. Guevara spent two years on house arrest. While
he was able to go to work, I find that his liberty was curtailed in that he was
required to be in the presence of a surety when outside of his residence for
non-work purposes. I have no evidence on the impact of these bail conditions
upon Mr. Guevara.
[29]          
Before me, Mr. Guevara appeared remorseful. I am
concerned that this statement in the PSR, that the gun was not his, could be a deflection
of his responsibility, despite his further statement that he accepted full
responsibility.
[30]          
In my view, given his work history, the support
from family, friends, and employers, he has excellent prospects for
rehabilitation. This is further supported by the significant gap between his 2009
offences and these offences.
[31]          
In the end, the most compelling factors are his productive
lifestyle, the support of family and friends and his strong prospects for
rehabilitation.
[32]          
The criminal record, while dated, is an
aggravating factor.
[33]          
I also find the fact that Mr. Guevara had the
firearm in a public place is an aggravating factor.
[34]          
Section 718 of the Criminal Code provides
that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to
contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and
the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions
that have one or more of the following objectives: the denunciation of unlawful
conduct, deterrence – both general and specific, the separation of the offender
from society where necessary, rehabilitation, reparation for harm done to the
victims and the community, and the promotion of a sense of responsibility in
offenders and an acknowledgment of the harm done.
[35]          
Section 718.1 mandates that a sentence must be
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of
the offender. Sentencing judges must also consider parity such that offenders
who commit similar offences in similar circumstances should receive similar
sentence (See R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9, at para. 31). This principle is
reflected in s. 718.2(b) of the Criminal Code.
[36]          
In Friesen, the Supreme Court again
stated that that parity is an expression of proportionality. Sentencing
precedents reflect “the range of factual situations in the world and a
plurality of judicial perspectives. Precedents embody the collective experience
and the wisdom of the judiciary. They are the practical expression of both
parity and proportionality.” (Friesen, at paras. 32 and 33.)
[37]          
I note also that I am bound by the principle of
restraint. This means that I should not deprive an offender of his liberty if
less restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances.
[38]          
Sentencing must be tailored to the circumstances
of the offence and the offender. The process of arriving at a proportionate
sentence is a highly individualized exercise, tailored to the gravity of the
offence, the blameworthiness of the offender, and the harm caused by the crime.
(See R. v. Nur, 2015 SCC 15, at para. 43.)
[39]          
In R v. Nur, 2013 ONCA 677, Justice
Doherty set out for the Court of Appeal for Ontario, at para. 206:
[40]          
This was re-affirmed in R. v. Mohiadin, 2021
ONCA 122, at para. 12.
[41]          
In Nur, Justice Doherty also explored
that s. 95 offences capture a wide range of conduct, from someone who uses it
as a tool of their illegal trade to the responsible gun owner who possesses the
gun outside of a place that falls within the terms of a license.
[42]          
The sentencing range is important to respect
parity.
[43]          
The primary consideration on the loaded
prohibited firearm are the principles of denunciation and deterrence with the
most important principle being general deterrence.
[44]          
In R. v. Nur, the Supreme Court of Canada
struck down mandatory minimum sentences and upheld a 40-month sentence for a 19-year-old
first offender. While it struck down the mandatory minimum, the Court held at
para. 120 that it “remains appropriate for judges to
continue to impose weighty sentences in other circumstances,”.
[45]          
Of the cases provided to me,
the circumstances of the offence and offender are similar to both R. v. Mohiadin
2021 ONCA and R. v. Kachol, 2017 BCCA 292, where sentences of 36 months
were imposed. In Mohiadin, the defence invited a conviction after a Charter
motion was dismissed. The accused was 19 years old and was considered a
youthful first-time offender.
[46]          
These factors lead me to
believe that a sentence of more that three years is appropriate.
[47]          
In Barreira, supra, the court
imposed a five-year global sentence. However, the court found that it was an
aggravating factor that the firearm was used as a tool of the trade. In
Barreira Justice Stribopoulos fully canvassed the range.
[48]          
The amount of cocaine seized was small and
attracts a sentence of months.  By way of example in R. v. Lourenco, 2017
ONSC 7606, a sentence of two months was imposed for simple possession of one
ounce of cocaine. In R. v. Sitladeen, 2024 ONSC 4244, Justice Charney
imposed a sentence of 3.5 months where the amount possessed was just over 9
grams.
[49]          
I find that the parties’ proposals are within
the appropriate range. I find that a conditional sentence order is not
appropriate given Mr. Guevara’s previous breach.
[50]          
I find that the circumstances of the offence are
not such to attract the high end of the range. There is no evidence that Mr.
Guevara used the firearm as a tool of the trade. The offence is also not at the
low end of the range.
[51]          
While he is not a first-time offender, Mr.
Guevara has had no convictions since 2009 which, in my view, speaks to his
rehabilitative potential. He was working two jobs at the time of the offence,
as he is now, and this in my view demonstrates that he has been and remains a
contributing member of society.
[52]          
In light of the parity principle, the need for
an exemplary sentence, that Mr. Guevara is not a first-time offender, that he
has good prospects for rehabilitation and reintegration and that I must impose
the least restrictive sentence in accordance with the principle of restraint, I
find the appropriate sentence is 42 months.
[53]          
I will apply a Downes credit to reduce
the sentence. There is no specific formula, and I may either assign a credit or
consider the circumstances in determining the fit sentence. I have decided to
assign a credit.
[54]          
Mr. Guevara was arrested on March 4, 2022. I am
imposing sentence today which is 679 days later. Mr. Guevara spent 19 days in
custody and 660 days on release. Mr. Guevara lived in a condo with his partner
while on release and worked. His conditions permitted him to leave his home in
the company of a surety and for work.
[55]          
I find that these conditions were restrictive in
the sense that his liberty was curtailed. I have no evidence on the impact of
the conditions. I am prepared to credit Mr. Guevara for four months for the
restrictiveness of his release conditions while on judicial interim release.
[56]          
Mr. Guevara, please stand so that I may
pronounce sentence.
[57]          
In the present case, I find a sentence of 42
months is the appropriate sentence taking into account the totality principle
and the factors discussed above. This sentence is comprised of:
[58]          
From that I deduct credits of four months for
restrictive conditions while on house arrest, and 29 days for pre-trial custody
for a total deduction of 4 months and 29 days, leaving a sentence of 37 months
and 1 day.
[59]          
I recommended that Mr. Guevara be permitted to
continue psychotherapy and to pursue a welding certificate to improve his
prospects for rehabilitation.
[60]          
In addition to the custodial sentence, there
will be a s. 109 order for 20 years, a DNA order and an order for the forfeiture
of the seized property which I previously ordered following the finding of
guilt.