[1]         
The plaintiff, Breaking Ground Drilling and
Blasting Inc. (“Breaking Ground”), is in the business of providing construction
and demolition services.
[2]         
The defendant, A.D. Hanslip Excavating &
Demolition, now known as A.D. Hanslip Ltd. (“Hanslip Demolition”), also
operates a construction and demolition business. The defendant, Allan Hanslip
(“Hanslip”), owns Hanslip Demolition.
[3]         
Breaking Ground was hired by Hanslip Demolition
to drill and blast rock on a construction site (“the Project”) located in a
quarry owned by Niiwin Wendaanimok Construction (“NWC”).  Once the rock was broken
up into pieces by the drilling and blasting, it would be crushed for use in
laying foundations for highway construction.  However, citing issues with the
completed work, Hanslip Demolition did not pay the invoices submitted by
Breaking Ground.
[4]         
Breaking Ground is suing Hanslip Demolition for
payment of its invoices totalling $377,293.85. Hanslip Demolition claims that
the work Breaking Ground did was deficient, and in its efforts to clean up and
perform the work which Breaking Ground agreed to do, Hanslip Demolition
incurred $6 million in costs, which it is seeking from Breaking Ground.
[5]         
Hanslip Demolition also issued a Third Party
Claim against Lloyd’s of London Limited (“Lloyds”) and Intact Insurance Company
(“Intact”), claiming indemnification as an additional insured under the
policies secured by Breaking Ground relating to the Project.
[6]         
The parties acknowledge that the insurance
policy from Intact does not provide coverage which could be triggered by the
issues in this litigation. As such, the Third Party Claim has been dismissed
against Intact.
[7]         
This motion is brought by Lloyds.  It seeks an
order striking the Third Party Claim against Lloyds without leave to amend on
the basis it discloses no reasonable cause of action.  Since this motion only
involves Lloyds and Hanslip Demolition, neither the plaintiff nor its counsel
appeared at the hearing.
[8]         
I released an endorsement on October 28, 2024,
which set out my decision to dismiss the Third Party Claim of Hanslip
Demolition against Lloyds with costs. These are the reasons in support of my
decision.
[9]         
The MTO Clearwater Bay Quarry Project is owned
by His Majesty the King (“HMK”).  HMK hired NWC to do work on the Project,
which included crushing rock from the quarry.
[10]      In January 2022, NWC retained Hanslip Demolition as a subcontractor
to crush rock at the Project. Before the rock could be crushed, drilling and
blasting was necessary. As such, Hanslip Demolition entered into a contract
with Breaking Ground to drill and blast rock at the quarry site.
[11]      A quote was provided by Breaking Ground to Hanslip Demolition for
drilling and blasting services. The quote was accepted, and Breaking Ground
commenced work in March 2022.  Invoices were provided to Hanslip Demolition for
the work undertaken by Breaking Ground, one dated March 18, 2022, in the amount
of $304,715.67, and a second dated June 6, 2022, in the amount of $72,578.18.
[12]      Breaking Ground’s invoices were not paid by Hanslip Demolition.
According to Hanslip Demolition, the rocks that resulted from the drilling and
blasting were too large to be crushed. The services provided by Breaking
Ground, according to Hanslip Demolition, were performed in a non-workmanlike
manner, and additional blasting was required in order to rectify the
commercially unreasonable size of the blasted rock product.
[13]      Breaking Ground issued a Statement of Claim on September 20, 2022,
against Hanslip Demolition and Hanslip – in addition to HMQ Ontario and NWC –
seeking damages in the amount of $377,293.85. The basis of Breaking Ground’s claim
is breach of contract and it seeks the following damages:
[14]      In a section entitled “DAMAGES” in the Statement of Claim, Breaking
Ground claims (a) that the defendants are in a breach of contract by refusing
to pay the outstanding balance due and owing to Breaking Ground, and (b) that the
defendants have been unjustly enriched by the work completed by Breaking
Ground.
[15]      In response to Breaking Ground’s Statement of Claim, Hanslip
Demolition delivered a Statement of Defence and Counterclaim, which in addition
to disputing the claim of Breaking Ground, seeks $6 million for its efforts to
address the alleged deficiencies in Breaking Ground’s work.
[16]      In its Statement of Defence and Counterclaim, Hanslip Demolition
alleges the following against Breaking Ground in support of its $6 million
counterclaim:
[17]      Finally, Hanslip Demolition alleges that it repeatedly informed
Breaking Ground of the deficiencies and demanded that Breaking Ground re-attend
to correct its errors and complete its contractual obligations, but Breaking
Ground refused to undertake the necessary remedial work or even communicate
with Hanslip Demolition or any of its representatives.
[18]      In addition to delivering a Statement of Defence and Counterclaim,
Hanslip Demolition commenced a Third Party Claim against Intact and Lloyds. As
already noted, the claim against Intact has been dismissed, but Hanslip
Demolition maintains its claim against Lloyds.
[19]      The Third Party Claim is based upon a Certificate of Insurance which
names Hanslip Demolition as an additional insured under the Lloyds insurance
policy secured by Breaking Ground.
[20]      Breaking Ground secured an insurance policy from Lloyds covering the
period of January 16, 2022, to January 16, 2023, in order to support the work
Hanslip Demolition contracted with Breaking Ground to perform.
[21]      As part of the agreement between Breaking Ground and Hanslip
Demolition, Lloyds also issued a Certificate of Insurance which listed Hanslip
Demolition as an additional insured.  The Certificate of Insurance, dated
January 18, 2022, and issued by BrokerLink Inc., clearly states that the
Insured’s name on the Lloyds policy is “Breaking Ground Drilling & Blasting
Inc.”, with the Additional Insured box stating the following:
[22]      It is this Certificate of Insurance which Hanslip Demolition relies
upon to advances its  Third Party Claim against Lloyds seeking the following
relief:
[23]      In summary, Breaking Ground is suing Hanslip Demolition for monies
which Breaking Ground alleges are owing pursuant to its contract for services
with Hanslip Demolition.
[24]      Hanslip Demolition has defended Breaking Ground’s claim on the
grounds that Breaking Ground did not perform the contract according to its
terms.  Hanslip Demolition is also seeking damages from Breaking Ground representing
the costs incurred by Hanslip Demolition to perform the work which it states
Breaking Ground was supposed to undertake.
[25]      Hanslip Demolition is further claiming indemnification for its
losses and a defence from Lloyds pursuant to the Certificate of Insurance in
which Hanslip Demolition is listed as an additional insured.
[26]      Hanslip Demolition is only an additional insured with respect to
liability arising from Breaking Ground’s operations.  If, for example, the
blasting activities of Breaking Ground injured or caused damage to a third
party’s person or property, and if a claim was advanced against Hanslip
Demolition for those damages, that claim would likely be covered.
[27]      The policy which Lloyds issued to Breaking Ground was a commercial
general liability policy, number 10029136, for the period January 16, 2022, to
January 16, 2023 (“the Policy”).
[28]      The Comprehensive General Liability policy provides in paragraph 1
the following:
[29]      The Policy defines Bodily Injury, Personal Injury, and Advertising
Injury as:
[30]      The Policy defines Property Damage as:
[31]      In its Third Party Claim, Hanslip Demolition is seeking coverage
under the Policy.
[32]      Hanslip Demolition asserts a claim against Lloyds for its costs of
defending Breaking Ground’s action, and indemnity for the monies which Breaking
Ground alleges are owed by Hanslip Demolition.
[33]      In addition, Hanslip Demolition is seeking indemnity for the losses
it incurred in addressing the allegedly deficient work of Breaking Ground,
which are advanced in its counterclaim.
[34]      Both claims asserted by Hanslip Demolition against Lloyds are
grounded in the pleadings.  It is on this basis that Lloyds brings this Rule 21
motion.
[35]      Rule 21.01 of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg.
194 as amended, provides that a party may move to strike a pleading in certain
circumstances:
[36]      When considering the application of Rule 21.01(1)(b), the
allegations of fact in the pleadings are assumed to be capable of being proven,
unless they are patently ridiculous or incapable of proof: see Hunt v. Carey
Canada Inc., 1990 CanLII 90 (SCC), [1990] 2 S.C.R. 959, at p. 989; Paton Estate v. Ontario Lottery
and Gaming Corporation, 2016 ONCA 458, 131 O.R. (3d) 273, at para. 12.
[37]      Assuming the claims can be proven, in assessing whether a claim
discloses a reasonable cause of action the court must consider a “plain and
obvious” test.  In other words, is it plain and obvious that the impugned claim
discloses no reasonable cause of action: see Hunt, at p. 960; Tran v.
University of Western Ontario, 2015 ONCA 295, at para. 16.
[38]      The application of the plain and obvious test has been considered by
the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Imperial Tobacco Canada Ltd., 2011
SCC 42, 3 S.C.R. 45, at para. 22:
[39]      At the pleadings stage, it is the obligation of the courts to
prevent claims which have no hope of proceeding.  The focus of such an inquiry
are the pleadings, which is why r. 21.01(2)(b) precludes the introduction of
evidence other than the relevant pleadings. If a pleading fails to disclose a
reasonable cause of action, the appropriate remedy is to strike the claim.
[40]      In this motion, Hanslip Demolition included the affidavit of Allan
Hanslip, sworn October 22, 2024, with attached exhibits A to Q in its
Responding Motion Record. While this motion was argued on the basis of r.
21.01(1)(b), I note that evidence is permissible on a motion brought pursuant
to r. 21.01(1)(a) with leave of the court or on consent of the parties. In this
case, irrespective of this motion arising from r. 21.01(b), Lloyds did not
consent to any evidence being filed by Hanslip Demolition, and Hanslip
Demolition did not request leave. Accordingly, following the decision in Web
Offset Publications v. Vickery (1990), 1999 CanLII 4462 (ON CA), 43 O.R. (3d) 802 (C.A.), except
where documents were specifically referenced in the pleadings, I did not rely
upon the evidence contained in the Responding Motion Record for my decision.
[41]      Therefore, based upon the pleadings, the question is whether Lloyds
has a duty to defend the claims against Hanslip Demolition, and whether there
are claims which, if successful, Lloyds could be called upon to indemnify?
[42]      As the duty to defend is based on the allegations made against the
insured, Lloyds has a duty to defend Hanslip Demolition if the allegations made
against it in the Statement of Claim commenced by Breaking Ground fall within
coverage.
[43]      Determining whether an insurer has a duty to defend involves
interpreting the insurance policy. The court must consider whether the
pleadings in the action allege facts that, if true, would be covered by the
policy: see Tedford v. TD Insurance Meloche Monnex, 2012 ONCA 429, 112
O.R. (3d) 144, at para. 14.
[44]      In Non-Marine Underwriters, Lloyd’s of London v. Scalera,
2000 SCC 24, 1 S.C.R. 551, at paras. 50–52, the Supreme Court set out a
three-step process to be used in determining whether a given claim could trigger
an insurer’s duty to defend:
[45]      The Court of Appeal for Ontario expanded on the Scalera test
in TD Insurance Meloche Monnex, at para.14, and provided seven
principles flowing from the framework:
[46]      The substance and true nature of Breaking Ground’s claim against
Hanslip Demolition is the non-payment of debt owed for construction services
performed on the Project. The Statement of Claim is not based in tort, nor in
negligence. It simply alleges that Hanslip Demolition owes Breaking Ground for
the value of the work which Breaking Ground undertook, as was agreed upon by
the parties.
[47]      Here, the only existing claim is the one where Hanslip Demolition
did not pay the invoices of Breaking Ground. At most, this arises out of
Hanslip Demolition’s operations, not Breaking Ground’s operations. Hanslip
Demolition simply did not pay the invoices which were sent by Breaking Ground,
and the non-payment arises from the fact that the rock crushed by Breaking
Ground was not small enough.  This is a breach of contract claim, not a claim
grounded in negligence or tort.
[48]      The claim of Breaking Ground is not derivative in nature.
[49]      So, the question to be determined is whether the breach of contract
claim amounting to a failure to pay for services rendered by Breaking Ground is
covered under the Policy.
[50]      The answer to that question is a clear and unequivocal “no”.
[51]      The comprehensive general liability section of the Policy states
that Lloyds will pay on behalf of an Insured all sums which the Insured shall
become legally obligated to pay as compensatory damages, including damages for
care and loss of services, because of bodily injury, personal injury, property
damage or advertising liability caused by an occurrence during the period of
insurance.
[52]      In the Statement of Claim, the monies sought by Breaking Ground
against Hanslip Demolition are not “compensatory damages”. No loss or damages
are being claimed arising from bodily injury, personal injury, property damage
or advertising liability.
[53]      Breaking Ground’s claim against Hanslip Demolition does not trigger
the Policy. As such, to the extent that the Third Party Claim is seeking a
defence or indemnity under the Policy arising from the claim issued by Breaking
Ground, there is no claim under the Policy which could be inferred.
[54]      The factum filed by Hanslip Demolition in support of its position in
this motion included references to property damage and coverage which could
arise on the basis of property damage.
[55]      This is akin to a first party claim under the Policy in which Hanslip
Demolition is claiming its property was damaged, which potentially triggers the
Policy.
[56]      First, there is no property of Hanslip Demolition which has been
damaged. The quarry site location of the Project was not owned by Hanslip
Demolition nor Breaking Ground. Hanslip Demolition cannot trigger the Policy on
the basis of a property damage claim which is not rooted in “property”.
[57]      The Policy does have a property section which covers property of
Breaking Ground.  However, the property covered is specifically laid out in the
equipment schedule of the Policy, and includes two Furakawa Drills, a Comachhio
Drill, an Altas Compressor Drill, and a John Deere Drill, all owned by Breaking
Ground.
[58]      There is no wording in the Policy which references any property of
Hanslip Demolition.
[59]      There is therefore no coverage in the Policy which could be extended
to property damage incurred by Hanslip Demolition.  The only coverage available
is third party liability coverage for acts of Breaking Ground, which is clearly
referenced in the Certificate of Insurance.
[60]      Hanslip Demolition has advanced claims in negligence against
Breaking Ground within its counterclaim. Arguably, these claims may trigger
coverage under the Policy such that Lloyds owes a defence and indemnity to
Breaking Ground. It does appear, however, that the claims of Hanslip Demolition
are still rooted in contract, and the allegations that Breaking Ground did not
perform its obligations under the contract between Breaking Ground and Hanslip
Demolition are better characterized as a breach of contract instead of
negligence. But I need not determine that issue since Breaking Ground – who is
subject to those allegations stemming from the counterclaim – is not here
seeking coverage under the Policy.
[61]      Hanslip Demolition is seeking coverage which can only arise from the
allegations advanced by Breaking Ground against the defendants in the Statement
of Claim. In the absence of allegations triggering coverage in the Policy, the
Third Party Claim seeking coverage has no reasonable prospect of success.
[62]      Having said that, seeking a defence and indemnity under the Policy
for claims against an insured is not the only way in which to access proceeds
from an insurance policy.  The Insurance Act can be used by a plaintiff
to force an insurer to satisfy a successful claim which has not already been
defended by an insurance company.
[63]      Without any coverage being triggered by the pleadings, the only way
in which Hanslip Demolition can advance a valid claim against the Policy is
through s. 132 of the Insurance Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. I.8, as amended.
[64]      What Hanslip Demolition may be attempting to do with its
counterclaim against Breaking Ground, for which it is claiming through the
Third Party Claim, is maintain that the negligence of Breaking Ground caused Hanslip
Demolition to incur compensatory damages. If Hanslip Demolition’s claim is
truly based in negligence, and not a simple breach of contract claim, then
arguably Breaking Ground may have a means to trigger the Policy, pursuant to
the coverage available to Breaking Ground.
[65]      There are many legal proceedings in which the alleged tortfeasor
seeks coverage under an insurance policy without its insurer responding to the
claim. There are various reasons why an insurer may not respond to a claim,
many of which stem from insurance policy wordings which exclude varieties of
coverages. When an insurer does not respond to a claim on behalf of its
insured, there are avenues for the insured to “force” an insurance company to
respond.
[66]      In fact, this is what Hanslip Demolition was attempting to do in its
Third Party Claim. As an additional insured, it is seeking coverage under the
Policy. For reasons already provided, that attempt to trigger coverage is not
going to succeed.
[67]      In those situations where an insured does not take legal steps in
order to engage an insurer, or where those steps do not result an insurance
company acknowledging its obligations, there is a way in which a plaintiff
suffering compensatory damages can take steps to legally bring that insurance
company to the table.
[68]      That way is through s. 132 of the Insurance Act.  If Hanslip
Demolition can satisfy the requirements of s. 132, then it can proceed with a
claim against Lloyds.
[69]      Unfortunately for Hanslip Demolition, s. 132 has not been satisfied.
[70]      Section 132 of the Insurance Act reads as follows:
[71]      A review of s. 132 indicates that there are four prerequisites for
it to be triggered.
[72]      First, there must be liability for damage to a person or the
property of another.
[73]      Second, a judgment is required in favour of a plaintiff against a
defendant.
[74]      Third, the judgment obtained must be enforced, and in that effort,
an execution is unsuccessful in satisfying the judgment.
[75]      And fourth, the other person must be insured against the liability.
[76]      As noted earlier, Lloyds may owe a defence and indemnity to Breaking
Ground for the allegations advanced by Hanslip Demolition in its counterclaim.
However, that claim belongs to Breaking Ground, and is not one which Hanslip
Demolition can advance.
[77]      If Hanslip Demolition does continue with its counterclaim against
Breaking Ground and succeeds in its claim for the costs of doing the work which
Breaking Ground was supposed to undertake, then it can advance a claim under s.
132(1) if Lloyds has not already acknowledged any available coverage to Breaking
Ground.
[78]      Before doing so, however, liability for Hanslip Demolition’s damages
must be established through a judgment against Breaking Ground. In addition,
Hanslip Demolition must be unsuccessful in attempting to realize upon its
judgment. And finally, Hanslip Demolition must establish coverage under the
Policy which extends to Breaking Ground for the losses claimed by Hanslip
Demolition.
[79]      Since the first step of this four-step process has not yet been
completed, s. 132(1) is currently unavailable to Hanslip Demolition, and, as
such, its Third Party Claim has no reasonable prospect of succeeding.
[80]      Accordingly,
it is my decision that the Third Party Claim of Hanslip Demolition against
Lloyds shall be dismissed with costs.
[81]      As per my endorsement of October 28, 2024, Lloyds was the successful
party in this matter and is entitled to its costs.
[82]      No offers to settle were provided to me. As such, costs shall be
awarded on a partial indemnity basis.
[83]      Both Lloyds and Hanslip Demolition provided me with their positions
on costs at the end of the motion hearing.
[84]      In reviewing the Bill of Costs of Lloyds, I note that partial
indemnity costs of $15,007.67 in fees is calculated on the basis of 65% of the
actual costs of Lloyds. Generally, partial indemnity costs work out to roughly
60% of a party’s actual costs. In addition, I note that 4.0 hours were
anticipated for arguing the motion, which ended up taking only 2.5 hours.
Making these adjustments, the claim for partial indemnity costs works out to
$13,039.54 in fees plus $362.11 in disbursements.
[85]      In reviewing the Bill of Costs of Hanslip Demolition, partial
indemnity costs of participating in the motion brought by Lloyds is suggested
to be $13,575.40 which includes fees, HST and $219.73 in disbursements.
[86]      In exercising my discretion under s. 131 of the Courts of Justice
Act, and in considering the factors set out within r. 57.01(1), the costs
claimed by both parties – of practically the same amounts – speak to r.
57.01(1)(0.b).
[87]      In considering the principles of indemnity, the complexity of the
issues raised by the parties, and the importance of these issues to both Lloyds
and Hanslip Demolition, as well as the costs typically awarded in the Northwest
Region for similar motions, a reasonable and fair amount of costs is assessed
at $10,000, inclusive of fees, disbursements, and HST, which shall be payable
by Hanslip Demolition to Lloyds.