[1]              
The plaintiff, GTA Fill Earthworks Inc. (“GTA”)
seeks damages against the defendants relating to various breaches of verbal contracts
entered into between GTA and the defendant, Anthony Ulbrick.
[2]              
The defendants failed to defend the proceeding
and were noted in default on March 1, 2021.
[3]              
The plaintiff had brought a motion for default
judgment pursuant to Rule 19.01 of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O.
1990, Reg 194 (the “Rules”).  That motion was heard in writing and by an
endorsement dated December 13, 2023, Justice Papageorgiou ordered a half day
undefended trial take place.
[4]              
Pursuant to Rule 19.02, having not defended the
proceeding, a defendant is deemed to admit the truth of all allegations of fact
made in a statement of claim.   Accordingly, I accept as true the facts
alleged in the Amended Statement of Claim dated November 18, 2020, in this
proceeding.  Peter Platis, the president and owner of GTA also provided
two affidavits sworn on July 22, 2021, and March 20, 2023, and gave testimony
at the trial.
[5]              
In summary, GTA is a brokerage company which
provides services relating to hauling, trucking, filling and dumping loads of
soil and fill from various work sites.  GTA’s claim relates to verbal
agreements it entered into with Mr. Ulbrick as follows:
[6]              
Mr. Platis spoke to Mr. Ulbrick late in March of
2020 about the unpaid amounts noted above.  Mr. Platis’ testimony is that Mr.
Ulbrick told Mr. Platis that he would ‘make things right’.  Mr. Ulbrick, in an
email dated March 26, 2020, offered to pay GTA four installments of $5,000 each
before July 3.  Mr. Ulbrick also stated in that email that ‘hopefully by then
they can get together and come to an agreement going forward’.  Although the
promised payments were not received, on March 27, 2020, Mr. Platis sent an
email to Mr. Ulbrick outlining all amounts owing by Mr. Ulbrick to Mr. Platis which
totaled $116,266.65.  This equates to the amounts claimed by GTA as owing under
the Davan Project, the Patrica Project, the Additional Invoices and the McCowan
Project, less a payment having been made by Mr. Ulbrick of $8,000.  Mr. Platis
testified that an additional amount of $4,000 was later paid by Mr. Ulbrick,
such that the total amount owing was reduced to approximately $112,000.
[7]              
As stated in the Amended Statement of Claim, demand
was made on the defendants on February 27, 2020.
[8]              
The issues are whether the evidence provides a
basis for:
[9]              
As noted above, pursuant to Rule 19.02, having
not defended the proceeding, a defendant is deemed to admit the truth of all
allegations of fact made in the statement of claim.  However, pursuant
to Rule 19.06 a plaintiff is not
entitled to judgment merely because the facts alleged in the statement of claim
are deemed to be admitted, unless the facts entitle the plaintiff to judgment.
[10]          
I am satisfied that GTA has established the liability
of Mr. Ulbrick based upon the deemed admissions from the Amended Statement of
Claim referred to above, together with the evidence of Mr. Platis.
[11]          
The evidence shows that for the Davan Project,
Mr. Ulbrick promised to pay 3G for their services from the funds advanced to
him by GTA and that Mr. Ulbrick failed to do so. Mr. Ulbrick’s failure to do so
resulted GTA suffering damages of $40,000, being the amount ultimately paid by
GTA to 3G.
[12]          
The evidence shows that for Patricia Project,
Mr. Ulbrick failed to provide GTA’s invoices to RONI as promised.  Rather, Mr.
Ulbrick created invoices in the name of the Defendant Corporation and provided
those invoices to RONI.  Accordingly, RONI paid the Defendant Corporation
rather than GTA. Mr. Ulbrick’s breach of his agreement with GTA in this regard
caused GTA damages in the amount $31,176.70.
[13]          
In respect of the Additional Invoices, the
evidence is that Mr. Ulbrick also promised to provide those invoices to RONI
and arrange for prompt payment to GTA.  GTA was not paid on these invoices.   The
statements of amounts owing by Mr. Ulbrick to GTA from March 2020 included the
amounts owing under these invoices and no objection was raised by Mr. Ulbrick. 
I also find Mr. Ulbrick liable for the amount of $49,284.95 in respect of these
Additional Invoices.
[14]          
 The evidence also shows that Mr. Ulbrick was
overpaid by $3,480 on the McCowan Project and has not repaid that amount to
GTA.  I find Mr. Ulbrick liable for that amount as well.
[15]          
The only involvement, on the evidence before me,
of the Defendant Corporation is in respect of the Patricia Project.  The facts
pled in the Amended Statement of Claim, which are deemed to be admitted as true,
are that invoices in the name of the Defendant Corporation were provided to RONI
for work actually done by GTA on that project and payments were made by RONI to
the Defendant Corporaiton for that work in the amount of $31,176.70.  Further,
the Defendant Corporation never remitted that amount to GTA.
[16]          
The plaintiff pleads unjust enrichment in their
Amended Statement of Claim.  I find that the Defendant Corporation received the
benefit of the amounts paid on the Patricia Project to the detriment of GTA and
that no juristic reason exists for just enrichment.  Accordingly, I find the
Defendant Corporation jointly liable with Mr. Ulbrick for the amount of
$31,176.70.
[17]          
The evidence does not support findings of
liability for the Defendant Corporation on the Davan Project, the Additional
Invoices or the McCowan Project.  This is no evidence that the Defendant
Corporation was involved in those projects.
[18]          
GTA seeks $50,000 in punitive damages.
[19]          
Punitive damages are awarded in exceptional
cases for “malicious, oppressive and high-handed” misconduct that “offends the
court’s sense of decency.” Awards of punitive damages are limited to misconduct
that represents a marked departure from ordinary standards of decent behaviour.
Because their objective is to punish the defendant, rather than compensate a
plaintiff, punitive damages straddle the frontier between civil law
(compensation) and criminal law (punishment): Whiten v. Pilot Insurance Co.,
2002 SCC 18, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 595 [Whiten], at para. 36.
[20]          
The court in Whiten particularized the
following factors that the court is to consider when granting an award for
punitive damages:
[21]          
Here, the defendants’ conduct, especially in
respect of the Patricia Project, was planned and deliberate.  The creation of
‘mirror invoices’ in the name of the Defendant Corporation by Mr. Ulbrick, his
provision of those invoices to RONI on multiple occasions, his attempt to
conceal such behaviour from GTA and the defendants’ receipt of funds from RONI
as a result of that scheme amount to conduct of the nature contemplated in Whiten.
[22]          
Punitive damages are to be assessed in an amount
reasonably proportionate to such factors as the harm caused, the degree of the
misconduct, the relative vulnerability of the plaintiff and any advantage or
profit gained by the defendant. Other fines or penalties suffered by the
defendant for the same misconduct should be considered. Punitive damages are
awarded in an amount that is no greater than necessary to rationally accomplish
their purpose. Moderate awards, which inevitably carry a stigma in the broader
community, are generally sufficient: Whiten, at para. 94.
[23]          
Considering the above factors, I find that an
award of $25,000 in punitive damages is appropriate.
[24]          
For the reasons expressed above, I grant the
plaintiff judgment against Mr. Ulbrick in the amount of 111,941.65 in respect
of general damages and $25,000 in punitive damages.  As well, the Defendant
Corporation is jointly and severally liable for the amount of $31,176.70 in
respect of general damages and $25,000 in punitive damages.
[25]          
Costs are in the discretion of the court. The
factors relevant to the exercise of discretion are set out in Rule 57.01 of the
Rules.  They include the result and relative success of each party, the
complexity of the proceeding, the importance of the issues and the conduct of
any party that impacted the duration of the proceeding. The court must consider
the purposes of costs, which include both the indemnification of successful
litigants for costs of the litigation and the facilitation of access to
justice: Boucher v. Public Accountants Council (Ontario) (2004), 2004
CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R. (3d) 291 (C.A.), at paras. 35-37.
[26]          
I have reviewed the costs outline submitted by
the plaintiff.  Taking into account the factors referred to above, including
the amount of the judgment obtained, the costs expended by the plaintiff, the
additional difficulty in obtaining evidence faced by the plaintiff as a result
of the lack of response from the defendants and the defendants’ attempt to
conceal their actions, I find that amount of $30,000 in costs is appropriate.  The
defendants are also ordered to pay the plaintiff $30,000 in costs, inclusive of
disbursements.