[1]         
R.E.G., a.k.a. R.G., is charged with assault on K.R. or about the 23rd
day of October, 2022, in the City of Brampton, contrary to s. 266 of the Criminal
Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46.
[2]         
R.G. is further charged with sexual assault on
K.R. on or about the 20th day of October, 2022, in the City of Brampton,
contrary to s. 271 of the Criminal Code.
[3]         
The judge alone trial was conducted on September
9 and 10, 2024. I reserved the judgment to November 18, 2024.
[4]         
It is an agreed fact that K.R. called the police
on October 23, 2022, at 1:51 p.m.
[5]         
K.R. is the complainant. She was the only
witness that testified at the trial.
[6]         
K.R. was in a romantic relationship with the
accused in October 2022.
[7]         
She testified that she met the accused through a
female friend.
[8]         
She said that she did not have a home at the
time and “couch surfed.” She would bunk with R.G. at a basement apartment in
Brampton that he was living at in the fall of 2022. They lived together for three
months.
[9]         
In cross-examination, K.R. said she thought
their relationship was a “friend with benefits” but accepted that she wanted
more than a casual relationship.
[10]      
There were other people that lived in the
basement. There were two rooms in the basement not too far apart. She described
that there was another woman living on the other side of the basement. There
were also people living upstairs. She did not think the other woman that lived
in the basement was around at the time of the incident.
[11]      
K.R. was asked by the Crown how many incidents
in total there were and she said one. K.R. was also asked if she had met with the
accused prior to her testimony at trial and she said she did not meet him until
today. This question was not entirely clear but covered whether she had met
with the accused since the alleged incidents and prior to her testimony. She
said she did not.
[12]      
K.R. stated that the sexual assault incident
occurred in October 2022.
[13]      
She stated that she was laying in the bed beside
the accused. He mentioned to her that he wanted to have sex.
[14]      
She told him no. However, the accused still proceeded
and got on top of her. He forcefully removed her clothes and took her pants
down half way.
[15]      
She said that her pants were basically taken off
but not all the way. Initially she said her legs were not inside the pants. Then
she said the legs were still in her pants.
[16]      
K.R. did not recall the kind of pants or top she
was wearing. She did not remember if she was wearing underwear. She did not
recall what R.G. was wearing.
[17]      
She stated that after removing her clothing,
K.R. put his penis inside of her vagina. He was facing her. Her feet were
positioned at his chest. No words were exchanged.
[18]      
She tried to push him off with her feet, but he
was forceful, and she could not get him off.
[19]      
She said the sexual assault lasted about 15
minutes. It ended when he went to the washroom. He did not use a condom. She
believes that he ejaculated.
[20]      
After R.G. returned and laid on the bed, she
went to the washroom.
[21]      
K.R. was asked if they discussed anything else
before the alleged incident. She said that R.G. told her he was in a
relationship with a woman she had known from high school, but he had not gotten
a divorce yet.
[22]      
She said that after the incident they did not
discuss what happened.
[23]      
She said that while it happened, she was afraid
he would try to kick her out of his home.
[24]      
She stated the sexual assault incident happened
about an hour before giving the statement to the police on October 23, 2022.
This timeline would be revisited later.
[25]      
K.R. later explained in cross-examination, that R.G.
had contact with her after their breakup and they resumed contact. She said
during that time he told her that he was sorry. In re-examination, she said the
apology was for the sexual assault.
[26]      
K.R. was asked by the Crown again if there was
any other incident between the two of them. She said just petty arguments. She
did not describe being a victim of an assault.
[27]      
K.R. was asked by the Crown if she spoke to the
police about another incident and she maintained - just the sexual assault. She
said she had an opportunity to review her statement to the police during a
recent preparation meeting online over zoom.
[28]      
After K.R. was permitted to review her statement
of October 23, 2022 to refresh her memory, and the Crown brought a section 9(2)
application, K.R. then explained that an assault that occurred earlier the same
day that she spoke to the police.
[29]      
She stated that she was expecting to see her
children at an access centre in Newmarket on October 23, 2022. She described
that she had three children at the time, one in foster care and two with her
parents. That day there was no driver to pick her up and she was very disappointed
that she did not get to see the children.
[30]      
The accused did not come home the day prior and
was not there for her to support her seeing her children. K.R. believed that he
was with another woman and was upset with him.
[31]      
When R.G. came home, they had an argument about
his absence, infidelity, and whether he had divorced his wife.
[32]      
During their argument, she had been using her
phone to make calls and CAS calls about the children. She stated that R.G.
grabbed her hand to stop her from making the call. She said that he grabbed her
wrist with one hand with some force. He hung onto to her wrist for around 30
seconds.
[33]      
She told him to let go. He released her. Then she
called the police. After reporting the incident she no longer lived with the
accused and went to live at a shelter.
[34]      
She stated that there were red marks on her
wrist as a result of the assault.
[35]      
She said after speaking with the police she went
to the hospital.
[36]      
In cross-examination, she said she waited the
whole day at the hospital and could not remain so she went back to the shelter
as she did not want to lose her placement. As a result, she was not examined at
the hospital in Mississauga.
[37]      
When questioned about the timeline again, she
stated that she did not go to the hospital on the same day that she spoke to
the police, it was possibly the day after or the week after.
[38]      
In re-examination, she stated that the shelter
had only let her out for a limited time, so she had to leave the hospital and return
to the shelter. She went to a shelter because she only had a few friends to go
to, and was not on good terms with her family.
[39]      
In cross-examination, she agreed she was upset with
R.G. before and when she called the police. She said she was upset because she
was unable to see her children due to the transportation issues, not because of
the incident with the accused. However, she agreed that the accused did not
come home on time. She expected him to come home when he finished work. She did
not believe him when he told her he was at his “boys’ place,” meaning with his
friends. She believed he was spending time with another woman. This made her very
upset. He also led her to believe he was getting a divorce but she saw no
divorce papers.
[40]      
She agreed that when she called 911, she was
upset about him not coming home. She agreed that she said to him that if he
played with her heart there would be consequences. When asked if the
consequences were getting him arrested, she said not exactly those consequences
without explaining further.
[41]      
In re-examination, she said she was upset but
still calm when she called 911. She called the police because she felt the accused
had abused her, was trying to manipulate her and took what happened for a joke.
[42]      
During the 911 call, she agreed that she did not
report the sexual assault. She went to the police station later that day and
reported both an assault and a sexual assault.
[43]      
She told the police the sexual assault happened
on Thursday, a few days prior. She agreed she told the court earlier that the
sexual assault happened an hour before she went to the police. When confronted
with that inconsistency, she said she mixed up the dates as it was a long time
ago. She repeated she did not recall the exact dates in re-examination.
[44]      
She was asked if she told the police the sexual
assault happened around 9:30 to 10 a.m., whereas today she said it happened an
hour before she gave the statement. Later, she said the assault took place the
same day as the sexual assault.
[45]      
K.R. stated that after reporting the incident to
police she moved out.
[46]      
She was cross-examined about the following post
relationship contact between her and the accused. She did not explain this part
of the relationship in examination in chief.[1]
[47]      
In March 2023, K.R. was working at a restaurant
as a cashier. She said that she bumped into the accused at the restaurant she
worked at, when he was doing food delivery. They spoke and she gave him her
phone number, written on the back of a restaurant invoice.
[48]      
She said he wanted to get back into her “good
graces.” He talked her into giving her number.
[49]      
Later that day he texted her and asked if she
needed a ride home. She accepted the offer. She said that he drove her close to
her apartment. In re-examination, she said in March she was still living in a
shelter.
[50]      
She trusted him enough to take a ride home because
in her mind, it could only go so far.
[51]      
She agreed that months later, she contacted the
accused when she was pregnant and needed help. She received information that
the father of her child had been murdered.
[52]      
She agreed that she provided R.G. with her email
for an e-transfer for money.
[53]      
She agreed that she texted the accused to buy
her a Coach brand purse. She texted him the online link. She said that was
because he offered to buy it for her.
[54]      
She agreed that on June 30, 2023 R.G. sent her $50
by Interac e-transfer.
[55]      
A few days later she asked him to buy her a
Michael Kors brand purse. She said he told her to send him the link.
[56]      
K.R. confirmed that on July 2 she spoke to the
accused for 60 minutes.
[57]      
She agreed that on July 4, she asked R.G. for money.
She sent him messages stating, “can you please send me money.” She said it was
because he offered.
[58]      
She agreed that she also asked him to buy baby
clothes. She said he told her that he had a contact that would permit him to
get her clothes at a cheaper amount.
[59]      
She agreed she sent him requests for items.
Initially, she said it was a link for a purse, not clothes.
[60]      
However, she agreed she sent him a link for a
Fendi brand jump suit. She said he told her he can get designer clothes for her
daughter.
[61]      
A few days later she sent him a text asking for $30.
She said it was the same day.
[62]      
She agreed that she asked R.G. to buy her a
specific expensive stroller. She said that he agreed to pay for half.
[63]      
She provided her email to facilitate the
e-transfer from him.
[64]      
She denied she apologized to the accused for
contacting the police. She said she told him at the restaurant whatever
happened, let it stay in the past. She wanted to drop everything and didn’t
want to deal with it anymore. She stated that he was approaching her at work.
She denied she wanted to drop the charges.
[65]      
She said he apologized to her, and said she
guesses she apologized to him, but not for contacting the police. Eventually,
she said she apologized, told him whatever happened she would leave it in the
past and she was not going to worry about it anymore and move on with her life.
[66]      
In re-examination, she said he apologized for
what happened, but he didn’t want her to talk about it. She said that’s when he
was offering financial assistance and stuff.  She believes that his apology was
about the sexual assault, describing it as the assault on the bed and pushing
him off.
[67]      
She added that he wanted her to help him out in
court and say that she has a mental health issue and wanted to blame it on her
issues, which is not true.
[68]      
She agreed in the summer of 2023 she sent him
many messages for money.  She said he told her she could ask when she needed money.
She didn’t know he wasn’t allowed to speak with her and he did not mention
that.  Later, when the police came to give her a subpoena for this trial at her
apartment, they told her he was not supposed to speak with her.
[69]      
In re-examination, she said that their contact
continued for months.
[70]      
She believed he wanted her to move back with
him.
[71]       Eventually, she did not remember when she ended their contact and told
him she couldn’t talk to him anymore. She had moved on in life.
[72]      
The accused is presumed innocent. The
presumption of innocence is of fundamental importance in the criminal justice
system as it places the burden of proof squarely on the Crown and protects
against wrongful conviction.
[73]      
The presumption of innocence stays with the
accused throughout the trial and is only displaced if the court is satisfied
that the Crown has proven the charges beyond a reasonable doubt. The Crown has
the sole obligation or burden of proving each charge. The accused does not have
an obligation to prove anything or to testify.
[74]      
The concept of proof beyond a reasonable doubt
is also of fundamental importance in the criminal justice system. Proof beyond
a reasonable doubt is a very high legal standard. A reasonable doubt is not an
imaginary or frivolous doubt. It is not a doubt based upon sympathy or
prejudice. Instead, it is a doubt based on reason and common sense. It is
logically derived from the evidence or absence of evidence.
[75]      
While probable or likely guilt is not enough,
proof to a level of absolute certainty is not required, as that standard is
impossibly high. However, proof beyond a reasonable doubt falls much closer to
absolute certainty than to proof on a balance of probabilities.
[76]      
If there are reasonable inferences other than
guilt, the Crown’s evidence does not meet the proof beyond the reasonable doubt
standard. A certain gap in the evidence or lack of evidence may result in
inferences other than guilt. But those inferences must be reasonable given the
evidence and the absence of evidence, assessed logically and in light of human
experience and common sense.
[77]      
When assessing circumstantial evidence, I must
consider other plausible theories and other reasonable possibilities which are
inconsistent with guilt. The Crown thus may need to negative these reasonable
possibilities, but certainly does not need to disprove every possible
conjecture which might be consistent with innocence. Other plausible theories
or other reasonable possibilities must be based on logic and experience applied
to the evidence or the absence of evidence and not on speculation: R. v.
Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 1000, at paras. 36-37.
[78]      
Ultimately, in order to convict an accused
person of an offence, I must be sure that the Defendant committed the offence.
If I am not sure, I must acquit.
[79]      
When assessing credibility, no formula applies
in determining whether a witness is telling the truth. Instead, the witness’s
evidence is considered by using an analytical approach that is not tainted by
myth, stereotype, sympathy, or assumption.
[80]      
Many factors may be relevant in determining
credibility. Some of the key factors include whether the witness’ evidence is
internally consistent, whether it is externally consistent with evidence from
other witnesses or exhibits, whether the witness has a bias or motive to lie,
or give evidence that is more favourable to one side or the other, whether
inconsistencies in the evidence are about important or minor matters, whether
the explanations given for any inconsistencies are accepted, and whether the
inconsistencies suggest that the witness is lying.
[81]      
It is open to a trier of fact to place no weight on the
evidence of a witness if it is found that their testimony is implausible, inconsistent,
or unreliable for any reasonable reason: R. v. Varghese, 2024 ONCA 555, 439
C.C.C. (3d) 402, at para. 55.
[82]      
Arriving at a verdict in this case requires that
I determine issues of credibility and reliability. In other words, I have to
decide whether the witness told the truth and if so, whether her evidence can
be relied upon as accurate.
[83]      
The issue is whether the Crown has proven the
case against the accused, on each charge, beyond a reasonable doubt. In making
this determination I can accept some, none, or all of a witness’s evidence. I
may find that even though I prefer the evidence of a Crown witness on some points
over the evidence of or supporting the accused, I am left with a reasonable
doubt about guilt.
[84]      
As well, after careful consideration of all the
evidence, I may not know who to believe, in which case, I am also left with
reasonable doubt.
[85]      
The accused has no obligation to establish that
the complainant has a motive to fabricate or lie or that they were biased. A
complainant may accuse a person of committing a crime for reasons that may
never be known, or for no reason at all.
[86]      
Lack of embellishment may be considered in
response to suggestions the complainant has a motive to lie. However, it is not
an indicator that a witness is more likely telling the truth because both
truthful and dishonest accounts can be free of exaggeration or embellishment: R.
v. Alisaleh, 2020 ONCA 597, [2020] O.J. No. 4004, at para. 16.
[87]      
It is wrong to reason that because an allegation
was not exaggerated or could have been worse, it is more likely to be true. R.
v. Kiss, 2018 ONCA 184, [2018] O.J. No. 1011, at para. 52, citing R. v.
G.(G.) (1997), 1997 CanLII 1976 (ON CA), 115 C.C.C. (3d) 1 (Ont. C.A.), [1997] O.J. No. 1501, at p.
10; R. v. L.L., 2014 ONCA 892, [2014] O.J. No. 5941, at para. 2; and R.
v. G. (R.), 2008 ONCA 829, [2008] O.J. No. 4925, at para. 20.
[88]      
As Paciocco J.A. stated in Kiss at para.
52, demeanour evidence must be considered carefully as emotion or lack thereof
is not a proxy for truthfulness or dishonesty.
[89]      
It is incorrect to reason that because the
complainant has made allegations, or disrupted their life by making a
complaint, or pursued the complaint, the complaint is true. It is dangerous for
a trial judge to find relevance in the fact that a complainant has exposed themself
to the unpleasant rigours of a criminal trial. This can reverse the onus of
proof. R. v. A. (G.R.), 1994 CanLII 8756 (ON CA), [1994] O.J. No. 2930 (Ont. C.A.), 35 C.R. (4th) 340, at para. 3; R. v. J.C., 2021 ONCA 131, 401
C.C.C. (3d) 433, at para. 88; R. v. S. (W.) (1994), 1994 CanLII 7208 (ON CA), 90 C.C.C. (3d) 242
(Ont. C.A.), 18 O.R. (3d) 509; R. v. K. (V.) (1991), 1991 CanLII 5761 (BC CA), 68 C.C.C. (3d) 18
(B.C.C.A.), 4 C.R. (4th) 338, at p. 35.
[90]       Stereotypical assumptions discussed further below about the lack of
credibility of complainants in sexual cases are totally inappropriate. It is
also essential that the court does not rely on pernicious assumptions about the
believability of complainants that have the effect of shifting the burden of
proof to those accused of such crimes.
[91]      
There is no fixed rule on who will experience
sexual violence or how they will react to it: R. v. Hoggard, 2024 ONCA
613, [2024] O.J. No. 3683, at para. 20; R. v. Lacombe, 2019 ONCA 938,
383 C.C.C. (3d) 114, at para. 45; Kiss, at para. 101, citing R. v. D.(D.),
2000 SCC 43, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 275, at para. 65.
[92]      
There is no typical victim or typical assailant
or typical situation or typical reaction. There are variations in responses,
and they can be subject to numerous variables. This is because sexual violence
can take place in almost any circumstance. It can happen between all different
kinds of people, and in different types of relationships. Victims will not all
look or act or respond the same way.
[93]      
A persistent myth is that a victim of sexual
assault should or will necessarily resist, fight, or attempt to get away from
their assailant: Varghese, at para. 35.
[94]      
Courts must be careful not to rely on “common
sense” that is based on stereotypes. While not all assumptions about ordinary
human behaviour rest on impermissible stereotypes, caution must be exercised
lest the “common sense approach” that purports to rely on common sense
assumptions “mask[s] reliance on stereotypical assumptions”: R. v.
Donnelly, 2023 ONCA 243, [2023] O.J. No. 1515, at para. 40; R. v.
Steele, 2021 ONCA 186, 154 O.R. (3d) 721, at
para. 19; R. v. A.R.D., 2017 ABCA 237, 353 C.C.C. (3d) 1, at
paras. 8-9, aff’d 2018 SCC 6, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 218.
[95]      
Reliance on discredited stereotypes and
prejudicial reasoning in assessing a complainant’s credibility is an error of
law: R. v. Kruk, 2024 SCC 7, [2024] S.C.J. No. 7, at paras. 29, 44 and 50.
[96]      
Sexual violence is rarely witnessed first hand
by another person. Domestic violence may not be witnessed by another person. These
crimes often are not.  Corroboration is not required.
[97]      
When there is arguably corroboration, to be
given confirmatory weight, evidence need only be more consistent with the
complainant’s version of events than with another version:  R. v.
Varghese, 2024 ONCA 555, 439 C.C.C. (3d) 402, at para. 49; R. v T.W.S., 2018 BCCA 119, at para. 40; R. v. Demedeiros, 2018 ABCA 241, 364 C.C.C. (3d)
271, at para. 10, aff’d 2019 SCC 11, [2019] 1 S.C.R. 568.
Deciding whether evidence confirms or corroborates a complainant’s allegations
“is part of the broader assessment of the complainant’s credibility and
reliability that trial judges must make based on the entirety of the
evidence”: R. v. G.H., 2023 ONCA 89, at para. 20, citing Primmer at
paras. 31-33, 39; R. v. S.R., 2023 ONCA 671, at para. 7.
[98]      
Someone who was the victim of sexual assault or
domestic violence may immediately stop having contact with their abuser,
whereas others may continue having contact with the person abusing them. Or
they may resume contact after a period of separation. Some victims might
immediately complain about the abuse, while some will delay disclosing it, and
still others will never disclose it. The reality is that there is no fixed rule
on how people who are the victims of sexual or domestic abuse will behave while
subject to such abuse or in its aftermath.
[99]      
In assessing the credibility of a complainant,
their continued contact with the accused or the timing of the complaint are
simply factors to consider in all the circumstances of a particular case.
[100]  
A delay in disclosure, standing alone, will not
give rise to an adverse inference against the complainant's credibility.
[101]  
A gap from the time of the incident to the date
it is reported does not detract from reliability. It does not necessarily mean
that the person has misconceived the events. Dates and times are not
necessarily determinative. The presence of inconsistencies about peripheral
matters (e.g., time and place) should be considered in context and in relation
to the totality of circumstances, including the age or maturity of the
complainant at the time of the event(s): R. v. W.(R.)., 1992 CanLII 56 (SCC), [1992] 2 S.C.R.
122, at p. 134.
[102]  
The accused has no obligation to identify a
potential motive to accuse him falsely. To require him to do so would be
contrary to the presumption of innocence and reverse the burden to prove his
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, which falls squarely on the Crown. At trial,
the chief task is whether the Crown has met its burden beyond a reasonable
doubt.
[103]  
Not only is there no burden on an accused to
prove a motive to fabricate, but there is also no burden on an accused to
disprove that the complainant had no motive to fabricate. It does not follow
that the witness must be telling the truth because there is no apparent motive
to lie. It is dangerous and impermissible to move from an apparent lack of a motive
to lie to the conclusion that the complainant must be telling the truth.  In
general, it is improper to ask why would the complainant lie about this
subject, implying they must be telling the truth.
[104]  
In R. v. Gerrard, 2022 SCC 13,
468 D.L.R. (4th)
389, at paras. 4-5, the Supreme Court noted that when the accused
suggests that the complainant has a motive to lie, lack of evidence of a
complainant’s motive to lie may be relevant in assessing credibility: R. v.
Stirling, 2008 SCC 10, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 272, at paras. 10-11; R. v.
Ignacio, 2021 ONCA 69, 400 C.C.C. (3d) 343, at paras. 38 and 52.
[105]  
When it is argued that a witness has a motive to
lie, then absence of evidence of a motive to lie, or the existence of evidence
disproving a particular motive to lie, is a factor that suggests a witness may
be more truthful because they do not have a reason to lie. When considering
this factor, trial judges must be alive to two risks. First, the absence of evidence
that a complainant has a motive to lie (i.e. there is no evidence either way)
cannot be equated with evidence disproving a particular motive to lie (i.e.
evidence establishing that the motive does not exist). The latter requires
evidence and is therefore a stronger indication of credibility. Neither is
conclusive in a credibility analysis. Second, the burden of proof cannot be
reversed by requiring the accused to demonstrate that the complainant has a
motive to lie or explain why a complainant has made the allegations: R. v.
Swain, 2021 BCCA 207, 406 C.C.C. (3d) 39, at paras. 31-33.
[106]  
The Crown submits that the testimony of K.R.
proves the elements of both offences beyond a reasonable doubt. She was
credible and reliable. Her inconsistencies were not material. There is no
motive to fabricate. She made a criminal complaint, even though she experienced
fallout to her personal detriment as she had to live in a shelter. Also, K.R. has
suffered due to making the complaint. For example, she came to court at
personal inconvenience.
[107]  
The Defence submits that the Crown has not met
its onus to prove the offences beyond a reasonable doubt.
[108]  
K.R.’s evidence was inconsistent on material
points.
[109]  
Although the accused has no onus to prove a
motive to fabricate, her testimony raises that she was motivated to lie out of
anger with the accused due to perceived infidelity and failure to get a
divorce. This was in the context of her belief that they were in a romantic
committed relationship.
[110]  
The focus of a criminal trial is whether based
on the totality of the evidence, the Crown has proved the charges beyond a
reasonable doubt.
[111]  
In that assessment of the totality of the
evidence, I must consider whether there is any evidence that raises a
reasonable doubt. Similarly, on the basis of the evidence which I do accept, I
must determine if I am convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by that evidence of
the guilt of the accused.
[112]  
This is a one witness trial. Corroboration is
not required to prove the charges.
[113]  
The fact that this is a single witness Crown
case is not unusual in cases of alleged intimate partner violence.
[114]  
The summary of K.R.’s testimony above,
demonstrates that her testimony was provided in a fragmented manner. While
respectful that testifying in court is a difficult and uncomfortable
experience, in my view, this occurred because K.R. chose to testify in this
manner and respond to the questions this way. She was deliberately vague and
omitted key information or full explanations in response to questions in
examination in chief or cross-examination, and then explained more in
re-examination. As noted above, the Crown relied on some impermissible oath
bolstering arguments about the complainant pursuing a complaint at personal
detriment, that were later abandoned when challenged during submissions.
[115]  
K.R. testified about a sexual assault that
occurred in October 2022.
[116]  
She did not initially testify about the
occurrence of an assault on or about October 23, 2022. After reviewing her
video-statement transcript she then described an alleged assault.
[117]  
I will explain this change further later in
these reasons. For now, I will proceed on the basis that she ultimately alleged
two incidents as framed in the indictment.
[118]  
K.R.’s explanation about the specific
allegations was not directly challenged. It was not contradicted by the accused
or other evidence. However, her credibility in relation to the allegations was
challenged on the basis of inconsistencies, a motive to lie, and her lack of
honesty about her conduct during the relationship with the accused after the
alleged incidents.
[119]  
When there is evidence of the existence of a
motive to lie, this circumstance is a relevant factor when evaluating if the
witness is credible and reliable and whether the Crown has proved the charges
beyond a reasonable doubt.
[120]  
A motive to lie may reasonably cause the trier
of fact to be concerned that the witness’s evidence should not be relied on in
part or in whole. The presence of a motive to fabricate does not
necessarily mean that a witness is not credible or that the complaint is false.
A motive to lie may be present without necessarily tainting the subsequent
complaint. It depends on what explanation is (or is not) provided, and the facts
and evidence I ultimately accept.
[121]  
On this record, K.R. clearly had a motive to lie
in her complaint against the accused. I reject the Crown submission that she
did not have a motive to lie.
[122]  
The evidence is clear that proximate to the
criminal complaint against the accused, K.R. was in a romantic relationship
with the accused. The night before he did not come home. K.R. was upset about
this conduct because she lost an opportunity to see her children, she thought
the accused was cheating on her, and she was mad that he was still married.
[123]  
It is in that context during an argument, that she
agreed in cross-examination that she told him - if you play with my heart there
will be consequences. As part of the context to their relationship, she
believed that they were supposed to be together as a committed couple and that he
had not taken steps to obtain a divorce as he had purported.
[124]  
I find that K.R’s comment was a warning that she
was going to punish the accused for not coming home, for causing her hardship,
and for not being faithful. It is at this key time that the criminal complaint was
brought.
[125]  
In my view, K.R.’s comment that if you play with
my heart there will be consequences is akin to a threat to the accused that he
would face real negative consequences for his failure to come home, for
cheating, and for not meeting her relationship expectations.
[126]  
I recognize that K.R.’s expectations of her
partner’s fidelity are reasonable. I have factored that she claims she called
the police at that time because he abused her. I recognize that in some cases,
the abuse may be proven even with or independent of the presence of a motive to
lie. This assessment depends on a number of factors including the strength of
the Crown’s case, the nature or potency of the motive, the credibility of the
witness and their explanation.
[127]  
In this case, I find that K.R.’s used specific
choice of language to R.G. that night, once she believed he was unfaithful and
not there for him at a critical time where she needed him, establishes distinct
animus instigating the complaint.
[128]  
Further, in the total circumstances, I
infer that she was not credible in her evidence. I find that the total evidence
demonstrates that that the "consequence" she was referring to was to
manufacture a criminal complaint to cause the accused hardship or harm as
payback for cheating on her and letting her down. This finding
undermines my confidence in her evidence as a basis to convict the accused.
[129]  
I find that based on the totality of the
evidence, K.R.’s complaint has significant credibility problems that leave me
in a state of doubt such that I cannot be sure that the incidents as alleged occurred.
[130]  
I do not accept K.R.’s explanation when
confronted about this contentious point. Although K.R. acknowledged that she
made the threat shortly before making the criminal complaint, I found that she
was unclear and evasive in parts of her explanation of why she made the threat.
For example, when it was suggested to her in cross-examination that by
“consequences” she meant contacting police and getting the accused arrested,
she said “not exactly those consequences.” She did not explain or clarify further.
In my view, this response was deliberately evasive during cross-examination.
[131]  
In re-examination, K.R. said that she called the
police because she felt he had abused her and was trying to manipulate her. She
also said he took it for a joke.
[132]  
In my view, the totality of her response
demonstrated she had animus and set out to make the accused suffer. In response
to the defence theory fairly put to her that correlated her anger with his
perceived infidelity with her making a criminal complaint, her explanation was
not a clear or credible. It certainly did not negate that she had a motive to
lie about the allegations and acted on that intention to deliberately cause him
harm.
[133]  
Also, when asked in cross-examination if the
accused not coming home had sparked an argument, she said they had a
“discussion.” Earlier, she said she was upset with the accused when she called
the police. In re-examination, she said that when she called the police, she
was upset but calm. In my view, she was deliberately but not credibly
downplaying the extent of her anger at the relevant time.
[134]  
I am left in a state of reasonable doubt that
the accused committed the sexual assault offence alleged based on this
complaint which, in my view, was motivated by animus against the accused for
infidelity coupled with a specific threat for violating their relationship. In
other words, it was not that she was just upset and decided to advance a
truthful complaint that she previously held off on. In this case, she uttered
the threat to take harmful action against the accused and ultimately did so.
She was not credible in her explanation when confronted with this circumstance.
[135]  
I am also concerned that she displayed anger
with the accused at the end of her testimony on September 9 that supports that the
animus continues into the trial. While under cross-examination, she openly
expressed frustration to the court about the accused, staring at R.G., as she
explained her perception that he had helped the police with her address to
issue a subpoena. She said that she did not want to attend again trial in-person
for the next day of testimony. This was explained to be due to her personal and
childcare commitments. The import of her comments is that she demonstrated a
clear animus towards the accused for having inconvenienced her to participate
in a trial regarding a complaint that she made.
[136]  
There are also concerning inconsistencies that
indicate the complaint has credibility and reliability issues that contribute
to reasonable doubt.
[137]  
With respect to the assault count, K.R. called
the police on October 23, 2022 at 1:51 p.m. after a dispute with the accused.
She alleged an assault in her initial call.
[138]  
At the police station while being interviewed
she said she had been assaulted on October 23, 2022 and sexually assaulted on
October 20, 2022. To be clear, that change or addition of another allegation in
this case is not on its own abnormal or concerning. A person may initially seek
police assistance without providing full particulars during a 911 call as their
focus may be on getting help first and not providing details, depending on the
circumstances and inquiries.
[139]  
However, at trial in examination in chief, K.R.
was asked specifically to explain all of her criminal complaints. She
testified about the sexual assault.
[140]  
The Crown then asked her more than once if there
was any other incidents and she said no, repeatedly stating that otherwise, she
and the accused had petty arguments. She did not mention or explain having
endured an assault. She did not mention having red marks on her wrist as a
result of the assault. This is despite the assault being the first allegation
to have the police attend, and then explained first in her video-statement.
[141]  
She acknowledged at trial that she had reviewed
her statement recently during a preparation meeting with the Crown’s office.
Still, she maintained that there were only petty arguments, and no other
alleged incident of abuse.
[142]  
The Crown brought an application to
cross-examine their own witness, K.R. on the apparent inconsistency in relation
to whether an assault occurred, under s. 9(2) of the Canada Evidence Act,
R.S.C. 1985, c. C-5. Notably, this was not brought as a K.G.B. application:
see R. v. K.G.B., 1993 CanLII 116 (SCC), [1993] 1 SCR 740, 148 N.R. 241.
[143]  
Section 9(2) of the Canada Evidence Act
authorizes a limited exception to the general rule about the manner in which a
party may elicit evidence from a witness the party has called.
[144]  
To invoke s. 9(2), the party calling the witness
must demonstrate that the witness made a statement, at another time and in a
particular form, inconsistent with their testimony in the proceeding. The
Court of Appeal for Ontario has decided that whether to grant the application
is discretionary. The judge should determine whether to grant leave to
cross-examine by asking whether the ends of justice are best attained by
permitting it: R. v. Carpenter (No. 2) (1982), 1982 CanLII 3308 (ON CA), 1 C.C.C.
(3d) 149 (Ont. C.A.), 142 D.L.R. (3d) 237, at p. 155.
[145]  
The Crown’s s. 9(2) application was granted
after it was proven K.R. made the statement on video, accurately reduced to
writing in a transcript, and that there was a contradiction by omission in her
trial testimony compared to the statement on the topic of whether there was
another incident, specifically an assault where, in summary, her hands or wrist
were grabbed.
[146]  
For that application, I found that her statement
was voluntary and reliable. The Defence was able to cross-examine her on the circumstances
of the alleged assault, and I was satisfied that she was clearly communicating
and voluntarily participating when interviewed. I permitted the Crown to
cross-examine on excerpts of the statement, where the officer was not leading
her or she was voluntarily expressing what happened, including correcting the
officer’s recap.
[147]  
Prior to the Crown choosing to embark on this
procedure, the Crown understood that the cross-examination was admissible for
the purposes of credibility that K.R. had said something different on a prior
occasion. In the absence of a successful K.G.B. application, the
statement was not admissible for the truth of its contents. The prior statement
is available as a factor for consideration in assessing the weight to be
assigned to the trial testimony. The prior statement, even if adopted at trial,
has no intrinsic evidentiary value and is not evidence on the trial: R.
v. Rowbotham (1988), 1988 CanLII 147 (ON CA), 41 C.C.C. (3d) 1
(Ont. C.A.), at pp. 53-54; and R. v. McShannock (1980), 1980 CanLII 2973 (ON CA), 55 C.C.C. (2d) 53
(Ont. C.A.), at p. 56; R. v. Taylor, 2015 ONCA 448 at para. 50.
[148]  
After reviewing her statement and being
questioned on the 9(2) application, when that procedure concluded, K.R. then
went on to testify about the assault. This formed part of her evidence in
chief. However, it was clearly the result of having re-read her statement on
this point, and the leading questions by the Crown during the voir dire.
In her trial testimony, K.R. did not explain adequately why she did not mention
an assault or marks suffered, prior to the s. 9(2) application despite having
reviewed her statement recently. This demonstrates the limited utility in this
particular case of the Crown proceeding with their own witness in this manner.
[149]  
To be frank, K.R. fundamentally changing her
testimony to conform with what she told the police earlier pursuant to leading
questions did not strengthen her credibility. To the contrary, I do not find
that her subsequent testimony that was inconsistent, was part of an independent
recollection of an assault. As noted above, she was asked clearly prior to the
s. 9(2) application about any other incident and said there was none.
[150]  
When the Crown indicated that they intended to
bring the s. 9(2) application, I asked the Crown to explain the purpose, as the
application was intended to adduce a prior inconsistency relevant to
credibility of their own witness. The Crown confirmed that it was for the
purpose of credibility only.
[151]  
K.R. did not testify about an assault incident
up to that point even though it instigated the call to the police and it is the
first incident she describes in her video statement.  The officer also
re-summarized the alleged assault to her and she added details. In these
circumstances, her total evidence at trial leaves me concerned about her
credibility and reliability sufficient to result in a reasonable doubt.
[152]  
I recognize that the passage of time can result
in faded memory, but this is a case with two incidents alleged only over a
short period of time, where the assault is the first revelation in the complaint.
On these facts, the omission during her testimony is troubling and detracts
from K.R.’s credibility on this count.
[153]  
Overall, this is not a minor inconsistency. I
considered that she initially said there was no other incident except for some
petty arguments. It is arguable that with the passage of time since the
incident, she grouped the assault into that category of minor disputes, but to
be clear she did not provide that explanation. I must be careful about not
speculating why she chose not to explain the assault at all when asked.  Based
on her change in evidence, I am concerned about her credibility and reliability
due to her lack of recollection and inadequate explanation for the change.
[154]  
There were also some other material
inconsistencies. In her testimony, she said the assault occurred inside the
home. In her statement to the police she said that it happened outside.
[155]   In some cases, standing alone, this may not raise a reasonable
doubt. In this case, it is part of the totality of the problems with the
complainant’s evidence.
[156]   Based on the above reasons, I have a reasonable doubt that the
accused committed the offences alleged.
[157]   I find the accused not guilty of both charges.
[158]  
There is another issue that I will review, as it
was part of the evidence and defence submissions. I will deal with this segment
of the analysis separately as it is not determinative of whether the burden of
proof is met. However, for reasons I will explain this area adds to the
reasonable doubt.
[159]  
For the purposes of credibility, the Defence
relied on K.R.’s re-connection with the accused in March to October 2023
wherein she communicated repeated requests through text or SMS messages for
financial assistance and material items. She also asked for and accepted money
from the accused.
[160]  
I recognize that the court may have only been
provided a segment of the total communications. The Crown did not seek
additional time to call any reply evidence about their communications.
[161]  
Defence counsel clearly indicated that they did
not rely on this post incident relationship and communication evidence to
advance any myths about how victims should respond to abusive relationships. Rather
they submitted that it was advanced to demonstrate that K.R.’s was not truthful
and could not be believed about how she described the full relationship, her
own conduct, and the actions of the accused. Her material omissions undermined
her credibility.
[162]  
Myths and stereotypes have no place in a
criminal trial. R v. Kruk, 2024 SCC 7 at para. 31. I acknowledge that
intimate partner relationships are complicated. The court must be careful not
to rely on prohibited reasoning. A person is not less worthy of belief because
of how they react or respond to an abusive relationship, or when they report
abuse. For example, some people remain in abusive relationships or resume
relationships with an abusive partner for a variety of complex reasons. There
are no presumptions about what is appropriate or reasonable in that context.  It
is risky to descend into “common sense” inferences in that dynamic and often
emotional human context. A victim may not advance a criminal complaint until later
for valid reasons. I also recognize that an abused person can return to the relationship
with their abuser for numerous reasons that should not adversely impact their
credibility. This may include but are not limited to emotional or financial
incentives by the abuser, including efforts to maintain financial dependency or
take advantage of vulnerability. Alternatively, it is plausible that they
resumed a relationship to advance their respective needs or interests, which
can include but not be limited to emotional and financial. Further, it may be
that their feelings about one another were conflicted and they had anger but
still cared about each other.[2]
The court must not only avoid stereotypes it must also keep an open mind about
their existence.
[163]  
Overall, I do not rely on or draw any negative
inference against K.R. from the fact that she resumed a relationship with the
accused or that she sought or accepted his financial assistance. There may be
reasonable explanations for why they decided to spend time together again,
after time apart.
[164]  
That said, cross-examination of K.R. raised relevant
credibility concerns about inconsistencies, omissions, and her mischaracterization
of the entire circumstances of the relationship. This evidence is permissible
to consider in the reasonable doubt analysis.
[165]  
K.R. was not honest about the actual circumstances
between her and the accused that contributed to the complaint and then the
resumption of their contact.
[166]  
In cross-examination it became clear, for the
first time in her testimony, that K.R. resumed and maintained contact with the
accused for months, starting around the spring of 2023. This was contrary to
prior testimony which left the impression the relationship ended after the
incidents and there was not subsequent contact.
[167]  
During this time in the Spring to summer, they met
at her work, re-connected, and then spent time together, wherein she sent him
messages seeking material items and financial support. In the texts, she
initiated requests for luxury and non-essential items.
[168]  
Of import to the credibility analysis, I am
concerned that K.R. did not mention this aspect of their relationship at all in
examination in chief, despite being asked about the subject. She omitted these
details despite being asked by the Crown about the background and nature of her
relationship with the accused, the scope of her contact with him, and her
knowledge of him.
[169]   K.R. was
asked at the outset of the trial by the Crown if she had met the accused prior
to her testimony (which logically included after the incidents) and she said
did not meet him until today. She did not explain this further in examination
in chief. That evidence was not the full picture or accurate. In my view, it
was a deliberate decision to conceal this reality.
[170]  
When the truth came out in cross-examination
about their post alleged offence relationship, she blamed the accused largely
for all of it, despite contrary evidence of her consistently reaching out to
him for money, clothing, purses, and having long conversations. I do not accept
that it was as simple as the accused offered money or gifts and she accepted
his help. The evidence supports that it was a mutual re-connection and relationship.
For example, even if he offered a ride or financial support, she maintained
consistent contact and accepted.
[171]   I am
also concerned that other key parts of her explanation about the totality of
her relationship with the accused only came out in re-examination, after specific
questions asking to explain the full circumstances during examination in chief.
[172]   This
type of selective disclosure and adding to the description is troubling,
particularly when the witness is asked earlier and provides a different or
brief answer. That approach is misleading. For example, K.R. was asked by the
Crown in examination in chief at another point when the relationship ended, and
she said she did not know. That turned out not to be true. She did know and
chose not to tell the total circumstances until later in her testimony.
[173]   K.R.
also did not mention in examination in chief that she received an apology or was
asked by the accused not to continue the case. These are significant material
omissions, followed by a change with improper amplification.
[174]   I do
not accept K.R.’s subsequent detailed claim that came out only in
re-examination that the accused apologized to her for sexually assaulting her. This
is because in examination in chief, and cross-examination, her recollection was
different. In examination in chief, she was asked if she ever discussed with
the accused what happened and said she did not. As noted earlier, she also
stated that the first day of trial was when she saw the accused again, implying
it was the first time since the police complaint. In cross-examination, she
said after they reconnected, he apologized but she did not explain the nature
of the apology further or with clarity.
[175]   It was
in re-examination that her memory became apparently clear about the post
incident relationship resumption. I recognize and understand that some of her
explanations may have come out later because the circumstances were put to her
in cross-examination. However, that is not a full or convincing explanation for
the changes or addition of details. The changing responses and omissions are
troubling since it is apparent that she did not forget about significant
aspects as she had earlier stated.
[176]    Although
in re-examination she expressed that after they resumed a relationship it was
her belief that he apologized for sexually assaulting her, I find that this was
a late addition that was not credible. Factoring the incremental way she
explained it, initially as an apology only, without a clear explanation, and
not stated by accused with respect to any offence, it is difficult to attach
any real weight to her subjective interpretation that she added in
re-examination.  Since they had broken up and then resumed, I am concerned that
the apology (as she initially explained it), could have plausibly been in relation
to the accused’s infidelity or letting her down by not getting a divorce and
being there for her. Those were significant issues in their relationship.
[177]   For similar reasons
about her fragmented evidence and late additions in re-examination, while still
considering the total evidence, I also do not accept K.R.’s evidence that the
accused told her that he wanted her to help him out in court by blaming her
complaint on a mental health issue.
[178]   Overall, K.R.’s evidence lacked candour. This further causes me to be
concerned about the truthfulness and accuracy of her evidence.
[179]  
I find Mr. Graham not guilty of both charges.