[1]         
In my Reasons for
Judgment issued August 30, 2024, I provided that if the parties were unable to
agree on the issue of costs, they could deliver written submissions on costs in
accordance with a timetable that was established.[1]
The parties were not able to agree on the issue of costs and delivered written
submissions.[2]
[2]         
 The Respondent,
Paul Carreira, sought an award of costs payable by the Applicant, Alexandra
Koutsovasilis, on a substantial indemnity basis or, alternatively, costs fixed
on a partial indemnity basis. Paul[3]
submitted that he was the more successful party in this Consolidated
Application because he obtained some relief whereas Alexandra obtained none.
Paul claimed costs on an elevated scale on his submission that Alexandra “took
unreasonable positions and behaved in an unreasonable manner” in the years of
litigation following the death of Paul’s spouse/Alexandra’s daughter, Vasiliki
Koutsovasilis, known to family and friends as “Bessie”. Paul submitted, based
on his Bill of Costs, that his costs on a substantial indemnity basis quantify
at $349,045.06, all inclusive of fees, disbursements and applicable taxes, and
on a partial indemnity basis at $269,436.78, all inclusive.
[3]         
Alexandra responded
that she and Paul equally succeeded and equally lost in the Consolidated
Application. Alexandra submitted that neither Alexandra nor Paul established
their claims for sole ownership of the real estate that was at the core of this
dispute, specifically, the property known municipally as 406 Marybay Crescent,
Richmond Hill, Ontario (the “Property”); that both Alexandra and Paul were
awarded an equal interest in the Property; and that neither party established
an entitlement to any payment from the other. Alexandra showed, through her
Bill of Costs, that she incurred an almost identical amount in costs as Paul,
and submitted that each party should bear their own costs.
[4]         
For the reasons that
follow, I order that each party shall bear their own costs of this Consolidated
Application.
[5]         
Section 131(1) of
the Courts of Justice Act[4]
provides the Court with discretion in the determination of costs. The
principles to be applied by the Court in the exercise of this discretion
includes the factors enumerated in Rule 57.01(1) of the Rules of Civil
Procedure.[5]
In consideration of these principles, the overarching objective is to determine
whether a party has established an entitlement to an award of costs and, if so,
“to fix an amount of costs that is objectively reasonable, fair, and proportionate
for the unsuccessful party to pay in the circumstances of the case”.[6]
[6]         
The purposes of an
award of costs are to indemnify the successful party of the legal costs they
incurred; to encourage settlement; to deter frivolous actions and defences; and
to discourage unnecessary steps that unduly prolong the litigation.[7]
The issue of entitlement to an award in costs is informed by the “result in the
proceeding”, a factor set out in Rule 57.01(1). The case law has
well-established that absent special circumstances, “costs follow the event”.[8]
[7]         
Paul’s claim for
costs falters on the determination of success in this Consolidated Application,
as I will explain.
[8]         
By a letter written
by Paul’s lawyers to Alexandra on September 10, 2019, Paul sought Alexandra’s
cooperation in transferring Alexandra’s interest in the Property to Bessie’s
Estate (the “September 2019 Demand Letter”).[9]
This was a claim by Paul on behalf of the Estate for sole ownership of the
Property. Alexandra refused, and on March 11, 2020, Alexandra commenced an
application in court file number CV-20-00005058-00ES against Paul in his
personal capacity and as estate trustee for the Estate (“Alexandra’s
Application”). Alexandra claimed a declaration that she was the sole beneficial
owner of the Property, and that Bessie held title to the Property as a joint tenant in resulting
trust for Alexandra or, alternatively, by constructive trust. Alexandra also claimed occupation rent.
[9]         
 On July 8, 2020, Paul initiated
an application against Alexandra in court file number CV-20-00005116-00ES
(“Paul’s Application”). Paul claimed a declaration that the Estate is the sole
beneficial owner of the Property, and that Alexandra holds title to the
Property as a joint tenant in resulting trust for the Estate or, alternatively,
through a constructive trust as a proprietary remedy for unjust enrichment said
to arise from payments made by Paul for the carrying costs, maintenance and
updating of the Property. By Order Giving Directions issued on August 13, 2020,
Dietrich J. ordered that Alexandra’s Application and Paul’s Application be
consolidated and heard at the same time or immediately after each other (the
“Consolidated Application”).
[10]      
These pleadings, and
the development of the Consolidated Application for trial showed that the
detailed list of issues framed for determination at trial could be distilled to
their most concise restatement as follows:[10]
[11]      
I found that the parties’ competing claims to the
Property relied primarily on the same legal principles. They were mirror
images. Alexandra claimed that Bessie held her joint tenancy interest in the
Property in resulting trust or constructive trust for Alexandra. Paul claimed
that Alexandra holds her joint tenancy interest in the Property in resulting
trust or constructive trust for Bessie, and now the Estate.[11]
[12]      
I determined
as follows:
[13]      
Each party failed in
their symmetrical claims for sole ownership of the Property and each party
failed in their claims for payments related to the Property. Neither party was
more successful than the other in this Consolidated Application. In reaching
this determination, I reject Paul’s submission that he was more successful than
Alexandra because he established, based on s. 26(1) of the Family Law Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. F.3 (the “FLA”), that the Property is held by Alexandra
and Paul, as estate trustee, as tenants in common, each to an equal 50%
interest. I will explain why.
[14]      
First, both Paul, on
behalf of the Estate, and Alexandra obtained judgment for a 50% interest as
tenants in common in the Property. The s. 26(1) analysis resulted in both parties
receiving an identical 50% interest in the Property.
[15]      
Second, Paul, like
Alexandra, brought his Application to seek sole ownership of the Property. Paul
took the position that the Estate was the sole owner of the Property from
Paul’s September 2019 Demand Letter, and he maintained this position through
the years of litigation. This is seen by Paul’s offer to settle, served in the
days before trial, wherein Paul proposed settlement through monetary payment by
Alexandra to Paul in an amount that equated to 100% of the estimated value of
the Property. Neither party delivered an offer to settle that provided for each
party owing a 50% interest in the Property as tenants in common. The parties’
competing claims to sole ownership of the Property was, to use the terminology
expressed by the Court of Appeal, the dispute that “drove” the proceeding.[15]
The finding that the parties held equal 50% interests as tenants in common was
the by-product of my determination that neither party established a claim to
sole ownership of the Property.
[16]      
Third, the s. 26(1)
analysis depended on my determination of whether Alexandra established that
Bessie held her legal interest in the Property in trust for Alexandra, which
she did not. The issues were intertwined. Paul’s claim for costs based on the
determination of the s. 26(1) issue, alone, is tantamount to a call for a
distributive cost award where the major issues addressed at trial are
identified and parties are awarded costs on an issue-by-issue basis.[16]
The Court of Appeal has made it clear that a distributive cost award should
only be made in a rare care.[17]
This is not such a case because the s. 26(1) issue depended on the
determination of Alexandra’s claim in resulting trust. For the same reason, I
decline to “award or refuse costs in respect of a particular issue or part of a
proceeding”, as is provided by Rule 57.01(4)(a).
[17]      
Fourth, in
consideration of the issues raised in this Application and argued at trial and
stepping back and considering the conduct of the trial and the result produced,[18]
I find that it is fair and just that the parties bear their own costs of the
Consolidated Application. They have incurred almost identical costs. They
equally shared in success and failure, and, in the result, they share
co-ownership of the Property. Neither party took steps that unduly prolonged
the litigation or the trial. I see no basis on which one party should be
ordered to pay costs to the other.
[18]      
I find that success
in this Consolidated Application was equally divided between the parties. Courts
have ordered parties to bear their own costs where there is equally divided
success.[19]
On the basis of these reasons, I conclude, in the exercise of my discretion,
that Alexandra and Paul shall bear their own costs of this Consolidated
Application.
[19]      
Alexandra sought
costs against Paul for the costs incurred in preparing her written submissions
on costs, submitting that these costs should be fixed in the amount of
$10,000.00, all inclusive. In
the exercise of my discretion, I decline to grant costs of the issue of costs. I
am not satisfied that the purposes for the granting of cost awards support the
rendering of a cost award for the argument on costs in this matter.
[20]      
On the basis of the
reasons set out herein, I order that each party shall bear their own costs of
this Consolidated Application.
[21]      
The lawyers
for the parties may deliver to my judicial assistant a form of draft Judgment,
after agreeing on its form and content, and filing it on Case Center. It shall
comprise the disposition set out in this Endorsement on Costs and in the
Reasons for Judgment. In the event of disagreement, any party may request the
scheduling of a Case Conference to settle the form of Judgment.