[1]              
On November 29, 2024 I issued an ex parte
injunction restraining the respondents and others from picketing on the
plaintiff's property at 90 Silver Star Boulevard in Scarborough, Ontario in a
manner that blocked the ability of the plaintiff's vehicles to leave the
property in a timely manner.[1] 
  The injunction was issued at 7:30 PM on Friday November 29, 2024.  As a term
of the injunction, I ordered the plaintiff to provide immediate notice of the
order to the President of the Canadian Union of Postal Workers (“CUPW”) and to
advise her that the court would be available for a with notice hearing in a
timely manner, including on the weekend. On Saturday November 30, 2024 counsel
for CUPW contacted me and asked for a hearing on Sunday December 1, 2024 which
I granted.  Shortly after the end of that hearing, I indicated that I would
keep the order in place with reasons to follow.  These are those reasons.
[2]              
Rather than referring back and forth between
these reasons and my reasons of November 30, I will approach these reasons as a
single cohesive set of reasons. That means there will be some duplication
between these reasons and those issued on November 30.
[3]              
The plaintiff, Purolator Inc. is a Canadian
integrated freight, package and logistics provider – delivering packages to,
from and within Canada.  Purolator’s network includes hub facilities, located
in key regional areas, as well as local pickup and delivery facilities, which
vary in size and scope.  Purolator’s pickup and delivery facilities include the
location at 90 Silver Star Boulevard in Scarborough, Ontario (the “Facility”).
[4]              
The Facility has become caught up in a strike
that CUPW members are mounting against Canada Post.  Canada Post is the
beneficial owner of 91% of the shares of Purolator. Approximately 7% of the shares
are beneficially held by an arms length individual through a holding company and
the remaining shares are held by Purolator employees as part of an employee
share purchase plan.
[5]              
Purolator employees are unionized as well but
are represented by a separate bargaining unit and a different union.  Purolator
employees are not on strike.
[6]              
The Facility has a single entry/exit onto Silver
Star Boulevard.  On Thursday November 28, 2024 a group of CUPW members began
picketing at the Facility.  The picketers did not block the exit or otherwise
prevent vehicles from leaving the premises. They did, however, picket at the exit
of the Facility and, if a vehicle stopped, they communicated a brief message to
the driver and gave the driver a pamphlet.  Vehicles that stopped were held up
for approximately 30 seconds to a minute.
[7]              
The following day, the picketing took on a
different dimension.  Shortly before 8 AM on Friday, November 29, 2024 a group
of picketers began blockading access to and exit from the Facility.  The number
of picketers varied between 17 and 21 throughout the course of the day.  The
picketers were approximately 10 to 15 feet south of Silver Star Boulevard on
the driveway of the Facility.  Many of the picketers were wearing bright yellow
jackets with Canada Post logos and were carrying flags which indicated that
they may be associated with CUPW.
[8]              
Shortly after the blockade of the entrance
began, Purolator employees approached the picketers and asked to speak with a
picket captain.  There did not appear to be one.  The picketers advised the
Purolator employees that they intended to stop each of the vehicles leaving the
Facility for 15 minutes.  The evidence before me at the hearing on November 30 was
that each Purolator vehicle was prevented from leaving for between 15 and 31
minutes.
[9]              
Purolator called Toronto Police Services for
assistance.  Police officers attended at approximately 8:25 AM and spoke with
some of the picketers.  The police advised Purolator that they had no grounds
to remove the picketers and that they could not choose sides in a labour
dispute.  The Purolator employee engaged with the police and asked if that was
the case even if the people blocking the exit were not Purolator employees. 
This did not change the view of the officers in attendance.  The police then
left.
[10]          
 Blocking the exit and entry to the Facility has
a critical impact on Purolator.  The evidence before me was that 78 vehicles
leave the Facility every day between 7:15 AM and 10 AM.  There are additional
deliveries to the Facility between noon and 2 PM.  On Friday, November 29, only
27 of the planned 78 vehicles were able to leave the Facility.
[11]          
The Facility is a hub for next day deliveries to
hospitals, medical service providers, pharmaceutical providers, police
departments, the passport office, car parts manufacturers, schools and
individuals.  Deliveries to hospitals, medical service providers, and
pharmaceutical providers are especially critical because they operate on a
just-in-time delivery system.  By way of example, one of Purolator’s main
clients at the Facility is Johnson & Johnson Medical Technologies.  Johnson
& Johnson cleans and sterilizes surgical equipment and uses the Purolator Facility
to deliver that equipment to hospitals throughout Canada for next day delivery. 
Medical instruments are delivered to hospitals for use on the day of delivery
or the day following delivery.  Purolator provides the same service for
suppliers of medical devices such as orthopedic implants.  Those implants are
similarly delivered to hospitals for use on the day of delivery or the
following day.    As a result, delays in the delivery of medical devices can
have significant impacts on the ability of physicians to conduct surgery and
the ability of patients to receive timely medical care.
[12]          
Pharmaceutical products are subject to similar
timelines.  The Facility receives and ships product for specialty pharmacies
that prepare compounded prescriptions, usually for infusions.  Infusions have
stability limits governed by time and temperature.  As a result, timely
delivery is critical.
[13]          
This is of course not to say that other deliveries
such as those to automobile manufacturers, other businesses and individuals are
not also critical.  Those businesses also depend on timely delivery to function
properly.
[14]          
To be fair to the picketers, when Purolator
approached them to explain that certain vehicles had to leave for medical
drop-offs, the picketers negotiated and allowed those trucks through.  In the
pressure of the moment, Purolator was, however, able to identify only four vehicles
that contained medical products.  Medical products are not delivered on
designated vehicles but are dispersed throughout the fleet.  While there was no
evidence led before me on the point, I assume that is because each vehicle is
designated for a particular geographical area as opposed to being dedicated to
a particular business use across a potentially wider geographical area.  The
four vehicles with medical deliveries that Purolator was able to identify were
allowed to leave at 9:59, 10:09, 10:33 and 11:38 AM.  Those were still beyond
the ordinary departure time of no later than 10 AM.
[15]          
Section 102 of the Courts of Justice Act[2] sets
out particular rules for injunctions in labour disputes.  The principal
differences between an injunction granted under s. 102 and a conventional
injunction are that, there is a significantly greater reluctance to grant ex
parte injunctions, a minimum of two days notice for an injunction is
usually required, an interim injunction is applicable for only four days, and
the court must be satisfied that the person seeking the injunction has made
reasonable efforts to obtain police assistance to prevent any alleged danger of
damage to property, injury to persons, obstruction of or interference with
lawful entry or exit from premises.
[16]          
CUPW submits that the activity they are engaged
in at the Facility brings this motion within the scope of s. 102.  CUPW argues
that s. 102 is jurisdictional in nature.  That is to say, that if the activity
falls within s. 102, the court simply has no jurisdiction to issue an injunction
other than by following the requirements of s. 102.  As a result, CUPW submits
that the ex parte order of November 30, 2024 was issued without
jurisdiction and must be set aside without prejudice to Purolator beginning
afresh to seek an injunction by complying with s. 102.
[17]          
In my view, s. 102 of the Courts of Justice
Act does not apply here.  Section 102 applies to injunctions issued in
connection with a “labour dispute”.  Section 102 (1) defines labour dispute as
follows:
[18]          
The focus of the argument on this issue turns on
the bolded portion of the definition above.  CUPW submits that the bolded
portion of the definition means that s. 102 applies the moment an injunction is
somehow related to a labour dispute, even though the parties to the injunction
are not parties to the labour dispute because the section provides that the
parties are not required to be in an employer - employee relationship.
[19]          
I do not read s. 102 in that way.  The closing
words must be read in light of what comes before. What comes before is the definition
of a “labour dispute.” A labour dispute is one that broadly concerns a
disagreement about employment “regardless of whether the disputants are in an
employer/employee relationship.  The “disputants” can only refer to the parties
to the “labour dispute.”  There are no other disputants referred to in the
definition.  Purolator is not a “disputant” for the purposes of s. 102 because
it is not a party to any labour dispute.  The broader reference to “regardless
of whether the disputants stand in the proximate relation of employer and employee”
is, on my reading, not intended to capture strangers to the labour dispute but
to include within the ambit of s. 102, parties to a labour dispute who might
not technically be employer/employee but who may, for example, be characterized
as independent contractors.
[20]          
As a result, on my reading of s. 102, the
starting point of the analysis is that s. 102 does not apply.  That is not
necessarily the end of the analysis though.
[21]          
The picketing at issue here is commonly known as
secondary picketing.  That is to say the target of the picketing is not a party
to the  labour dispute in question, and/or the picketing is conducted at a
place other than the place of business of the employer of the picketers.[3]  The picketers here were
not Purolator employees.
[22]          
The parties disagree about the extent to which
s.102 applies to secondary picketing.  Purolator submits that it is settled law
that secondary picketing is not picketing in relation to a labour dispute for
purposes of s. 102 of the Courts of Justice Act.[4] CUPW  submits that the
cases Purolator relies on for that proposition must be treated with caution because
they pre-date the Supreme Court’s decision in R.W.D.S.U., Local 558 v. Pepsi-Cola
Canada Beverages (West) Ltd.,[5]
which CUPW submits did away with the distinction between primary and secondary
picketing. I do not think the situation is quite as stark as that. Pepsi-Cola
overruled cases that stood for the proposition that secondary picketing was
illegal regardless of the circumstances.  It did not, however, address or change
the definition of labour dispute under s. 102.  Moreover, in Canadian
Pacific Railway Company v. Gill et al.,[6]
 which was decided well after Pepsi-Cola, Ellen MacDonald J stated:
[23]          
Purolator concedes that the law is also not so stark
as to say that s. 102 can never apply just because picketing occurs on premises
that are technically not the place of business of the employer. The courts have
long held that they will look to the underlying realities of the situation to
determine whether s. 102 should apply.  As Osler J.  put it in Nedco Ltd. v.
Nichols et al. [8]:
[24]          
Principled guidance about when those realities
may lead s. 102 to apply is found in Trudel & Sons
Roofing Ltd. v. Canadian Union of Shingler's & Allied Workers[9] where Eberhard J. set out
three tests to assist in the analysis: the  alter ego test; the place of
business test; and the remoteness test.[10] 
Thus, if the target of the picketing is the alter ego of the employer, it
should be bound by s. 102.  Similarly, if a party has the same place of
business as the employer, it may be appropriate to have them be bound by s. 102.
The remoteness test requires the court to determine more generally how remote
the party seeking the injunction is from the labour dispute.
[25]          
Although decided long before Trudel, the
case of Nedco Ltd. v. Nichols et al.[11] provides a good example
of the application of these tests.  In that case, employees of Northern Electric
were on a lawful strike. The plaintiff, Nedco, sought an injunction to restrain
Northern Electric employees from picketing outside of Nedco’s premises.  The
court found that s. 102 applied to the dispute even though Nedco was not
technically the employer.  It is, however, the specific facts of the case that
led to this conclusion.  Nedco was a wholly owned subsidiary of the employer,
Northern Electric.  Nedco was created to take over certain operations of Northern
Electric. Nedco carried on business in the same building as Northern Electric. 
A cafeteria in the building was used by employees of both companies.  A single switchboard
and switchboard operator served both companies.  The entrances and exits of the
building were used indiscriminately by employees of both companies (at least
until the strike broke out).  Many of the officers and employees of Nedco were
formerly employees of Northern Electric.  In those circumstances the court had
no difficulty finding that s. 102 should apply when Nedco sought to enjoin
employees of Northern Electric from picketing “its” premises. Although the
court did not expressly refer to the alter ego, place of business or remoteness
tests, one can readily see how at least the place of business and remoteness
tests would justify applying s. 102.
[26]          
In my view, the Purolator Facility does not give
rise to the concerns that s. 102 or these three tests are designed to address.
[27]          
Although Canada Post is a 91% shareholder of Purolator
and although Canada Post's CEO and Chair are on Purolator’s board, the other
directors of Purolator are arms length from Canada Post. There was no evidence
before me to suggest that Purolator is in any way the alter ego of Canada Post. 
There is no evidence of joint premises. Apart from the two directors, there is
no evidence of employees of one company providing services to the other.  As
noted, Purolator employees are represented by a different union than Canada Post
employees.  The union representing Purolator employees has written to Purolator
indicating that it would refuse to handle any parcels that were diverted from Canada
Post to Purolator.  There is no particular connection between the business
operations of Canada Post and Purolator.  Indeed, it appears that Canada Post
allows Federal Express, a competitor of Purolator, to set up kiosks in some Canada
Post facilities. The Facility at issue is used exclusively by Purolator. There
was no evidence before me to suggest that any other Purolator facilities in
Canada are shared with Canada Post.
[28]          
These various factors apply equally to the
remoteness test.   In addition, Purolator does not appear to have any
connection to the labour dispute between Canada Post and CUPW.  The closest
CUPW came to demonstrating a connection between Purolator and Canada Post for
purposes of the strike was to say that during previous CUPW strikes Purolator benefited
from an increase in parcel volumes.  That is not surprising. I would expect
that courier companies generally would have increased volumes in the event of a
strike at Canada Post.  In a similar vein, CUPW notes that on November 20,
2024, in reference to the ongoing Canada Post strike, Purolator issued a
statement saying, among other things:
[29]          
I do not find statements like that surprising
either.  I would expect that all courier companies would try to benefit from
the strike by persuading Canada Post customers to switch over to them with the
hope of retaining those customers after the strike ends.  In my view, that does
not connect Purolator any more closely to the labour dispute between Canada
Post and its employees than similar efforts by Purolator’s competitors would.
[30]          
Finally, CUPW submits that Purolator is
connected to the labour dispute because Canada Post uses revenues from its 91%
shareholding in Purolator to offset losses from its own operations. That simple
fact does not make Purolator the alter ego of Canada Post nor does it connect
Purolator so closely to the Canada Post labour dispute that one should override
principles of separate corporate personality.
[31]          
It is also worth noting in this regard that CUPW
has the ability to ask the Canada Labour Relations Board to declare that Canada
Post and Purolator are related employers.  It has never done so.
[32]          
 As a result of the foregoing, I am satisfied
that s. 102 does not apply to the present circumstances either by its language
or by its purposive application to the facts.
[33]          
I continue to remain troubled, however, by the
lack of notice to CUPW.  Even outside of the labour context, courts are
reluctant to grant injunctions ex parte without so much as short,
informal notice.  They do so only when there are circumstances of such urgency
that informal notice cannot be given, or where giving notice would put the
moving party at risk, such as in situations of fraud.  There is no suggestion
before me that Purolator would somehow have been put at risk had it given informal
notice to CUPW.    Here, notice could have been given. Purolator first
contacted the court office to notify it of an impending urgent injunction at
approximately 11:00 AM on November 29. Purolator ought to have given CUPW
notice at the same time.
[34]          
The case for informal notice becomes even
clearer because, as has now become apparent, Purolator's counsel have been
involved in other disputes with CUPW, including ongoing disputes, where CUPW's counsel
of record is the same counsel as is acting for CUPW in this matter.
[35]          
One answer to the issue of notice could be to
say that it was up to the court to determine whether it would proceed with the ex
parte injunction or grant it.  While there is some merit to that
suggestion, it is no answer to put the entire responsibility on the court.  Injunctions
evolve in real time in circumstances of urgency.  The injunction first came to
my attention at approximately 4:50 PM on November 29 as an extremely urgent matter.
The hearing began at approximately 5:30 and lasted until approximately 7:30. At
the outset of the hearing the strong message delivered to the court was that Purolator
did not know who the picketers were. As the hearing proceeded information emerged
to suggest that the picketers were CUPW members and in particular were Canada
Post employees. When information trickles out during the course of an urgent
hearing, its full implications are not necessarily immediately understood.  Especially
not when the court is being told that an injunction is required immediately.  Given
what I perceived (and still continue to perceive) to be the strength of Purolator's
case I nevertheless granted the injunction on November 29 with the proviso that
CUPW be given immediate notice.  With the benefit of hindsight, the technically
perfect answer may have been to decline to hear the motion until CUPW had been
given at least the courtesy of a phone call.  The strength of Purolator's
position is such that I do not think the failure to give notice should lead to
a refusal of the injunction. It may, however, be that some consequence for
failing to provide even short notice by telephone is appropriate.  I will
entertain submissions about that issue should CUPW wish to pursue it.
[36]          
The test for a conventional injunction requires
the moving party to demonstrate:
[37]          
The analysis of this four-part test requires a
balancing of the factors.  Each factor is not a standalone watertight
compartment.  Factors can be balanced against each other.  Strength with
respect to one factor can offset weakness with respect to another.
[38]          
Purolator submits that it must establish a
serious issue to be tried to warrant an injunction.  CUPW submits that Purolator
must establish a strong prima facie case. There is law to support the
proposition that a strong prima facie case is required when there are no
material facts in dispute or when the picketing injunction amounts to a final
order.[12]
There are no such facts in dispute here and it is likely that the interlocutory
proceeding here will, for all practical purposes, amount to a final order.  I therefore
apply the strong prima facie case test.
[39]          
The bulk of the parties energies were devoted to
the presence or absence of a strong prima facie case.  The issue focuses
on the extent to which there remains any distinction between primary and
secondary picketing and to what extent obstruction of egress from a property is
to be tolerated.
[40]          
CUPW submits that the Supreme Court of Canada did
away with the distinction between primary and secondary picketing in Pepsi-Cola.
[41]          
Although the Supreme Court did say later in Pepsi-Cola
that “all picketing is allowed, whether “primary” or “secondary,”[13] and that “we should not
lament the loss of the primary – secondary picketing distinction,”[14]  the court nevertheless
continued to draw a distinction between employers and third parties.
[42]          
  CUPW Relies on statements in Pepsi-Cola
and elsewhere that recognize and accept the coercive nature of labour
disputes.  For example, in paragraph 38 of Pepsi-Cola,  the Court said:
[43]          
In a similar vein, CUPW notes the words of Justice
Gray in Sobey's v. UFCW, Local 175,[15]
to the effect that:
[44]          
At the same time, however, both of those courts
recognized the potentially different position in which third parties find
themselves.   In Pepsi-Cola the Supreme Court noted that “third parties
are to be protected from undue suffering, not insulated entirely from
the repercussions of labour conflict”[18]
(emphasis in original).
[45]          
In Sobey’s, Justice Gray went on to say,
11 years after Pepsi-Cola was decided:
[46]          
In Pepsi-Cola, the Supreme Court resolved
the question of how much harm was acceptable to third parties by holding that picketing
of third parties is acceptable unless it involves a tort or a crime.[20] The court further
amplified on this as follows:
[47]          
This becomes a particularly live issue here
because the picketing that CUPW members carried out on Friday, November 29
involved blocking trucks from leaving the Purolator property for between 15 and
30 minutes.  Given that approximately 78 vehicles leave the Facility every day,
a 15 minute delay for each vehicle results in a total delay of 19 ½ hours.  Should
a third party to the dispute have to endure that sort of harm?
[48]          
Blocking access to property can constitute
wilful obstruction, interruption or interference with an owner’s lawful use,
enjoyment or operation of its property contrary to section 430 of the Criminal
code.[22]
[49]          
Blocking entry or exit to the property of
another can also constitute nuisance.[23] 
In Brookfield Properties v. Hoath et al.,[24] D.M. Brown J., as he
then was, summarized the law as follows in a case involving the picketing of an
employer:
[50]          
Numerous cases have made clear that picketers are
not permitted to obstruct entry or exit from the property of their own
employers let alone that of third parties.[27]
[51]          
Picketing of employers in a way that obstructs
entry to or exit from property has been subject to time limits.[28]  Time limits for blocking
access to an employer’s property have tended to be longer than those applicable
to third parties. In the latter situation, courts have tended to prevent
blockages altogether, have reserved picketing to purely informational purposes and
voluntary stops,  or have imposed time limits on any delays to which the third
party is subject. By way of example, in Metro Ontario Inc. v Teamsters Local
928,[29]
Justice Cavanaugh limited delays at the premises of a third party to a cumulative
total of 12 minutes.[30]
[52]          
CUPW submits that courts have allowed delays of
15 minutes per vehicle and longer as a result of which it argues that Purolator
has not made out a strong prima facie case.  The case that CUPW relies
on for that submission[31]
is, however, one involving the employer of the striking workers, not a third
party.
[53]          
I recognize that the right to strike and the
right to picket are constitutionally protected rights under the Charter. 
Picketing is an essential component of freedom of expression.  As noted in Pepsi-Cola,
the extent of the right should be informed by its nature as a protected form of
expression.  In that context, picketing of a third party that provides
information to those who want to stop and listen is permissible and protected. 
That was the general nature of the picketing at the Facility on Thursday November
28.  The picketing on Friday did not, however, have that objective.  As CUPW
put it in its factum, on Friday, November 29:
[54]          
Thus, on Thursday drivers who stopped of their
own volition received about 30 seconds to one minute of information.  On Friday
drivers “were stopped and held.”  That is a significantly different.
[55]          
The distinction between the picketing on
Thursday and Friday is reflected in the description of acceptable third party
picketing in U.F.C.W., Local 1518, v. KMart Canada Ltd.,[32]  where
the Supreme Court of Canada noted:
[56]          
In response to a question from the court, Purolator
expressed a willingness to designate an area in or adjacent to the employee
parking lot at the Facility where CUPW members could engage in lawful
informational picketing with anyone who wanted to speak with them without obstructing
access in or out of the property.  Purolator would also be open to making
similar arrangements with respect to its other Ontario premises as well where
it is feasible to do so. In the event of a disagreement with respect to the
designated area provided, the parties can approach me for a case conference to
resolve the disagreement.
[57]          
In my view Purolator has demonstrated a strong
prima facie case of nuisance by having its trucks blocked from leaving the property
for up to 19.5 hours.
[58]          
CUPW submits that Purolator has not met this
branch of the test because irreparable harm is limited to harm that cannot be
quantified or cured in monetary terms.  CUPW says such harm must be supported
by hard evidence rather than “speculative assertions” and that Purolator relies
on only unparticularized allegations of economic loss.
[59]          
In support of its position CUPW cites Justice
Gray’s statement in Sobey's v. UFCW to the effect that:
[60]          
That is an entirely fair observation.  However
it was made in the context of restrictions on an employer’s rights to access
property during a strike, not in the context of a third party being denied use
of its property.
[61]          
It is well-established in law that where
protesters engage in tortious or criminal actions, damages are not an adequate
remedy.  The remedy for intentional, unlawful conduct ought to be an order to
cease and desist, not a lengthy action for damages.[35]  Courts have also
regularly found that blocking entry or exit to an owner’s property constitutes
irreparable harm to the owner.[36]
[62]          
Given that Purolator has demonstrated that
continued activity of the sort that occurred on Friday November 29 would lead
to delays of 19.5 hours each day which, as a practical matter, would prevent
the majority of its trucks from leaving the Facility each day, I am satisfied
that Purolator has demonstrated that it will suffer irreparable harm if the
injunction is not granted.
[63]          
The balance of convenience requires the court to
determine which of the two parties will suffer greater harm if the injunction
is granted or denied.
[64]          
If the injunction is granted, picketers will be
enjoined from blocking egress from the Facility.  The law prohibits them from
doing that in the first place.  In similar situations, other courts have noted
that there is nothing inconvenient in being asked to stop conduct that one has
no right to engage in to begin with.  In those circumstances, there is simply
nothing to balance.[37]
[65]          
If the injunction is not granted, Purolator will
continue to be deprived of the free use of its property and its many customers
will be deprived of timely delivery of products including products needed for
immediate surgery or pharmaceutical infusions.
[66]          
Given that the primary purpose of picketing on
or around third party property is to provide information, that objective would
appear to be satisfied by Purolator's agreement to make space available on the
Facility parking lot for CUPW members to picket and engage Purolator employees
for as long as each Purolator employee wishes to speak.  Nothing of course
prevents other picketing off of the Purolator property which does not block
entry or egress from the property.
[67]          
In those circumstances, the balance of
convenience strongly favors Purolator.
[68]          
Since the hearing on November 29, Purolator has
provided a formal undertaking in damages.  That requirement has therefore been fulfilled.
[69]          
For the reasons set out above, I grant the
injunction that Purolator requests on condition that Purolator grant access to
CUPW members to a designated space on its parking lots as set out in paragraph 56
above.