[1]         
On November 21, 2024
following oral submissions, I granted the relief requested by the applicants
with brief written reasons to follow.  Here are those reasons.
[2]         
This matter involves a
demand mortgage that was registered against a Northwestern Ontario residential
property located in Nolalu in 2009.  Title for the property is registered in
the District of Thunder Bay and bears PIN 62285-0179 (the “Property”) The
mortgagee is a not-for-profit federal corporation, Frontiers Foundations Inc.
(“FFI”).   The mortgagor was a Joseph Armstrong who owned the Property.  The
principal amount was $54,000.00 and had an annual interest rate of 10%.
[3]         
Mr. Armstrong died in
May 2013.  The applicants are the sole beneficiaries of Mr. Armstrong’s
estate.  The applicant, Auralea Michaud is the Estate Trustee.
[4]         
An affidavit was filed
on this matter by Mr. Armstrong’s son Justin.  It enumerated the efforts made
by the beneficiaries to locate evidence of the status of the mortgage.  They
could find nothing.  FFI continues as a corporation and has a registered head
office at 419 Coxwell Avenue in Toronto.  A google map search indicates this
address is occupied by a three storey multi residential building.  The affiant
could find no evidence of any demands for payments, payments having been made
at or after Mr. Armstrong’s death or any indication of the status of the
mortgage in documents among the personal effects of the deceased.  I drew the
inference that the Estate Trustee has made no payments in respect of the
mortgage since Mr. Armstrong’s death.
[5]         
Correspondence to FFI
at its registered corporate address has been unanswered.  A website formerly
operated by FFI has been taken over by another company which is using the
corporate name but disavows any knowledge of the mortgage.
[6]         
The Property was
transferred by the Estate Trustee to the applicant Amber Armstrong in June 2014.
[7]          The applicants rely on section 12(3) of the
Mortgages Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. M.40 which provides:
[8]         
Also, the applicants
rely on a 2022 Superior Court decision of Di Luca J. in Sayward Investments
Inc. v. DaSilva, 2022 ONSC 6215.  At paragraph 37 Di Luca J. reiterated
established law that the Mortgages Act is remedial legislation which
should be liberally interpreted.  An order under section 12 is discretionary
and must consider the relative equities between the mortgagor and the
mortgagee.
[9]         
The applicants also
argue that section 4 of the Real Property Limitations Act, R.S.O. 1990
c. L 15 (the “RPLA”) bars any claim under the mortgage by FFI as more than
after ten years have passed from the date of Mr. Armstrong’s death, a date at
which FFI knew or ought to have known it had a claim to any amounts owing under
the mortgage. Further as the mortgage contained standard charge terms 200033,
these terms provide at paragraph 14 that upon the Chargor selling the mortgaged
lands the principal sum and any interest owing becomes immediately due and
payable without notice from the Chargee.  Therefore, as the Property was
transferred in June 2014, FFI’s right to claim anything under the mortgage has
now expired.
[10]      On the basis of the material filed and the
submissions of counsel, including his representations that he could not locate
any counsel acting for FFI, I find that FFI as mortgagee of the mortgage at
issue in this application for the Property cannot be found.  I find the
applicants as beneficiaries and Estate Trustee have made diligent and complete
efforts to ascertain the status of the mortgage as well as any claim FFI may
continue to have in same.  I find a discharge of the mortgage cannot be
obtained without undue delay.   I find that FFI’s claim in the mortgage is
statute barred by operation of section 4 of the RPLA.  I find no amount is
presently owed by Joesph Armstrong, or his successor in title, to FFI in
respect of the mortgage.  Accordingly, as FFI has no further claim in the
mortgage, I find that balancing the equities of mortgagor and mortgagee in this
matter militates in favour of exercising my discretion in favour of granting an
order discharging the mortgage without the necessity of any payments being made
into court in respect of the mortgage as contemplated by section 12(3) of the Mortgages
Act.
[11]      Order to go discharging the mortgage and
directing the Registrar of Land Titles at Thunder Bay to register a copy of the
order on title to the property at issue in this application thereby discharging
the mortgage.