[1]              
I.T. is a young Black youth charged with second-degree murder. From the
back seat of a taxi, he shot and killed Christopher Jung, an elderly taxicab
driver ferrying him to a shopping mall in East Toronto.[1]
I.T. wishes to testify in his own defence before the jury but he has a youth record.
After the end of the Crown’s case, he brought a Corbett application: R.
v. Corbett, 1988 CanLII 80 (SCC), [1988] 1 S.C.R. 670. The application was allowed in part. These
reasons provide more substance to the decision given in court.
[2]              
Purposefully, I have described I.T.’s race. I find that anti-Black
racism should be a factor in the exercise of my discretion to exclude or
sanitize certain parts of his youth record. I will explain why.
[3]              
Before I do, I will first set out the basic test to be applied on a Corbett
application.
[4]              
The admissibility of a witness’s criminal record is governed by s.12(1) of
the Canada Evidence Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-5 which states:
[5]              
 Section 12 of the Canada
Evidence Act is made applicable to youth records pursuant s. 81 of the
Youth Criminal Justice Act, S.C. 2002, c. 1. Therefore, this makes I.T.’s
prior youth record presumptively admissible for the purpose of assessing his
credibility when he testifies in his own defence. It is agreed that the convictions
do not fall within the access period restrictions for youth records as found in
Part 6 of the Youth Criminal Justice Act. Thus, the Crown is not
precluded for that reason from cross-examining I.T. on such youth findings: R.
v. Sheik-Qasim, (2007), 2007 CanLII 52983 (ON SC), 230 C.C.C. (3d) 531 (Ont. S.C.J.); R. v.
Hammerstrom (2018), 363 C.C.C. (3d) 430 (B.C.C.A.).
[6]              
​In Corbett, the Supreme Court of Canada upheld the
constitutionality of s. 12 when an accused is cross-examined on their previous
convictions and found the section did not violate the right to a fair trial nor
was it contrary to the principles of fundamental justice. In coming to this
conclusion, the court determined that the preferred approach was to permit the
jury to have all relevant information with a proper limiting instruction given
as to its permissible use. However, a discretion in the trial judge to exclude
evidence of previous convictions in the appropriate case was recognized when
the right to a fair trial required it. The test for doing so is familiar: the
onus is on the defence to prove that the probative value of a criminal record
on the credibility of the accused is outweighed by the risk of prejudice: Corbett,
at para. 51. The factors considered in the exercise
of this discretion include:
[7]              
These factors, while not exhaustive, have been the most
important ones in determining a Corbett application: R. v. King, 2022 ONCA 665, 163 O.R. (3d) 179, at para. 177; R. v. McManus, 2017 ONCA 188, 36 C.R. (7th) 261, at para. 82; R. v. Laing, 2016 ONCA 184, at para. 20. Deference is afforded to trial judges’ determinations of Corbett
applications. Appellate intervention is only warranted when the trial judge’s Corbett
decision demonstrates an error in principle, misapprehension of the material
facts, or was an unreasonable exercise of discretion: R. v. Asante, 2022 ONCA 657, at para. 21, citing R.
v. R.D., 2019 ONCA 951, 382
C.C.C. (3d) 304.
[8]              
 ​Credibility is the key consideration when deciding the probative value of past
convictions on a Corbett application: “[t]he probative
value of a prior conviction in a Corbett application is always rooted in
the strength of the inference that can be drawn from the fact of the conviction
to the testifying accused's credibility”:  King, at para. 180. The prejudice
involved is the obvious one: the jury may well consider the general propensity
revealed by the criminal record as evidence that the accused is more likely to
have committed the offence they are charged with.
[9]              
 Convictions for offences such as acts of deceit,
fraud, cheating, theft, and disrespect for the administration of justice have
been considered particularly informative of a witness’s honesty: King,
at para. 140. On the other hand, certain types of convictions have been considered
less relevant to credibility. For example, in R. v. Wilson (2006), 2006 CanLII 20840 (ON CA), 39 C.R. (6th) 345 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 33, the Court of Appeal held that drug convictions are of
little probative value on the issue of credibility. La Forest J., in his
dissent in Corbett, at para. 155, said that acts of violence
generally have little or no direct bearing on honesty and veracity. However,
even where convictions are disconnected from crimes of dishonesty, they may have
the potential to demonstrate a lack of trustworthiness on the part of the
witness by showing an “abiding and repeated contempt for laws”: King,
at para. 140, citing Corbett.
[10]          
In general, the Corbett analysis is the same
whether the records are youth records or adult records; the question remains
whether the prejudicial effect of a conviction outweighs its probative
value: Morris v. The Queen, 1978 CanLII 168 (SCC), [1979] 1 S.C.R. 405. Yet, added complexity is involved when it
comes to youth records. Amongst other principles, the YCJA is premised
on the principle that young persons have diminished moral blameworthiness or
culpability: s. 3(1)(b) of the YCJA; R. v. D.B., 2008
SCC 25. Consequently, youth convictions for an offence are not necessarily
the moral equivalent as adult convictions for the same offence. This may have
an impact on the probative value of youth convictions on credibility: R. v.
Hall, 2011 ONSC 6526, at para. 14; R. v. Hussein, 2023 ONCA 253, at para. 66; Nicola J. Langille, Forgetting Youth: The Use of Prior Youth
Records to Impugn Credibility, 2014 72-1 University of Toronto Faculty
of Law Review 10, 2014 CanLIIDocs 33741. At times, courts have deleted
youth records or convictions when the accused has a similar adult record because
the existence of adult convictions would avoid leaving the jury with a skewed
or incomplete picture of their credibility: Hall; R. v. Barreira, 2017 ONSC 2478, at para. 27; R. v.
Champagne, 2024 ONSC 1437, at para. 24. In other cases, youth convictions
remained untouched though an adult record also existed: Asante, at
paras. 23-25.
[11]          
I turn now to how anti-Black racism can be considered
as a factor in a Corbett application.
[12]          
The seminal case of R. v. Gladue, 1999 CanLII 679 (SCC), [1999] 1
S.C.R. 688 offered early guidance to courts on how the racial background
of an accused should affect sentencing, per section 718.2(e) of the Criminal
Code. In that case, a 19-year-old Cree woman named Jamie Tanis Gladue was
convicted of manslaughter after killing her common-law husband. Cory and
Iacobucci JJ. writing for a unanimous Supreme Court of Canada, explained that
the intent of s. 718.2(e) is to alleviate Indigenous overincarceration and to
adopt the principle of restorative justice. At para. 68, the court recognized
that “the circumstances of aboriginal offenders differ from those of the
majority because many aboriginal people are victims of systemic and direct
discrimination, many suffer the legacy of dislocation, and many are
substantially affected by poor social and economic conditions.” As such, the s.
718.2(e) analysis must focus on the unique circumstances of Indigenous peoples
in Canada, including systemic factors that may have assisted in bringing the
Indigenous accused before the courts.
[13]          
Relatively recently, the principles set out in Gladue
in the sentencing context were made applicable to Corbett applications.
[14]          
In King, at paras. 132-202, the Court
of Appeal for Ontario held that trial judges can apply Gladue principles
in their determination of a Corbett application for an
Indigenous accused. The accused in that case, a
young Indigenous man, was charged with second-degree murder. The trial judge,
Goodman J., excluded King’s prior assault convictions, accepting defence
counsel’s submission that the respondent’s Indigeneity impacted the probative
value and prejudicial effect of the prior convictions: R. v. King, 2019
ONSC 6851. At para. 41, Goodman J. spelled out the need to extend Gladue
principles beyond the sentencing context: “Sentencing innovation, by itself,
will not deal with the underlying causes of crimes committed by Indigenous
people nor with the problem of over-incarceration. More must be done.”
[15]          
The Court of Appeal upheld Goodman J.’s decision on the
Corbett application, finding that an accused's Indigeneity is a
relevant, although not dispositive, factor to consider. The concern for trial
fairness, underlying the Corbett analysis, requires trial judges to pay
particular attention in the analysis to the unique circumstances of an
Indigenous accused, where those circumstances affect the probative value and
prejudicial impact of their criminal record. Several of the Corbett
factors required further specification to put the judge into an adequate
position to accurately assess the prejudice and probative value of admitting
past convictions. This can be done as a separate step or within the confines of
the existing traditional Corbett factors. The court concluded in
upholding the trial judge’s ruling, that the
accused’s Indigeneity, placed in its proper context and considered
alongside the other traditional Corbett factors, weighed
in favour of numerous convictions being excluded.
[16]          
The post-King case law continues to
consider Gladue principles in the Corbett analysis for
Indigenous accused persons: see, for example, R. v. Hikoalok,
2023 ONSC 406, and R. v. Young, 2023 BCSC 276, [2023]
B.C.J. No. 347. However, to my knowledge, no trial judge has ventured
to extend the court’s reasoning in King to other racialized accused
persons.
[17]          
In my view, the reasoning from King makes
this extension to Black accused ripe and very much
called-for. What I propose is not a simple application of Gladue to
Black Canadians, which Rosenberg J.A. declined to do in R.
v. Borde (2003), 2003 CanLII 4187 (ON CA), 63 O.R. (3d) 417 (Ont. C.A.), but rather an
extension of the reasoning in King as it pertains to accused
who are subject to the adverse effects of systemic racism more generally. This
doesn’t presuppose that the racism experienced by Indigenous peoples and Black
Canadians are comparable. As I previously observed in R. v. Jackson, 2018
ONSC 2527, 46 C.R. (7th) 167, at para. 57, “the
voices of each community deserve to be heard on their own individual terms.” What
it does presuppose is that racism’s roots, both historical and
current, based in privilege and dominance, are comparable across
cases and may call for similar safeguards among differently racialized accused.
To address it similarly across cases of differently racialized accused merely
recognizes the common source of racial inequity in the criminal justice
system and society at large, without diminishing the varied experiences of
different racialized groups. This recognition should imbue the concept of trial
fairness for other racialized accused that suffer from systemic racism as much
as it does for Indigenous accused.
[18]          
The Court of Appeal in King is
clear that the purpose of considering Gladue principles in
a Corbett analysis is to advance trial fairness by ensuring
oft-overlooked factors, like systemic racism, are accounted for (at para. 175):
[19]          
 The Crown submitted that it is unnecessary to do this
for a Black accused like I.T. because of the general instructions about bias
and prejudice given to the jury panel and petite jury, and the challenge
for cause on the grounds of race. I do not agree. As Moldaver J.
stated in R. v. Barton, 2019 SCC 33, [2019] 2
S.C.R.579, existing procedural safeguards against juror bias are not a
panacea. Corbett itself is a recognition that jury instructions
will not always be sufficient to guard against improper propensity reasoning.
Trial fairness demands that all factors bearing on the statutory presumption
of admission be considered. It is imperative that the Corbett analysis
direct trial judges to consider whether in the context before them, the accused
is at elevated risk of prejudice because of racist stereotypes: King,
at para. 196. I am satisfied that this need to guard against improper
propensity reasoning applies not only to cases of Indigenous accused, but to
all cases involving Black accused.
[20]          
In my view, cases that consider anti-Black racism in
sentencing, such as  Borde, R. v. Hamilton (2004),
2004 CanLII 5549 (ON CA), 72 O.R. (3d) 1 (Ont. C.A.), and, most cogently, R. v. Morris, 2021
ONCA 680, 159 O.R. (3d) 641, can be extended for use in the Corbett
analysis in a way that mirrors the Court of Appeal’s reasoning in King and
widens its scope to Black accused in Canada.
[21]          
It is not a novel idea that social principles
considered in sentencing need not be limited to the sentencing
context. Courts have held that Gladue principles are not
strictly limited to sentencing hearings and ought to be considered by all
decision makers who have the power to influence the treatment
of Indigenous offenders in the justice system. As aptly summarized by
King at para. 170:
[22]          
It reasonably follows that Morris principles
ought not be strictly limited to sentencing decisions and should be
considered by all decisionmakers who have the power to influence the treatment
of Black people in the justice system. It is worth noting here, though not applied as directly or as often
as Gladue principles to the exercise of judicial discretion, Morris principles
have been utilized in legal contexts other than sentencing: R. v. Theriault,
2021 ONCA 517, at paras. 141-146 (the assessment of the credibility of a Black
witness based upon the racial and social context of a witness’s background
including a distrust for law enforcement); R. v. Ali, 2024 ONSC 5208, at
para. 157 (anti-Black racism heightening the prejudicial effect of the
admission of rap music); R. v. Morgan, 2023 ONSC 6855, at para. 70 (anti-Black
racism intersecting with the assessment of police racial profiling); R. v.
Aim et al, 2023 ONSC 5909, at para. 40 (race-based fear of police providing
an alternative explanation for post-offence conduct); R. v. E.B., 2020
ONSC 4383, at paras. 26, 40-44 (application in a bail decision).[2]
[23]          
The Court of Appeal held in Morris at
para. 13 that “[c]ourts may acquire relevant social context evidence
through the proper application of judicial notice or as social context evidence
describing the existence, causes and impact of anti-Black racism in Canadian
society, and the specific effect of anti-Black racism on the offender”.
The court cited a report, “Expert Report on Crime, Criminal Justice
and the Experience of Black Canadians in Toronto, Ontario”, by Professor Owusu-Bempah, Professor
James, and Ms. Sibblis, which explains how systemic discrimination in many
social institutions marginalizes Black people in communities marked by poverty,
diminished economic and employment opportunities, and a strong and aggressive
police presence. The court urged those called upon to prosecute,
defend, and sentence Black offenders, particularly young Black offenders,
to “read and re-read this report” (at para. 43). That
report concluded:
[24]          
 The report discusses how
young Black men in particular are discriminated against in the criminal justice
system: “[y]oung Black Canadians are not only over-represented in stop,
search and carding practices of local police, but they serve longer periods of
time in pre-trial detention, resulting in longer periods of incarceration than
are others charged with the same or similar crimes”: R. v. Morris,
2018 ONSC 5186, 422 C.R.R. (2d) 154, at para. 22. According to
the report, Black youths’ experiences with the criminal justice
system led to an “inescapable” conclusion that young Black
Canadians who view the system as unjust are less likely to believe they should
abide by that system’s rules.
[25]          
While Morris dealt with sentencing and
the present case deals with a Corbett application, I am prepared to find
that similar factors relating to anti-Black racism can appropriately be
considered in both. Both cases deal with
ensuring judicial fairness in light of systemic racism. By
considering anti-Black racism in I.T.’s Corbett application, I am
striving to improve trial fairness by considering all factors
bearing on the admissibility of his past convictions. To make it abundantly
clear though, this in no way diminishes the traditional four Corbett factors
nor does it demand a favourable result for a Black accused.
[26]          
In sum, I am satisfied that King and Morris make
it possible—if not imperative—for me to consider Canada’s historical and
continued presence of anti-Black racism in my Corbett
analysis of I.T.’s past criminal record. While I realize the novelty
of this addition to the Corbett analysis, I am satisfied
that the case law, social science literature, and the fair and impartial
administration of justice compels me to take this step.
[27]          
In applying the Corbett analysis to
Black accused, the following principles can be gleaned from King:
[28]          
Those are the principles at play. As an aside, in
keeping with the above conclusion that Gladue considerations cannot be
simply transposed to other racialized groups, I find that the record is
inadequate to adopt what King held with respect to convictions of
Indigenous accused obtained as a result of a guilty plea. For Indigenous
accused, convictions secured by guilty pleas must be placed in the context of
the attitudes of Indigenous persons shaped by systemic racism in the criminal
justice system (at paras. 190-191). Said differently, Indigenous accused overwhelmingly
plead guilty suggesting that, for Indigenous people, a conviction arising from
a guilty plea may be less probative of credibility because of their belief that
they will not receive a fair trial due to the racist nature of the criminal
justice system. For Black accused, I do not have the social context evidence to
support a similar conclusion.
[29]          
Before this analysis is undertaken, I wish to make the following
observations about the evidentiary voir dire. One is normally required
at the end of the Crown’s case before the accused has to make the decision
whether to testify or not: R. v. Underwood, 1998 CanLII 839 (SCC), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 77, at
paras. 9-11.
[30]          
Similar to the facts in King, here, the defence did not call any viva
voce evidence nor was there a formal agreed statement of facts presented on
the Corbett voir dire at the end of the Crown’s case. That said, like
the trial judge in King, I heard much about I.T.’s background when he
testified in chief in his own defence. As the Court of Appeal noted in King,
it would have been preferable to have received some of this evidence during the
voir dire. However, for the following reasons, I find that there was a
sufficient foundation laid for me to take into consideration the systemic
anti-Black racism factors.
[31]          
First, while Lamer C.J. in Underwood saw the need for evidence,
he made this comment in the context of the court knowing something about the
defence to meaningfully conduct the assessment of probative value versus prejudice.
He was not making this observation when it came to the use of social context
evidence more generally and the consideration of systemic considerations in
that analysis. As Morris and King hold, judicial notice can be
taken of the social context evidence required to further the Corbett analysis.
[32]          
Second, the defence has been very transparent from the beginning of the jury
trial what his defence will be. In questioning Crown witnesses and in
submissions made in the absence of the jury, the defence has been consistent,
focused, and revealing that I.T. will testify that he was too intoxicated to
form the intent to commit second degree murder. The Crown in no way disputes
that this will be the defence. At para. 10 in Underwood, Lamer C.J. was
receptive to the possibility that there will be cases where in a Corbett application,
no defence disclosure is needed because the nature of the defence is fairly
clear or has otherwise been disclosed, or where the outcome of the application
is readily apparent without this information.
[33]          
Third, the link required to tie the systemic and background factors to
the accused or their convictions, is neither causal, nor, in my view, a
significant one depending on the particular circumstances presented. Noteworthy
is the fact that a court will always have the record before it with the nature
of its convictions. In addition, the social context evidence for which judicial
notice applies provides a tool to assess the various convictions. Moreover, the
evidence led by the Crown in its prosecution can also be considered in
assessing the existence of the required link. Just as an example, the Crown’s
case included evidence of I.T. after the shooting making his way back to a
social housing complex in a poor neighborhood. Finally, even the appearance of
I.T., his “Blackness”[4],
surely must be considered as some evidence to support that anti-Black racism
could well be tied into some of his convictions and the potential prejudice he
might suffer if they are admitted.
[34]          
Fourth, the court in King was most mindful that the addition of
systemic considerations in a Corbett voir dire, not cause any
significant disruption to the trial. They said at para. 183:
[35]          
Finally, as previously noted, I have heard about I.T.’s background when
he testified. He was born in the United States. His childhood was punctuated by
repeated incidents of abandonment by those nature had tasked to nurture, care,
and love him. His early upbringing was caustic, isolating, and severe. He was
shuffled for many years across many States, to various families, including once
being sent on a cross-continental bus trip, alone, without any adult to accompany
him. Ultimately, he arrived in Toronto, where again he was abandoned by his
mother. His teenage years though more stable, was confined to a violent and poor
neighborhood. He resorted to illegal activities to survive. In Underwood
at para. 11, Lamer C.J. explicitly left it open for a trial judge to change their
Corbett ruling after hearing defence evidence led. Thus, it was open to
me to consider I.T.’s testimony in assessing whether my Corbett ruling
needed to be revisited. To the contrary, I.T.’s testimony only solidified my
view that systemic factors must play a role in the assessment of his youth
record.
[36]          
In short, the point I make here is that a significant burden should not
be placed on a Black accused before Morris considerations be taken into
account on a Corbett application. To place an onerous evidentiary
burden, in my opinion, would inject a significant element of unfairness into what
is meant to be an expeditious mechanism to make a trial fairer.
[37]          
The Crown and defence counsel have been exceptionally fair in their
positions on this application. Thus, I have focused on the convictions in
dispute in these reasons.
[38]          
In summary form, I.T.’s convictions are all from the years 2020 to 2021.
There are 14 convictions in total. The Crown and the defence agree that the
following convictions can be admitted: Fail to comply with a recognizance,
theft of an automobile (x2), operate a conveyance while impaired, fail to
comply with a sentence, and possession of stolen property over. Both parties
agree that a conviction for a break and enter with intent be deleted.
[39]          
Before addressing the material convictions in dispute, a factor taken
out of the analysis is the fourth one mentioned in Corbett. The defence
conducted no attack on the credibility of any Crown witness. Indeed, almost all
the Crown’s evidence was unchallenged. The most probative of the prosecution
evidence was in the form of CCTV surveillance evidence, which spoke for itself.
The singular issue in this case will be whether the Crown has proven beyond a
reasonable doubt the mens rea for second degree murder. This will
largely depend on the defence evidence called.
[40]          
The following is my analysis with respect to the convictions in dispute.
[41]          
First, in 2020-02-28, there is a conviction for assault peace officer.
While this is a crime of simple violence which normally would not have much
probative value in relation to credibility, the Crown submits that because it
was an assault upon a peace officer, the probative value is increased. As a
state agent charged with the enforcement of laws and the protection of the
public, an assault on that agent, the Crown argues, is conduct
akin to failing to abide by a court order and demonstrates an antipathy towards
the system of law.
[42]          
Relevant considerations include the conviction is not
too remote in time. On the other hand, it was committed when I.T. was about 15
years of age. It is a crime of violence, though far less serious, than the
murder charge he faces.
[43]          
In this instance, systemic racism plays a role. Devoid
of social context, this conviction might well be admitted. But the social
context provides a backdrop against which the enhanced prejudicial
effect of this conviction, and the high risk of improper propensity
reasoning, becomes clear. This conviction has a
strong potential to cast I.T., a young Black man, as having
a heightened disdain for law enforcement and the criminal justice
system. Jurors with implicit anti-Black attitudes might more readily see
I.T. as the “type of person” to commit the
offence charged because the conviction of assaulting
a peace officer validates their implicitly held attitudes about Black
people and their criminality: see R. v. Parks (1993), 1993 CanLII 3383 (ON CA), 15
O.R. (3d) 324 (Ont. C.A.). In turn, this could enhance the risk that Black
persons are more likely to resort to violence in defiance of social morals and
norms. This would invite improper propensity reasoning with respect to the
offence the accused is charged with. Stereotypes about Black
people and criminality are shaped by these unfortunate and misguided social
norms. Corbett provides an opportunity for trial judges, exercising
their gatekeeper role, to exclude convictions that engage
these stereotypes, and thus run a high risk of producing reasoning
fallacies among jurors.
[44]          
In addition to the heightened prejudice of this
conviction, its probative value is lessened when the social context is
considered. With the added dimension of systemic anti-Black racism comes an
understanding that racial profiling leads to more frequent interactions
between Black people and police, and that Black communities have
a deep mistrust of police based on historic and continued
racial profiling, instances of police brutality, and Black
overrepresentation in the criminal justice system. These interactions and
the prevalent distrust add complexity to the straightforward submission on
probative value made by the Crown and detracts from the force of the inference
that the conviction influences I.T.’s credibility. In other words, the
probative value of the conviction on an accused’s trustworthiness is
significantly lessened when it is placed into its proper social context.
[45]          
I am satisfied that given who I.T. is and the nature of the offence, that
the systemic or background factors are tied in some way to the accused and the
conviction. I am further satisfied that its prejudice outweighs its probative
value. It will be excluded.
[46]          
Second, is a Toronto conviction of 2020-02-28 for possession
of a firearm knowing its possession is unauthorized. Along with this are Oshawa
entries of 2020-08-26 for four firearm offence convictions for the possession
or conveyance of a firearm, all pertaining to the same handgun. For these sets
of offences, the Crown agrees that the transport firearm conviction and one of the
possession counts can be removed from the record. The defence submits that all
should go. Alternatively, the defence submits that convictions for a possession
of a weapon offence should be substituted.
[47]          
While these offences are not offences immediately connected to
dishonesty or a disrespect for the administration of justice, I find that they
do have probative value in that given the number of convictions, at two
different times for crimes of a similar nature, they tend to show an abiding
and repeated disrespect for the law. Like all entries on his youth record, they
are not remote and given the whole of the record, they show a linear path of
repeated disrespect of the law up to the time of the shooting of Mr. Jung. If removed
completely like the defence requested, there would be a fairly significant gap
in his youth record; significant in the sense since he is still young and has
not yet had the time to accumulate a lengthy record. I am concerned that
deletions of all these convictions may have a misleading effect on the jury
when it comes to assessing his record and its effect on his credibility.
[48]          
On the other hand, while these are not crimes of violence per se,
the prejudice of propensity reasoning is greater because of the connection made
in the public mind of guns and crimes of violence: R. v. Grizzle, 2016
ONCA 190 at paras. 15-16. Moreover, on the case specific facts here, I.T. used
a handgun to repeatedly shoot a defenceless taxi driver. While these offences on
his youth record are less serious than murder and the defence is focused on the
state of mind of I.T., nonetheless, the potential prejudice is real.
[49]          
This type of prejudice arose in a similar situation in R. v. Hussein, 2023 ONCA 253 at paras. 54-55. In that case, the trial judge had dismissed a Corbett
application because the trial judge discounted the risk of propensity
reasoning on the key trial issue of the proof of the mens rea for murder.
He explained that the foreseeability of death in the context of intoxication
and the developmental delays of the accused person, would not be more likely if
Mr. Hussein is thought by the jury to be a violent man on the basis of his
criminal record. While Paciocco J.A. ultimately deferred to the exercise of
discretion by the trial judge in his ruling, he nevertheless disagreed with the
trial judge on a number of points in the latter’s reasoning and concluded that
there was indeed a potential for prejudice even in these circumstances. He
first disagreed with the suggestion that because the convictions did not
include aggravated forms of violence and were significantly less serious than
the offence charged, this would completely remove the risk of general
propensity reasoning. Paciocco J.A. then acutely noted that a history of
violence regardless can provoke a strong emotional response (at para. 54):
[50]          
In addition, while Paciocco J.A. agreed with the logic
of the trial judge’s reasoning that when foreseeability of death is the primary
focus in a trial, the danger of propensity reasoning of a criminal record of
violence is lessened, there still remained a risk that jurors could draw the
general prohibited inference that because he is a violent man, the accused would
be more likely to act violently even when foreseeing the risk of death. If that
improper reasoning was to be engaged, it could support a finding that the
accused had the requisite intention for the offence (at para. 55).
[51]          
On the facts before me, the prejudice is even greater
since the prior convictions involve the possession of firearms. The very kind
of deadly weapon used to kill Mr. Jung. Simply, a jury may improperly reason
that a person with the propensity to possess handguns, weapons that are designed
only to kill, is more likely a person who would have a murderous intent when he
did kill someone.
[52]          
Lastly, the prejudice is compounded when systemic considerations are
added. For the reasons already articulated above, anti-Black racism and
stereotypes of young Black men and firearms, pose a significant threat of
general propensity reasoning, the kind alluded to in Hussein.
[53]          
Equally, systemic racism may also factor into the probative value of
these convictions. A Black youth’s possession of guns cannot just be extricated
from the complex and intersectional social context of growing up as a member of
a racial minority in a socio-economically impoverished setting. Said
differently, the probative value of these firearm convictions may be attenuated
by these social considerations. As the expert report in Morris stated:
[54]          
Yet, as I mentioned before, I do recognize that there remains
significant probative value to these convictions. An important consideration is
whether the excision of a conviction, in whole or in part, would leave the jury
with incomplete and therefore inaccurate information.
[55]          
I find that the right balance can be achieved by sanitizing these convictions; that is by restricting the criminal offences
that may be used or modifying the description of offences, to reduce the risk
of prejudice: R. v. Batte (2000), 2000 CanLII 5750 (ON CA), 34 C.R. (5th) 263 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 51; R. v. Charbonneau, 2012 ONCA 314, at para. 29; Hussein,
para. 25; R. v. Paul, 2009 ONCA 443, 249 O.A.C. 200, at para. 19.
[56]          
After considering all appropriate factors, the removal
of any reference to a “firearm” will strike the right balance.  Regarding the
Toronto convictions, rather than a conviction for possession of an unauthorized
firearm, there will be substituted an entry for possession of a restricted
weapon knowing that its possession is unauthorized” (s. 92(2) of the Criminal
Code). For the Oshawa offences, the entries regarding a firearm will be
deleted. There will be substituted the offence of “possession of a restricted
weapon” and “possession of a restricted weapon contrary to a prohibition
order”. (s. 117.01 of the Criminal Code). Those are the only two
convictions that will remain for the Oshawa entries.
[57]          
Lastly, the Toronto 2021-09-10 robbery conviction will
be deleted, and the offence of “assault and theft” will be substituted. In
submissions, both sides allowed for this as a reasonable compromise solution.
[58]          
The probative value of the conviction will remain as
the element of dishonesty in the crime will be reflected by the theft
conviction. The prejudice of the robbery conviction not only comes from the
general propensity to violence that it conjures up, but also, from some very case
specific circumstances. The Crown does not allege any motive on the part of
I.T. in the shooting of Mr. Jung. It forms no part of any prosecution theory
that this was a robbery gone awry. Nothing was taken from the cab and a
substantial sum of money was left in Mr. Jung’s backpack visible on the front passenger
seat. Nonetheless, in the light of what appears to be a random, senseless, and
motiveless shooting, if a robbery conviction is left on I.T.’s record, some
jurors may well speculate that a person who has in the past committed robbery,
intended to rob Mr. Jung during the course of which, shot him with the intent
to kill him or cause him bodily harm he knows is likely to cause his death and is
reckless whether death ensues or not. This prejudice can be avoided with the
proposed substitution.
[59]          
In conclusion, looked at in an aggregate and cohesive fashion, this admissible
youth record will ensure a fair trial and the jury will still have sufficient
and accurate information to assess I.T.’s credibility when he testifies. The
jury will have a considerable youth record to consider on I.T.’s credibility
including convictions for dishonesty, disrespect for judicial orders, and
serious weapons offences. Any further deletion or editing of the appellant’s
record would leave the jury with incomplete and incorrect information about his
credibility as a witness. On balance, the probative value of this edited youth
record on the question of his credibility as a witness outweighs the potential
risk that the jury might use the prior convictions as evidence that I.T. is the
type of person likely to have committed the offence with which he is charged.
[60]          
For these reasons, the application is allowed in part.