[1]             
The Plaintiff, Jose Pereira, is a welder who
fell from a 12-foot step ladder and was injured while working on a project on
the premises of the Defendant that involved the cutting of steel beams from the
existing structure.
[2]             
The project used a mini-excavator with a thumb or
claw attachment which was to hold the beam while Mr. Pereira cut it. The thumb
attachment failed, the beam fell and hit the ladder. Mr. Pereira fell and was
injured.
[3]             
A Ministry of Labour investigation found that
the excavator was not maintained to manufacturer’s recommendations and that the
failure of the machine to hold the beam in place was caused by “extensive
leakage of hydraulic oil from grapple thumb cylinder reduced the clamping force
of the bucket and the grapple thumb” and that the excavator “was not maintained
as per manufacturer recommendation resulted in extensive leakage of hydraulic
oil”.
[4]             
The Plaintiff alleges that the Defendant, Yaya
Foods Corporation (“Yaya”), is liable as an occupier as the accident occurred
on its premises.
[5]             
Yaya brings this motion for summary judgment
alleging that there is no basis upon which to find the Defendant liable as an
occupier.
[6]             
For the Reasons that follow, I agree. I grant
the motion and dismiss the action as against Yaya.
[7]             
The issues on this motion are as follows:
[8]             
Before addressing the legal issues, I will
examine the facts in more detail. Then I will address the test for summary
judgment and applicable OLA principles.
[9]             
Yaya Foods is a business that manufactures and
packages beverages. It owned the premises where Mr. Pereira was injured.
[10]         
Yaya contracted with Yes Services to expand a
loading dock on the outside of the building. Yes Services hired subcontractors:
Arzer Contracting Ltd. (“Arzer”) and Mr. Pereira.
[11]         
Mr. Pereira was working on a Sunday and was cutting
steel beams with a welding torch. The excavator had a thumb attachment. The
Ministry of Labour report provides that the failure of the thumb attachment occurred
because there was not enough hydraulic fluid in the machine. As a result, the
machine could not maintain the grip.
[12]         
The burden is on the moving party to demonstrate
that there is no genuine issue for trial based on the evidence filed upon the
motion. It is well understood that a responding party to a summary judgment
motion must put its best foot forward. As noted by the Court of Appeal for
Ontario in Boltyansky v. Joseph-Walker, 2024 ONCA 682, at para. 15:
[13]         
The issue on this motion is whether there is a
genuine issue for trial. Rule 20.04(2) provides that the court shall
grant summary judgment if,
[14]         
Subrule (2.1) provides various powers to the judge in determining
whether there is a genuine issue requiring a trial.
These include:
[15]         
For the purposes of exercising any of
these powers, the judge may order a mini trial under subrule (2.2) whereby oral
evidence is presented by one or more parties, with or without time limits on
its presentation.
[16]         
The Supreme Court of
Canada’s decision Hryniak v. Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 87, called for called
for a “culture shift” finding that summary judgment motions should be used to resolve
disputes in a proportionate, timely, and affordable manner to improve access to
justice.
[17]         
Justice Glustein summarized the key
principles from Hryniak in Mayers v. Khan, 2017 ONSC 200, at
para. 18, as follows:
[18]         
In Sweda Farms Ltd. v. Egg Farmers of Ontario, 2014 ONSC
1200, at para. 33, affirmed, 2014 ONCA 878, leave to
appeal to S.C.C. refused, [2015] S.C.C.A. No. 97, Justice Corbett set out the
approach for the summary judgment judge:
[19]         
I note that this motion is for partial summary
judgment as it will dispose only of the claim against Yaya, and not the other Defendant.
However, Arzer has failed to defend this action. Previous counsel attempted to
note Arzer in default but this was rejected apparently.
[20]         
In this case I must assess whether the granting
of partial judgment presents a risk of duplicative
proceedings or inconsistent findings of fact, and if resolving the claim could
significantly advance access to justice and be the most proportionate, timely
and cost-effective approach. If it is the latter, it may be in the interests of
justice to grant partial summary judgment. See Heliotrope Investment
Corporation v. 1324789 Ontario Inc., 2021 ONCA 589, 462 D.L.R. (4th) 731,
at para. 32.
[21]         
Section 3 of the Occupiers’ Liability Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. O.2 (“OLA”) provides:
[22]         
Section 6 of OLA provides:
[23]         
The Plaintiff’s argument is that there is a
genuine issue for trial and that Yaya has responsibility for the defective
machine left on the premises. He argues that it was foreseeable that the
machine would be used and states that leaving the defective machine on the
premises was akin to leaving a loaded gun as it presented a real risk to those
on the premises.
[24]         
In support, he relies on Botosh v. Ottawa
(City), 2013 ONSC 5418, at paras. 85-86.
[25]         
I read Botosh as applying to the
practices of an independent contractor but only as they relate to the work that
the contractor was expected to do. I do not think it extends to ensuring also
that the tools used by the independent contractor are safe for use.
[26]         
The Plaintiff’s argument taken to its end would
mean that every occupier would have to inspect the tools of an independent
contractor to ensure that they were safe for use on the premises. I cannot read
the OLA as requiring that.
[27]         
I can safely conclude on the evidence before me
that the equipment failure is the responsibility of the independent contractor
and not Yaya. Yaya did not have a duty to ensure that the equipment was
properly maintained and that as a result, there is no failure on behalf of
Yaya.
[28]         
I also find that because of the nature of the
claim as against Yaya, there is no risk of duplicative proceedings or
inconsistent findings of fact and I find that granting judgment by dismissing
the claim against Yaya is the most proportionate, timely and cost-effective
approach.
[29]         
On the basis of the costs submissions made
before me at the end of the motion and the costs outline filed, I am prepared
to order costs payable by the Plaintiff to the Defendant Yaya. On a partial
indemnity scale, the Defendant claimed fees in the amount of $7,762 plus $1,180.00
for his attendance on the day of argument. Mr. Csathy’s hourly rate is
reasonable given his year of call and experience. The Plaintiff claimed a
higher hourly rate although he was called 12 years after Mr. Csathy. The
Plaintiff claimed $5,944 in fees on a partial indemnity basis.
[30]         
I would exercise my discretion to award costs in
the amount of $8,000 for fees plus HST and disbursements and taxes in the
amount of $807.35 for a total of $9,847.35. I find this to be fair and
reasonable in light of the importance of the issues, the moderate complexity
and that it would have been in the reasonable expectation of the parties.
[31]         
If there are offers to settle or other considerations
that impact costs about which I am unaware, the parties shall bring them to my
attention by written submissions limited to no more than three double-spaced
pages exclusive of attachments within 7 days of the receipt of these Reasons.
[32]         
The motion is granted and judgment shall issue
in accordance with these Reasons. The parties shall have seven days to raise
any additional costs issues that could not have been contemplated. In the event
that there are none, the Defendant shall have its costs in the amount of
$9,847.35, inclusive of HST and disbursements.