[1]              
This is a motion for an ex parte interim injunction
to restrain secondary picketing at the plaintiff’s premises at 90 Silver Star Boulevard
in Scarborough, Ontario.
[2]              
The matter came to my attention shortly before 5
PM  on Friday, November 29, 2024.  A hearing occurred between 5:30 PM and 7:30
PM at the end of which I granted an interim injunction with reasons to
follow.  These are those reasons.
[3]              
The plaintiff, Purolator Inc. is a Canadian
integrated freight, package and logistics provider – delivering packages to,
from and within Canada.  Purolator’s network includes hub facilities, located
in key regional areas, as well as local pickup and delivery facilities, which
vary in size and scope.  Purolator’s pickup and delivery facilities include the
location at 90 Silver Star Boulevard in Scarborough, Ontario (the “Facility”).
[4]              
The Facility has a single entry/exit onto Silver
Star Boulevard.  Shortly before 8 AM on Friday, November 29, 2024 a group of
picketers began blockading access to and exit from the Facility.  The number of
picketers varied between 17 and 21 throughout the course of the day.  The
picketers were approximately 10 to 15 feet south of Silver Star Boulevard on
the driveway of the Facility.  Many of the picketers were wearing bright yellow
jackets with  Canada Post logos and were carrying flags which indicated that
they may be associated with the Canadian Union of Postal Workers (“CUPW”).
[5]              
CUPW employees are currently engaged in a strike
with Canada Post.  Canada Post is also the majority shareholder of Purolator.  Purolator
employees are not, however, on strike.  They are represented by a separate
bargaining unit and a different union.  Shortly after the blockade of the
entrance began, Purolator employees approached the picketers and asked to speak
with a picket captain.  There did not appear to be one.  The picketers advised
the Purolator employees that they intended to stop each of the vehicles leaving
the Facility for 15 minutes.  The evidence before me at the hearing was that
each Purolator vehicle was stopped from leaving for between 15 and 31 minutes.
[6]              
Purolator then called Toronto Police Services
for assistance.  Police officers attended at approximately 8:25 AM and spoke
with some of the picketers.  The police advised Purolator that they had no
grounds to remove the picketers and that they could not choose sides in a
labour dispute.  The Purolator employee engaged with the police and asked if
that was the case even if the people blocking the exit were not Purolator
employees.  This did not change the view of the officers in attendance.  The
police then left.
[7]              
 Blocking the exit and entry to the Facility has
a critical impact on Purolator.  The evidence before me was that 78 vehicles
leave the Facility that every day between 7:15  AM and 10 AM.  There are
additional deliveries to the facility between noon and 2 PM.  On Friday,
November 29, only 27 of the planned 78 vehicles were able to leave the
Facility.
[8]              
The facility is a hub for next day deliveries to
hospitals, medical service providers, pharmaceutical providers, police
departments, the passport office, car parts manufacturers, schools and
individuals.  Deliveries to hospitals, medical service providers, and
pharmaceutical providers are especially critical because they operate on a
just-in-time delivery system.  By way of example, one of Purolator’s main
clients at the Facility is Johnson & Johnson Medical Technologies.  Johnson
& Johnson cleans and sterilizes surgical equipment and uses the Purolator Facility
to deliver that equipment to hospitals throughout Canada for next day delivery. 
Medical instruments are delivered to hospitals for use on the day of delivery
or the day following delivery.  Purolator provides the same service for
suppliers of medical devices such as orthopedic implants.  Those implants are
similarly delivered to hospitals for use on the day of delivery or the
following day.    As a result, delays in the delivery of medical devices can
have significant impacts on the ability of physicians to conduct surgery and
the ability of patients to receive timely medical care.
[9]              
Pharmaceutical products are subject to similar
timelines.  The Facility receives and ships product for specialty pharmacies
that prepare compounded prescriptions, usually used for infusions.  Infusions
have stability limits governed by time and temperature.  As a result, timely
delivery is critical.
[10]          
This is of course not to say that other deliveries
such as those to automobile manufacturers, other businesses and individuals are
not also critical.  Those businesses also depend on timely delivery to function
properly.
[11]          
To be fair to the picketers, when Purolator
approached them to explain that certain vehicles had to leave for medical
drop-offs the picketers negotiated and allowed those trucks through.  In the
pressure of the moment, Purolator was, however, able to identify only four vehicles
that contained medical products.  Medical products are not delivered on
designated vehicles but are dispersed throughout the fleet.  While there was no
evidence led before me on the point, I assume that is because each vehicle is
designated for a particular geographical area as opposed to being dedicated to
a particular business use across a potentially wider geographical area.  The
four vehicles with medical deliveries that Purolator was able to identify were
allowed to leave at 9:59, 10:09, 10:33 and 11:38 AM.  Those were still beyond
the ordinary departure time of no later than 10 AM.
[12]          
Section 102 of the Courts of Justice Act[1] sets
out particular rules for injunctions in labour disputes.  The principal
differences between an injunction granted under section 102 and a conventional
injunction are that it must involve a labour dispute, there is a significantly
greater reluctance to grant ex parte injunctions, a minimum of two days
notice for an injunction is usually required, an interim injunction is
applicable for only four days, and the court must be satisfied that the person
seeking the injunction has made reasonable efforts to obtain police assistance
to prevent any alleged danger of damage to property, injury to persons,
obstruction of or interference with lawful entry or exit from premises..
[13]          
In my view, section 102 of the Courts of
Justice Act does not apply because, as noted earlier, there is no labour
dispute between Purolator and the picketers.
[14]          
The picketing at issue here is commonly known as
secondary picketing.  That is to say it is picketing by people who have no
business or contractual relationship with the target of the picketing, where
the target of the picketing is not a party to a labour dispute, and the
premises of the target are not the place of business of the employer of the
picketers.[2] 
The picketers here were not Purolator employees.
[15]          
It is settled law that secondary picketing is
not picketing in relation to a labour dispute for purposes of section 102 of
the Courts of Justice Act.[3]
[16]          
As Justice D.  Brown (as he then was) explained
in CNR v. Chief Chris Plain,[4]
 although individuals of course have the right to freedom of expression
regardless of whether they are involved in a labour dispute, that freedom does
not extend to blockading the property of others (such as Purolator in this
case).
[17]          
The picketers are entitled to protest anywhere
they are lawfully permitted to but they are not entitled to blockade
Purolator’s facilities, disrupt the delivery of shipments from Purolator’s
facilities, or restrict Purolator employees from being able to freely enter and
exit Purolator’s facilities.  Illegal activity by picketers, such as blockading
has frequently been enjoined by the courts.[5] 
Picketers are not allowed to block entry or egress from the property of others,
not even for a short time.
[18]          
The test for a conventional typical injunction
requires the moving party to demonstrate:
[19]          
The analysis of this four-part test requires a
balancing of the factors.  Each factor is not a standalone watertight
compartment.  Factors can be balanced against each other.  Strength with
respect to one factor can offset weakness with respect to another.
[20]          
On my view of the evidence, Purolator has met
that test.
[21]          
With respect to a serious issue to be tried: as
noted above, secondary picketers are not permitted to obstruct entry or exit
from the property of others.[6]
[22]          
Blocking access to property can constitute
wilful obstruction, interruption or interference with an owner’s lawful use,
enjoyment or operation of its facilities contrary to section 430 of the
Criminal code.[7]
[23]          
Blocking entry or exit to the property of
another can also constitute nuisance.[8]
[24]          
As a result, Purolator has demonstrated that
there is at the very least, a serious issue to be tried.
[25]          
With respect to irreparable harm: Where
protesters engage in tortious or criminal actions, damages are not an adequate
remedy.  The remedy for intentional, unlawful conduct ought to be an order to
cease and desist,  not a lengthy action for damages.[9]
[26]          
Courts have regularly found that blocking entry
or exit to an owner’s property constitutes irreparable harm to the owner.[10]
[27]          
As a result, Purolator has demonstrated that it
will suffer irreparable harm if the injunction is not granted.
[28]          
The balance of convenience requires the court to
determine which of the two parties will suffer greater harm if the injunction
is granted or denied.
[29]          
If the injunction is granted, the only “harm”
the picketers will suffer is to be prohibited from engaging in conduct that is
unlawful in the first place.  If the injunction is not granted, Purolator will
continue to be deprived of the free use of its property and its many customers
will be deprived of timely delivery of products including products needed for
immediate surgery or pharmaceutical infusions.
[30]          
In similar situations, other courts have noted
that there is nothing inconvenient in being asked to stop conduct that one has
no right to engage in to begin with.  In those circumstances there is simply
nothing to balance.[11]
[31]          
The undertaking in damages is usually contained
in an affidavit delivered by the moving party.  Here, there were no affidavits
because of the urgency of the motion.  Instead, I heard viva voce
evidence at the hearing.  Although none of the witnesses was asked whether
Purolator would provide an undertaking in damages, Purolator has stated in its
factum that it “has given the usual undertaking as to damages.”  Given this
statement in its factum, I assume that the  absence of a statement to this
effect in the viva voce evidence was either an oversight or arose
because none of the three witnesses I heard had the corporate authority to
provide such an undertaking.  I therefore order that Purolator provide such an
undertaking as a condition of the continuation of the injunction.
[32]          
For the reasons set out above, I grant the
injunction that Purolator requests.  Given that this motion proceeded without
notice to the respondents, as a condition of granting the injunction I ordered
Purolator to provide immediate email notice of the order to the President of
CUPW and to provide my email address to any counsel retained by CUPW or any
other party seeking to vary or set aside the order  to ensure that any
potentially opposing parties had immediate access to the court over the course
of the weekend.