1.                 
Sandvine
Corporation (“Sandvine Canada”), and the other applicant companies
(collectively, the “Applicants” and together with the partnership Procera II LP
and certain non-filing entities, “Sandvine” or the “Company”), seeks an initial
order (the “Initial Order”) and related relief under the Companies’
Creditors Arrangement Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-36, as amended (the “CCAA”).
2.                 
In
particular, the Applicants seek an urgent stay of proceedings (the “Stay of
Proceedings”) for the permitted initial ten-day
period (the “Initial Stay Period”) under s. 11.02(2) of the CCAA, an
extension of the Stay of Proceedings to certain Non-Applicant Stay Parties (as
defined below), the appointment of KSV Restructuring Inc. as
monitor (the “Proposed Monitor”), along with certain other relief necessary to
preserve the Applicants’ business and stakeholder value during the Initial Stay
Period.
3.                 
The
six other corporations that are wholly owned Sandvine subsidiaries that are not
Applicants but are integral to Sandvine’s integrated global operations (the
“Non-Applicant Stay Parties”) include Sandvine Sweden A.B. (“Sandvine Sweden”),
Sandvine Singapore Pte. Ltd., Sandvine Japan K.K., Sandvine Technologies
(India) Private Limited, Sandvine Technologies Malaysia Sdn Bhd, and Sandvine
Australia PTY Ltd.
4.                 
The
Applicants rely on the Affidavit of Jeffrey A. Kupp sworn November 6, 2024
together with Exhibits thereto, and the Pre-Filing Report
of KSV Restructuring Inc. as Proposed Monitor dated November 6, 2024. Defined
terms in this Endorsement have the meaning given to them in the Application
materials and/or the Pre-Filing Report, unless otherwise stated. References in
this Endorsement to dollar amounts are expressed in United States currency.
5.                 
Sandvine
is a Canadian application and network optimization company headquartered in
Waterloo, Ontario, which provides quality of experience (“QoE”) analysis and
performance optimization software applications to its customers, the majority
of whom consist of telecommunications service providers around the world. Sandvine
operates in approximately 54 countries. Sandvine has approximately 500
employees and contractors and its products allow its customers to
understand the application traffic flowing in their networks with significantly
higher accuracy compared to other products on the market.
6.                 
Sandvine’s
software products generate meta data about the quality and usage of
over-the-top (“OTT”) at (i.e., Netflix, Amazon Prime and YouTube) by
subscribers. While Sandvine historically also sold proprietary computer hardware to
support its software products, it is currently transitioning to a software-only
business and today no longer offers hardware services other than limited
ongoing maintenance and related support.
7.                 
On
February 27, 2024, Sandvine Canada and certain of the other Sandvine entities
were designated on the US Department of Commerce’s Entity List
(the “Entity List”), which resulted in the added entities being subject to
export restrictions which materially impacted Sandvine’s business. To mitigate
these impacts, Sandvine submitted a Request for Emergency Authorization to the
U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security (“BIS”), which was
granted and subsequently extended to December 31, 2024.
8.                 
On
May 1, 2024, Sandvine submitted a proposal for removal from the Entity List,
which removal ultimately occurred on October 23, 2024. In
conjunction with these requests and discussions, Sandvine has
reoriented its business model and will cease operating in non-democratic
countries or countries where the threat to digital rights is too high. Sandvine
is also making other significant changes to its governance and business model
in consultation with BIS and other interagency partners of the U.S. government.
9.                 
Sandvine’s
business has been significantly impacted by the Entity List designation, as the
countries that Sandvine has exited (and is in the process
of exiting) represent approximately 45% of Sandvine’s 2023 revenue. Sandvine’s top
line revenue is projected to be reduced by approximately 50% compared to its
2023 revenue due to the country exits and customer attrition related to the
Entity List dynamic. In light of potential defaults stemming from the Entity
List designation and related impacts, earlier this year Sandvine negotiated a
reorganization with its Lenders, pursuant to which the Lenders became the indirect
owners of Sandvine and Sandvine’s debt was reduced by approximately USD $92
million (the “June 2024 Reorganization”).
10.             
Despite
these reductions, Sandvine remained over-leveraged and required additional
short-term funding, as well as a plan to address the operational restructuring
of its business, including the country exits. Sandvine and certain of the
Existing Loan Lenders (as defined below) have therefore negotiated
further agreements
regarding the financing and restructuring of Sandvine, which provide for: (i) USD
$45 million in new money financing under the DDTL Facility (as defined below),
including a commitment to provide any undrawn portion as a DIP Facility (as
defined below) in the event of court-supervised restructuring proceedings; (ii)
a restructuring support agreement (the “RSA”) with approximately 97% of the
Existing Loan Lenders; (iii) an agreement by such Existing Loan Lenders to
forbear from any default remedies under the First Lien Credit Agreement (as
defined below) and other debt documents; and (iv) a proposed transaction, to be
tested through a sales process, whereby Sandvine’s funded debt obligations
would be converted into a 50% equity share of a restructured company and new
first lien financing, and Existing Loan Lenders that provided new money
commitments would receive 50% equity of the restructured company as
consideration for such commitments. The proposed transaction would result in a USD
$337 million reduction of Sandvine’s current debt of approximately USD $421
million (in outstanding principal).
11.             
The
RSA requires Sandvine to commence a restructuring proceeding by November 15,
2024, failing which the RSA can be terminated, and the Consenting Stakeholders
(as defined below) could commence enforcement proceedings with respect to the
DDTL Credit Agreement (as defined below), which would in turn constitute an
event of default under the First Lien Credit Agreement. Sandvine would not be
able to pay or otherwise satisfy the amounts due under these agreements and is
therefore insolvent.
12.             
The
Applicants require immediate CCAA protection so that they will have the
necessary breathing space to complete the last step of their balance street
restructuring, continue to access needed liquidity from the Existing Loan
Lenders, and have the time and resources to implement orderly exits from
high-risk jurisdictions and restructure their operations accordingly.
13.             
Prior
to the June 2024 Reorganization, Sandvine’s primary debt obligations consisted
of two secured credit facilities jointly issued to
Sandvine Canada and Procera US as borrowers (the “Borrowers”) totalling USD
$504 million in debt: (i) the “First Lien Credit Agreement” between the
Borrowers, the First Lien Guarantors, the lenders party thereto (the “First
Lien Lenders”), and Jeffries Finance LLC (“Jeffries”) as Administrative Agent
and Collateral Agent, which prior to June 28, 2024, had an outstanding
principal of approximately USD $394 million; and (ii) the “Second Lien Credit
Agreement” between the Borrowers, the Second Lien Guarantors, the lenders party
thereto (the “Second Lien Lenders,” and together with the First Lien Lenders,
the “Lenders”) and Barings Finance LLC as Administrative Agent and Collateral
Agent, which, prior to June 28, 2024, had an outstanding principal of USD $110
million.
14.             
The
Lenders subsequently became the ultimate owners of Sandvine pursuant to the
June 2024 Reorganization. As part of the June 2024 Reorganization, the
Obligations under the Second Lien Credit Agreement were settled and
extinguished in exchange for: (i) the issuance by the Borrowers of USD $18
million of Term Loans
under the amended First Lien Credit Agreement to the Second Lien Lenders (on a
pro rata basis); and (ii) the issuance of Class C limited partner interests in
Procera II LP to the Second Lien Lenders (on a pro rata basis). Sandvine’s debt
obligations following the June 2024 Reorganization therefore consisted of terms
loans in under the First Lien Credit Facility of approximately USD $412
million.
15.             
Additionally,
Sandvine has 17 cash collateralized letters of credit totaling approximately USD
$7.2 million, all of which were issued to secure
future performance obligations by Sandvine for products and services
pre-paid by its customers.
16.             
At
present, Sandvine has
drawn USD $20
million under the DDTL Facility.
17.             
I
observe that, as set out in the Application materials and in the Pre-Filing
report of the Proposed Monitor, the Lenders, who are owed approximately $431.8
million in principal secured debt, are the largest economic stakeholders. 97%
of the Lenders have entered into the RSA and support both this CCAA
Application and the substantive relief being sought today and at the proposed
comeback hearing, including (as further discussed below), approval of the DIP
Facility, the proposed SISP, the proposed stalking horse transaction, and the
various related Charges ranking in priority to the security granted by the
Sandvine Entities in favour of the Lenders.
18.             
Subsection
9(1) of the CCAA provides that an application for a stay of proceedings
under the CCAA may be made to the court that has jurisdiction in the
province in which the head office or chief place of business of the company in
Canada is situated, or, if the company has no place of business in Canada, in
any province within which any assets of the
company are situated: Target Canada Co. (Re), 2015 ONSC 303 (“Target”)
paras. 26 to 30; Bed Bath & Beyond Canada Limited (Re), 2023 ONSC
1014 (“BBB”) at para. 25.
19.             
Each
of the Applicants fulfils these requirements. Sandvine Canada is incorporated
in Canada and headquartered in Waterloo, while the remaining applicants each
have assets in Canada in the form of funds on deposit in Canadian bank accounts
and funds currently being held on retainer in Canada by
counsel. A number of courts have held that funds deposited in bank accounts or
held on retainer in this manner are sufficient to satisfy the CCAA
jurisdiction requirements and
have cautioned that the court must not engage in “a qualitative or detailed
analysis of the Canadian assets”: Global Light Telecommunications Inc.,
(Re), 2004 BCSC 745 at para. 17; see also CanWest Global Communications
Corp. (Re), 2009 CanLII 55114 (ONSC) (“CanWest”) at para. 30. In
reference to funds held on retainer by counsel, see Syncreon Group B.V.
(Re), 2019 ONSC 5774 at para. 27; and LTL Management LLC (Re), 2021
ONSC 8357 at para. 13.
20.             
Further,
Ontario is the proper forum for the restructuring. Ontario is the chief place
of business of the Applicants as a whole, given that: (i) the majority of
Sandvine’s North American Employees are in Canada; (ii) the majority of
Sandvine’s assets (in particular the majority of its IP assets, cash, customer
accounts receivable, inventory, fixed assets, and real estate investments) are
in Canada; (iii) Sandvine’s General Counsel resides in Canada; (iv) Sandvine is
operationally dependent on the shared services provided by the Accounting and
A/R teams, each of which is primarily located in Canada; (v) Sandvine Canada
issues all customer invoices; (vi) approximately two-thirds of Sandvine’s
customer receipts are deposited into Sandvine Canada’s Canadian bank accounts;
(vii) in 2023, Sandvine Canada generated approximately two-thirds of Sandvine’s
revenue; (viii) approximately 69% of Sandvine’s customers contract with Sandvine
Canada; (ix) the majority of Sandvine’s patents are held by Sandvine Canada;
and (x) Sandvine Canada is party to the majority of Sandvine’s shared services
agreements.
21.             
Canadian
courts have accepted that a multinational enterprise such as the Applicants’
business must be restructured as a global unit, even where operating units
are located in foreign jurisdictions: See, e.g., Ted Baker Canada Inc. et al
(Re), (April 26, 2024), Ont S.C.J. [Commercial List],
Court File No. CV-24-718993-00CL at para. 28, in which the court held that the
requirements of s. 9(1) of the CCAA were satisfied on the basis that the
applicants, which included both Canadian and U.S. entities, maintained their
head office and much of their business activities in Ontario. See also Ghana
Gold Corp (Re), 2013 ONSC 3284 at para. 56, in which the court included
foreign applicants within a CCAA proceedings on the grounds that doing
so was “critical to a restructuring.”
22.             
If
the proposed Initial Order is granted, Sandvine intends to commence a
recognition proceeding under Chapter 15 of the US Bankruptcy Code in the United
States Bankruptcy Court for the Northern District of Texas to ensure that
actions taken in relation to US entities and US property will
be under the supervision of the US courts.
23.             
The
CCAA applies to a “debtor company” or affiliated debtor companies where the
total amount of claims against the debtor or its affiliates exceeds $5 million.
The Applicants are each a “company” for the purposes of s. 2 of the CCAA as they do
business in or have assets in Canada: Lydian International Limited (Re),
2019 ONSC 7473 at para. 35-36 (“Lydian”).
24.             
A
“debtor company” means, inter alia, a company that is insolvent: CCAA,
ss. 2 and 3(1). The CCAA defines a “debtor company” as, among other
things, any company that is insolvent or has committed an act of
bankruptcy within the meaning of the Bankruptcy
and Insolvency Act (“BIA”).
25.             
The
determination of whether a company is insolvent requires consideration of the
definition of “insolvent person” in the BIA, and the expanded concept of
insolvency adopted in Stelco Inc., Re, 2004 CarswellOnt 1211 at para. 26
(“Stelco”), in which this Court held that a debtor is insolvent where
there is a looming liquidity crisis such that it is reasonably
foreseeable that the debtor will run out of cash unless its business is
restructured. This approach to the insolvency criterion has been applied in
other cases, including Target at para. 26; Just Energy Corp. (Re),
2021 ONSC 1793 (“Just Energy”) at paras. 48 to 51; and Nordstrom Canada
Retail, Inc. (Re), 2023 ONSC 1422 (“Nordstrom”) at para. 26.
26.             
I
am satisfied that the Applicants here face a liquidity crisis consistent with
the Stelco test. If they do not commence restructuring
proceedings by November 15, 2024, the Applicants would be unable to fulfil
their obligations under the First Lien Credit
Agreement and the DDTL Credit Agreement. Each of the Applicants is either a
borrower or guarantor under those agreements or is the general partner of a
guarantor.
27.             
Accordingly,
the Applicants are corporations that collectively owe over $5 million in
outstanding liabilities. They have delivered the documents and financial
statements required under s. 10(2) of the CCAA.
28.             
Section
11.02(1) of the CCAA provides that the Court may order a stay of
proceedings on an initial CCAA application for a period of not more than
10 days. Section 11.001 of the CCAA provides that relief granted on an
initial CCAA application shall be limited to relief that is reasonably
necessary for the continued operations of the debtor company in the ordinary
course of business during that initial 10-day period.
29.             
In
Lydian, Chief Justice Morawetz stated that the Initial Stay Period
preserves the status quo and allows for operations to be stabilized and
negotiations to occur, followed by requests for expanded relief on
proper notice to affected parties at the full comeback hearing. Whether
particular relief is necessary to stabilize a debtor company’s
operations during the Initial Stay Period is an inherently factual
determination, based on all of the circumstances of the particular debtor.
30.             
All
of the relief requested in this first-day application meets these criteria.
Each aspect of the relief sought by the Applicants in the Initial Stay
Period is interdependent, and collectively the relief is critical to
allow the Applicants to properly respond to their current circumstances.
31.             
As
set out in the Pre-Filing Report of the Proposed Monitor, the customers of
Sandvine include over 130 of the largest global communications
service providers, serving hundreds of millions of network users. Any
disruption in the services provided by Sandvine could and likely would have
serious implications for the continuity and security of services provided by
customers of Sandvine, including many of the largest internet service providers
in Canada and globally.
32.             
A
stay of proceedings is clearly necessary here if any form of restructuring
process is to be successful. The relief sought today is limited to
what is reasonably necessary.
33.             
I
further observe that the Applicants have included in these first day materials
disclosure of the relief that will be sought on the comeback
hearing, if the Initial Order sought today is granted, including
approval of a sales and investment solicitation process (“SISP”) with a
proposed stalking horse agreement.
34.             
Finally
in this regard,
the Applicants have prepared a Cash Flow Forecast for the 13-week period from November 3,
2024 to February 1,
2025, which has been reviewed by the Proposed Monitor. Its statutory report on
the Forecast is attached to the Pre-Filing Report as Appendix “C”.
35.             
I
am also satisfied that the stay and the protections and authorizations proposed
in the draft Initial Order should be extended to Procera II LP. The CCAA
expressly applies by its terms to debtor companies but not partnerships. Where
the functions and
operations of partnerships are integral and
closely related to the business and operations of the Applicants, the CCAA
Court has the jurisdiction to extend the protection of the stay of proceedings
to those partnerships in order to ensure that the purposes of the CCAA
can be achieved. Such relief has been granted on multiple occasions. See: Target,
at paras. 42 and 43; Just Energy, at para. 116; and BBB, at para.
28.
36.             
The
Applicants submit that it is appropriate to extend the stay of proceedings to
Procera II LP. I agree. As guarantor under the Credit Facilities and the
ultimate parent company of the Sandvine operating entities
(and the vehicle through which certain of the Existing Loan Lenders currently
own Sandvine), Procera II LP is insolvent, and the extension of the
benefit of the stay of proceedings and the protections and authorizations of
the Initial Order to Procera II LP is necessary to maintain stability and value
in the CCAA process and to complete the proposed Restructuring
Transactions.
37.             
I
am also satisfied that the stay should be extended to the Non-Applicant Stay
Parties. The authority of the Court to extend a stay to
non-filing affiliates is derived from the broad jurisdiction given to the Court
under ss. 11 and 11.01(2) of the CCAA and is commonly granted as part of
CCAA proceedings, including to foreign non-applicant affiliates: Chalice
Brands Ltd (Re)., 2023 ONSC 3174, at para. 35.
38.             
In
JTI-Macdonald Corp., this Court outlined the factors determining when it
is appropriate to extend a CCAA stay over non-filing affiliates,
including where the business of the non-filing affiliate is
significantly intertwined with that of the debtors and extending the stay would
help maintain stability during the CCAA process: JTI-Macdonald Corp.
(Re), 2019 ONSC 1625 at para. 15 (“JTI-Macdonald”).
39.             
The
test as articulated in JTI-Macdonald is met here. The business and
operations of the Non-Filing Affiliates are functionally and operationally
integrated with those of the Applicants, and these entities provide research
and development, sales, customer success in marketing
services. The Non-Applicant Stay Parties together have approximately 294
employees constituting over half of Sandvine’s global workforce. I am satisfied
that the extension of the stay to the Non-Applicant Stay Parties is therefore
necessary to maintain stability and value in the CCAA process.
40.             
The
Applicants
propose to have KSV Restructuring Inc. (“KSV”) appointed as the Monitor. KSV is
a “trustee” within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the BIA, is
established and qualified, and has consented to act as Monitor. The involvement
of KSV as the court-appointed Monitor will lend stability and assurance to the
Applicants’ stakeholders. KSV is not subject to any of the restrictions set out
in s. 11.7(2) of the CCAA.
41.             
I
am satisfied that KSV
should be appointed as Monitor in these CCAA Proceedings.
42.             
The
DIP Lenders have agreed to provide the proposed DIP Facility up to the amount
of USD $30 million. The Applicants seek an interim financing charge to secure
that DIP Facility pursuant to s. 11.2 of the CCAA. The
DIP Charge is proposed to be secured against the Property as defined in the
Initial Order, and to rank behind the Administration Charge and the Directors
Charge and pari passu with amounts owed with respect to the DDTL Tranche
A Loans and DDTL Tranche B Loans.
43.             
Section
11.2(4) of the CCAA sets out a non-exhaustive list of criteria that the
Court must consider in deciding whether to grant a DIP lender’s charge. Those
criteria apply to the period during which the
Applicants are expected to be subject to CCAA proceedings, how the
Applicants’ business and financial affairs are to be managed during the
proceedings, whether the Applicants’ management has the confidence of its major
creditors, whether the loan would enhance the prospects of a viable compromise
or arrangement being made in respect of the Applicants, the nature and value of
the Applicants’ property, whether any creditor would be materially prejudiced
as a result of the security or charge, and whether the monitor supports the
charge.
44.             
When
an application for interim financing is made at the same time as an initial
application, the applicant must additionally satisfy the Court that the terms
of the loan are “limited to what is reasonably necessary for
the continued operations of the debtor company in the ordinary course of
business during that period: s. 11.2(5).
45.             
It
is important that an applicant meet the criteria in section 11.2(1) as well as
those in s. 11.2(4). (See CanWest Publishing Inc.,
Re,
2010 ONSC 222 (“CanWest II”) at paras. 42-44).
46.             
These
factors favour the requested relief here. Sandvine will need access to debtor-in-possession
financing during the CCAA proceedings to continue to operate its
business and administer its insolvency and has no other immediate options to
provide it with the liquidity it needs. Approving the
DIP Facility and DIP Lenders’ Charge at this time will provide necessary
certainty and stability for Sandvine and its stakeholders – including customers
and vendors – that funding will be available to complete the transactions
contemplated by the RSA (including any superior transaction received as part of
the proposed sale process).
47.             
As
noted above, the DIP Facility (and Charge) are supported by the Lenders and
recommended by the Proposed Monitor who is of the professional opinion that the
DIP Facility terms are
reasonable in the circumstances, and comparable to other DIP facilities
approved by Canadian courts in CCAA proceedings (see comparison chart attached
to the Report as Appendix “D”).
48.             
Granting
the DIP
Charge at this time will ensure that the authorizations required to access the
DIP Facility are put in place at commencement of the CCAA Proceedings,
and that the Applicants can seek to have the DIP Charge recognized in a timely
manner in the concurrent Chapter 15 proceedings. Further, the relief sought is
appropriately limited, as the proposed Initial Order prohibits Sandvine from
drawing on the DIP Facility unless approved at the comeback hearing. Sandvine
intends to seek that authorization to draw on the DIP Facility at the Comeback
Hearing.
49.             
The
Applicants are seeking an Administration Charge in favour of the Monitor, its
Canadian and US Counsel, counsel to the Applicant in Canada and the US, and GLC,
as security for their respective fees and disbursements (in the case of GLC, to
the extent of the Monthly Advisory Fees, to a maximum of USD $2.5 million for
the duration of the Initial Stay Period.
50.             
The
Administration Charge was developed in consultation with the Proposed Monitor
and is proposed to be secured by the Property with first priority over all
other charges and security interests.
51.             
The
Court has jurisdiction to grant an administration charge under s. 11.52 of the CCAA.
It is to consider: the size and complexity of the business being restructured,
the proposed role of the beneficiaries of the
charge, whether there is an unwarranted duplication of roles, whether the
quantum of the proposed charge appears to be fair and reasonable, the position
of the secured creditors likely to be affected by the charge, and the position
of the Monitor. (See CanWest, at para. 54).
52.             
The
proposed Administration Charge sought for the initial 10-day period meets this
test and is appropriate. It is supported by the
Proposed Monitor.
53.             
The
Court has jurisdiction to grant a directors’ charge under s. 11.51 of the CCAA,
provided notice is given to the secured creditors who are likely to be affected
by it.
54.             
To
ensure the stability of the business during the restructuring period, the
Applicants need the ongoing assistance of their directors, managers and
officers, who have considerable institutional knowledge and specialized
expertise. They seek a priority directors’ charge in favour of the Sandvine
Entities directors, managers and officers for the Initial Stay Period, ranking
subordinate to the Administration Charge, but in priority to the DIP Charge and
all other interests. The managers include the managers of the Cayman entity,
Procera II LP, whose roles and responsibilities largely mirror those of
directors of Canadian corporations. The Applicants propose a directors’ charge
in the amount of $4.44 million.
55.             
While
there is available liability insurance, the policies will likely not provide
sufficient coverage for potential liability that
the directors, managers and officers could incur in relation to the CCAA
proceedings.
56.             
The
Monitor supports the Applicants’ request for the directors’ charge. I am
satisfied it is appropriate here.
57.             
The
directors’ charge
is approved.
58.             
On
June 29, 2024, Sandvine engaged GLC Investment Advisors & Co., LLC and GLC
Securities, LLC (collectively “GLC”) as its independent financial advisor. The
Applicants seek the approval of this engagement nunc pro tunc.
59.             
The
Court has the jurisdiction to approve the engagement of the Financial Advisor
under s. 11 of the CCAA, and Courts have approved the engagement of a
financial advisor in order to assist the debtors in
achieving the objectives of the CCAA, to assist the debtors’ management
in dealing with a crisis situation, and to allow management to focus on the
debtor’s continued operations: Walter
Energy Canada Holdings, Inc., (Re), 2016 BCSC 107 at paras. 35, 39-43 and
48.
60.             
 GLC
has significant experience as a financial advisor in North American
restructuring and capital market transactions and was
instrumental in assisting with both the negotiations that led to the execution
of the RSA and the preparations for these CCAA proceedings. GLC’s
continued involvement, including running the proposed sales process on behalf
of Sandvine, will be critical to the successful completion of a going concern
restructuring transaction that will maximize value for stakeholders.
61.             
The
GLC retainer and the terms of the Engagement Letter are supported by the
Lenders and recommended by the Proposed Monitor who is of the opinion that the
terms and in particular the fees are appropriate and
comparable to the fees for similar engagements.
62.             
The
Applicants seek authorization, with the consent of the Monitor, to make
payments of pre-filing amounts to certain critical third parties. Sandvine
relies on several third-party software providers for: (i) products it imbeds
into its App QoE software and (ii) for products used in its internal
operations, many of which are critical to Sandvine’s business and its ability
to serve customers.
63.             
Third-party
software for Sandvine’s internal needs include, among other things, security
solutions for Sandvine’s internal IT networks, customer relationship management
(CRM) software, software to integrate the Company’s IT applications, data
storage and business intelligence products, video and
messaging software programs for online collaboration, Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) and finance software, shipping and logistics services, as well
as export control and denied party screening essential to complying with export
laws. Sandvine also relies on third-party suppliers who provide hardware that
is critical for its business.
64.             
In
addition, the proposed Initial Order provides that the Applicants can pay
pre-filing amounts to other critical third parties up to a
maximum aggregate amount of USD $250,000 with the consent of the Monitor.
65.             
The
Court has exercised its jurisdiction on multiple occasions to grant similar
relief in other cases: See, for example, Target, at paras. 62-65; Nordstrom,
at paras. 50-53; Just Energy, at para. 99; Original Traders Energy
Ltd. and 2496750 Ontario Inc. (Re), 2023 ONSC 753 at paras. 72-74; and Boreal
Capital at paras. 20-22.
66.             
The
factors that courts have considered in determining whether to grant such
authorization include: (a) whether the goods and services are integral to the
business of the applicants; (b) the applicants’ dependency on the uninterrupted
supply of the goods or services; (c) the fact that no payments will be made
without the consent of the Monitor (which is a requirement under the proposed
Initial Order); and (d) the effect on the debtors' operations and ability to
restructure if it could not make such payments:  Index Energy Mills Road
Corporation (Re), 2017 ONSC 4944 at para. 31.
67.             
These
factors are fulfilled in
this case, as these categories of suppliers are fundamental to the continuing
operations of the Applicant.
68.             
Because
the Applicants have operations, assets and valuable business in the US, the
Applicants intend to initiate a proceeding under Chapter 15 of Title 11 of the US
Bankruptcy Code
seeking an order to recognize and enforce orders made in these CCAA
proceedings in the US and protect against any potential adverse action taken by
US-based creditors (the “Chapter 15 Proceedings”).
69.             
Jurisdiction
to appoint any person or body to act as a representative for the purpose of
having these CCAA proceedings recognized in any jurisdiction outside
Canada, including but not limited to the United States, is found in s. 56 of
the CCAA. I am satisfied that the relief sought in this regard is
appropriate. (See Caesars Entertainment Operating Company Inc., Re, 2015
ONSC 712 at para. 38; and Payless Holdings LLC, Re, 2017 ONSC 2242 at
para. 35).
70.             
As
noted, US proceedings are contemplated here to enforce the stay of proceedings
established by the initial order if granted today, with the result that it is
necessary to seek recognition of the initial order by the United States
Bankruptcy Court.
71.             
Courts
have consistently encouraged, and do encourage, comity and cooperation between
courts in cross-border
insolvencies.
72.             
Here,
the operations of the
Applicants are functionally and operationally integrated, such that the US
business cannot operate independently of the Canadian business. I am satisfied
that an order authorizing Sandvine Canada to act as a foreign representative in
respect of this proceeding, for the purpose of seeking seek recognition of the
orders of this Court in the United States, is appropriate and in the best
interests of stakeholders.
73.             
For
all of these reasons, the Initial Order is granted. Order to go in the form
signed by me today which is effective immediately and without the
necessity of issuing and entering.
74.             
The
comeback hearing shall take place on Friday, November 15, 2024 for commencing
at 2:00 PM via Zoom in order to accommodate stakeholders who are located across
Canada and the United States.