[1]         
As
the trial judge indicated at the outset of the reasons for judgment, the
appellant, a man in his early sixties, and the complainant, a woman in her
mid-twenties, had a dominant-submissive sexual relationship.
[2]         
On
April 22, 2021, the complainant was blindfolded and bound to the bed.  She was
to engage in the sexual activity that the appellant directed.
[3]         
Unbeknownst
to the complainant, however, on this particular occasion, the appellant had
invited another man to join in the sexual activity, his 71-year-old friend, a
stranger to the complainant.
[4]         
With
the three persons in the bedroom, the sexual activity began with the
complainant performing fellatio on the appellant’s friend.  It continued and
included the complainant performing fellatio on both men, back and forth, and
each man having sexual intercourse with the complainant.
[5]         
During
the sexual encounter, without the knowledge of the complainant, the appellant
used his cellular telephone to take a video of the complainant performing
fellatio on both men.
[6]         
The
appellant was charged with sexual assault contrary to section 271 of the Criminal
Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, as amended (“Criminal Code”), and
unlawful confinement contrary to section 279(2) of the Criminal Code,
and voyeurism contrary to section 162(1)(c) of the Criminal Code.
[7]         
The
appellant and the appellant’s friend were tried together.  The appellant’s
friend is not a part of the within appeal.
[8]         
After
trial, in oral reasons for judgment delivered on December 16, 2022, the
appellant was convicted on all three counts.
[9]         
The
appellant appeals against his convictions.  There is no sentence appeal.
[10]       For
the following reasons, I would allow the appeal on both the unlawful
confinement and the voyeurism counts, quash the convictions on those two
counts, enter an acquittal on the unlawful confinement, and order a new trial
on the voyeurism count.  I would dismiss the appeal on the sexual assault
offence.
[11]       After
summarizing the uncontested facts and the trial evidence of the complainant,
the appellant, and the appellant’s friend, the trial judge concluded that the
evidence of the complainant could not be relied upon. The trial judge doubted
whether the complainant was being truthful when she testified that she did not
know that a third person was there and did not consent to the sexual activity
with that third person or with the appellant while that third person was
present.
[12]       The
trial judge then continued, however, and found that both the appellant and the
appellant’s friend misunderstood the concept of consent.
[13]       The
trial judge then properly instructed herself on the basic legal principles
applicable to all criminal trials, including the presumption of innocence, the
burden of proof resting exclusively with the Crown, the standard of proof being
beyond a reasonable doubt, and the W.(D.) instruction.
[14]       The
trial judge then discussed, at length, with references to both statutory
provisions in the Criminal Code and jurisprudence, the meaning of
consent.
[15]       Ultimately,
the trial judge found that the complainant had been “tricked”.  When the sexual
activity began, that is when the appellant’s friend’s penis touched the mouth
of the complainant, it could not be said that the complainant consented to that
because she did not know that the penis belonged to a man other than the
appellant.  In other words, she consented to the act but not to the identity of
the partner. The ruse was orchestrated by the appellant. The actus reus
of sexual assault was complete the moment that the appellant’s friend’s penis
touched the mouth of the complainant.  Accordingly, the appellant was found
guilty of sexual assault.
[16]       The
trial judge then turned to the voyeurism count.  In very brief reasons (eight
lines of transcript), the appellant was found guilty of that offence because he
took the video surreptitiously, with the complainant being unaware of it, and
the complainant did not consent to the video being taken, and the appellant had
to have known that.
[17]       The
trial judge then turned to the unlawful confinement count.  In brief reasons,
the appellant was found guilty of that offence because, although the
complainant consented to be bound to the bed and could be freed at any time on
her request, the trick that was perpetrated by the appellant (inviting his
friend into the bedroom without the knowledge of the complainant) meant that
the complainant’s consent was not voluntary or informed in that it was vitiated
by fraud.
[18]       This
Court’s jurisdiction to hear the within appeal derives from section 812(1)(a)
of the Criminal Code, under Part XVII, which provides that the Superior
Court of Justice is the “appeal court” for summary conviction offences.
[19]       The
within appeal is brought under section 813(a) of the Criminal Code,
which provides, in part, that the defendant may appeal (i) from conviction
and/or (ii) against a sentence.  As indicated above, there is no sentence
appeal in this matter.
[20]       A
review of the Amended Notice of Appeal dated August 6, 2024, and the
factum of the appellant, supplemented by Ms. Caterina’s excellent oral
submissions at the hearing of the appeal, reveals that the appellant is
advancing the following arguments:
[21]       In
summary, the grounds of appeal advanced in this case fall into two main
categories: (i) alleged errors made by the trial judge, and (ii) alleged
ineffective assistance of trial counsel.
[22]       There
are three possible bases upon which the within appeal may be allowed: (i) the
verdict is unreasonable or cannot be supported by the evidence; (ii) there was
a wrong decision made on a question of law; and/or (iii) there has been a
miscarriage of justice.  R. v. Hunt, 2024 ONSC 5454 (CanLII), at
paragraph 11; R. v. McLean, 2021 ONSC 34 (CanLII), at paragraph 11.
[23]       It is
clear from the submissions of counsel on behalf of the appellant, taken as a
whole, that all three of those bases are relevant in this case.
[24]       Though
questions of law are generally reviewed on a standard of correctness, the
jurisdiction of this Court to review a finding of fact made by the trial judge
is limited.  I am not entitled to retry the case or to substitute my own view
of the evidence for that of the trial judge.  This is not a retrial.  This
Court has no basis upon which to interfere with the trial judge’s findings
unless they are unreasonable or unsupported by the evidence.  R. v. Smits,
2012 ONCA 524 (CanLII), at paragraph 67, 294 O.A.C. 355, 102 W.C.B. (2d) 316
(Ont. C.A.), [2012] CarswellOnt 9437 (C.A.), [2012] O.J. No. 3629 (C.A.), 36
M.V.R. (6th) 217 (Ont. C.A.); R. v. Grosse (1996), 1996
CanLII 6643 (ON CA), 29 O.R. (3d) 785 (C.A.), at pages 791-792; R. v. Hunt,
supra, at paragraph 12; R. v. McLean, supra, at paragraph 13; R.
v. Doyle, [2006] O.J. No. 315 (C.A.), at paragraph 6.
[25]       Put
another way, the factual findings of a trial judge are entitled to deference,
and an appellate court may only interfere where there has been a palpable and
overriding error.  Findings of fact and factual inferences must be clearly
wrong, unsupported by the evidence, or otherwise unreasonable before an
appellate court can interfere.  R. v. Hunt, supra, at paragraph 13; R.
v. Clark, 2005 SCC 2, at paragraph 9, [2005] 1 S.C.R. 6 (S.C.C.), 249
D.L.R. (4th) 257 (S.C.C.), 193 C.C.C. (3d) 289 (S.C.C.), 25 C.R. (6th)
197 (S.C.C.), [2005] S.C.J. No. 4 (S.C.C.); R. v. Sheahan, 2017 ONCA
159, at paragraph 12, 8 M.V.R. (7th) 1 (Ont. C.A.); R. v. R.E.M.,
[2008] 3 S.C.R. 3 (S.C.C.), at paragraph 54, 2008 SCC 51 (CanLII); Housen v.
Nikolaisen, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235 (S.C.C.), at paragraphs 10 and 23, 2002 SCC
33 (CanLII).
[26]       Credibility
is a question of fact, and an appellate court should afford due deference to
the trial judge who actually saw and heard the witnesses.  Further, it is wrong
for an appellate court to dissect the trial judge’s reasons into small pieces
without examining how those pieces affect the end result (the verdict) and/or
without appreciating that reasons for judgment must be read as a whole.  R.
v. Morrisey (1995), 22 O.R. (3d) 514 (C.A.), at paragraph 28, 1995 CanLII
3498 (ON CA), 38 C.R. (4th) 4 (Ont. C.A.), 97 C.C.C. (3d) 193 (Ont.
C.A.), [1995] CarswellOnt 18 (C.A.), [1995] O.J. No. 639 (C.A.); R. v. C.R.,
[2010] O.J. No. 911 (C.A.), at paragraph 31, 2010 ONCA 176 (CanLII).
[27]       On the
voyeurism and unlawful confinement counts, with respect, I find that the trial
judge erred in law.  Those two convictions cannot stand.
[28]       Regarding
the voyeurism count, although the trial judge considered (i) whether the
appellant took the video surreptitiously (with the complainant being unaware of
it), and (ii) whether the complainant consented to the video being taken, and
(iii) whether the appellant knew that the complainant had not consented to the
video being taken, the trial judge did not consider an essential element
of the offence of voyeurism – whether the complainant was in circumstances that
gave rise to a reasonable expectation of privacy.
[29]       It is
not disputed by the Crown, nor could it be, that a reasonable expectation of
privacy is an essential element of the offence of voyeurism, something that the
Crown had to prove beyond a reasonable doubt.  The plain wording of section
162(1) of the Criminal Code makes that clear.  The decision of the
Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Jarvis, 2019 SCC 10, [2019] 1 S.C.R.
488, 52 C.R. (7th) 62, makes that clear as well, as confirmed in the
commentary at page 417 of The 2025 Annotated Tremeear’s Criminal Code,
2024 Thomson Reuters Canada Limited, David Watt, K.C., The Honourable Madam
Justice Michelle Fuerst, and Jill D. Makepeace.
[30]       It is
equally not disputed by the Crown, nor could it be, that whether the
complainant consented to the video being taken is not determinative of the
question of whether there was a reasonable expectation of privacy.  We know
that from Jarvis, supra, at paragraph 29, where the Supreme Court of
Canada points to awareness of or consent to the recording as being only one of
many factors in a list of non-exhaustive considerations that may assist a court
in deciding whether there was a reasonable expectation of privacy.
[31]       The
totality of the circumstances must be considered. The inquiry is a contextual
one, and there are instances where some of the considerations mentioned at
paragraph 29 in Jarvis, supra will not be relevant, for example where a
camera is hidden in a washroom and used to surreptitiously record what is a
patently obvious private experience of someone who uses the washroom.  Jarvis,
supra, at paragraph 30.
[32]       In
fairness to the trial judge, on the issue of a reasonable expectation of
privacy, no assistance was given to her by counsel on either side.  The case
appears to have been presented, and decided, primarily on the basis that there
was a straight line between a finding of no consent to the video being taken
and a conviction for voyeurism.  Respectfully, that was wrong in law.
[33]       It is
possible for a recording to be done surreptitiously but not in breach of a
reasonable expectation of privacy.  Jarvis, supra, at paragraph 33.  If
that is the case, then it is certainly possible for a recording to be done
without consent but not in breach of a reasonable expectation of privacy.
[34]       With
respect, to convict the appellant of voyeurism in the absence of any analysis
of or finding of a reasonable expectation of privacy, an essential element of
the offence, was a legal error.
[35]       The
Crown urges this Court to apply the curative proviso.
[36]       In R.
v. Edwards, 2022 ONCA 78 (CanLII), Justice Sossin, writing for the Court of
Appeal for Ontario, very neatly summarized the legal principles applicable to
the curative proviso.  Paragraphs 36-40 of that decision are set out below.
[37]       In my
view, the curative proviso cannot be applied here.  The error was not minor or
harmless as it went to an essential element of the offence and, thus, clearly
impacted on the verdict.  Further, the evidence against the appellant on the
voyeurism count was not so overwhelming that a conviction was inevitable.  It
was not so overwhelming that any other verdict would have been impossible.  The
trial judge could have found that the video was taken surreptitiously (without
the consent of the complainant) but that a fulsome analysis of all of the
factors mentioned in Jarvis, supra, together with the facts that the
complainant knew that there were two men in the bedroom and was involved in
sexual activity with both of them by the time that the appellant commenced
taking the video (which findings were available on the record and would have
been consistent with the reasons for judgment taken as a whole), meant that
there was a reasonable doubt as to whether there was a reasonable expectation
of privacy.
[38]       The
conviction on the voyeurism count must, therefore, be quashed.
[39]       In
terms of remedy, the choice between entering an acquittal and ordering a new
trial is left to this Court’s discretion.  Where reversible error of law is
committed, but the evidence at trial is such that a properly instructed trier
of fact acting reasonably could have convicted, it is usually appropriate to
order a new trial.  R. v. Levy, 1991 CanLII 2726 (ON CA), citing R.
v. Haslam (1990), 1990 CanLII 166 (BC CA), 78 C.R. (3d) 23 at 34, 56 C.C.C.
(3d) 491 at 502; and R. v. More (1959), 1959 CanLII 447 (BC CA), 31 C.R.
59 at 65-69, 28 W.W.R. 562, 124 C.C.C. 140 at 146-150.
[40]       Here,
the evidence at trial was such that a properly instructed trier of fact acting
reasonably could have convicted (could have found, beyond a reasonable doubt, a
reasonable expectation of privacy). Thus, I order a new trial on the voyeurism
count.
[41]       Given
the manner in which the appellant was sentenced, however, and given the
disposition of the appeal on the sexual assault offence, I would strongly
urge the Crown to not retry the appellant on the voyeurism offence.  It
would not be in the interests of justice.  It would not be a good use of judicial
resources.
[42]       Regarding
the unlawful confinement count, at the very end of the hearing of the appeal,
the Crown fairly conceded that the appeal should be allowed and the conviction
quashed if this Court finds that the trial judge had to consider whether the
complainant was confined for a significant period of time, or even for some
period of time that can be said to have been beyond fleeting.
[43]       I do
so find. Respectfully, although again the trial judge received no assistance
from counsel on either side on this point, it was incumbent on the trial judge
to consider that issue, and the failure to consider that issue amounted to an
error in law, and thus, the conviction for unlawful confinement must be
quashed.
[44]       The
law is clear that the two essential elements of an unlawful confinement are (i)
an intentional confinement and (ii) a confinement without lawful authority. 
Confinement is an unlawful restriction on liberty for any significant period of
time, or at least for some appreciable period of time.  Watt’s Manual of
Criminal Jury Instructions, 2023, 2023 Thomson Reuters Canada Limited,
David Watt, K.C., at page 917; R. v. Sundman, 2022 SCC 31 (CanLII), at
paragraph 21.
[45]       The
Crown does not argue, nor could it on this evidentiary record, that the
complainant was physically restrained, contrary to her wishes, and her liberty
deprived, for any significant period of time, or for any period of time beyond
what could only be described as fleeting.
[46]       Given
the express concession made by the Crown at the hearing of the appeal, and
given the state of the law on what constitutes a confinement, there is no other
reasonable conclusion other than that the trial judge misapplied the law and
erred in convicting the appellant of unlawful confinement.
[47]       It is
not appropriate to order a new trial.  This Court enters an acquittal on the
offence of unlawful confinement.  Specifically with regard to the period of
time that the complainant was restrained against her wishes and had her liberty
deprived, the evidence at trial was not such that a properly instructed trier
of fact acting reasonably could have convicted the appellant of unlawful
confinement.  The Crown does not seriously suggest otherwise.
[48]       In
summary, it was not sufficient to ground the conviction of the appellant for
unlawful confinement exclusively on the basis that the complainant’s consent to
be bound to the bed was vitiated by fraud, which is what the reasons for
judgment stand for.
[49]       Regarding
the sexual assault count, I am of the view that the trial judge did not err in
any way.  More specifically, there was no misapprehension of the evidence, and
the reasons were not insufficient.
[50]       In R.
v. Doodnaught, 2017 ONCA 781 (CanLII), 358 C.C.C. (3d) 250 (Ont. C.A.),
Watt J.A. summarized the legal principles applicable to an appeal that is
grounded on an alleged misapprehension of the evidence by the trial judge. 
Paragraphs 71-75 of that decision are set out below.
[51]       More
recently, Zarnett J.A., for the Court of Appeal for Ontario, stated the
following at paragraphs 53-55 of the decision in R. v. Kwok, 2023 ONCA
458 (CanLII), 427 C.C.C. (3d) 462.
[52]       Here,
first, the appellant’s counsel points to an alleged inconsistency between the
appellant’s evidence in direct examination at trial (page 21 of the Appellant’s
Compendium) and his evidence in cross-examination at trial (page 26 of the
Appellant’s Compendium).  It is submitted that only the former, where the
appellant stated that he asked the complainant if she was okay only after
she had already been touched sexually by the appellant’s friend, was
inculpatory. The latter, it is submitted, was not.
[53]       With
respect, counsel for the appellant is straining to find something that is
simply not there.
[54]       Even
if it is correct to say that what the appellant testified to in
cross-examination was in fact different than what he said in direct
examination, on the basis that he asked the complainant if she was okay “before
anything happened”, and “anything” includes the first sexual touching of the
complainant by the appellant’s friend, all of which is not at all clear to me
on a reading of the evidence at page 26 of the Appellant’s Compendium, it
remains that whether the first sexual touching, that is the appellant’s
friend’s penis to the complainant’s mouth, occurred in circumstances where the
complainant did not know that the penis belonged to someone other than the
appellant was a finding of fact made by the trial judge.  It is owed deference
by this Court.  The trial judge was entitled to accept all, some, or none of
the appellant’s evidence.  She was not required to review all of his evidence
on any one point, especially where his evidence in direct examination on this
point was crystal clear, while his evidence was much less so in
cross-examination.  The evidence of the appellant at page 21 of the Appellant’s
Compendium fully supported the trial judge’s finding of fact referred to above.
[55]       Second,
the appellant’s counsel points to the appellant’s friend’s trial evidence at
page 31 of the Appellant’s Compendium, where the appellant’s friend stated in
cross-examination that he thought that the complainant “sensed” that there was
a third party in the bedroom.
[56]       Respectfully,
the trial judge’s finding of fact that the complainant did not know about the
third person in the bedroom when the appellant’s friend first touched the
complainant in a sexual manner could not reasonably be undermined by that
evidence at page 31 of the Appellant’s Compendium. Frankly, that evidence was
next to worthless. It was speculative to the point of being inadmissible.  It
ran contrary to the entire admitted scheme of the appellant to orchestrate this
sexual encounter with his friend as a “surprise”, and thus it made no common
sense.  The trial judge cannot be faulted for not mentioning that evidence of
the appellant’s friend when making her finding of fact referred to above.
[57]       Third
and finally, the appellant’s counsel submits that there is a host of unanswered
questions in terms of why the trial judge made the findings that she did and,
therefore, why she convicted the appellant of sexual assault.
[58]       The
appellant’s counsel asks, how was the complainant “tricked” when it would have
been obvious to the complainant that the penis that first touched her mouth
could not have been from the person who was on the bed (the appellant), and
thus, she must have known that there were two persons besides herself in the
bedroom (referring to an excerpt from the closing submissions at trial of the
appellant’s friend, page 32 of the Appellant’s Compendium)?  With respect, what
was said in closing submissions was not evidence.
[59]       The
appellant’s counsel asks, further, why did the trial judge state that the
discrepancy between the evidence of the complainant and the appellant’s friend
on what constituted the first sexual touching between them, whether him
touching her vagina or her putting his penis inside her mouth, was not
“determinative of the result in this case” (page 7 of the transcript of the
reasons for judgment)?  With respect, the answer is obvious – that discrepancy
did not matter because, either way, the first sexual touching was without valid
consent on the part of the complainant.
[60]       The
appellant’s counsel asks, further, how did the trial judge find a “trick” when
she found both the appellant and his friend to be credible witnesses and
accepted much of their evidence?  With respect, the trial judge found that
because the appellant himself testified that the whole thing was a “surprise”,
both by design and in effect (the latter having been effectively admitted by
the appellant when he testified that he asked the complainant if she was okay
only after the first sexual touching occurred between his friend and the
complainant).
[61]       In
summary, there were no misapprehensions of the evidence by the trial judge.
[62]       Turning
to the insufficiency of reasons argument, I see no merit to it.
[63]       A very
helpful summary of the legal principles applicable to a sufficiency of reasons
argument is found in the decision of the Court of Appeal for Ontario, Doherty
J.A. writing for the Court, in R. v. J.J.R.D., 2006 CanLII 40088. 
Paragraphs 26-33 of that decision are set out below.
[64]       Here,
the route to conviction was clearly and fully explained by the trial judge at
page 14 of the transcript of the reasons for judgment.  In short, the
complainant was tricked. The penis of the appellant’s friend touched the mouth
of the complainant without the complainant even being aware that there was
someone else in the bedroom besides her and the appellant, and this was by
design of the appellant.
[65]       It is
unnecessary to analyze whether there was ineffective assistance of trial
counsel regarding the unlawful confinement and the voyeurism counts. The appeal
is allowed on those two counts for different reasons.
[66]       On the
sexual assault offence, I am of the view that the appellant cannot succeed on
the prejudice component of the test for ineffective assistance of counsel, in
other words there was no miscarriage of justice, and thus that ends the
inquiry.
[67]       The
law regarding ineffective assistance of counsel was nicely summarized by the
Court of Appeal for Ontario in R. v. J.B., 2011 ONCA 404, [2011] O.J.
No. 2322, at paragraphs 2 and 6, set out below.
[68]       Reference
should also be had to the decision of the Court of Appeal for Ontario in R.
v. Fiorilli, 2021 ONCA 461, 156 O.R. (3d) 582.  On the prejudice component
of the analysis specifically, paragraphs 54 through 59 of that decision are
important, set out below.
[69]       Here,
in my view, it cannot be said that the trial was rendered unfair or the verdict
unreliable as a result of anything that defence counsel at trial did or did not
do.
[70]       Once
it was established that the complainant was not aware of the addition of a
third person into the sexual activity until after it started, and the appellant
knew that because he intended that to be the case as it was meant to be a
“surprise” (all findings of fact made by the trial judge, and all supported by
the appellant’s own evidence at trial), and more specifically once it was
established that there was sexual touching between the appellant’s friend and
the complainant before the appellant asked the complainant if she was okay and
before the complainant knew that the person whose penis was touching her mouth
belonged to a third person (all findings of fact made by the trial judge, and
all supported by the appellant’s own evidence at trial, in particular his
evidence in examination-in-chief at page 21 of the Appellant’s Compendium), a
conviction for sexual assault was the inevitable consequence.
[71]       That
the appellant’s counsel at trial appears to have advanced a theory of the
defence on the sexual assault charge that could not have amounted to a defence
in law, even if accepted by the trial judge, because one cannot consent to
sexual activity retrospectively (with effect from a time that has already
passed), did not result in an unfair trial or an unreliable verdict.
[72]       The
verdict was grounded on the undisputed facts and the appellant’s own evidence
at trial.  A high degree of confidence can be placed on the validity and
reliability of the appellant’s conviction for sexual assault because, in
essence, that conviction did not depend on anything that the appellant himself
did not agree with.  Given the appellant’s own admissions at trial, there is no
reasonable probability, or even reasonable possibility, that the verdict would,
or even could,  have been any different.
[73]       Defence
counsel at trial could have taken a different approach.  He could have taken an
approach more like that of Ms. Caterina on appeal, arguing that there was other
evidence at trial which made it uncertain whether the first sexual touching
between the appellant’s friend and the complainant actually happened before she
knew that there was a third person in the bedroom.  This is not an exercise in
grading the performance of defence counsel at trial, however.  On the trial
fairness branch of the prejudice component, we are concerned about the
appearance of the fairness of the trial, as justice must manifestly be seen to
be done.  This Court does not conclude that trial counsel’s performance
undermined the appearance of trial fairness.
[74]       I
would accordingly allow the appeal in part.
[75]       The
conviction on the unlawful confinement offence is quashed, and an acquittal is
entered on that count.
[76]       The
conviction on the voyeurism offence is quashed, and a new trial is ordered on
that count.
[77]       The appeal
against the conviction on the sexual assault offence is dismissed.  There was
no misapprehension of the evidence by the trial judge.  The reasons of the
trial judge were clear and thorough and more than sufficient.  There was no
ineffective assistance of trial counsel.
[78]       Again,
I repeat my strong urging to the Crown to not retry the appellant on the
voyeurism count.