[1]                  
The named plaintiffs herein have brought a
motion to amend their extant statement of claim in the manner set forth in
Schedule “A” to the notice of motion; e.g., to add Edward Ouellette as a named
defendant to the proceeding, and substitute Stephanie Ouellette, (rather than
Edward Ouellette), as the child plaintiff’s litigation guardian.
[2]                  
As indicated during the course of submissions
today, my preliminary view is that there is nothing inherently objectionable to
addition of Mr Ouellette as a defendant, (e.g., insofar as no limitation period
has operated vis-à-vis the child plaintiff, and the FLA claims in that regard
are derivative), and that the proposed litigation guardian substitution is also
appropriate, insofar as the child plaintiff now seeks to advance claims of
negligence against his father but no claims against his mother. Without any
positions being formally and decisively indicated yet in that regard by the
responding parties, it appears from the submissions received today that those
aspects of the requested relief are unlikely to be controversial or opposed,
once responding party counsel obtain instructions having regard to the outcome
of the remaining issue I independently raised, and which responding counsel
then indicated was also a matter of concern for their clients; i.e., Mr
Ouellette also remaining as a plaintiff in the action, asserting a claim for
damages, (albeit FLA damages), arising in part, (according to the proposed
amended statement of claim), from his own independent negligence.
[3]                  
As I indicated during the course of submissions,
in my preliminary view that suggestion and proposed approach to the litigation are
inherently problematic and arguably inappropriate.
[4]                  
Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, it was and remains a fundamental principle of common law that a
person cannot sue himself for damages said to arise from and/or be based upon
his or her own independent negligence; i.e., as opposed to liability arising
solely by way of a statute without any assertion of such independent negligence. 
See Public Trustee v. Guaranty Trust Co. of Canada, 1980 CanLII 52 (SCC), [1980] 2 S.C.R. 931,
and Dionisi v. Dionisi (1983) 1983 CanLII 1863 (ON SC), 42 O.R. (2d) 597 (H.C.J.).
[5]                  
Without formally deciding the matter, (as
plaintiff counsel essentially did not have an opportunity to prepare a response
to the concern and authorities I raised in that regard), my preliminary view is
that the proposed amended pleading is therefore impermissible, and that Mr
Ouellette instead should be removed as a plaintiff while being added as a
defendant; a defendant who then can deny negligence as a defendant, while
advancing his FLA claim by way of crossclaims and/or third party claims if so
advised. In that regard, it is also my preliminary view that his doing so would
not be barred by operation of any limitation period; e.g., as his FLA claim is
not only derivative to that of the child plaintiff, but was also advanced
earlier, and the other defendants and third party clearly have had notice of Mr
Ouellette’s FLA claim.
[6]                  
For now, I will refrain from making any formal
order, and am not seized of the matter.
[7]                  
The motion instead will be adjourned to January
17, 2025, to allow plaintiff counsel time to give further consideration to the
matter, allow for the involvement and input of Mr Watson, (who intends to
represent Mr Ouellette as a defendant and possibly as a claimant), and allow
the other responding parties to seek instructions in relation to whatever revised
amended pleading plaintiff counsel may seek to propose.
[8]                  
Costs of today are reserved to the judge hearing
the motion on its merits.
[9]                  
Matter adjourned to January 17, 2025.