1.                 
The
Monitor moves for two orders.
2.                 
First,
the Monitor seeks an order:
3.                 
Second,
the Monitor seeks an order in the nature of the draft Approval of Replacement
DIP Facility and Ancillary Matters Order:
4.                 
At
the outset of the hearing, counsel to the Monitor advised that the motion for
an order discharging the Unsecured Lender Representative Counsel was adjourned
to a later date given the continuing role for that counsel.
5.                 
Defined
terms in this Endorsement have the meaning given to them in the 10th
Report, unless otherwise stated.
6.                 
Service
of motion materials was effected on the entire Service List, and a significant
number of parties beyond that, including the Supplementary List of parties
whose rights are being vested off, and notice by email to Secured Lenders and
affected tenants under the Leases discussed below. In short, I am satisfied
that the Monitor, assisted by Representative Counsel for both the Unsecured
Lenders and the Secured Lenders has made all practical and reasonable efforts
to provide notice to all affected parties on as wide a basis as reasonably
possible. I note that in addition to counsel for the parties, a very
significant number of secured and unsecured lenders were present in Court as
observers.
7.                 
The
relief sought today was unopposed. No party filed any materials opposing the
relief sought. That said, a number of observers, who, as more particularly
noted below, were Secured Lenders or Unsecured Lenders - individuals and
families - affected by these events, made submissions as to their perspective
on the process and the hardship that has been inflicted upon them by the
unfortunate circumstances of this case.
8.                 
The full
background for, and context of, this motion is set out in the 10th
Report and earlier reports, and I have not repeated all of that here.
9.                 
This
Court approved a SISP on April 12, 2024. Regrettably, the SISP generated 12
letters of intent that contemplated third-party sales or refinancing
transactions, but the Monitor determined not to pursue any of them after
extensive consultation with the Secured Lender Representative Counsel, the
Unsecured Lender Representative Counsel and the Lions Share Representative and
its counsel.
10.             
While
the principals of the Applicants had conveyed to stakeholders an estimated
Portfolio value of approximately $140 million based on a Comparative Market
Analysis obtained by the Applicants in May, 2024 from a representative of a
brokerage with which Mr. Suiter is affiliated, the Monitor ultimately came to
the conclusion that the Comparative Market Analysis included significant
overstatements and errors in the underlying assumptions and comparable
properties used for the analysis, all with the result that it was not credible.
11.             
Both
SISP Advisors accordingly refused to include the analysis in their respective
data rooms, with the result that that Monitor also concluded it was unreliable.
This unfortunate series of events contributed significantly to
misunderstandings on the part of numerous stakeholders and inflated
expectations with respect to anticipated recoveries in these proceedings.
12.             
Following
the conclusion of the SISP, the Monitor worked with the Secured Lender
Representative Counsel, the Unsecured Lender Representative Counsel, the Lions
Share Representative and its counsel to negotiate the Restructuring Term Sheet
which was approved by this Court on August 30, 2024. That established deadlines
for mortgagees to submit credit bids for their respective Properties, all as
set out in the 10th Report.
13.             
Ultimately,
the Monitor received 323 credit bids representing approximately 79% of the
Properties. The form of purchase agreement documenting the credit bid
transactions was developed by the Secured Lender Representative Counsel in
consultation with the Monitor and was made available to the Secured Lenders.
14.             
The
Monitor now seeks approval of the Credit Bid APAs and the granting of the
Credit Bid Vesting Order.
15.             
These
APAs require that each Purchaser assume any tenant leases on closing. Of the
323 properties, 253 are tenanted. The form of tenant leases does not contain
any restriction on the right of the landlord to assign the lease. However, it
is the view and strong recommendation of the Monitor that it is important to
provide to both purchasers and tenants certainty as to the state of the leases,
but that it will be impractical to obtain executed consents or acknowledgements
from hundreds of tenants under the leases, and that doing so will create a risk
of completing the simultaneous closing of all credit bid transactions on an
expedited timeline as contemplated by the APAs.
16.             
The
Monitor recently identified that the leases are between the applicable tenant
and SID Management rather than the Applicant entity owner of each Property. SID
Management has confirmed to the Monitor that the leases are in its name as
agent for the applicable Applicant Property Owner and that it agrees that the
leases should be assigned to the applicable Purchasers on closing of the credit
bid transactions.
17.             
For
those reasons, the Monitor seeks an assignment of the leases from the SID
Companies to the applicable Purchaser as well as an assignment of the tenant
leases in respect of the remaining properties to the applicable Applicant.
18.             
This
Court has jurisdiction pursuant to section 36 of the CCAA to authorize
an Applicant to sell or otherwise dispose of its assets outside the ordinary
course of business, free and clear of charges. A sale to preserve a going
concern outcome is consistent with the objectives of the CCAA.
19.             
In
determining whether to approve the transaction, the Court must determine
whether it is appropriate, fair and reasonable as against the primary
objectives of the CCAA, and considering the non-exhaustive list of
factors set out in section 36(3) of the CCAA. The Soundair Principles
continue to be relevant to such an analysis.
20.             
I am
satisfied for the reasons set out in the 10th Report that both the
section 36(3) factors and the Soundair Principles have been satisfied
here. I recognize, as I observed in Court and particularly for the benefit of
affected stakeholders and observers, that the result here is not perfect. I am
satisfied, however, that it is fair and reasonable and represents the best
outcome in what is a most unfortunate set of circumstances.
21.             
I
also pause to observe that a number of Purchasers have already assigned their
rights under the APAs to one party, Big North, a vehicle created by a number of
Secured Lenders to finance and hold a number of the Properties in an efficient
manner. The president of Big North, Mr. Dan Uszynski, was present in Court
today and confirmed that neither Big North nor any of its principals are
related in any way, directly or indirectly, to Mr. Suiter.
22.             
The
number of people (real people, individuals and families) who are secured and
unsecured lenders and who are adversely affected by this entire situation is
significant. The impact on them, their lives and their life savings is
profound, as was clear from a number of comments made by many of those parties
to the Court today. I recognize all of those concerns and hardships. In
approving the transactions as I am doing today, the Court is not for a moment
condoning the actions and events that led to the unfortunate situation in which
all affected stakeholders find themselves today. As noted, however, I am
satisfied that approving the relief sought today represents the best and most
advantageous path forward and maximizes outcomes and recoveries in challenging
circumstances.
23.             
It
remains impractical to list and attempt to sell all 323 Properties
individually. The terms of the Restructuring Term Sheet already provided the
right for Secured Lenders to credit bid, and they set out the mechanism to
determine any Equity Properties as to fairness and reasonableness. The Monitor
views all of the transactions as satisfying all relevant criteria. It is not
aware of any Purchasers being related to the Applicants.
24.             
With
respect to the assignment of the leases from the SID Companies to the
applicable Purchaser as well as an assignment of tenant leases in respect of
the remaining properties to the applicable Applicant, this Court has the
authority to approve such transactions pursuant to section 11.3 of the CCAA if
three statutory factors as set out in that subsection are met. In addition, the
Court must be satisfied that all monetary defaults in relation to the assigned
contracts (subject to certain exceptions) will be remedied.
25.             
The
Monitor gave notice to the known tenants under the Leases for the Remaining
Portfolio advising of the proposed assignments. No objections have been
received. While it is important to provide both purchasers and tenants with
certainty as to the state of the leases, obtaining executed consents and
acknowledgements would clearly be impractical here. It would risk a failure of
the simultaneous closing of all credit bid transactions on an expedited
timeframe. The Monitor is not aware of any reason why the applicable Purchasers
would not be able to satisfy their obligations under the Leases once assigned,
nor is it aware of any potential monetary obligations in favour of tenants that
would be outstanding.
26.             
Accordingly,
and while, without question, the current circumstances, unique and ought not to
serve as a general precedent, I accept the recommendation of the Monitor that
the proposed assignment of Leases is warranted here given that the Credit Bid
Vesting Order provides that such assignments are subject to, among other
things, the payment of amounts required to be paid under section 11.3 of the CCAA.
27.             
There
is approximate $15 million owing under the Existing DIP Facility, and the
Monitor seeks allocation of that amount as between property specific costs such
as renovations and property taxes negated to the applicable Property; and
general costs, such as professional fees, allocated over the Portfolio in
proportion to the acquisition cost of each Property. The proposed allocation is
more fully set out in the 10th Report.
28.             
With
respect to the proposed Viscount DIP Facility, the Monitor negotiated its
terms, which provide for a maximum principal amount of $4.85 million. Immediate
funding is necessary to repay the Existing DIP Facility, finalize transactions
under the Credit Bid APAs and support an orderly liquidation of the 84
remaining properties in the Portfolio. None of those steps can be completed
without the Viscount DIP Facility. Failure to complete those steps would impair
recoveries for all stakeholders with the result that the Monitor believes the
terms and conditions of the Viscount DIP Facility are commercially reasonable,
and further that they are in the best interests of the stakeholders.
29.             
As a
result of all of the above, the Monitor seeks a reduction in the Administration
Charge from $1.5 million to $500,000, of which 50% is to rank in priority to,
and 50% is to rank subordinate to, the DIP Lenders Charge, to become effective
upon the filing of the Monitor’s Certificate under the Credit Bid Vesting
Order.
30.             
The
Monitor is also seeking a reduction in the DIP Lender’s Charge from $15 million
plus interest, fees and costs to $4.85 million plus interest, fees and costs
being the amount of the Viscount DIP Facility, provided that Viscount will be
the beneficiary of the DIP Lender’s Charge, effective upon the filing of the
Monitor’s Funding Certificate.
31.             
I am
satisfied that this relief should be granted pursuant to section 11 of the
CCAA and the general power to make orders that are considered by the Court
to be appropriate in the circumstances.
32.             
The
allocation of costs proposed here is reasonable in the particular circumstances
of this case and as measured against the factors set out by this Court in Royal
Bank of Canada v. Atlas Block Co Limited, 2014 ONSC 153. It is approved.
33.             
It
is equitable in that it allocates general costs across all Properties, and
property-specific costs to the applicable Property. It employs the acquisition
cost as the basis for allocation of general costs which, in these circumstances
is, in the view of the Monitor, more appropriate than allocating those costs
based on mortgage debt as the Applicants did not incur or repay mortgage debt
in any systematic manner.
34.             
The
proposed DIP Allocation was first communicated to stakeholders in August and
well in advance of the credit bid submission deadline, such that mortgagees had
time to review their allocations for first and second mortgagees, respectively.
The large number of credit bids received, with deposits, reflects a strong
desire on the part of the mortgagees to proceed, which includes the funding of
their respective DIP Allocation amounts. The Monitor is not aware of any
outstanding information requests in respect of the DIP Allocation or objections
thereto.
35.             
This
Court has authority to approve interim financing and related charges, pursuant
to section 11.2 of the CCAA, if consideration of the non-exhaustive list
of factors set out in section 11.2(4) leads to the conclusion that the relief
should be granted. Having considered those here, I agree with the
recommendation of the Monitor that the Viscount DIP Facility, and corresponding
DIP Lender’s Charge, should be approved.
36.             
With
respect to the approval of the Seventh through 10th Reports,
inclusive, and the activities of the Monitor described in all, as well as the
fees and disbursements of the Monitor and its counsel, I am satisfied that they
have been required to undertake significant work to get this proceeding to
where it is, including conducting operational oversight, conducting the SISP,
performing the Investigation as set out in the 10th Report, taking
control over the Applicants in accordance with the Expanded Powers Order,
coordinating the transition of property management from the SID Companies to
Richmond Advisory Services and dealing with the Credit Bid APAs.
37.             
All
of this work was accretive to the outcome for stakeholders, consistent with the
mandate given to the Monitor in the original appointment order and the Expanded
Powers Order. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the activities were fair and
reasonable, and should be approved. The fees and disbursements of the Monitor
and its counsel as set out in the fee affidavits appended to the 10th
Report correspond to those activities, are fair and reasonable and consistent
with market rates. They also are approved: Bank of Nova Scotia v. Diemer,
2014 ONCA 851 at para. 33.
38.             
Finally,
I am satisfied that the stay of proceedings should be extended through and
including February 28, 2025 to provide the time necessary for the Monitor to
close the transactions contemplated under the Credit Bid Vesting Order and
consult with applicable stakeholders to formulate and implement an orderly
liquidation plan for the Remaining Portfolio.
39.             
Jurisdiction
to extend the stay is found in section 11.02(2) of the CCAA.
40.             
I am
satisfied that the Monitor has been acting, and continues to act, in good faith
and with due diligence. The Cash Flow Forecast appended to the 10th
Report projects, subject to approval of the Viscount DIP Facility, sufficient
funding available to fund operations and these proceedings through the extended
period. No creditor will be prejudiced by the granting of the extension.
41.             
The
motion (except for discharge of Unsecured Lender Representative Counsel, which
is adjourned) is granted.
42.             
Both
orders to go in the form I have signed today. These orders are effective
immediately and without the necessity of issuing and entering.