[1]              
Jean Fenelon has been charged with
first degree murder in the death of Marie Gabriel. At the conclusion of the
Crown’s case, the Defence brought an application for a directed verdict. The
allegation in this case is that the murder of Ms. Gabriel is elevated to first
degree murder by virtue of unlawful confinement and/or criminal harassment. It
is submitted that only second-degree murder should be left with the jury.
[2]              
After hearing from the Defence, I
dismissed the application as it related to criminal harassment. I provided oral
reasons at that time. I further found that forcible confinement as a route to
first degree murder was not available and indicated that brief written reasons
would follow. These
are those reasons.
[3]              
The test on a directed verdict
application pursuant to s.
548(1) of the Criminal Code is whether or not there is any evidence,
direct or indirect, upon which a jury properly instructed could return a verdict
of guilty.
[4]              
The Crown must present evidence respecting
every essential element of the offence they are burdened with proving.
The Crown’s evidentiary threshold is low, and the trial judge should dismiss
directed verdict applications where there is admissible evidence that, if
believed, could result in the accused’s conviction. When direct evidence is not
presented for every essential element of the offence, the trial judge is tasked
with conducting a weighing exercise to determine whether the circumstantial
evidence can reasonably support a guilty inference.
[5]              
While the trier of fact in a
circumstantial case will have to determine whether guilt is the only
reasonable inference, on a directed verdict application my role is limited to
determining whether guilt is a reasonable inference. If it is, then it
will be for the trier of fact to determine whether it is the only reasonable
inference. The inferences the Crown seeks to have drawn need only be
reasonable. They need not be easily drawn, likely or probable. However, the
burden of proof must be kept in mind and the evidence must be capable of
supporting not simply an inference of guilt, but guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt: R. v. Jama, 2023 ONSC 2375 at paras. 78 and 79.
[6]              
On an application for a directed
verdict in a circumstantial case, the ultimate goal is to determine whether the
essential elements of the offence at issue can be reasonably inferred from the
whole of the evidence, when viewed most favourably to the Crown. It has been
recognized that the boundary which separates permissible inference from
impermissible speculation in relation to circumstantial evidence is often a
difficult one to determine. An inference
must flow logically and reasonably from the facts, or else it amounts to
conjecture and speculation. There is a difference between an inference that
flows logically and reasonably from the facts and a hypothesis that is simply
consistent with the facts: Jama at paras. 84 and 85
[7]              
The essential element at issue here
is whether the alleged confinement constitutes a distinct act which forms part
of the same transaction as the murder.
[8]              
The Defence submits that there is
no evidence that Mr. Fenelon committed any acts of confinement outside of the
alleged acts inherent in the murder itself.  The Crown argues that it is open to the jury to find that a
confrontation began in the kitchen, and that Ms. Gabriel was brought to the
basement against her will, being confined in the process. Even if the jury
could not find this, they could find that in the basement alone she was
attacked about the arms, legs and head, prior to the fatal attack with the
dumbbell while she was lying on the floor, but that she tried to flee and was
thereby confined, or there was an attempt to confine her.
[9]              
I cannot accept the Crown’s
contention. Unlike many of the cases relied on by the Crown, there is no
evidence from any witnesses, whether it be from the accused or from others, as
to what transpired in either the kitchen or basement. This makes the process of
determining what distinct acts occurred much more difficult.
[10]          
Turning first to whether there is
evidence that Mr. Fenelon brought Ms. Gabriel to the basement against her will,
I begin my noting that there is no direct evidence this occurred. No one
witnessed it. Mr. Fenelon never told the police that it happened. Nor is there
any forensic evidence this occurred, such as signs of a struggle in the
kitchen.
[11]          
That Ms. Gabriel was brought to
the basement against her will is nothing more than a Crown hypothesis that is,
at its highest, possibly consistent with the evidence. It is based on
conjecture and speculation. It is not an inference that flows logically and
reasonably from the evidence.
[12]          
As for what occurred in the
basement, there is some evidence of the following:
[13]          
The difficulty is that unlike in the
cases provided by the Crown, there is no evidence as the timing of these events
in relation to one another. Did they occur within minutes of each other?
Seconds? What was happening in between, if anything? The evidence from Dr.
Milroy and Detective Dimova cannot provide any answers to these questions.
[14]          
In short, it is impossible to say
whether the confinement and the murder were separate.  As noted by the Ontario
Court of Appeal in R. v. Kimberley (2001), 2001 CanLII 24120 (ON CA), 157 C.C.C. (3d) 129, a
confinement which is inherent in the very act of killing cannot not be relied
on to impose liability under s.231(5)(e); not because there is no confinement
but because s.231(5)(e) requires two discrete criminal acts, a killing that
amounts to murder and a confinement that is unlawful. Once again, it would be
conjecture and speculation to conclude that Ms. Gabriel was unlawfully confined
in the basement in an act that was distinct from the murder itself.
[15]          
There is no evidence, direct or indirect, upon which a jury
properly instructed could return a verdict of guilty
on first degree murder based on forcible confinement.