[1]              
On August 8, 2024, after a judge alone trial, I
found the Applicant, Mr. Birtch, guilty of a sexual assault and a common
assault with respect to allegations from complainant T.P. He was scheduled to
be sentenced on November 18, 2024. However, on November 12, 2024, the Applicant
brought a mistrial application. More particularly, he seeks a mistrial on Counts
1 and 2, exclusively. That is, only on those counts for which he was found
guilty. The sentencing hearing was adjourned pending the determination of this
application.
[2]              
On September 3, 2024, the Applicant commenced a
second judge alone trial relating to charges from complainant M.P. before
another jurist. That trial has now been completed and is pending judgment. Over
the course of that trial, the Crown called evidence from witness T.W.S. However,
the available evidence from this witness is considered relevant to the defence
for not only the M.P. related trial but also the T.P. related trial.
[3]              
While the T.W.S. statement was disclosed in
advance of the T.P. trial, it was disclosed within the Crown’s M.P. digital file
only. It was not reviewed by the defence prior to the T.P. trial’s completion.
It was first digitally accessed by the defence between the T.P. and M.P. trial,
prior to my judgment on August 8, 2024. However, it was not reviewed at that
time. Instead, the defence only reviewed the T.W.S. statement when a transcript
of it was disclosed on August 23, 2024 – after my T.P. trial judgment, but
before the commencement of the M.P. trial.
[4]              
The defence asserts proper Crown disclosure
would have enabled it to call T.W.S. as part of the T.P. trial. This witness
had important evidence respecting possible witness/complainant collusion and/or
could establish an improper motive to fabricate on the part of complainant T.P.
Denied proper disclosure of T.W.S.’s statement, it is alleged that the Crown
has breached the Applicant’s s. 7 Charter right to fundamental justice.
As a result, he seeks a mistrial of the T.P. trial proceedings to redress the injustice
caused.
[5]              
The parties are content to rely upon the
evidence filed as part of this application. No further evidence was adduced, no
cross-examination of the Applicant’s affidavit was conducted.
[6]              
On February 2, 2022, the Applicant was arrested
respecting the complaints of T.P. He was charged with two counts of sexual
assault and one count of common assault. The trial of these allegations
occurred before me on May 27th – May 30th, 2024. As
noted, my trial judgment was rendered on August 8, 2024, wherein he was found
guilty of two of three counts.
[7]              
On April 26, 2022, Mr. Birtch was arrested
respecting the complaints of M.P. He was charged with three counts of sexual
assault. The judge alone trial of those allegations commenced before another
jurist on September 3, 2024, and has now been completed. Judgment respecting
this trial is outstanding.
[8]              
Two separate police investigations, involving
two different investigative teams, was carried out. The Applicant was
ultimately prosecuted on two separate Indictments with two different Crown
counsel conducting the prosecutions. Further, disclosure respecting each of
these sets of allegations was separated. The Crown established two different
files on their electronic disclosure ‘hub’ for which the Applicant’s counsel
was granted access. He had the same defence counsel for both sets of charges.
[9]              
As part of the M.P. investigation, witness
T.W.S. was audio interviewed on June 25, 2023. T.W.S. had been a long-time
friend of the Applicant. As this statement revealed, she was also known to both
complainants and discussed their relative allegations with each of them. Indeed,
days after T.W.S. spoke with T.P. about her experiences with the Applicant, and
other alleged misconduct, T.P. came forward and made her complaint to police.
The following is a summary of the pertinent details respecting the T.P.
prosecution which were revealed to police during T.W.S.’s audio statement:
[10]          
T.W.S.’s audio statement was not disclosed to the
defence until March 13, 2024, 75 days or, approximately 2 ½ months before the
commencement of the T.P. related trial. No explanation for this delayed
disclosure was provided by the Crown. This statement was electronically disclosed
as a properly labelled witness statement file, in audio format. No summary or
transcript was disclosed. However, the T.W.S. statement was disclosed as part
of the M.P. prosecution file only. Despite references to T.W.S.’s
communications with complainant T.P., this file was not disclosed as part of
the T.P. prosecution file. No evidence was provided for why this statement was
not disclosed as part of the T.P. prosecution file. In argument, the Crown
merely suggested that it was disclosed in this fashion due to the separate
investigative teams involved.
[11]          
When this disclosure was made on the Crown’s Digital
Disclosure Hub, counsel received an email identifying the fact that new
disclosure was being made.
[12]          
During the Applicant’s trial involving
complainant T.P.’s allegations, witness T.W.S. was not called as a witness.
[13]          
On June 13, 2024, defence counsel “accessed” the
T.W.S. audio statement from the Digital Disclosure Hub for the M.P. prosecution
file, apparently, for the first time.  This was 15 days after the completion of
the T.P. trial.
[14]          
On August 23, 2024, the Crown disclosed a
transcript of the June 25, 2023, T.W.S. statement. They advised that they
intended to call T.W.S. as a witness in the M.P. related trial. The Applicant advised
that only then, 16 days after the T.P. related trial judgment on August 8, 2024
was rendered, was this statement reviewed in preparation for the M.P. related trial
commencing on September 3, 2024.
[15]          
When that trial was completed, and before the
date of sentencing related to the T.P. trial, the Applicant brought this
application.
[16]          
The Applicant asserts that the audio statement
of T.W.S. was not disclosed prior to the T.P. trial. Despite the fact that the
statement was disclosed within the M.P. file in advance of the T.P. trial, he
takes the position that until a transcript of the statement was provided, the
Crown failed to disclose it at all. And further, the Crown never disclosed a
transcript of this statement as part of the T.P. file disclosure. Having failed
to make this disclosure, even with respect to the audio statement as part of
the T.P. prosecution file, the Crown breached its disclosure obligation. This breach
of the Applicant’s s. 7 Charter rights merits the declaration of a
mistrial.
[17]          
The Crown asserts that disclosure was made. While
not perfectly executed, relevant disclosure was directed to the Applicant’s
counsel in advance of the T.P. trial. The Crown is not required to disclose
transcripts of audio statements. The Applicant’s counsel failed to diligently review
disclosure made or seek out relevant identifiable disclosure. As a result,
there has been no breach of the Applicant’s s. 7 Charter rights and, in
the alternative, the test for granting a mistrial has not been met.
[18]          
First, I will address the Applicant’s disclosure
complaint respecting the Crown’s failure to disclose the T.W.S. audio statement
in the form of a transcript. The Applicant has offered no authority for the
proposition that the Crown must provide a transcript of relevant statements
before it constitutes appropriate, or constitutionally sanctioned, disclosure.
[19]          
On its face, this argument is absurd. Short of
disclosure being inaccessible based upon the manner in which it was disclosed,
the Crown is under no obligation to disclose witness statements by transcript.[1] Here, the Applicant
raises no issue with the accessibility of the T.W.S. audio statement on March
13, 2024. It was simply ignored until after the T.P. trial had been completed,
and beyond “accessing”, had not been reviewed until the Crown, as a courtesy,
provided a transcript of the statement in advance of the M.P. trial.
[20]          
The Applicant’s only legitimate disclosure
complaint relates to the Crown’s failure to disclose the T.W.S. audio statement
within the confines of the T.P. prosecution file.
[21]          
For a claim asserting a s. 7 Charter breach
for non-disclosure, I should first determine whether the non-disclosure results
in s. 7 breach based on interference with the Applicant’s right to make full
answer and defence and then determine the appropriate remedy.
[22]          
The Applicant is entitled to full and complete
disclosure. The Crown is duty bound to disclose to the defence all evidence
that is not clearly irrelevant or all evidence that could possibly be relevant
to the case, regardless of whether the Crown plans to call that evidence at
trial, or whether it helps or hurts the Crown’s case. Implementation of this
duty allows a criminal defendant to make full answer and defence.[2]
[23]          
In R v La, Justice Sopinka affirmed that the
principles of fundamental justice include the right to disclosure:
[24]          
The Crown does not dispute that the T.W.S. statement
is relevant disclosure respecting the T.P. prosecution. It constitutes
first-party Stinchcombe disclosure and the Crown was under the
obligation to provide it to the Applicant in advance of the T.P. trial.
[25]          
However, the Crown asserts that the T.W.S. statement
was “properly disclosed” 2 ½ months before the T.P. trial to “the same defence
counsel, for the same accused, on the same disclosure sharing portal, by the
same electronic means.” Further, the Crown notes that the audio file was identifiable
and not obscured: “Witness Audio STMT – Winter Smith June 25, 2023 –
EDITED.avi.” This file was received by the Applicant once it was placed upon
the Crown’s Digital Disclosure Hub on March 13, 2024, with a notification email
sent. That it was not accessed on the disclosure hub by the Applicant’s counsel
until June 13, 2024, and, thereafter, not reviewed until receipt of a
transcript on August 23, 2024, is not in the control of the Crown. The Crown
met its constitutional disclosure requirements.
[26]          
Once more, the Crown asserts that the manner of
disclosure is entirely within Crown discretion. The statement in question was
disclosed as part of the M.P. prosecution file because that is how the investigation
unfolded. Two separate investigations were undertaken with two separate
investigative teams, and the T.W.S. statement was procured as part of the M.P. complaint
investigation. However, despite the Crown’s concession that this statement was
directly relevant to the T.P. prosecution, I have no evidence why the Crown
failed to disclose the T.W.S. statement within the T.P. prosecution file as
well.
[27]          
By analogy, the Crown raises R v Papageorgiou[4] in support of its
proposition that the manner of disclosure is at the discretion of the Crown.
There, access to video statement disclosure was at issue. After discharging
counsel, the self-represented accused sought disclosure of the video statement(s)
previously provided to his former counsel. Given the nature of this disclosure,
the Crown required that the accused appear at their office for viewing. The
summary conviction appeal court faulted the Crown for this alternative
disclosure practice and issued a stay of proceeding. The Ontario Court of
Appeal affirmed the propriety of this disclosure practice citing no evidence of
prejudice from the appellate. Having considered this ruling, I find that it is
patently distinguishable from this case. There, disclosure was offered to an
accused who was aware of its existence. The alternative access regime was
founded upon legitimate policy and security concerns. Here, disclosure was
omitted or misdirected from the Applicant’s T.P. prosecution file, such that it
was not brought to his attention until it was too late.
[28]          
While I agree that the manner of disclosure is
in the Crown’s discretion, as long as it is accessible, the fact of making
disclosure is not. The Crown did not disclose the T.W.S. statement within the
T.P. prosecution file. It did not do so despite the fact that it was relevant
to that prosecution. The Crown produced no evidence on this application. It
argued, nonetheless, that the manner of disclosure mirrored the process of the Applicant’s
two concurrent investigations. Assuming I accept that, I find that it presents
no answer to their disclosure obligation. As conceded, a competent review of
that statement would have identified its relevance to the T.P. prosecution
file. Disclosure is the Crown’s obligation and the Crown, not the police, is in
the best position to supervise disclosure distribution. It cannot cede that
responsibility to the structure of a police investigation which here involved
two separate investigative teams. Context for why this statement may not have
been disclosed in the T.P. file is no excuse for the fact of its
non-disclosure. The Applicant is entitled to relevant disclosure, despite its
source, when it is in possession of the Crown.
[29]          
Further, I find that the fact that the Applicant
had the same counsel for each prosecution is no answer to the Crown’s lack of
proper, targeted disclosure. The Crown, not the defence, elected to prosecute
these complaints separately. The Crown, not the defence, elected to structure the
separate prosecutions into two distinct files. The Crown, not the defence,
elected to process disclosure through that structure identifying Stinchcombe
disclosure for each, separately. When disclosure was made, it was made
separately to defence counsel, not globally with respect to the Applicant
himself. I find that the Crown cannot now, after-the-fact, point to the
Applicant’s consistent legal representation as a means of excusing its lack of
proper targeted disclosure. It does not control who represents the Applicant on
each prosecution and ought not later justify its failure to make properly
targeted disclosure on that basis.
[30]          
The Crown submits that defence counsel lacked
sufficient due diligence in reviewing available disclosure and raising this
issue as part of the T.P. trial. T.W.S.’s statement and her related cellphone
extraction report were both disclosed in the M.P. prosecution file on March 13,
2024. It is argued that it is “entirely on the Applicant to determine whether
it was relevant to the trial” in the T.P. case. The Applicant could have,
therefore, called T.W.S. as a witness at the T.P. trial if he had determined
that this disclosure was relevant.
[31]          
This argument relies upon the presumption that
preparation for the T.P. trial required a review of disclosure made respecting
the M.P. prosecution file. That this must have occurred but that the Applicant tactically
decided not to pursue the T.W.S. evidence as part of the T.P. trial. The
Applicant must then live with his tactical decisions.
[32]          
Of course, this argument must fail because it is
clear that the T.W.S. disclosure was not first accessed until June 13, 2024,
two weeks after the completion of the T.P. trial.
[33]          
Should defence counsel have accessed the T.W.S. disclosure
in the 2 ½ months leading up to the T.P. trial, regardless of what file it was
disclosed in? Of course. That would have been ideal and, perhaps, should have
been expected. But we now know that this did not occur. As a result, the
Applicant did not have the capacity to raise the issue during the T.P. trial
nor, for that matter, make any tactical decisions about it.
[34]          
The Crown also notes that in the M.P. prosecution
file, M.P.’s statement was disclosed on December 2, 2022. Therein, she
references both T.P. and T.W.S. A review of that statement would have
identified the complainants’ connection and that T.W.S. may have relevant
evidence on the T.P. complaints. This submission implies that the Applicant
ought to have sought additional disclosure from the Crown, namely whether
T.W.S. had been interviewed.
[35]          
Whether or not that should have been expected,
T.W.S. was interviewed and her statement was, for an unknown reason, not
disclosed for 8 ½ months. When it was disclosed, it was not disclosed as part
of the T.P. prosecution file. I cannot, therefore, infer that inquiries by the
Applicant would have resulted in a different disclosure process. Nor, on this
evidentiary record, can I draw conclusions about the extent to which the M.P.
prosecution file was reviewed in advance of the T.P. trial.
[36]          
That leaves the issue of promptly raising the
T.W.S. disclosure issue after the statement was “accessed” on June 13, 2024,
and, therefore, before my trial judgment on August 8, 2024. Here, the Applicant
does not explain why there is a distinction between “accessing” the disclosure
in June and “reviewing” it in August, after my judgment was rendered. He simply
asserts that it was not reviewed until a transcript was received in
anticipation of the M.P. trial. I presume, as the T.P. trial judgment had
already been rendered and the M.P. trial was about to begin, the Applicant waited
to conduct that proceeding before raising the disclosure complaint with me after
the M.P. trial was finished.
[37]          
I have no evidence to suggest that any tactical
decision was made between June 13th and August 8th, 2024,
to wait it out pending my trial decision on the T.P. matter. The only
uncontested evidence I have is that defence counsel simply failed to review the
T.W.S. evidence until the eve of the M.P. trial. And then, I presume, realized
that this disclosure was also relevant to the completed T.P. trial matter.
[38]          
With this in mind, I find that I cannot visit
upon the Applicant the less-than-ideal disclosure review practices of his
counsel. I have no evidence that the Applicant or his counsel was aware of the T.W.S.
disclosure until after the completion of the T.P. trial, including my trial
judgment, and, as a result, I have no basis to conclude that any tactical
consideration was in play.
[39]          
Defence counsel’s disregard of identified M.P.
prosecution disclosure in advance of this trial does not absolve the Crown of
its disclosure obligation. While it may prove relevant to a remedy, it does not
diminish the fact that the Crown failed to provide proper and targeted
disclosure for the T.P. prosecution. I find that there has been s. 7 Charter
breach for inadequate disclosure which has interfered with the defendant’s
ability to make full answer and defence.
[40]          
As noted, the Applicant seeks a mistrial given
the present stage of proceedings and the nature of the Charter breach. Here,
a remedy can be grounded at common law or through s. 24(1) of the Charter.
 Upon my review of authorities, a mistrial is the most common remedy
sought for post-verdict disclosure complaints, but re-opening the defence case
and a stay of proceedings are available options.
[41]          
The Crown noted that, in Stinchcombe,
defence due diligence is a relevant consideration when a trial judge is called
upon to determine what may be the appropriate remedy for a disclosure breach:
[42]          
In R v Arabia, Justice Watt of the
Ontario Court of Appeal reviewed the governing principles for re-opening the
case and/or considering a mistrial even after the trial judge has “recorded
findings of guilt”. In such circumstances, a “more rigorous test” is required to
protect the integrity of the process, which includes finality. First, when
considering re-opening or a mistrial based upon fresh evidence, the test cited
in Palmer and Palmer v The Queen[6]
respecting the introduction of ‘fresh evidence’ on appeal was favoured:
[43]          
In addition to the Palmer criteria, a
trial judge facing an application to re-open or declare a mistrial after a
finding of guilt must consider whether the application is merely an attempt to
reverse a competent trial tactical decision. As I have noted, an accused must
ordinarily live with the consequences of those decisions.
[44]          
In Arabia, after the appellant was found
guilty of drug offences, he applied to re-open the defence case or have a
mistrial declared. He sought to file two affidavits calling into question who
was responsible for the subject marijuana grow operation (another party taking
responsibility – under the protection of the Canada Evidence Act) and questioning
the court’s finding that given the narcotic’s quality it could not be possessed
for the purpose of trafficking. The trial judge dismissed this application and
went on to sentencing. The court denied the request to re-open based
principally upon the prejudice this would cause to the prosecution. The
mistrial relief was denied citing that no procedural error or serious
misconduct flawed the trial proceeding. Finding that the trial judge utilized
the wrong test for post-verdict re-opening or mistrial applications, the Court
of Appeal applied the Palmer test and found that the same result was
inevitable. A lack of due diligence and credible, admissible evidence doomed
the application to failure.
[45]          
In R v Kowall,[8] after the appellant was
found guilty of fraud and theft, he dismissed his trial counsel and, before the
sentencing hearing, brought an application to re-open the defence case to
adduce fresh evidence from his former lawyer and two “fresh evidence”
witnesses. The trial judge, citing a lack of sufficient relevance, due
diligence, and tactical decision-making, refused to re-open the defence case
after she gave her reasons for judgment. This was not interfered with by the
court of appeal, deferring to the trial judge’s discretion and, itself,
refusing to admit the ‘fresh evidence’.
[46]          
Here, unlike in Arabia and Kowall,
I acknowledge that the proposed “fresh evidence” of T.W.S. would meet the Palmer
criteria for the following reasons:
[47]          
Having met the Palmer criteria, built
upon the foundation of a s. 7 Charter breach, what is the most effective
remedy to redress the harm caused by the inadequate Crown disclosure? I find
that re-opening the defence case would inadequately address trial fairness
concerns. Introducing T.W.S.’s evidence into the defence case would invariably
require consideration of recalling T.P. to respond. There would then also be
the potential prejudice to the Applicant who foreseeably may have had relevant responding
evidence. Recalling him might also have to be considered. However, in the face
of renewed Applicant evidence, my existing credibility conclusions raise a perception
of partiality concern.  Overall, the inclusion of the T.W.S. evidence would not
simply add to the existing trial record, as was the case in Arabia and Kowall,
but would be intertwined into that narrative requiring its substantive
reconstitution. It would potentially significantly recast my former analysis of
the party’s credibility overall. As my judgment was driven by a W.(D.) analysis,
the implications of this evidence, if believed, could be pervasive. In effect,
re-opening the case could do more mischief than starting anew.
[48]          
The Applicant has not sought a stay of
proceedings which is entirely appropriate given the lack of evidence respecting
any bad faith or improper exercise of Crown discretion. That remedy is reserved
for only the clearest of cases. In the context of this narrative, granting a
stay would, itself, shock the community. The Crown’s incomplete direction of
disclosure, which manifested here as defence prejudice prohibiting the
Applicant’s capacity to make full answer and defence, does not justify
prohibiting a hearing on the merits of T.P.’s complaints.
[49]          
Further, I cannot criticize the fact that this
application was brought as opposed to simply proceeding to an appeal and there
bringing a motion for the introduction of fresh evidence. As the Kowall
court recognized, “[t]he trial judge is in a better position to assess the
proposed fresh evidence than is the appellate court. Had counsel in this case
waited and raised the matter for the first time on appeal he would have faced
an argument that he failed to exercise due diligence in presenting the
evidence.”[9]
[50]          
A mistrial should only be granted as a “last
resort where no other remedy will adequately redress the harm occasioned.”[10] Justice Trotter faced a
similar situation in R v Drysdale. There, after finding the accused
guilty based upon strong adverse credibility findings, including rejecting the
accused’s evidence on identification, new evidence touching upon identification
came forward during the sentencing hearing. The court concluded that the only
reasonable course of action would be to declare a mistrial because, in light of
the credibility findings, “any attempt to rebuild [the accused’s] credibility findings
on a different footing would be disingenuous ... he, along with reasonably
informed members of the public, would always wonder whether my “new”
conclusions and reasons were infected by my prior adverse finding of
credibility”.[11]
As I have already noted, I share that concern.
[51]          
Overall, I believe that the only appropriate
remedy to redress this Charter breach is, as requested, a mistrial. I
recognize the benefit of finality and the burden that another trial may have
upon the complainant and the overall administration of justice. However, a meaningful
redress to this Charter breach is required to ensure that the principles
of fundamental justice and the right to make full answer and defence is truly
respected.
[52]          
The Applicant’s right to full and complete
disclosure was breached by inadequate Crown disclosure efforts. This regrettable
confluence of events has resulted in a breach of the Applicant’s s. 7 Charter
rights which can only meaningfully be addressed by a mistrial declaration.
[53]          
The Applicant has specifically requested that a
mistrial should only be declared with respect to the first two counts, wherein
I have made findings of guilt. The third count on this Indictment was
dismissed. Beyond this pleading, however, I have not heard from counsel on the
scope of a mistrial declaration and, in particular, whether it ought to apply
to Count 3 on this Indictment. I, therefore, invite further submissions on this
issue.
[54]          
For the reasons provided, the Applicant’s
application for mistrial is granted subject to further submissions and a ruling
on its scope.