[1]               
Over 10 years ago, the
Supreme Court of Canada recognized that a “culture shift” was required to
promote “timely and affordable access to the civil justice system.” See Hryniak
v Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7, at para 2. In 2021, the Court of Appeal for Ontario
described our civil justice system as facing “an unprecedented crisis”, and
courts as “overwhelmed” by the management of the system. See Louis v
Poitras, 2021 ONCA 49, at para 1.
[2]               
One of the tools that
can deliver time civil justice is separate hearings on issues in a proceeding.
In motor vehicle and other personal injury cases, the bifurcation of the issues
of liability and damages may lead to a more just, expeditious, and less
expensive determination of the case on its merits.
[3]               
For many years, the
statutory right to a jury trial hampered the parties’ and the court’s ability
to use this tool. The Rules of Civil Procedure and the common law
constrained the court’s jurisdiction to order bifurcation in a jury trial
unless all the parties agreed. In July 2024, perhaps in response to both this
law and in furtherance of the mandate for a culture shift, Ontario amended Rule
6.1 to allow the court to order bifurcation in a jury trial over a party’s
objection.
[4]               
The plaintiff Ronald
Wheelans was seriously injured in a multi-car accident in 2016. For over 9
years, this case has been plodding along to trial. In January 2025, the parties
are on the trial list for a five-week jury trial on both liability and damages.
In late November, the defendants moved urgently for an order for separate
hearings on the issues of liability and damages. If granted, the liability hearing
will be less than a week.
[5]               
Ronald and his spouse,
the plaintiff Sandra Wheelans, oppose this motion. They say that there’s been
too much delay already. If they succeed on proving the defendants’ liability,
the hearing on damages likely won’t be heard until January 2027.
[6]               
The issue on this
motion is whether it’s just to order a separate hearing on liability. For the
reasons discussed below, I don’t believe so. Even though rule 6.1 can be used
to help deliver timely justice, it can also be misused to create further delay.
If Ronald and Sandra prove the defendants’ liability, they may have to wait two
more years to finish the trial. That’s too long. In October, the defendants
said they were ready for the damages trial in January 2025. They’ll have to be.
[7]               
As a result, the
defendants’ motion is dismissed. In accordance with the parties’ agreement, the
defendants shall pay Ronald and Sandra’s costs fixed in the amount of $8000.
[8]               
Ronald was seriously injured in a car crash in July 2016. He alleges
that he was hit by the defendant Adla Begeta’s car while he was maneuvering
to avoid crashing into the defendant Emily Kuss’s car. She had changed
lanes in front of Ronald to avoid the defendant Jean Claude Mureke’s broken-down
car in her lane.
[9]               
Ronald sued the other drivers and owners in November 2017. Pleadings
closed in October 2018. Most of the defendants delivered a jury notice.
[10]          
Ronald was injured in another car accident in November 2018. He sued for
those injuries in 2020 (CV-20-723). In May 2022, the court ordered that the
actions be heard at the same time or one immediately after the other.
[11]          
The actions were placed on the trial list for the January 2025 sittings.
[12]          
In August 2024, Adla and the defendant Amir Begeta asked the parties to
consent to separate hearings on the issues of liability and damages. Ronald and
Sandra refused because of “inordinate delay”.
[13]          
The pre-trial conferences were on October 8, 2024. The pre-trial
conference judge asked the parties to file the pre-trial conference report by
October 25th.[2]
The estimated duration of the trial is 25 days.
[14]          
One of the issues at the pre-trial conference was scheduling Mureke and
the defendant Blandine Karire’s motion for an order that Ronald undergo a
physical examination so they could serve a supplementary expert’s report. They
are now not moving for this order, and have since served the report.
[15]          
The companion action then settled on October 29th.
[16]          
The pre-trial conference report filed by the parties states that they
expected a “Bifurcation motion”. There’s nothing in the pre-trial conference
judge’s endorsement that shows this issue was discussed at the conference. The
defendants’ evidence is that it was “briefly discussed”; Ronald and Sandra say
it has “never been mentioned before” this motion.
[17]          
In mid-November, the defendants requested an urgent hearing of this
motion for an order for separate hearings. Regional Senior Justice Tzimas
designated me to hear it.
[18]          
The parties agree that the trial of the liability issues will be three
to four days (990 minutes).
[19]          
The court used to have the inherent jurisdiction to bifurcate a non-jury
trial. But the practice in Ontario precluded bifurcation where a jury notice
had been served, absent consent. The court’s inherent jurisdiction can’t be
exercised to undermine a litigant’s statutory right to a jury trial. See Duggan
v Durham Region Non-Profit Housing Corporation, 2020 ONCA 788, at paras
23-28.
[20]          
In 2010, rule 6.1.01 was enacted: “With the consent of the parties, the
court may order a separate hearing on one or more issues in a proceeding,
including separate hearings on the issues of liability and damages.” This
addition to the rules confirmed the court’s power in jury cases but constrained
the court’s inherent jurisdiction in non-jury cases. See Duggan, at para
31. In short, starting in 2010, the court couldn’t order bifurcation in either
a jury trial or a non-jury trial without the parties’ consent.
[21]          
Rule 6.1.01 was amended in July 2024. Now, the court may order a
separate hearing with or without the consent of the other parties. There’s
nothing in the words of the rule that suggests that it’s limited to non-jury
trials (i.e., that the court can, once again, order bifurcation in a
non-jury trial over a party’s objection but still can’t do so in a jury
trial). See also Duggan, at para 21.
[22]          
I don’t know the express purpose of the rule. But the timing of the
amendment, which follows the courts’ recognition of a crisis in the civil
justice system and an increased backlog of cases following the COVID-19
pandemic, suggests that two of its objects are to shorten trials and encourage settlements.
[23]          
The rules must be liberally construed to secure the just, most
expeditious, and least expensive determination of every civil proceeding on its
merits. See Rules of Civil Procedure, r 1.04(1). That said, as far as
possible, multiplicity of legal proceedings must be avoided. See Courts of
Justice Act, RSO 1990, c C.43, s 138.
[24]          
In determining whether to order a separate hearing, the court shall
consider:
[25]          
There’s only one published case applying the amended rule. See LaPointe
v Simcoe Muskoka Catholic District School Board, 2024 ONSC 4040. As I
discuss below, many of the arguments made by the defendants here were rejected
by Justice Susan Healey in that case, leading her to deny the defendant’s
motion.
[26]          
The defendants briefed whether leave is required after the action is set
down for trial. Rule 48.04(3)(b) states that no such leave is required and, in
any event, the defendants didn’t set the action down for trial.
[27]          
The defendants argue that separating the hearings will result in a much
shorter trial, which will save time, money, and judicial resources. Ronald and
Sandra respond that bifurcation will, in fact, increase their costs and delay
final resolution of this matter.
[28]          
This trial is scheduled for 25 days, before a jury.[3]
The parties agree that if the liability issue is litigated first, the trial
will be three to four days long. On its face, separate hearings will shorten
the proceedings. The parties will save some costs if only because their
preparation, at least from this date forward, and their work during the trial will
focus on liability only. The defendants also submit that there are several
pre-trial motions on the damages issue that won’t need to be litigated right
away.
[29]          
But separate hearings aren’t guaranteed to shorten the proceeding or
save costs overall. If the defendants are found liable, there will still be a
damages hearing. The damages hearing won’t be heard during the January 2025
sittings. When the damages hearing is called, the parties will have to select
another jury. There will have to be some duplication of work as the parties and
their lawyers “pick up the file” again to prepare for the damages hearing.
[30]          
Or there could be an appeal. If an appeal successful, there could be a
second liability hearing, but only after the damages hearing and the appeal. The
“ordinary practice” is to pursue a single appeal from decisions on liability
and damages. See SS & C Technologies Canada Corp. v The Bank of New York
Mellon Corporation, 2021 ONCA 601, at para 38.
[31]          
The defendants argue that a separate hearing might encourage settlement.
There’s no evidence of that. It can be equally said that the costs of a long jury
trial might encourage settlement.
[32]          
In sum, separate hearings may shorten the proceedings and save costs if
the defendants are successful on the issue of liability and there’s no appeal.
In all other circumstances, separate hearings may lengthen the proceeding and
increase costs.
[33]          
None of the defendants’ liability witnesses will have to testify at the
damages hearing. The defendants also argue that Ronald won’t have to repeat his
evidence at the damages hearing. There are no liability experts. Ronald and
Sandra respond that the defendants are engaged in a ruse—they submit that the
damages jury should hear about how this accident happened because it’s
important context for understanding Ronald’s pain and suffering.
[34]          
In support of their argument, the defendants have filed the evidence
from several parties given on examinations for discovery. The defendants argue
that this evidence shows that Ronald caused the accident, and thus it’s
“possible, if not likely” that he can’t prove liability. To begin, rule 39.04
bars the defendants from using their own discovery evidence on a motion. As a
result, I don’t consider that evidence—it shouldn’t have been filed.
[35]          
Leaving aside that technical issue, I don’t see how this argument is
relevant. The defendants are effectively asking me to find that Ronald is
likely to be found liable for the car crash and, as such, there’s merit in
litigating liability first. If the defendants are so sure there’s no genuine
issue requiring a trial on liability given this evidence, they should’ve moved
for summary judgment. But I can’t weigh evidence and make findings of fact on
the merits of this action on this procedural motion.
[36]          
That all said, I agree with the defendants—liability and damages can be
cleanly separated, and avoid the undue repetition of evidence or inconsistent
findings of fact by the jury. In LaPointe, Justice Healey found that
assessing the standard of care in that case required understanding the facts,
including the severity of harm. The parties intended to call both fact
witnesses and expert witness on both liability and damages. Here, there’s no
overlap identified by any party.
[37]          
To the extent that Ronald and Sandra believe that narrative evidence
about how the accident happened is relevant and necessary, they can introduce
that evidence at the damages hearing.
[38]          
In LaPointe, Justice Healey found that the delivery of a jury
notice “militates” against separating the issues (at para 73). She identified
several challenges: it’s unlikely the same jury will decide both issues, and
different juries may reach inconsistent verdicts. The defendants distinguish LaPointe
by arguing that they delivered the jury notice, and they’re prepared to embrace
any prejudice from separating the hearings.
[39]          
Rule 6.1.01 accounts for different juries hearing different issues. The
risk of inconsistent findings by two juries means the issues aren’t “clearly
severable”. But, if the court has found that they are, there’s no bar on
different juries deciding the different issues. Indeed, the court has always
been able to bifurcate the issues of liability and damages in a jury trial, although
with the parties’ consent. In that case, the parties have “freely” given up
their “right to have the issues tried by a single jury.” See Kovach v Linn,
2010 ONCA 126, at para 38.
[40]          
The defendants here elected to have the action heard by a jury. The
wording of rule 6.1.01(2)(c) requires the court to consider whether the
defendants’ request for separate hearings will either unduly prejudice or
advantage that election. Since the defendants are the ones asking for separate
hearings, they’re “freely” giving up their right to a same jury presiding over
both cases. There’s no undue prejudice to their election. There’s also no
evidence that their request will give them an advantage.
[41]          
Ronald and Sandra argue that they’ll be prejudiced by increased costs
and delay. I’ve already considered costs. I consider delay next.
[42]          
The trial sittings start on January 6, 2025. The accident was over 8
years ago. The action was set down for trial in 2022. I don’t know why it took
so long to close pleadings and discover the case. I appreciate there’s a
backlog that likely delayed the trial even after the action was set down. In
any case, the need for timely justice demands that the trial of this action
happen soon.
[43]          
If there are separate hearings, the damages hearing likely won’t be
heard until January 2027. Leaving aside the delay since the start of the
action, it’s prejudicial to effectively adjourn the trial for two years, even
if there’s a chance that the defendants will succeed, and the damages won’t be necessary.
Real and substantial prejudice arises “simply by reason of delay”. See Louis,
at para 22.
[44]          
The defendants argue that they made this request as soon as they could. They
say their request didn’t crystallize until: (a) the rule was amended in July
2024; and (b) the companion action settled in late October 2024.
[45]          
I don’t accept their argument. This request is too close to trial. It’s
too late.
[46]          
First, there’s no evidence that the defendants turned their mind to this
issue before August 2024. Under the old rule, they could’ve sought Ronald and
Sandra’s consent months or years ago. The arguments they make now about the
severability of the issues were all known to them after the parties were
discovered in 2018 and 2019. Ronald and Sandra’s concern about delay may have
been mollified if the request had been made earlier.
[47]          
Second, the bar had notice that the rule was being amended long before
July 2024. In LaPointe, the defendants teed up their motion before the
amendment and it was heard the day after the amendment was enacted. The
defendants here could’ve done the same. Or, faced with Ronald and Sandra’s objection
in August, they could’ve moved then.
[48]          
Third, I don’t accept the defendants’ reliance on the settlement of the
companion action. The defendants asked Ronald and Sandra to consent to
bifurcation on August 1st, long before the companion action settled.
The defendants can’t explain why the settlement of the companion action
triggered their request, other than to say bifurcating both cases would’ve been
too complex. But they didn’t think so in August.
[49]          
Finally, this issue wasn’t fully canvased at the pre-trial conference,
when the parties confirmed they were ready for trial. Even accepting the
defendants’ recollection that the issue was raised, they didn’t ask for a
motion date (like they did for the defence medical) and there’s nothing in the
pre-trial judge’s endorsement that suggests this was a live issue. The only
evidence about this issue on this motion is the pre-trial conference report,
which was filed long after the conference.
[50]          
When an action is placed on the trial list, all parties shall be
deemed to be ready for trial. See Rules of Civil Procedure, r 48.07(a).
By participating in the pre-trial conference and confirming that the trial
would be 25 days long on both the issues of liability and damages, the
defendants told the court they were ready. Ronald and Sandra were entitled to
rely on that representation. There are only 22 business days between now and
the start of this trial, which includes the winter break. The parties should’ve
started preparing for the damages hearing long before today, meaning that
Ronald and Sandra will have to throw away some of their preparation costs.
[51]          
Taking all of these factors into account, I endorse an order dismissing
the defendants’ motion. The potential costs savings and efficiencies of
separate hearings are outweighed by the delay and the risk of increased costs.
[52]          
Further to the parties’ agreement, I endorse an order that the
defendants shall pay Ronald and Sandra’s costs of this motion, fixed in the
amount of $8000, inclusive of fees, taxes, and disbursements, on or before
December 31, 2024.
[53]          
The newly amended rule 6.1.01 can and should play
an important role in managing delays and costs in our civil justice system. Bifurcating
the issues of liability and damages can lead to shorter trials and cost savings
for both sides, without endangering anyone’s fair trial rights.
[54]          
But, in my view, this rule has to be invoked
long before the pre-trial conference. That event is the beginning of the end of
an action. Requesting bifurcation after the pre-trial conference suggests that
the parties are only at the end of the beginning. If the culture of complacency
that threatens to break our civil justice system is finally to be smashed,
parties have to shorten trials and settle cases from the earliest moment
possible.