[1]              
Michael Pryce, a licensed paralegal, seeks
coverage for a professional negligence suit under a 2019 policy that LawPro
issued to Jamie Bruce, a lawyer at Mr. Pryce’s employer, the Oshawa law firm Kelly
Greenway Bruce. The plaintiff in the lawsuit is a former client who hired that
firm to advance accident benefits and tort claims arising from a motor vehicle
accident. There is no dispute that Mr. Pryce was acting within the scope of his
employment and provided legal services to the client under Mr. Bruce’s
supervision.
[2]              
LawPro accepted coverage for the claim against Mr.
Bruce and the firm and have afforded them a defence. It has declined coverage
for Mr. Pryce. He is a separately named defendant in the suit. The rationale
behind the former client’s suit against Mr. Pryce personally was left as an
imponderable. The former client’s lawyers received the application record and
notification of the hearing but did not attend.
[3]              
Mr. Pryce was insured under a mandatory Paralegal
Professional Liability policy issued by Lloyd’s Underwriters. If Mr. Pryce is
successful here, the only real consequence would be duplicate insurance and the
basis of a dispute between insurers over priority or equitable contribution.
The sole issue in the application hearing was coverage for Mr. Pryce under the
LawPro policy. In any insurance coverage case, the wording governs. After
considering the general principles of liability insurance policy interpretation,
I will deal with three issues raised in the parties’ arguments regarding the coverage
afforded by the LawPro policy:
[4]              
The LawPro policy is not a comprehensive
liability policy. It insures lawyers against most, but not all, claims arising
from their professional legal work. It extends coverage to lawyers’ firms, but
only because all lawyers in the firm are separately insured. The wording of the
policy does not include coverage for a separate lawsuit against a paralegal,
because the LawPro coverage grant does not cover him as an insured.
[5]              
The contractual background of the LawPro policy,
in the context of a suit against a licensed paralegal, requires the court to
consider that the paralegal was obligated by the Law Society of Ontario to
obtain his own insurance from the private insurance market. This background is
important because it supports the interpretation of the policies as separate
parts of a regulated scheme of mandatory professional insurance. The result is
no different than the case of two or more lawyers sued for negligence with the
law firm. In that instance, the separate policies issued to the lawyers would
respond. The fact that the insurers are different in the case before me does
not alter this reasoning.
[6]              
Finally, the law of employer liability for the
professional torts of its employees does not extend to a separate duty to
defend arising from the employment contract. In fact, there are good reasons for
the common law not to recognize such a duty. Even if there were such a duty, it
would not extend to requiring LawPro to defend a party it does not insure.
[7]              
For the reasons that follow, the applicant’s
arguments fail to establish that LawPro’s insurance policy to Mr. Bruce extends
coverage to the licenced paralegal, Mr. Pryce.
[8]              
The structure of the LawPro policy follows a
typical pattern for liability insurance described in Progressive Homes Ltd.
v. Lombard General Insurance Co. of Canada, 2010 SCC 33, [2010] 2 SCR 245,
at paras. 26-28, and Ledcor Construction Ltd. v. Northbridge Indemnity
Insurance Co., 2016 SCC 37, [2016] 2 SCR 23, at para. 49. For the sake of
completeness, I will describe the three logical parts of this kind of
insurance.
[9]              
The starting point is the insuring agreement,
also known as the coverage grant. The grant will define the outside scope of
what the policy insures. The scope of coverage can be limited by the language
of the grant before any consideration of exclusions. However, it must be
construed broadly in the sense of extending insurance to the full meaning of
the words: Reid Crowther & Partners Ltd. v. Simcoe & Erie General
Insurance Co., 1993 CanLII 150 (SCC), [1993] 1 SCR 252, at 269.
[10]          
If a claim comes within the insuring agreement, the
next step is to determine whether it could be removed from coverage by an
exclusion clause. The absence of an exclusion does not create coverage,
however. In principle, exclusion should be read narrowly, in the sense of
preventing a result that would “necessarily result in a substantial
nullification of coverage”: Consolidated-Bathurst v. Mutual Boiler, 1979
CanLII 10 (SCC), [1980] 1 SCR 888, at 903.
[11]          
The inquiry does not end at exclusions. There
can be exceptions to exclusions. These clauses restore coverage in subsets of
circumstances otherwise falling into exclusions. The exceptions do not create
coverage, either: Progressive Homes, para. 28.
[12]          
The alternating structure of coverage grants,
exclusions, and exceptions to exclusions, are easy to follow where the express
terms of the policy are clear. Occasionally, insurance policies contain ambiguous
wordings, either in the meaning of words or the grammatical order in which they
are used. Ambiguities are to be resolved first in relation to the reasonable
expectations of the parties. If ambiguities remain, the contra proferentum
rule is a judicial tool of final resort, to construe the policy unfavorably
against the insurer: Ledcor, at para. 51.
[13]          
Mr. Pryce clearly does not come within the
LawPro coverage grant because he is not a lawyer. The court need not and cannot
consider exclusions or exceptions where the grant does not provide coverage.
[14]          
Finally, much of the traditional reasoning behind
the development of general interpretive principles for insurance policy
interpretation stems from the absence of negotiation of standard form insurance
contracts: Ledcor, at paras. 27-32. This contrasts with manuscript policies,
where the parties craft and tailor insurance suited to the specific needs of
the policyholder: Coleman v. Great American Insurance Company, 2010 BCSC
1796, at para 60.
[15]          
The LawPro policy, as I will explain, cannot be
considered a standard form. For example, it bore no resemblance to the Lloyd’s
policy, which did follow a standard form. However, the LawPro policy must be
considered a contract of adhesion, in the sense that the LSO requires every
lawyer to purchase the coverage. Whereas the Lloyd’s coverage is a
“take-it-or-leave-it” contract, as described in MacDonald v. Chicago Title
Insurance Company of Canada, 2015 ONCA 842, at para. 33, the LawPro policy
is a “take-it-or-face-licence-suspension” contract. The significance of the
mandatory insurance coverage and the captive nature of LawPro’s pool of
policyholders is that the policy must be construed as matching hand and glove
with the LSO’s authority to require lawyers to take out liability insurance
with LawPro on their own activities as lawyers.
[16]          
It is clear from a reading of the LawPro policy
that its intention is to insure lawyers, and that the extension of coverage to
their firms arises from the fact that every lawyer in the firm is also insured
under their own coverage.  In this regard, the LawPro policy mirrors the
organization of lawyer licensing in Ontario. The LSO regulates individual
lawyers. Apart from administrative conveniences for operation of trust accounts
the authorization of lawyers’ practices through law partnerships and
corporations, the LSO does not license or regulate law firms.
[17]          
Mr. Pryce, a paralegal insured under a different
insurance regime, does not qualify as an insured under the coverage grant. This
is clear from a reading of the insuring agreement and its defined terms.
[18]          
Section A of the insuring agreement in the
LawPro policy read as follows:
[19]          
Section B of the insuring agreement also afforded
a duty to defend the insured “in respect of such coverage as provided by this
POLICY,” referring to the coverage under Section A. Coverage for Mr. Pryce
therefore depends on the meaning of Section A. Section A, in turn, is limited
by the definitions of the words spelled out in block capitals.
[20]          
Interpretation of Section A requires the court
to apply the policy definitions of the terms “INSURED,” “LAWYER,” and
“PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.” The definitions reproduced below make it clear that the
policy insures lawyers and their firms. I also underline the stipulations
involving employees of the firm, and how the definitions restrict the meaning
to employed lawyers of the firm:
[21]          
The references to employees of the firms, either
as partnerships or as law corporations, as including only lawyer, contrasts
with the definition in the Lloyd’s policy taken out by Mr. Pryce, which
includes employees of Mr. Pryce if he had been a paralegal sole practitioner,
without any restrictions on the qualifications of the employee (underline
added):
[22]          
I need not consider whether the law firm is
insured under the Lloyd’s policy, in respect of any liability on Mr. Pryce’s
part. That policy is not before me for the purpose of interpreting the wording.
[23]          
LawPro’s professional liability policy differs
from the language of many commercially available policies, in not including a
general extension of coverage to firm employees. Instead, it extends coverage
only to law firm employees who are lawyers. The plain and grammatical meaning of
the definitions of insureds and law firm employees is to reflect the fact that
all lawyers of a firm are insured under separate insurance policies, at least
at the primary layer. This affords protection for all lawyers of the firm
against joint and several liability arising from the fault of other lawyers of
the firm.
[24]          
Finally, the extension of coverage to law
partnerships is qualified by the words “other than a … COMBINED LICENSEE FIRM.”
A combined licensee firm, as defined elsewhere, consists of lawyers and
paralegals. This clearly implies that the policy covers only the joint and
several liability of other lawyers and does not accept an indemnity obligation in
respect of paralegals such as Mr. Pryce, whom the LSO requires to be insured
under a separate insurance regime.
[25]          
Because the LawPro policy extends coverage only
to the insured lawyer, to the law firm, and to the other lawyers for joint and
several liability, it does not extend coverage to Mr. Pryce, who is not a
lawyer. I need not resort to special interpretive rules, or refer to coverage
exclusions or exceptions from exclusion, to arrive at this conclusion. Thus,
the application fails under an ordinary contextual reading of the policy.
[26]          
Long before Ledcor and Sattva Capital
Corp. v. Creston Moly Corp., 2014 SCC 53, [2014] 2 SCR 633, the Supreme
Court considered the surrounding circumstances of a contract, including
insurance policies, to protect the reasonable expectations of the parties in
the interpretive process. In Consolidated Bathurst, at pp. 901-02, it
was the “commercial atmosphere in which the insurance was contracted.” In that
1979 case, the Supreme Court stated:
[27]          
LSO By-law 6, Part 1, as filed in the record,
requires lawyers to apply for and obtain liability insurance coverage through
LawPro as the insurance plan arranged for by the LSO. I can take judicial
notice that LawPro is the successor brand name of a 1990 corporation, originally
called LPIC and operated directly by LSO Convocation. The history of the reorganization
and rebranding arose from a 1990’s funding crisis which is immaterial to this
proceeding but should be known to all who were members of the Law Society of
Upper Canada (the LSO’s former name) at the time. LawPro is now operationally
separate from the LSO, but the fact that it is a single insurer providing
mandatory primary insurance coverage to lawyers for the practice of Canadian
law is relevant. Individual lawyers have no say in the wording of the LawPro
policy.
[28]          
The consequence of this mandatory and captive
insurance is that the court should read its terms broadly in favour of coverage
for the insured. However, in view of the pains taken to restrict the class of
persons who are insured to lawyers, the court cannot then extend the breadth of
coverage to persons who are not lawyers.
[29]          
Mr. Pryce is not a lawyer. He is licenced under
class P1 as a paralegal. LSO By-law 6, Part 2, s. 12, requires a paralegal to
hold a policy of professional liability insurance comparable to a LawPro
policy, but the insurance can be purchased from any insurer licenced in
Ontario. Lloyd’s is such an insurer.
[30]          
By-law 6 does not require law firms, whether
operating as partnerships or as law corporations, to insure themselves. Instead,
every lawyer and paralegal must be insured personally. Law firms are afforded
coverage from LawPro through the insurance levies charged to every lawyer. This
regulatory structure means the two licensed professions require separate forms
of mandatory primary professional liability insurance. There is no duplication
of insurance. Rather, the insurance fulfils the LSO’s public protection role to
make sure clients of these professionals have recourse if they incur damages
from substandard service.
[31]          
Had two lawyers been named personally in the
liability suit beside the law firm, LawPro would be liable to defend both and
the firm, but it would do so under two policies. Such a typical case would not
preclude instances where this symmetry and harmony create differences in
coverage. In Cassels Brock & Blackwell v. Lawpro, 2007 ONCA 122, at
para. 7, the Court of Appeal upheld the application judge’s finding that the
LawPro policy did not cover the use of a law firm trust account used to provide
investment services. One can readily imagine the coverage being afforded to a
claim arising from the negligence of specific lawyers performing actual legal
services. If the coverage for the law firm could be split between covered and
uncovered claims against separate lawyers in the same firm, it would be because
the insurance coverage was anchored in the protection of individual lawyers.
[32]          
Difference in coverage for different personnel
in a law firm is no more unimaginable than other instances of separate insurance
for different aspects of a common enterprise. In Derksen v. 539938 Ontario
Ltd., 2001 SCC 72, [2001] 3 SCR 398, the Supreme Court considered the
liability insurance implications of the death and injuries of occupants of a
school bus, after a steel base plate flew off the tow bar of a haulage vehicle and
through the windshield of the bus. The court held the automobile insurer and
the general liability insurer separately covered liability for the projectile,
one for the liability arising from the vehicle and the other arising from the
failure to secure it to the vehicle as part of construction site clean-up.
[33]          
The principled coverage analysis as between Mr.
Bruce and Mr. Pryce is no different. Each is a policyholder. It happens that,
in the deliberations leading to paralegal licensing, the LSO and the province
did not mandate insurance for paralegals by a common captive insurer. Instead,
paralegals were permitted to buy insurance in the commercial market, as evident
in By-law 6 and in the Lloyd’s policy filed in evidence here. This difference
does not affect the legal result on the coverage question here. Mr. Bruce and
Mr. Pryce were both insured. The insurers can later dispute the extent to which
each’s insured contributed to the client’s loss, if they are found liable for the
client’s loss. In contrast, duplication of insurance occurs when the same
insured is covered under two or more policies for the same risk. If the LawPro
policy covered P1 paralegal licensees working at law firms, they should be
exempt from the insurance requirement and insurers such as Lloyd’s would indeed
be pocketing a premium for primary insurance even though its exposure would
only be excess.
[34]          
The commercial background to the LawPro policy
therefore supports an interpretation that is harmonious with the regulatory background.
L1 and P1 licensees both need to be insured against clients’ claims. The fact
that lawyers must insure with LawPro at a fixed premium and paralegals can
negotiate policies in the insurance market does not change the structure of the
regulatory scheme. Mr. Bruce and Mr. Pryce both had to be insured under their
own policies. The commercial reality does not favour a reading of the coverage
as overlapping or contemplating insurer priority disputes. Rather, they were
intended by all concerned to exist as separate insurance policies that the
subject licensees had to carry.
[35]          
There was no dispute that the law firm was
vicariously liable for any negligence of Mr. Pryce during his handling of the
claim, because he was an employee and not an independent contractor. The modern
evolution of respondeat superior in the employment law context arose
from the public policy reality that employers are better situated to manage the
risk: London Drugs Ltd. v. Kuehne & Nagel International Ltd., 1992
CanLII 41 (SCC), [1992] 3 SCR 299, at 337.
[36]          
Relying on London Drugs, Mr. Pryce’s
counsel argued that LawPro’s refusal to defend Mr. Pryce “risks upending
decades of case law that obligates an employer to defend and indemnify their
employee for actions performed in the course of employment.” London Drugs
did not extend employer vicarious liability to an obligation to defend the
employee in litigation. These are different duties.
[37]          
In practice, the risk of vicarious liability
prompts employers to assume the cost and carriage of an employee’s defence to a
lawsuit. There are often good reasons to defend the employee, such as the
maintenance of a common front to avoid a plaintiff from exploiting a wedge in
the defence at trial. In most instances where an insurer defends an employer,
the comprehensive or commercial general liability (CGL) policies sold to
businesses contain express coverage and defence obligations covering employees,
like the one contained in the Lloyd’s policy sold to Mr. Pryce. The other case
law cited by Mr. Pryce’s counsel derived their source from CGL disputes.
[38]          
There can also be good reasons for an employer
not to defend an employee. In James-Bowen et al. v. Commissioner of
Police, [2018] UKSC 40, at paras. 34-38, the U.K. Supreme
Court has held that recognition of an employer’s duty to defend employees could
place employers in unfair conflicts of interest and gave four public policy
reasons against an implied duty to defend an employee. Of those, the first two
are the most persuasive. The recognition of a duty to defend the employee could
fetter the employer’s ability to defend itself as the real target and funder of
indemnity for the claim, including the need to protect the employee from public
criticism or embarrassment during the trial. The duty could also discourage employers’
settlement of civil claims separately from employees, where employees insist on
defending at the employer’s expense. These arguments are by no means ironclad.
However, potential limitations to arguments against recognizing a common law
defence obligation do not amount to reasons for recognition.
[39]          
The only Canadian decision dealing with the
point appears to be Williams v Mutual Life Assurance Co. (2000), 20 TLWD
2014-016, 20 TLWD 2014-016. In that case, the employer had circulated a
memorandum to employees purporting to provide insurance coverage to them. Somers
J. held that the memorandum did not amount to an insurance policy but the
employer’s promise to indemnify its employees. It did not carry with it an
obligation to defend an action against employees.
[40]          
A similar argument recognizing an implied duty
to defend arising from a duty to indemnify certainly does not exist in
insurance law. In the absence of an express contractual duty to defend, the
court cannot read one into an insurance policy: Alie v. Bertrand & Frere
Construction Co. Ltd. (2009), 62 O.R. (3d) 345, 2002 CanLII 31835 (ON CA),
at para. 219. Insurance and employment contracts are different in nature but
are both contracts. The rationale in Alie was the courts’ lack of
authority to rewrite the terms of contracts. By the same principle, the court
has no authority to fill in the absence of coverage for Mr. Pryce in the LawPro
policy. It is not a question of filling in a gap in express coverage where a
non-lawyer employee could be construed as qualifying as an insured. Even if the
common law recognized an implied duty to defend in the employment contract, the
courts cannot impose an analogous duty on an insurer unless the policy
expressly extended the duty to defend to such a duty. The LawPro policy
contains no such wording.
[41]          
I therefore reject the argument made on behalf
of Mr. Pryce, that he is covered under the LawPro policy because the law firm
that employed him owes him a defence. Even if there were such a duty in
employment law, it would not give rise to coverage under an insurance policy
that does not provide analogous coverage. The vicarious liability argument
therefore fails to establish that the LawPro policy insured Mr. Pryce in
respect of the liability claim.
[42]          
LawPro was successful in opposing the
application. Its costs were approximately double the comparable amounts stated
in the applicant’s costs outline. This comparison is an important factor in assessing
the reasonable expectations of the parties in bringing and resisting these
types of cases, in accordance with the principles stated in Boucher v.
Public Accountants Council for the Province of Ontario, 2004 CanLII 14579
(ON CA), at para. 37.
[43]          
Among the rule 57.01 considerations, there were
no aspects of the case warranting a higher scale of costs, such as misconduct
or improper step. Ultimately, what seems to have motivated the parties’ ties
into clause 57.01(1)(d), the importance of the case to the parties.
[44]          
LawPro’s arguments, both written and oral,
emphasized that the application was really a subrogated attempt by Lloyd’s to
transfer the risk to LawPro. In this regard, I am cognizant of LawPro’s mandate
to fully defend the application and to seal off any possibility of a court
ruling in Mr. Pryce’s favour. LawPro is not a commercial entity and has a
mandate to contain attempts to expand coverage beyond the premium it charges
lawyers.
[45]          
Since the fixing of costs is intended to be an
efficient exercise performed by the judicial officer who reviewed the materials
and presided over the hearing, it is not to be an assessment of costs. The applicant’s
bill of costs is also helpful in measuring proportionality, and parties are
encouraged to submit them before they know the outcome. I therefore award costs
to LawPro on a partial indemnity basis, in the amount of $25,000.00, inclusive
of disbursements and HST.
[46]          
The application is dismissed, with costs payable
by the applicant to the respondent in the amount of $25,000.00, inclusive of
disbursements and HST.