[1]          On October
3, 2024, the court dismissed the plaintiff’s action after a trial lasting
nearly three weeks. The parties could not agree on costs.
[2]          The
defendant seeks costs on a substantial indemnity basis of $222,969.68 or,
alternatively, on a partial indemnity basis of $150,152.65. The plaintiff
argues against the award of any costs but has not submitted a bill of costs or
commented on the defendant's counsel’s hourly rates, hours, or disbursements.
[3]          Fixing
costs is not a mechanical exercise. Costs should reflect what the court
considers a fair and reasonable amount for the unsuccessful party to pay,
rather than simply the successful party's actual costs.[1]
The incurrence of costs and time spent by counsel is a judgment call, and the
prudence of counsel’s judgment must be considered at the time the work was
done.
[4]          The
defendant’s counsel charged $350 per hour until 2022, at which point the rate
increased to $400.  Mr. Cavanagh was called in 1980.  The defendant was
originally represented by Heather J. Williams, who was called in 1991.  Her
hourly rate was also $350.  These rates are considered low for counsel with
comparable experience.
[5]          The court
has reviewed the defendant’s bill of costs and finds that the time spent on the
various steps in this action, along with the incurred disbursements, are
reasonable. There is no basis for reducing the defendant’s fees, hours, or
disbursements.
[6]          The
primary issue to determine is the appropriate scale of costs.
[7]          The
defendants argue for costs on a substantial indemnity scale for two reasons.
First, Mr. Lamoureux accused the defendant of dishonesty, including allegations
that Mr. Boyd attempted to steal his practice. The defendants claim the action
was a vendetta, brought to punish them for asking Mr. Lamoureux to leave the
firm in 2011.
[8]             Second,
the defendants highlight Mr. Lamoureux’s offer on August 4, 2022, to settle the
action for $1 plus costs. They argue this offer demonstrates the plaintiff
himself did not consider his claim to have any merit.
[9]          The
plaintiff disputes the defendants’ reliance on Baryluk (Wyrd Sisters) v.
Campbell,[2]
noting that it involved baseless accusations of case-fixing, abuse of public
office, and dishonesty against judges of this court. The plaintiff argues that
he never alleged criminal or fraudulent conduct by the defendant; rather, he
claimed the defendant's conduct was aimed at taking over his practice. The
plaintiff points to remarks in the court’s judgment that support the
reasonableness of his belief, such as the defendant’s failure to locate
correctly filed wills and certain actions that exacerbated the situation, and
which added fuel to the fire.
[10]      The plaintiff contends that his
offer to settle by accepting his partial indemnity costs should not be seen as
an admission that the action lacked merit. Instead, it was a reasonable compromise
which would have covered a portion of his legal fees. The plaintiff argues that
using this offer to justify awarding substantial indemnity costs would
discourage parties from making settlement offers.
[11]       Elevated costs may be warranted
where a party has engaged in conduct that is reprehensible, scandalous, or
outrageous.[3] Costs
on the higher scale can be awarded as a “form of chastisement” and as a “mark
of the court’s disapproval of a litigant’s conduct”.[4]
However, failing to prove fraud or dishonesty on a balance of probabilities
does not automatically warrant substantial indemnity costs, as not all such
attempts constitute “reprehensible, scandalous, or outrageous conduct”.[5]
[12]      This case arose from a dispute
between parties following the breakdown of a 10-year professional relationship.
The dispute was charged with emotion for both sides, but particularly the
plaintiff, who directed various epithets at Mr. Boyd and was eventually
cautioned by the Law Society.  The court does not doubt that Mr. Lamoureux honestly
held these beliefs, even though they were not proved at trial on the balance of
probabilities.  The court also noted in its judgment that the defendant could
have behaved more constructively, unnecessarily impugned Mr. Lamoureux’s
professional integrity, and recognized why Mr. Lamoureux might have perceived a
conspiracy.
[13]      In these circumstances, the court
declines to make an award of substantial indemnity costs.  Although Mr.
Lamoureux's serious allegations were not proven, he had a basis for making
them, and the court accepts that he sincerely believed in these views.
[14]      The court also agrees with the
plaintiff that his settlement offer does not indicate an acknowledgment that
his action lacked merit. Numerous reasons can motivate a settlement offer
unrelated to one's belief in his or her case's strengths. Additionally, settlements
are crucial for the effective administration of civil justice, [6]  and I concur
that they should not be discouraged by using them against the offering party as
evidence of belief that their case lacks merit.
[15]      For the preceding reasons, the
court awards the defendant its partial indemnity costs, fixed at $150,152.65,
payable within 30 days.