[1]              
The Plaintiff Zhen Kang (also known as Ryan
Kang) is the owner and sole shareholder of the Plaintiff Arkland Homes, a
property development company. Arkland Homes owns the four numbered company
Plaintiffs. In connection with Arkland Homes’ first home construction projects,
Mr. Kang and his companies have taken several loans, including mortgage loans,
from the Defendants Ming Wei Liu (also known as Edward Liu), Yizi Feng, and Da
Hai Chen.[1]
[2]              
The Defendants Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng state that Mr.
Kang and his companies have defaulted on the mortgages for two properties at
177 and 171 Rumsey Road in East York (the “Rumsey Properties”) and one property
at 93 Bannatyne Drive in North York (the “Bannatyne Property”). In the wake of
these alleged defaults, Mr. Liu sold the Rumsey Properties in January 2024 and
now seeks to sell the Bannatyne Property. Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng say the
Plaintiffs embarked on an ill-conceived venture to build homes, and that
venture has now crashed. They say the Plaintiffs have borrowed over $10 million
from them and from other Defendants, have not finished any of the construction
projects that were funded with that money, and have impeded Mr. Liu’s and Mr.
Feng’s legitimate efforts to enforce the mortgages on which they have defaulted.
[3]              
The Plaintiffs state that they have not
defaulted on the mortgages and that Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng seek to alienate them
from title to properties that they rightfully own and have built through their
development business.
[4]              
The Plaintiffs have now commenced this action,
seeking a declaration that the mortgages on the Bannatyne Property and Rumsey
Properties are in good standing, a declaration that the purchasers of the Rumsey
Properties are not bona fide purchasers for value, and an order that the
sales of the Rumsey Properties be set aside.
[5]              
The parties are also embroiled in other
litigation. Mr. Liu has commenced an action for enforcement of the mortgage on
the Bannatyne Property and possession and sale of the Bannatyne Property
(CV-24-00717746-0000). He has commenced an action for enforcement of the mortgage
on the Rumsey Properties and possession of the Rumsey Properties
(CV-23-00708596-0000).  Additionally, he has commenced an action in respect of various
secured and unsecured loans, including a second mortgage on the Rumsey
Properties (CV-24-00715323-0000).
[6]              
There are three motions before me in this
action.
[7]              
First, the Plaintiffs seek an injunction against
Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng restraining their sale of the Bannatyne Property under
power of sale. The Plaintiffs assert that the mortgage on the Bannatyne
Property is not in default. They further state that Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng are
predatory lenders and have acted in bad faith, including through Mr. Liu’s “surreptitious”
sale of the Rumsey Properties.
[8]              
Second, the Defendant Qiong Huang brings a
motion for possession of 177 Rumsey Road. Ms. Huang states that Mr. Liu sold 177
Rumsey to her pursuant to a valid power of sale after the Plaintiffs’ default
on the Rumsey Mortgage, and that she is a bona fide purchaser for value.
A Certificate of Pending Litigation has been registered on title for 177 Rumsey.
[9]              
Third, the Plaintiffs bring a cross-motion for a
Certificate of Pending Litigation on 171 Rumsey Road. The Defendant Jianjun Shi
purchased that property pursuant to a power of sale conducted by Mr. Liu. The
Plaintiffs state that this purported sale was improper, and that Mr. Shi
conspired with Mr. Liu to improperly obtain title to 171 Rumsey.
[10]          
For the reasons below, I grant the injunction restraining
the sale of the Bannatyne Property. I do not grant the motion for possession of
177 Rumsey. I grant the cross-motion for a Certificate of Pending Litigation on
171 Rumsey. I further order that this action be consolidated with the actions
listed above and any other litigation relating to the various loan arrangements
between the parties, and that the consolidated actions be case managed.
[11]          
Mr. Kang purchased the Bannatyne Property in
October 2020. Arkland Homes was incorporated the following year and developed
and built the Bannatyne Property. The original mortgage for the Bannatyne
Property was entered into in December 2021, between Mr. Kang as borrower and
Mr. Liu as lender. It was brokered by the Defendant Xiao Liu (also known as
Alex Liu, and to whom I will refer as “Alex”). Mr. Kang and Alex had worked
together in the past before he engaged Alex as a project management advisor on
Arkland Homes’ development projects.
[12]          
The “Loan Commitment Agreement” for the mortgage
on the Bannatyne Property provided that the mortgage was for the principal
amount of up to $1.4 million, to be provided in several advances. An initial
advancement of $600,000.00 would be made in December 2021, provided that
backfill in the construction project was completed. Six months of interest was
to be deducted from that initial advance. A second advancement in the same
amount could be made upon completion of drywall finishing, and a third
advancement could be made upon obtaining the Occupancy Certificate. The
mortgage had a maturity date in September 2022. The Schedule to Charge/Mortgage
provided that the borrower would provide twelve post-dated monthly cheques
covering monthly installments under the agreement.
[13]          
In December 2021 and July 2022, pursuant to the Loan
Commitment Agreement, principal advances of $600,000.00 each were made to Mr.
Kang. On each occasion, interest for six months was prepaid and deducted from
the advance. In July 2022, Mr. Feng became a co-lender of the mortgage loan.
[14]          
The Plaintiffs say that because this was a
construction loan, there was an “overarching agreement” that the principal
would not have to be repaid until construction of the Bannatyne Property was
completed and the property sold. The mortgage would renew routinely until that
time. Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng dispute that claim.
[15]          
In April and May 2023, Mr. Kang transferred RMB
11,900,000 (approximately $2,297.087.73) to Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng’s Chinese bank
account (the “2023 Payment”). There is no evidence before me as to why the 2023
Payment was made or against which loans it was to be applied. The 2023 Payment plays
an important role in these motions, as discussed below.
[16]          
In June 2023, two of Mr. Kang’s companies, the
Plaintiffs 11291319 Canada Inc. (“11291319”) and 11291246 Canada Inc.
(“11291246”), obtained a mortgage loan from Mr. Liu in respect of the Rumsey
Properties for $4.38 million (“the Rumsey Mortgage”).
[17]          
The “Loan Commitment Agreement” for the Rumsey Mortgage
provided that the mortgage had a four-month term. Interest was to be paid
monthly. Any request to renew or extend the Rumsey Mortgage was to be made in
writing at least 60 days before the maturity date. If the lender did not grant
a renewal, the mortgage was to be repaid in full upon maturity. If the mortgage
was not repaid in full at maturity, the lender could either choose a “deemed
auto renewal,” which would impose certain fees on the borrower, or grant no
renewal and demand the full amount of the mortgage. The lender’s option would
not prejudice their rights “for any default act” under the Mortgages Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. M.40.
[18]          
In July 2023, the mortgage on the Bannatyne
Property was renewed for a six-month term by way of a written “Mortgage Renewal
Agreement” between Mr. Kang as borrower and Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng as lenders. I
will refer to the renewed iteration of the mortgage as the “Bannatyne Mortgage”.
[19]          
The Mortgage Renewal Agreement indicated that
Mr. Kang was in default of the original mortgage on the Bannatyne Property because
he had failed to make his interest payments. It provided that Mr. Liu and Mr.
Feng agreed to renew the mortgage “on the condition that” Mr. Kang “shall make
all future interest payments on time” and maintain the mortgage in good
standing, failing which the mortgage “shall be in default immediately” and Mr.
Liu and Mr. Feng could proceed with power of sale.
[20]          
The Mortgage Renewal Agreement provided that an advancement
of $200,000.00 would be made to Mr. Kang on August 1, 2023. Mr. Kang’s existing
debts were deducted from the advancement, as were interest penalties and a
renewal fee. In the result, the net advancement was $53.42.
[21]          
Interest was due on the first day of each month.
On August 1, 2023, Mr. Kang was to provide six post-dated cheques for the
interest amounts due at the start of each month. For the first five months,
interest costs would be $17,500.00; thereafter they would be $28,000.00.
[22]          
The Mortgage Renewal Agreement did not modify
the terms governing the renewal of the mortgage. Those terms were articulated
in the Loan Commitment Agreement for the original mortgage and mirrored those
of the Rumsey Mortgage. Any request to extend the mortgage was to be sent in
writing 60 days before the maturity date. If no extension was granted by the
lender, the mortgage was to be repaid in full on the maturity date. If the
mortgage was not repaid in full on the maturity date, the lender could either
select a “deemed auto renewal” for a six-month period, which would be subject
to various fees to the borrower, or demand that the full amount of the loan be
paid on the maturity date with no renewal or extension. The lender’s option
would not prejudice their rights upon any default under the Mortgages Act.
[23]          
Mr. Kang’s interest payments through to July
2023 were taken out of the principal advance of $200,000.00. Mr. Kang paid the
interest from August 2023 and September 2023 separately via post-dated cheque.
[24]          
Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng say that the interest from
October 2023 onward has not been paid and that the Bannatyne Mortgage is consequently
in default. In February 2024, they served a Notice of Sale for the Bannatyne
Property. It states that $1,755,341.85 is owed on the Bannatyne Mortgage, inclusive
of all principal, interest, and fees. Soon afterward, they commenced an action
to enforce the Bannatyne Mortgage (CV-24-00717746-0000), in which they plead
that $1,790,376.10 is owed.
[25]          
The Plaintiffs deny that the Bannatyne Mortgage
is in default, for two reasons. First, they state, in early September 2023, Mr.
Kang directed Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng to make all monthly interest payments for
October 2023 onward out of the 2023 Payment, which had been remitted to Mr. Liu
and Mr. Feng a few months earlier. The Plaintiffs say that Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng
failed to honour Mr. Kang’s instructions, and that had they done what Mr. Kang
told them to, the Bannatyne Mortgage would not be in default. Mr. Liu and Mr.
Feng dispute that there was any agreement to so apply the 2023 Payment.
[26]          
Second, the Plaintiffs state that the Bannatyne
Mortgage had automatically renewed by the time the Notice of Sale was issued. As
such, its principal was not due, and it was not in default. Mr. Liu and Mr.
Feng disagree.
[27]          
Finally, the Plaintiffs say that the Notice of
Sale for the Bannatyne Property is unsigned and has errors and improper
charges. Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng say that these charges are proper, and that in
any event, any errors can be corrected and are not impediments to their right
to proceed with the sale of the Bannatyne Property.
[28]          
Mr. Liu states that 11291319 and 11291246 never
paid any interest owed on the Rumsey Mortgage and accordingly defaulted on it.
[29]          
The Plaintiffs deny that the Rumsey Mortgage is
in default, for the same reasons they offer in respect of the Bannatyne
Mortgage: the 2023 Payment was supposed to have been applied against the Rumsey
Mortgage, and in any event the Rumsey Mortgage had renewed automatically by the
time the Notice of Sale was issued.
[30]          
In September 2023, Mr. Liu served a Notice of
Sale in respect of the Rumsey Properties. It stated that $4,649,885.00 was owed
on the Rumsey Mortgage, inclusive of principal, interest, and fees. He says he
served it via registered mail to the Rumsey Properties and the shared office of
11291319 and 11291246. The Plaintiffs say Mr. Kang did not receive the Notice
of Sale and they had no notice of Mr. Liu’s intention to sell.
[31]          
In October 2023, Mr. Liu issued a Statement of
Claim in the CV-23-00708596-0000 matter, seeking to enforce the Rumsey Mortgage
against 11291319 and 11291246. In his Statement of Claim, he alleges that
$5,021,985.00 is now owed on the Rumsey Mortgage.
[32]          
Mr. Liu obtained default judgment in that action
on December 14, 2023. The Plaintiffs say they did not receive the Statement of
Claim or any warning before the default judgment was obtained. They have
brought a motion to set aside the noting in default, which is to be heard later
this month.
[33]          
In November 2023, Mr. Kang moved into 177 Rumsey
with his family. Mr. Liu says Mr. Kang moved into 177 Rumsey simply to make it
more difficult for Mr. Liu to enforce the Rumsey Mortgage and sell the property.
He states that at the time, the property was unfinished and had “serious safety
concerns and no occupancy permit”.
[34]          
The Plaintiffs say they did not learn that the
Rumsey Properties had been listed for sale until December 30, 2023. When they
made this discovery, they retained counsel, who communicated promptly with the
listing agent and Mr. Liu. In the ensuing communications, Mr. Liu agreed to
de-list the Rumsey Properties and pause any litigation in respect of them. He indicated
he was willing to consent to the default judgment being set aside. The
Plaintiffs state that these assurances were designed to give them a “false
sense of security” and that Mr. Liu went on to re-list the properties and sell
them without their knowledge.
[35]          
On December 30, 2023, the Defendant Ms. Huang
entered into an agreement of purchase and sale to purchase 177 Rumsey from Mr.
Liu, under power of sale, for $1.9 million. The sale closed on January 11,
2024; it was originally scheduled to close on January 5.
[36]          
On December 31, 2023, the Defendant Mr. Shi
entered into an agreement of purchase and sale to purchase 171 Rumsey from Mr.
Liu, under power of sale, for $1.78 million. The sale closed on January 10,
2024.
[37]          
The Plaintiffs discovered the sales of the
Rumsey Properties on January 20, 2024. They say the sales were conducted
without any warning to them, in a hurry, and below market value, all in an
effort to preclude their opposition to the sales. They describe the sales as
“surreptitious” and a reflection of bad faith on the part of Mr. Liu.
[38]          
Mr. Kang and his family lived at 177 Rumsey at
the time. Some days after the sale, Ms. Huang attended at the property, saying
she was its owner. The police were called. They instructed her to leave. She
later returned with Alex, who stated that Mr. Liu “had instructed him to empty”
the Rumsey Properties. Alex pushed the door to the home open and physically
assaulted Mr. Kang and his wife. The police returned and arrested Alex. None of
this is contested by Alex.
[39]          
Many of the issues before me pertain to both
Mortgages and/or more than one of the three motions. I have therefore analyzed
the issues first, before considering the specific motions.
[40]          
The Plaintiffs say that because this was the
Bannatyne Mortgage and the Rumsey Mortgage were construction loans, there was
an “overarching agreement” that their principal amounts would not have to be
repaid until construction was completed and the Properties sold.
[41]          
I am unable to agree. There is no evidence
before me of any oral or written agreement to this effect. To the contrary,
each Mortgage expressly gives the lender the option to demand payment of the
Mortgage in full upon maturity, without requiring that construction be complete
before payment is demanded.
[42]          
The Plaintiffs claim that both the Bannatyne
Mortgage and the Rumsey Mortgage had automatically renewed before their
respective Notices of Sale were issued. They say the auto-renewal clause in the
Loan Commitment Agreement for each Mortgage required the lender to make a
demand for full payment of principal upon maturity, failing which there was a
“deemed auto renewal” of the Mortgage. Mr. Liu (and Mr. Feng) never made such a formal
demand. As such, there was a “deemed auto renewal” of each Mortgage upon
maturity and neither was in default.
[43]          
I am respectfully unable to agree. Each Mortgage
expressly required the borrower to make a written request to extend the
Mortgage at least 60 days before maturity. Mr. Kang did not do this for the
Bannatyne Mortgage. His companies did not do this for the Rumsey Mortgage. Each
Mortgage required that, if the lender did not grant a renewal, the principal
was due in full upon maturity. Mr. Liu (and Mr. Feng) did not grant a renewal
of either Mortgage. As such, the principal of each was due in full at maturity.
Finally, each Mortgage provided that if the Mortgage was not repaid fully at
maturity, it was the lender’s choice – and the lender’s choice alone – to
either renew the Mortgage or demand the full amount. Neither Mortgage
was paid in full upon maturity. It was therefore entirely for Mr. Liu (and Mr.
Feng) to choose what to do next. There is no suggestion in the record that they
opted to renew. There is every indication that they demanded full payment. Indeed,
Mr. Liu commenced his action to enforce the Rumsey Mortgage within days of its
maturity date.
[44]          
It was not for Mr. Kang or his companies to
choose the “auto renewal” option: that was not their choice to make. The
Plaintiffs’ view to the contrary is not consistent with the express language of
the renewal provisions of the Mortgages. Nor is it commercially reasonable.
[45]          
The Plaintiffs further submit that Mr. Kang
instructed Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng to apply the 2023 Payment against the interest
owed on the Mortgages and that they did not do so. They say Mr. Liu and Mr.
Feng thereby “concocted” a default so that they could sell the Properties under
power of sale. Had the 2023 Payment been applied against the Mortgages in
accordance with Mr. Kang’s instructions, say the Plaintiffs, both Mortgages would
be in good standing.
[46]          
Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng acknowledge that they
received the 2023 Payment from Mr. Kang and that they did not apply it against either
Mortgage. They say that they instead applied it against two unsecured loans
made to Mr. Kang in September 2022 by the Defendant Mr. Chen, in the amount of
$600,000.00 each (the “Chen Loans”). Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng say Mr. Kang had
instructed them to apply the 2023 Payment against the Chen Loans, and that in
any event they had the authority to do so, as the lenders and pursuant to an
“Assignment Agreement” between Mr. Liu and Mr. Chen.
[47]          
The record before me does not support the
Plaintiffs’ claim that there was an agreement between the parties, or a binding
instruction from Mr. Kang, as to how the 2023 Payment was to be used.
[48]          
First, there is no contemporaneous evidence as
to the purpose of the 2023 Payment, or what debt obligations it was intended to
be applied against, at the time that Mr. Kang remitted it to Mr. Liu and Mr.
Feng.
[49]          
According to Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng, on September
22, 2023, Mr. Kang verbally agreed to apply the 2023 Payment against the Chen
Loans. The Plaintiffs deny that he did so.
[50]          
According to the Plaintiffs, Mr. Kang
subsequently instructed Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng to apply the 2023 Payment against
the Mortgages. However, in my view, the record does not contain any such clear
indication. It indicates the following:
[51]          
Thus, even if Mr. Kang agreed, on September 22,
2023, to apply the 2023 Payment against the Chen Loans, he subsequently asked to
modify this arrangement by allowing the 2023 Payment to be applied against the
Bannatyne Mortgage and other debts owed to Mr. Liu. Those other debts did not
include the Rumsey Mortgage. These were wishes or requests, not instructions.
Mr. Kang worded them as such, and the parties treated them as such. Mr. Liu
never acceded to these requests. Indeed, he consistently refused them.
[52]          
I also note that although both Mortgages were
entered into after the 2023 Payment was made, neither Mortgage’s Loan
Commitment Agreement refers to the 2023 Payment, or to any pre-payments having
been made under the Mortgage. To the contrary, each Loan Commitment Agreement refers
to Mr. Kang’s obligation to write monthly cheques to cover his interest
obligations.
[53]          
I am therefore not persuaded that there was ever
an agreement among the parties, or an instruction from Mr. Kang, that the 2023
Payment was to be applied against either Mortgage.
[54]          
Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng say that they had authority
to apply the 2023 Payment against the Chen Loans. They base this argument in
part on an “Assignment Agreement,” dated December 19, 2023, in which Mr. Chen
assigned the Chen Loans to Mr. Liu and gave Mr. Liu the right to enforce them.
[55]          
I am unable to agree. The 2023 Payment was made by
Mr. Kang to Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng alone. It was therefore to be applied only against
loans made to Mr. Kang by Mr. Liu and/or Mr. Feng unless the parties had a
clear agreement to the contrary. Mr. Chen had no right to the 2023 Payment
because Mr. Kang did not make the 2023 Payment to him.
[56]          
In any event, there is no evidence as to when,
or even whether, the 2023 Payment was applied against the Chen Loans. As such,
there is no evidence to demonstrate that the Assignment Agreement pre-dates the
application of the 2023 Payment against the Chen Loans, as it must have in
order to have authorized it.
[57]          
The evidence that Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng actually
applied the 2023 Payment against the Chen Loans, as they claim, is limited. There
is no direct affidavit evidence from them, or from Mr. Chen, saying that this
was done. The only documentary evidence of this transaction is a “Receipt” from
Mr. Chen indicating that he received $1,850,794.52 in cash from Mr. Liu and
that Mr. Liu’s obligations under the Assignment Agreement were fulfilled. The
Receipt does not state that the money paid to Mr. Chen came from the 2023
Payment. The Plaintiffs doubt whether Mr. Liu in fact applied the 2023 Payment
against the Chen Loans at all. They suggest he merely pocketed the 2023
Payment.
[58]          
The record contains a document created by Mr.
Liu and provided to Mr. Kang entitled “Repayment Confirmation”. The dates of
its creation and provision to Mr. Kang are unknown. The Repayment Confirmation indicates
that, on September 15, 2024, Mr. Liu applied the 2023 Payment against two loans
that Mr. Chen had made to Mr. Kang. First, he used the 2023 Payment to pay out,
in its entirety, a loan from Mr. Chen of $1,790,539.78. He then used the
remaining balance of the 2023 Payment to pay down a separate loan from Mr. Chen
of $1.2 million. According to the Repayment Confirmation, both loans against
which the 2023 Payment was applied were secured against 173 Rumsey, a property
that is not involved in this motion but is referenced in the WeChat messages
discussed above.
[59]          
In cross-examination, Alex gave evidence that,
contrary to what the Repayment Confirmation indicates, Mr. Liu did not apply
the 2023 Payment against loans from Mr. Chen that were secured against 173
Rumsey. Rather, he applied it against the Chen Loans. That is also the position
taken by Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng in this motion. There is no evidence that
purports to explain this discrepancy between what the Repayment Confirmation,
created by Mr. Liu, states, and what Mr. Liu now submits before me on this
motion.
[60]          
Alex further testified that the first payout
referred to in the Repayment Confirmation, of $1,790,539.78, relates to a third-party
loan that has nothing to do with this action. I take this to mean either that
Mr. Kang’s money was in fact applied against another borrower’s debt, as the
Plaintiffs claim, or that his money was applied against his debt to a different
lender, not Mr. Liu. The Repayment Confirmation, however, misleadingly
indicates that the 2023 Payment was applied against Mr. Kang’s own debts to Mr.
Liu.
[61]          
Alex’s evidence aligns with that of Mr. Kang,
who says that the $1,790,539.78 payment identified in the Repayment
Confirmation amount “far exceeded” any loan made to him (or his companies) by
Mr. Chen and must pertain to a loan from Mr. Chen to some unnamed third party.
[62]          
If Alex’s evidence is believed, Mr. Liu has
created, in the Repayment Confirmation, a document that contains material
errors or falsehoods. Notably, no effort has been made to explain those errors
or falsehoods, because Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng offer no direct affidavit evidence
in this motion. This is so even though one or both of them loaned the funds at
issue to Mr. Kang, decided to apply the 2023 Payment against the Chen Loans,
sold the Rumsey Properties via power of sale, commenced the process for selling
the Bannatyne Property via power of sale, and created the Repayment
Confirmation document, whose contents, by the Defendants’ own admission, are
untrue. Their counsel suggested that they do not speak English and therefore
were not proper affiants. I see no reason why they could not have provided
affidavit evidence via an interpreter. Indeed, Alex received assistance from an
interpreter during his cross-examination.
[63]          
The record thus leaves me unable to assess the
following material issues:
[64]          
These issues are squarely relevant to Mr. Liu
and Mr. Feng’s claims that they had authority to apply the 2023 Payment against
the Chen Loans, and that they in fact did so – claims that lie at the heart of
Mr. Liu’s and Mr. Feng’s position in this motion.
[65]          
These issues are also relevant to the
allegations of bad faith made by the Plaintiffs. If Mr. Liu generated a
document that he knew mis-stated the loan against which he had applied Mr.
Kang’s debt, or said he applied the 2023 Payment against the Chen Loans but did
not do so, or knowingly applied part of the 2023 Payment against a debt owed by
another borrower and concealed that fact from Mr. Kang, he may well have acted
in bad faith.
[66]          
The Plaintiffs say that the Notice of Sale for
the Bannatyne Property is unsigned and has errors and improper charges. Mr. Liu
and Mr. Feng say that these charges are proper, and that in any event, any
errors can be corrected and are not impediments to their right to proceed with
a sale of the Bannatyne Property.
[67]          
I accept that there are circumstances in which
errors in a Notice of Sale might prove fatal. If a Notice of Sale does not
accurately reflect the borrower’s indebtedness, the borrower cannot
meaningfully exercise their option to redeem. The purpose underlying the Notice
of Sale is thus defeated.
[68]          
Here, however, there is no suggestion that Mr.
Kang would have been able to redeem the Bannatyne Mortgage, had the Notice of
Sale correctly calculated the amount he owed. To the contrary, the evidence
suggests Mr. Kang is not able to pay anything, other than the 2023 Payment,
against any of his debts. The issue of whether any errors in the Notice of Sale
preclude the sale of the Bannatyne Property is therefore academic. In these
circumstances, I am not persuaded that any such errors, on their own, stand in the
way of the proposed sale.
[69]          
The Plaintiffs state that Mr. Kang did not receive
the Notice of Sale for the Bannatyne Property. As a result, they had no notice
of its proposed sale. The record contains an affidavit of service for the
Notice of Sale and a Canada Post tracking receipt for it. The Plaintiffs say
Mr. Kang did not receive the Notice of Sale and that the Canada Post tracking receipt
contains a signature that was not his. They imply someone forged Mr. Kang’s
signature, although there is no indication of who that was.
[70]          
The Plaintiffs likewise say that they did not
receive the Notices of Sale for the Rumsey Properties. The record contains
Canada Post documentation indicating that the Notices of Sale were delivered or
picked up in person at Canada Post. Some of this documentation indicates that
an individual named “Zhen K,” which is Mr. Kang’s name, picked up the items
from Canada Post. Other documentation indicates that the items were picked up
but does not specify by whom.
[71]          
The Plaintiffs further state that they never
received the Statement of Claim in the enforcement proceedings for the Rumsey Mortgage.
The record contains an affidavit of service indicating that the Statement of
Claim was personally served upon Mr. Kang on behalf of 11291319 and 11291246.
[72]          
The Plaintiffs thus assert that someone forged Mr.
Kang’s signature in respect of the Notice of Sale for the Bannatyne Property;
that Mr. Kang did not pick up the Notices of Sale for the Rumsey Properties,
even though there is documentation indicating that they were all picked up, and
at least some of them were picked up by Mr. Kang; and that Mr. Kang never
received a pleading that, according to an affirmed affidavit of service, was
served on him personally. I find it unlikely that all these claims hold true. I
am also informed by the principle that it is sufficient in these circumstances
for notice to be given by registered mail in accordance with the requirements
of the Mortgages Act, as was done here (CIBC Mortgage Corp. v. Chopra
(1997), 1997 CanLII 854 (ON CA), 35 O.R. (3d) 362 (C.A.)). I therefore am unable to accept the argument
that these alleged issues with service preclude the sale of the Bannatyne
Property or undermine the validity of the sale of the Rumsey Properties.
[73]          
The Plaintiffs say that the sales of the Rumsey
Properties were conducted without any warning to the Plaintiffs, in a hurry,
and below market value, all to preclude their opposition to the sales.
[74]          
The record shows, and Mr. Liu does not seriously
contest, that he told the Plaintiffs he would delist the Rumsey Properties and
nonetheless went on to sell them. I accept that this was not a transparent way
of proceeding. To the extent that legal counsel was involved in making any
misrepresentations to Plaintiffs’ counsel in these interactions, that is of
particular concern.
[75]          
More contested is the issue of whether Mr. Liu
sold the Rumsey Properties for less than their fair market value, as the
Plaintiffs assert. Mr. Liu acknowledges that he did not accept the highest
available offers and that he chose the offers they did because they were
unconditional and would close quickly. The Plaintiffs state that, even if there
was a default on the Mortgage (and they say there was not), Mr. Liu, as
mortgagee, was under a “duty to take reasonable precautions to obtain the fair
market value of the mortgaged property” (1427814 Ontario Limited v. 3697584
Canada Inc., 2013 ONCA 597, at para. 17).
[76]          
The parties have tendered voluminous evidence on
whether the Rumsey Properties were sold at their fair market value. They make
extensive arguments on the admissibility and weight of one another’s evidence. I
will not summarize the evidence or the evidentiary disputes here. It suffices
to say that the Plaintiffs have obtained valuations of the Rumsey Properties
that are higher than those obtained by Mr. Liu, and that the record shows that
both Rumsey Properties received offers for higher purchase prices than the ones
that were ultimately accepted. On this basis, the Plaintiffs say that Mr. Liu
failed to obtain fair market value, and that this is a sign of his bad faith.
[77]          
I am not persuaded on this basis alone. The various
valuations were obtained when the Properties were at different stages of construction
and completion. I am therefore unable to do an “apples to apples” comparison of
the parties’ respective valuations, or of those valuations to the actual sale
prices.
[78]          
What does give me pause for thought, however, is
the speed at which the Rumsey Properties were sold. The record does not specify
when they were listed for sale, although it was likely shortly after default
judgment was obtained on December 14, 2023. The agreements of purchase and sale
for 177 Rumsey and 171 Rumsey were entered into on December 30, 2023 and
January 2, 2024 respectively. The sales closed within 12 and 8 days
respectively. They were originally scheduled to close even earlier. This is a
very compressed timeline. Indeed, Alex’s evidence acknowledges that Mr. Liu
sold the Rumsey Properties quickly in an effort to sidestep what they
considered to be the Plaintiffs’ ongoing efforts to avoid enforcement of the
Mortgages.
[79]          
Mortgagees may be in breach of their duty to
take reasonable precautions to obtain fair market value where they list
properties for only brief time frames and prioritize a fast sale over obtaining
market value (Wilf Rieck Inc. v. Gordon J. Holdings Ltd., 1994
CarswellOnt 757 (Ct. J. (Gen. Div.)), at para. 16; Filion v. 689543 Ontario
Ltd. (1994), 68 O.A.C. 389 (Ct. J. (Gen. Div – Div. Ct.)), at paras. 33-36).
Based on the timeline described above, I find that there is basis for concern
that Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng did not meet their obligations to take reasonable
steps to obtain fair market value.
[80]          
I also have grave concerns about the “self-help”
approach Mr. Liu and Alex took upon learning that 177 Rumsey was occupied by
Mr. Kang and his family. Some days after the sale, Alex attended at 177 Rumsey,
stating Mr. Liu “had instructed him to empty” the Rumsey Properties, pushing the
door to the home open, and physically assaulting Mr. Kang and his wife. He was
arrested. That this happened is not contested by Alex or any of the Defendants.
To put it mildly, it is alarming. It may well be, as Ms. Huang argues, that as
a matter of practice parties do not always obtain writs of possession for newly
constructed homes. However, upon learning that the home was indeed occupied, Mr.
Liu should not have sent Alex in to clear out its occupants. Alex should not
have accepted the instruction to do so. This was blatant lawlessness. It
strongly supports the Plaintiffs’ claim of bad faith.
[81]          
The Plaintiffs seek an injunction preventing Mr.
Liu and Mr. Feng from selling the Bannatyne Property under power of sale, on
the bases that the Bannatyne Mortgage is not in default and Mr. Liu and Mr.
Feng have acted in bad faith and/or engaged in tortious conduct. A party may
seek an interlocutory injunction pursuant to s. 101 of the Courts of Justice Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, and Rule 40 of the Rules of Civil Procedure,
R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194.
[82]          
The test for interlocutory injunctive relief is
well-established: the moving party must establish that their action raises
either a serious issue to be tried or a strong prima facie case, that
they will suffer irreparable harm if an injunction is not granted until the
completion of the trial, and that the balance of convenience favours granting
the relief sought because they would suffer greater harm than the responding
party if the injunction is not granted (RJR-MacDonald Inc. v. Canada
(Attorney General), 1994 CanLII 117 (SCC), [1994] 1 S.C.R. 311; R. v. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, 2018 SCC 5, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 196).
[83]          
For the reasons below, I grant the
injunction.
[84]          
The parties agree that the standard to be
applied to the first part of the test is the “serious issue to be tried”
standard – that is, whether the Plaintiffs have shown that there is a serious
issue to be tried as to whether the Bannatyne Mortgage was in default. Whether
the case raises a serious issue to be tried is determined “on the basis of
common sense and an extremely limited review of the case on the merits” (RJR-MacDonald,
at p. 348). Essentially, it requires a determination that the case is not
frivolous or vexatious (RJR-MacDonald, at p. 337).
[85]          
I agree this is the correct standard, given that
the Plaintiffs seek a prohibitory injunction. They seek to stop Mr. Liu and Mr.
Feng from doing what they are currently doing (or were doing, before an interim
injunction was granted): selling the Bannatyne Property under power of sale.
[86]          
For the reasons above, I find that there are
serious issues to be tried as to whether Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng had authority to
apply the 2023 Payment against the Chen Loans instead of the Bannatyne Mortgage,
whether they in fact applied the 2023 Payment against the Chen Loans, and
whether they mis-applied any portion of the 2023 Payment against a loan made by
Mr. Chen to another borrower rather than to Mr. Kang.
[87]          
It flows from this that there is a serious issue
to be tried regarding whether the Bannatyne Mortgage was truly in default. If
indeed Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng were obligated to apply the 2023 Payment against
the Bannatyne Mortgage, then the Advance Payment (which was for $2,297.087.73) would
have fully paid off the Bannatyne Mortgage (on which the amount owed, as at the
time the Statement of Claim was issued, was $1,790,376.10).
[88]          
There is also a serious issue to be tried as to whether
Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng have acted in bad faith. If Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng said they
applied the 2023 Payment against the Chen Loans but did not, or if they applied
a portion of it against another borrower’s debts while suggesting otherwise to
Mr. Kang, then they did not act in good faith. These are significant concerns
that go to the core of the relationships and dealings among the parties.
[89]          
Separately, I am of the view that the documentation
maintained, and not maintained, by Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng in respect of their
lending activity leaves much to be desired. They are unable to provide clear
documentary evidence that they applied the 2023 Payment against the Chen Loans,
as they claim, even though this is a claim that is capable of clear proof and
which lies at the core of their position in this motion.  They are unable to
show me that they had clear authority to apply the 2023 Payment against the
Chen Loans. This, too, is an essential issue. The documentation they have
provided indicates, wrongly, that the 2023 Payment was applied against a secured
loan on an altogether distinct property. It also suggests, concerningly, that
part of the 2023 Payment may have been applied against the loan of another
borrower or another creditor altogether, but that this was concealed from Mr.
Kang. In my view, these concerns regarding the actual status of the Mortgages,
the record keeping on the part of Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng, and the overall good
faith of their conduct together strongly support granting interlocutory relief.
[90]          
I must also assess whether irreparable harm will
result if the injunction is not granted. The burden is on the Plaintiffs to
place sufficient evidence before me to show that they will suffer irreparable
harm, which is harm that “either cannot be quantified in monetary terms or
which cannot be cured, usually because one party cannot collect damages from
the other” (RJR-MacDonald, at p. 341). The word “irreparable”
describes the nature of the harm, rather than its magnitude (RJR-MacDonald,
at p. 341). I am to consider the question of irreparable harm in the
context of the specific facts of this case.
[91]          
I am not persuaded that Mr. Kang or his
companies would suffer irreparable harm if the injunction were not granted. The
Bannatyne Property is Mr. Kang’s personal property; he purchased it before
Arkland Homes developed it and owns it in his own name. The claim that the
Plaintiffs’ business reputation will suffer if it is sold is therefore
debatable. I also note that, because Arkland Homes is a new venture, it only
recently began earning revenue and has earned only minimal revenue to date. Against
this backdrop, I am not persuaded that the business will be harmed if the
Bannatyne Property is sold.
[92]          
Finally, I must assess the balance of
convenience. The Supreme Court of Canada has held that the question to be
asked at this stage of the inquiry is which of the two parties will suffer the
greater harm from the granting or refusal of an interlocutory injunction,
pending a decision on the merits (Manitoba (A.G.) v. Metropolitan
Stores (MTS) Ltd., 1987 CanLII 79 (SCC), [1987] 1 S.C.R. 110, at p. 129).
[93]          
I find that the balance of convenience favours
granting the injunction. I am concerned about changing the status quo in
the face of my concerns about potential bad faith on the part of Mr. Liu and
Mr. Feng. I am not prepared to find that the balance of convenience favours the
parties about whose conduct I have reservations. Even if these reservations
prove unfounded, and the issue is more about Mr. Liu’s and Mr. Feng’s
documentation (or lack thereof), interlocutory relief is still appropriate. Those
issues give rise to questions about how the 2023 Payment was actually used and
what, in turn, Mr. Kang’s actual indebtedness to Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng is. They
are properly addressed by way of interlocutory injunction.
[94]          
Based on the analysis above, I find it
appropriate to grant the injunction. It will be just and equitable in all the
circumstances to do so (1960529 Ontario Inc. v. 2077570 Ontario Inc.,
2017 ONSC 5254, at para. 23), particularly in light of my concerns about
potential bad faith and my finding that there is a serious issue to be tried as
to whether the Bannatyne Mortgage is in default. Although I am not persuaded
that Mr. Kang would suffer irreparable harm without an injunction, overall, my
assessment of the other two criteria outweighs any reservations I may have
about irreparable harm. The three criteria are inter-related and weakness in
one may be compensated for by strength in another (Circuit World Corp. v. Lesperance (1997), 1997 CanLII 1385 (ON CA), 33 O.R. (3d) 674 (C.A.)). In my view,
the strength of the serious issue to be tried and balance of convenience
criteria compensate for the relative weakness of the irreparable harm criterion.
[95]          
The Defendant Ms. Huang entered into an
agreement of purchase and sale for 177 Rumsey on December 30, 2023. The sale
closed on January 11, 2024, after initially being scheduled to close on January
5, 2024. Mr. Kang currently resides at 177 Rumsey with his family, having moved
there in November 2023.
[96]          
Ms. Huang now seeks an order that the Plaintiffs
deliver possession of 177 Rumsey to her, an order that the sheriff of the City
of Toronto deliver vacant possession of 177 Rumsey to her, an order that the
Caution currently registered against title to 177 Rumsey by 11291246 be lifted,
and leave to issue a Writ of Possession against 177 Rumsey. The Plaintiffs
oppose her motion. They state that they did not receive notice of the sale of
177 Rumsey and that the sale was made under suspicious circumstances and is not
valid.
[97]          
At the core of Ms. Huang’s motion is her claim
that she has good title to 177 Rumsey under the safe harbour provisions of
sections 35 and 36 of the Mortgages Act and sections 99(1) and
99(1.1) of the Land Titles Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L.5. Those
provisions together protect bona fide purchasers for value of property
under power of sale from impeachment of title due to any improper notice or
conduct of the power of sale proceedings. They in effect shield Ms. Huang, if
indeed she is a bona fide purchaser for value, from claims of
impropriety by Mr. Liu in the sale of 177 Rumsey.
[98]          
Whether Ms. Huang is a bona fide purchaser
for value is one of the issues the Plaintiffs ask the court to address in the
underlying action. Indeed, it is squarely pleaded in the action. Ms. Huang now
asks the court to consider this issue in this interlocutory motion. She
effectively asks for grant summary judgment on this issue. I am not prepared to
grant it.
[99]          
I find that whether Ms. Huang can invoke the
safe harbour provisions cited above is a genuine issue requiring trial, for
several reasons. First, the compressed timeline of Ms. Huang’s purchase of 177
Rumsey supports the inference that Mr. Liu may not have taken reasonable steps
to obtain fair market value in its sale. This is an issue that may only be
evaluated at trial, with evidence from all of the relevant players, including
Mr. Liu.
[100]      
Second, and relatedly, there is competing
evidence on whether the Rumsey Properties were sold at market value. The record
does not enable me to draw any clear conclusions in this regard. This, too, is
a matter better addressed at trial, where the competing property valuations may
be explained by witnesses and fully scrutinized by the trier of fact.
[101]      
Third, there are other circumstances surrounding
the sale that, taken together, raise questions as to whether it was a truly
arms length transaction. For instance, Ms. Huang waived her right to a property
inspection, her right to visit the property to view it and obtain an appraisal,
and her right to vacant possession. Some of these conditions might logically be
waived by a purchaser who is moving into a newly (yet partially) constructed
home. However, there is limited evidence before me on Ms. Huang’s waiver of
these conditions. Whether these are indicia of a non-arms length purchase (and
whether, as a consequence, Ms. Huang is not a bona fide purchaser for
value without notice) is, in my view, a genuine issue requiring trial.
[102]      
Ms. Huang also waived the financing condition on
the purchase and paid the entire purchase price in cash. She says that her
parents provided that cash but does not provide records that satisfactorily
document such transactions. This, too, is an aspect of the transaction that is
relevant to the bona fide purchaser for value issue, and which can only
be assessed with the benefit of trial testimony from Ms. Huang and Mr. Liu.
[103]      
I also find that Ms. Huang’s evidence raises
credibility issues that may only be properly evaluated at trial. These include
her claim that she “personally visited” 177 Rumsey on December 30, 2023, which
the Plaintiffs claim is misleading, and whether she knew or should have known
that Mr. Kang and his family were in fact residing there at the time.
[104]      
Accordingly, it is my view that declaring Ms.
Huang to be a bona fide purchaser for value of 177 Rumsey would amount
to an improper granting of partial summary judgment.
[105]      
Ms. Huang further asks for an order for
possession of 177 Rumsey, the effect of which would be to require Mr. Kang and
his family to move out of 177 Rumsey, where they have resided for about a year.
This is in substance a request for injunctive relief on the issue of
possession, which is itself an essential issue in the underlying action. Ms.
Huang has not framed her request for relief as such, however. She makes this
request without the benefit of a full record and trial evidence, including
evidence from Mr. Liu.
[106]      
I find that she does not meet the test for
interlocutory injunctive relief. For the reasons above, I find there are
serious issues to be tried regarding whether Ms. Huang is a bona fide purchaser
for value and is in fact entitled to possession of 177 Rumsey. I am not
persuaded by the record before me that she would experience irreparable harm if
she were not granted possession, given that she never moved in and does not
currently reside there, does not appear to be incurring any costs of running
the home, and knew the home to be incomplete at the time of purchase. Any harm
she incurs could be addressed through damages. Finally, I find that the balance
of convenience would favour not granting the order: this would maintain the status
quo and would not tip the scale in favour of Ms. Huang, whose purchase of
177 Rumsey raises several serious questions requiring trial.
[107]      
The Defendant Mr. Shi entered into an agreement
of purchase and sale for 171 Rumsey on December 31, 2023. The sale closed on
January 12, 2024; it was originally scheduled to close on January 9.
[108]      
The Plaintiffs now seek a Certificate of Pending
Litigation (“CPL”) on 171 Rumsey. They assert that Mr. Shi purchased the
property through an improper power of sale process when the Rumsey Mortgage was
not in default, and that he bought it for a fraction of its market value and
through a hasty transaction. They say he is not a bona fide purchaser
for value and that he conspired with Mr. Liu to improper obtain title.
[109]      
The court’s authority to grant a CPL is found in
s. 103(1) of the Courts of Justice Act. To grant the CPL, I must first be
satisfied that the Plaintiffs have a triable claim to an interest in 171 Rumsey.
Then I must consider all relevant factors between the parties and balance the
interests of the parties in the exercise of my discretion to issue the CPL (Rahbar
v. Parvizi, 2022 ONSC 1104, at para. 20).
[110]      
I am satisfied that the Plaintiffs have a
triable claim to an interest in 171 Rumsey. They were the registered owners of
171 Rumsey before the power of sale proceedings began. They challenge the power
of sale proceedings and assert that the Rumsey Mortgage would not have been in
default had Mr. Liu and Mr. Feng applied the 2023 Payment against it. As
discussed above in relation to the injunction motion, I find that whether Mr.
Liu and Mr. Feng had authority to apply the 2023 Payment against the Chen Loans
rather than the Bannatyne Mortgage is a serious issue to be tried. For the same
reasons, I find that whether they had authority to apply the 2023 Payment
against the Chen Loans rather than the Rumsey Mortgage is a triable issue. In
addition, the Plaintiffs assert that the Rumsey Properties were sold
improvidently to Mr. Shi; if they are correct on this issue, then they have an
interest in the difference between 171 Rumsey’s actual market value and the
price at which it was sold to Mr. Shi. Based on these considerations, I find
that the first part of the test for granting a CPL is met.
[111]      
Turning to the second part of the test, I am
satisfied, based on the relevant factors between the parties and a balancing of
their interests, that it is appropriate to exercise my discretion in equity to
grant a CPL.
[112]      
As discussed above, there are valid questions
about the speed with which the Rumsey Properties were sold, and, relatedly, whether
the Rumsey Properties were sold at fair market value. The evidence in this
motion reinforces these concerns. It shows that, mere weeks after Mr. Shi
purchased 171 Rumsey, he obtained a new mortgage that was predicated on a
market valuation about one and a half times the price he paid for it.
[113]      
The record also raises questions as to whether Mr.
Shi truly has an arms-length relationship to the Defendants. Mr. Shi had a
longstanding relationship with Alex and was performing construction work at 171
Rumsey for Alex when he purchased the property. Additionally, Mr. Shi obtained
a vendor takeback mortgage from Mr. Liu as part of the power of sale. He did
not attempt to obtain a traditional mortgage for the purchase. He did not make
regular interest payments on the mortgage from Mr. Liu.
[114]      
Considering these relevant factors between the
parties, and balancing their respective interests, I find that it is
appropriate to exercise my discretion to grant a CPL over 171 Rumsey. The
concerns that Mr. Shi may not be an arms-length purchaser and may not have paid
fair market value are equitable considerations. The CPL is appropriately
granted in these circumstances.
[115]      
These motions raise important questions about Mr.
Liu’s and Mr. Feng’s potential bad faith, inadequate or misleading
documentation, and inability to make out the claims, central to their position,
that they were authorized to apply the 2023 Payment against the Bannatyne
Mortgage and Rumsey Mortgage and that they did in fact do so. The motions also
raise concerns about whether the Rumsey Properties were in fact purchased by bona
fide and arms-length purchasers. These considerations form the basis of my
decision to grant interlocutory relief.
[116]      
I am, at the same time, mindful that the courts
should not unduly interfere with the ability of a mortgagee to exercise their
power of sale (Arnold v. Bronstein et al., 1970 CanLII 245 (ON SC), [1971] 1 O.R. 467 (H.C.)). If
indeed it is found that the Bannatyne and Rumsey Mortgages are in default, there
is, on the record before me, no evidence that the Plaintiffs have any funds
with which to pay the Mortgages other than the 2023 Payment, which in any event
is insufficient to redeem both Mortgages. There is no evidence that the
Plaintiffs have refinanced either Mortgage; that they have additional funds
that they are willing and able to apply against either Mortgage; or that the
completion of construction on any of the Properties is imminent. If the
Mortgages are in fact in default, then any power of sale proceedings should be
able to unfold in a timely and smooth fashion.
[117]      
I therefore consider it appropriate to
consolidate and impose case management on this action, the related actions
identified above, and any other litigation among the parties relating to the loan
arrangements among them. Presently, these actions appear to be unfolding in
parallel. Indeed, these three motions were originally scheduled to be heard by
two separate judges on two separate dates. This approach will only result in
delay and additional expense for the parties. It will also result in an
inefficient use of judicial resources and, potentially, inconsistent judicial
findings. Consolidation and case management will help the actions to move
forward efficiently and in a timely way.
[118]      
The parties are to advise me if there are any
actions among the parties other than the ones about which I am aware and which
I have listed earlier in these Reasons. If there are such actions, they will be
added to the case management and consolidation order.
[119]      
In exercising my discretion to fix costs under
section 131 of the Courts of Justice Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c C.43, I may consider the factors enumerated in Rule 57.01 of
the Rules of Civil Procedure,
R.R.O. 1990, Reg 194. Those factors include the result achieved, the amounts
claimed and recovered, the complexity and importance of the issues in the
proceeding, the principle of indemnity, the reasonable expectations of the
unsuccessful party, and any other matter relevant to costs.
[120]      
In the recent case of Apotex Inc. v. Eli
Lilly Canada Inc., 2022 ONCA 587, the Ontario Court of Appeal restated the
general principles to be applied when courts exercise their discretion to award
costs. The Court held that, when assessing costs, a court is to undertake a
critical examination of the relevant factors, as applied to the costs claimed,
and then “step back and consider the result produced and question whether, in
all the circumstances, the result is fair and reasonable”. The overarching
objective is to fix an amount for costs that is objectively reasonable,
fair, and proportionate for the unsuccessful party to pay in the circumstances
of the case, rather than to fix an amount based on the actual
costs incurred by the successful litigant.
[121]      
Applying these principles here, I note that the
Plaintiffs were successful in each of the three motions. They had to do
considerable work to put together the evidentiary record given the various
transactions and interactions at issue. These are all factors that support
granting them their costs. I am also of the view, however, that both parties
drove up their own and one another’s costs by taking steps that were
unnecessary, such as serving sur-reply materials and raising objections on
matters that could and should have been sorted out constructively. Additionally,
there is some duplication of effort across the motions, given that several
factual and legal issues overlap across the motions to some extent.
[122]      
The Plaintiffs claim a total of $194,091.30 in
costs on a partial indemnity basis, inclusive of HST and disbursements, on the
three motions. This number breaks down as follows:
[123]      
Stepping back and viewing the matter as a whole,
I consider it appropriate for the Plaintiffs to recover $170,000.00 in costs,
inclusive of HST and disbursements. This amount shall be paid by the Defendants
within 30 days.
[124]      
The Plaintiffs’ motion for an interlocutory
injunction restraining the sale of 93 Bannatyne pending the final determination
of this action is granted.
[125]      
Ms. Huang’s motion seeking an order that the
Plaintiffs deliver possession of 177 Rumsey to her, an order that the sheriff of
the City of Toronto deliver vacant possession of 177 Rumsey to her, an order
that the Caution currently registered against title to 177 Rumsey by 11291246
be lifted, and leave to issue a Writ of Possession against 177 Rumsey, is denied.
[126]      
The Plaintiffs’ motion for leave to register a
Certificate of Pending Litigation on 171 Rumsey pending the final determination
of this action is granted.
[127]      
This action, together with the action for
enforcement of the mortgage on the Bannatyne Property and possession and sale
of the Bannatyne Property (CV-24-00717746-0000), the action for enforcement of
the mortgage on the Rumsey Properties and possession of the Rumsey Properties
(CV-23-00708596-0000), the action in respect of various secured and unsecured
loans, including a second mortgage on the Rumsey Properties
(CV-24-00715323-0000), and any other actions involving the loan arrangements
among the parties shall be consolidated and case managed. If there are other
such actions beyond the ones identified herein, the parties shall advise the
court immediately.
[128]      
The Defendants shall pay the Plaintiffs
$170,000.00 in costs, inclusive of HST and disbursements, within 30 days.