[1]              
The Plaintiffs move for
an order striking the Defendants’ Amended Statement of Defence and
Counterclaim, and for costs.
[2]              
The Defendants oppose
the relief sought.
[3]              
For the reasons that
follow, the motion is granted.
[4]              
The Defendants in this
matter are Eric Klein, his brother Evan Klein, and the entities they own and/or
control: Klein Property Group Inc., Klein Capital Group and KPG Capital LP.
They took investments from the Plaintiffs in purported limited partnerships
under promissory notes created by the Kleins. The partnerships were to develop
various real estate projects, many in and around Montréal, Québec.
[5]              
Eric and Evan Klein appear
on this motion as self-represented litigants. A court reporter was present at
the hearing.
[6]              
The Defendant Eric
Klein had previously worked for an entity called Cadman Capital Inc. for
approximately 10 months until the fall of 2017. The Plaintiffs were clients of
Cadman. The Plaintiffs’ claim is that, using confidential client information
that he had misappropriated from Cadman, Eric Klein and his brother Evan Klein targeted
clients of Cadman, including the Plaintiffs, to solicit them for investment in
their purported promissory notes.
[7]              
The Plaintiffs allege
that the misrepresentations from the Kleins on which they relied included the
representations that:
[8]              
In fact, the Kleins had
not begun a single development project, and the Plaintiffs allege that, with
the exception of their use of $90,000 of investor funds to purchase a single
property described below (in their own name, and not on behalf of investors),
the Kleins squandered the balance of the investor funds on themselves.
[9]              
The Plaintiffs commenced
this proceeding on the basis of the alleged fraudulent misrepresentations to
seek to recover the funds they invested in the amount of USD $375,000 (approx. CAD $527,000).
[10]          
The Plaintiffs were
granted a Mareva order in this proceeding on October 10, 2018. In his Endorsement setting out the reasons for
granting that order, Penny, J. found:
[11]          
On December 17, 2018, the Defendants (then represented by counsel),
consented to a continuation of the Mareva order until trial or further
order of the Court. Among the assets covered by the Mareva order was a property
located in Trois-Rivieres, Québec purchased by the Defendants outright in their
own names using the Plaintiffs’ funds. Title to the Property was taken in the
names of the Klein brothers personally (as opposed to the name of any corporate
Defendant with which the Plaintiffs had placed their funds).
[12]          
The Property generated
rental income which the Plaintiffs subsequently consented to being placed in
trust by counsel to the Defendants, provided that the rental income funds were
not co-mingled and were held for the purposes of the Mareva order.
[13]          
Notwithstanding the
continuing Mareva order, in February
2019, the Klein brothers placed
a $25,000 mortgage on the Property in favour of a Québec lender. They received
the mortgage proceeds, subsequently failed to make payments on the mortgage. The
mortgagee took possession of the Property in September 2019, when
the Klein brothers voluntarily surrendered the Property to that mortgagee and
relinquished any claim on the proceeds of the sale of the Property in exchange
for a surrender fee of $5000. The mortgagee subsequently sold the Property.
[14]          
The Property was the
only tangible asset subject to the Mareva order. Of the investor funds
of USD $375,000 (approximately CAD $487,500), most of the funds were spent as allowable
legal fees and living expenses and, except for a modest balance of a few
thousand dollars, the remainder had been used to purchase the property.
[15]          
When these events were
discovered by the Plaintiffs and brought to the attention of counsel for the
Defendants, the Defendants' counsel removed themselves from the record in this
proceeding.
[16]          
The Defendants
commenced a third-party claim against Cadman and its principal.
[17]          
The Plaintiffs then
moved for an order finding the Kleins in contempt of the Mareva order.
[18]          
The first phase of the
contempt hearing resulted in a finding of contempt and an order of McEwen, J. dated April 23, 2020. In his reasons, McEwen, J.:
[19]          
As a result of the
Covid 19 pandemic, the second (penalty) phase of the contempt motion was delayed,
and the resulting decision was made some 21
months thereafter. In the
interim, the Klein brothers attempted to challenge the Mareva order and
take other steps.
[20]          
Four days after the
hearing of the first phase of the contempt motion, and while the decision was
under reserve, the Klein brothers delivered an Amended Statement of Defence. For
the first time, they sought to commence a counterclaim against the Applicants
(the victims of their fraud) seeking $1,500,000 in damages. Specifically, they sought $1,000,000
for alleged breach of confidence and unlawful conspiracy, and $500,000 in punitive,
aggravated and exemplary damages.
[21]          
The Kleins then
attempted several times and in several ways to advance that counterclaim,
despite an Endorsement from this Court prohibiting them from doing so pending
the outcome of the second phase of the contempt motion. Those attempts included:
[22]          
Numerous Court
attendances, motions and case conferences were required to address these
actions of the Kleins.
[23]          
The Plaintiffs sought
an order for costs in respect of the motion to quash. On January 21, 2021, McEwen, J. awarded the Plaintiffs costs of $15,474.32.
[24]          
The penalty phase of
the contempt motion was heard on November
17, 2021. The Plaintiffs
sought the imposition of a custodial term, and an order striking the Amended Defence
and Counterclaim.
[25]          
McEwen, J. delivered
his decision on January 13, 2022: Citti v. Klein, 2022 ONSC 293. As
reflected in that decision, the Plaintiffs did not seek the payment of a fine
on the basis that the Kleins, given their self-proclaimed difficult financial
circumstances, would be unable to pay a fine. The Kleins submitted that a term
of imprisonment would be disproportionate to the acts of contempt.
[26]          
In his Reasons for the sanction
order, McEwen, J. was clear both about the gravity of striking a pleading, and
that such could occur if the costs were not also paid. He determined that a
period of incarceration was not appropriate in the circumstances of this case,
but with respect to the relief that was ordered, he stated:
[27]          
McEwen, J. then made the
following disposition as reflected at paragraph
22 of the decision, and
awarded costs:
[28]          
That disposition is
reflected in paragraph 1 of the issued and entered Order dated January 13, 2022. In addition, that Order goes on in paragraph 2 to
require the Defendants to pay the costs of the Plaintiffs fixed in the total
amount of $85,474.95 within 60
days of May 27, 2022.[1]
[29]          
The third-party claim
was dismissed on consent. In that consent dismissal order dated January 12, 2023, McEwen, J. ordered the Kleins to pay a third-party
costs award in the amount of $51,823.78. That costs award also remains unpaid.
[30]          
As noted above, the
sanction order is clear on its terms, providing in paragraph 1 that if the fine
and the costs were not paid within 60
days, the pleading would be
struck. The costs were in fact paid. While the sanction motion was under
reserve, unbeknownst to McEwen, J., such that by the date on which the sanction
decision was released, the Defendants had in fact remitted the outstanding
costs of $15,474.32. Those costs had been paid by the
Defendants in the face of a then pending motion for security costs against them
brought by the third parties.
[31]          
The result of all of
the above is that (and leaving aside the unpaid third-party costs award of $51,823.78), the Defendants were ordered to pay the fine of $35,000 and costs of $85,474.95
by July 29, 2024.[2]
[32]          
The Defendants did not pay
the fine. Instead, approximately three weeks after it was due, on August 19, 2024, the Defendants requested a case conference to seek
an extension until November 4, 2024 to pay the fine. They submitted that it
was due to be paid on September 4 (which was erroneous), and that they
required additional time to raise the funds.
[33]          
At a scheduling case
conference on September 25, 2024, Penny, J. directed that the Defendants
would be permitted to bring a motion to vary the sanction order and scheduled November 14, 2024
as the return date for that motion. The Defendants have not
brought any motion to vary.
[34]          
As of the date of this
motion, the Defendants have not paid any of the fine of $35,000,
or the outstanding costs award in favour of the Plaintiffs of $85,474.95 (or the third-party costs award of $51,823.78).
[35]          
The Plaintiffs
therefore request that the Defendants’ pleading be struck for failure to comply
with the sanction order, and further submit that a plain reading of paragraphs 17 and 21 of McEwen J’s reasons for making that Order reflect
the clear intention of the Court that if those amounts were not paid within 60
days, the pleading would be struck.[3]
[36]          
Rule 60.12 gives this Court the discretion, where a party fails
to comply with an interlocutory order, and in addition to imposing any other
sanction provided by the rules, to stay the party’s proceeding; dismiss the
party’s proceeding or strike out the party’s defence; or make such other order
as is just.
[37]          
The leading authority
on the factors to be considered
on a motion to strike a defence is Falcon
Lumber Limited v. 2480375 Ontario Inc. (GN Mouldings and Doors), 2020 ONCA 310 (“Falcon Lumber”).
[38]          
In that case, Brown J.A.
agreed that “the scope of the remedy is one within the discretion of the Court,
to be determined in the context of that particular case” (at para. 49, citing with approval Wein J. in Newlove
v. Moderco Inc., 2002 CanLII 34748 (ON SC), at para.
21). The striking of a
pleading is not restricted to “last resort” situations in the sense that it
must be preceded by a party breaching a series of earlier orders that compelled
better disclosure or production: see Falcon Lumber at para. 57.
[39]          
The Court in Falcon
Lumber held that a number of common-sense factors should be considered when
determining whether to strike a pleading. At para. 57, the Court listed those factors:
[40]          
In my view, the factors
are satisfied here. The failure to comply with the Order is clear and
unequivocal.
[41]          
The Defendants do not
dispute that neither the fine nor the outstanding costs award has been paid.
They do however submit that they failed to understand or appreciate that the
costs (in addition to the fine) were required to be paid, failing which their
pleading would be struck. They submit that at the time the Order was made they
were represented by counsel, and they did not see the language of the actual
order until the last few months. They submit that it was only then that they
appreciated the consequences of their failure to comply.
[42]          
They now request that
they be permitted additional time to make the required payments given their
financial circumstances.
[43]          
I reject the submission
for a number of reasons.
[44]          
In my view, it is clear
that the Defendants were each well aware of their obligations to pay both
amounts.
[45]          
Evan Klein delivered an
affidavit in response to this motion. Eric Klein elected to file no evidence.
[46]          
In his affidavit, Evan
Klein states that he and his brother paid the outstanding costs award (of $15,474.32) “approximately one week after we received Justice McEwen’s Reasons
for decision”. He attaches a copy of the Reasons as an exhibit to his affidavit,
demonstrating that he clearly had the Reasons.
[47]          
Evan Klein makes
extensive references in his affidavit to various steps in this litigation, the
overwhelming majority of which are not responsive to the issue on this motion.
For example, he details what he describes as an exchange with the Plaintiffs
about the possibility of coming to a mutually beneficial resolution plan,
beginning around January 2020.
[48]          
Evan Klein states that
the Defendants retained new counsel (Goldman Hine LLP) to represent him and his
brother in the action on February 7, 2022, and that they sent that counsel a
retainer fee in the amount of $30,000. One week later, they were served with the
Notice of Appeal referred to above.
[49]          
Evan Klein then states
that in or around August 2023, their lawyer was away on medical
leave and did not plan to return, with the result that that firm subsequently
brought a motion to be removed from the record, on or around January 25, 2024. The Defendants attempted to retain new counsel over
the next month or so, until March 5, 2024, without success. Evan Klein states that,
with their lawyer away on medical leave “it took some time to receive the
complete case file from [that firm]."
[50]          
I pause to observe that
there is no evidence from or on behalf of those lawyers as to:
[51]          
As a preliminary
matter, in my view the date on which they received the file is not particularly
relevant here. The Defendants were aware of Justice McEwen’s Reasons for
Decision effectively when they were released, as acknowledged by Evan Klein in
his affidavit, and as was clearly acknowledged by both Kleins in court during
the hearing of this motion. That is why they immediately paid the costs award
of $15,000.
[52]          
In my view, the fact
that they were aware of the Reasons for Decision is largely dispositive of the
matter given the paragraphs from that decision excerpted above. Justice
McEwen’s Reasons were clear that in the absence of the payment of all specified
amounts, their pleading should be struck. The Defendants admit that they were
aware of the Reasons.
[53]          
However, the Kleins
submit that, as set out in Evan Klein’s affidavit beginning at paragraph 69, “on or around July 2024, I first discovered a copy of the order from
Justice McEwen. That stated that the fine of $35,000 must be paid,
otherwise our defence would be struck. Until that time, I was of the
understanding that it was only the costs of $15,474 that ought to be paid,
which the defendants paid within one week.”
[54]          
Evan Klein goes on to
state that his counsel was in possession of the order, but he and his brother
were not. He says transition of documents was difficult, as their former
counsel was hard to reach and did not frequently respond, and that when he (Evan)
took over the file, he was only in possession of the endorsement (i.e., the Reasons)
“which did not clearly state the terms of the fine.”
[55]          
Again, there is no
evidence beyond these bald statements as to any difficulty in the transition of
documents, counsel being hard to reach, or when Evan Klein took over the file
as he admits he did.
[56]          
There is no clear
statement that the Order was not also in the solicitor’s file. Nor is there any
basis for an inference that it would not be in the file. Moreover, Evan Klein
does not explain in his affidavit at all the entire chronology of the events
surrounding the appeal to the Court of Appeal for Ontario from that Order. The
Kleins’ own appeal materials filed make express and repeated references to the Order
of McEwen, J.
[57]          
Having considered all
of the evidence in the record on this motion, I find that the position of the
Kleins (as described albeit vaguely in the affidavit of Evan Klein, and in the
absence of any evidence from Eric Klein), that they only became aware of the
terms of the Order of Justice McEwen in July of this year, to not be credible,
just as Justice McEwen earlier found. Moreover, that allegedly recent awareness
of the terms of the Order is no answer to the motion in any event, for a number
of reasons.
[58]          
First, as noted above,
the fact of the late awareness of the Order as a separate document is
irrelevant given that they were clearly aware of the Reasons, as was expressly
conceded.
[59]          
Second, even if I did
accept that evidence, which I do not, Evan Klein states at paragraph 71 of his affidavit that when he received the Order, he immediately wrote
to the court requesting a case conference to seek an extension of time for the
payment of the fine “so that the defendants could arrange the funds to pay the
remainder of the $35,000. I did not want our defence being struck.”
[60]          
Evan Klein further
states that it has been extremely difficult to obtain enough money to satisfy
the fine by the deadline. In any event, it has not been paid.
[61]          
Evan Klein does not
even now seek leave to pay the fine, albeit late. Rather, he states that “the
defendants would like to propose the following, which would satisfy the payment
of the fine and prevent the striking of their defence”. The proposal, set out
at paragraph 75 of his affidavit, is another attempt to renegotiate an Order
now made over two years ago, and to do so on terms that are woefully
inadequate. Even if any such proposal could or should be accepted in any event,
the Defendants now propose that the fine be paid as follows:
[62]          
None of this is
acceptable to the Plaintiffs, and nor should it be. It is not acceptable to the
Court either. Rather, even today, they continue to attempt to negotiate and
barter, and propose to offer up an instalment plan and pay the funds over time.
[63]          
In addition, I cannot
conclude on the evidence (the affidavit of Evan Klein), that the Defendants are
impecunious (or even that Evan Klein is impecunious, leaving aside Eric, from whom
there is no evidence). They have not sought to vary the sanction order, but
rather, simply request even more time to make the payments.
[64]          
In further addition,
the submission of impecuniosity now advanced is inconsistent with the position
advanced by the Kleins on the security for costs motion brought by the third
parties.
[65]          
In connection with that
motion, Eric Klein swore in his affidavit that he had been able to overcome the
financial stress that resulted from the Mareva order and contempt
proceeding; that he had built a successful blockchain company; and that Evan
Klein had established a successful career as a freelance writer and editorial
director. That evidence was put forward shortly before the sanction order at
issue here was granted and I reject the opposite position now taken,
essentially baldly and without evidence, on this motion.
[66]          
In any event,
impecuniosity, even if established, would not on its own be sufficient to
excuse the non-compliance with the order. As observed by Dunphy, J. in Rana v. Unifund Assurance Company, 2016
ONSC 2502, at para. 50, a litigant’s right of access to the courts must be
accompanied by the responsibility to abide by the Rules and comply with court
orders. Exempting impecunious parties from enforcing costs orders may amount to
granting “carte blanche to continue to ignore rules and orders and take
unsupportable steps in the action without fear of consequences.”
[67]          
Moreover, the quantum
of the fine is in addition to, and not substitution for, the costs award, as
ordered by Justice McEwen and upheld by the Court of Appeal. That order did not
contemplate payment of the funds coming from the very limited amounts already frozen
by the existing Mareva order. The Defendants are seeking not just additional
time to pay amounts they were ordered to pay long ago, but they are also
seeking to use funds already paid in respect of the fine. That is, in effect,
double counting and is not acceptable.
[68]          
Finally, what the
Defendants are actually offering from their own non-frozen funds is only $1250 per month, beginning approximately two months from now and
totalling only $15,000 in the aggregate.
[69]          
Moreover, the
Defendants do not address the balance of Justice McEwen’s order, the obligation
to pay the costs outstanding of $35,000,
at all. That amount remains
owing, as it was ordered over two years ago, and there is no acknowledgement of
this amount alone payment or even a proposal for the payment over time.
[70]          
I also pause to observe
that, as submitted by the Defendants, they are owed $15,000
in costs from the Plaintiffs ($10,000 in respect of the motion of the Plaintiffs
to lift the stay while the appeal was pending, and $5000
awarded on the dismissal of the appeal). The Plaintiffs have understandably not
paid those amounts in the circumstances set out above, but in any event, they formally
acknowledged in argument that they would be prepared to set off those amounts
as against the net owing by the Defendants.
[71]          
I make this observation
given the submission of the Defendants that the Plaintiffs are in the same
situation as they are in that there are unpaid costs awards. The situation is
not at all analogous: there has been no finding of contempt in respect of the Plaintiffs,
which contempt in respect of the Defendants continues.
[72]          
In any event, the fact
of the outstanding costs award in favour of the Defendants, particularly in
light of the undertaking to set off, does not alter the fundamental fact that
significant amounts remain owing by the Defendants to the Plaintiffs, and that
the relevant orders are simply being ignored. To state the obvious, there is no
undertaking on the part of the Defendants to purge their contempt by paying the
amount owing, even net of the $15,000 in their favour. Instead, they propose the
instalment plan and set-off as against the fine, all as described above.
[73]          
The Court of Appeal
observed in Falcon Lumber that orders to strike pleadings are one means
by which to ensure that the
civil justice process delivers justice that is proportionate, timely and
affordable (Falcon Lumber, at para. 55).
[74]          
In this case, the
Plaintiffs are trying, so far in vain, to recover the USD $375,000 they invested in purported real estate projects of the Plaintiffs that
never existed. The only tangible Property frozen by the Mareva order has
a value that is well short of the amounts invested, of approximately $90,000.
Further, the funds actually available are significantly less because of the
actions of the Defendants, resulting in the contempt order in the first place:
in flagrant disregard of that order, they mortgaged the Property for $25,000
and took those funds for their own uses.
[75]          
The default is material
and continuing. It is but one of a number of examples of the Defendants simply
not complying with court orders, many of which were recognized by McEwen, J. in
his Reasons. Their conduct has made and continues to make the delivery of civil
justice that is proportionate, timely and affordable, almost impossible in this
case. In the circumstances, it is not just and equitable for the Plaintiffs to
continue to have to prosecute their claim and defend the counterclaim.
[76]          
That was true at the
time McEwen, J. made his decision in which he noted that “it would be grossly unfair to the Plaintiffs to condemn
them to have to pursue their action and defend the counterclaim involving Defendants which have been found in contempt, and will not
or cannot pay a fine or the outstanding Costs Order” (para. 21). That
was the case then and is even more so the case today.
[77]          
Finally, the Defendants
have also failed to pay the award of costs made in connection with the sanction
order by the deadline set by McEwen, J. or at all. I am also satisfied that
this justifies the pleading being struck pursuant to Rule 57.03(2). In my view, it is not the role of the Court on this motion to revisit
the discretion exercised by McEwen, J. who has already ordered those costs to
be paid within 60 days of May 27, 2022 (the date on which the costs of the
contempt motion were determined).
[78]          
In determining whether
to strike a claim pursuant to Rule 57.03, the
Court must “balance between having claims and defences adjudicated on their
merits and ensuring that the administration of justice is not undermined by
litigants failing to comply with court orders”: Allen v. Kumar, 2022
ONSC 4223, 87 CPC (8th) 293, at para. 10, citing Garrett v. Oldfield,
2016 ONCA 424 at para. 2, and Hazelton Homes Corporation v. Katebian,
2021 ONSC 1167 at para. 6. The Court in that case identified several principles
to guide the Court’s exercise of discretion under Rule 57.03(2):
[79]          
In my view, a
consideration of these factors militates strongly in favour of striking the
pleading of the Defendants here, recognizing as I do the strong preference of
our courts to determine matters on their merits. When all of the circumstances
of this case and the chronology of events as set out above is taken into
account, I cannot conclude anything other than it would be unfair and
inequitable to allow the Defendants to continue their behaviour, while
effectively compelling the Plaintiffs to continue to have to prosecute their
claim in an attempt to recover their investments and defend the counterclaim. This
is just as Dunphy, J. found, and as McEwen J. found.
[80]          
The starting point for
all of this was the Defendants’ brazen decision to simply ignore the Mareva
order, encumber the only significant Property that the order froze, take the
funds, and then argue that they did not appreciate the effect of the order.
[81]          
The Court found them to
be in contempt, and now they argue, yet again, that notwithstanding they had by
their own admission the Reasons clearly compelling them to satisfy the costs
awards or their pleading would be struck, and notwithstanding their appeal to
the Court of Appeal from the Order they now allege they did not see until a few
months ago, they did not appreciate the effect of the Reasons and the Order.
The Defendants had the opportunity to make submissions about impecuniosity, and
in response to the motion for security for costs, did the opposite. Finally,
even now, the Defendants do not offer to purge their contempt and comply with
the Order, but instead elect to try to renegotiate it.
[82]          
As noted in the excerpt
above, such a result is unfair to the parties opposite and undermines respect
for the court in the civil justice system.
[83]          
The observations of
Ricchetti, J. in his disposition of the motion in Falcon Lumber Limited v. 24803375 Ontario Inc., 2019 ONSC 4280, at para. 5, aff’d 2020 ONCA 310, at first instance (and obviously prior to
the decision of the Court of Appeal referred to above), are in my view equally
applicable to the present case:
[84]          
For all of these
reasons, the Amended Statement of Defence and Counterclaim of the Defendants is
struck.
[85]          
The Plaintiffs have
been successful on the motion. They are presumptively entitled to their costs.
[86]          
The Plaintiffs have
submitted a Costs Outline reflecting partial indemnity costs of $23,262.18 and substantial indemnity costs of $34,723.77. All amounts are inclusive of fees, disbursements and HST.
[87]          
Pursuant to s. 131 of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, costs are in the
discretion of the court, and the court may determine by whom and to what extent
the costs shall be paid.
[88]          
Rule 57.01 provides
that in exercising its discretion under s. 131, the court may consider, in
addition to the result in the proceeding (and any offer to settle or
contribute), the factors set out in that Rule.
[89]          
The overarching
objective is to fix an amount that is fair, reasonable, proportionate and
within the reasonable expectations of the parties in the circumstances: Boucher
v. Public Accountants Council for the Province of Ontario (2004), 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R.
(3d) 291 (C.A.), at paras. 24-26.
[90]          
In my view, there is no
basis here to award costs on an elevated scale, and they should be awarded on a
partial indemnity basis. Taking into account the factors set out in Rule 57 and
considering them in the particular circumstances of this case, in my view an
appropriate award of costs is $15,000 inclusive of fees, disbursements and HST.
[91]          
Rule 57.03 provides that, on the hearing of a contested motion,
unless the court is satisfied that a different order would be more just, the
court shall fix the costs of the motion and order them to be paid within 30
days.
[92]          
Accordingly, that
amount is payable by the Defendants to the Plaintiffs within 30 days.
[93]          
Order to go in
accordance with this Endorsement.