[1]              
The Plaintiff, Jennings Lodge Inc. (“Jennings
Lodge”), brings this motion for an interlocutory injunction to restrain and enjoin
the Canadian Mental Health Agency – South Simcoe Branch (“CMHA”) from
relocating its residents. Specifically, it seeks an order that the Defendant
shall be restrained and enjoined from directly or indirectly, by any means
whatsoever relocating any residents of Jennings Lodge at 38 Church St.,
Penetanguishene until either the resolution of the Plaintiff’s claim or until
January 22, 2025, whichever is earlier.
[2]              
Jennings Lodge operated as a licensed home for special
care under the Homes for Special Care Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. H.12 (the
Act) for approximately 40 years in Penetanguishene, Ontario serving persons
with serious mental health challenges who require significant support.
[3]              
Under the Act, a home for special care provides
nursing, residential and sheltered care and the Minister is responsible for the
Act. A resident under the Act is a person received and lodged under the Act.
[4]              
The Act provides for the licensing of special
care homes which can be renewed or canceled on terms and conditions as
prescribed in the regulations. The inspection of homes, fire safety standards,
admissions, trust funds for residence and other aspects of the home were
regulated and subject to licensing standards. Under the Act, Jennings Lodge was
licensed and funded by the Waypoint Centre for Mental Health Care and subject
to the Act, regulation, and Policy Manual.
[5]              
In October, 2018, the Ministry of Health began
to wind down the Homes for Special Care program and created a new program
called the Community Homes for Opportunity (CHO) program. The Act was not
repealed. CHO homes do not operate under the Act but rather as a Ministry
program.
[6]              
Under this program, rather than being licensed, homes
that were licensed under the Act were required to enter into a Transfer Payment
Agreement with a community agency running the program. The community agency for
Jennings Lodge was the Canadian Mental Health Agency – South Simcoe Branch (CMHA).
As a result, the CMHA South Simcoe Branch in charge of administering Jennings
Lodge entered into a Transfer Payment Agreement with the CMHA.
[7]              
The Transfer Payment Agreement is a standard
agreement created by the Ministry of Health. Under the agreement, CMHA may terminate
the agreement on 90 days’ notice. Jennings Lodge resisted the inclusion of this
term before entering into the agreement. However, the CMHA, after checking with
the Ministry of Health, refused to change the term arguing that it was a
standard term across all CHO homes. CMHA told Jennings Lodge that the agreement
is standardized across all homes in Ontario and while the Ministry was willing
to meet with Jennings Lodge, the outcome would not change.
[8]              
Jennings Lodge wanted to continue to provide the
service and operate the home so it reluctantly signed the agreement and
transitioned from a Home for Special Care to a CHO with the same residents.
[9]              
Under the CHO program, homes subject to a TPA
must meet certain program standards for which the CMHA is responsible to ensure
compliance. CMHA also appears to deliver services for the residents of the Jennings
Lodge CHO program, such that it is both delivering a program and ensuring
compliance of the home.
[10]          
Under the TPA, the CMHA and the CHO Homeowner agreed
to “Relationship Principles” where the tenant is said to be at the centre of
the CHO program. These principles provide, among other things, that:
[11]          
Upon the transition to a CHO home, the CMHA
worked to ensure that Jennings Lodge complied with program standards.
Ultimately, Jennings Lodge and the CMHA created a compliance plan to bring
Jennings Lodge into compliance.
[12]          
On September 24, 2024, the CMHA gave notice that
it was terminating the agreement effective January 22, 2025. It began giving
notice to the residents in early October, 2024, and some residents have already
been relocated.
[13]          
The notice to the residents informed them that
Jennings Lodge would cease to be a CHO home as of January 22, 2025. It
explained that CMHA would no longer be administering the rent payments for the
residents at Jennings Lodge and that they would be responsible for rent. It
also set out that the residents to continue to receive CHO services would need
to relocate, and that the only services that CMHA would provide to the resident
after January 22, 2025, would be to assist them with relocating to new housing
where they could receive CHO services.
[14]          
The CMHA asserts that this represented a choice
for the residents: they could remain at Jennings Lodge without being part of
the CHO program (meaning without rent or supports), or that CMHA would support
them in finding a new residence.
[15]          
Neither party takes the position that the
decision made constitutes the exercise of a statutory power such that it falls under
the Judicial Review Procedures Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. J.1. As the CHO
program operates outside of a statutory framework, I have jurisdiction to
consider this motion.
[16]          
The issue on this motion is whether the interlocutory
injunction should be granted.
[17]          
I first address the governing principles and then apply them to the
facts of this case.
[18]          
The test for an interlocutory injunction was set out in RJR-MacDonald
Inc. v. Canada, 1994 CanLII 117 (SCC), [1994] 1 SCR 311 and re-affirmed in Google Inc. v.
Equustek Solutions Inc., 2017 SCC 34 (CanLII), [2017] SCJ No. 34 and R. v. Canadian
Broadcasting Corp., [2018] SCC 5. It requires the Court to assess whether
there is a serious issue to be tried, whether the Plaintiff would suffer
irreparable harm if the injunction is not granted, and where the balance of
convenience lies. The balance of convenience requires the Court to examine which
party will suffer the greater harm from the granting or the refusal of an
interlocutory injunction.
[19]          
The threshold on serious issues to be tried is a low one such that if
the Court is satisfied that the application is neither vexatious nor frivolous,
the Court should examine steps two and three. See RJR-MacDonald, supra,
at p. 402.
[20]          
On the second part of the test, the Plaintiff must demonstrate that
irreparable harm will result if the relief is not granted.
[21]          
The third part of the test requires the Court to examine the balance of
convenience. This means that I must determine which of the two parties will
suffer the greater harm from the granting or refusal of an interlocutory
injunction, pending a decision on the merits.
[22]          
Additionally, Rule 40.03 of the Rules of Civil Procedure provides:
[23]          
The undertaking is mandatory, and the Plaintiff has provided that
undertaking.
[24]          
The Plaintiff argues that the issue to be tried is whether the
termination without notice provision is enforceable.
[25]          
The Defendant did not appear to breach the contract. I accept that CMHA
gave more than the 90-day notice period provided in the TPA.
[26]          
The Plaintiff argues that the TPA is a contract of adhesion and that
terms imposed were unilaterally imposed. At issue is the termination with
notice without cause.
[27]          
The Plaintiff has shown that there is a serious issue to be tried. The
agreement was a take it or leave it agreement and can be considered a contract
of adhesion.
[28]          
The Plaintiff also asserts that there is also a serious issue to be
tried regarding whether the termination on notice clause is unconscionable such
that it should be voided.
[29]          
In Uber v. Heller, 2020 SCC 16, [2020] 2 S.C.R. 118, at para. 65,
the Supreme Court of Canada set out the two-part test for unconscionability in
contract:
[30]          
The Plaintiff has shown a serious issue with respect to both. CMHA’s take
it or leave it position demonstrates the first prong of the two-part test in Uber
v. Heller, supra. Jennings Lodge had no power to alter the agreement
and could not alter the agreement. On the evidence before me, there is a
serious issue with respect to whether Jennings Lodge struck an improvident
bargain. This is evident as Jennings Lodge, which has operated for approximately
40 years is forced to close on 120 days’ notice.
[31]          
Finally, despite the language in the contract that the tenants are at
the centre of the relationship, CMHA’s termination without cause has resulted
in the present situation where the residents have been treated as chattels who
can be moved without cause and without a meaningful choice.
[32]          
The Plaintiff claims irreparable harm to the business, its reputation,
the loss of its business, and for its residents, some of whom have lived at
Jennings Lodge for decades.
[33]          
The Defendant states that the losses claimed by Jennings Lodge in
respect of the business are quantifiable losses and that this aspect of the
test is not met. It argues that I have no evidence of the harm to be suffered
by the residents as the evidence before me is hearsay evidence.
[34]          
In RJR, the Supreme Court set out this part of the test as
follows:
[35]          
I agree with the CMHA, that the Plaintiff has been able to quantify the
value of the business loss should the CHO program end. However, I find that
that approach too narrowly construes the nature of the harm. The Plaintiff has
demonstrated that the termination could result in damage to its business
reputation and a permanent loss of its operation.
[36]          
As a result, I find that the Plaintiff has demonstrated that should the
injunction not be issued that it could suffer irreparable harm.
[37]          
As for the interests of the residents, the record contains letters from
family members concerned about the move and its impact on the care and
stability of the residents. It also contains a short survey conducted by
Jennings Lodge intended to draw out the wishes of the residents. I approach
this latter piece of hearsay evidence with caution as it was solicited by the
Plaintiff and cannot be viewed as either reliable or independent. This is one
of the reasons why I did not take up the Plaintiff’s offer made on the day of
the hearing for affidavits of the residents to be provided.
[38]          
However, I find support that irreparable harm to the residents could
occur in the obvious lack of consultation with them. While the TPA rests on
principles that the tenants are at the centre of the relationship, they have
been treated like chattels, things that can be moved. They were not consulted
on the decision until after it was made. Their views appear irrelevant to CMHA’s
decision making.
[39]          
Once notified of the decision, the residents were given no real choice and
forced to choose between staying, without CMHA paying rent or providing
support, or move to a place to be determined. That is not a real choice.
[40]          
The Defendant has provided evidence that 17 of the 18 residents have expressed
interest in relocating to another residence. This too is hearsay evidence. Even
if admissible, I have concerns about whether that expression of interest was
given after they were told that they could not receive rental payments or
support to stay at Jennings Lodge.
[41]          
CMHA also states through its affidavit evidence that it is actively
working with other residences and facilities in Simcoe County to house those
residents who wish to move. Five residents have already moved. CMHA states that
it will be able to move all residents prior to the termination but the scope of
the move and disruption to the residents is unclear. It could be that the
residents will eventually land in a better place. That remains unknown. However,
as the residents are forced to find a new supportive residence, they have been
made vulnerable because of program choices and decisions.
[42]          
In addition, CMHA’s decision to terminate will sever relationships that
tenants have made with each other and the professionals who work at Jennings
Lodge.
[43]          
For these reasons, I conclude that the refusal to grant this relief
could adversely affect the residents’ interests as result of the CMHA decision
to terminate the agreement. Irreparable harm has been made out in respect of
the residents.
[44]          
Under this part of the test, I consider the impact of the injunction and
look at how each party might suffer should I grant or not grant the injunction.
[45]          
CMHA does not assert that it will be harmed. However, it asserts that should
the injunction be granted, CMHA would be prevented from providing its clients
with the supports and services that they require during the transition process.
[46]          
Jennings Lodge faces the loss of its business and the residents face the
loss of their home. In my view, the balance of convenience lies with the
Plaintiff as it will suffer the greatest harm.
[47]          
The motion is granted. I order that CMHA shall
be restrained and enjoined from directly or indirectly, by any means whatsoever
relocating any residents of Jennings Lodge at 38 Church St., Penetanguishene
until either the resolution of the Plaintiff’s claim or until January 22, 2025,
whichever is earlier.
[48]          
I urge the parties to resolve costs. If they
cannot reach an agreement within the next week as to costs, the parties may
arrange an appointment before me.