1.     
The applicant, Ekatarina Cherkassova (“wife”),
seeks financial disclosure from the respondents, Rustam Ilakhunov (“Rustam”),
R&S Supreme Mobile Wash Inc. (“R&S”) and Supreme Capital Group Inc.
(“Supreme”), together referred to as the “Corporate Respondents”. The wife
submits that the respondent, Sergey Cherkassov (“husband”) was an owner and active
participant in these businesses during the marriage and it was only after
separation that he announced he has no ownership in these corporations.
Further, the wife argues that the corporate documentation appears to have been
amended after the parties’ separation to match the husband’s narrative. For
these reasons, the wife maintains the disclosure she seeks from Rustam, R&S
and Supreme is necessary and relevant, not only to prove the extent of the
husband’s net family property but, also, to determine his true income for
support purposes.
2.     
Rustam asks that the wife’s motion be dismissed.
He submits that the husband is neither an owner of R&S nor Supreme which is
reflected in the corporate records and that only he and the husband’s father,
Gennady Cherkassov (“Gennady”) are shareholders. Gennady owns Spetsavtomatika KZ (“SKZ”), a foreign company. Rustam maintains
that before both companies were incorporated, he ran the business, the seed
capital for which was provided by Gennady and SKZ. In exchange for investing
$280,000 USD in Rustam’s company, Gennady requested that his son be given a job
by Rustam for the company which is why the husband was employed by the
companies.
3.     
According to the wife, Faieta, J. made an order
on May 16, 2022, requiring the Corporate Respondents to provide financial
disclosure to her. She submits that the Corporate  Respondents are in breach of
this order and asks this court to compel them to produce this disclosure, failing
which, she asks for fines to be imposed effective immediately for the items of
disclosure already ordered to be produced by Faieta, J., starting December 1,
2024, and for all other items, with fines accumulating monthly until the
disclosure is provided. Alternatively, if the Corporate Respondents fail to
comply with the disclosure order, the wife asks for leave to bring a contempt
motion against them.
4.     
The Corporate Respondents maintain that there is
no court order requiring them to produce any disclosure. At the time Faieta, J.
made the disclosure order on May 16, 2022, neither Rustam, R&S nor Supreme were
parties to this proceeding, nor were they given notice of a motion for third
party disclosure. Accordingly, they submit they are not in breach of any court
orders. Instead, they argue that the disclosure order of Faieta, J. was only for
the husband to produce disclosure.
5.     
The issues for me to determine on this motion
are:
6.     
I have ordered the disclosure sought by the wife
from the Corporate Respondents, only once a Non-Disclosure Agreement is prepared
by the Corporate Respondents for execution by the wife. The reasons for my
decision are set out below.
7.     
The wife and husband were married for 11 years.
They have two children.
8.     
The issues outstanding in the litigation are the
division of net family property, which includes a determination of whether the
husband has an ownership interest in R&S and Supreme, and support, which
includes a determination of the husband’s true income for support purposes.
9.     
During the marriage, the wife did not work
outside of the home. It is agreed that the husband’s source of income came from
R&S.
10.  R&S is a company based in Mississauga, Ontario and provides
mobile truck washing services in the GTA. It began operations in 2007.
11.  According to the husband and Rustam, the only shareholders of
R&S are Gennady and Rustam.
12.  Supreme Capital is a real estate holding company, the primary assets
of which are a 100% interest in two residential condominium rental units
located at 88 Scott Street, Suites 4907 (purchased in September 2018) and 101
Charles Street West, Suite 1806 (purchased in March 2015). Again, according to
the husband and Rustam, the shareholders of Supreme Capital are Gennady and
Rustam.
13.  It was only after the wife received the husband’s Answer and
Financial statement on April 19, 2022 that she discovered he claims to hold 49%
of his interest in both R&S and Supreme in trust for his father’s company,
SKZ and the remaining 1% for Rustam. This came as a complete surprise to her as
she always understood the husband was a 50% owner of R&S and Supreme. The
wife understood that the husband managed both investment condominiums on his
own and that he owned them outright.
14.  According to the wife, the parties lived a luxurious lifestyle,
which included vacations to places such as Europe, Bahamas, and the Maldives,
flying business class, driving luxury vehicles such as Mercedes, and purchasing
expensive clothing and jewellery. The wife submits that substantial amounts
from the corporate accounts were deposited by the husband into the parties’
joint account and he used corporate credit cards to support their lavish
lifestyle and family expenses.
15.  On August 13, 2021, less than 2 weeks after the parties’ separated, the
husband transferred title to the Charles Street and Scott Street condominiums
from his sole name to Supreme and claims to hold title to these properties in
trust for Rustam and SKZ. The mortgage application which the wife attached as
an Exhibit to her affidavit, sworn on July 22, 2024, lists the husband as an
owner of R&S and having an annual income of $370,000. This contradicts the
husband’s sworn financial statement sworn in this proceeding.
16.   Despite the husband’s transfer of the two
investment properties to Supreme, the mortgages registered on title to both
investment properties remain in the husband’s name.
17.  The motion before me is to address disclosure the wife seeks fromRustam,
R&S and Supreme.
18.  At a case conference on May 16, 2022, Faieta, J. ordered the husband
to produce the financial disclosure listed in paragraph 17 of the wife’s case
conference brief.
19.  I have reviewed paragraph 17 of the wife’s case conference brief,
which contains a list of 29 items for the husband to produce, a list of 3 items
for Gennady to produce; a list of 9 items for R&S to produce; and a list of
9 items for Supreme to produce.
20.  Paragraph 2 of Faieta, J.’s Endorsement states,
21.  The Endorsement does not require Gennady, Rustam R&S or Supreme
to produce any disclosure. At the time the case conference was held on May 5,
2022, neither Gennady, Rustam, R&S nor Supreme were made parties to this
family law proceeding. Further, since there was no motion before the court,
these third parties were not served with motion materials seeking disclosure
from them.
22.  Accordingly, I do not find based on the record before me that
Gennady, Rustam, R&S nor Supreme were subject to a prior order for
disclosure. Although paragraph 17 of the wife’s case conference contains lists
of financial disclosure she wanted produced by Gennady, R&S and Supreme,
Faieta, J.’s order only references the husband as being required to provide her
with disclosure and that can only have meant the list of items she sought from
him.
23.  On this basis, I do not find that Rustam, Gennady, R&S or
Supreme are in breach of an existing court order requiring financial
disclosure. As a result, the relief sought by the wife for the imposition of
fines as a result of breach by Rustam, R&S and Supreme of an existing
disclosure order need not be considered by me, since there is no triggering
event.
24.  Therefore, the real issue for me to decide on this motion is whether
Rustam, R&S and Supreme should be ordered to produce the financial disclosure
requested by the wife in her Notice of Motion
25.  Despite the position taken by Rustam and the husband in this
proceeding, the wife believes the husband has an ownership interest in R&S
and Supreme and that Rustam and Gennady have altered the corporate
documentation after the separation to make it seem like the husband has always
been holding his father’s shares in both companies in trust for him.
26.  According to the husband, he met Rustam in 2000 and Rustam was
looking for a partner to continue his business operations at R&S, which was
initially a partnership. The husband advises as follows:
27.  The wife brought a motion to register a certificate of pending
litigation on both the Charles Street and the Scott Street condominiums which
was heard on November 5, 2024. The determination of that motion is outstanding.
28.  The determination of the husband’s ownership in R&S and Supreme
is an issue that will be determined at trial. However, I find that the
determination of the husband’s ownership interest in these corporations, if
any, requires disclosure of corporate documentation from both R&S and
Supreme. Further, to determine the husband’s income for support purposes,
disclosure from R&S and Supreme are necessary, since the parties have
directly opposed narratives as to how they met their expenses during the
marriage, but they do agree that the husband derived his income from R&S.
This is particularly the case, since the husband and Rustam have admitted on
their respective questioning, that the husband has control over the corporate
bank accounts and regularly transferred corporate funds into his personal bank
accounts and vice versa.
29.  The wife points to the following documentation to support her
position that the husband has an ownership interest in the two corporations
from which she seeks disclosure:
30.  In response to an order from Diamond, J., the husband retained a CBV
to obtain a valuation of the fair market value of R&S, Supreme, Supreme
Water Delivery Inc. and 12065916 Canada Inc. as at the parties’ date of separation,
August 2, 2021.
31.  The Report was completed by Steven Rayson and is dated October 28,
2024. It states that other than 12065916 Canada Inc. (in which the husband
advises he has a 50% interest), the husband told the valuator that he is not a
shareholder in the other three corporations. The report clearly states “However,
as at the date of this Report, we have not been able to confirm this.” The
wife’s position is that there is an overwhelming lack of disclosure given to
the husband’s own expert and because of this, the valuation Report provided by Mr.
Rayson is disputed by her.
32.  The Report acknowledges its limitations in the scope of review. It
specifically states that,
33. 
Schedule
“A” to the Valuation Report has an extensive list of disclosure Mr. Rayson did
not receive to prepare his report. This is highly relevant to this motion since
it is evident that the husband did not disclose highly relevant documents to
his own expert. Schedule “A” identifies the documents Mr. Rayson requested from
the husband but which he did not receive, as follows:
34. 
Given that the general ledgers for R&S and
Supreme were not disclosed to the Valuator, nor details of the remuneration
paid to the husband, I find that the disclosure sought by the wife with respect
to R&S’s and Supreme’s general ledgers, bank statements, credit card statements,
loan agreements with third-party lenders, including loan applications, and net
worth statements, along with credit facilities, balance sheets and expense
reports are all highly relevant and necessary disclosure that ought to be
produced.
35.  Since the husband transferred funds from the corporation to pay
personal expenses, all of the corporate bank account statements are necessary
and relevant to determine the husband’s true income for support purposes.
36.  The Authorizations and Directions the wife seeks are for all banking
financial institutions, including banks and credit unions to authorize the
release of information and documentation. Rustam, R&S and Supreme, argues
that Authorizations to all such institutions is overreaching and not
proportional. The wife argues that she cannot know whether R&S, Supreme or
Rustam have accounts at other banks, given the lack of disclosure to date. She
further argues that there is no prejudice to the corporations if the
Authorizations and Directions are signed since if there are no bank accounts at
an institution, the institution will simply state that.
37.  Counsel for Rustam, R&S and Supreme argued there would be
hardship to the corporations and it would be detrimental to the corporations if
these Authorizations and the disclosure requested is permitted. When asked by
the Court to describe the potential hardship, there was a concern raised that
the wife would report Rustam, R&S and/or Supreme to CRA. As a result, counsel
for the Corporate Respondents asked that no further disclosure be produced
until it is determined that the husband has an ownership interest in R&S
and/or Supreme.
38.  This is not a practical solution. As stated above, the determination
of the husband’s ownership, if any, in R&S and Supreme is a triable issue.
If the trial judge determines the husband has an ownership interest in R&S
and Supreme, then a new trial would need to be convened once the corporate disclosure
is provided. The issues are not bifurcated nor did any of the Corporate
Respondents seek such relief.
39.  Counsel for the husband acknowledges that since the husband’s
ownership in the Corporate Respondents is a triable issue, it is not practical
for the disclosure to come at a later time. However, she asks that the wife and
her counsel not receive any of the corporate disclosure directly and that, instead,
disclosure, if ordered, be delivered directly to the wife’s Valuator who will
be critiquing the Rayson Report. The concern raised is that if the wife is in
receipt of the corporate documentation and disclosure she seeks she will take
steps to somehow damage or ruin the active operation of the businesses.
40.  When asked by the Court if the wife was asked to sign a
Non-Disclosure Agreement (“NDA”) by the Corporate Respondents, the answer was
no.
41.  Counsel for Rustam, R&S and Supreme submitted that if any disclosure
is ordered, the wife be required to sign an NDA.
42.  I agree that prior to any disclosure being ordered, the wife be
required to sign an NDA. I so order.
43.  The directions to the corporate lawyers who drafted the transfer of
the corporations is necessary along with the documents for the lawyer who
prepared the trust documentation. The husband gave an undertaking to get his
corporate lawyer’s file and later claimed that the other parties would not consent
to him providing this disclosure. I order the Corporate Respondents to produce
the files from the corporate lawyers who prepared these documents.
44.  In family law, there is a fundamental
obligation for parties to provide full and frank financial disclosure. This
duty extends to all relevant financial information, including any interest in
corporate entities. Failure to disclose such information impedes the court's
ability to ensure a fair resolution of financial disputes; Roberts v.
Roberts, 2015 ONCA 450, at para. 11.
45.  In Hohl v Hohl, 2021 ONSC 2182, the
court emphasized the necessity of full and frank disclosure in family law,
particularly when corporate entities are involved. The court highlighted that
when a party has control over or involvement with corporations, those entities
hold crucial financial information that is directly relevant to support and the
equalization of net family property.  The court adopted a liberal approach to
ordering disclosure, especially in cases where there is a complex corporate
structure that might be used to conceal income or assets. The court ordered
extensive disclosure  from corporations controlled by the respondent’s family,
recognizing the importance of these records in accurately determining the
respondent’s financial position: at paras. 20-24, 25-26, and 27-35.
46.  In Filoso-Baglione v Lawson, 2024
ONSC 3900, the court addressed the issue of third-party disclosure,
specifically focusing on financial documents held by the applicant’s father,
who was not a party to the litigation. The court ordered the production of
certain bank statements from the father’s corporation, noting that these
documents were relevant to the issues in the case, particularly concerning the
applicant's financial situation and the nature of the financial support
provided by her father.  Despite the father not being a party to the
litigation, the court found that the bank statements were necessary for
determining the applicant's true income and financial means. The information
was directly relevant to the respondent’s defense, particularly regarding the
claims of financial abuse and the applicant’s entitlement to spousal support.
The court held that without these documents, it would be unfair to require the
respondent to proceed to trial, as the information was necessary to properly
assess the applicant’s financial circumstances; at paras. 44-52.
47.  As the Supreme Court suggested in Leskun
v. Leskun, 2006 SCC 25, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 920 (S.C.C.), at para. 34,
nondisclosure is the cancer of family law. This is an apt metaphor. Nondisclosure
metastasizes and impacts all participants in the family law process. Lawyers
for recipients cannot adequately advise their clients, while lawyers for payors
become unwitting participants in a fraud on the court. Judges cannot correctly
guide the parties to a fair resolution at family law conferences and cannot
make a proper decision at trial. Payees are forced to accept an arbitrary
amount of support unilaterally determined by the payor. Children must make do
with less. All this to avoid legal obligations, which have been calculated to
be a fair quantification of the payor's required financial contribution. In
sum, nondisclosure is antithetical to the policy animating the family law
regime and to the processes that have been carefully designed to achieve those
policy goals.
48.  In the case at bar, although the Corporate Respondents are not
family members to the husband, Gennady, his father, is an apparent partner of
the Corporate Respondents and no doubt has influence over them. The family law
legislation and the Family Law Rules are clear. The disclosure being sought by
the wife is relevant and necessary not only to determine the husband’s
ownership in R&S and Supreme, if any, but also to the very relevant issue
of his income for support purposes.
49.  This court makes the following order: