[1]             
The plaintiff, Harris Rosen (“Rosen”), brings this motion under rule
40.01 of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194 and s. 101
of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C. 43 for an interlocutory
injunction against the defendants 2740309 Ontario Inc., a.k.a. Bar Karma, and
Daniel Dilan Dalima Quintus (“Quintus”) (collectively, the “Bar Karma Defendants”),
and the defendants Drewcan Enterprises Limited, David Miller Drewette, and John
Duncan Drewette (the “Landlord Defendants”).
[2]             
Rosen seeks the following orders from the court:
[3]             
The Toronto Police Service (“TPS”) was not served with the motion record
and did not appear at the hearing.
[4]             
For the reasons that follow, I dismiss the motion.
[5]             
Rosen relies on the test in RJR-MacDonald Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General),
[1994] 1 S.C.R. 311, 1994 CanLII 117, under which the plaintiff needs to establish
(i) a “serious question to be tried”, (ii) irreparable harm if the injunction
is not granted, and (iii) the balance of convenience favours granting the
injunction.
[6]             
The “serious question to be tried” threshold is “low” and does not engage
a detailed review of the merits of the case. As stated by the court in RJR-MacDonald,
at paras. 49-50:
[7]             
Under the RJR-MacDonald test, the irreparable harm requirement
provides that the plaintiff must establish “harm which either cannot be
quantified in monetary terms or which cannot be cured”: RJR-MacDonald,
at para. 59.
[8]             
The balance of convenience component requires that the court determine “which
of the two parties will suffer the greater harm from the granting or refusal of
an interlocutory injunction, pending a decision on the merits": RJR-MacDonald,
at para. 62.
[9]             
When applying the RJR-MacDonald test, the court will review the irreparable
harm and balance of convenience factors even if the court is of the opinion
that chances of success are low. The irreparable harm and balance of convenience
factors relate to each other and the strength of one part of the test can
compensate for weakness of the other: Bell Canada v. Rogers Communications
Inc., 2009 CanLII 39481 (ONSC), 76 C.P.R. (4th) 61, at para. 29,
citing Sharpe, Injunctions and Specific Performance (looseleaf edition)
at para. 2.370, 2.600.
[10]         
In the alternative, Rosen submits that the applicable test for the court
to follow in determining whether to grant an interlocutory injunction in the
present case is the test set out in Hamilton (City) v. Loucks, 2003
CanLII 64221, 232 D.L.R. (4th) 362 (Ont. S.C.). In Hamilton, the court held
that if a plaintiff can establish a strong prima facie case for either interference
with property rights, a breach of a municipal bylaw, or that the defendants are
engaging in civil disobedience, then the RJR MacDonald test does not
apply. Consequently, the court is not required to consider whether either (i) the
plaintiff will suffer irreparable harm if the injunction is not granted or (ii)
whether the balance of convenience favours granting the injunction.
[11]         
Rosen submits that under the Hamilton test, a plaintiff is only required
to establish that there is a “serious question to be tried” which is a relatively
low threshold under the RJR-MacDonald test. It only requires the
plaintiff to establish that the merits of the action are not “frivolous or
vexatious”: RJR-MacDonald, at paras. 44, 50.
[12]         
However, while Rosen relies on para. 36 of Hamilton for his submission,
he did not refer to the balance of the reasons in Hamilton, which make
it clear that the test for the merits requires proof of a strong prima facie
case. In Hamilton, the court held, at paras. 37, 39, and 40:
[13]         
If the Hamilton test applies, the plaintiff must establish a
strong prima facie case. As the court held in R. v. Canadian Broadcasting
Corp., 2018 SCC 5, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 196, at para. 18 (“CBC”), the
strong prima facie test requires the court to be satisfied, after an
extensive review of the evidence, that there is a strong likelihood on the law
and the evidence that the plaintiff will succeed.[1]
[14]         
Consequently, a plaintiff under the Hamilton test must first satisfy
the court that one of the bylaw, property rights, or civil disobedience factors
arise in the action. If so, the plaintiff must then establish, after an extensive
review of the evidence, a strong likelihood on the law and evidence that the
plaintiff will succeed. It is only if both these criteria are met that the court
does not need to consider the remaining two requirements of irreparable harm
and balance of convenience under the RJR-MacDonald test.
[15]         
The Bar Karma Defendants submit that the Hamilton test does not
apply to private law disputes over property rights, relying upon Isabelle v.
Lahaie, [2006] O.J. No. 5030 (S.C.J.), at para. 7. Consequently, the Bar
Karma Defendants submit that the Hamilton test does not apply.
[16]         
Instead, they submit that the CBC test applies, because Rosen
seeks mandatory orders which require (i) the installation of a noise limiter,
and (ii) the TPS to “immediately respond” to any call from Rosen “reporting ...
the emission of amplified sound or noise vibrations.”[2]
[17]         
The CBC test is a modified version of the RJR-MacDonald
test and is used when mandatory relief is sought. The court must conduct an extensive
review of the evidence and the plaintiff must establish a strong prima facie
case that it will succeed at trial, as well as establishing the irreparable
harm and balance of convenience factors: CBC, at para. 18.
[18]         
Neither party relied on the test for a statutory injunction as reviewed
in Allied Properties v. 1064249 Ontario Inc., 2016 ONSC 6665, at para. 7.
Under this test, a party seeking an injunction for a breach of a bylaw, would not
need to establish the irreparable harm or balance of convenience requirements.
They would, however, need to meet an even higher merits-based criteria that
there has been “a clear breach of the by-law.”
[19]         
 For the purposes of my reasons, it is not necessary to determine
which test applies to the interlocutory injunction before me. Even if the court
accepted Rosen’s submission on the appropriate test, neither of the tests Rosen
proposed (the RJR-MacDonald or Hamilton tests) supports granting
an interlocutory injunction.
[20]         
Given that Rosen failed to meet either the RJR-MacDonald or Hamilton
tests, he necessarily fails to satisfy the CBC test proposed by the
defendants. The CBC test requires both (i) a strong prima facie case
(also required under the Hamilton test), as well as (ii) irreparable
harm and balance of convenience (as required under the RJR-MacDonald test).
Since neither of these Hamilton or RJR-MacDonald requirements can
be established, the CBC test cannot be met.
[21]         
I review the relevant evidence and then apply the law under the RJR-MacDonald
and Hamilton tests.
[22]         
Rosen filed an affidavit he affirmed on August 29, 2014 and a reply
affidavit he affirmed on September 27, 2024.
[23]         
Rosen resides on the third floor of an apartment building at 514 Queen
Street West (“514”) in Toronto. Rosen has lived at 514 since 2004. He has full
custody of his 13 year old son.
[24]         
Bar Karma operates next door at 512 Queen Street West (“512”). Bar Karma
is a tenant in the building owned by the defendant, Drewcan Enterprises
Limited. There is a dispute in the evidence regarding whether Bar Karma
operates as a bar, or a night club. None of the relief Rosen seeks turns on this
distinction, so I make no finding on that issue.
[25]         
The tenant next door to Bar Karma is a nightclub and live music venue known
as The Velvet Underground.
[26]         
Rosen alleges that Bar Karma has engaged in nuisance by interfering with
his rights of enjoyment of his apartment.
[27]         
Rosen led evidence as to his personal experience living in 514,
attaching numerous visual and audio recordings of sound and vibrations in his
apartment. However, Rosen led no expert evidence, so the court had no evidence (i)
of an objective level of sound or vibration in his apartment, or (ii) that the noise
came from Bar Karma (rather than the Velvet Underground or the surrounding
neighbourhood).
[28]         
Rosen tendered evidence of tests he conducted of noise levels, using “Noise
Sentry RT sound level meters.” These devices were provided to him by an
organization called “No More Noise Toronto.” The sound meters were installed “in
the second-floor apartment in the middle of 514”, not in Rosen’s third floor
apartment. Rosen did not ensure that the Noise Sentry sound meters were calibrated
prior to use.
[29]         
Rosen attached emails and complaints from neighbours to the City of
Toronto about noise from Bar Karma. None of those neighbours filed affidavits
in support of the motion.
[30]         
Rosen filed evidence of charges pending against Bar Karma for breach of
the “Noise Bylaw” under the Toronto Municipal Code, Chapter 591, Noise.
[31]         
Rosen’s evidence is that since “[s]ince July 2020, Bar Karma has
consistently emitted and permitted continuous amplified sound and unreasonable
and persistent noise heard indoors and outdoors of my home. The occurrences commence
as early as 3:00 pm and last until 5:00 am.”
[32]         
Rosen’s evidence is that “[s]ince July 2020, I have experienced periods
of severe mental distress, suffering and torment due to the persistent
amplified noise emanating from the indoor and outdoor areas of Bar Karma.”
[33]         
Rosen also filed a one paragraph note from Dr. Esho, addressed “To Whom
It May Concern” and dated July 27, 2021. In the note, Dr. Esho stated that as
Rosen’s family physician, it was his opinion that “the stress and aggravation
from living next to a bar which is creating a noise disturbance is negatively
affecting [Rosen’s] health” and that the “city must step in or my patient which
(sic) suffer serious and irreparable negative health impacts”. Rosen provided
no medical records to support Dr. Esho’s comments in the July 27, 2021 note.
[34]         
Rosen attached a document described as an “Affidavit of Dr. David Esho”
sworn December 12, 2023 as an exhibit to his affidavit. However, Rosen did not
file an affidavit from Dr. Esho as evidence on the motion and thus shielded Dr.
Esho from cross-examination.
[35]         
The Bar Karma Defendants filed an affidavit sworn on September 20, 2024
from the defendant Daniel Dilan Dalima Quintus (“Quintus”), the owner and
operator of Bar Karma.
[36]         
Quintus acknowledged that there had been noise complaints about Bar
Karma’s operations. His evidence was (quoted verbatim):
[37]         
GTA Environmental also conducted tests in a second floor apartment at
512 that established that if the speakers at Bar Karma were played at 25%, the
audible sound in that apartment would be within the acceptable range.
[38]         
Rosen filed no expert evidence to contradict the findings in the GTA Environmental
report. Instead, under a heading in his affidavit entitled “The GTA
Environmental Report is Problematic”, Rosen tendered his own critique of the report.
He filed a webpage article from “NoiseMeters Inc.” and used it to conclude that
GTA Environmental should have used decibel ratings under the “C” scale instead
of under the “A” scale.
[39]         
Quintus also led direct evidence about the steps Bar Karma took to ensure
compliance with the Noise Bylaw. He stated:
[40]         
The Bar Karma Defendants provided evidence of nightly noise level
testing, three times per night, from August 2021 to September 2024.
[41]         
Without any expert evidence, Rosen criticized the Bar Karma monitoring
approach and use of the Protmex devices. Rosen expressed his opinion that:
[42]         
Rosen attached an “Amazon page” as an exhibit to support his opinion that
“the [Protmex] device cannot generate a report directly.”
[43]         
Quintus filed additional evidence relevant to the issue of noise from
Bar Karma (quoted verbatim):
[44]         
The Landlord Defendants filed evidence from a legal assistant at the law
firm representing them on this motion. That affidavit attached the lease
agreement dated February 4, 2020 (the “Lease Agreement”) which provides that:
[45]         
Rosen seeks mandatory relief compelling Bar Karma to install a noise-limiter.
He also seeks to compel the TPS to immediately respond to any reports in the
future that Rosen may make about emission of amplified sound or noise from a
source which Rosen claims is Bar Karma.
[46]         
I do not find that the caselaw reviewed in footnote 2 above supports the
submission that the RJR-MacDonald test applies, given the mandatory relief
set out at paras. 2(ii) and 2(iii) above. However, even if the RJR-MacDonald
test applied to the entire injunction or to the prohibitory relief as set out
at para. 2(i) above, Rosen has not met the RJR-MacDonald test.
[47]         
For the purposes of this analysis, I will assume that Rosen can meet the
much lower threshold on the merits. He is only required to establish that his
action is not frivolous or vexatious, without an extensive review of the merits
of his claim by the court. My comments as to the weaknesses of the evidence are
set out in my analysis of the Hamilton test below, which requires the plaintiff
to establish a strong prima facie case.
[48]         
Rosen has not satisfied the requirements of irreparable harm and balance
of convenience. Further, given the weaknesses of Rosen’s case set out below,
this case does not present a situation where there are such strong merits that affect
the importance of the irreparable harm and balance of convenience requirements
under the RJR-MacDonald test.
[49]         
The test for irreparable harm is strict. It requires clear and
non-speculative evidence proving the plaintiff will suffer harm that cannot be
quantified in monetary terms or compensated through a damages award: Lee v.
Agnelo, 2021 ONSC 8188, at para. 22.
[50]         
The plaintiff has the onus to lead sufficient evidence to establish that
irreparable harm will result from not granting an interlocutory injunction. As the
court held in Panahiannigjeh et al. v. Vosoughian et al., 2022 ONSC 5298,
at para. 59:
[51]         
In Lee, the court, at para. 22, emphasized the importance of
proper evidence:
[52]         
In the present case, the evidence does not establish irreparable harm to
Rosen if the injunction is not granted.
[53]         
The key evidence on the lack of irreparable harm comes from Rosen’s affidavit
evidence. There, he states:
[54]         
Consequently, for more than four years, Rosen has lived with the
nuisance he alleges is taking place on a nightly basis.
[55]         
In addition, even if the medical note of Dr. Esho was accepted, for the
truth of its contents and as proper evidence, it does not assist under the RJR-MacDonald
test in establishing irreparable harm.[3]
The note states that by July 2021, Rosen was suffering “serious and irreparable
negative health impacts” from the noise allegedly emitted from Bar Karma.
Consequently, Rosen’s own medical evidence establishes that he has lived with
the alleged “irreparable” harm for more than three years.
[56]         
There is no basis to find that Rosen’s circumstances have changed at any
point since July 2020. Consequently, there is no basis to find irreparable harm
if the interlocutory injunction is not granted.
[57]         
In Cardinal v. Cleveland Indians Baseball Co. Limited Partnership,
2016 ONSC 6929, 134 O.R. (3d) 340, the court dismissed the motion for an interlocutory
injunction based on the delay in bringing the motion. The court held, at para.
73:
[58]         
I adopt the analysis in Cardinal and find that Rosen has not
established irreparable harm based on the delay in the present action.
[59]         
As I discuss above, Rosen produced no medical records. Attaching Dr.
Esho’s affidavit as an exhibit to Rosen’s affidavit means there is only hearsay
evidence of the effects of the alleged nuisance on Rosen’s health. Dr. Esho was
shielded from cross-examination by not filing an affidavit for the motion.
[60]         
In any event, the delay in the present case refutes Dr. Esho’s medical
note in July 2021 (more than three years ago) that states that Rosen was
suffering “irreparable” harm, a conclusion which is legal in nature and not
medical.
[61]         
For the above reasons, Rosen has failed to establish the irreparable harm
requirement under the RJR-MacDonald test.
[62]         
I also find that Rosen has failed to establish that the balance of
convenience favours granting the injunction.
[63]         
In the present case, Rosen seeks an interlocutory injunction until trial
that would preclude Bar Karma emitting any amplified sound or noise vibrations
between 10 pm and 9am that is “audible beyond the lot limit of 512 Queen Street
West”. The Noise Bylaw only requires that noise must be limited to 50 dBA or 65
dBC at the property line from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. and from 45 dBA or 60 dBC
from 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
[64]         
Consequently, Rosen seeks an order imposing a requirement beyond the
Noise Bylaw on Bar Karma. Such a result is disproportionate to any harm Rosen
might suffer if the injunction is not granted, particularly given the lack of any
evidence (including medical evidence) of irreparable harm and the more than four
year delay in bringing the motion.
[65]         
Further, the order requested would require the TPS to attend at Bar
Karma for any complaint, regardless of its merit. Such a result would impose
severe inconvenience on the TPS. An interlocutory injunction would also impose
severe inconvenience on Bar Karma, who would be required to respond to the TPS’
inquiries about any complaint. This inconvenience would arise upon every complaint
Rosen makes about audible noise at the lot line, regardless of whether there is
any breach of the Noise Bylaw and regardless of any sound in Rosen’s apartment.
[66]         
For the above reasons, Rosen has failed to establish the balance of convenience
requirement under the RJR-MacDonald test.
[67]         
Having failed to establish irreparable harm or the balance of convenience,
and given the weaknesses in Rosen’s evidence, I would not grant an
interlocutory injunction under the RJR-MacDonald test even if it applied
in the present case.
[68]         
For the reasons that follow, I find that Rosen has not met the requirement
for an interlocutory injunction under the Hamilton test, if it applies.
[69]         
Rosen has failed to establish a strong prima facie case of
nuisance. The evidence does not support a strong likelihood that Rosen will
succeed.
[70]         
The Bar Karma Defendants ask the court to strike the Rosen affidavit, or
in the alternative give it little weight. The Bar Karma Defendants submit that the
Rosen affidavits are replete with hearsay and opinion evidence, argument, and irrelevant,
frivolous and vexatious statements.
[71]         
The Bar Karma Defendants further submit that Rosen improperly split his
case. They argue that his reply affidavit raises numerous matters that ought to
have been raised in his initial motion record and as such is an “[attempt] to
backfill obvious holes in his first affidavit after receiving the defendants’
responding motion records”, either to obtain a “tactical advantage”, or because
“key issues were simply overlooked.”
[72]         
I agree with many of the criticisms set out above. However, instead of
striking the Rosen affidavits, I find that even if I accept the evidence summarized
above, it does not approach the high threshold required to establish a strong prima
facie case under the Hamilton test.
[73]         
Rosen’s claim is based in nuisance, The law of nuisance was summarized
in St. Lawrence Cement Inc., v Barrette, 2008 SCC 64, [2008] 3 S.C.R.
392, at para. 77:
[74]         
In the present case, the evidence set out above fails to establish a
strong prima facie case of nuisance. I rely on the following:
[75]         
The above evidence does not meet the high threshold required under the Hamilton
test. Satisfying this threshold is necessary because an interlocutory injunction
can be ordered under the Hamilton test, without any need to establish irreparable
harm or balance of convenience.
[76]         
Rosen relies heavily on the decisions in Alchuk v. 44 Toronto,
2024 ONSC 4174 and Balmain Hotel Group LP v. 1547648 Ontario Ltd. (Menage),
2009 CanLII 28199, 60 M.P.L.R. (4th) 262 (Ont. S.C.). In these
decisions, tenants and a hotel successfully obtained interlocutory injunctions
against nightclubs.
[77]         
However, unlike the present case, the plaintiffs in Alchuk and Balmain
retained qualified experts who conducted thorough testing and analyses. Those plaintiffs
also led affidavit evidence from other tenants or guests, which corroborated
and supported the plaintiffs’ evidence. This is dissimilar to the present case,
where Rosen attached emails and complaints from neighbours without any direct
affidavit evidence before the court.
[78]         
In Alchuk, the plaintiff’s expert took 16 sound measurements over
eight different weekends in the plaintiff’s unit, 6 of which were above the Noise
Bylaw. The expert also post-treated data to remove additional noise from the
environment like human activities and mechanical equipment. The expert analyzed
data to determine whether sounds in the plaintiff’s unit became louder when music
in the nightclub, measured from outside the doors, became louder and vice
versa. The expert concluded there was a very high potential for noise disturbance
and sleep disruption: Alchuk, at paras. 97, 100, 120 and 139.
[79]         
Consequently, the court in Alchuk specifically held that the
plaintiff’s evidence was credible, clear, and compelling: at paras. 91, 111 and
115. In the present case, the evidence does not support such a conclusion.
[80]         
In Balmain, the expert attended the hotel over two days and took
sound measurements in seven different hotel rooms and a public laneway between
the hotel and the nightclub. The expert concluded that the noise level was of
sufficient severity within hotel rooms to be disturbing and interfere with
sleep. The plaintiff also hired a licenced investigator who walked the
neighbourhood and heard no noise from nearby establishments: Balmain, at
paras. 13, 26-29.
[81]         
Rosen also relies upon the case of Walker et al. v. Pioneer
Construction Co. (1967) Ltd., 1975 CanLII 481, 8 O.R. (2d) 35 (S.C.). In Walker,
the court relied on direct evidence from five neighbours to conclude that
the noisy operation of an asphalt plant located in a gravel pit, between the
hours of nine in the evening and seven in the morning, constituted a material,
undue and unreasonable interference with the enjoyment of the plaintiff’s
property.
[82]         
No evidence similar to the materials relied upon in the above case law was
led in the present case.
[83]         
Further, bylaw compliance is only one factor that courts must consider
in a tort claim.[4]
A holistic review of the evidence is required: Alchuk, at para. 109.
[84]         
Finally, Rosen provided no reliable evidence regarding the source or
level of sound in his apartment. This is a matter of a technical nature where
expert evidence is required to assist the court: R. v. Johnson, 2019
ONCA 145, 145 O.R. (3d) 453, at para. 53.
[85]         
For all of the above reasons, I find that Rosen has not established a strong
prima facie case in nuisance. I am not satisfied, after a review of the evidence,
that there is a strong likelihood on the law and the evidence that the
plaintiff will succeed.
[86]         
Consequently, even if the Hamilton test applied, I would not
grant the interlocutory injunction sought in the present case.
[87]         
In addition to splitting his case, Rosen filed no evidence in either
affidavit regarding his obligation under rule 40.03 to “undertake to abide by
any order concerning damages that the court may make if it ultimately appears that
the granting of the order has caused damage to the responding party for which
the moving party ought to compensate the responding party.”
[88]         
After the Bar Karma Defendants raised the absence of an undertaking in their
factum as a further basis to deny the injunction, Rosen filed an “Undertaking
As To Damages” dated November 23, 2024. This document was signed by Rosen, but
not affirmed. Rosen did not seek leave to file additional affidavit evidence, as
required by rule 39.02(2), despite the importance of providing an undertaking by
affidavit: Guelph Taxi v. Guelph Police Service, 2016 ONSC 3671, at
para. 17.
[89]         
Rosen’s late filing of an “Undertaking” had the effect of attempting to
shield him from cross-examination on whether he had the financial means to
provide such an undertaking.
[90]         
It should not have been any surprise to Rosen that an undertaking was
required, as it was a basis for the injunction granted in Alchuk. Rosen relied
heavily upon this case in his written submissions and at the hearing: Alchuk,
at paras. 144-45.
[91]         
A few days before the hearing, Rosen also filed a certificate from
Ontario Works to establish that he receives assistance. At the hearing, Rosen
relied on that evidence to submit that no undertaking should be ordered. Again,
the late filing of the certificate, after all motion records had been exchanged,
cross-examinations had been completed, and factums exchanged, left the
defendants without an opportunity to cross-examine Rosen on his financial
condition.
[92]         
The purported undertaking provides no evidence on Rosen’s financial
means and ability to pay damages arising from an interlocutory injunction. Rosen’s
counsel advised at the hearing that he had the financial means to post $35,000
in security as an undertaking, if ordered to do so, as an alternative argument if
the court required Rosen to provide an undertaking. Again, the last-minute filing
of the purported undertaking, and the proposed security offered at the hearing,
did not provide an opportunity for cross-examination on this issue.
[93]         
Given my findings that the plaintiff has failed to establish the
requirements under either the RJR-MacDonald or Hamilton tests, I
do not need to determine the myriad of issues associated with the last-minute
undertaking. These issues include whether (i) the proposed undertaking is valid
without an affidavit, (ii) if not, whether leave should be granted to file a
new affidavit, (iii) if leave would be granted, would additional
cross-examination be appropriate, (iv) whether the undertaking provided is sufficient
(or would be considered sufficient after cross-examination), or (v) whether an
undertaking is required either the RJR-Macdonald or Hamilton tests.
[94]         
Consequently, I do not address these issues in my reasons. I make no
finding that the proposed undertaking would suffice to permit an injunction
even if the RJR-MacDonald or Hamilton tests were met.
[95]         
Since I do not order an interlocutory injunction against the Bar Karma
Defendants, there is no basis to order injunctive relief against the Landlord
Defendants.
[96]         
However, even if I ordered injunctive relief against the Bar Karma
Defendants, there would still be no basis to order injunctive relief against
the Landlord Defendants. The Lease Agreement establishes that the Landlord
Defendants have no role in the operations of 512. No such orders were made against
the landlords in either Alchuk or Balmain.
[97]         
For the above reasons, I dismiss the motion.
[98]         
The Bar Karma Defendants provided a costs outline and set out costs of $42,309.92[5]
on a partial indemnity scale, and $70,516.52 on full indemnity scale (which would
amount to $63,464.87 on a substantial indemnity basis at 90% of full indemnity
costs).  The Bar Karma Defendants seek partial indemnity costs in the amount of
$42,309.92.
[99]         
The Landlord Defendants provided a costs outline and set out costs of $10,466.91
on a substantial indemnity scale and $7,676,12 for partial indemnity costs. The
Landlord Defendants seek partial indemnity costs in the amount of $7,676.12.
[100]      Rosen
provided a costs outline and set out costs of $24,558.16 on a full indemnity scale,
which would amount to $14,734.90 on a partial indemnity scale (at 60% of full
indemnity costs) and $22,102.34 on a substantial indemnity scale (at 90% of the
full indemnity rate). Rosen submitted that if he was successful on the motion, the
defendants should pay substantial indemnity costs of $22,102.34.
[101]      Given
the success of the defendants, there is no request for substantial indemnity costs
that needs to be considered. The defendants only seek partial indemnity costs from
Rosen. However, I note that I do not find egregious conduct that would warrant
an order of substantial indemnity costs. There was no improper conduct during
the litigation or vexatious positions taken by the parties.
[102]      Rosen
does not challenge the quantum of costs sought by the Landlord Defendants. I agree
that such costs reflect what an unsuccessful party would expect to pay.
Consequently, I fix the costs of the Landlord Defendants in the partial indemnity
amount of $7,676.12.
[103]      Rosen
challenges the $42,309.92 in costs the Bar Karma Defendants seek. He submits
that the quantum is excessive and does not reflect the amount an unsuccessful
party would reasonably expect to pay. I agree.
[104]      It
would be reasonable to expect the parties to incur some significant costs. The
parties prepared lengthy factums reviewing the evidence and case law, drafted thorough
affidavits, and engaged in cross-examinations. The issue was of considerable
importance to both parties.
[105]      However,
the Bar Karma Defendants used eight different timekeepers on the file, even though
counsel on the motion, who was called in 2020, was very capable. The additional
timekeepers included more senior counsel who did not attend on the motion. The
Bar Karma Defendants incurred 214.4 hours on the file. This is more than double
the 96.4 hours Rosen incurred. Rosen used one principal timekeeper (counsel on
the motion) and only one other timekeeper. It would not be reasonable for an
unsuccessful party to expect that a motion of this nature would require the time
and costs that the Bar Karma Defendants incurred.
[106]      For
the above reasons, I order Rosen to pay partial indemnity costs to the Bar Karma
Defendants in the amount of $25,000, inclusive of taxes and disbursements.
[107]      All
costs are to be paid within 90 days of this order. Rosen requested additional
time to pay and the request was not opposed by the defendants.