[1]              
In this motion for default judgment under rule
19.05, the plaintiff sought damages of $62,651.36, plus interest and costs. The
claim arises from the defendant’s alleged breach of an equipment lease for a
Freightliner haulage vehicle. The damages consist of arrears in lease payments,
plus contractual obligations to defray the lessor’s vehicle recovery and repair
costs. Offsetting these charges are payments on account made by the lessee.
[2]              
In support of the claim for damages, the plaintiff
filed an affidavit sworn by a lawyer at the law firm of the lawyer who filed
the motion. The deponent was not an employee of the plaintiff. The affidavit
asserted:
[3]              
No further than in the next paragraph, the
deponent asserted the following fact, without qualifying that it was
information and belief:
[4]              
The affidavit recited some further facts, this
time gleaned from the deponent’s “review of the file.” Then the deponent
reverted to personal knowledge and stated the following as proof of additional
damages owed to the plaintiff:
[5]              
I have little doubt that all the evidence in the
affidavit fell into the “information and belief” category and that none of it
involved the deponent’s personal knowledge of negotiation of the lease, the
management of the account, or the nature of the recovery and repair costs.
There was no evidence that the lawyer was moonlighting as an employee of the
client. Thus, without further explanation, I have no reason to accept the
lawyer’s evidence regarding the plaintiff’s receipt of an executed lease
agreement, the post-recovery assessment of the vehicle for repairs, or the
authenticity of the documents marked as exhibits.
[6]              
The question therefore arises whether any of
this information is admissible on a rule 19.05 motion and whether the court
should simply ignore the question or the wording of the affidavit, in the
interest of keeping the judicial assembly line running. There does not appear
to be any reported decision directly on point, even though the practice of
filing these lawyer affidavits is not uncommon.
[7]              
For the following reasons, I rule that the
affidavit is inadmissible, and the motion must be dismissed. The dismissal is
without prejudice to the motion being resubmitted with evidence from a
representative of the plaintiff company with actual corporate knowledge of the
lease account and the details of the damages incurred.
[8]              
Rule 19.04 allows a plaintiff to requisition
default judgment from a registrar, if the claim is for a debt or liquidated
demand. Rule 19.05 sets out a procedure for obtaining default judgment by
motion in other cases. Subrule 19.05(2) requires such a motion to be supported
“by evidence given by affidavit if the claim is for unliquidated damages.”
[9]              
The interaction between rules 19.04 and 19.05
mean that the admitted pleadings alone cannot support an award of damages
except on a pure debt or liquidated demand. This court set out the basic
requirements of rule 19.05 motions in Ybaws! Inc. v. Ramo Canada Inc.,
2024 ONSC 69, at para. 11, referring to Elekta Ltd. v. Rodkin, 2012 ONSC
2062, at paras. 12-14. In Elekta, D. M. Brown J. relied Fuda v. Conn,
2009 CanLII 1140 (ON SC), at para. 16, for the proposition that the moving
party has the burden to prove the claim and damages on the civil standard of
proof even though the proceeding is uncontested.
[10]          
Affidavit evidence for use in motions are
governed by rule 39. Subrule 39.01(4) permits affidavits on motions to contain
statements of the deponent’s information and belief, if the source of the
information and the fact of the belief are specified. Subrule 39.01(5) limits
the use of such statements in applications to uncontentious facts. A rule 19.05
motion is a motion, and therefore that restriction does not apply. However, I
do observe that the evidence in a contested motion for judgment permits a court
to draw an adverse inference from the failure of a party to produce evidence of
a person with personal knowledge: subrule 20.02(1). On a motion for default
judgment or any other substantive procedure, an affidavit consisting entirely
of hearsay creates discomfort for a court of law.
[11]          
The rules for affidavits on motions therefore tolerate
hearsay, even on contested facts. However, these rules do not necessarily
sanction a lawyer’s affidavit, let alone one that mixes improbable personal
knowledge with information from an inanimate source such as “the file.” An
affidavit from a lawyer practising with the lawyer of record is presumptively
problematic for several reasons.
[12]          
There has always existed varying degrees of
conflict of interest when an officer of the court is required to remove the
robes to step into the witness box: TSCC No. 2519 v. Emerald PG Holdings Ltd.,
2022 ONSC 3916, at para. 16. There are exceptions to the rule that counsel
should avoid putting themselves in the dual role of advocate and witness. It is
commonplace for lawyers or law firm employees to provide affidavits on purely
procedural motions because of their knowledge of interactions with the other
law firm. For example, a motion to dismiss a case or to strike out a defence
based on procedural non-compliance must necessarily be proven by a member of
the party’s legal team – no one else would be better placed to give the
evidence of a discovery non-attendance or other default. By convention, courts
have allowed counsel to appear on their own affidavits on rule 15.04 motions
for removal of a lawyer of record. Subrule 7.08(4) requires the
plaintiff’s lawyer to file an affidavit to obtain approval of a settlement on
behalf of a person under disability.
[13]          
However, the evidence on substantive motions must
be different from the evidence on procedural motions, because the judicial act
of judgment extends to facts emanating outside of the court and its process. A
statement under oath of the facts of the case and the authenticity of
documentary evidence too closely resembles an opinion of the merits, something
a lawyer cannot provide a court or tribunal: Rules of Professional Conduct,
s. 5.1-1, commentary 5.
[14]          
The best practices for rule 19.05 motions, as
described in Casa Manila Inc. v. Iannuccilli, 2018 ONSC 7083, and as
adopted by the Toronto civil list, contemplates that a motion for default
judgment can, in fact, unravel and lead to a regular trial of liability and/or
damages. In such an instance, a lawyer’s affidavit leads to the undesirable
prospect of the lawyer being compelled to testify and being examined as an
adverse witness on a substantive issue.
[15]          
The current streamlined procedure facilitates
but does not replace or mechanize the judicial function of a default judgment. In
1986, the current iteration of rule 19.05 replaced a procedure requiring the
plaintiff to set the action down for a trial of unliquidated damages: Oko v.
Kwinch (1987), 1987 CanLII 4321 (ON SC), 60 O.R. (2d) 220 (Ont. D.C.), at 221-22. As reproduced by
Borins D.C.J. (as he then was), rule 19.05 originally read (emphasis added):
[16]          
Prior to the 1986 rule change, the procedure was
a damages trial, with the client or other witness providing live evidence in
the ordinary manner, albeit with no one on the other side to cross-examine. The
streamlining of the procedure did not negate the fact that a default judgment
on an unliquidated claim for damages is a judicial act. Unlike a contractual
debt claim, the amount owed is not fixed by agreement of the parties. In the
pre-1986 default judgment trial, the only difference between the trial and the
regular trial was that the defendant lost the right to participate. The change
from live evidence to affidavits does not change the nature of the required
evidentiary record. Although uncommon, subrule 19.05(3) preserves the pre-1986
default judgment trial in appropriate instances.
[17]          
Under the pre-1986 procedure, a court would not
have allowed a lawyer representing the plaintiff, or another member of the
lawyer’s firm, to remove his or her gown and testify at a trial for assessment
of damages. The conversion of the procedure to a motion based on affidavits
does not alter the requirement that the evidence of the defendant’s liability
and of the damages suffered by the plaintiff must all be admissible. Hearsay
from a lawyer from the same firm as the advocate for the plaintiff, upon review
of documents in a client file, cannot be the foundation of a judgment setting
the defendant’s liability for damages. While some information that is likely
incapable of dispute might go in, the affiant must be the party, an employee of
a corporate party, or some other witness with sufficient proximity to the
transaction to satisfy the court that the liability and damages have a proper
factual foundation.
[18]          
The issue of the lawyer’s affidavit must
therefore be resolved by excluding it from the record. Because of this ruling,
I need not enter a further dissection of the affidavit to query the lawyer’s
claim of possessing personal knowledge of certain facts.
[19]          
Since there is no admissible affidavit evidence
supporting the defendant’s liability or the claim for unliquidated damages
under subrule 19.05(2), the motion is hereby dismissed. This disposition is
without prejudice to the plaintiff’s resubmission of the motion based on
information from a deponent who has actual corporate knowledge of the
transactions in issue.