[1]         
This is an appeal by Navjot Nanda (“Nanda”), a town
and regional councillor for the Town of Oakville, of a decision by the
Respondent, Joint Compliance Audit Committee for the Town of Oakville (the
“Committee”), dated August 2, 2023. That decision granted the application of
the Respondent, Gobinder Randhawa (“Randhawa”), to authorize the appointment of
an auditor to conduct a compliance audit of Nanda’s campaign finances. That
authorization was granted by the Committee pursuant to s. 88.33 of the Municipal
Elections Act, 1996, S.O. 1996, c 32 Sched (the “Act”).
[2]         
Nanda argues that the Committee erred in granting
the application because Randhawa lacked standing to bring his application. He was
not a resident of Ward 7 of the Town of Oakville, the ward in which Nanda
successfully ran. Nanda argues that for elections to the Town of Oakville
Council, s. 88.33 of the Act is restricted to electors who are entitled
to vote in the ward whose candidate is subject to the application.
[3]         
Since the financial compliance terms of the Act
are complaint driven, Nanda argues that the Committee lacked the
jurisdiction to engage in a compliance audit of her campaign finances. She
further argues that the Committee’s overbroad interpretation of the provision
would give licence to officious intermeddlers, with no stake in a local ward election,
to abuse the compliance audit process for their own purposes. That would cause
great aggravation to the candidate and increase the expenditures of time and
money by the municipalities, which will be called upon to consider and pay for
a likely expanded pool of applications for compliance audits.
[4]         
The Committee argues that Nanda engages in too
restrictive a reading of s. 88.33. It says that the right to bring a s. 88.33 challenge
is open to any entitled voter in all of the Municipality of Oakville, whether
or not they reside in Nanda’s ward. Any more restrictive a reading would
violate the modern principle of statutory interpretation and ignore the
Legislature’s intention of creating an effective mechanism to enforce campaign
finance laws.
[5]         
Both sides agree that the standard of review in
this appeal is correctness: Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
v. Vavilov, 2019 SCC 65, at para. 37, citing Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33, at para. 8.
[6]         
Both sides agree that the sole issue is whether the
Committee’s decision, that Randhawa had standing to make his application, is
correct.
[7]         
Nanda successfully ran for the office of
Oakville Ward 7 Town and Regional Councillor in the October 2022 municipal
election. She assumed her seat as a member of both the Oakville Town Council
and the Regional Municipality of Halton Council in November 2022.
[8]         
Nanda’s sole opponent in the election was the
incumbent councillor, Pavan Parmar. Ms. Parmar’s campaign manager and major
donor was Randhawa’s spouse, Jagandeep Randhawa.
[9]         
On June 29, 2022, Randhawa applied to the
Committee for the appointment of an auditor to conduct a compliance audit of
the election campaign finances of Nanda. He cited six alleged campaign finance
violations by Nanda.
[10]       The Committee met on August 1, 2022. At that time, Nanda raised, as
a preliminary objection, the issue of Randhawa’s standing. She pointed out that
Randhawa was not a resident of Ward 7 and hence, in the words of s. 88.33, not
“an elector entitled to vote in an election” that she had run in.
[11]       On August 2, 2022, the Committee granted Randhawa’s application and
appointed an auditor despite Nanda’s objection.
[12]       In its decision, the Committee found that:
[13]       The Committee then determined that there were “reasonable grounds
to believe that” one of Randhawa’s grounds,
regarding the reporting of the costs of website hosting for Nanda’s campaign,
were valid. Therefore, it ordered a compliance audit of all of Nanda’s campaign
expenses.
[14]       From the submissions of counsel, I understand that the audit has not
taken  place, pending the determination of this appeal.
[15]       This appeal does not deal with the propriety of that decision, other
than in regard to the issue of standing.
[16]       The issue raised in this appeal does not appear to have been
litigated before in Ontario. Being a matter of first impression, it is
important to start with the relevant statutory provisions, which must be
interpreted within the bounds of what is known as the modern approach to statutory
interpretation.
[17]        Section 88.33(1) of the Act is the central statutory
provision in this appeal. It reads as follows:
[18]       The key issue raised by this provision is which elector s. 88.33(1)
is referring to when the provision is applied to the election of a councillor
for a particular ward of a municipality divided into wards. For a municipal/regional
election, is it just a voter in the particular ward in which the candidate in
question is running, as Nanda says or is it the entire municipality as the
Committee says? Or is it something else? Nothing in the Act defines
either word, “elector” or “election”.
[19]       Section 17(2) and (3) of the Act defines who is and is not
entitled to be an elector in a municipal election. It states:
[20]       But while s. 17(2) broadly refers to “an elector at an election held in a local municipality”,
s. 19(7) limits the entitlement of voters in municipal
elections to vote only in their wards. It states:
[21]       Under s. 88.24(3)(2), when a person “is a candidate, at different
times in the same election, for more than one office on the same council or
local board … Each candidate for an office for which the election is conducted
by ward is a separate campaign.”
[22]       The right of municipalities to set the wards for which elections
take place is found in the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2002, c. 25,
s. 222.
[23]      
The Committee points out that the Act
covers a number of different elections. They include what it described as “a
competition between candidates,” such as election to an office. But as s. 3
demonstrates, the Act covers other types of elections as well. It states:
[24]       In addition, there are also by-elections to fill vacant offices: ss.
37(4)(2) and 65 of the Act and s. 263(1)(b) of the Municipal
Act.
[25]       At para. 117 of Vavilov, the court set out the “modern
principle” of statutory interpretation that it first laid out 26 years ago in Rizzo
& Rizzo Shoes Ltd. (Re), cited below.  It stated that:
[26]       That approach was adopted “because legislative intent can be understood only by reading the
language chosen by the legislature in light of the purpose of the provision and
the entire relevant context”: para. 118.
[27]       The administrative decision maker must interpret a statute in that
manner. Its responsibility “is to discern meaning and legislative intent, not
to ‘reverse-engineer’ a desired outcome”: para. 121.
[28]       Each side offers valid policy considerations for its preferred
interpretation of the Act. Nanda does not appear to contest the
Committee’s view that the purpose of the compliance audit process “is to ensure
transparency and public scrutiny of those who run for public office, and provide
a mechanism for the public to hold candidates accountable for their campaign
finances”.
[29]       However, Nanda argues that an overly broad interpretation of s.
88.33(1) can result in applications for compliance audits from “officious
intermeddlers with no direct or vested interest in a local election to
intervene”. The direct interests of a resident of the ward in which a
particular ward candidate election is taking place are clear. The election of a
candidate has direct consequences for the elector as the candidate’s role is to
represent that elector’s interests in municipal decision-making. On the other
hand, the interests of an elector living outside the candidate’s ward are less
clear or direct. Allowing such electors to apply for an election audit of a
candidate that does not represent them opens the door to abuse of the process.
[30]       Such broad standing rules would lead to an increase in applications,
leading to a drain on public resources. As Nanda states in her factum, “[i]t
takes significant resources, time and costs to hear an initial application,
conduct a audit, consider the results of the audit, and make a decision. The
Committee’s decision can then be appealed to this Court, resulting in the
further use of judicial resources.”
[31]       For its part, the Committee argues that the Legislature’s “design
choices” in the Act’s compliance process support a broad interpretation
of standing to apply for a compliance audit. That is because the Act imposes
strict limits on campaign financing to level the playing field in local
elections. Those limits are enforced in two ways. First, there is the disclosure
of campaign finances through a publicly available financial statement form. A
candidate can be guilty of an offence for a violation of the campaign finance
rules or the filing of an inaccurate financial statement: s. 92(1)(a) and (b), 93
– 94 of the Act.
[32]       Second, the Act allows for “electors” to bring a complaint of
campaign financing impropriety forward in the form of an application for a
compliance audit. That process could lead to the appointment of an auditor and
ultimately a prosecution under the Act. This process is intended to be
expeditious; hence a series of strict timelines for various steps of the
process under s. 88.33.
[33]       Importantly, there must be a complaint. The Committee itself lacks
the power to authorize an investigation on its own volition.
[34]       The Committee contends that restrictive standing requirements would
be discordant with the complaint-based legislative scheme. It would prevent the
Committee from hearing “potentially highly relevant complaints”. The Committee
further asserts that the history of the statute demonstrates that the
Legislature sought to make it easier, not more difficult to hold a candidate
accountable for financial irregularities.
[35]       The Committee points out that there were no election finance
controls until 1980. But the Municipal Elections Act, S.O. 1980, c 308, s.
121 allowed municipalities to pass their own by-laws, which impose campaign financing
restrictions. With the Municipal Elections Amendment Act, 1992 (No.
2), S.O. 1982, c 37, a breach of a municipal campaign financing by-law
could be prosecuted as a “corrupt practice.” But the prosecution must have been
conducted by an elector rather than a public authority: Municipal Elections
Act, s. 106 (3), Municipal Elections Act, s. 25, adding s. 121(5) to
the Municipal Elections Act.
[36]       Section 81(1) of the Municipalities Act, 1996 allowed an
“elector who is entitled to vote in an election” to apply for a compliance
audit if they believe that a candidate had contravened a provision of that act.
But the elector still had to bring the application,
which was made to the local municipal council. With the Good Government Act,
2009, S.O.  2009, c. 33 Sched. 21, s. 8(44), each municipal council was
required to establish a compliance committee.
[37]       The Committee summarizes its argument on policy grounds, following
this historical review of statutory election spending limit compliance by stating:
[38]       Both parties offer valid policy reasons for their interpretation of
the Act. It is hard to argue that the risk of officious intermeddling sounds
as important as ensuring fair elections under financing rules that apply to all
through a transparent audit process. But it is a valid policy concern for both
councillors who were pulled into a difficult and time-consuming audit process
and for councils who have to foot the bill and devote time and resources to the
process.
[39]       Saying that though, I add that it is not for this court to inject
its policy preferences to a statute to give it a reading that is not supported
by its wording. Policy and context are important, but only to understand the
meaning of that wording. If that wording is torqued to meet a particular
judge’s views and priorities, then the judiciary will have usurped the role of the
Legislature.
[40]       Here, the wording, “an elector who is entitled to vote in an
election” is an amorphous and undefined term in the Act. As the
Committee argues, it was open to the Legislature to clearly specify that it was
referring only to the voters in an election for a councillor in particular ward.
But it was also open to the Legislature to explicitly word the statute to offer
the reading suggested by the Committee.
[41]       If, based on the policy considerations the Committee wishes to guide
the court’s interpretation of s.88.33, “an elector who is entitled to vote is
an election” covers the entire municipality, why limit it there? Why not every
elector entitled to vote in the Region? After all, Nanda was also elected to
sit on Halton Regional Council.
[42]       Moreover, taking it a step further,  if maximum transparency and
citizen participation in ensuring fair elections is the lens with which to
interpret the Act, why is standing limited to even those voters? Why not
all of the electors entitled to vote in an election in Ontario, or even Canada?
The plain words set out above support those potential interpretations and the
broad standing rules suggested by the Committee would support it.
[43]       Surely, both Nanda and the Committee agree that there must be a
limit in order to avoid the harms that too broad a standing rule would impose
on councillors and municipal councils. They just don’t agree in what it should
be.
[44]       Returning to the text of the Act, the place where judges are required
to start, there is a provision that is helpful in interpreting where the line
for standing must be drawn. Section 19(7), cited above, offers the best understanding
of the Legislature’s intention regarding which elector is entitled to standing
to challenge the spending of a candidate for election in a ward in a municipal
election. Again, it says:
[45]       The Committee says that this provision is found in a broader section
of the Act, s. 19, dealing with preliminary voting lists. That does not
diminish the Act’s limitation on the term, “elector” in s. 19(7).
In that provision, an elector is someone entitled to vote only in the ward in
which they reside in a municipal election that includes wards.
[46]       Considered within the context of the Presumption of Consistent Expression[1], the term “elector” must be
understood to refer to a voter entitled to vote for the particular election in
question. For a municipal election for a ward councillor, it means a person
entitled to vote for a candidate in that ward.
[47]       That interpretation does not diminish the Act’s focus
on election integrity and transparency. Rather it offers a proportional process
for dealing with complaints about a candidate’s spending. It limits those
complaints or applications to  someone with “skin in the game” or a direct
interest in the result. Thus, it also deals with the concern that election
audits are not an open-ended free-for-all process in which anyone within a
broad area can impose a costly and time-consuming process on municipal councils
and councillors. It is a proportional remedy that the Legislature has crafted
to deal with a concern without creating even more concerns.
[48]       It is true, as the Committee says, that some sufficiently determined
complainant can simply arrange for a “straw man” to issue the complaint. There
are always ways that a clever and unscrupulous individual can find to game the
system. That would be true with the Committee’s limitation on standing as well.
As both parties would likely say, that does not mean that anything goes
regarding standing or that the concerns set out above should be ignored.
[49]       For the reasons set out above, I find that Randhawa lacked standing
to bring his application. Thus the Committee erred in ordering the compliance
audit of Nanda. Accordingly, I set aside the Committee’s decision to order a
compliance audit of Nanda.
[50]       As the parties have agreed that no costs will be payable regardless
of the result, no costs are ordered.