[1]              
Rachel Obita attended
Algonquin College (“the College”) from January 2019 to April 2021.  Ms. Obita
graduated with an Advanced Diploma in Business Administration - International
Business.  Ms. Obita commenced this action in May 2022.  On the final page of
her amended statement of claim (“the Pleading”), Ms. Obita lists ten causes of
action asserted against the College.
[2]              
The claims Ms. Obita
is pursuing relate to the treatment she alleges she received during her time as
a student at the College.  As an example of that treatment, Ms. Obita highlights
the final grade she was assigned for a course taken during the Fall 2020
semester (“the disputed grade”).  In January 2021, Ms. Obita requested a Review
of Final Grade for that course.  The review was conducted; the decision on the
review was communicated to Ms. Obita in the latter half of January 2021.  The decision
resulted in a downward adjustment of the disputed grade.
[3]              
Ms. Obita appealed the
review decision to the College’s Academic Appeal Committee.  The appeal was
dismissed.  The Academic Appeal Committee concluded that the grade review had
been determined in accordance with the relevant policies.
[4]              
Ms. Obita then requested
a review of the decision on appeal.  That request was made to the College’s
Senior Vice-President, Academic; the request was denied.
[5]              
In the Pleading, Ms. Obita
alleges that, during her time as a student at the College, she was the subject
of academic bullying and verbal harassment.  In addition, Ms. Obita questions
the fairness and impartiality of the College’s policies and procedures.  She
does so not only for herself but also for the benefit of the student body at the
College.  Ms. Obita seeks (a) $1,000,000 in
damages for pain and suffering; (b) $4,000,000 in punitive damages; (c) an
order mandating that policy changes are made by the College; and (d) an order
quashing the decision of the Academic Appeal Committee.
[6]              
In its fresh as amended statement of defence and
on the motion before this court, the College takes two primary positions. 
First, the College asserts that the court does not have jurisdiction over the
dispute between Ms. Obita and the College.  The College describes the issues
raised in the Pleading as “purely academic in nature”.  The College submits the
issues fall exclusively within the broad discretion academic institutions have
to manage and implement their programs.  The College asks the court to dismiss
Ms. Obita’s action for want of jurisdiction.
[7]              
Second, the College asserts
that Ms. Obita fails to plead the requisite elements of each of the causes of
action she is pursuing.  The College submits that the Pleading is completely
devoid of material facts upon which any of the causes of action can be made out
explicitly, or even inferred.
[8]              
The College asks that the
relevant paragraphs of the Pleading be struck, without leave to amend, and that
the action be dismissed in its entirety.  The College highlights that Ms. Obita
was previously given an opportunity to amend her pleading.  The College submits
that no further amendments to the Pleading would address the fact that Ms.
Obita’s claims are fatally flawed; the Pleading discloses no cause of action;
and the claims are entirely lacking in legal foundation.
[9]              
The following issues
are determined in this ruling:
[10]          
Before determining the
issues, I will first review the evidence and the Pleading.
[11]          
In support of its
motion, the College relies on an affidavit from Michael Laviolette (“the
Laviolette affidavit”).  When he swore his affidavit in May 2023, Mr.
Laviolette was the Director, Risk Management for the College.  Ms. Obita did
not cross-examine Mr. Laviolette on his affidavit.
[12]          
The following topics
are covered in the Laviolette affidavit:
[13]          
The exhibits to the
Laviolette affidavit include the relevant College policies and written
communication between Ms. Obita and employees or representatives of the
College.
[14]          
In response to the
College’s motion, Ms. Obita delivered a 180-paragraph affidavit (“the Obita
affidavit”).  Ms. Obita was not cross-examined on her affidavit.
[15]          
The Obita affidavit is
the subject of an interim ruling: Obita v. Algonquin College, 2024 ONSC
2901 (“Ruling No. 2”).  Ruling No. 2 was released following a
motion by the College for an order striking 60 of the 180 paragraphs and all of
the approximately 70 exhibits from the Obita affidavit (“the interim motion”)
[16]          
The motion to strike
was heard in January 2024, on the original return date for the College’s
substantive motion.  The latter motion was adjourned to June 2024, pending the
court’s determination on the interim motion.
[17]          
The College was
successful on the interim motion.  All of the paragraphs in the Obita affidavit
that were the subject of the motion were struck: Ruling No. 2, at paras.
39, 58.  In addition, other parts of the substantive text of the affidavit were
struck.  The court concluded that those parts of the affidavit consist of argument,
opinion evidence from Ms. Obita, inflammatory rhetoric, or inflammatory
allegations: Ruling No. 2, at paras. 39, 58.
[18]          
The topics covered in
the approximately 120 paragraphs admitted into evidence include the topics
listed in para. 12, above.  In addition, in her affidavit, Ms. Obita addresses
each of the causes of action listed in the Pleading.
[19]          
Ms. Obita’s response
to the affidavit evidence of Mr. Laviolette is limited.  For example, at para.
61 of her affidavit, Ms. Obita says, “I would like to point out that Mr.
Laviolette stated in his affidavit what he was supposedly told by my academic
chair.  He was not involved when the events transpired, nor did he learn of
these events as they occurred.”
[20]          
As another example, at
para. 120 of her affidavit, Ms. Obita addresses Mr. Laviolette’s role as
Director, Risk Management.  She therein says, “Mr. Laviolette is the director
risk management.  His job revolves around emergency management and fraud
prevention.  Mr. Laviolette has no knowledge of academic policies and
procedure.  Mr. Laviolette certainly did not write the unethical policies that
are being used to perpetually abuse students and staff.”
[21]          
Ms. Obita does not
dispute Mr. Laviolette’s chronology of the events that comprise the review and
appeal process Ms. Obita followed; nor does Ms. Obita dispute Mr. Laviolette’s
description of the outcome at each stage of that process.
[22]          
There are
approximately 70 exhibits to the Obita affidavit.  The exhibits are not
attached to the affidavit; they are interspersed throughout the substantive
text of the affidavit.
[23]          
On the interim motion,
the College originally requested that all the exhibits be struck from the Obita
affidavit.  On the return of the interim motion, the College abandoned that
request.
[24]          
At para. 40 of the Ruling
No. 2, the court (a) highlights its gatekeeper function; and 
(b) states that, when ruling on the substantive motion, the court will
determine which of the exhibits are properly in evidence and the weight to be
given to those exhibits.
[25]          
Set out below is a
non-exhaustive list of the types of documents included in the 70 exhibits:
[26]          
Many of the exhibits
are irrelevant to the issues raised on the motion; those exhibits are
inadmissible.  For the exhibits admitted into evidence, I highlight that the
attachment or inclusion of a document as an exhibit does not necessarily result
in the contents of the document becoming evidence on the motion.  For some of
the exhibits, the purpose served by their admission is limited to providing evidence
of the existence of a document.
[27]          
In the context of the
motion now before the court, it is not possible to review each of the exhibits
individually.  The principles discussed in the preceding paragraph summarize
the court’s treatment of the exhibits to the Obita affidavit.
[28]          
Ruling No. 2 was released approximately one month prior to the return date for
the College’s substantive motion.  During that one-month period, Ms. Obita
filed a confirmation form for the motion.  In that document, Ms. Obita listed
an affidavit sworn in May 2023 in support of a motion she brought in 2023 for
interim substantive relief (“the May 2023 affidavit”).
[29]          
Ms. Obita did not
include the May 2023 affidavit in her responding record on the College’s
substantive motion.  The confirmation form referred to in para. 28, above, was
the first time that Ms. Obita gave the College notice she intended to rely on
the May 2023 affidavit in response to the College’s substantive motion.
[30]          
At the outset of the
hearing in June 2024, Ms. Obita requested leave to rely on the May 2023
affidavit in response to the College’s substantive motion.  The court heard
submissions from Ms. Obita and from counsel for the College.  For oral reasons
given that day, the request for leave to rely on the May 2023 affidavit was
refused.
[31]          
The Pleading consists
of 49 numbered paragraphs and concludes with two unnumbered paragraphs. 
Attached to the Pleading is a single page listing ten causes of action, described
as “grounds for [the] lawsuit”.
[32]          
During the hearing of
the motion, Ms. Obita informed the court that she is not pursuing three of the
ten listed causes of action.  On the consent of the parties, claims based in
the following three causes of action are dismissed as abandoned: (a) the tort
of harassment (item 2 on the list); (b) breach of fiduciary duty (item 3 on the
list); and (c) breach of confidentiality (item 8 on the list).
[33]          
Ms. Obita is pursuing
claims based in the following seven, remaining causes of action:
[34]          
The first paragraph of
the Pleading begins with an allegation that “underneath [the] polished veneer
[of a long-maintained respectable image, the College] is a cruel organization
motivated by greed.”  That same paragraph concludes with the following three
sentences: “Initially, I took legal action against Algonquin College because I
was seeking to get a refund of my tuition and a remedy for my grades.  My
professor sabotaged my grades for 4 semesters.  For the past year I have been
monitoring Algonquin College’s online activity and investigating Algonquin
College.  I have a twisted tale to tell this court.”
[35]          
The Pleading covers
topics ranging from the treatment Ms. Obita alleges she received from the
professor who taught the course in which she received the disputed grade, to
allegations that the College is spying on students by monitoring and collecting
information from student activity on College networks.
[36]          
The Pleading does not
comply with r. 25.06(1); the Pleading does not “contain a concise statement of
the material facts on which [Ms. Obita] relies for the claim […], but not the
evidence by which those facts are to be proved.”  The Pleading is replete with
both evidence and argument.
[37]          
Ms. Obita is a
self-represented litigant.  The technical deficiencies in the Pleading are not determinative
of the outcome on this motion.
[38]          
Approximately one-half
of the Pleading is devoted to the course in which Ms. Obita was assigned the disputed
grade; the conduct of the professor who taught that course; allegations that both
the College’s grade review and appeals processes are procedurally unfair; and
shortcomings in the appeal process specific to Ms. Obita’s appeal.  Those
topics are addressed in paras. 2-13 and 19-21 of the Pleading.
[39]          
Paragraphs 14-18 of
the Pleading consist of evidence related to Ms. Obita’s pursuit of her appeal
to the Academic Appeal Committee.  Those paragraphs do not include allegations
of material facts.
[40]          
During oral
submissions, Ms. Obita informed the court that paras. 11-14 set out the
allegations upon which she relies in support of her claim for damages for
breach of contract.
[41]          
Content from the
Ombudsman Annual Report for 2020 to 2021 is set out in detail in paras. 22-25
of the Pleading.
[42]          
Paragraphs 26-35
appear under the title “Role of the Ombudsman”.  Only four paragraphs in this
section of the Pleading include what can generously be described as allegations
of material facts.  It could also be said that the same four paragraphs are
devoid of material allegations and include only argument:
[43]          
Based the Pleading,
the only involvement that the Ombudsman had in Ms. Obita’s grade review and
appeal processes is set out in para. 11.  Ms. Obita therein alleges that
following the end of the September 2020 semester, she went to the Ombudsman for
assistance.  Ms. Obita states that following the intervention of the Ombudsman,
she “was able to have an academic appeal hearing.”  Paragraph 11 concludes with
an allegation that Ms. Obita “received advisement from the Ombudsman of
Algonquin College throughout [her] appeals process.”
[44]          
Nowhere in the Pleading
does Ms. Obita assert that the assistance she received from the Ombudsman was
insufficient, appeared to her to be unfair or to prejudice her in the appeals
process, or in any way affected the result of that process.  Nor is there any
allegation that Ms. Obita was, in any general way, affected by the alleged lack
of procedural fairness related to the Ombudsman’s role with the College (i.e.,
paras. 34-35 of the Pleading).
[45]          
In paras. 36-48, Ms.
Obita addresses what she alleges are the “countless measures [taken by the
College] to cover up misconduct by employing fraud and misrepresentation, among
other tactics” (para. 36).  Ms. Obita specifically addresses two forms of
alleged cover ups, fraud, or misrepresentation.
[46]          
First, Ms. Obita
describes her post-graduation effort to log into Brightspace.  Ms. Obita
alleges the response she received was that her student account had been shut
down and she could no longer access it because she had graduated from her
studies at the College (paras. 37-38 and 41).
[47]          
Ms. Obita alleges
that, on its networks, the College makes fraudulent misrepresentations about
the access former students, including graduates, of the College have to their
student accounts (paras. 38-41).  Ms. Obita alleges that the College network is
set up in such a way that the College has the ability to “clear” all of a
student’s course content; she suspects that the College has taken that step
regarding her course content (para. 43).
[48]          
Ms. Obita does not claim
that her grade review and appeals processes were affected because of the
alleged cover ups, fraud, or misrepresentation.  Nor does Ms. Obita assert that,
during her time as a student at the College, she was impacted, either
specifically or generally, as a result of the alleged cover ups, fraud, and
misrepresentation.
[49]          
The only allegation in
this section of the Pleading related to Ms. Obita’s grade review and appeals
processes is found at para. 42.  Ms. Obita therein alleges that, subsequent to
her review and appeals process, the College took steps to prevent professors
from unilaterally accessing the College networks for the purpose of changing a
student’s grade (para. 42).
[50]          
In paras. 45-47, Ms.
Obita addresses a second form of alleged cover ups, fraud, and
misrepresentation.  In those paragraphs, Ms. Obita alleges that, in its
“Harassment and Discrimination” policy the College misrepresents the access
that students have to, and the fairness of, the student complaints mechanism
(para. 45).  In summary, Ms. Obita alleges that the complaints mechanism is set
up in such a way as to “attempt to suppress student complaints” (para. 46) and
lead to the dismissal of student complaints (para. 47).
[51]          
The Pleading does not
include any allegations relating this second form of purported cover ups,
fraud, or misrepresentation to Ms. Obita’s grade review and appeals process.
[52]          
In a single paragraph
(para. 48), Ms. Obita alleges that the College relies on its networks to
monitor online student activity and to collect information about students,
including when students who live in residence access those networks.  Paragraph
48 concludes with the following allegations: “This use of people’s information
also ensures Algonquin College has the upper hand in any kind of matter.  [The
subject policy] details measures to help the College evade liability.  Policy
IT01 also contains fraud and misrepresentation.  Algonquin College is illegally
collecting and using people’s information for research and profit with
‘business partners’.”
[53]          
In the first of the
two unnumbered paragraphs in the Pleading, Ms. Obita alleges that the College
security policy, which permits the College to monitor and access information on
the College networks, constitutes a breach of an individual’s right, pursuant
to s. 8 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, to protection
from illegal search and seizure.
[54]          
In the final numbered
paragraph, Ms. Obita reviews the College’s “workplace violence prevention”
policy, which she contends  extends to students.  Ms. Obita alleges that the
language of the policy allows the College to rely on the policy to “muzzle
those who are challenging the College”.
[55]          
The allegations in the
second of the two unnumbered paragraphs include that the “College has defamed
[her] internally to members of the faculty and other employees as being
unstable”.  Ms. Obita alleges that in a College response to one of her student
complaints, the document states that she was acting in an “obsessive, harassing
and vexatious manner” and that the College “has been pushing this narrative
about [her] to the board of governors and employees”.  Ms. Obita describes the
impact of the review, appeals, and litigation processes on her mental health. 
Ms. Obita asserts that “College management did not acknowledge [her]
deteriorating mental health.”
[56]          
With the evidence and
the Pleading reviewed, I determine the issues in the order in which they are
listed in para. 9, above.
[57]          
The College relies on
r. 21.01(3)(a), which provides that, “A defendant may move before a judge to
have an action stayed or dismissed on the ground that […] the court has no
jurisdiction over the subject matter of the action”.  The parties are permitted
to file evidence on a motion brought pursuant to that rule.
[58]          
On a motion pursuant
to r. 21.03(3), the court must consider the material facts alleged in the
statement of claim as true, unless they are incapable of being proven or are
manifestly ridiculous: Gauthier v. Saint-Germain, 2010 ONCA 309, 325
D.L.R. (4th) 558, at para. 8.
[59]          
Post-secondary
institutions have a very broad discretion when resolving academic issues,
including issues regarding (a) the evaluation of the quality of a student’s
work, and (b) the structure and implementation of institution programs: Gauthier,
at para. 47.  When a student seeks to alter an internal academic decision made
by an institution’s officials, the appropriate route for the student is to
apply for judicial review of the decision: Gauthier, at para. 30.
[60]          
When a student or
former student seeks to do more than simply alter an internal academic decision;
pleads other causes of action, such as breach of contract or negligence; and
claims damages, a nuanced review of the subject pleading is required: Gauthier,
at para. 46.  The court must determine whether the action “is simply an
indirect attempt to appeal an academic decision” for which the appropriate
remedy is judicial review: Jaffer v. York University, 2010 ONCA 654, 326
D.L.R. (4th) 148, at para. 28.
[61]          
In Lam v. University of Western Ontario, 2019 ONCA 82, 144 O.R. (3d) 587, at para. 32,
the Ontario Court of Appeal sets out the approach on a motion of the kind now
before the court:
[62]          
The analysis below is based on the application
of the principles cited in this section of the ruling to the Pleading.
[63]          
To determine whether
the court has jurisdiction, it is helpful to focus on the remedy claimed by the
plaintiff: Lam, at para. 31(c).  A request for an order overturning an
internal academic decision, by a university or college, and nothing more, must
be addressed by judicial review: Gauthier, at para. 46.
[64]          
If, however, “a
plaintiff alleges the constituent elements of a cause of action in tort or
breach of contract, while claiming damages, the court will have jurisdiction
even if the dispute stems from the scholastic or academic activities of the
institution in question”: Gauthier, at para. 46.  That said, a claim
“that a grade is incorrect, or that a professor is incompetent, without more,
will not normally be sufficient grounds on which to base a cause of action in
breach of contract or tort”: Gauthier, at para. 47.
[65]          
The challenge on the
motion before this court is that Ms. Obita seeks both (a) relief to which she
is entitled only by way of judicial review (i.e., an order quashing the
decision of the Academic Appeal Committee) and (b) damages based on
causes of action in tort and breach of contract.
[66]          
In Gauthier,
Rouleau J.A. reviews several decisions of the Court of Appeal for Ontario in
matters involving students and post-secondary institutions.  Based on that
review, Rouleau J.A. rejects a submission by the respondent university that the
decisions reviewed establish a broad principle that, “if the core of the
dispute concerns a school matter, the court has no jurisdiction, even if the
underlying cause is based in tort and breach of contract and the remedy sought
aims to recover damages”: at para. 33.
[67]          
In his review of the
earlier decisions, Rouleau J.A. highlights whether, at first instance, the
moving party defendant relied on one or more of rr. 21.01(1), 21.01(3), and
25.11.  In Jaffer, at para. 22, Karakatsanis J.A. (as she then was)
summarizes the outcome of Rouleau J.A.’s review:
[68]          
Applying those
principles to the Pleading, I start with the remedies Ms. Obita seeks.  One of
the remedies she seeks is an order quashing the decision of the Academic Appeal
Committee.  That type of remedy is only available to Ms. Obita on an
application for judicial review.  The fact that Ms. Obita is not entitled to
one of the remedies she seeks does not, in and of itself, support a conclusion
that the court lacks jurisdiction over the action.
[69]          
The question the court
must answer can be framed in one of several ways:
[70]          
The claims Ms. Obita
is pursuing are based not only on the College’s conduct regarding the disputed
grade; in addition, the claims are based on the College’s conduct in the
operation of the College networks, in the information displayed by the College
on those networks, and in the dissemination of statements made about Ms.
Obita.  The claims pursued are based in several types of tortious conduct,
breach of contract, and defamation.
[71]          
The court has
jurisdiction over matters in each of the types of tortious conduct alleged, in
breach of contract, and in defamation.  The College does not identify any
legislative or contractual provision that deprives Ms. Obita of her access to
this court.  In the absence of such a provision, the court is deemed to have
jurisdiction to rule on the dispute: Gauthier, at para. 29.
[72]          
The court has
jurisdiction over the matters raised in the Pleading.  The answer to Issue No.
1 is “no”.
[73]          
Before moving on to
Issue No. 2, I will address an alternative submission made by the College on
the issue of the court’s jurisdiction.  At para. 20 of its factum, the College
attempts, for the purpose of the motion pursuant to r. 21.01(3)(a), to tie the
quality of the Pleading to the issue of jurisdiction.  The College therein
submits that “the elements of the cause of action must be properly pleaded to
allow the court to have jurisdiction over the claim, even if the dispute is
academic in nature.  That is, the plaintiff must plead sufficient material
facts to make out the legal elements of the causes of action for the court to
accept jurisdiction of the claim.”
[74]          
I reject that submission.
 Whether the court has jurisdiction over the action does not depend on the
quality with which the elements of the various causes of action are pleaded. Rather,
the quality with which the elements of the causes of action are pleaded is
relevant to a motion under 
r. 21.01(1)(b) or, in exceptional circumstances, under r. 25.11 when the court
concludes the action is untenable or cannot succeed: Gauthier, at para.
50.
[75]          
The College relies on
r. 21.01(1)(b) in support of its request that the action be dismissed for
failure to disclose any reasonable cause of action.  I move on, then, to Issue
No. 2.
[76]          
The College relies on
r. 21.01(1)(b), which provides that, “A party may move before a judge […] to
strike out a pleading on the ground that it discloses no reasonable cause of
action or defence”.  No evidence may be filed on a motion pursuant to this
rule: r. 21.01(2).
[77]          
A claim will be struck
under this rule only, if assuming the facts pleaded to be true, it is plain and
obvious that the claim has no reasonable chance of success: Hunt v. Carey
Canada Inc., 1990 CanLII 90 (SCC), [1990] 2 S.C.R. 959, at p. 980.
[78]          
In Fernandez Leon
v. Bayer Inc., 2023 ONCA 629, at para. 8, the Court of Appeal for Ontario
describes as “stringent”, the test for striking a pleading for failure to
disclose a reasonable cause of action.  In the same paragraph, the court highlights
that “the moving party must satisfy a very high threshold in order to succeed.”
[79]          
When determining a
motion pursuant to r. 21.01(1)(b), the court must read the subject pleading
generously and err “on the side of permitting an arguable claim to proceed to
trial”: Rausch v. Pickering (City), 2013 ONCA 740, 369 D.L.R. (4th) 691,
at para. 34.
[80]          
To determine Issue No.
2, I consider only the Pleading.  I do not consider any of the affidavit
evidence.
[81]          
For ease of reference,
I repeat the list of the seven causes of action Ms. Obita is advancing:
[82]          
I consider the causes
of action in the order in which they are listed immediately above.
[83]          
There are three
elements to the tort of intentional infliction of mental suffering.  The
conduct must (a) be flagrant and outrageous; (b) be calculated to produce harm;
and (c) result in a visible provable injury: see Prinzo v. Baycrest Centre
for Geriatric Care (2002), 2002 CanLII 45005 (ON CA), 60 O.R. (3d) 474 (C.A.), at para. 43, citing Rahemtulla
v. Vanfed Credit Union (1984), 1984 CanLII 689 (BC SC), 51 B.C.L.R. 200, 29 C.C.L.T. 78 (B.C.S.C.),
at paras. 52-56, a decision of McLachlin J. (as she then was).
[84]          
At para. 45 of Prinzo,
Weiler J.A. explains what is required to establish the second element of this
cause of action—the requirement “is met where the actor desires to produce the
consequences that follow from the act, or if the consequences are known to be
substantially certain to follow”.
[85]          
I find that the
Pleading is entirely lacking allegations of material facts in support of each
of the three elements of this cause of action.  It is plain and obvious the
claim of intentional infliction of pain and suffering (or mental suffering, as
the cause of action is known) stands no reasonable chance of success.
[86]          
In Grant v. Torstar
Corp., 2009 SCC 61, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 640, at para. 28, McLachlin C.J. lists
the three things a plaintiff in a defamation action is required to prove, on a
balance of probabilities, to obtain judgment and an award of damages:
[87]          
In the same paragraph,
McLachlin C.J. explains that if those elements are established, falsity and
damage are presumed.
[88]          
The tort of defamation
is one of strict liability.  The plaintiff in a defamation action is not required
to establish that the defendant intended to do harm or even that the defendant
was careless: Grant, at para. 28.
[89]          
I also consider the more
recent decision of the Court of Appeal for Ontario in Catalyst
Capital Group Inc. v. Veritas Investment Research, 2017 ONCA 85, 136 O.R.
(3d) 23.  Pleadings in defamation “actions have traditionally been held to a
higher standard than in the case with other types of actions, in terms of the
precision with which the material facts must be pleaded”: Catalyst Capital Group,
at para. 22.  The modern approach to assessment of defamation pleadings is less
strict than the approach historically taken: Catalyst Capital Group, at
para. 22.
[90]          
At para. 23 of Catalyst
Capital Group, Blair J.A. emphasizes that “the material facts must be
sufficient, if proved, to establish a cause of action.”  He then lists, in the
same paragraph, the material facts a plaintiff in a defamation case must plead:
[91]          
Ms. Obita’s
allegations of defamation are found in the final, unnumbered paragraph of the
Pleading.  Ms. Obita therein alleges that she has been defamed by the College
because of a description of her behaviour, as it appears in the College’s document
in response to one of her student complaints.
[92]          
Taking into
consideration the pleading requirements set out in both Grant and Catalyst
Capital Group, I make the following findings.  First, the particulars of
the allegedly defamatory words are pleaded.  Ms. Obita alleges that in its
responding document, the College describes her as acting in an “obsessive, harassing
and vexatious manner”.  The Pleading satisfies the first of the four
requirements listed in Catalyst Capital Group.
[93]          
Second, Ms. Obita
alleges that the impugned words were published because, “Algonquin College has
been pushing this narrative about me internally to the board of governors and
employees”.  Ms. Obita asserts that she has been defamed “internally to members
of faculty and other employees as being unstable.”  The Pleading does not
include particulars as to how the impugned words were disseminated to one or
more of the board of governors, faculty, and employees of the College.  The Pleading
does not satisfy the second of the four requirements listed in Catalyst
Capital Group.
[94]          
Third, Ms. Obita does
nothing more than provide a general description of the individuals to whom the
impugned words were disseminated.  It is questionable whether the Pleading satisfies
the third of the four requirements listed in Catalyst Capital Group.
[95]          
Last, the Pleading is
devoid of any allegations that the impugned words, by their ordinary meaning or
innuendo, would tend to the lower the plaintiff’s reputation in the eyes of a
reasonable person.  The Pleading does not satisfy the fourth requirement listed
in Catalyst Capital Group.
[96]          
It is plain and
obvious that, as plead, the claim in defamation does not stand a reasonable
chance of success.
[97]          
There are three
elements to this cause of action.  In Jones v. Tsige, 2012 ONCA 32, 108
O.R. (3d) 41, the Court of Appeal for Ontario concludes that a right of action
for intrusion upon seclusion should be recognized in Ontario.  At para. 71, the
Court highlights the key features of this cause of action: “first, that the
defendant’s conduct must be intentional, within which [the Court] would include
reckless; second, that the defendant must have invaded, without lawful
jurisdiction, the plaintiff’s private affairs or concerns; and third, that a
reasonable person would regard the invasion as highly offensive, causing
distress, humiliation or anguish.”
[98]          
At para. 72 of Tsige,
the Court emphasizes that “[a] claim for intrusion upon seclusion will arise
only for deliberate and significant invasions of personal privacy.”  In the
same paragraph, the Court provides a non-exhaustive list of the types of
intrusions “that, viewed objectively on the reasonable person standard, can be
described as highly offensive.”  The non-exhaustive list consists of “matters
such as one’s financial or health records, sexual practises and orientation,
employment diary or private correspondence”.
[99]          
The Pleading includes general
allegations about the College’s conduct in the monitoring of networks and in the
management of students’ Brightspace accounts.  The general allegations in that
regard do not satisfy the requirements for the cause of action of intrusion
upon seclusion.  It is plain and obvious that the claim based in this cause of
action has no reasonable chance of success.
[100]      
For several of the
causes of action Ms. Obita is pursuing, the cause of action appears as a title
to a section of the Pleading.  That is not the case for Ms. Obita’s claim in
breach of contract.
[101]      
During oral
submissions, Ms. Obita informed the court that she relies on paras. 11a, 11b,
and 12-14 of the Pleading in support of the claim in breach of contract.  I
find that those paragraphs consist primarily of evidence; they contain none of
the particulars required to support a claim in breach of contract by an
academic institution in relation to one of its students (see: Jaffer, at
paras. 27, 28, and 45).  For example, the Pleading does not identify (a) the
specific contract Ms. Obita alleges was breached by the College; (b) the
specific terms of the contract that were breached; and (c) how the terms of the
contract were breached.
[102]      
It is plain and
obvious that the claim in breach of contract has no reasonable chance of
success.
[103]      
In Mustapha v.
Culligan of Canada Ltd., 2008 SCC 27, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 114, at para. 3,
McLachlin C.J. lists the four elements which a plaintiff must prove to succeed
with a claim in negligence: “1) that the defendant owed [the plaintiff] a duty
of care; (2) that the defendant’s behaviour breached the standard of care; (3)
that the plaintiff sustained damage; and (4) that the damage was caused, in
fact and in law, by the defendant’s breach.”
[104]      
Although Ms. Obita is
pursuing a claim in negligence, she does not identify, through the use of a
title or heading in the Pleading, the allegations made in support of that
claim.  It is therefore necessary to attempt to parse from the Pleading
allegations which address each of the four elements of the cause of action.
[105]      
That the court is
required to carry out such an exercise supports a finding that the requirements
for pleading a claim in negligence are not met.  I would go a step beyond that
general deficiency in the Pleading.
[106]      
The Pleading is
deficient specifically regarding a claim in negligence advanced by a student or
former student against an academic institution.  At para. 49 of Gauthier,
Rouleau J.A. emphasizes that to “establish that the [academic institution] breached
its duty of care, the student must plead specific facts tending to show that
the conduct of the [academic institution] constituted an intentional tort […]
or was outside the broad margins of the discretion that the [academic
institution enjoys]”.
[107]      
The Pleading falls far
short of the requirements for a claim based in negligence.  It is plain and
obvious that Ms. Obita’s claim in negligence stands no reasonable chance of
success.
[108]      
Ms. Obita refers to
“the tort of deceit” and to “fraudulent misrepresentation” as two separate
causes of action.  Justice Vermette reviewed the two causes of action in Filler
Depot v. Copart Canada Inc., 2024 ONSC 466.  At paras. 40 and 41, Vermette
J. discusses the pleading requirements for civil fraud, deceit, and fraudulent
misrepresentation:
[109]      
For the purpose of the
motion before the court, I consider Ms. Obita’s claims in deceit and in
fraudulent misrepresentation collectively.  To the extent that any of the
allegations in the Pleading can be said to relate to either deceit or
misrepresentation, the allegations address the College’s treatment of the
student body as a whole.  There are no allegations of either deceit or fraudulent
misrepresentation, specific to Ms. Obita, that come anywhere close to addressing
the particulars listed in para. 41, items a-g, of Filler Depot.
[110]      
It is plain and
obvious that the claims in deceit and in fraudulent misrepresentation stand no
reasonable chance of success.
[111]      
The answer to the
question posed as Issue No. 2 is, “yes”: it is plain and obvious that all of
the causes of action that Ms. Obita is pursuing stand no reasonable chance of
success.  On that basis, they are all struck.  It remains to be determined
whether the causes of action are dismissed outright or with leave to amend
(i.e., Issue No. 3).
[112]      
Before leaving Issue
No. 2, I will briefly address the College’s reliance on r. 25.11.  Pursuant to
that rule, the court has the discretion to “strike out or expunge all or part
of a pleading or other document, without leave to amend” on one of three
grounds listed therein.  One of the listed grounds is that the pleading or
document is “scandalous, frivolous, or vexatious”.
[113]      
At the hearing, the
College acknowledged that because Ms. Obita is self-represented, it is
incumbent on the College to limit what it alleges in the Pleading constitutes
“scandalous” content.  The College submits that approximately ten paragraphs in
the Pleading include scandalous allegations.
[114]       The following are examples of the allegations the
College submits are scandalous:
[115]      
The College relies on
r. 25.11 as an alternative to r. 21.01(1)(b).  Given that all of the claims are
struck because it is plain and obvious that they stand no reasonable chance of
success, it is not necessary for the court to consider r. 25.11 in relation to the
merits of the claims per se.
[116]      
At the hearing, the
College requested that the court consider r. 25.11 in the context of Issue No.
3—meaning that, if leave to amend the Pleading is granted, the College asks the
court to strike the scandalous allegations from the Pleading before it is
amended.
[117]      
I turn then to the
issue of leave to amend the Pleading and consideration, if required, of the
allegedly scandalous portions of the Pleading.
[118]       For the reasons which follow, Ms. Obita is not
entitled to leave to amend the Pleading.
[119]      
First, Ms. Obita has
already been given one opportunity to amend her pleading.  The Pleading is Ms.
Obita’s second attempt at setting out her claims against the College.  The
court recognizes that Ms. Obita is a self-represented litigant.  Ms. Obita’s
status in that regard does not, however, entitle her to repeated indulgences
from the court while she educates herself as may be required to prepare a
pleading that complies with the Rules of Civil Procedure and includes
the particulars required for the claims made.
[120]      
In 2006, the Canadian
Judicial Council released a document titled, “Statement of Principles on
Self-represented Litigants and Accused Persons” (“the Statement”).  One of the
goals identified in the Statement is the promotion of “access to the justice
system for all persons on an equal basis, regardless of representation.”  The
Statement identifies the responsibilities of participants in the justice
system, including self-represented litigants.
[121]      
Included in the responsibilities which
self-represented litigants have is that they are “expected to familiarize
themselves with the relevant legal practices and procedures pertaining to their
case.”  Another responsibility with which self-represented litigants are tasked
is the preparation of their own case.
[122]      
 Based on the form and content of the Pleading,
I draw an inference and find that after drafting the statement of claim in its
original form and prior to drafting the Pleading, Ms. Obita made minimal effort
to familiarize herself with the legal practices and the Rules of Civil
Procedure relevant to the preparation of a statement of claim.
[123]      
Second, I consider Ms. Obita’s litigation
conduct in relation to the Obita affidavit.  That affidavit was not the first
affidavit Ms. Obita prepared for the purpose of a motion in the proceeding. 
She prepared an affidavit in support of her 2023 motion for interim substantive
relief (“the first Obita affidavit”).
[124]      
In 2023, the College brought a motion for an
order striking 26 paragraphs from the first Obita affidavit. 
The College was successful on the motion, with two of the paragraphs struck in
their entirety and a portion of each of the other 24 paragraphs struck: Obita
v. Algonquin College, 2023 ONSC 4661 (“Ruling No. 1”), at paras. 43,
45.  Justice Doyle heard the 2023 motion to strike and concluded that the
offending portions of the paragraphs contained argument and/or inflammatory
rhetoric.
[125]      
The Obita affidavit,
upon which Ms. Obita relies in the motion now before the court, was also the
subject of the interim motion to strike.  As noted in an earlier section of
this ruling, the College was successful in having a part of all of more than 60
paragraphs in the 180-paragraph Obita affidavit struck.
[126]      
Based on the outcome
of the interim motion to strike related to the Obita affidavit, I draw an
inference and find that, despite having faced a motion to strike portions of
the first Obita affidavit, and despite having the benefit of Doyle J.’s ruling,
Ms. Obita made minimal effort to familiarize herself with the legal practices
and the Rules of Civil Procedure relevant to the preparation of an
affidavit.
[127]      
Third, and regarding
all causes of action other than defamation, I agree with the College’s
submission that no further amendments to the Pleading would address the fact
that Ms. Obita’s claims are fatally flawed; and the Pleading does not disclose any
of those causes of action.
[128]      
For those reasons, the
claims in all causes of action, other than defamation, are struck, without leave
to amend.
[129]      
I consider the claim in
defamation separately from the other causes of action.  In McIntosh v. Shore, 2023 ONSC 3124, at para. 61, this court
refers to the challenges that a self-represented litigant can face when
“attempting to navigate the complexities of a claim based in defamation.”  The
quality of Mr. McIntosh’s pleading was at issue before the court in the context
of a request, pursuant to r. 2.1.01, for an order dismissing Mr. McIntosh’s
claim in defamation.
[130]      
I distinguish between a self-represented
plaintiff facing dismissal of a defamation claim in the context of a r. 2.1.01
request and a self-represented plaintiff who has had an opportunity to amend
their pleading and thereafter faces a motion to strike their pleading for failure
to disclose a reasonable cause of action.  Plaintiffs who fall into the former
category may, like Mr. McIntosh, be given the benefit of the doubt: McIntosh,
at para. 61.
[131]      
Ms. Obita falls into the latter category.  Based
on her litigation conduct to date, I find that Ms. Obita is not entitled to the
benefit of the doubt.  Ms. Obita has not demonstrated to the court that,
despite being a self-represented litigant, she has made and will, in the future,
make efforts to familiarize herself with the legal practices and principles and
be in a position to prepare a pleading, even if restricted to a claim in
defamation, that is Rules-compliant and satisfies the requirements for a
pleading in defamation.
[132]      
It would be unfair to, and unreasonable for, the
College to have to respond to a motion for leave to amend the Pleading, even if
the proposed amendments relate only to the claim in defamation.  Striking the
claim in defamation, without leave to amend, is just and an expeditious and
cost-effective method by which to deal with that specific claim on its merits
(see: r. 1.04(1)).
[133]      
For the reasons given in this ruling, Ms.
Obita’s claims in harassment, breach of fiduciary duty, and breach of
confidentiality are dismissed, as abandoned; the balance of the claims are struck,
without leave to amend.  The overall effect of the court’s ruling is that Ms.
Obita’s action is dismissed, in its entirety and without leave to amend.
[134]      
The College is successful
on the motion.  As the successful party, the College is presumptively entitled
to its costs of the motion and of the action.  If the College intends to seek
costs from Ms. Obita, and the parties are unable to resolve the issue of costs,
then written costs submissions shall be made pursuant to the following
timetable and requirements:
[135]      
If the parties are able to resolve the issue of
costs, then counsel for the College shall send an email to the SCJ Assistants
generic email account, copied to Ms. Obita, and to my attention, informing the
court of the resolution of the costs issue.
[136]      
If the College does not deliver costs submissions
by the deadline stipulated in para. 133, item 1, above, then there shall be no
costs of the motion or the action.
[137]      
The order which flows
from this ruling is straightforward.  Given that Ms. Obita has not familiarized
herself with the Rules of Civil Procedure, the court dispenses with the
requirement for the College to obtain Ms. Obita’s approval of the form and
content of the draft order.
[138]       The draft order, in an editable Word format,
shall be filed with the court in the ordinary manner and to my attention.  The
College shall provide Ms. Obita with a copy of the draft order and confirm to
her when it has been filed with the court.