[1]          BDO Canada
Limited is the trustee in bankruptcy in both of these proceedings, which are governed
by the summary administration provisions of the Bankruptcy and Insolvency
Act (“BIA”).
[2]          Sandra
Dixon and Francine Lorraine Leung each filed an assignment in bankruptcy on
July 31, 2020. Ms. Dixon and Ms. Leung both received automatic discharges from
bankruptcy on May 1, 2021 through the operation of subsection 168.1(1) of the BIA.
[3]          BDO was discharged
as Trustee for Ms. Dixon on February 2, 2023, and for Ms. Leung on October 25,
2022.
[4]          BDO subsequently
brought motions to be re-appointed as Trustee. The motions were granted on July
11, 2024 for Ms. Dixon and March 26, 2024 for Ms. Leung.
[5]          The
Trustee now brings motions to annul the automatic discharges from bankruptcy
received by Ms. Dixon and Ms. Leung. In its motion materials, the Trustee
states that both Ms. Dixon and Ms. Leung jointly owned properties with their
respective spouses.
[6]          Ms. Dixon
and Ms. Leung both provided to the Trustees letters of opinion for their
properties from the same realtor at Royal LePage. In each case, the value for
the properties was roughly equivalent to the amount owed under the mortgages. As
a result, the Trustee did not identify any non-exempt equity for the bankruptcy
estates.
[7]          The
Trustee subsequently received information that the values were incorrect. The
Trustee obtained its own evaluations earlier this year, which shows the values
of the properties being significantly higher than that set out in the opinions
of value provided by the bankrupts.
[8]          As a
result, the Trustee, at the instruction and request of the OSB, brought the
re-appointment and annulment motions so that it may pursue the equity in the
properties for the benefit of creditors.
[9]          The
Trustee served its motion materials on Ms. Dixon, Ms. Leung, all known
creditors in both proceedings, and the OSB. No party has taken any steps to
oppose the motion.
[10]      The Trustee cites no section of
the BIA that it is relying on for the purposes of this motion. The
Trustee did not file any legal submissions for the motions.
[11]      As I
have previously written, as noted in Bankruptcy and Insolvency Law of
Canada, 4th Edition at §8.164, “a registrar derives
its authority from the Act and the Rules and has no inherent jurisdiction. If
authority for an act cannot be found in the BIA or the [Bankruptcy and Insolvency General Rules],
then the registrar cannot perform it.” The learned authors of the text go on to
state that “if the power to hear a matter is not expressly conferred on the
registrar by s. 192 or some other section of the Act or the Rules, the
registrar has no jurisdiction to hear it.”
[12]      In the
circumstances, I was required to consider which sections of the BIA may
grant authority to the Court to annul automatic discharges.
[13]      Subsection 180(1) provides that “where a bankrupt after his discharge
fails to perform the duties imposed on him by this Act, the court may, on
application, annul his discharge.” That section is not applicable, as the
Trustee has raised no issues regarding the conduct of the bankrupts following their
discharge from bankruptcy.
[14]      Subsection 180(2) of the BIA
provides that “where it appears to the court
that the discharge of a bankrupt was obtained by fraud, the court may, on
application, annul his discharge.”
[15]      Mr. Ihnatiuk argues that this section is applicable, as the
opinions of value may have been fraudulent. As well, Ms. Woodfull informed the
Court that the OSB has referred a complaint to the Real Estate Council of
Ontario about this realtor.
[16]      There is nothing in the affidavits
filed for these motions that provides that the letters of opinion appeared to
be fraudulent. As a result, I am not prepared to grant annulments under
subsection 180(2) of the BIA based on the record before me.
[17]      In Cameron, Re, Justice Blair (as he then was) held
that subsection 187(5) of the BIA was applicable to a motion to annul a
discharge.[1] That section provides that “every
court may review, rescind or vary any order made by it under its bankruptcy
jurisdiction.”
[18]      In Cameron, Re, Justice Blair set out factors the
court is to review when considering whether to annul a discharge.[2] Blair J. referred
to Tong, Re[3] as a precedent for an
annulment motion under subsection 187(5) of the BIA.
[19]      Justice Blair also referred to the decision of Justice Farley
in Baker, Re, where Farley J. considered a motion for annulment of an
automatic discharge because of inadvertence of the trustee by applying
subsection 187(9) of the BIA.[4]
[20]      That section provides that “no proceeding in bankruptcy shall
be invalidated by any formal defect or by any irregularity, unless the court
before which an objection is made to the proceeding is of opinion that
substantial injustice has been caused by the defect or irregularity and that
the injustice cannot be remedied by any order of that court.”
[21]      In my view, even in circumstances
where a motion is unopposed, a trustee in bankruptcy must provide legal
submissions where it is requesting an annulment of a discharge from bankruptcy.
As no submissions considering the applicable law and cases were filed, I am
adjourning these motions sine die.
[22]      The Trustee shall review these
decisions, note them up, review the applicable sections of Houlden &
Morawetz, and prepare legal submissions that set out the section(s) of the
BIA they say should be applied by the Court, and how the facts of the case
support the granting of the annulment motions based on the tests set out in the
relevant jurisprudence.