[1]              
Some of the issues in the within motion and
cross-motion before the Court have been resolved. What remains is the
Plaintiff’s (“Floriri”) motion for an equalization payment from the Respondents
in the amount of $320,713.66 and the Respondents’ (“Niazi”) motion to require
that the accounting formula used to calculate the equalization payment include
the payment received by Ms. Aiello for her preference shares in Niazi. This
would result in Ms. Aiello owing Mr. Bleta an equalization payment of $2,625,000.
[2]              
Other ancillary issues to be determined by this
Court (as agreed) are as follows:
[3]              
For the reasons set out below I find that
Niazi’s motion must be dismissed, and the relief sought found to be res
judicata. The Respondents are required to pay the equalization payment to the
Applicant. Directions are given below regarding the ancillary matters.
[4]              
Leroy Bleta and Bertha Aiello are siblings. They
have a sister, Marline Bleta, who is not involved in these proceedings. They
are the children of Karafil Bleta (“the deceased”) who died in 2008. The
deceased worked tirelessly throughout his lifetime to build a significant portfolio
of rental and residential properties for his children. Most unfortunately, Mr. 
Bleta and Ms. Aiello have engaged in endless legal disputes about the
properties that their father worked so hard to accumulate.
[5]              
While there have been a substantial number of
proceedings between Ms. Aiello and Mr. Bleta, and the Plaintiff and Defendant
corporations (“the corporations”), these motions relate specifically to a
decision resulting from a trial I presided over in November and December 2021.
My trial decision was released on May 13, 2022 (“the Trial Decision”, Aiello
et al. v. Bleta et al., 2022 ONSC 2798, 79 ETR (4th) 62).
[6]              
The main dispute in that trial was whether Ms.
Aiello and her brother had come to an agreement with respect to her owning all
of the common shares in Floriri and him being the beneficiary of the BFT, which
owned all of the common shares of Niazi and Korce. I found that they had indeed
come to an agreement and that the agreement resulted in Ms. Aiello being the
beneficial owner of the common shares in Floriri and Mr. Bleta being the sole
beneficiary and trustee of the BFT. As a result, Ms. Aiello has no interest in
the common shares of Niazi or Korce.
[7]              
Mr. Bleta was unhappy with the Trial Decision
and appealed. The Court of Appeal upheld the trial decision with reasons
released in August 2023 (the "Appeal Decision", Aiello v. Bleta,
2023 ONCA 525, 88 ETR (4th) 198).
[8]              
In paragraph 250 of the TrialDecision, Imade the
following finding:
[9]              
An equalization payment was not ordered to be
made at the time of the Trial Decision due to certain intercorporate loans
owing to Floriri by Niazi. There was an outstanding “Loans Action” brought by
Ms. Aiello that was pending at the time of trial to determine that very issue.
The Loans Action was heard by Justice Penny on December 13, 2023.
[10]          
In the Loans Action, Floriri proceeded by way of
summary judgment motion seeking repayment of intercorporate debt totalling $1,688,351
from Niazi and $305,696 from Korce. Floriri admitted it owed Korce $550,000
resulting in Floriri owing Korce a net amount of $244,304. In the end, Korce
and Niazi agreed that the sum of $1,444,047 was owed to Floriri. Justice Penny
further found that my judgment confirmed that in giving up her rights to any
interest in the BFT, Ms. Aiello agreed that Floriri would make an equalization
payment of $1,123,333.34. Therefore, as the loans amount of $1,444,047 was
agreed upon, and the equalization payment had already been determined in my
judgment, the net amount owing by the defendant corporations was $320,713.66.
Penny, J. stayed payment on the judgment until the share transfer to Floriri
took place and the issues related to the pledged GICs in favour of TD Bank were
resolved.
[11]          
Ms. Aiello had also brought an oppression
application against Niazi for redemption of her preference shares in Niazi in
the amount of $999,007.05 and other relief. Ms. Aiello had delivered her Notice
of Election to redeem her preference shares in Niazi in 2021 but Mr. Bleta
refused to pay the redemption amount.
[12]          
In his endorsement dated September 22, 2023 (Aiello
v. Niazi and Bleta, 2023 ONSC 5588), Justice Osborne noted that Niazi was
opposing the redemption on the grounds that paying out the required amounts would
render Niazi insolvent. Justice Osborne rejected this argument for two reasons.
First, he referred to the Trial Decision and specifically the Share Transfer
Agreement (“the STA”) in which Mr. Bleta represented Niazi’s value as of October
1, 2014 as being $14,779,757.75. Second, he reviewed Niazi’s financial
statements from February 2021 and 2022 and found that properties owned by Niazi
would not have to be sold or encumbered in order to satisfy the redemption
amount.
[13]          
Mr. Bleta also argued that the oppression
application ought to be stayed pending the outcome of the Loans Action. Justice
Osborne specifically stated at paragraph 34 of his endorsement that “the
preference shares (together with associated redemption rights) in Niazi are not
at issue in the Loans Action." It is clear from the Trial Decision as well
 that the preference shares in Niazi were to be dealt with in a “separate
proceeding or forum if required” (see para. 239).
[14]          
Mr. Bleta is entitled to the same number of
preference shares in Niazi as Ms. Aiello and has the option of redeeming them
at any time. It is not known if he has done so.
[15]          
Mr. Bleta argues that while he is no longer in a
position to dispute that there was an agreement between him and his sister
regarding the ownership of the corporations, the trial judge did not make any
order as to the quantum of the equalization payment. Neither did the Court of
Appeal.
[16]          
Mr. Bleta further submits that the trial judge
relied on the STA for evidence to determine the calculation of the equalization
payment. He submits it would be unfair to rely on that agreement to determine
the calculation for two reasons: first, it was never signed; and second, the
accounting in the STA did not take into consideration the value of the
preference shares in Niazi for which Ms. Aiello has already been paid almost
$1M pursuant to Justice Osborne’s endorsement. Failing to take these
considerations into account would result in unfairness to Mr.  Bleta and a
massive overpayment to Ms. Aiello.
[17]          
Mr. Bleta argues that the existence of the STA
is insufficient to determine the calculation of the equalization payment
because it could not have considered the value of the preference shares which
were disposed of long after the STA was drafted.
[18]          
Further, an examination of the STA shows that it
dealt with the preference shares, yet the Trial Decision expressly states that
it does not apply to the preference shares.
[19]          
Mr. Bleta does not agree that Justice Penny
decided the equalization issue in its entirety. Justice Penny only decided what
the offset was between the intercorporate loans and the equalization payment
set out in the Trial Decision. He stayed his Order for the equalization payment
pending further evidence related to cross-collateral obligations which had not
yet been resolved.
[20]          
Mr. Bleta has provided the expert report of Claudio
Martellacci dated March 20, 2024. Mr. Bleta submits that although he assisted
with the preparation of the accounting in the STA, he is not an accountant, and
the equalization payment should be calculated based on sound accounting
principles. The report sets out the Fair Market Value of Floriri as $19,321,000
and Niazi as $14,071,000 as of October 1, 2014. The differential is $2,820,000.
Mr. Bleta submits this is what he owed by Floriri.
[21]          
Ms. Aiello’s position is that the issue of the
equalization payment is mentioned frequently throughout the Trial Decision, and
it is clear that the payment is based on the accounting in the STA. However,
that payment was subject to an adjustment depending on the outcome of the Loans
Action. That is, the Court did not order Floriri to pay the defendant
corporations over $1M when it was clear from the evidence at trial that they
owed loans to Floriri which may exceed that amount. Ms. Aiello submits that the
Court of Appeal did not disturb the approach taken by the trial judge, and that
the issue has been decided and cannot be relitigated.
[22]          
She submits that her brother now seeks to
include the preference shares in Niazi as part of the equalization payment
calculation despite the fact that they were not considered at trial because
they were not transferred to the siblings until after their mother’s death. The
preference shares were transferred from their mother’s Estate to the siblings
equally on February 18, 2021 (before the trial was heard).
[23]          
Ms. Aiello points to the fact that the Court of
Appeal confirmed that the preference shares were not factored into the ownership
issues that were litigated in 2021 at paragraph 20 of their decision:
[24]          
Ms. Aiello submits that her brother could have
litigated the preference shares issue at trial but chose not to. Further, it is
unfair of her brother to raise this issue now. If he had agreed to include it
as a trial issue, the Court would have dealt with it. Requesting that the value
of preference shares now be factored into the intercorporate loan issue is an
attempt to re-litigate issues which have already been decided, and mix
intercorporate loans with amounts to which Ms. Aiello is personally entitled
(the preference shares).
[25]          
There are three key sources which must be
referred to in order to understand why the Defendants cannot relitigate the
issue of the Equalization Payment: the STA, the Trial Decision, and the Court
of Appeal Decision.
[26]          
The STA was prepared by Mr. Bleta. While it was
never signed by the parties, it represents the direction they intended to go
with respect to a division of their interests in the corporations.
[27]          
The following is salient concerning the STA:
[28]          
Mr. Bleta insists that the Trial Decision does
not make any Order with respect to the equalization payment and therefore the
calculation of such payment should be based on the most current and accurate
information as set out in his expert’s report.
[29]          
However, the judgment resulting from the Trial
Decision at paragraph 3, sets outs as follows:
[30]          
It is clear that the “accounting” referred to in
the Trial Decision is the accounting excerpted from the STA (this is not
disputed by the parties). The accounting stipulates that Floriri owes Niazi $1,123,000.
[31]          
Paragraph 23 of the STA specifically sets out
how the equalization amount was calculated as follows:
[32]          
This is reiterated at paragraph 6 the Loan
Action Endorsement of Justice Penny, in which he found as follows:
[33]          
It is clear that Justice Penny did not have any
difficulty with interpreting the Trial Decision to mean that Floriri was
required to pay an equalization payment to the BFT. Justice Penny was tasked
with determining the “offset” between what was owed by Floriri to the BFT and
vice versa. That is exactly what he did, and as outlined above, he determined
that the net obligation owed by the Defendants was $320,713.66.
[34]          
Mr. Bleta argues that the equalization payment
was intended to equalize the personal assets and debts of the parties. This, by
necessity must include the Niazi preference shares. As such, Mr. Bleta argues
that this Court cannot rely on Justice Penny’s decision as determinative of the
equalization payment issue. Justice Penny ordered that a separate motion be
scheduled due to the impact of other “cross-collateral obligations on the value
differential or the calculation of the equalization payment.”
[35]          
I disagree with this interpretation of Justice
Penny’s reasons for the following reasons:
[36]          
Part of Mr. Bleta’s Notice of Appeal sets out as
follows:
[37]          
The Court of Appeal dismissed those grounds of
appeal at paras. 20-21, 24, stating:
[38]          
The Court of Appeal agreed that there was a
formula for an equalization payment, but that such payment was effectively
deferred pending the outcome of the Loans Action. Further, the Appeal reasons
make it clear that the preference shares did not factor into the equalization
payment. At the outset of the Trial Decision, it was also made clear that the
decision related only to the ownership of the common shares of the companies
and not the preference shares as per Justice McEwen’s endorsement with respect
to the issues to be tried.
[39]          
Mr. Bleta takes the position in his factum that
the equalization payment remained a subject “to be agreed upon” by the parties.
I disagree. The amount of the equalization payment was known by the parties and
set out in the STA. The STA was also before the Court of Appeal. It was only
the adjustment for intercorporate loans that required a further decision by way
of the Loans Action.
[40]          
Further, it cannot be ignored that the STA
accounting was prepared by Mr. Bleta. He wanted his sister to sign the STA and
pay him over $1M in exchange for her receiving 100% of the Floriri common
shares. Mr. Bleta engaged the family corporate accountant and obtained property
valuations to support his calculations. He now resiles from this and submits
that the accounting is incorrect, incomplete and that it should now include the
personal interests of Ms. Aiello and himself.
[41]          
The fact that finalizing the equalization payment
was left to another day in the Trial Decision does not mean that no finding was
made in that regard. As in many complex cases that contain multiple moving
parts, the finalization of the equalization payment was dependent on a further
calculation that simply was not available to the Court at the relevant time but
was available later and determined by Justice Penny.
[42]          
In the Commercial case of Bryton Capital
Corp. GP Ltd. v. CIM Bayview Creek Inc., 2023 ONCA 363, the Court set out
the salient principles related to the doctrine of res judicata as
follows at paras. 41-43:
[43]      Issue
estoppel is narrower than cause of action estoppel as “[i]t applies to prohibit
the re-litigation of an issue that has already been decided in an earlier
proceeding, even where the cause of action is different in the two proceedings”: Dosen,
at para. 32. For issue estoppel to
operate, there are three conditions: (1) the same issue has been decided in an
earlier proceeding; (2) the prior judicial decision was final; and (3) the
parties to the earlier and subsequent proceedings are the same: Fresco
v. Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, 2022
ONCA 115, 160 O.R. (3d) 173, at para. 79.
Even where the three requirements for issue estoppel are met, the courts retain
a residual discretion to refuse to apply the doctrine: Fresco, at
para. 81.
[44]          
Ms. Aiello argued that Mr. Bleta’s cross-motion
was an abuse of process as per the principles set out in Peter B. Cozzi
Professional Corporation v. Szot, 2019 ONSC 5071, at para. 16.  She submits
that Mr. Bleta’s cross-motion misuses Court procedure and erodes public
confidence in the proper administration of justice.
[45]          
While I would not go so far as to call Mr.
Bleta’s motion an abuse of process, I note that both parties are precluded from
bringing any further proceedings in this Court without my leave. The endless retribution
litigation between these siblings ends here.
[46]          
Mr. Bleta has agreed that he will transfer two
of the family burial plots to his sister Marline and the adjacent two plots to
Ms. Aiello.
[47]          
It is further agreed that Mr. Bleta will provide
the cemetery with a letter confirming that the interment rights to those plots
are held by Marline and Ms. Aiello. Marline has agreed that she and husband will
be buried in her plots. She has advised the cemetery of this arrangement and
the cemetery has approved of the arrangement.
[48]          
What remains in issue is Mr. Bleta’s insistence
that Ms. Aiello’s burial plots be used only for family members.  While Ms.
Aiello agrees that one of the plots will be used for her own interment, she
does not wish to be dictated to by her brother with respect to the use of the
remaining plot. She is single and could remarry. Any number of changes could
happen in her life.
[49]          
Mr. Bleta is concerned that the cemetery will
not accept a transfer of the plots without them being designated. There was no
evidence filed that this was the case.
[50]          
If Mr. Bleta is agreeing to transfer the burial
plots to Ms. Aiello, he cannot add restrictions to that agreement. Ms. Aiello
has agreed to use one of the plots for herself. If the cemetery has
restrictions of its own, Ms. Aiello can deal with that once she is the owner of
the plots. Mr. Bleta need not be involved.
[51]          
The parties dispute the form of release in
relation to the Estate and Guardianship matters including the Passing of
Accounts. A settlement was reached in these matters in May 2024.
[52]          
After some discussion during the hearing, it was
agreed that the best course of action would be to wait until the decision in
this matter was released because the parties would have a better understanding
of what litigation remained outstanding.
[53]          
Within 10 days of the release of this decision,
Mr. Graham is to provide a new form of release for the Estate and Guardianship
matters to opposing counsel for review.
[54]          
Mr. Bleta provided his sister with a number of
original documents for the purposes of the trial heard in 2021. He seeks a
return of those documents to ensure they are available in the event he is
audited by the Law Society of Ontario.
[55]          
Ms. Aiello’s position is that Mr. Bleta is
referring to two different categories of documents. The first category relates
to the purchase and sale of certain real estate by Ms. Aiello. Those are her
personal documents and Mr. Bleta has no rights in relation to them. The second
category are Estate related documents. As both Mr. Bleta and Ms. Aiello were
Estate Trustees of their father’s Estate, the documents belong to them equally.
[56]          
Ms. Aiello is entitled to retain the originals
of her personal documents. Where Mr. Bleta acted as solicitor on those real
estate transactions, he may request copies from Ms. Aiello in the event of a
Law Society audit.
[57]          
Due to disputes between Ms. Aiello and Mr. Bleta
they were removed as Estate Trustees of their father’s Estate and replaced by
Scotiatrust in November 2018. As such, the Estate documents can be sent to
Scotiatrust as the Succeeding Estate Trustee. The Estate documents will remain
with Scotiatrust and either party may request copies if required.
[58]          
Mr. Bleta seeks payment of $335 for the 33.5
preference shares he owns in Floriri.
[59]          
Ms. Aiello submitted that the preference shares
in Floriri were redeemed some time ago. Mr. Bleta was sent a cheque for his
shares but did not cash the cheque.
[60]          
Mr. Bleta issued an Application in 2022 naming
Floriri and Ms. Aiello as the Respondents. He made various claims against
Floriri in that Application including a claim for a declaration that the
redemption of his preference shares in Floriri was null and void.
[61]          
No steps have been taken in that litigation by
either party in some time. Mr. Bleta is content to have the Application
dismissed. Ms. Aiello wants her costs of the dismissal. She did not file any
responding record.
[62]          
The subject Application, being Court File No. CV-22-00691109-000 is dismissed. Ms.
Aiello is entitled to costs of the dismissal in the amount of $335. Mr. Bleta
will not receive any redemption for his preference shares in Floriri in
exchange for the payment of costs.
[63]          
In his Notice of Motion, Mr. Bleta seeks a
declaration that as of October 1, 2014 he was sole trustee and beneficiary of
the BFT.
[64]          
Ms. Aiello submits that this relief was added
after Floriri’s motion was scheduled and that such relief may require notice to
third parties.
[65]          
It appears that a declaration may be going
beyond what is necessary. A finding is hereby made that Mr. Bleta is the sole
beneficiary and trustee of the BFT and has been since October 1, 2014. This
formed part of the Trial Decision and is not in dispute.
[66]          
Given all of the above, I make the following
Orders:
[67]          
None of the parties herein nor Mr. Bleta or Ms.
Aiello personally may commence any further litigation in the Superior Court of
Justice of Ontario (in any Region) without leave given by me or my designate.
[68]          
The parties are to provide their written
submissions on costs as follows: