[1]            
On October 23, 2024, I issued my corrected
endorsement in this matter.  In that endorsement, I described this litigation
as “long and tortuous”.  That is reflected by the fact that this is the fourth
time in the litigation that costs have been considered by the court, something
noted in the Applicant’s costs submissions.  The first time was after this
matter was settled immediately before trial before Justice Corkery in 2013 when
a final order was agreed upon based upon an assessment completed in that litigation. 
There was a second lengthy trial in 2017 before Bennett J. resulting in an
interim order and finally a trial in that motion to change before Justice
Sutherland resulting in a final order; costs were ordered for each of those
trials.  The costs that I am considering are in the context of a second motion
to change brought by the Respondent which was heard by me on June 5, 2024.
[2]            
This was a motion brought by the Respondent to
vary child support ordered by Justice Sutherland in his endorsement of February
7, 2022.  At that time, he ordered child support payable by the Respondent
based upon the shared care of two of the children (the eldest child was
attending university).  Eventually both of those children ended up living primarily
with their father, C.M.V.   Justice Sutherland had ordered, concerning the
youngest child, that if he was to be released from the order, the Respondent should
bring a motion to do so when he turned 16; C.M.V. didn’t follow the order and
permitted that child to move in with him and then claimed a change in child
support.  M.M.B. described this as the Respondent unilaterally releasing the
child of the shared care arrangement without the sanction of the court.
[3]            
However, by this point, maybe because of the
tortuous litigation history, all reason had long fled from these parties. 
Based upon the fact that the Respondent failed to bring the required motion to
release the youngest child from the order, the Applicant not only refused to
pay child support for the children in his care, but continued to collect the
monthly child support that the Respondent was paying under the order made by
Justice Sutherland in 2022.  As far as I can determine, she did this because
she thought that she was owed support until the parenting order was legally changed
pursuant to Justice Sutherland’s endorsement.
[4]            
This hole became deeper as matters progressed. 
Justice Sutherland had provided for an annual review in his order commencing
May 1, 2022 and C.M.V. approached M.M.B. in November, 2022.  When these attempts
were ignored, Ms. Normandin became involved and wrote to M.M.B. in February,
2023.  When those efforts were again ignored, these proceedings were
commenced.   It was only at the Settlement Conference in October, 2023 that
M.M.B. agreed to stop collecting the child support; however, she would not
agree to pay any child support to C.M.V. for the children in his care.
[5]            
In my endorsement, M.M.B. was ordered to repay
the child support that she had collected after the children moved in with the
Respondent Father.  She was also ordered to pay base child support as well as
arrears of s. 7 expenses.   She was unsuccessful in her attempts to delay child
support until the order was formally changed, an issue that neither party
placed before the court in this motion to change.
[6]            
M.M.B. blames the Respondent for the result at
trial and her inability to obtain counsel to present a coherent case on her
behalf.  She says that his unreasonable behaviour (which she refers to in her
costs submissions as bad faith behaviour) in failing to pay costs and arrears
on a timely basis resulted in her having to take out a second mortgage for more
than $180,000 for the costs of this litigation.  Because of her inability to
afford the support and the legal fees that she has incurred, she says that she
was unable to afford counsel for this matter and that is one reason that she
was unsuccessful.  She also says that I got the decision wrong and failed to
consider the costs that she paid for the children which she says should have
been set off against the s. 7 expenses that she had paid.  She says that
Justice Sutherland and I both got it wrong concerning her hardship claim as her
household income did not include a partner’s income as she did not have a
partner either in 2022 or now.  She says that, because of the Respondent’s bad
faith behaviour throughout, both parties should bear their own costs of this
motion to change notwithstanding the Respondent’s success at trial.
[7]            
The Respondent relies upon his success in the
trial, the Applicant’s unreasonable behaviour in this litigation and the offers
that he served.  He says that he should be awarded with full recovery costs for
at least a portion of the litigation.  He seeks full recovery costs of $68,140.23 which
include the costs of Mr. Codas that he paid to prepare affidavits for the two
adult children which were used at trial to prove where they were living and to
address their university costs.
[8]            
Modern costs rules are designed to foster four
fundamental purposes (1) to partially indemnify successful litigants; (2) to
encourage settlement, (3) to discourage and sanction inappropriate behaviour by
litigants and; (4) to ensure that cases are dealt with justly under subrule 2
(2) of the Family Law Rules). See: Mattina v. Mattina, 2018 ONCA 867.  A
further purpose is to encourage proportionality considering the issues before
the court and the resources to be devoted to those issues:  see Beaver v.
Hill, 2018 ONCA 860.
[9]            
It is presumed that costs would follow the event
and that the successful party is entitled to costs:  see r. 24(1) of the Family
Law Rules.[1]
[10]        
It is without a doubt that the successful party
is the Respondent who brought the motion to change.  The offers to settle filed
by each party make this apparent as does the result compared to what was
addressed at trial and in the pleadings.  M.M.B. took the position that, since
the Respondent had not changed the parenting order as ordered by Justice Sutherland,
he was not entitled to any child support.  Indeed, she took the position for
some time that C.M.V. should continue to pay support to her, partly because of
the expenses of the children in her home while visiting and partly because the
order had not been formally changed.  This position was untenable as it failed
to take into account the fact that child support belongs to the child, not the
recipient and the children no longer lived with M.M.B.  I made an order for base
child support in favour of the Respondent according to the Child Support
Guidelines.  I also ordered arrears to be fixed and that overpayments of
support be returned to the Respondent along with s. 7 expenses, largely in
accordance with the Respondent’s offers.  The success of the Respondent in this
proceeding means that the Applicant should presumptively bear the Respondent’s
costs.
[11]        
I note at this juncture that the Applicant says
in her costs submissions that I got it wrong on several fronts (as she says
Justice Sutherland did in 2022).  That may be so, but costs submissions are no
place to argue that.  My decision, rightly or wrongly, has been made and the
questioning of that decision is for the Court of Appeal and not in addressing
costs which must be based on the decision that I have made and not what might
have been.
[12]        
The Respondent says he is entitled to full
recovery costs based upon the Applicant’s behaviour and based upon his offers
to settle.  The Applicant also says that the Respondent is guilty of
blameworthy behaviour and that this behaviour is sufficient to displace the
presumption of costs to the successful party.  She also relies upon her own
financial circumstances and hardship in addressing costs.  In essence, she
blames the Respondent for her own inability to obtain counsel and for her
financial circumstances which she says should displace any entitlement to costs
that he may have.
[13]        
Rule 18(14) speaks to the costs consequences of
an offer to settle:
[14]        
The Applicant served three offers to settle. 
None were severable meaning that these offers were “all or nothing” and that
all of the terms or none could be accepted:  see Paranavitana v. Nanayakkara, 2010 ONSC 2257 (CanLII), [2010]
O.J. No. 1566 (SCJ).  The first two offers, made October 26, 2023 and February
7, 2024, provide that the Respondent would continue to pay child support to the
Applicant of $1,632 based upon the a shared care arrangement for all three
children.  This was, as proven at trial, wishful thinking.  All three children
were then living with the Respondent, the youngest with him full time and the
two oldest during the summer.  The first offer suggested that the Respondent
owed the Applicant $1,692.81 in arrears; the second provided that no arrears
were payable.
[15]        
The third offer was made by the Applicant on May
3, 2024.  It again was not severable and provided that no support would be paid
by either party to the other and that there were no arrears of support or s. 7
expenses.
[16]        
Although the Applicant was successful on one
issue mentioned in that offer, being the direct payment of tuition by her to
the university or the child, the result at trial for the Applicant were not, in
the words of r. 18, “as favourable or more favourable” than any of the three
offers on the major issues considered at trial being retroactive and
prospective child support for the three children.  The offers were not
severable.  Her offers therefore do not attract any costs consequences in
respect of this matter.
[17]        
The Respondent also submitted three offers.  The
first two were severable and the Respondent’s results at trial were more
favourable than the offers insofar as the arrears of support in both offers
were less than that ordered at trial and the repayment terms for those arrears
in the offers were substantially more generous than those ordered at trial.  He
was spot on concerning ongoing base child support.  Because they were
severable, the offers would have permitted the Applicant to accept only the
support provisions of the offers and, as these were the major issues, this would
have probably avoided a trial.
[18]        
If the Respondent had left well enough alone
with his first two offers, he would have been in a position to rely upon r.
18(14) and obtain an award of full recovery costs.  However, he did not and
issued a third offer on March 13, 2024.  In that offer, the arrears were
substantially less than that ordered and the ongoing child support was again
less than that ordered.  However, unlike his first two offers, this offer
contained no repayment terms, crucial to the Applicant who had addressed her
financial circumstances in her affidavit evidence.  It was not severable, which
made it all or nothing as with the Applicant’s offers.  This means that, had
the Applicant accepted this offer, the Director of the Family Responsibility
Office would have then been immediately seizing half of the Applicant’s net
income, putting her housing and financial security at.  Because the offer was
not severable, that omission, in my view, makes the result at trial less
favourable to the Respondent than the offer and was not a “genuine effort at
compromise” in the words of Beaver v. Hill, supra.
[19]        
Moreover, it is a bit rich for the Respondent to
expect immediate payment of the arrears when he delayed payment of the costs
that he had owed since 2018 until the eve of the Sutherland J. trial in
December, 2022.
[20]        
Moreover, the Respondent’s earlier offers cannot
be considered under r. 18(14) as they were effectively withdrawn by the final
offer made on March 13, 2024.
[21]        
Therefore, I find that the Respondent’s offers
also do not result in full recovery costs under r. 18(14).  However, they were
more of an effort to compromise than were the Applicant’s offers and I take
that into account under r. 18(16) of the Family Law
Rules.
[22]        
The Applicant accuses the Respondent of bad
faith behaviour.  She says that he breached court orders continuously, refusing
to pay court ordered costs and support.  She says that his behaviour prior to
Sutherland J.’s decision was just a sham and that he reverted to bad faith
behaviour immediately after receiving that decision.
[23]        
Bad behaviour by a litigant is directly related
to the costs to be awarded.   Rule 24(4) permits costs to be awarded against a
successful litigant who has behaved unreasonably.  In setting the amount of
costs to be awarded, r. 24(12) permits the court to take into account “each
party’s behaviour”.  Therefore, both in determining entitlement to costs and
the quantum, either party’s unreasonable behaviour may be taken into account.
[24]        
The nuclear option, however, is bad faith
behaviour as alleged by the Applicant.  If a court finds bad faith behaviour,
r. 24(8) requires the court to award full recovery costs against that party,
payable forthwith.  The Applicant claims that the Respondent is guilty of, not
only unreasonable behaviour but bad faith behaviour.
[25]        
I do not believe that the Respondent is guilty
of bad faith behaviour.  Subrule 24 (8) requires a fairly high threshold of
egregious behaviour, and in cases such as this a finding of bad faith is rarely
made. See: Cozzi v. Smith, 2015 ONSC 3626; Scipione v. Del Sordo, 2015 ONSC 5982. There
is a difference between bad faith and unreasonable behaviour. The essence of
bad faith is duplicity, when a person suggests their actions are aimed for one
purpose when they are aimed for another purpose. It is done knowingly and
intentionally: see S.(C.) v. S.(M.) (2007), 2007 CanLII 20279 (ON SC), 38
R.F.L. (6th) 315 (Ont. S.C.J.). Bad faith is not synonymous with bad judgment or negligence;
rather, it implies the conscious doing of a wrong because of dishonest purpose
or moral obliquity. Bad faith involves intentional duplicity, obstruction
or obfuscation. See: Scipione, supra.
[26]        
There is no question that the Respondent was
badly behaved throughout, not only this litigation but the earlier iterations
of this matter.  The conclusions of Bennett J. and, to a lesser extent,
Sutherland J., make this clear.  As far as this motion to change goes, C.M.V.
did not follow the directions of Sutherland J. in bringing a motion to change
to release the youngest child, R.E. from the shared care arrangement when he
turned 16 years old; instead, he just took it upon himself to pronounce to the
Applicant that R.E. was 16 and could make up his own mind.  This, amongst other
things, was one of the direct causes of the breakdown in communication between
the parties leading to this litigation.  He was also arbitrary in refusing to
provide tuition receipts to the Applicant when she requested them, arranging
directly with the children their contribution to their expenses and the payment
of that tuition.   His actions in withdrawing his second from last offer and
making a non-severable offer requiring payment of the arrears immediately was,
again, unreasonable behaviour as this offer was not made in the spirit of
compromise (unlike his first two offers).
[27]        
However, although the Respondent was badly
behaved, I do not believe it meets the test of bad faith behaviour as defined
in the cases.  The Respondent was not doing this, in my view, to hurt the
Applicant or for some nefarious purpose.  The two older children in their
affidavits express that any change in residency was their own decision and that
they were content to work out their university costs with their father.  Those
children are now adults and prepared their affidavits with their own lawyer and
I was satisfied that this evidence was independent of any pressure brought to
bear by the Respondent, if any.  The Applicant’s case was based largely upon
the Respondent’s alleged bad faith behaviour, but that would not, in my view,
affect child support which is the right of the child and not the recipient.  I
therefore do not find that the Respondent was guilty of bad faith behaviour. 
As stated by Perkins J. in S.(C.) v.S.(M.), supra at para. 17, “A
misguided but genuine intent to achieve the ostensible goal of the activity,
without proof of intent to inflict harm, to conceal relevant information or to
deceive, saves the activity from being found to be in bad faith.”  I find this
to be the case here as well.
[28]        
However, even if it does not meet the threshold
of bad faith conduct, the Respondent is guilty of unreasonable behaviour. 
Unfortunately, so is the Applicant.  None of her offers were made with
compromise in mind.  She failed to participate in the review of child support
as ordered by Sutherland J. and did not respond to communications by either the
Respondent or his lawyer.  She was also arbitrary in her determination of the
s. 7 expenses for the children, refusing to share in legitimate costs for the
children.  Her actions in failing to admit the residency of the children
directly resulted in the children having to go back to their former counsel to
complete and sign affidavit evidence as to their views and preferences and
their version of arranging for payment of their s. 7 university expenses.  That
put them in the middle of this litigation which was unacceptable.  The
Applicant further continued to collect child support that she was not entitled
to, notwithstanding the advice given to her by the DRO officer who conducted
the first case conference.  It took a judge’s advice to bring that to a halt. 
Her rigidity and unmitigated hostility toward the Respondent made this matter
impossible of settlement and resulted in this trial.
[29]        
I find the statement of Dunn J. in Self v.
Reid, 2006 ONCJ 30 at para. 29 particularly applicable to the Applicant’s
behaviour:
[30]        
Both parties in this matter gave as good as they
got.  These parties are locked in unrelenting litigation because of their
mutual bad behaviour.  Neither deserves to rely upon the unreasonable behaviour
of the other in assessing the costs of this matter.
[31]        
Based upon my findings above, the presumption
that costs are payable to the successful party under r. 24(1) is not displaced
by unreasonable or bad faith behaviour.  The successful party in this trial was
clearly the Respondent.  He succeeded in obtaining a repayment of the support
that was paid by him after he broached the subject and the children ended up
living with him full time.  He succeeded in obtaining payment of the child
support as offered by him in his offers to settle and also was successful in
obtaining arrears of base child support and s. 7 expenses.  As indicated by his
offers and the major issues argued at trial, he was successful at trial.
[32]        
He is therefore entitled to his costs of this
motion to change on a partial recovery basis.
[33]        
The Respondent has filed a Bill of Costs.  That
Bill of Costs suggests that Ms. Normandin’s hourly rate is $600 per hour.  She
has 20 years of experience.  Mr. Teitel’s hourly rates are set at about $400
per hour; he has 10 years of experience.
[34]        
M.B.B. filed a “fee schedule” from the Law
Society of Ontario website.  Although unclear from her costs submissions, I suspect
that this was to prove that the hourly rates of the Respondent’s lawyers were
unreasonable.  However, the LSO fee schedule is not a suggested fee schedule
for counsel; in fact, fee tariffs for lawyers are a thing of the past due to
anti-trust legislation.  What was submitted is a fee schedule of what the Law
Society is willing to pay for outside counsel.[2] 
That does not suggest that Ms. Normandin’s or Mr. Teitel’s hourly rates are
excessive; all it does is express what the Law Society is willing to pay
outside counsel if retained.
[35]        
Considering counsel’s years of experience, I
find their respective hourly rates reasonable.  Ms. Normandin’s office has also
avoided billing for two counsel when efforts were duplicated, again a
reasonable practice under the circumstances.
[36]        
Full recovery costs for fees claimed by the
Respondent in this matter are $65,016.81 inclusive of HST.  Although I do not
find any particular expense unreasonable, I am concerned about
proportionality.  Parenting was not part of this claim and the only issues
before the court were arrears and the Respondent’s overpayment of child support
as well as base child support and s. 7 expenses for two salaried employees. 
There were only three court appearances including a DRO conference, the settlement
conference and the trial.  The trial was only one day in duration.  More than
$65,000 in fees is disproportionate to the issues before the court.
[37]        
The disbursements claimed are reasonable,
especially the invoice of Mr. Codas for preparation of the children’s
affidavits which is directly attributable to the Applicant’s failure to
reasonably respond to the Respondent’s Request to Admit.  The travel expenses
are also reasonable as Ms. Normandin does not not appear to have charged her
time out for travel time.
[38]        
M.B.B. asks that I take into
account her impecuniosity in ordering costs.   Considering the fact that the
Applicant refused to negotiate a reasonable support arrangement when given the
opportunity to do so, I decline to deprive the Respondent of costs because of
the Applicant’s financial circumstances.  As noted by Kaufman J. in Balsmeier v Balsmeier, 2016 ONSC 3485:
[39]        
It is apparent that M.B.B. did not pursue
settlement where possible; she refused to participate in the support review
ordered by Sutherland J. and refused the advice of the Dispute Resolution
Officer.  She had before her two reasonable offers from the Respondent and
refused to suspend his support payments when she clearly should have.  She
refused to respond reasonably to the Respondent’s request to admit, thereby
putting her adult children in the position of being witnesses at this hearing. 
Her actions resulted in much of the Respondent’s legal fees including the fees
paid by the Respondent to Mr. Codas for preparation of the children’s
affidavits.
[40]        
However, in In Van
Rassel v. Van Rassel,  2008 CanLII 56939 (ON SC), [2008]
O.J. No. 4410, 61 R.F.L. (6th) 364 (S.C.J.) at para. 9 Mossip J. concluded that
the court should also consider the financial means of the unsuccessful party
including the issue of the impact on the child of the paying party of a large
costs order.  In doing so, she followed Rosenburg J.’s suggestion in M. (C.A.) v. M. (D.) (2003), 2003 CanLII 18880 (ON CA), 67 O.R. (3d) 181 (Ont. C.A.) at para. 42 that, “In fixing costs, the courts
cannot ignore the best interests of the child and thus cannot ignore the impact
of a costs award against a custodial parent that would seriously affect the
interests of the child.”  Although M.B.B. is not the “custodial parent” of any
of these children, two of the children are in university and M.B.B. has to pay
a significant portion of their university expenses.  C.M.V. has RESPs with
which he can pay those expenses; M.B.B. by comparison has to pay those expenses
out of her ongoing income.   I take her financial circumstances into account in
setting costs based upon the amount that any costs award is going to
significantly impact her ability to assist her adult children in university.
[41]        
The Respondent’s partial recovery costs are
stated to be $42,260.93 which is 65% of the full recovery costs claimed by the
Respondent.  Taking into account issues of proportionality and ability to pay,
I find that the Applicant is liable to pay the Respondent’s costs in the amount
of $25,000 which is substantially less than the partial recovery amount
claimed.  In addition, the Applicant shall pay the Respondent’s disbursements
in full which are $3,123.42 inclusive of HST.   Therefore, the Respondent shall
have his costs of this proceeding in the amount of $28,123.42 inclusive of HST.
[42]          
In light of the Respondent’s failure to pay the
Applicant’s costs of the 2017 trial on a timely basis, I decline to have this
costs award enforced as support pursuant to s. 1(1)(g) of the Family
Responsibility and Support Arrears Enforcement Act, 1996.[3]  As I stated above, it is
a bit rich for the Respondent to expect immediate payment of the costs when he
failed to do so over the course of years after trial in 2017.