[1]              
On March 30, 2022, the appellant was involved in
a one-car collision on the Aviation Parkway. Emergency services attended and there
were indicia of intoxication. In a conversation
with police, the appellant admitted to consuming alcohol. Following that
admission, police made an Approved Screening Device (ASD) demand and the
appellant failed. Later at the police station, the appellant provided breath
samples registering 140 milligrams of alcohol in 100 milliliters of blood, being
over the legal limit.
[2]              
The parties agreed to litigate the issue of
whether there was a valid ASD demand absent the appellant’s admission of
alcohol consumption. The trial judge found that there was a valid demand and this
determination is the subject of this appeal.
[3]              
On January 4, 2024, the appellant was convicted
of operating a conveyance over 80, contrary to s. 320.14(1) of the Criminal
Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 by Justice Boxall of the Ontario Court of Justice
after five days of trial, which included a two-day Charter voir dire
and additional submissions requested by the court.
[4]              
The trial judge found that the roadside
statement about consumption of alcohol was a compelled statement. The appellant
brought a Charter challenge in respect of s. 320.31(9) of the Criminal
Code.
[5]              
The parties agreed that the voir dire would
proceed on the basis of screening out the compelled statement in order to
determine if both subjective and objective grounds existed to make the ASD
demand. The appellant does not contest that objective grounds to make the
demand existed. The subject of this appeal is focused on the officer’s subjective
grounds for the ASD demand.
[6]              
The appellant alleges that the trial judge erred
when he held that the officer's subjective standard was too high and applied an
objective view to the officer’s subjective grounds. In doing so, the trial
judge erred by replacing a subjective/objective test with an objective/objective
test. The appellant requests that a new trial be ordered.
[7]              
As the trial judge concluded that both
subjective and objective grounds existed for the ASD demand, there was no need
to proceed with the Charter challenge of s. 320.31(9). The trial judge
found that grounds to make a roadside screening demand existed, even absent the
compelled statement.
[8]              
On March 30, 2023, Constable Manion was
dispatched to a one-car motor vehicle collision along the Airport Parkway in
Ottawa. After the appellant was assessed by first responders, the officer asked
for her driver’s licence, vehicle ownership, and insurance papers. The
appellant fumbled with her wallet and the officer believed that this could be
cognitive impairment from the accident. The officer asked the appellant twice for
the vehicle ownership and insurance papers, but the appellant never provided
them.
[9]              
The officer noticed that the appellant’s eyes
were constrained. She had overheard the appellant tell first responders that
she could not recall the accident but that she was not speeding.
[10]          
The officer asked the appellant if she had
consumed alcohol and the appellant replied, “dinner with wine”. The officer
felt this was an unusual response and made the ASD demand.
[11]          
The officer testified that the one-car collision
could have been an accident, but also could have been related to alcohol
consumption. The trial judge found that it was the combination of the
collision, constricted eyes, confusion, and the admission of consumption that
gave the officer the grounds for the roadside demand. The officer acknowledged
in her testimony that the grounds to make the ASD demand followed the admission
of consumption of “dinner with wine”.
[12]          
Constable Manion
described her process leading up to the ASD demand as follows:
[13]          
She then expanded in cross-examination:
[14]          
The appellant failed the ASD test and was arrested. She was subsequently taken to the Ottawa
Police Service (OPS) station at 474 Elgin Street, where she provided two breath samples registering 140mg/100ml each, being over the legal limit.
[15]          
On November 2, 2023, the trial judge ruled that the admission
of alcohol consumption was a statutorily compelled statement.
The result was that the statement
would be excised to determine if the grounds for the ASD demand could otherwise have existed, obviating the need to consider the constitutional challenge to s. 320.31(9) of the Criminal Code. It remained to be determined whether the ASD demand was lawful, absent the compelled statement.
[16]          
This meant excising the evidence from the
grounds for reasonable suspicion to make the ASD demand. As a result, as the trial court noted “this indicates that the officer must have an honest belief the person committed the offence,
or, in this case, an honest
suspicion that Ms. Smethurst had alcohol in
her body” for the ASD demand to be valid.
[17]          
The trial judge correctly recognized that a
reasonable suspicion must be subjectively held and objectively reasonable at p.
6 of his reasons:
[18]          
There is no dispute that the trial judge
properly analysed the objective component and no appeal is taken of that
finding. The trial judge concluded that a combination of the relevant factors raised
an objectively reasonable suspicion of alcohol in the driver’s body.
[19]          
The appellant states that the trial judge
erroneously held that the officer’s subjective standard
was too high and
imposed his objective view of the evidence onto her
subjective grounds. In short, he erred by replacing a subjective/objective test with an objective/objective test. This obviated
the need for determining the validity of s.
320.31(9), since the trial judge found that grounds
to make a roadside screening
demand existed, even absent the compelled statement.
[20]          
The appellant further states that the trial judge erred in determining that the existence
of objective grounds for a suspicion
salvaged the arresting officer’s lack of a subjectively held suspicion of alcohol consumption. The officer’s lack of a subjectively held suspicion absent
the compelled statement would render the ASD demand invalid, but for the operation
of s. 320.31(9) of the Criminal Code. The appellant states that had the law been applied correctly,
the trial judge would have needed to consider the constitutionality of s.
320.31(9) of the Criminal Code,
the necessary evidentiary threshold having been established. But for the compelled statement,
and as the arresting officer lacked grounds
to make an ASD demand,
the impugned evidence
would have been excluded, and the appellant
acquitted following R. v. Soules, 2011 ONCA 429, 105 O.R. (3d) 561.
[21]          
 The Crown’s position is that the trial judge found
as a matter of law that, absent the appellant’s admission of consumption,
objective grounds existed to reasonably suspect that she had alcohol in her
body. No appeal is taken from this finding of law.
[22]          
Furthermore, the trial judge found as a fact
that, even though she continued to investigate, the demanding officer had a
subjective suspicion of alcohol in the appellant’s body prior to the appellant’s
admission of consumption.
[23]          
The Crown states that a valid demand does not
require that the basis for the officer’s subjective grounds be exactly the same
as the basis for the trial judge’s objective review. It is sufficient if (1)
the officer believed she had the grounds; and (2) the admissible circumstances
known to the officer at the time provided an objective basis for the grounds.
Both of those components were met in this case.
[24]          
Finally, the Crown relies on the Court of Appeal
for Ontario’s decision in R. v. Fyfe, 2023 ONCA 715, 432 C.C.C. (3d) 145
in support of its position that the court is not limited to the grounds for
arrest adopted by arresting officers. The court is entitled to consider all of
the circumstances known to the arresting officers in determining whether there
were objectively reasonable and probable grounds for an arrest.
[25]          
The application of a legal standard to
the facts of the case is a question of law. Further, although the trial judge’s factual findings are entitled to deference, the trial judge’s
ultimate ruling is subject to review for correctness: see R. v.
Shepherd, 2009 SCC 35, [2009] 2 S.C.R. 527, at para. 20.
[26]          
Furthermore, in R. v. Beaver, 2022 SCC 54, 475 D.L.R.
(4th) 575, at para. 72, the Supreme Court of Canada adopted the following statements
in assessing subjective grounds for arrest:
[27]          
The arresting officer’s subjective grounds for
arrest must be justifiable from an objective viewpoint. The objective
assessment is based on the totality of the circumstances known to the officer
at the time of the arrest, including the dynamics of the situation, as seen
from the perspective of a reasonable person with comparable knowledge, training,
and experience as the arresting officer: see R. v. Zacharias, 2023 SCC
30, 431 C.C.C. (3d) 421, citing R. v. Tim, 2022 SCC 12, 467 D.L.R. (4th)
389, at para. 24; R. v. Storrey, 1990 CanLII 125 (SCC), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 241, at pp. 250-251.
[28]          
Absent palpable and overriding error, a trial
judge’s interpretation of the evidence should not be overturned: see Housen
v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 262, at para. 36.
[29]          
The above passage from Tim is in large part
dispositive of the appeal in this matter. When assessing the subjective grounds
for the ASD demand, the trial judge must, while considering the dynamics of the
situation, assess these subjective grounds as seen from the perspective of a
reasonable person with comparable knowledge, training, and experience as the
arresting officer. This individual can also be considered as “the reasonable
police officer standing in the shoes of Constable Manion” as stated by the
trial judge. This forms part of the analysis of the subjective grounds for
appeal but does not transform the analysis into one that is objective.
[30]          
A proper reading of the trial judge’s reasons as
a whole demonstrates that the trial judge was perfectly aware of the challenges
that were presented in the voir dire where the court was asked to screen
out the compelled statement provided by the appellant, being the admission of
having consumed alcohol. This is not the circumstance in which the officer was
placed at the time of the ASD demand. The officer was not able to halt her
investigation precisely before the compelled statement and assess if she subjectively
possessed reasonable suspicion before making what she deemed to be a permitted
request.
[31]          
The trial judge was perfectly aware of the
awkward circumstances of this analysis when he deemed it a “hypothetical and
illusory exercise for the court to determine what that particular officer would
personally have believed at the time they made the demand or arrest if they had
not possessed the unlawfully obtained information.” I highlight again that the officer
in the field is operating under the belief that the compellable demand is
authorized by the Criminal Code.
[32]          
This was the correct way of approaching the
subjective grounds analysis that was required as a result of screening out the
information about alcohol consumption. In performing this function, the trial
judge went on to assess the evidence of Constable Manion as being credible and
reliable while concluding that the officer honestly held a subjective reasonable
suspicion that the appellant had alcohol in her body at the time she made the
ASD demand. The officer’s evidence was that her belief included the compelled
statement.
[33]          
The trial judge then went on to assess the
officer’s subjective belief in line with how a reasonable police officer in her
situation would have done so. This is precisely the direction provided by the
Supreme Court of Canada in Tim. It is obviously more common for this
type of analysis to be done when the court must assess if an officer’s
subjective belief was objectively reasonable when an officer testifies that he
or she believes they had reasonable suspicion. In the present case, the officer
may have wanted to go further and did not recognize that she had reached a
standard of reasonable suspicion, but the trial judge still needed to assess
the objective reasonableness of the information that she possessed.
[34]          
It is well established that an officer is not
required to make a demand instantaneously upon reasonable suspicion. Common
sense must dictate: see R. v. Tosun, 2021 ONSC 2895, at para. 38.
[35]          
The trial judge made a finding of fact that the
officer entertained alcohol involvement, as a reasonable possibility, early in
the investigative process. In the trial judge’s
assessment, Constable Manion “engaged in the thought process that provided the
possibility of alcohol, and thus reasonable suspicion” and “did subjectively
reasonably suspect alcohol in Ms. Smethurst’s body, even without the compelled statements.”
This was a finding of fact, and it is entitled to deference absent palpable and
overriding error.
[36]          
Contrary to the appellant’s allegation, the
trial judge did not transform the subjective belief requirement into an
objective analysis. The trial judge made specific reference to the Supreme
Court of Canada's decision in R. v. Caslake, 1998 CanLII 838 (SCC), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 51 and
highlighted how the subjective part of the analysis forces the officer to satisfy
herself that there is a valid purpose for the search incident to arrest before
the search is carried out.
[37]          
The trial judge proceeded to assess the
objective reasonableness of the officer's subjective belief based on her
testimony and what she knew at the time. While the trial judge concluded that
in the heat of the moment, the officer was of the view that she needed more
information prior to making the ASD demand, he assessed the evidence that she
possessed at the time and concluded that objectively, the officer’s evidence
amounted to reasonable suspicion.
[38]          
The trial judge went on to find that the officer
either applied an incorrect legal standard or in the moment, failed to
recognize what would amount to reasonable suspicion in that she did not appreciate
the information that she had on the possibility of alcohol.
[39]          
In assessing whether these subjective grounds
existed in the officer’s mind following excision, the trial judge went on to
assess the information known to the officer and the test she applied to the known
information to determine if subjective grounds existed.
[40]          
The trial judge made a finding that even without
the compelled statement, the officer subjectively reasonably suspected alcohol
in the appellant’s body. That finding is supported by the evidence she had surrounding
the nature of the accident, which she stated raised for her the possibility of
alcohol involvement. Furthermore, the trial judge highlighted the slight
confusion relating to the information provided to first responders, the
fumbling with documents requested by the officer, and the appellant’s
constricted eyes. The officer’s evidence demonstrates that she recognized
multiple possibilities, one of which was alcohol consumption. The trial judge
concluded that the officer engaged in the thought process that provided the
possibility of alcohol involvement and thus reasonable suspicion.
[41]          
Finally, the trial judge concluded that while
the officer may not have recognized or did not address her mind fully to the
issue that she subjectively possessed what the law required to make a roadside
demand, she did subjectively reasonably suspect alcohol in the appellant’s body
even without the compelled statement. The trial judge made a finding of fact
that the officer’s lack of recognition was due to the dynamic situation, the
reality that the events happened quickly in the field, or that it was possibly
a misunderstanding of the legal requirement of reasonable suspicion. It was
open to the trial judge to look at all the circumstances and determine if the subjective
view of the officer, after screening out the compelled statement, was
objectively reasonable.
[42]          
Contrary to the appellant’s contention, this is
not a case where the officer applied the wrong test such as the difference
between reasonable suspicion and reasonable and probable grounds.
[43]          
For the above reasons, the appeal is dismissed.