[1]              
Mr. Langstaff is a defendant and plaintiff by
counterclaim. He moves to amend his counterclaim to include:
[2]              
The motion is opposed by the defendants by
counterclaim on one basis only – that the essential facts which underpin the
allegations against Senior Management and the three new causes of action were
known to Mr. Langstaff in January 2018, when his counterclaim was first delivered,
or at least by September 25, 2019, when the counterclaim was substantially
amended. Thus, Catalyst argues the proposed amendments are out of time.
[3]              
For reasons I will explain below, the motion is
granted in part. Leave to amend is denied with respect to adding Senior
Management as parties. Leave is granted to increase the claim for punitive
damages and to advance theories of liability based on defamation, unlawful
means and intrusion upon seclusion.
[4]              
Mr. Langstaff was employed by Canaccord Genuity
Corp. His employment was terminated in September 2017. Mr. Langstaff alleges in
his counterclaim that his employment at Canaccord was terminated because of a
campaign by The Catalyst Capital Group Inc. and Callidus Capital Corporation
(Catalyst) to punish and embarrass him for his alleged participation in a
scheme to “short” Catalyst stock and otherwise cause harm to Catalyst in the
marketplace.
[5]              
The counterclaim seeks damages against Catalyst
for: inducing breach of contract; intentional interference with economic
relations; loss of competitive advantage; and intentional or negligent
infliction of emotional distress. There is also a claim for punitive and
aggravated damages.
[6]              
Mr. Langstaff is but one of many parties
involved in this complex, highly acrimonious litigation arising out of the
alleged scheme. The full extent of the allegations and counter-allegations, and
the tortuous course of this litigation to date, are set out in several
decisions previously rendered by the court. I will not recount them all here.
For present purposes, the key events are as follows.
[7]              
After the Catalyst claim was commenced in August
2017, Catalyst produced documents. Privilege claims were made over thousands of
documents. In November 2019 several co-defendants (not Mr. Langstaff) commenced
motions to dismiss the claims against them on the basis that the Catalyst
action was a strategic lawsuit against public participation (SLAPP). In the
course of those proceedings, there was a production motion against Catalyst.
Justice Boswell ordered Catalyst to produce many documents over which
privilege, he found, had been improperly claimed. Those documents were not
produced until March 2021.
[8]              
Mr. Langstaff takes the position that the
documents in March 2021 disclosed, for the first time, material facts that were
necessary for him to know before the allegations contained in the amendments
now sought to be approved by this motion could be made. Specifically, Mr.
Langstaff says that while he knew Messrs. Glassman, Riley and De Alba
constituted Catalyst’s senior management and that they were the individuals
through which Catalyst carried out the acts and omissions Mr. Langstaff alleged
as the basis for his counterclaim in 2018, he did not know the extent to which
Senior Management “knew” there was absolutely no reliable support for their
allegations until after the SLAPP-related production was made by Catalyst in
March 2021. Mr. Langstaff submits that it was only after the March 2021
productions were received that he was in a position to make allegations that
would engage the personal liability of Senior Management.
[9]              
The parties entered into a tolling agreement on
June 20, 2022, with an effective date of June 15, 2022.
[10]          
The evidence is that Catalyst was advised of Mr.
Langstaff’s intention to bring a motion to amend his counterclaim to add Senior
Management as parties in March 2022. Mr. Langstaff says in his affidavit that
because of the stay imposed under the SLAPP rules (s. 137.1 of the Courts of
Justice Act), he could not bring his motion until that litigation was dealt
with. This issue was not raised in Mr. Langstaff’s factum. Mr. Langstaff was
not a respondent in the SLAPP motions. He was, therefore, not caught by the
SLAPP-related prohibition in s. 137.1(6) against amendment of pleadings.
[11]          
No motion to amend was brought by Mr. Langstaff
prior to motions for a Mareva injunction being brought against Mr. Glassman by
several parties, including by Mr. Langstaff, in April 2024. These motions were
based on an apprehension that Mr. Glassman was leaving Ontario and moving
assets offshore. The motions were dismissed with reasons by Black J. (2024 ONSC
2430). It appears Mr. Langstaff also requested, at the time of his motion for a
Mareva order, leave to amend his defence and counterclaim to add Senior
Management (including, of course, Mr. Glassman) as parties to his counterclaim.
Justice Black’s initial did not deal with this request.
[12]          
Mr. Langstaff’s request to amend his
counterclaim became the subject of a further endorsement of Justice Black.
Justice Black pointed out in his subsequent endorsement that it was somewhat
unusual to seek leave to amend pleadings without a motion record being delivered
containing, at the very least, a draft of the proposed amendments being sought.
Justice Black declined to make any ruling on this request and ordered that Mr.
Langstaff’s motion for leave to amend must proceed on a full record before the
court.
[13]          
This is what brought the parties before the court
on October 25, 2024.
[14]          
Rule 26.01 provides that “at any stage of an
action the court shall grant leave to amend a pleading on such terms as are
just, unless prejudice would result that could not be compensated for by costs
or an adjournment.” Numerous cases have established that an amendment which
discloses no reasonable cause of action will not be granted: Fram Elgin
Mills 90 Inc. v. Romandale Farms Ltd., 2016 ONCA 404. Further, an amendment
will cause non-compensable prejudice where a party is sought to be added after
the expiry of a limitation period: 1588444 Ontario Ltd v State Farm Fire and
Casualty Co, 2017 ONCA 42 at para 25.
[15]          
The Limitations Act provides that a
proceeding shall not be commenced in respect of a claim after the second
anniversary of the day on which the claim was “discovered”.
[16]          
Section 5(1) of the Limitations Act
provides that a claim is discovered on the earlier of:
[17]          
A presumption arises under s. 5(2) that a person
with a claim shall be presumed to have known of the matters referred to in
5(1)(a) on the day the act or omission on which the claim is based took place, unless
the contrary is proved.
[18]          
Both sides agree that the critical factor
regarding the disputed amendment in relation to Senior Management is the
requirement under s. 5(1)(a)(iii), i.e., whether Mr. Langstaff “knew the act or
omission was that of the person against whom the claim is made”. The issue regarding
the proposed new claims is under s. 5(1)(a)(ii), whether the injury, loss or
damage was caused by or contributed to by an act or omission.
[19]          
The prohibition in section 21(1) of the
Limitations Act is of central importance in this case. Section 21(1) provides:
[20]          
In Arcari v. Dawson (2016), 2016 ONCA
715, at para. 7, leave to appeal refused [2016] S.C.C.A. No. 522, the Court of
Appeal observed that the effect of s. 21(1) is that “the clear expiration of a
limitation period is an absolute bar to the addition of a party to an already
existing action”.
[21]          
Thus, where a party seeks to add an individual
to an action after the expiry of a limitation period, that party bears the
burden to establish the claim was not discoverable at the presumptive date and
a “reasonable explanation on proper evidence” as to why the claim could not
have been discovered through the exercise of reasonable diligence: Morrison
v. Barzo, 2018 ONCA 979 at paras 32.
[22]          
The principal question raised on this motion,
amending the counterclaim to add Senior Management, is a subtle one for a
number of reasons.
[23]          
Given the mandatory language of Rule 26, the
only opposition to the amendments being sought involves the question of
discoverability under section 5(1)(iii) of the Act. The counterclaim was issued
in January 2018 and substantially amended in September. 2019. The events giving
rise to the counterclaim (including those reflected in the proposed amendments)
took place prior to January 2018. The main issue involves the addition of
Senior Management as parties. Section 21(1) of the Act prohibits adding the
Senior Managers as parties if a limitation period has expired.
[24]          
By any measure, two years has elapsed since the
acts or omissions upon which the claims advanced in the proposed amendments
took place. Section 5(2) creates a presumption that Mr. Langstaff knew of the
acts or omissions alleged on the day they took place “unless the contrary is
proved”. In the circumstances of this case, therefore, s. 5(2) places an onus
on Mr Langstaff to prove he did not know about the acts or omissions alleged in
the proposed amendments until March 2021.
[25]          
A further subtlety arises out of the fact that
while corporations are separate legal entities from the persons who own, manage
(as officers and directors) or are employed by them, there are circumstances in
which the acts of managers and employees may attract personal liability as
well. Personal liability may arise in various ways. It may arise by virtue of
the relationship between the plaintiff and the individual representing the corporation
(duty of care, fiduciary duty or personally authorizing torts such as assault,
trespass to property, nuisance and the like). It may also arise when an
individual representing the corporation has exceeded the bounds of his or her
responsibilities to the corporation (such as a decision made in bad faith or
with an ulterior motive). Or it may arise where the corporation is dominated
and controlled by individuals and, through this control and domination, the
individuals use the corporation as a front for the individuals’ own fraudulent
or improper conduct or to shield the individuals from liability for these
actions. When an employee, officer or director crosses these lines is often a
difficult question to answer.
[26]          
The main issue on this motion turns on whether,
in January 2018, Mr. Langstaff had knowledge of material facts capable of
supporting the pleading of a claim against Senior Management personally.
[27]          
In George v. 2411363 Ontario Inc. (Ontario
Health Clinics Brantford FHO Inc.), 2024 ONCA 752 at para. 7, the Court of
Appeal stated that determining when a claim was discoverable against an
individual defendant depends on the day that the plaintiff could first make a
“plausible inference of liability” that the act or omission was that of the
individual defendants. The plaintiff need not be certain nor need the plaintiff
have knowledge of all the material facts. It is sufficient, to set the
limitation period running, that they knew enough to make a “plausible inference
of liability”: see also Levac v. James, 2023 ONCA 73.
[28]          
Mr. Langstaff relies heavily on the fact that
Catalyst withheld thousands on documents on a “spurious” claim of privilege.
That privilege claim was later found by Justice Boswell to be improper and
unsupported. Mr. Langstaff says that the improper withholding of these
documents prevented him from discovering the true nature of the campaign
Catalyst mounted against him and the utter paucity of evidence upon which its
allegations against him were based.
[29]          
A central example of this relied on by Mr.
Langstaff arises out of the so-called “Hanna email”. The Hanna email was
produced early on in the Catalyst litigation; it was not withheld on the basis
of a privilege claim. The Hanna email came from an anonymous source using the
pseudonym, Vincent Hanna. The Hanna email was the sole piece of evidence relied
upon by Catalyst to corroborate its allegations to Canaccord against Mr.
Langstaff.
[30]          
Mr. Langstaff argues that the facts about the
true identity of Vincent Hanna (and the assessment of his credibility by
Catalyst at the time) were only discoverable following the delivery of the new
documents produced in March 2021. As noted by Justice McEwen in his decision
dated December 2, 2021:
[31]          
Mr. Langstaff argues that the October 7, 2017
email, which not produced until March 2021, shows that Catalyst and Senior
Management relied on the Hanna email when it contacted Canaccord to exert
pressure about terminating Langstaff’s employment at a time when Senior
Management knew the Hanna email was unsubstantiated by any credible
evidence or documentation.
[32]          
Notwithstanding Ms. Jarcaig’s able submissions,
I am unable to accept Mr. Langstaff’s argument on this issue.
[33]          
If the question of when Mr. Langstaff knew facts
from which a plausible inference of the personal liability of Senior Management
could be drawn turned on a disputed issue of fact which could not be resolved
on a paper record, the correct procedure would, it seems to me (by analogy to a
motion for summary judgment), be to allow the amendments on a provisional basis
and refer the matter of discoverability to the trial judge as one of the issues
to be determined at trial.
[34]          
However, as it turns out, the motion was not
argued on the basis of disputed facts about Mr. Langstaff’s knowledge of Senior
Management’s motivations or knowledge at the time. The motion was argued on the
basis of Mr. Langstaff’s own 2018 and 2019 pleadings and admissions with
respect to those pleadings made on his cross examination for this motion.
[35]          
The Catalyst argument is that the counterclaim
from 2018 and the amendments to the counterclaim in 2019 both reveal that Mr.
Langstaff had a fully articulated basis for a claim of personal liability
against Senior Management but failed name the individuals as defendants in the
counterclaim. Thus, Catalyst argues that the relevant limitation period for
adding parties expired in January 2020 or September 2021 (subject to a limited
COVID adjustment). These limitations expired before the tolling agreement in
June 2022. There is, as Catalyst points out, barely any change in the substance
of the pleaded amendments. In most cases, Mr. Langstaff has simply added Senior
Management, along with the already-named Catalyst entities, as the perpetrators
of the alleged acts or omissions already pleaded.
[36]          
A full comparison of the three pleadings (that
is, 2018, 2019 and 2024) was prepared by counsel for Catalyst and filed at
B-1-761 of the October 25, 2024 bundle in Case Center. That detailed analysis
shows the full extent to which the pleaded allegations of acts or omissions
carried out by Senior Management, involving deceit, bad faith, ulterior motive,
false pretences, misuse of corporate control, baseless and meritless
allegations made for an improper purpose, and conduct which was vindictive,
vexatious, unlawful and an abuse of process, were embedded in Mr. Langstaff’s
pleadings from the outset. These allegations are capable of supporting the
further allegation that Senior Management were directly implicated in
independent tortious conduct and thus personally liable. All this leads me to
the conclusion that, while the 2021 productions arising out of the SLAPP
litigation may have provided additional evidence of the tortious or
other improper conduct of Senior Management, they were not necessary to draw a plausible
inference of personal liability, which was present in Mr. Langstaff’s
pleadings from the beginning. To demonstrate this point, I will set out the
main allegations below.
[37]          
Mr. Langstaff’s original pleading in response to
the Catalyst action included his counterclaim for $3,350,000 in damages against
Catalyst. The counterclaim specifically alleges, as of January 15, 2018, that
Mr. Langstaff believed that it was the acts or omissions of Senior Management
which gave rise to his claim against Catalyst:
[38]          
In his September 2019 Fresh as Amended Statement
of Defence and Counterclaim Mr. Langstaff alleged, among other things, the
following additional facts:
[39]          
On cross-examination, Mr. Langstaff admitted
that, as of January 15, 2018, he believed or understood that:
[40]          
I am conscious of the fact that crossing the
line from allegations of corporate wrongdoing to allegations of wrongdoing by
individual employees, officers and directors requires a particular level of
conduct which, quite properly, parties should be cautious about alleging
without a proper foundation. Among other things one could ask, if Senior
Management had been added as parties in the first instance, would that pleading
have been struck out as overreach or insufficiently supported by allegations of
particular fact going to the personal liability of Senior Management?
[41]          
This case does not involve a close call. As set
out above, almost nothing has changed in the nature of the substantive
allegations. The pleaded allegations made in the first counterclaim are a
sufficient basis to support the proposed allegations against Senior Management
personally. The problem is not that the proposed amendments involve
insufficient particularity to plead a claim of personal liability. The problem
is that Mr. Langstaff is seeking to add Senior Management as parties after the
expiry of the two year limitation period. This is, on its face, prohibited by
s. 21(1) of the Act. The original pleading in 2018 and as amended in 2019
contained sufficient allegations to support a claim against Senior Management
personally. In the circumstances, I am compelled to conclude that Mr. Langstaff
had knowledge of material facts from which a plausible inference of personal
liability of Senior Management could be drawn in 2018, or at least by September
2019. This is apparent from the allegations that were expressly made in the
2018 counterclaim and in the September 2019 amendments. The limitation period
for adding Senior Management as parties expired in January 2020 (or September
2021). The tolling agreement expressly provides that it does not toll any
limitation period which had already expired as of June 15, 2022.
[42]          
For these reasons, the motion for leave to amend
to add Senior Management as parties to Mr. Langstaff’s counterclaim is
dismissed.
[43]          
There was no serious opposition to this aspect
of the motion for leave to amend. There is no suggestion that an increase in
the quantum of damages is barred by the Limitations Act or otherwise
imposes irremediable prejudice on the defendants by counterclaim. Leave is
granted for this amendment.
[44]          
Apart from the question of adding Senior
Management (who would be subject to these claims), Catalyst opposes the
proposed amendments to add these “new” causes of action on the basis that they
are being added to the counterclaim after the limitation period for making a
claim has expired.
[45]          
These claims, unlike the proposal to add new
parties, are not subject to s. 21(1) of the Act.
[46]          
Under the Limitations Act, a “claim” is defined
to mean “a claim to remedy an injury, loss or damage that occurred as a result
of an act or omission”. This is consistent with the concept of a cause of
action, which does not turn on labels, such as “negligence” or “nuisance” but
on the pleading of material facts which give rise to a claim or remedy known to
the law. Thus, courts have consistently held that if the necessary material
facts are pleaded within the limitation period, the adding of a new theory of
liability based on these facts is not barred by the Act.
[47]          
Mr. Langstaff’s existing amended counterclaim as
of September 2019 pleads material facts (i.e., a claim to remedy an injury,
loss or damage that occurred as a result of an act or omission) capable of
supporting claims based on defamation, unlawful means and intrusion on
seclusion. Amending the counterclaim to plead these three specific theories of
liability does not, in the circumstances, fall afoul of the Limitations Act.
The motion for leave to amend to add these additional theories of liability is
granted.
[48]          
The motion for leave to amend is granted in
part. Leave to add Senior Management as party defendants is denied. Leave to
amend to increase exemplary damages and to plead defamation, unlawful means and
intrusion on seclusion is granted.
[49]          
If successful, Mr. Langstaff would have sought
$12,000 in partial indemnity costs. The cost summary filed by Catalyst seeks
$45,000 in partial indemnity costs.
[50]          
There was divided success, although the bulk of
the time and effort, before and during oral argument, was devoted to the issue
of adding Senior Management as party defendants.
[51]          
I find that $12,000 (all inclusive partial
indemnity) costs payable by Mr. Langstaff to Catalyst is an appropriate award in
all of the circumstances.