[1]              
This
motion raises the issue of when, and in what circumstances, a registered
mortgage takes priority over unregistered construction liens.
[2]              
The
Applicants (collectively, the “First Mortgagee” or “the Applicants”) seek an
order:
[3]              
The
Motion is opposed by two lien holders, Classic Tile Contractors Limited
(“Classic Tile”) and Urban Mechanical Contracting Ltd. (“Urban Mechanical”) (together,
the “Lien Claimants”).
[4]              
Defined
terms in this Endorsement have the meaning given to them in the motion
materials unless otherwise stated.
[5]              
For
the reasons that follow, the motion is granted.
[6]              
Vandyk-Backyard
Queensview Limited (the “Borrower”, and together with Vandyk-Backyard
Humberside Limited, the “Debtors”), were incorporated to develop a condominium project
at 25 Neighbourhood Lane (the “Project"), near the Humber River in
Toronto. Construction began in 2021. The Project comprised 134 residential
units, five underground parking levels and storage lockers.
[7]              
The
Borrower obtained construction mortgage financing from Kingsett Mortgage
Capital Corporation. In April and May 2023, the City of Toronto issued
occupancy certificates for all of the units. The condominium plan was
registered in July 2023.
[8]              
Almost
all of the units were sold before construction was complete. The sales for
those 115 Sold Units closed later in July 2023. The condominium building is
fully constructed and is also fully occupied with the exception of the Unsold
Units consisting of 21 units, 33 parking stalls and 30 storage lockers.
[9]              
The
First Mortgagee agreed to provide the Debtors with a condominium inventory term
loan in the principal amount of $12,700,000, available upon completion of the
Project and closing of the sale of approximately 115 Sold Units. That Loan was
fully advanced to the Debtors on August 24, 2023. The Loan is secured by the
First Mortgage and other security.
[10]          
Following
completion of the Loan and registration of the corresponding First Mortgage,
various claims for liens were registered against the Unsold Units:
[11]          
The
Borrower had entered into labour and materials contracts with the Lien
Claimants in 2021. Urban Mechanical was initially paid for its work on the
Project until February 2023. The Borrower failed to pay its progress draw
invoices thereafter. Classic Tile commenced work in December 2022, and was not
paid for progress draw invoices rendered in March, April, or May 2023.
[12]          
As reflected
in the above chart, the Lien Claimants registered their respective liens well
after the First Mortgage had been registered and their funds were advanced.
[13]          
The
registration of those Lien Claims constituted an event of default under the
First Mortgage. When the Borrower failed to cure that default, the Lender
brought this Application for the appointment of a receiver.
[14]          
On
February 6, 2024, the Receiver was appointed in respect of the Unsold Units and
the proceeds from the sale thereof, pursuant to section 243 of the Bankruptcy
and Insolvency Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. B-3, and section 101 of the Courts
of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43.
[15]          
The
Receiver then brought a motion for an order establishing the Maximum Lien Holdback
amount that may be applicable in respect of those Lien Claims that may be
subsequently determined to be valid and rank in priority to the First Mortgage.
[16]          
The
First Mortgagee submits that the Lien Claims at issue here were not preserved
or perfected at the time that the First Mortgage was registered on title, and
that no written notice of the unregistered lien claims was provided to the
First Mortgagee in advance of its registration of the First Mortgage. In
addition, it submits that the Loan is an advance in respect of the mortgage.
[17]          
The
Receiver supports the position of the First Mortgagee and submits that the
claims of Classic Tile and Urban Mechanical for full priority over the First
Mortgage cannot succeed. It further submits that the maximum aggregate
potential priority of the Lien Claims over the First Mortgage is limited to the
Maximum Lien Holdback, as Cavanagh, J. previously directed in the March 6
Ancillary Order.
[18]          
The
First Mortgagee wants the Net Proceeds of the sale of each Unsold Unit applied
to reduce the indebtedness under the Loan. The proposed interim distributions
to the First Mortgagee are, in the opinion and recommendation of the Receiver,
to the benefit of all stakeholders, as they will serve to reduce accrued and
accruing interest on the Loan.
[19]          
The
First Mortgagee further submits that the position of the Lien Claimants is additionally
protected by two factors.
[20]          
First,
the estimated value of the remaining Unsold Units exceeds $15,500,000. If the
Receiver is successful on this motion, there is more than sufficient security
available to allow for the Net Proceeds of the Unsold Units to be distributed
to the First Mortgagee, subject to the Unsold Unit Holdback Reserve, without
any prejudice to any stakeholders.
[21]          
Second,
the title insurer of the Lender, Chicago Title Insurance Company (“CTIC”), has
provided a confirmation to the Receiver to the effect that it confirms and acknowledges
an obligation to pay amounts in respect of construction liens registered
against the Property that are determined by the Court to be valid and in
priority to the First Mortgage, to the extent that such determination of
priority in favour of the Lien Claimants results in any loss or deficiency in
the repayment in full of the Mortgage (in accordance with the terms of the
commercial loan policy granted in favour of the Lender) (the “CTIC
Confirmation”).
[22]          
Accordingly,
the position of the First Mortgagee is that the Unsold Unit Holdback Reserve,
together with the CTIC Confirmation, provides appropriate and sufficient
security for those Lien Claims which may ultimately be found to rank in
priority to the First Mortgage.
[23]          
The
first responding Lien Claimant, Urban Mechanical, submits that what the
Applicant proposes (that the Receiver hold back from sale certain Unsold Units
with the valuation of an amount up to the Maximum Lien Holdback as “security”
for the Lien Claimants and provide further protection in the form of the CTIC
Commitment) is inadequate and provides no basis for the relief being sought by
the Applicant in the form of an order giving it priority to be paid in full
ahead of all lien claims.
[24]          
The
second responding Lien Claimant, Classic Tile, submits that the First Mortgage
is void as against it pursuant to the Fraudulent Conveyances Act, R.S.O.
1990, c. F.29, and/or the Assignments and Preferences Act, R.S.O. 1990,
c. A.33, on the basis that it was allegedly made with the intent to defeat and
defraud creditors.
[25]          
Specifically,
Classic Tile submits that the Mortgage was obtained by the Debtors through
fraud, to evade creditors by moving cash to other affiliated projects within
the Vandyk Group when it was insolvent or nearly so. Classic Tile takes the
position that the Applicant either had notice or knowledge of this and/or was
wilfully blind and cannot succeed on the statutory defences available under
either of the above-noted two statutes. In either case, the result being that
its lien claim is entitled to full priority over the First Mortgage pursuant to
section 78 of the Construction Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.30.
[26]          
Since
the March 6 Ancillary Order did not address claims to full priority over the
First Mortgage, these priority issues must be determined.
[27]          
The
Lien Claimants assert that their claims are entitled to complete priority over
the First Mortgage, notwithstanding the fact that they were not registered
prior to that First Mortgage. They also take the position that the Loan is not
“an advance in respect of the mortgage” that is excepted from the general
priority of their liens established by section 78 of the Construction Act.
[28]          
The
analysis must begin with the relevant provisions of the Construction Act,
found in section 78:
[29]          
The
priorities regime created by section 78 of the Construction Act is a
complete code for the determination of lien priority disputes with mortgagees. The
concept is that liens in respect of labour and materials contributing to the
improvement of a property have priority over mortgages unless the enumerated
exceptions apply.
[30]          
There
is no issue that section 78(1) applies to the liens
of Urban Mechanical and Classic Tile, as “liens arising from an improvement”.
Pursuant to that subsection, such liens have priority over all mortgages
affecting the owner’s interest in the premises, except as provided in section 78.
[31]          
Subsection
78(5) is clear that where a
mortgage affecting the owner’s interest is registered after the time when the
first lien arose, the liens have priority over the mortgage to the extent of
any deficiency in the holdbacks required to be retained by the owner.
[32]          
Subsection
78(6) provides, in relevant
part, that subject to subsection (5), a mortgage registered
after the time when the first lien arose has priority over the liens, to the
extent of any advance made in respect of that mortgage, unless, at the time the
advance was made, there was a preserved or perfected lien or prior to the
advance, the mortgagee making the advance had received written notice of a
lien.
[33]          
In
my view, these statutory provisions are largely dispositive of this motion when
informed by the relevant facts.
[34]          
There
is no issue that for the purposes of subsection 78(5), each of the liens here arose
before the Mortgage was registered. A lien arises when labour and materials are
first supplied to an improvement of a property by a lien claimant: section 15.
[35]          
There
is also no issue that for the purposes of subsection 78(6)(a) that at the time the advance under
the Mortgage was made, neither lien was preserved or perfected. The Lien
Claimants concede this.
[36]          
Finally,
there is also no issue for the purposes of subsection 78(6)(b) as to whether the
Mortgagee making the advance had received written notice of either lien. The Lien
Claimants conceded that the Mortgagee had not.
[37]          
I
accept the submission of the First Mortgagee that by seeking complete priority
over the First Mortgage for their liens, the Lien Claimants are in effect
arguing that a mortgagee has a duty to go beyond the priority regime
established by the Construction Act described above.
[38]          
In
my view, additional inquiries are not required on a plain reading of the above
provisions, and imposing such a duty runs contrary to the legislative intent
behind the statutory provisions. They provide a complete, fundamental, yet
easily understandable code: where a lien has arisen before an advance under the
mortgage, but the lien has not been perfected or preserved and the mortgagee has
no notice of the lien, the mortgage has priority over the lien.
[39]          
The appropriate
balancing of interests is achieved and maintained. The unpaid contractor can
protect its interest by preserving or perfecting the lien it clearly has.
Further, the unpaid contractor can enjoy priority over a subsequently
registered mortgage if the mortgagee has knowledge of the lien (even if not
preserved or perfected). Absent that, however, the mortgagee is entitled to
rely on the statutory regime and the land register, and the lien claimant risks
losing priority. The mortgagee then has a corresponding duty to register its
mortgage promptly or face the risk of losing its own priority.
[40]          
Both
the lien claimant and the mortgagee have the opportunity and ability to fully
protect their position, but they need to actively do that.
[41]          
Given
my conclusion that there was no obligation on the First Mortgagee to make
further inquiries, that is the end of this part of the analysis. However, and
if I am in error in this regard, I have nonetheless considered the submissions
of the Lien Claimants that the circumstances of this case were such that the First
Mortgagee had a duty to make further inquiries and conduct due diligence, and
it was either reckless or wilfully blind in electing to make the advance under
the First Mortgage in the circumstances.
[42]          
The
Lien Claimants submit that, notwithstanding the absence of any registered liens
or written notice of liens, the failure on the part of the First Mortgagee to
conduct appropriate due diligence is illustrated by two principal facts which,
when considered in context, support a finding of recklessness or wilful
blindness:
[43]          
In
my view, the Lien Claimants cannot succeed even if there was an obligation on
the First Mortgagee who had not received notice of the liens to make further
inquiries since the First Mortgagee was not reckless or wilfully blind.
[44]          
The
First Mortgagee performed a title search immediately before making the advance
under the First Mortgage. No liens were registered. To be clear, the title
search reflected that the Roni lien was deleted on July 14, 2023 and the FKB lien
was deleted on July 19, 2023, well before the advance and the registration
pursuant to the First Mortgage. In each case, the lien was on title for a
relatively short period of time: approximately one month.
[45]          
In
my view, it is unreasonable to conclude that either the First Mortgagee had
constructive knowledge of unpaid liens or ought to have conducted any further
inquiries about the probability of unpaid liens - and in particular, the liens
of Urban Mechanical and Classic Tile. The fact that in a very significant
multiunit residential project involving multiple trades, two liens had been
previously registered and almost immediately thereafter discharged could equally
have supported the opposite conclusion or inference: the Borrower was dealing
with its trades in the ordinary course and where disputes arose, it was
settling them promptly.
[46]          
I
reach the same conclusion in respect of the second fact relied upon by the Lien
Claimants: ongoing work on site by other trades. That is to be expected in a
project of this scale and complexity, and it would be entirely inconsistent
with the clear statutory regime to impose a duty of inquiry on a lender arising
from the simple observation of a trade on the building site.
[47]          
In
my view, the circumstances here with respect to ongoing construction are
analogous to those considered by this Court in Jade-Kennedy Development
Corporation (Re), 2016 ONSC 7125, 72 CLR (4th) 236 (“Jade-Kennedy”).
There, like here, a lien claimant asserted priority over the registration of a
subsequent mortgage submitting that the mortgagees had been aware of the fact
that construction was underway when the funds were advanced. The Court rejected
this argument at paras. 32 - 35:
[48]          
Widespread
uncertainty for lenders and contractors alike would inevitably arise from the
imposition of a duty to conduct additional due diligence beyond the title search
simply as a result of having observed any construction on the site. In my view,
preventing that uncertainty is precisely why the current statutory regime was
enacted in the first place.
[49]          
In
any event, the First Mortgagee here in fact undertook further due diligence. It
obtained a formal declaration from the Borrower confirming that there were no
unregistered liens. It received Occupancy Certificates and the Condominium
Declaration. It conducted a physical site visit and inspection of the Unsold
Units, and it did all of this before making the advance under the Mortgage.
[50]          
Everything
the First Mortgagee learned from undertaking the additional due diligence was
consistent with what in fact had occurred with respect to each of the two Lien
Claimants here: their work on the Project had been performed much earlier and
was substantially complete.
[51]          
The
Borrower did not pay the progress draw invoices rendered by Classic Tile for
February, March, April and May 2023. By the time the last invoice was delivered
in May, Classic Tile had substantially completed all of the base contract work.
Not only was the First Mortgagee not aware that the Borrower had any issues
with Classic Tile as a basis for the non-payment, but the Borrower also had in
fact not raised any such issues. This was confirmed by Ehab Shaheen, the
principal of Classic Tile on examination.
[52]          
Urban
Mechanical had initially been paid and kept current by the Borrower, but
payment stopped in February 2023 when the Borrower failed to pay its progress
draw invoices. On May 25, 2023, Urban Mechanical’s Chief Financial Officer
corresponded with the Borrower by email, demanding to know when the company
would be paid for its overdue February and March draw requests, and threatened
to “escalate the situation.”.
[53]          
In
addition, the evidence here satisfies me that each of the Lien Claimants was
actively considering whether to exercise their rights, and consciously elected
not to do so.
[54]          
This
is as one would reasonably expect of very experienced commercial contractors,
which each of the Lien Claimants clearly was. The senior representatives of
both confirmed on examination that:
[55]          
Each
Lien Claimant did that for its own commercial reasons. In particular, Classic
Tile agreed that in lieu of registering its lien as security, it would accept a
partial payment of $200,000 from the Borrower on May 26, 2023 as against the
February 2023 invoice. In addition, it received an irrevocable direction from
the Borrower (to its counsel dated June 28, 2023 delivered July 10, 2023) to
pay Classic Tile first out of the net sale proceeds from the sale of the Sold
Units. It did this, notwithstanding that by June 28, 2023, the date of the
irrevocable direction, the Borrower was indebted to Classic Tile for at least
92% of the base contract price ($1,142,270.29 as against $1,239,723).
[56]          
By May
19, 2023, Classic Tile had already engaged its counsel to address the
delinquent payments and it was actively considering whether to exercise its
rights to lien the Project. It elected not to do so.
[57]          
Urban
Mechanical similarly had substantially completed the work required by its
contracts by the summer of 2023. It also similarly accepted assurances from the
Borrower and elected not to lien the Project. The evidence of Paul Di Lucia, President
of Urban Mechanical, was that the Borrower warned him that registering a lien
would prejudice Urban Mechanical, since it would prevent the Borrower from
obtaining the financing that would in turn allow the Borrower to pay the
arrears owing.
[58]          
The
Borrower advised both Classic Tile and Urban Mechanical that it was trying to acquire
new financing secured by the remaining inventory of Unsold Units, which would
be used for the benefit of unpaid construction trades.
[59]          
Both
Lien Claimants, in the above circumstances, elected not to register their lien
claims at any time through May, June or July 2023, precisely because they were
concerned that doing so would prevent or at least inhibit the flow of any
payments and cause even further delay. Their hope was that they would be paid
out of the sale proceeds, or the refinancing, and based on that hope they
elected to continue working without registering their respective liens or
putting the mortgagee (or anyone else) on notice of their unregistered lien
claims.
[60]          
The
Commitment Letter was entered into between the First Mortgagee and the Borrower
on June 28, 2023. The Lender conducted an in-person site visit on July 19, 2023,
that confirmed that the Unsold Units were complete with only minor deficiencies
to be addressed. The Borrower obtained a professional appraisal as to the value
of the Unsold Units (which reflected an estimated market value of $19,855,000).
[61]          
Approximately
one month later, on August 10, 2023, before the Loan was advanced, the Chief
Financial Officer of the Borrower executed a Certificate of Advance and a
Statutory Declaration as to title for the Unsold Units expressly confirming
that:
[62]          
Immediately
prior to the registration of the First Mortgage and the Loan advance, the
Lender’s counsel conducted a title search as against the Unsold Units, again
confirming the absence of liens or other encumbrances registered on title. It
was that title search that confirmed the discharge of the previously registered
liens in favour of Roni and FKB.
[63]          
On
August 24, 2023, the funds in the principal amount of $12,700,000 were advanced
in a single payment.
[64]          
One
day later, on August 25, 2024, lien claimants began registering lien claims
against title to the Unsold Units as reflected above at para. 10. Of those 14
lien claims, the claims of the Lien Claimants opposing the relief here were
registered much later: Classic Tile registered its lien claim on October 30,
2023 and Urban Mechanical registered its two lien claims on November 10, 2023.
[65]          
In
my view, this situation is analogous to that considered by the Court of Appeal
for Ontario in Urban Mechanical Contracting Ltd. v. Zurich, 2022 ONCA
589, 163 OR (3d) 652, where the Court was clear that the Construction Act
occupies the field and does not allow for the imposition of an equitable lien
that in turn opposes additional obligations, in order to avoid the result of
the clear application of the statutory provisions. The Court stated at para. 46:
[66]          
That
approach is consistent with the observation of this Court that it is not proper
for the court to create an equitable lien “when a statute has occupied the
field of when a lien will be created”. Talbot v. Pawelzik, 2005 CanLII 4844 (ON SC), at para. 20
("Talbot").
[67]          
At
paras. 32-33 of Trez v.
Wynford, 2015 ONSC 2794 (“Trez”), this Court quoted with approval
from Talbot, at para. 20 (as well as Rafat General Contractor Inc. v.
1015734 Ontario Ltd., 2005 CanLII 47733 (ON SC)), where Pattillo, J. stated
in the course of concluding that the court ought not to create an equitable
lien in the place of statutory liens available to condominium corporations for
common area expense arrears:
[68]          
Simply,
but inescapably, each of the Lien Claimants here elected to wait for many
months to exercise the rights they had and which they had had long before the
First Mortgage was registered and before the funds were advanced. The Lien
Claimants did so, notwithstanding that they were the empowered parties here
relative to the First Mortgagee. They were empowered with the knowledge of their
unpaid invoices in respect of completed work, and the fact that their lien
claims were not registered on title. Yet they are critical of the due diligence
undertaken by the First Mortgagee, notwithstanding its absence of knowledge of
the same facts. That is not the circumstance the statutory regime is designed
to protect.
[69]          
Even
if the Lien Claimants were entitled to an equitable lien, it would not have
priority over the First Mortgage in any event. I accept the submission of the
First Mortgagee that the lien priority regime established by section 78 of the Construction
Act is itself an exception to the general priority scheme established by subsection
93(3) of the Land Titles Act, R.S.O. 1990 c. L5.
[70]          
That
subsection provides that, when registered, a mortgage takes priority over all
unregistered interest in the land (which would include an equitable lien). It
follows that, at its highest, the claim to an equitable lien of the Lien
Claimants here would be a claim to an unregistered interest in the Unsold Units
which would arise only subsequent to the First Mortgage (i.e., when it was
imposed by the Court).
[71]          
In Trez,
at para. 36, this Court expressly rejected the proposition that an equitable
lien, even if established, would have priority over a prior registered mortgage.
Such a result would be inconsistent with section 93(3) of the LTA, which
operates to oust the doctrine of actual notice in Ontario in respect of a
registered charge. This is so even if the chargee has actual notice of an
unregistered interest, including an equitable lien. The Court stated:
[72]          
Finally,
and even if (contrary to the statutory provisions) the doctrine of actual
notice applied, I have already concluded that the First Mortgagee did not have
actual notice, and also that it was not reckless or wilfully blind as to the
lien claims in any event.
[73]          
Classic
Tile submits that even if the Court ought not to impose an equitable lien in
order to change the priority scheme set out in section 78, the Construction
Act does not oust the application of other statutes, in this case, the Fraudulent
Conveyances Act and the Assignments and Preferences Act.
[74]          
It
submits that the First Mortgage is void as against it under either or both of
those statutes because the Mortgage transaction was an attempt to defraud
creditors, and that several badges of fraud were present here. It submits that
the First Mortgagee has the burden of defending the transaction by adducing
evidence to show the absence of fraudulent intent. To the extent that is
correct, in my view, the First Mortgagee met any burden it had by undertaking
the due diligence as described above.
[75]          
Even
if there were fraudulent intent on the part of the Borrower (i.e., an intent to
enter into the Mortgage transaction to remove equity from the Project to the
detriment of trade contractors and use the proceeds to support other Vandyk
projects), there is no evidence of wilful blindness, let alone active intent on
the part of the First Mortgagee to be part of any such scheme. Intent must be
based on something beyond mere suspicion, and the fraudulent intent shown must be of both parties (i.e., the grantor and
the grantee) to defeat, delay, or defraud creditors:
Bank of Montreal v. Smith, 2008 CanLII 28435
(ON SC), at para. 66; Cybernetic
Exchange Inc. v. J.C.N. Equities Ltd., 2003 CanLII 17041 (ON SC), at paras. 218-221; Solomon
v. Solomon (1977), 1977
CanLII 1164 (ON SC), 16 O.R. (2s) 769 (H.C.) at pp. 774
-775, quoting Shephard v. Shephard (1925), 1925 CanLII 409 (ON
CA), 56 O.L.R. 555 at p. 558.
[76]          
The
evidence here does not support such a finding in my view.
[77]          
Classic
Tile submits that the Declaration sought and obtained by the First Mortgagee
was false because indeed there was significant construction still ongoing. I
have already rejected that argument for the reasons above.
[78]          
As
to the other alleged badges of fraud here, I find they also are insufficient to
support the result sought by the Lien Claimants: see, for example, Applicants’
Reply Factum at para. 15.
[79]          
Finally,
the Lien Claimants submit on this motion that their claims have priority over
the First Mortgage since the funds advanced under the Loan and secured by the
First Mortgage do not constitute an “advance made in respect of that …
mortgage” as required by section 78(6) of the Construction Act.
[80]          
The
Court in Jade-Kennedy came to three relevant conclusions on this issue.
First, at para. 49, the Court concluded that the concept of an “advance” is not
limited to the principal amount advanced under a mortgage. It includes all
amounts which the mortgagor was contractually obligated to pay in respect of
any such principal amount advanced, including interest and the costs of
registration, etc.
[81]          
Second,
at paras. 50-51, the Court concluded that, the phrase “in respect of” is
intended to be broader than “under” insofar as “under” refers to advances made
directly by a mortgagee.
[82]          
Third,
at para. 52, the Court observed that XDG Ltd. v. 1099606 Ontario Ltd.,
2002 CanLII 22043 (ON SC) (“XDG”) establishes that a collateral mortgage
given to secure a guarantee of an underlying loan to another party does not
give rise to “an advance made in respect of that mortgage,” at least to the
extent that no further advance is made after delivery of the collateral
mortgage. Section 78(6) refers to amounts “advanced”, not amounts “secured”. A
purely collateral mortgage under which no advance was made will not have
priority over construction liens, but that is not the case here.
[83]          
Put
simply, the First Mortgage here is not a collateral mortgage. None of the
complications courts in other cases have wrestled with when trying to determine
the applicability of section78(6) to a collateral mortgage arise in this case. For
example, in XDG, the mortgage at issue was a collateral mortgage, no
funds were advanced, and instead, the mortgage was used to secure a prior loan,
advance to a third party.
[84]          
In
particular, the Loan here was advanced to the Borrower in a single transaction,
at the same time the First Mortgage was registered. Nothing in the language of
section 78(6) requires the First Mortgagee to establish not only that the loan
monies were advanced to the mortgagor (as it has done), but also that they were
applied to the improvement of the land.
[85]          
There
is no issue that the funds were advanced to the Borrower. The fact that the Borrower
then dispersed those funds, or at least some of them, to creditors in respect
of other Vandyk projects does not invalidate the priority of the mortgage: Jade
Kennedy at paras. 44 and 80 (affirmed by the Divisional Court in Dircam
Electric v. Am-Stat Corp., 2017 ONSC 3421 at para. 18).
[86]          
Finally,
I observe that the Receiver supports the proposed relief for the reasons set
out in its Fourth Report. As a neutral Court-appointed officer, the Receiver submits
that the proposed order is fair and reasonable in the circumstances and will
operate to the benefit of the stakeholders. It does this for three principal
reasons, each of which I have addressed above.
[87]          
First,
the proposed relief recognizes the Maximum Lien Holdback at $1,979,540.34,
being the amount already confirmed by this Court as the Maximum Lien Holdback
in the March 6 Ancillary Order.
[88]          
Second,
the proposed relief reflects a determination that no Lien Claimant has complete
priority over the First Mortgage and therefore eliminates any uncertainty as to
whether the quantum of the Maximum Lien Holdback set out above is the full and
final statement of such amount.
[89]          
Third,
the relief will authorize the Receiver to make distributions from the Net
Proceeds of the sale of the Unsold Units to the Applicants, including Net
Proceeds already held by the Receiver. The Receiver will of course hold back
certain Unsold Units from sale with an aggregate valuation of not less than the
Maximum Lien Holdback as security for the benefit of the Lien Claimants’ Claims
to be subsequently determined.
[90]          
The
current market value of the Unsold Units is between approximately $900 and $950
per square foot, and there are 18 such Unsold Units. Given this, the Receiver
will conduct an analysis upon the sale of each additional Unsold Unit of the
approximate aggregate value of the remaining Unsold Units comprising the
security at that time, and report to the Court with respect thereto. Once the
estimated value of the Unsold Unit Holdback Reserve is calculated to be less
than $2,500,000, the Net Proceeds of sale will no longer be paid out in full by
the Receiver to the Applicants and will instead be held by the Receiver pending
a final determination by the Court with respect to the priority of the Claims.
[91]          
For
all of these reasons, I find that that the maximum aggregate potential priority
of the claims for liens registered against the Unsold Units ahead of the First
Mortgagee’s First Mortgage is limited to the maximum statutory holdback of
$1,979,540.34 as set out in the March 6 Ancillary Order and in para. 2(a) above.
[92]          
It
follows that I must now consider whether the Receiver should be authorized to
make the distributions on the terms described at para. 2(b) above.
[93]          
In
my view, that relief is appropriate. It is, as noted by the Receiver, subject
to the Receiver holding back certain Unsold Units from sales, with an aggregate
valuation of not less than an amount (to be confirmed and agreed upon at the
recommendation of the Receiver), but which would not be less than the Unsold Unit
Holdback Reserve.
[94]          
The
Unsold Unit Holdback Reserve will be maintained and stand as security for the
claims of the Lien Claimants for priority over the statutory holdback required
to be retained by the Borrower, to the extent of any deficiency as submitted by
the Applicants. This will also provide security additional to the Confirmation
provided by title insurer to the Lender as to its obligation to pay amounts in
respect of construction liens held by the Court to be valid and stand in
priority to the First Mortgage.
[95]          
In
my view, this strikes a balance between the interests of the competing parties
that is appropriate in the circumstances of this case. The practical reality is
that it will likely take some time for the Receiver to sell all of the Unsold
Units. The interest that continues to accrue on the First Mortgage increases at
a rate of approximately $90,000 per month. Paying down the indebtedness from
the net proceeds of sales as they are completed will reduce the interest
accruing, while preserving remaining proceeds from the sale of the Unsold Units
for the benefit of the Lien Claimants.
[96]          
For
all of these reasons, the motion is granted.
[97]          
The
Applicants have been successful on the motion. They are presumptively entitled
to their costs.
[98]          
They
have submitted a Bill of Costs reflecting partial indemnity costs of $57,716.56
and substantial indemnity costs of $86,348.16. Urban Mechanical has submitted a
Costs Outline reflecting partial indemnity costs of $14,406.09 and substantial
indemnity costs in the amount of $21,403.05. Classic Tile has submitted a Costs
Outline reflecting partial indemnity costs of $33,225.11 and substantial
indemnity costs of $49,402.19. All amounts are inclusive of fees, disbursements
and HST.
[99]          
Pursuant
to section 131 of the Courts of Justice Act, costs are in the discretion
of the court, and the court may determine by whom and to what extent the costs
shall be paid.
[100]      
Rule
57.01 provides that in exercising its discretion under section 131, the court
may consider, in addition to the result in the proceeding (and any offer to
settle or contribute), the factors set out in that Rule.
[101]      
The
overarching objective is to fix an amount that is fair, reasonable,
proportionate and within the reasonable expectations of the parties in the
circumstances: Boucher v. Public Accountants Council for the Province of
Ontario (2004), 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R. (3d) 291 (C.A.), at paras. 24-26.
[102]      
In
my view, there is no basis here to award costs on an elevated scale and they
should be awarded on a partial indemnity basis. Taking into account the factors
set out in Rule 57 in considering them in the particular circumstances of this
case, in my view an appropriate award of costs is $75,000 inclusive of fees,
disbursements and HST.
[103]      
Rule
57.03 provides that, on the hearing of a contested motion, unless the court is
satisfied that a different order would be more just, the court shall fix the
costs of the motion and order them to be paid within 30 days.
[104]      
Accordingly,
50% or $37,500 is payable by each of the Lien Claimants, to the Applicants,
within 30 days.