[1]              
This is a motion for summary judgment brought by
the plaintiff, Marian Massaar, for repayment of what she alleges was a loan
made jointly in 2017 to her daughter, the defendant Lauren Moneck, and
son-in-law, the defendant Anthony Moneck, when the defendants were purchasing
their first home.
[2]              
Lauren and Anthony’s marriage broke down in 2020
and they are now engaged in matrimonial litigation.
[3]              
Everyone acknowledges that the funds were
delivered by Marian. However, Anthony denies, and Lauren affirms, that the
money provided to them by Marian was a loan. Anthony takes the position that it
was a gift.
[4]              
This court must determine:
[5]              
The statement of claim claims the sum of
$163,982.50, and a declaration that it be paid from the sale proceeds of the
matrimonial home owned by Lauren and Anthony.
[6]              
The material facts pled by Marian are that in
July 2017 she entered into an agreement with Anthony and Lauren whereby she
provided a non-interest-bearing loan to them in the amount of $199,982.50 to
assist with their purchase of a property in Orangeville.
[7]              
The terms of the agreement were that Anthony and
Lauren would start repaying the loan after three months and repayments would be
provided in monthly installments until the loan was repaid in full. Consistent
with their assurances that they would honour the loan agreement, Anthony and
Lauren began to pay monthly payments of $900 toward the principal amount of the
loan. Marian pleads that in May 2019, the defendants provided her with a payment
schedule in respect of the monthly instalments.
[8]              
In 2020 the defendants began having marital
problems. In an effort to improve their marriage and start “fresh”, the
defendants sold the Orangeville property and used the proceeds of sale to
purchase another property in Collingwood in July 2020, which is their
matrimonial home.
[9]              
Marian pleads that because of these marital
problems, she requested that the defendants sign a promissory note to ensure
that she would be repaid regardless of what occurred in their marriage. She
alleges that the defendants signed a demand promissory note in August 2020,
whereby they agreed that the remaining indebtedness was $170,300 and that their
liability to repay the indebtedness would arise immediately upon receiving a demand
from Marian.
[10]          
The defendants continued to pay the monthly
instalments after moving into their matrimonial home and did so until February
27, 2021. As of that date, the principal amount owed to Marian was $163,982.50.
[11]          
Marian made several demands for repayment. The
defendants have not repaid the debt, despite listing and selling the
matrimonial home.
[12]          
Anthony denies that he is liable to pay monies
to Marian as alleged in the statement of claim.
[13]          
He crossclaims for contribution and indemnity
over as against Lauren for any promises that she may have made to Marian
without his knowledge or consent.
[14]          
The material facts pled by Anthony are that a
“Gift Letter” on the letterhead of TD Canada Trust was signed by the defendants
on July 26, 2017. The Gift Letter states in part “[t]his is to confirm that the
undersigned is making a gift of $200,000.”
[15]          
Anthony alleges that after he signed the Gift
Letter, and without his knowledge or consent, someone hand wrote the phrase
“reflects a non-interest-bearing and unsecured loan from mother to daughter and
son-in-law”.
[16]          
Anthony pleads that Marian is wealthy and her
family has set up a trust for Lauren. He alleges that the $200,000 was a gift
given to the defendants during the month immediately following their marriage.
[17]          
Anthony alleges that Lauren expressed a wish to
begin making monthly payments to Marian to “help pay back part of this gift
over time”. He pleads that he was surprised by Lauren’s position, as he had
always been advised that the monies were a gift. He simply agreed that Lauren
could make payments to her mother if she wished, but he did not agree to be
personally responsible or consent to the gift being turned into a loan. He
pleads that if the Gift Letter indicates a loan, it is strictly between Lauren
and Marian and does not involve or bind him.
[18]          
Anthony further pleads that the monies paid by
Lauren to Marian were placed into a trust fund that was created and held, in
part, for the benefit of Lauren. Accordingly, he pleads that even if it is
found that Marian is owed money, her claim should be dismissed on the basis
that Marian was actually collecting the monthly payments for the benefit of
Lauren in order to reduce her net family property in the event of her
separation from Anthony. He seeks a tracing of the monies that Lauren provided
to Marian.
[19]          
Anthony denies signing the promissory note. He
alleges that the signature placed on the document is a forgery and that he will
be seeking a handwriting expert to confirm the forgery. He denies agreeing to a
demand promissory note in favour of Marian.
[20]          
In reply to Anthony’s allegations, Marian admits
the existence of the Gift Letter. She pleads that it was provided to the
defendants by a TD representative in July 2017 when the defendants met with
that representative regarding financing of their first property.
[21]          
Marian also pleads that following that meeting
with the TD representative, the defendants returned to her home where they were
temporarily residing until the closing date for the Orangeville property. They
provided the Gift Letter to her and informed her that it was to be completed as
part of the financing approval process. She reviewed the Gift Letter, which
included the defendants’ signatures, as well as the additional handwritten
phrase, and signed it.
[22]          
She denies that the additional handwriting was
placed on the Gift Letter without Anthony’s consent and pleads that the
defendants understood and consented to the additional phrase being added to the
Gift Letter.
[23]          
Marian also denies the existence of a trust fund
for Lauren and pleads that it would have no bearing on the defendants’
liability in any event.
[24]          
Marian states that she has provided home
financing assistance to her other children and their partners in the past, none
of which was by way of a gift. These loans are being paid back monthly.
[25]          
Marian denies that the promissory note was
forged and understands that it was signed by both defendants using Lauren’s
mobile device.
[26]          
The pleading states that the defendants
acknowledged their debt obligation to Marian in accordance with the loan
agreement and the promissory note. Consistent with that, Anthony paid monthly
instalments from his joint bank account with Lauren and at no time objected to
the repayments.
[27]          
Lauren admits and pleads the allegations
contained in the statement of claim.
[28]          
She defends against Anthony’s crossclaim and
makes a crossclaim for contribution and indemnity for any amounts for which she
is found responsible to pay Marian in the main action.
[29]          
Additional material facts provided in this
pleading are that in July 2017, she and Anthony arranged financing for the
purchase of their first property. Financing for this purchase was partly by way
of a loan from Marian, on the terms set out in the statement of claim. The
balance of the financing was provided by way of a TD line of credit. To
facilitate the approval of the line of credit, a TD representative provided
Lauren with the Gift Letter for Marian’s signature.
[30]          
After reviewing the Gift Letter with Marian,
Lauren discussed with the TD representative whether the Gift Letter could be
amended to confirm that the funds referenced therein were a loan from Marian to
the defendants. The TD representative confirmed that the additional term could
be added to the Gift Letter.
[31]          
She and Anthony attended together at the bank to
finalize financing of their property. A TD representative observed Lauren hand-write
the additional term on the Gift Letter. Both defendants signed the TD form.
[32]          
It is undisputed that Anthony and Lauren married
on June 9, 2017, separated on November 22, 2020, and that they have an ongoing
Family Court proceeding that was started in April 2021. The issues in that
proceeding include equalization claims, which will be impacted by whether the
advance by Marian is characterized as a gift or a loan.
[33]          
Mirroring her pleading, Marian’s evidence is
that in July 2017 she agreed to provide Lauren and Anthony with a
non-interest-bearing loan in the amount of $200,000 to assist with their
purchase of a property in Orangeville. The defendants agreed that they would
start repaying the loan in October 2017 and that payments would be made by
monthly instalments of $900 until the loan was paid in full (the “Loan
Agreement” or the “Loan”).
[34]          
The defendants also obtained financing for the
Orangeville property by way of a line of credit from TD Canada Trust (“TD”). On
July 18, 2017, Mark Rattray, Manager of Residential Mortgages at TD, provided
Lauren with a document titled ‘Gift Letter’. The following day, Lauren sent an
email to Mr. Rattray asking whether it mattered to TD if the Loan was a
non-interest-bearing loan and not a gift. Mr. Rattray responded: “In your case
it’s fine the term and repayment is being agreed to after the deal closes”.
[35]          
Lauren showed the Gift Letter to Marian and
explained what Mr. Rattray had told her. Lauren told her that to facilitate the
line of credit approval for the property, she needed to sign the Gift Letter to
indicate that she was providing $200,000 to the defendants.
[36]          
Marian’s evidence is that she was hesitant to
sign the Gift Letter since she did not intend to make a gift. She contacted her
financial advisor of 15 years, Douglas Brown at Newport Private Wealth Inc., to
ask his advice about whether to sign the Gift Letter. Mr. Brown advised her
that she should only sign the Gift Letter if she added the wording “reflects a
non-interest-bearing and unsecured loan from mother to daughter and son-in-law”
to the document.
[37]          
In accordance with this advice, on July 22, 2017
Marian sent Lauren a copy of the Gift Letter with revisions. She crossed out
the wording “a genuine gift and does not have to be repaid”, and included the
wording suggested by Mr. Brown, but with the words “and son-in-law” omitted.
She emailed the Gift Letter to Lauren and told her that she would not sign the
document unless it included that additional wording. In turn Lauren forwarded
her mother’s email to Mr. Rattray, who advised her that the additional wording
was acceptable.
[38]          
The Gift Letter included in Marian’s July 22,
2017 email appears to have initially been signed by Marian, and then her
signature stroked out.
[39]          
Marian was advised by Lauren that she then
obtained a new copy of a Gift Letter from a representative at TD. Lauren
handwrote the amendment, adding the wording exactly as suggested by Mr. Brown
and including the words “and son-in-law”. A copy of the final Gift Letter,
signed by herself, the defendants and Mr. Brown, is attached to her affidavit.
Marian’s signature appears similar to that on the original copy of the Gift
Letter, but without the squiggle or line through it.
[40]          
Marian’s evidence is that by signing the Gift
Letter, she did not intend to gift $200,000 to the defendants and believes that
they understood that intention. She signed it strictly to assist the defendants
with their financing approval process and to assure TD that she had no legal
priority to proceeds from the eventual sale of the Orangeville property.
[41]          
Lauren agrees with Marian’s evidence.  She adds
that she and Anthony were both actively involved in signing all necessary
documents to secure the financing for the purchase of their first property. Her
evidence is that on or around July 22, 2017, she showed Anthony the email from
Marian dated July 22, 2017, with Marian’s requested changes to the Gift Letter.
Anthony agreed to change the Gift Letter to note that the funds were a loan.
[42]          
Lauren says that it was at the bank, when
provided with another Gift Letter by Mr. Rattray, that she wrote “reflects a
non-interest-bearing and unsecured loan from mother to daughter &
son-in-law” in Anthony’s presence, and they signed the Gift Letter together.
[43]          
In his affidavit sworn October 31, 2023, Anthony
denies any knowledge of these dealings related to the Gift Letter. Reflecting
his pleading, he alleges that the phrase stating that the funds were given as a
non-interest-bearing loan was added after the signatures were already on the
document, and without his knowledge or consent.
[44]          
Anthony notes that he has not received an
unsigned copy of the Gift Letter with the same wording as that found on the
fully executed document. He believes this is significant, given his position
that the wording was added after the signatures and without his knowledge. On
cross-examination, Marian stated that although she did not think that she would
sign the Gift Letter unless the handwritten phrase had already been placed on
it, she admitted that she does not remember whether she signed the document
before or after the handwritten phrase had been added.
[45]          
Anthony relies on evidence given by Lauren at
her discovery, in which she admits that there was no witness to the defendants’
signatures on the Gift Letter, nor evidence to prove that the handwritten
portion was added prior to the signatures. She also could not recall whether
her mother had signed the document before she and Anthony went to TD on July
26, 2017. She also confirmed that she wrote the additional phrase on the Gift
Letter at the bank before she and Anthony signed it.
[46]          
Douglas Brown is the President Chief Executive
Officer & Co-Founder at Newport, who has provided wealth management
services to Marian for over 15 years.
[47]          
His evidence is that in July 2017, Marian told
him that she had agreed to provide a non-interest-bearing loan to the
defendants to purchase their new home. He stated that she told him that TD
required her signature on the Gift Letter for the defendants to receive
financing approval.
[48]          
His affidavit confirms that he provided the advice
described by Marian, being the addition of the phrase “reflects a
non-interest-bearing and unsecured loan from mother to daughter and
son-in-law”, to reflect her intent to provide a non-interest-bearing loan.
[49]          
Marian’s evidence is that the defendants began
to pay monthly instalments of $900 toward the principal amount of the Loan,
beginning in October 2017. She has provided redacted copies of her bank
statements to show the monthly instalments deposited into her account. These
payments were sent by e-transfer. Some of the e-transfer transactions did not
indicate the name of the sender; others show that the name of the sender was
either Lauren or Anthony.
[50]          
The defendants missed a payment of the monthly
Loan instalment in May 2018. On June 1, 2018 Marian sent the defendants a text
message stating that it was not acceptable that they miss payments. Anthony
responded by text message: “I’m going to let Lauren explain this one, I
apologize though, I wasn’t aware of the message she sent to you” and confirming
that he had sent the money, which was e-transferred on June 1, 2018. A
screenshot of the text messages confirming this exchange is included in
Marian’s evidence.
[51]          
Another monthly instalment was missed in
December 2018, and Anthony sent that instalment simultaneously with the January
2019 instalment.
[52]          
On May 31, 2019, Lauren sent her mother the
payment schedule for the Loan for the rest of the year. This was sent in an
email from Lauren’s email account, on which Anthony was copied. In the text of the
email, following the payment dates, Lauren signed it “Lauren & Tony”.
[53]          
Lauren’s evidence is that she and Anthony often
discussed the Loan, and those discussions were premised on both having to pay
the loan. She and Anthony maintained a joint bank account to cover their joint
expenses. She and Anthony often discussed which one of them was going to
deposit funds into the account, and which of them would be sending the monthly
payment to Marian to ensure that they did not accidentally double the payment.
[54]          
Lauren has attached various text exchanges
between herself and Anthony as exhibits to her affidavit. In a text exchange on
July 26, 2017, Anthony acknowledged that one of his monthly paychecks “is going
to your mom once a month”. In another dated July 27, 2020, Anthony sent Lauren
a text message stating: “okay so do you want to pay 500 to me for the
appliances/ and I’m going to do the same/ and we can pay your mom”, to which
Lauren responded “transfer $450 to the savings for my Mom’s mortgage”, and then
later in the exchange, which is focused on money, Lauren wrote “900 goes to my
mom, my money is already in chequing”.
[55]          
After their separation, Lauren and Anthony
continued to communicate regarding the Loan. On January 23, 2021, a text
message from Anthony states “and it’s also the 22nd of the month we
owe your mother once a month so it can wait”. On February 22, 2021, Lauren
emailed Anthony regarding the joint expenses listed on their calendar, with the
Loan included in the list. There is no evidence that Anthony disputed the
inclusion of this expense, despite responding and adding another expense to the
list.
[56]          
The exchanges between the defendants became
increasingly acrimonious following their separation in November 2020. On March
8, 2021, Lauren sent an email regarding payment of the utilities on the
matrimonial home. Anthony responded: “pay your half of all bills associated to
the house or your mother will not see another dime from me from this day
forward”.
[57]          
Anthony stopped contributing payments under the
Loan Agreement when his counsel sent a letter in the matrimonial proceeding in
March 2021 indicating his position on the Loan, which indicated counsel’s view
that the “document” is “clearly framed as a gift”. The letter goes on to say:
[58]          
The letter does not mention anything about
Anthony’s allegation that the phrase had been added after he signed the Gift
Letter, or his understanding that Marian had gifted the money to the couple.
[59]          
About the text messages and screenshots attached
to Marian’s affidavit, Anthony says that they have no context and do not prove
any of Marian’s claims. He relies on the discovery evidence provided by Marian,
in which he says that she admitted that there are no documents to support that
Anthony agreed to any type of loan from her. Marian also confirmed that she has
no evidence that Anthony prepared the payment schedule, but rather that it was
prepared and provided by Lauren.
[60]          
Despite executing supplementary affidavits on
December 18, 2023 and September 23, 2024, Anthony has not responded to any of
the text message or email evidence provided by Lauren in her affidavit sworn
October 30, 2023.
[61]          
Marian’s evidence is that Lauren and Anthony
began to have marital problems in the spring of 2020. She asked Mr. Brown for
advice on how to ensure that the Loan was repaid and he suggested that a
promissory note be signed. He drafted a promissory note showing the outstanding
amount of $170,300, as it was at that time.
[62]          
Marian delivered the promissory note to the
defendants for signing by forwarding a copy to Lauren on July 28, 2020. By
August 13, 2020 it remained unsigned, so Marian sent Anthony a text message on
that date reminding him and Lauren to sign the Promissory note. Anthony’s
response was: “oh yes okay”.
[63]          
On August 18, 2020, Lauren sent an email to her
mother attaching the promissory note, which had been electronically signed.
[64]          
The defendants continued to pay the monthly
instalments until February 2021, at which time the principal amount owing under
the Loan Agreement was $163,982.50.
[65]          
Marian made several demands for payment
thereafter, until eventually a demand letter was delivered by her lawyers in
January 2022.
[66]          
Lauren’s evidence is that she and Anthony had a
temporary separation between February and May 2020. After they reconciled, they
decided to sell their first home and move to a new property located at 54
Plewes Drive, Collingwood (the “matrimonial home”) which was purchased in July
2020.
[67]          
Marian advised Lauren and Anthony at that time
that she had concerns about payment of the Loan given their marital problems
and decision to purchase a new home. In July 2020, Marian provided her with a
promissory note by email.
[68]          
Lauren’s evidence is that she immediately
forwarded the promissory note to Anthony and asked him to print it. A copy of
her email to Anthony, dated July 28, 2020, has been provided. Anthony never
printed the promissory note although Lauren asked him to do so several times.
[69]          
On August 18, 2020, she sent the document to
Anthony from her iPhone at 11:51 a.m. with an all-caps subject line that read
“PLEASE SIGN AND SEND BACK”. When Anthony came home from work, she had him sign
the Promissory Note on her iPhone. Another email was sent on the same date to
Marian, at 7:09 p.m., attaching the promissory note with both defendants’
signatures, with the subject line stating: “promissory note signed”.
[70]          
On her cross-examination, Lauren stated that she
did not have any evidence aside from her recollection to prove that Anthony
signed the promissory note. They were together in their home in Collingwood
when he digitally signed on her phone. She admitted that she delivered the note
to Marian without copying Anthony on the email, and that she did not provide
him with a copy of the signed note afterward.
[71]          
Anthony’s evidence is that he did not sign the
promissory note and the signature that Marian is relying upon is not his, being
placed there fraudulently and without his knowledge or consent. Presumably, he
asks this court to draw the inference that Lauren signed it on his behalf.
[72]          
Anthony relies on Marian’s evidence from her
discovery, in which she admitted that there is no documentation to prove that
Anthony acknowledged signing the promissory note. After it was signed, she had
no specific conversations with him about it.
[73]          
Anthony relies on a report from Docufraud Canada
dated September 20, 2024, attached to his affidavit sworn September 23, 2024.
The author, whose qualifications and educational experiences in his area of
supposed expertise are not outlined, purports to express the opinion that the
signatures on the promissory note dated August 18, 2020 “exhibit common
characteristics of being written with a stylus as you would at the passport
office or when signing for a driver’s licence”. This report does not comply
with r. 53(2.1) in almost any respect, including that no signed Form 53 has
been provided. The content of the report has been given no weight.
[74]          
Marian’s evidence is that it was always her
intention, and known to the defendants, that the money provided to them for
purchasing their property was a loan and not a gift. Lauren was not treated
differently than her other daughters.
[75]          
Marian’s evidence is that she has provided
non-interest-bearing loans in the amount of $200,000 to each of her three other
daughters, Nicole Coyle, Rebekah Manley and Danielle Keenan and their
respective partners, for their first property purchases.
[76]          
The loan provided to Nicole and her husband,
made in September 2007, has been only partly repaid. In April 2016, Marian
learned that Nicole and her husband were experiencing some financial
difficulties. By then they had made monthly payments for approximately nine
years, totalling $70,386.08. Marian suggested to them that they stop making
monthly loan payments and proposed that the outstanding amount of $129,613.92
would eventually be subtracted from Nicole’s inheritance from Marian’s estate.
Nicole and her husband agreed to this arrangement. Marian’s evidence is that
she has attempted to make efforts to obtain her bank statements showing the
payments into her bank account but was unable to obtain them before June 2016.
[77]          
With respect to the loan provided to Danielle
and her husband in August 2012, that couple has made monthly e-transfers in
respect of their loan repayment. As of the date of Marian’s affidavit, they had
repaid the amount of $105,125.17. Marian has provided redacted copies of her
bank statements from June 2016 to July 2023 showing those monthly installment
payments.
[78]          
The loan provided to Rebekah and her husband was
made in April 2020. Rebekah signed a promissory note on April 15, 2020. It is
Marian’s evidence that even though Rebekah’s husband has not signed the
promissory note, they are aware that both are responsible for repayment of
their loan. Rebekah and her husband have paid monthly instalments totalling
$21,500 as of the date of Marian’s affidavit. Marian has provided redacted
copies of her bank statements from June 2016 to July 2023 showing those monthly
loan payments.
[79]          
Marian did not ask Mr. Brown to prepare
promissory notes for her loans to Danielle and Nicole and their respective
husbands because it did not cross her mind to do so.
[80]          
Each of these daughters has provided evidence
about the status of these loans.
[81]          
Rebekah’s affidavit acknowledges an initial loan
of $200,000 from Marian, and states that both she and her husband are
responsible for repayment of the loan. The affidavit states that she and her
husband always knew that her mother was providing them with a loan, not a gift.
They were initially paying the monthly amount of $800, which was lowered to
$500 in April 2022 with Marian’s agreement. Rebekah has provided redacted
copies of her Interac e-transfer history indicating e-transfers into Marian’s
bank account up to the month in which her affidavit was sworn.
[82]          
Danielle has provided an affidavit acknowledging
an initial loan of $200,000 from Marian, which she and her husband know is not
a gift. In in accordance with their loan agreement, she and her husband have
paid monthly instalments in the amount of $800 and will continue to do so until
the loan is paid in full. Between August 2012 and December 2020, she made the
monthly payments by cash or e- transfer. Danielle deposes that she has made
efforts to locate bank statements that show all the e-transfers and cash
withdrawals in respect of the loan but was only able to obtain a list of the
e-transfers from January 2021 onward. She has provided redacted screenshots
from the TD Canada Trust phone app that show the monthly installments paid to
her mother between January 2021 and January 2022, and in November 2022. For all
other months, her evidence is that she has paid in cash.
[83]          
Nicole has also provided an affidavit
acknowledging the loan of $200,000 in August 2007, stating that she and her
husband know that Marian was providing the money as a loan and not a gift. She
confirmed that they paid the loan in monthly amount of $683.36 until April
2016, when $129,613.92 remained owing.
[84]          
Nicole’s evidence was that her husband found it
difficult to secure employment after being medically released from the army in
2008, after which they experienced financial difficulties. She confirmed her
mother’s offer to subtract the balance of the loan from her inheritance from
Marian’s estate. She also has made efforts to obtain bank statements and
evidence of e-transfers to show the payments made on the loan, but given the
passage of time was unable to retrieve them.
[85]          
Anthony maintains that Marian has provided no
evidence that any of her sons-in-law have signed any promissory notes, and
submits that the evidence establishes that the other loans were only provided
to her daughters, and not their husbands.
[86]          
Anthony has raised various other matters which
he believes to be germane to the proceeding, arising from the discovery of
Marian. These are:
[87]          
The applicable principles that guide a summary
judgment motion derive from Hryniak v. Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7, [2014] 1
S.C.R. 87.
[88]          
With respect to when summary judgment may be granted, Karakatsanis J. stated, at para. 49:
[89]          
At para. 50, the Court defined the
overarching issue to be “whether summary judgment will provide a fair and just adjudication.”  Karakatsanis J. went on to say that “the
standard for fairness is not whether the procedure is as exhaustive as a trial,
but whether it gives the judge confidence that she can find the necessary facts
and apply the relevant legal principles so as to resolve the dispute.”
[90]          
In terms of the approach to a motion for summary
judgment, Hryniak directs at para. 66 that the judge should first
determine if there is a genuine issue requiring a trial based only on the
evidence before her, without using the new fact-finding
powers.  If there appears to be a genuine issue requiring a trial, she should
then decide if the need for a trial can be avoided by using the new powers
under rules 20.04(2.1) and (2.2) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O.
1990, Reg. 194.  These powers may be used by the motion judge in her discretion
provided that their use is not against the interest of justice.  Their use will
not be against the interest of justice if they will lead to a fair and just
result and will serve the goals of timeliness, affordability, and
proportionality in light of the litigation as a whole.
[91]          
The court must take a hard look at the evidence
on a motion for summary judgment to determine whether
there is a genuine issue requiring a trial and may freely canvas the facts and
law in doing so.  No party is entitled to rely on the prospect of additional
evidence that may be tendered at trial; all parties have an obligation to put
their best foot forward on a summary judgment motion: Mazza v. Ornge
Corporate Services Inc., 2016 ONCA 753, at para. 9; Chernet v. RBC
General Insurance Co., 2017 ONCA 337, [2017] O.J. No. 2094, at para. 12; Sweda
Farms Ltd. v. Egg Farmers of Ontario, 2014 ONSC 1200, [2014] O.J. No. 851,
at para. 26, aff’d 2014 ONCA 878, [2014] O.J. No. 5815, leave to appeal to SCC
refused, [2015] SCCA No. 97. As stated in Dawson v.
Rexcraft Storage and Warehouse Inc., 1998 CanLII 4831 (ON CA), [1998] O.J.
No. 3240 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 17, “[t]he motions judge is entitled to assume
that the record contains all the evidence which the parties will present if
there is a trial.”
[92]          
The requirement to put one’s best foot forward
means that although the onus is on the moving party to establish the absence of
a genuine issue requiring a trial, there is an evidentiary burden on the responding
party, who may not rest on the allegations or denials in the party’s pleadings,
but must present specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for
trial: Cuthbert v. TD Canada Trust, 2010 ONSC 830, [2010] O.J. No. 630,
at para. 12; Sanzone v. Schechter, 2016 ONCA 566, [2016] O.J. No. 3760,
at para. 30.  These principles were affirmed once again
in Broadgrain Commodities Inc. v. Continental Casualty Company (CNA Canada),
2018 ONCA 438, at para. 7.
[93]          
The evidence adduced on a summary judgment motion
need not be equivalent to that at trial. A documentary record may be enough, if
it allows the motion judge to have confidence that she can fairly resolve the
issues: Hryniak, at para. 57.
[94]          
Rule 20.09 mandates that rules 20.01 to 20.08
apply, with necessary modifications, to counterclaims, crossclaims and
third-party claims.
[95]          
For the purpose of determining whether an
advance from a parent is a loan or a gift, the intention of the parent is the
determining factor. The legal test is the intent of the parent at the time of
the transfer. The intention of the transferee is not relevant to the inquiry: Crepeau
v. Crepeau et al., 2012 ONSC 418, at para 44; Prtenjaca et al. v. Well-Prtenjaca
et al., 2022 ONSC  438, at paragraph 46, Chao v. Chao, 2017 ONCA
701, at para. 54, citing Pecore v Pecore, 2007 SCC 17 at paras. 5 and
44.
[96]          
Evidence of intention that arises after a
transfer may be relevant to the intention of the transferor at the time of the
transfer. However, the court must be alive to evidence that is self-serving or
that tends to reflect a change in intention when assessing the reliability of
evidence of subsequent intention, and the weight to be given to it: Chao,
at para. 56.
[97]          
In asserting that the funds were advanced as a
gift, Anthony bears the onus of disproving the presumption of resulting trust.
He must rebut the presumption on a balance of probabilities: Crepeau, at
paras. 39-40; Pecore, at paras. 24-25.
[98]          
To prove the existence of a gift, Anthony must
establish three elements: 1) the clear and unmistakable intention of Marian to
make a gift; 2) acceptance of the gift; and 3) delivery of the gift: Crepeau,
at para. 42. Only the first element would be at issue in this case.
[99]          
The following factors may be relevant in the
context of analyzing whether funds were given as a loan or a gift:
[100]      
In Barber v. Magee, 2017 ONCA 558, at
para 4, the court discussed the indicia of gifts versus loans as follows:
[101]      
In Prtenjaca, the court was faced with
the issue of whether the funds provided by parents to purchase their son and
daughter-in-law’s matrimonial home were intended to be a gift or loan. A gift
letter was signed by the parents as a condition of financing imposed by the
mortgage lender. Aside from the gift letter, there was no evidence establishing
that the funds were intended as a gift. In holding that the funds were
transferred as a loan, the court held that the evidence clearly established
that the parents executed the gift letter for the sole purpose of permitting
the children to obtain mortgage financing to satisfy the balance of the
purchase price.
[102]      
There are additional cases in which courts have
rejected a gift letter given to facilitate mortgage financing as evidence of a
gratuitous gift: Bostrom v.  Bigford, 2019 BCSC 79, at para. 115; Sheppard
v. Carvalho, 2015 ONSC  3266, at para. 14; Dhaliwall v. Ollek, 2012
BCCA 86, at paras. 24 and 37; Crepeau, at paras. 68-69; and Bemrose
v. Fetter, 2003 CarswellOnt 6547, at para. 69.
[103]      
Anthony relies on Aguanno v Aguanno, 2002
CarswellOnt 1251. Like the situation before the court, Aguanno involved
monies advanced by parents, with separating spouses disputing the
characterization of the funds as a gift versus loan. However, that is where the
similarity ends. In arriving at the conclusion that the money was a gift, the
court took into account that there was no documentary evidence confirming that
the funds were advanced as a loan. At paragraph 28, the court advanced the
following principle: “where a parent gives money to a child, the advance is
presumed to be a gift. Thus the onus is on the parent or child who alleges a
different intention to prove that the transactions surrounding the advance was
in fact a loan”.
[104]      
The foregoing statement of law from Aguanno
is no longer correct following the Supreme Court of Canada’s decision in Pecore,
in which the presumption of advancement was held to no longer apply in respect
of a transferor’s adult children.
[105]      
Anthony also relies on Locke, which
involved a matrimonial breakdown and a dispute over whether funds
provided by grandparents for the purchase of a house were a gift or loan. A
note had been signed acknowledging receipt of the funds, which stated that the
funds must be fully repaid or else the grandfather’s estate would have a claim
to the equity in the matrimonial home. The court found that the funds advanced
to the husband by his grandparents were intended as an advance on inheritance,
rather than a loan repayable on demand, noting “there is a substantial amount
of evidence which supports that conclusion”.
[106]      
The court found that the preponderance of
evidence led to the conclusion that a failure to repay would lead to the
husband relinquishing his right to inheritance. This was found to be consistent
with the wording of the note, which indicated that the advance was “from the
estate of [the grandfather] and his heirs”. There was no provision for
repayment at a specific time, on the happening of any event, or upon demand. In
this context, the court also examined the wills of the grandfather and the
husband’s parents to assist in determining whether the money could properly be
characterized as an advance on the husband’s inheritance.
[107]      
Another case relied on by Anthony is Klimm v.
Klimm, 2010 ONSC 1479, a decision of Mulligan J. of this court. One of the
issues at trial is whether advances of money totalling $150,000 from the
husband’s father constituted gifts or loans, with the wife maintaining that
they were gifts. The wife admitted that she made a series of payments to the
husband’s father but stated that she was directed to do so by the husband when
he took over her vehicle payments. In reaching the decision that the advances
were not at loan, the court took into account “the unique feature of this
case”, including that $40,000 had been forgiven by the parents with respect to
loans made to all four of their children, and no payments were made after 2003,
the year the parties’ separated, nor were demands for payments issued.
[108]      
At paragraph 29 of Klimm the court
referred to Heeney, J.’s discussion of the implications of allegations of debt
on net family property statements in Poole v. Poole, 2001 CanLII 28196 (ON SC), [2001] O.J. No.
2154 (Ont. S.C.J.), at paragraph 36:
[109]      
There is ultimately only one discrete issue in
this litigation – were the funds advanced by Marian a loan or a gift?
[110]      
It is important to emphasize that this is an
action to recover payment under the Loan Agreement, and not an action to
enforce the provisions of a promissory note. Accordingly, it is not critical to
the analysis to determine whether the promissory note was signed by Anthony.
However, for the reasons that follow, I find that the evidence of Lauren is
significantly more credible and reliable than that of Anthony and accept that
he did sign the promissory note.
[111]      
The record filed by the parties on this motion
is thorough. The parties have exchanged all documentary evidence, examinations
for discovery have been held, and undertakings answered. The record for this
motion includes the transcripts from the examinations for discovery of the
parties and relevant portions thereof being relied on. The court may assume
that no other relevant evidence exists.
[112]      
The record gave this court ample opportunity to
consider the totality of the evidence provided by the parties. From this evidence
I have been able to conclude that I can make credibility findings, assign weight
to the evidence, find the necessary facts and apply the relevant legal
principles to enable me to resolve the single issue in dispute in the action.
[113]      
In this case, where the central issue is the
characterization of the transfer of the funds from Marian, the credibility of
the parties is critically important to the court’s determination of the issue.
[114]      
In Cook v Joyce, 2017 ONCA 49, at para. 92,
the court stated:
[115]      
Nonetheless, subrule 20.04 (2.1) permits the
motions judge to evaluate the credibility of a deponent unless it is in the
interests of justice for such powers only to be exercised at trial. Even
disputed factual issues that are central to the issues between the parties may
be resolved by making credibility findings on a motion for summary judgment,
where the record fairly allows the judge to do so. Credibility determinations
can be aided by reference to contemporaneous documents exchanged by the
parties: 2212886 Ontario Inc. v. Obsidian Group Inc., 2018 ONCA 670, at
para. 39. Such is the case here.
[116]      
I have reached the conclusion that the need to
make credibility assessments does not require that this motion be dismissed, as
Anthony has argued. Credibility issues have been easy to resolve, without
requiring oral evidence. The documentary record provides little support for Anthony’s
version of events.
[117]      
The evidence of Marian and Lauren, where it
conflicts with that of Anthony, is preferred. Their evidence is logical and
supported by contemporaneous documentary evidence, as reviewed. In contrast, Anthony’s
evidence lacks credibility as it is frequently illogical, internally
inconsistent, and inconsistent with the contemporaneous documentary evidence.
[118]      
The record supports the allegations made by Marian
in her statement of claim.
[119]      
First, Anthony has failed to produce evidence
that Marian intended to make a gift. The only evidence that he has elicited is
that of his own understanding that the money was meant as a gift, which the law
considers irrelevant to the inquiry. He has produced no evidence that would establish
Marian’s intention to provide a gift when she advanced the funds in 2017.
[120]      
The factors set out by the court in Chao
must also be considered.
[121]      
The first is whether there are any
contemporaneous documents evidencing a loan. In this regard, the best evidence
are the communications from Anthony himself, the authenticity of which are not
in dispute, which clearly establish that he is aware that he and Lauren were
paying back a loan from Marian. In those messages he repeatedly, explicitly,
and implicitly, acknowledged that he and Lauren have a debt to repay. One
example of many is his text message of January 23, 2021, in which he notes “we
owe your mother once a month”. Supporting this characterization is the wording
of his counsel’s letter of March 2020, which acknowledges a loan and does not
assert a gift. The only quarrel that Anthony has made in respect of his own
words is that they have been taken out of context. He does not suggest how or
what the proper context might be.
[122]      
Anthony’s evidence that he was agreeing to repay
the “gift” in monthly instalments to appease his new wife is neither believable
nor logical, particularly when there is no evidence that he ever questioned
Lauren or Marian about the logic or necessity of repaying a gift. His evidence
is that he simply acquiesced. The unlikelihood of this is underscored by the
content of the text messages between the spouses, which reveal the struggle
that they were having making ends meet at that time in their marriage.
[123]      
Accordingly, Anthony’s own correspondence leads
this court to be able to soundly reject his evidence that he knew nothing about
this money being a loan, and to reject his allegation that the impugned phrase
was added to the Gift Letter after he had signed it and without his knowledge.
[124]      
Anthony’s related arguments with respect to
Marian’s failure to remember when she signed the Gift Letter, her refusal to
produce her Will or a financial statement to show where the repayments were
deposited, or Lauren’s evidence that there were no witnesses to the signing of
the Gift Letter, are not relevant in the face of this overwhelmingly cogent
evidence of Anthony’s acknowledgment of the debt.
[125]      
The contemporaneous evidence clearly establishes
Marian’s intention to make a loan: her hesitation to sign the Gift Letter
because she did not intend to make a gift; her request for advice from Mr.
Brown, her crossing out the words “a genuine gift that does not have to be
repaid”, her email to Lauren to express her position that she would not sign
the Gift Letter without the additional phrase, her crossing out of her
signature when she returned the document to Lauren; Lauren’s sharing of that
email with Anthony, and his verbal agreement to the change; the email from
Lauren to Mr. Rattray attaching the revisions to the Gift Letter, which he
confirmed would be acceptable, and that the purpose of the Gift Letter was so
that TD would approve the mortgage financing for Lauren and Anthony. The
following year, when the defendants missed a payment in May, Marian’s
chastisement and Anthony’s apology, followed by his confirmation that he had
sent the money, is further confirmation of Marian’s intention and the parties’
mutual understanding that a loan had been advanced, with regularly repayment terms.
[126]      
All of this is corroborated by the evidence of
Marian’s financial consultant, Mr. Brown, who provided advice on how to ensure
that the Gift Letter be altered to accurately reflect the Loan Agreement.
[127]      
Another factor to be considered is whether the
manner for repayment is specified. Marian’s allegation that the repayment terms
were $900 per month commencing in October 2017 is corroborated by her bank
statement deposits, some of which show the money being e-transferred by either
Lauren or Anthony from their joint account. The spouses’ text messages further
support a finding that the monthly repayment amount was $900. There is also the
repayment schedule, on which Anthony was copied. The evidence easily leads to
the conclusion that not only was there an understanding between the parties
about the quantum and frequency of the repayment, but repayment was being made
regularly even after the parties separated. The defendants’ conduct is entirely
consistent with repayment of a loan. Payments from the defendants ceased
following Anthony’s threat that Marian would not see another dime from him.
[128]      
Another factor is whether there is security held
for the loan. In this case, the evidence establishes that the loan was
unsecured. I find, however, that it was advanced one month after the
defendants’ marriage, and as part of the commercial financing transaction
undertaken in July 2017 for the purpose of buying their Orangeville property.
As was the case in Prtenjaca, I find that the Gift Letter was signed by
Marian to satisfy TD’s financing requirements, and not to document the
existence of a gift. Any other conclusion would be inconsistent with the
overwhelming evidence of Marian’s intention and the parties’ understanding of
the Loan Agreement.
[129]      
Another factor that may be relevant is whether
there are advances to one child and not others, or advances of unequal amounts
to various children. In this case there is evidence of loans made to Lauren’s
three sisters and their husbands, also to help them purchase their first homes.
Anthony argues that there is no direct evidence from the spouses of Marian’s
other daughters to confirm that those spouses are jointly indebted, so the
court is left only with the daughters’ evidence of their husbands’
understanding that the loans were made jointly to each couple.
[130]      
I have no reason to reject the evidence of
Marian and her other daughters with respect to the nature of those other loans
and who is indebted by them in the face of the overwhelming evidence, which I
have accepted, showing that Anthony understood that he was jointly indebted to
Marian. And while Marian may have changed her mind about how to treat the money
given to Nicole and her husband after the fact, and because of their special
circumstances, that does not change the fact that her initial intention was to
have them repay the full amount of a loan.
[131]      
Whether there has been any demand for payment
before the separation of the parties is another factor to consider. As
previously mentioned, the exchange that ensued between Marian and Anthony in
June 2018 following the missed payment leaves no doubt that Marian expected
repayment in regular monthly installments, and that Anthony understood that
obligation. Marian’s expectation of repayment is fully supported by the
evidence.
[132]      
The expectation of repayment is also established
by the evidence surrounding the promissory note. The importance of this
document is only to corroborate Marian’s evidence that she expected the money
to be repaid to her, and to show that the defendants were likewise operating
under that same understanding. Marian’s actions in sending it to the parties
when she did is logical given the defendants’ recent reconciliation following a
period of separation.  Marian’s concern that full repayment may be in jeopardy makes
sense in the circumstances.
[133]      
I find on balance of probabilities that it is
Anthony’s electronic signature on the promissory note. There is his own written
acknowledgement on August 13, 2020 that he would sign it. Five days later, the
executed document was delivered to Marian by Lauren. It was delivered to Marian
in the evening, in accordance with Lauren’s evidence that she waited for
Anthony to come home from work to sign it on her phone. There is no evidence
that Anthony denied that it was his signature until this litigation began,
although it is clear that he knew of the existence of the document since August
13, 2020 at the latest. Because of the adverse credibility findings I have made
against Anthony, arising from him taking unsupportable positions in this case
despite cogent evidence to the contrary, I place no reliance on his evidence
that he did not sign the promissory note.
[134]      
In summary, the issue of whether the money is a
loan or gift does not require a trial to decide. Accordingly, summary judgment
provides an outcome that ends all issues that would otherwise continue to be
litigated between the parties to this action, and thus will result in a savings
of time and expense associated with a trial, meeting the objectives of
proportionality, efficiency and cost-effectiveness.
[135]      
Neither of the defendants has disputed the
calculation of the amount left unpaid at the time that payments ceased. The
evidence is that $163,982.50 remained outstanding as of the date of the
statement of claim. Prejudgment interest will now be owed on that amount.
[136]      
Accordingly, this court orders that judgment be
granted on the claim jointly and severally against both defendants in the
amount of $163,982.50 plus prejudgment interest, and further order that this
amount be paid from the funds held in trust from the matrimonial home.
[137]      
There is no issue requiring a trial on the
crossclaim, which is simply for contribution and indemnity. Based on the
results of the motion, summary judgment on Lauren’s crossclaim follows as a
natural result.
[138]      
The court was not advised of the amount that
remains in trust from the sale of the matrimonial home. However, barring offers
that the court should take into consideration, the plaintiff is presumptively
entitled to costs not only of this motion but also for her action, because this
motion was dispositive of the entire claim: Persaud v. Bratanov and Unifund
Assurance Co., 2012 ONSC 6870. If a sufficient amount exists, the costs
order will also be paid from the trust funds.
[139]      
Lauren’s cross-motion against Anthony has also
been successful and she has asked for costs associated with defending the
action and Marian’s motion, and for bringing her own motion.
[140]      
The court urges the defendants to now come to a
swift resolution of the matrimonial proceeding, before any further costs are
incurred, and particularly urges Anthony to start taking more reasonable
positions.
[141]      
If the parties are unable to agree upon the
issue of costs within 20 working days from the date of these Reasons, they may
make submissions in writing. The Plaintiff’s and Lauren’s are due on January 15,
2025, Anthony’s on January 24, 2025 and any reply, if necessary on January 28,
2025. Written submissions are limited to 5 double-spaced pages, plus a Bill of
Costs or Costs Outline.
[142]      
All authorities relied on are to be hyperlinked
in the document or uploaded to Case Center with a tabbed (i.e., hyperlinked)
index.
[143]      
The submissions are to be filed with the court,
with a copy emailed to my judicial assistant at
BarrieSCJJudAssistants@ontario.ca, in addition to being uploaded to Case
Center.