[1]              
On May 28, 2024, R.D. was found guilty by a jury
of three counts of sexual assault, three counts of sexual interference, and one
count of invitation to sexual touching, in relation to N.W., a person who was a
young child with whom he was in a de facto relationship of stepfather at
the time of the commission of the offences.
[2]              
It is now my task to determine a fair, fit, and
principled sentence.
[3]              
As provided at s.724(2) of the Criminal Code,
where the court is composed of a judge and jury, the court shall accept as
proven all facts, express or implied, that are essential to the jury’s verdict
of guilty.
[4]              
As McLachlin C.J.C. stated at paras. 16 - 18 in R.
v. Ferguson, 2008 SCC 6:
[5]              
In this case, in order to find R.D. guilty, the
jury clearly must have rejected his assertion that the alleged events never
occurred, and accepted the version of events in the evidence of the complainant
N.W.
[6]        In accordance with the evidence presented at trial and
evidently accepted by the jury, I make the following findings of fact for the
purposes of sentencing.  When she was in Grade 1, and six or seven years old,
N.W. resided with her mother B.W., her younger brother J., and B.W.’s
then-partner R.D. in an apartment in Cambridge.  N.W. described three incidents
which comprise the offences for which R.D. has been found guilty by the jury.
For purposes of simplicity and clarity, I will describe these, in the sequence
is which she testified they occurred,  as the “Twinkie Incident,” which is the
subject of Counts 1 and 4 on the Indictment;  the “Movie Incident,” which is
the subject of Counts 2 and 5 on the Indictment;  and the “Bed Incident,” 
which is the subject of Counts 3 and 6 on the Indictment.  Count 7, Invitation
to Sexual Touching, pertains to both the Twinkie Incident and the Movie
Incident.
[7]        N.W. testified that on one occasion, when she was playing
in the living room with her brother her mother was not home, R.D. told her to
come into the bedroom he shared with her mother, and told her to sit on a chair
in the room.  He told her that he was going to give her a Twinkie.  He placed a
black toque over her head, covering her eyes.  However, the material of the
toque was thin, and she was able to see through it.  She could see R.D.
standing in front of her.  He told her to keep the hat on.  He undid his
buckle.  He was wearing blue jeans.  He moved his underwear down, just below
the shaft of his penis.  He tried to get her to put his penis in her mouth.  He
told her to open her mouth, and, while standing in front of her, attempted to
insert his penis in her mouth. She could see that it was his penis, not a
Twinkie, and prevented him from inserting it in her mouth by making a repeated
chomping motion with her mouth.  He was consequently not able to insert his
penis into her mouth. After 1 - 2 minutes, he put his penis back in his
underwear.  He did not do his pants up. He went and got a Twinkie.  He took the
hat off and gave her a Twinkie.  She then went back to playing with J.
[8]        On
a subsequent occasion, N.W. and R.D. were watching a movie on the bed in his
bedroom.  The movie was about scientists and talking apes.  The two were
sitting up in the bed, by the headboard.  She and R.D. were covered in a
blanket from the waist down.  Her mother and J. were watching a different movie
in the living room.
[9]        While
laying on the bed, R.D. started touching her vagina, and attempted to get her
to touch his penis with her hand, while they were watching the movie. Mid-way
through the movie, he took his penis out of his pants, and started touching her
vagina with his fingers, making a circular motion with three fingers. He asked
her if she liked it.  She initially responded no, but observed an angry look then
on his face, with a movement of his eyebrow.  This made her feel scared.  She
subsequently said that she liked it.
[10]      Her hands were resting on top of her lap, underneath the
blanket.  Her hands started to get sweaty.  She attempted to move her hands,
but he would take her hand, and try to put it on his penis. She could see his
penis.  He had an erection. She could see the head of his penis, and a little
bit of the shaft. He was on her right side, with his left hand down her pants.
She said that in her head, she did not want to engage in this, and that she
just wanted to watch the movie.   He did not penetrate her vagina. This
activity went on for about half the movie, until it ended. She was uncertain
how long the movie was, but agreed that it could have been 90 minutes - two
hours.  She then went out to check on her mother and brother, who were asleep
in the living room in front of the television.
[11]      The
third incident occurred after the Twinkie and Movie Incidents. N.W., R.D.  and
her brother J. were sitting on the couch in the living room.  Her mother was
not home.  They were watching a movie.  They had a blanket.
[12]      Under
the blanket, R.D. took her pajama pants off. He tossed them aside.  He told J.
that he wanted to cuddle with N.W. and took her to his bedroom.   She was still
wearing a purple nightgown, which came down to her knees.  He told her to sit
on the bed.  She did so. She was sitting in a backwards angle, with her hands
behind her supporting herself. He was wearing jeans with no belt. He unzipped
his pants and removed her underwear.  He got on the bed, kneeling in front of
her.  He pulled her nightgown up, pushing it against her belly button.  He
moved her legs into an open position.  He took out his penis and started
rubbing it on her vagina.
[13]      After
about four or five minutes, J. came into the room, saying that he also wanted a
cuddle. R.D. angrily told him to get out, which he did.   R.D. resumed rubbing
his penis on her vagina.  The incident lasted for 8 - 9 minutes. N.W. said that
in her head, when he was rubbing his penis on her vagina, she was not exactly
sure what was going on.  She did not want to get hurt, and stayed still. He was
rubbing the head and part of the shaft of his penis on her, in what she
described as an up and down type of motion.  His penis did not penetrate her
vagina.  He then ejaculated above her vagina.  At that age, she did not know
what ejaculate was.  He did not say anything.
[14]      He got up, and told her to take a bath, as her mother was
coming home soon.   He kissed her on the mouth in the hallway, in what she
described as a French kiss.  His mouth was open, “kind of slobbering over my
face,” she said.  He had what she described as a bad breath smell.
[15]      The evidence on sentencing included a Pre-Sentence Report,
a Victim Impact Statement provided by B.W. (the mother of N.W.), and a copy of R.D.’s
criminal record.
[16]      A
Pre-Sentence Report was produced in relation to R.D. and was admitted into
evidence as an exhibit on sentencing.  It details his family and employment
history.  R.D. has fathered three children with two different partners. A local
child protection agency was involved in these relationships due to the history
of intimate partner violence in each relationship. R.D. has not been
consistently employed. His last period of employment was in 2020.  He has
primarily subsisted on social assistance for the past 10 years. He has a
criminal record which dates back to 2010.
[17]      R.D. denies the commission of the offences and blames
B.W., whom he insists “made up” the allegations to remove him from their son’s
life.  He has not expressed any remorse towards N.W.
[18]      In
her Victim Impact Statement submitted to the Court, B.W. detailed the trauma
learning of the abuse of her daughter perpetrated by her then-partner R.D.
caused her, and her continuing difficulty in dealing with this.
[19]      N.W. did not submit a Victim Impact Statement, but told
the author of the Pre-Sentence Report how these incidents have negatively
impacted her life through developing trust issues with adults and straining her
relationship with her mother B.W.
[20]      R.D. has a criminal record for assault, assault with a
weapon, failure to comply with recognizance, taking a motor vehicle without
consent, possession of property obtained by crime, forcible entry and failure
to attend court, for which he has been sentenced to suspended sentences and to
short periods of custody and repeated periods of probation.
[21]      The
Crown submits that R.D. should be sentenced to imprisonment for 7 years, less a
credit for time spent in pre-trial custody credited on a 1.5 to 1 basis, which
would amount to a reduction of 363 days, together with ancillary orders,
including a DNA order, a s.109 weapons prohibition, and a non-contact order in
respect of N.W. and B.W.  The Crown submits that R.D. engaged in a deliberate
grooming of a vulnerable victim over time, to whom he stood in a relationship
of trust, and that there were multiple instances of sexual assault, which
escalated over time.  It submits that there was some indication of planning and
manipulation, especially in the Twinkie Incident, and that the criminal record
of R.D. is significant.  It submits that an appropriate Duncan credit
would be 30 - 60 days.
[22]      The Defence agrees that a penitentiary sentence is
appropriate in this instance, and that denunciation and deterrence must be the
predominant sentencing principles having application in this case, but submits
that an appropriate sentence for the court to consider would be in the range of
4 - 5.5 years.  It also submits that, given the harsh conditions under which
R.D. was detained at Maplehurst Correctional Complex in pre-sentencing custody,
an enhanced Duncan credit of six months would be appropriate for the
court to consider.
[23]      As
succinctly summarized by Watt J.A. in R. v. Marshall, 2021 ONCA 28, in
determining a fit sentence, the sentencing judge must consider a complexity of
factors including the nature of the offence and the personal characteristics of
the offender. As well, the sentencing judge must weigh the normative principles
Parliament has enshrined in the Criminal Code; the sentencing objectives
in s. 718, the fundamental principle of proportionality in s. 718.1, the
aggravating and mitigating factors, as well as the principles of totality and
restraint in s. 718.2: R. v. M. (L.), 2008 SCC 31, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 163,
at para. 17.
[24]      Proportionality
is a cardinal principle that governs the fitness of a sentence imposed on an
offender. It requires that every sentence be proportionate not only to the
gravity of the offence, but also to the degree of responsibility of the
offender who committed that offence: Criminal Code, s. 718.1.
[25]      Individualization
is central to the assessment of proportionality in that it demands focus upon
the individual circumstances of each offender:  R. v. A.J.K., 2022 ONCA
487, at para. 82.
[26]      The
severity of a sentence depends not only upon the seriousness of the
consequences of a crime, but also on the moral blameworthiness of the offender.
The more serious the crime and its consequences, or the greater the offender’s
degree of responsibility for that crime, the heavier the penalty.
[27]      The
Crown referred me to the following cases:  R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9; R
.v T.J., 2021 ONCA 392; R. v. C.C., 2018 ONCJ 596; R. v. C.C.,
2020 ONCA 396; R. v. R., 2020 ONSC 7411; R. v. G.R., 2022 ONCA
374; R. v. Kiflemariam, 2022 (ONSC)(unreported); R. v. S.L.M.,
2024 ONSC 2418; and, R. v. B.D.,(2023) SCA-22-101557 (ONSC).
[28]      The
Defence referred me to the following cases: R. v. W.V., 2023 ONCA 655; R.
v. B.M., 2023 ONCA 224; R. v. K.W., 2024 ONSC 6102; and R. v.
Jeyakanthan, 2024 ONSC 1665.
[29]      I
have considered all of these cases.
[30]      In addition, I have considered R. v. De Flores Bermudez,
2024 ONCA 433; R. v. G.B., 2023 ONSC 5081; and R. v. G.S., 2022
ONSC 120.
[31]      The
most significant guidance when it comes to sentencing in cases involving sexual
abuse of children is that provided in the judgment in R. v. Friesen,
2020 SCC 9, a unanimous judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada.  Given its
significance, I will consider the direction provided therein at some length,
summarizing and paraphrasing the guidance provided by the Court.
[32]      In
Friesen, the Supreme Court of Canada started by reinforcing the
principle that all sentencing starts with the principle that sentences must be
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of
the offender.  Sentencing judges must also consider the principle of parity:
similar offenders who commit similar offences in similar circumstances should
receive similar sentences. Parity is an expression of proportionality and gives
meaning to proportionality in practice.
[33]      In
writing for the Court, Wagner C.J.C. and Rowe J. stated at para. 5 of Friesen:
[34]      The
Supreme Court of Canada declared that protecting children from wrongful
exploitation and harm is the overarching objective of the legislative scheme of
sexual offences against children in the Criminal Code. At the sentencing stage, it insisted, in
order to effectively respond to sexual violence against children, sentencing
judges need to properly understand the wrongfulness of sexual offences against
children and the profound harm that they cause and give effect to both in
imposing a sentence. This will help bring sentencing law into line with
society's contemporary understanding of the nature and gravity of sexual
violence against children and will ensure that past biases and myths do not
filter into the sentencing process.
[35]      The
Court further declared that Parliament's creation of the modern legislative
scheme of sexual offences against children shifted the focus of the sexual
offences scheme from sexual propriety to wrongful interference with sexual
integrity. The prime interests that the legislative scheme of sexual offences
against children protect are the personal autonomy, bodily integrity, sexual
integrity, dignity, and equality of children. Emphasis on these interests
require courts to focus their attention on emotional and psychological harm, not
simply physical harm. In particular, courts need to take into account the
wrongfulness and harmfulness of sexual offences against children when applying
the proportionality principle, as these factors impact both the gravity of the
offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender and understanding them
is key to imposing a proportionate sentence.
[36]      The
Supreme Court directed that trial courts must impose sentences commensurate
with the gravity of sexual offences against children and that reflect the
normative character of the offender's actions and the consequential harm to
children and their families, caregivers, and communities. Specifically, courts
must recognize and give effect to (1) the inherent wrongfulness of these
offences; (2) the potential harm to children that flows from these offences;
and (3) the actual harm that children suffer as a result of these offences.
Sexual offences against children are inherently wrongful and always put
children at risk of serious harm, even as the degree of wrongfulness, the
extent to which potential harm materializes, and actual harm vary from case to
case.
[37]      In
Friesen, the Supreme Court declared that courts must also take the
modern recognition of the wrongfulness and harmfulness of sexual violence
against children into account when determining the offender's degree of
responsibility.  Intentionally applying force of a sexual nature to a child is
highly morally blameworthy because the offender is or ought to be aware that
this action can profoundly harm the child, because it involves the wrongful
exploitation of the child by the offender, and because children are so
vulnerable.  Courts must give proper weight in sentencing to the offender's
underlying attitudes because they are highly relevant to assessing the
offender's moral blameworthiness and to the sentencing objective of
denunciation.  The fact that the victim is a child increases the offender's
degree of responsibility.
[38]      The
Supreme Court declared that Parliament has determined that sentences for sexual
offences against children should increase to match its view of the gravity of
such offences.  It has increased maximum sentences for these offences and
prioritized denunciation and deterrence in sentencing. Parliament's decision to
repeatedly increase maximum sentences for sexual offences against children
should be understood as shifting the distribution of proportionate sentences
for these offences. To respect Parliament's decision, courts should generally
impose higher sentences than the sentences imposed in cases that preceded the
increases in maximum sentences. Parliament's decision to prioritize
denunciation and deterrence for offences that involve the abuse of children by
enacting s. 718.01 of the Criminal Code confirms the need for courts to impose
more severe sanctions for sexual offences against children.
[39]      The
Supreme Court determined that a national starting point or sentencing range for
sexual offences against children should not be created by the Court.  It
considered that the appropriate length and the setting of sentencing ranges or
starting points are best left to Provincial appellate courts. Nonetheless, to
ensure that sentences for sexual offences against children correspond to
Parliament's legislative initiatives and the contemporary understanding of the
profound harm that sexual violence against children causes, it determined that
guidance on three specific points is required.
[40]      First,
upward departure from prior precedents and sentencing ranges should occur for sexual
offences against children because Parliament increased the maximum sentences
for these offences and because society's understanding of the gravity and
harmfulness of these offences has deepened. Courts are justified in departing
from dated precedents that do not reflect society's current awareness of the
impact of sexual violence on children in imposing a fit sentence. There is
concern about sentencing ranges based on precedents that appear to restrict
sentencing judges' discretion by imposing caps on sentences that can only be
exceeded in exceptional circumstances.
[41]      Sexual
offences against children can cover a wide variety of circumstances, the
Supreme Court recognized, and it considers that appellate guidance should make
clear that sentencing judges can respond to this reality by imposing sentences
that reflect increases in the gravity of the offence and the degree of
responsibility of the offender.  Imposing proportionate sentences will
frequently require substantial sentences.  Parliament's statutory amendments
have strengthened that message.  Mid-single digit penitentiary terms for sexual
offences against children are normal and upper-single digit and double-digit
penitentiary terms should be neither unusual nor reserved for rare or
exceptional circumstances. A maximum sentence should be imposed whenever the
circumstances warrant it.
[42]      Second,
sexual offences against children should generally be punished more severely
than sexual offences against adults, as Parliament has determined by clear
indication in the Criminal
Code.  Accordingly, the Supreme Court directed Provincial appellate
courts are to revise and rationalize sentencing ranges and starting points
where they have treated sexual violence against children and sexual violence
against adults similarly.
[43]      Third,
the Court declared, treating the offence of sexual interference with a child as
less serious than that of sexual assault of a person under the age of 16 is an
error of law.  Parliament has established the same maximum sentences for both
offences.  The elements of the offences are also similar, and a conviction for
sexual assault of a child and for sexual interference with a child can
frequently be supported on the same factual foundation.
[44]      In order to promote the uniform application of the law of
sentencing, the Supreme Court provided the following non-exhaustive significant
factors to determine a fit sentence for sexual offences against children that must
be considered. First, the higher the offender's risk to reoffend, the more the
court needs to emphasize the sentencing objective of separating the offender
from society to protect vulnerable children from wrongful exploitation and
harm. Second, an offender who abuses a position of trust to commit a sexual
offence against a child should receive a lengthier sentence than an offender
who is a stranger to the child. Any breach of trust is likely to increase the
harm to the victim and thus the gravity of the offence, and it also increases
the offender's degree of responsibility. Third, sexual violence against
children that is committed on multiple occasions and for longer periods of time
should attract significantly higher sentences that reflect the full cumulative
gravity of the crime and the offender's increased degree of responsibility.  Fourth,
the age of the victim is also a significant aggravating factor because children
who are particularly young are even more vulnerable to sexual violence.  The
moral blameworthiness of the offender is enhanced in such cases.  Fifth, defining
a sentencing range based on the specific type of sexual activity at issue poses
several dangers.  In particular, courts must be careful to avoid the following
errors: attributing intrinsic significance to the occurrence or non-occurrence
of sexual acts based on traditional notions of sexual propriety; assuming that
there is correlation between the type of physical act and the harm to the
child; failing to recognize the wrongfulness of sexual violence in cases where
the degree of physical interference is less pronounced; and understanding the
degree of physical interference factor in terms of a type of hierarchy of
physical acts.  Sixth, a child's participation is not a mitigating factor, nor
should it be a legally relevant consideration at sentencing.  In particular, a
child's non-resistance should not be equated to "de facto consent";
a victim's participation should not distract the court from the harm that the
victim suffers as a result of sexual violence; a breach of trust or grooming
that led to the victim's participation is an aggravating factor; and adults
always have a responsibility to refrain from engaging in sexual violence
towards children.
[45]         The aggravating factors present in this case include
the following:
[46]      There
are few mitigating factors in this case.
[47]      All
sentencing starts with the principle that sentences must be proportionate to
the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.  Sentencing
judges must also consider the principle of parity: similar offenders who commit
similar offences in similar circumstances should receive similar sentences.
Parity is an expression of proportionality and gives meaning to proportionality
in practice.  It helps calibrate proportionate sentences.
[48]      Where
a breach of trust or grooming led to the victim’s participation, this should
properly be seen as an aggravating factor:  R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9,
at para. 153.
[49]      As the Court of Appeal for Ontario recently stated at
para. 32 in R. v. De Flores Bermudez, 2024 ONCA 433:
[50]      This
is manifestly not a case in which a conditional sentence would be appropriate. 
It would not be consistent with the fundamental purposes of sentencing in ss.
718 to 718.2.
[51]      Having
regard to the principle of parity, and with regard to the cases which the Crown
and Defence have provided, I assess that the appropriate range of sentences to
consider would be 4 - 6 years.
[52]      I
have carefully considered all of the sentencing purposes and principles
elaborated at ss. 718, 718.01, 718.1 and 718.2 of the Criminal Code.  I
have also considered the sentencing precedents in the caselaw jurisprudence
submitted by the Crown and the Defence, and the relevant aggravating and
mitigating factors in this case.  I have of course given particular weight to
the guidance provided by the Supreme Court of Canada in Friesen.
[53]      R.D.
does not accept responsibility for the offences and has not expressed any remorse. 
This is not an aggravating factor, but rather the absence of a mitigating
factor.
[54]      On its facts, this case exemplifies several of the
significant sentencing factors highlighted in Friesen:
[55]      In
cases such as this, which involve the sexual abuse of a vulnerable young person
by a person in authority, the dominant sentencing principles must be
denunciation, as well as general and specific deterrence.  This is reinforced
by s.718.01 of the Criminal Code, which provides that where a court
imposes a sentence for an offence that involved the abuse of a person under the
age of eighteen years, it shall give primary consideration to the objectives of
denunciation and deterrence of such conduct.
[56]      I
have also had regard to the issue of rehabilitation, as well as the sentencing
principles of separation of offenders from society, where necessary, and the
promotion of a sense of responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgement of the
harm done to victims or to the community.  But, as stated, considerations of
denunciation and deterrence must predominate in this case.
[57]      The
moral responsibility of R.D. is high.  He sexually exploited a vulnerable young
child to whom he stood in a relationship of trust for his own sexual
satisfaction, heedless of the inevitable adverse impact upon her sexual
integrity and well-being.   He engaged in a pattern of grooming over time, progressively
pushing the boundaries further.
[58]      Having
regard to the facts in evidence in this case, the relevant aggravating and
mitigating factors, the statutory provisions of the Criminal Code,
including the objective gravity of the offences, and the sentencing precedents
cited by the Crown and Defence, and in particular the guidance provided by the
Supreme Court of Canada in Friesen, I am satisfied that, on the facts of
this case, a significant penitentiary sentence is required to fulfill these
objectives.  This is a case that involved a wrongful interference with the
personal autonomy, bodily integrity, sexual integrity, dignity and equality of N.W.,
a person who was a child at the time of the commission of the offences.
[59]      For these reasons, I consider that the appropriate global sentence
in this case, before consideration of Summers and Duncan credits,
would be one of 5.5 years imprisonment.  However, for the reasons explained in
detail at paragraphs 60 - 68 below, a substantial Duncan credit should
be applied in the circumstances of this case as one of the factors in
determining an appropriate sentence, which leads me to conclude that the
appropriate sentence, before the application of Summers credit, is
imprisonment for five years.
[60]      
In order to determine the effective sentence, I must consider the potential
application of Summers and Duncan credits.
[61]      In R. v. Marshall, 2021 ONCA 344, at paras. 50 - 53,
Doherty J.A. gave guidance regarding the application of these credits:
[62]      As
noted by Doherty J.A., “Duncan” credit is given on account of
particularly difficult and punitive presentence custody conditions. It must be
borne in mind the 1.5:1 “Summers” credit already takes into account the
difficult and restrictive circumstances offenders often encounter during
pretrial custody.  In terms of quantifying the Duncan credit, there is
no obligation to do so, although there is nothing wrong with quantifying it: Marshall,
at para. 53.  As explained in Marshall, at paras. 51 - 52, unlike Summers
credit, which is a calculated deduction from an otherwise appropriate sentence,
Duncan credit is but one factor to be considered in arriving at an
appropriate sentence.   Treating it as a quantifiable numerical deduction in all
cases may result in Duncan consideration overwhelming the sentence. Of
course, a sentencing judge must be careful not to treat the Duncan credit
in isolation – it is just one factor, among all of the
aggravating and mitigating factors at play, in determining the appropriate
sentence.
[63]      R.D. spent 242 days in pre-sentence custody at Maplehurst
in relation to the charges on this Indictment.  For this, he should receive a Summers
credit, on a 1.5 to 1 basis, of 363 days.
[64]      A
more complicated assessment is required in respect of any Duncan credit,
due to the persistence of difficult conditions at Maplehurst Correctional Complex
(MCC).
[65]      The
persistence of lockdowns, triple-bunking and unsanitary conditions at MCC has
led to the awarding of Duncan credit in the following reported cases: R.
v. Simeu, 2024 ONSC 5958; R. v. Raja, 2024 ONCJ 456; R. v.
Mitchell, 2024 ONSC 5003; R.v. Sitladeen, 2024 ONSC 4344; R. v.
Rooplal, 2024 ONSC 3729; R. v. Donacien, 2024 ONSC 3573; R. v.
Bleck, 2024 ONSC 3461; R. v. Aiken, 2024 ONCA 326; R. v. Perez,
2024 ONSC 2247; R. v. Vincent, 2024 ONCJ 178; R. v. Hasan, 2023
ONSC 5323; R. v. Cormier, 2023 ONSC 4640; R. v. Singh, 2023 ONSC
4949; R. v. Abraham, 2023 ONSC 4592; R. v. Reid, 2023 ONSC 4452; R.
v. Whetham, 2023 ONCJ 379; R. v. Joseph, 2023 ONCJ 207; R. v.
Solomon, 2023 ONSC 2602; R. v. Dalia, 2023 ONSC 2114; R. v.
Cassanova-Alman, 2023 ONSC 1470; R. v. De La Cruz, 2023 ONSC 314, R.
v. Alvarado, 2022 ONCJ 577; R. v. McIntosh, 2022 ONSC 6437; R. v.
Walters, 2022 ONCJ 484; R. v. Brooks, 2022 ONCJ 242; R. v.
Robertson, 2022 ONCJ 240; R. v. Thomas, 2022 ONCJ 232; R. v.
Doyle, 2022 ONSC 2489; R. v. Dienaar, 2022 ONCJ 196; R. v. Hamas
Khan, 2022 ONSC 410; and R. v. Chang, 2021 ONSC 7954.
[66]      R.D.
spent 242 days in pre-sentence custody at MCC in relation to this case, 274 in
total including his sentence on another matter.  (Crown and Defence are agreed
that the appropriate number for Summers credit regarding his sentencing
in this case is 363). Of these 274 days, he was triple bunked for 262 days (96%
of his time there).  90 days were on full lockdown (a full lockdown means an
inmate will be confined to his cell for the 6.5 hours he would normally be in
the dayroom) and 26 days were in partial lockdown (a partial lockdown means an
inmate was confined to his cell for some part of the 6.5 hours he would normally
be out in the dayroom).  This amounts to 116 days out of 274, or 42% of the
time being on full or partial lockdown.
[67]      The
protracted continuation of lockdowns and overcrowding at MCC, now persisting
past the exceptional circumstance of the COVID-19 pandemic, is no doubt a
complex phenomenon with multiple causal factors not susceptible to a facile
analysis or a quick fix, but the bottom line is this:  it is inhumane and of
grave concern to the Court.  It infringes the dignity of prisoners. It is unworthy
of us as a society.  It derogates substantially from the appropriate standard
of justice in Canada in 2024.  There is a systemic problem, as illustrated by
the large number of cases cited above in which courts have given Duncan
credit arising from conditions at MCC.  Measures to alleviate it are urgently
required as a moral and legal imperative. In R. v. Simeu, 2024 ONSC
5958, at para. 18, Conlan J. stated: “this Court would describe Simeu’s
experience at MCC, overall, as being disgraceful.”  Regretfully, I must echo
that comment in the circumstances of this case.
[68]      In the circumstances of this case, I consider that this
must lead to a substantial Duncan credit.  In calculating this, I have
borne in mind the guidance given in Marshall. It has been one factor
amongst many in my determination of an appropriate global sentence. I have
chosen to express this as a discrete number in my assessment of an appropriate
sentence in order to highlight the seriousness and the importance which the Court
attaches to the issues at MCC.
[69]      R.D.
has been convicted of three counts of Sexual Assault contrary to s. 271 of the Criminal
Code of Canada, three counts of Sexual Interference contrary to s.151 of
the Criminal Code of Canada, and one count of Invitation to Sexual
Touching contrary to s. 152 of the Criminal Code.
[70]      Consistent
with the principle against multiple convictions for the same delict articulated
in R.v. Kienapple, 1974 CanLII 14 (SCC), [1975] 1 S.C.R. 729, which applies
when there is a factual and a legal nexus between the charges, the convictions
in relation to Counts 1,2, and 3, will be conditionally stayed.
[71]      On
each of the fourth, fifth and sixth Counts of the Indictment, for Sexual
Interference, R.D. is sentenced to imprisonment for five years.  On the seventh
Count, Invitation to Sexual Touching, he is sentenced to five years. The
sentences are to run concurrently.  From this there shall be subtracted Summers
credit of 363 days.   For the reasons explained above, a credit of six months Duncan
credit due to harsh conditions of pre-sentence custody at MCC was a factor in
arriving at the determination of the appropriate sentence as five years.   The
effective sentence will thus be 1,825 days - 363 days, for an effective
remaining sentence of 1,462 days, or 4 years and two days, which I will assess
as 4 years.
[72]      As
the offences are primary designated offences, pursuant to s. 487.051 of the Criminal
Code, R.D. shall provide a sample of bodily substances for the purpose of
forensic DNA analysis.
[73]      There
shall be a Sex Offender Information Registration Act Order pursuant to
s. 490.012(1) of the Criminal Code.  The duration of the order shall be
for 20 years.
[74]      There
shall be an Order pursuant to s. 161(1)(a) of the Criminal Code prohibiting
R.D. from attending a public park or swimming pool area where persons under the
age of 16 years are present or can reasonably be expected to be present, or a
daycare centre, schoolground, playground or community centre, for a period of 10
years; pursuant to s. 161(1)(b) prohibiting R.D. from seeking, obtaining or
continuing any employment, whether or not that employment is remunerated, or
becoming a volunteer in any capacity that involves being in a position of trust
or authority towards a person under the age of 16 years for a period of 10
years; and pursuant to s. 161(1)(c) prohibiting R.D. from having any contact –
including communicating electronically by any means – with a person who is
under the age of 16 years, unless the person is a member of his family, for a
period of 10 years.
[75]      During
his incarceration, pursuant to s. 743.21, R.D. is to abstain from
communicating, directly or indirectly, with N.W. or B.W.
[76]      There
shall be a s.109 weapons prohibition Order for 10 years in respect of any
firearm, other than a prohibited firearm or restricted firearm, and any
cross-bow, restricted weapon, ammunition and explosive substance, and for life
in respect of any prohibited firearm, restricted firearm, prohibited weapon,
prohibited device and prohibited ammunition.
[77]      The
Victim Fine Surcharge will be waived.