[1]              
The defendant brings this motion seeking leave
to amend its statement of defence and counterclaim and for an order requiring
the plaintiff to produce a further and better affidavit of documents. The plaintiff
objects to one paragraph of the proposed amended pleading and opposes the
request for a further and better affidavit of documents.
[2]              
For the reasons that follow, the defendant’s
motion to amend the statement of defence and counterclaim to add paragraph 8A is
dismissed. Its motion for a further and better documents is also dismissed.
[3]              
This action arises out of the retainer of the
defendant architectural firm Hariri Pontarini Architects (“HPA”) by the
plaintiff Corey Libfeld in connection the design of his residence in Toronto.
The plaintiff alleges that HPA breached its contract with him, was negligent in
the provision of professional services, and acted in bad faith.
[4]              
This claim was commenced on August 16, 2017. HPA
filed its defence and counterclaim on November 6, 2017. It counterclaims for
unpaid accounts. HPA served a draft affidavit of documents and productions in
mid-June 2018. On consent, the plaintiff amended his statement of claim on
April 25, 2019. In March 2022, Associate Justice Jolley made an order removing
the plaintiff’s former lawyer as lawyer of record. Current counsel for Mr.
Libfeld filed a notice of appointment of lawyer on June 20, 2022. The plaintiff
served his affidavit of documents on November 3, 2022. Oral examinations for
discovery have not taken place.
[5]              
In June 2023, HPA advised it wished to amend its
statement of defence and counterclaim. Mr. Libfeld does not object to the
proposed amendments except for paragraph 8A. Thereafter, HPA brought this
motion for leave to amend its pleading and for a further and better affidavit
of documents.
[6]              
Rule 26.01 of the Rules of Civil Procedure
provides:
[7]              
The applicable principles on motions to amend a
pleading are well-known and have been expressed in a number of decisions of the
Court of Appeal including in Marks v Ottawa (City)[1] where the court said:
[8]              
The third principle, that no amendments should
be allowed which, if originally pleaded, would have been struck, was considered
by Master Graham (as his title then was) in Eisen v Altus Group Ltd. at
paragraph 31:[2]
[9]              
Portions of a pleading that are irrelevant,
argumentative or inserted solely for colour should be struck out as scandalous.
Therefore, leave to make such amendments should be refused.[3]
[10]          
The proposed pleading must be tenable and comply
with the general rules applicable to all pleadings.[4]
[11]          
The proposed paragraph in dispute reads as
follows:
[12]          
Mr. Libfeld takes the position that the proposed
amendment is not tenable and does not comply with the rules of pleading. He
submits that the proposed amendment is not relevant to the performance of the contract
between the plaintiff and defendant which forms the basis of the claims and defences
in this action.  He further submits that the amendment is a matter of
historical fact, atmosphere and colour.
[13]          
HPA submits that Mr. Libfeld has already put
into issue the retention of the two prior architects in paragraphs 6 and 7 of
the statement of claim which states:
[14]          
I agree with the defendant that the reference to
the prior architects in the amended statement of claim is a matter of
background and historical fact. Indeed, the paragraph is the first paragraph
after the heading “Background”.  The statement that the plaintiff had
previously worked with other Toronto architects sets the stage for the
defendant’s retainer by Mr. Libfeld.
[15]          
Paragraphs 6 and 7 of the amended statement of
claim do not put in issue the contracts and relationships that the plaintiff
had with the prior architects. What is put in issue is what Mr. Libfeld said (orally
or in writing) about the prior architects in terms of what he was looking for
in an architect.
[16]          
Paragraphs 8 and 9 of the current statement of defence
and counterclaim also reference the prior architects. Paragraph 8 states in
part that “HPA was wary of the troubled history [the fact that the plaintiff
had previously engaged two prior architects], however Libfeld personally
assured [HPA] that he would follow HPA’s procedures and protocols for an
orderly design process.”  Paragraph 9 states that Libfeld represented to HPA
that he would be a cooperative client and “breakdowns as in the case of his
previous client/ architect relationships, would be avoided.”
[17]          
Proposed paragraph 8A puts in issue the reasons
for the termination of the prior architects, not what Mr. Libfeld said about
the relationships. Whether Mr. Libfeld was correct his characterization of
those relationships and the reasons for termination in communications with HPA
is not relevant to the issues in this litigation. The contracts with the prior
architects are not germane to the plaintiff’s causes of action or HPA’s defences
and counterclaim for unpaid fees.
[18]          
If I permitted the amendment in paragraph 8A,
the door would be opened to litigating the termination of the contracts with
the prior architects. The reasons for the termination of those contracts do not
have any bearing on the rights of the parties in this action and are irrelevant.
The facts alleged in paragraph 8A are immaterial and will have no effect on the
result of the litigation. The proposed amendment has not been shown to be an
issue worthy of trial. It would have been struck out as being irrelevant and
therefore scandalous if contained in the original pleading. Therefore, leave to
amend the statement of defence and counterclaim to include draft paragraph 8A
is refused.
[19]          
The plaintiff also submits that leave to amend
should be refused because of the presumed prejudice to him because of the
plaintiff’s delay in seeking the amendment. Because I deny the amendment for
other reasons, I do not need to deal with this argument.
[20]          
The defendant seeks an order compelling the
plaintiff to produce a further and better affidavit of documents that discloses
all documentation related to the plaintiff’s retainer and termination of the
prior architects.
[21]          
Rule 30.06 of the Rules of Civil Procedure
provides that where the court is satisfied by any evidence that a relevant
document in a party’s possession, control or power may have been omitted from the
party’s affidavit of documents, the court may order the service of a further
and better affidavit of documents.
[22]          
In the recent decision of Stronach v Stronach,[5] Justice Osborne
summarized the test to be applied as follows:
[23]          
HPA submits that Mr. Libfeld’s affidavit of
documents is deficient because it does not disclose any documentation related
to Mr. Libfeld’s retention and termination of the prior architects. It submits
that even if I do not grant the amendment, the productions are relevant by
virtue of the existing pleadings. It points to paragraph 6 of the amended statement
of claim, as well as paragraphs 9 and 11 of HPA’s statement of defence and
counterclaim.
[24]          
I have dealt with paragraph 6 of the amended
statement of claim and paragraph 9 of the statement and defence and
counterclaim above. They do not make relevant Mr. Libfeld’s files with the
other two architects.
[25]          
Paragraph 11 of the statement of defence and
counterclaim gives a list of alleged conduct on the part of Mr. Libfeld which
“fundamentally undermined the client/ architect relationship and led to its
termination” including failing to make timely decisions, demanding design
changes that impacted the schedule, and insisting on illegal design changes. How
Mr. Libfeld conducted himself with regard to the two prior architects is not
relevant to the plaintiff’s conduct during the performance of the contract
between the plaintiff and HPA.
[26]          
In oral argument, Ms. Marrie said that the
proposed files were relevant to Mr. Libfeld’s “course of conduct in dealing
with architects”.  The problem with this submission is that Mr. Libfeld’s
“course of conduct in dealing with architects” is not relevant to the issues in
the litigation.
[27]          
What was said in the conversations or documents between
the plaintiff and defendant about Mr. Libfeld’s expectations of architects by
way of reference to his dealings with the other two prior architects is
relevant and may be explored in discovery, but the files related to the
plaintiff’s retainer and termination of the prior architects are not relevant.
[28]          
The defendant’s motion for leave to amend its
statement of defence and counterclaim is granted only with respect to the
uncontested amendments. Its motion to amend the statement of defence and
counterclaim to include draft paragraph 8A is dismissed and its motion for a further
a further and better affidavit of documents is also dismissed.
[29]          
The parties have agreed that the successful
party is entitled to partial indemnity costs fixed in the sum of $4,000 and
payable within 30 days. As the plaintiff was the successful party, the
defendant shall pay the plaintiff costs in the sum of $4,000 within 30 days of
the release of this endorsement.
[30]          
Finally, I wish to thank both counsel for the
quality of their materials and oral submissions.