[1]              
The defendant seeks summary judgment dismissing the plaintiff’s claim on
the basis of the expiry of a limitation period.
[2]              
The plaintiff was an aspiring accountant. He was a candidate member of
the Certified General Accountants Association of Ontario when the three
separate accounting designations in Ontario (Chartered Accountants, or Cas;
Certified General Accountants, or CGAs; and Certified Management Accountants,
or CMAs) merged their designations and regulatory bodies.
[3]              
There is now a single designation in Ontario, that of Chartered
Professional Accountant (“CPA”), that exists under a single regulator, the
defendant Chartered Professional Accountants of Ontario (“CPAO”).
[4]              
At the time of the merger, the plaintiff had completed most, but not
all, of the steps to become a CGA. He was transitioned into the CPAOs
accreditation process. He was required to complete certain additional courses
and pass the common final examination (“CFE”). Candidates have three chances to
pass the CFE. If they have not passed the CFE after three attempts, the
Registrar of CPAO is mandated under s. 47.5 of CPAO Regulation 9-1 to
deregister the student.
[5]              
The CFE is a three-day examination. Day 1 is evaluated on a stand-alone
basis, while Days 2 and 3 are evaluated together. To successfully pass the CFE,
a candidate must achieve an overall pass on Day 1 and an overall pass on Days
2-3.
[6]              
The first time the plaintiff wrote the CFE, in May 2016, he failed Day 1,
and Days 2 and 3. He wrote the CFE a second time in September 2-17, and again
failed Day 1, and Days 2 and 3.
[7]              
On a third attempt, in September 2019, the plaintiff passed Day 1, but
failed Days 2 and 3. During that examination, there had been technical glitches,
so the CPAO announced that it would not be counted as one of the three
permissible attempts for candidates to pass the CFE.
[8]              
As a result, the plaintiff was eligible to write the CFE a fourth time.
Because he had passed Day 1 in September 2019, he did not have to rewrite it.
In September 2020, he wrote Days 2 and 3 of the CFE for the fourth time, his
last permissible attempt.
[9]              
Days 2 and 3 of the CFE are structured under four levels. Level 1 is an
aggregate score, based on overall sufficiency of competencies demonstrated
through Day 2 and 3. Levels 2, 3, and 4 assess the competencies demonstrated
based on depth and breadth.
[10]          
On November 27, 2020, the plaintiff received his results from Day 2 and
3. He failed level one with a decile ranking of 6, which meant that 50% of the
students who failed Day 2 and 3 scored higher than he did.
[11]          
He passed level 2 overall, but failed the level 2 assessment of “Depth
in Financial Reporting.” He passed all the other competencies assessed in
levels 2, 3 and 4.
[12]          
On the same day he received his results, the plaintiff received a letter
entitled “information for Candidates,” designed to assist students with
interpreting their CFE results. The letter explained the process for requesting
a remark of his exam, but noted that students with a decile ranking of three or
higher were less likely to be successful on a remark.
[13]          
Notwithstanding that advice, the plaintiff requested a remark of his
2020 results on December 11, 2020. On the same day he made enquiries as to
whether an appeal and a remark of his exam results were the same thing. He also
asked if he could submit a letter in support of his remark.
[14]          
The response he received indicated that a remark, or appeal, of the CFE
result, is a separate process from an appeal of the decision to deregister a
student for failing the exam three times. The plaintiff was instructed to
request a remark by December 14, 2020 if that is what he sought. He was advised
to wait until he received confirmation of deregistration, and to appeal that,
if he desired, within thirty days of its receipt.
[15]          
On February 1, 2021, CPAO provided the plaintiff with the results of his
remark, indicating that no change in his grade was warranted.
[16]          
The following day, the plaintiff received an email from the Registrar
confirming that he had been deregistered as a student effective that day in
accordance with s. 47.5 of Regulation 9-1. It indicated that an appeal of the
deregistration decision could be brought within thirty days.
[17]          
The plaintiff commenced an appeal of the deregistration decision, during
which he was represented by counsel. On appeal he sought, among other things, a
full pass for Days 2 and 3 of the CFE, arguing that his Level 1 score and
decile ranking could not be reconciled with his performance on Levels 2, 3 and
4.
[18]          
On June 1, 2021, the Registrar filed submissions indicating that the
deregistration decision was mandated by s. 47.5 of Regulation 9-1, and the
relief sought by the plaintiff was beyond the Registrar’s authority.
[19]          
The plaintiff’s appeal was dismissed on August 16, 2021. The Admission
and Registration Committee (the “ARC”) found that the deregistration decision
was reasonable because s. 47.5 mandated the Registrar to deregister the
plaintiff after his third failure to pass the CFE.
[20]          
On July 23, 2023, the plaintiff commenced this action against CPAO,
arguing misfeasance in public office and breach of fiduciary duty. He pleads
that CPAO acted to falsify and manipulate the plaintiff’s September 2020 CFE
results by modifying his answers, deleting portions of his answers, assigning
inaccurate marks, modifying CPAO’s records to reflect a fail rather than a
pass, and deliberately reducing the plaintiff’s decile ranking to discourage
him from appealing or investigating his results.”
[21]          
He pleads that the 2020 results were “extremely anomalous” given that he
passed Levels 2, 3, and 4, but failed Level 1 and at the 6th decile.
In his affidavit he explains that he was puzzled, and mystified, and could not
understand “how I could possibly have scored passing grades on levels 2, 3, and
4, and yet not only failed level 1, but also been outscored by 50% of the
unsuccessful candidates.”
[22]          
CPAO argues that all of the material facts the plaintiff pleads and on
which he relies were known to him on November 27, 2020, the day he first got
his results from his fourth attempt at the CFE, such that he commenced his
action outside the applicable two-year limitation period. The plaintiff, in his
affidavit, deposes that he had “no knowledge of any of [CPAO’s alleged
wrongdoing] prior to September 2021. He does not explain when he came to know
of the alleged wrongdoing, but denies knowing about it more than two years
prior to the date he commenced his action. He argues that he need do no more,
because the burden rests on the defendant to prove the limitation period
defence, and it has not done so.
[23]          
This motion raises the following issues:
[24]          
For the reasons below, I find that the defendant has proven that the
plaintiff’s action is statute-barred and must be dismissed.
[25]          
The law with respect to summary judgment is set out in Hryniak v.
Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7. There will be no genuine issue requiring a trial when
the process allows the judge to make the necessary findings of fact, apply the
law to the facts, and is a proportionate, more expeditious and less expensive
means to achieve a just result: Hryniak, at para. 49.
[26]          
A party must put its best foot forward on a summary judgment motion: Sweda
Farms Ltd. v. Egg Farmers of Ontario, 2014 ONSC 1200, at para. 33; 2212886
Ontario Inc. v. Obsidian Gorup Inc., 2018 ONCA 670 at para. 49.
[27]          
Summary judgment motions are often brought in connection with limitation
period defences. As the court held in Kamalanathan v. CAMH, 2019 ONSC
56, at para. 42:
[28]          
I am entitled to assume that all the evidence the parties would adduce
at trial on the question of the applicability of the limitation period has been
placed before me: Moshin v. Empire Communities (Mount Pleasant) Ltd.,
2019 ONSC 852, at para. 37.
[29]          
I am satisfied that summary judgment is appropriate in this case. The
record allows me to find the necessary fact and apply the law to those facts to
achieve a just result in a process that will be more expeditious and less
expensive.
[30]          
Section 4 of the Limitations Act, 2002, S.O. 2002, c. 24, Sch. B.
(the “Act”), provides for a two-year basic limitation period.
[31]          
Section 5(1) of the Act prescribes when a claim is discovered. It
provides:
[32]          
Section 5(2) of the Act creates a legislative presumption that a
person with a claim knew of the matters referred to in s. 5(1)(a) on the day the
act or omission on which the claim is based took place, unless the contrary is
proved.
[33]          
“As a result of the presumption under s. 5(2), the limitation period
begins to run on the date of the breach (being the date of the ‘act or
omission’) unless it is proven that the person with the claim did not know of
one or more of the matters set out in s. 5(1)(a), and that a reasonable person
would not have known of those matters”: Apotex Inc. v. Nordion (Canada) Inc.,
2019 ONCA 23, at para. 87.
[34]          
In AssessNet Inc. v. Taylor Leibow Inc., 2023 ONCA 577, the Court
of Appeal held that the expiry of a limitation period is raised by a defendant
as an affirmative defence; it is the defendant who has the burden of proving
that defence: AssessNet, at para. 34. When the issue is raised on a
summary judgment motion, the defendant has the onus of establishing that there
is no genuine issue requiring a trial with respect to the limitation period: AssessNet,
at para. 34.
[35]          
In discharging the burden of proof, a defendant may rely on the
presumption in s. 5(2) that the claim was discovered on the day the act or
omission on which the claim is based took place. In that event, the plaintiff
must rebut the presumption in s. 5(2). To do so, it “need only prove that its
actual discovery of the claim within the meaning of s. 5(1)(a) was not on the
date of the events giving rise to the claim”: AssessNet, at para. 35,
citing, among others, Morrison v. Barzo, 2018 ONCA 979, at para. 31.
[36]          
In Barzo, at para. 31, the Court of Appeal addressed a case where
a plaintiff sought to add a defendant to its action after the apparent expiry
of a limitation period. It identified the evidentiary burden (as distinct from
the legal burden) on a plaintiff as two-fold. It described the first of these
evidentiary burdens as follows:
[37]          
The Court in AssessNet also cited the Court of Appeal’s decision
in Ridel v. Goldberg, 2019 ONCA 636, at para 28. There, the Court of
Appeal noted that to rebut the presumption under s. 5(2), a claimant “may point
to evidence to establish that the claim was ‘discovered’ on a date other than
the date on which the ‘act or omission’ took place.” The presumption is
displaced by the court’s finding as to when the plaintiff subjectively knew he
had a claim against the defendants. The evidentiary threshold to rebut the
presumption is relatively low.
[38]          
The Supreme Court of Canada considered the requisite degree of knowledge
to have discovered a claim in Grant Thornton LLP v. New Brunswick, 2021
SCC 31. At para. 44, the Court held that, in assessing the plaintiff’s state of
knowledge, both direct and circumstantial evidence can be used. A plaintiff
will have constructive knowledge when the evidence shows that the plaintiff
ought to have discovered the material facts by exercising reasonable diligence.
Suspicion may trigger that exercise: Grant Thornton, at para. 44.
[39]          
The Court concluded that a plaintiff must be “able to draw a plausible
inference of liability on the part of the defendant from the material facts
that are actually or constructively known”: Grant Thornton, at para. 45.
[40]          
The degree of knowledge needed to discover a claim is more than mere
suspicion or speculation. At the same time, the standard does not rise so high
as to require certainty of liability. A plaintiff does not need to know the
exact extent or type of harm it has suffered, or the precise cause of its
injury for the limitation period to run: Grant Thornton, at para. 46.
[41]          
The parties agree that the date on which the plaintiff is presumed to
know the matters set out in s. 5(1)(a)(i)-(iv) — that is, the date on which the
act or omission on which the claim is based occurred — is November 27, 2020,
the day on which the plaintiff received his results from the fourth CFE and
learned he had failed.
[42]          
In this case, the defendant relies on the presumption in s. 5(2). The
first question to be answered is therefore whether the plaintiff has rebutted
the presumption that he learned about the act or omission on the day on which
it occurred. To rebut the presumption, the plaintiff must prove that his actual
discovery of the claim within the meaning of s. 5(1)(a) was not on November 27,
2020.
[43]          
The evidence on which the plaintiff relies to rebut the presumption is the
following:
[44]          
I find that this evidence is not sufficient to rebut the presumption in
the Act. I reach this conclusion for the following reasons:
[45]          
The plaintiff has failed to discharge his burden to displace the
presumption. There is no reason to go further to determine when he discovered
his claim. By reason of the presumption in the legislation, he discovered it on
November 27, 2020. Thus, his action, commenced more than two years thereafter,
was commenced out of time unless the limitation period was tolled by virtue of
s. 5(a)(iv) to which I now turn.
[46]          
The question that arises is whether the appeal from the deregistration
decision offered an adequate alternative remedy such that it would have been
premature for the plaintiff to commence an action until the appeal process had
been exhausted. As the Court of Appeal held in Presidential MSH Corporation
v. Marr Foster & Co LLP, 2017 ONCA 325, at para. 29, “it is premature
for a party to bring a court proceeding to seek a remedy if a statutory dispute
resolution process offers an adequate alternative remedy and that process has
not fully run its course or been exhausted.” Similarly, in 407 ETR
Concession Company Limited v. Day, 2016 ONCA 709, at para. 40, the Court of
Appeal held that “in fixing the appropriate date, it may not be enough that the
loss exists and the claim is actionable. If the claim is the kind of claim that
can be remedied by another and more effective method provided for in the
statute, then a civil action will not be appropriate until that other method
has been used.”
[47]          
The problem here is that the deregistration appeal was never an adequate
alternative remedy.
[48]          
The letter to candidates that the plaintiff received on the same day as
his CFE results clearly set out how to request a remark of the exam results. When
the plaintiff enquired as to whether a remark and an appeal were the same
thing, he was advised that there was a difference between the potential to
remark the CFE to change the results, and the potential to appeal from the
decision of the Registrar to deregister a student for having failed the CFE
three times.
[49]          
After receiving the results of the remark, which did not change his
grades, the following day the plaintiff received “Confirmation of Student
Deregistration.” This letter informed him that “as a result of [his] third
unsuccessful attempt at the [CFE], that [he had] been deregistered as a student
with [CPAO].” The letter referenced s. 47.5 of Regulation 9-1, and summarized
it as requiring that “a student shall be deregistered forty-five days following
the release of the result of the student’s third unsuccessful attempt of any
module/exam of the CPA Professional Education Program or [CFE].” Section 47.5
also clearly indicates that the timing for deregistration is 45 days following
release of the third unsuccessful attempt on the CFE or “if an appeal of the
student’s CFE result has been filed, immediately upon the denial of the
appeal.”
[50]          
The letter set out the consequences of deregistration, and explained the
plaintiff’s appeal rights. The appeal referred to is the appeal of the
deregistration decision.
[51]          
The plaintiff appealed the deregistration decision. At the time he did
so, he was aware that the remarking of his exam had not resulted in any change.
The remarking results did not suggest there was any further step that could be
taken to challenge the CFE results.
[52]          
He was also aware that, as a result of his third failure of the CFE, he
was deregistered, and of the consequences of deregistration. He was aware that
his appeal rights were in respect of the deregistration decision.
[53]          
The plaintiff argues that someone in his circumstances and with his
abilities would not find it readily apparent that the ARC did not have the
power to change the CFE result. I pause here to note that someone in the
plaintiff’s circumstances is someone who was represented by counsel, as the
plaintiff was during the appeal. In any event, the confusion the plaintiff
points to is confusion he has created. There is nothing in the communications
from the CPAO nor the regulations that lead to any confusion. Rather, the
communications from the CPAO as early as December 14, 2020 made the two
different processes clear.
[54]          
A successful appeal of the Registrar’s decision to deregister can
restore a student’s registration, but the decision that the plaintiff failed
the CFE was not the Registrar’s decision. It is plain that an appeal of the
Registrar’s decision is not the appeal of the student’s grade, especially when
the student has already been through the remarking process unsuccessfully.
[55]          
Put plainly, when the plaintiff failed the CFE, he was entitled to seek
a remark. The remark attempt did not yield the result the plaintiff wanted. He
had failed the CFE three times; the Registrar was mandated by the Regulations
to deregister him. He was entitled to appeal the deregistration decision, which
could be corrected if there were some kind of error (for example, in
calculating how many attempts he had made at passing the CFE) but the ARC was
never empowered to do more than the Registrar could have done. It could never
have changed the plaintiff’s grade. There was nothing unclear about the process
as set out in the Regulation and in the correspondence from the CPAO.
[56]          
Even if I am wrong, and the limits of ARC’s jurisdiction were unclear to
the plaintiff or his lawyer, then it should have been clarified by June 1,
2021, when the Registrar’s submissions made clear that the Registrar had no
authority to change a candidate’s CFE grade, or grant the other relief sought
by the plaintiff. In any event, if the plaintiff wrongly believed the appeal to
the ARC could resolve his claim, his error does not change the operation of the
limitation period. As the Court of Appeal held in Beniuk v. Leamington
(Municipality), 2020 ONCA 238, at para. 70, “it has always been a principle
of limitations law that a plaintiff knows, or could by the exercise of
reasonable diligence, determine what legal principles apply.”
[57]          
For these reasons, the appeal of the deregistration decision was not a
legally appropriate means to address the plaintiff’s claim. The appeal to the
ARC did not toll the limitation period.
[58]          
Because the limitation period is not tolled by reason of the appeal to
the ARC, and the presumption under s. 5(2) has not been displaced, it follows
that the plaintiff did not commence his claim within the limitation period set
out in s. 4 of the Act. The claim is out of time and must be dismissed.
[59]          
The parties uploaded their bills of costs and costs outlines to Case
Center prior to the hearing of the motion. At the motion, the parties agreed
that I would write my reasons on the merits of this motion and then review
their costs materials and make a determination of costs without any further
submissions. This is the process I have followed.
[60]          
The defendant is the successful party on the motion and is presumptively
entitled to its costs of the motion, and the action. Its bill of costs supports
costs on a partial indemnity scale in the amount of $90,984.53 all inclusive. Of
this amount, just over $12,000 in fees relates to the action, while almost
$66,000 in fees relates to the summary judgment motion.
[61]          
The plaintiff filed his costs outline on the motion. It supports partial
indemnity fees in the amount of $6,278.28 on the motion. A separate bill of
costs filed by the plaintiff supports partial indemnity fees in the amount of
$10,820.88 relating to the action.
[62]          
The three main purposes of modern costs rules are to indemnify
successful litigants for the costs of litigation, to encourage settlement, and
to discourage and sanction inappropriate behaviour by litigants: see Fong v.
Chan (1999), 1999 CanLII 2052 (ON CA), 46 O.R. (3d) 330, at para. 22.
[63]          
Subject to the provisions of an act or the rules of this court, costs
are in the discretion of the court, pursuant to s. 131 of the Courts of
Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43. The court exercises its discretion
considering the factors enumerated in r. 57.01 of the Rules of Civil
Procedure, including the principle of indemnity, the reasonable
expectations of the unsuccessful party, and the complexity and importance of
the issues. Overall, costs must be fair and reasonable: see Boucher v.
Public Accountants Council for the Province of Ontario (2004), 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R. (3d)
291 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 38. A costs award should reflect what the court views
as a fair and reasonable contribution by the unsuccessful party to the
successful party rather than any exact measure of the actual costs to the
successful litigant: see Zesta Engineering Ltd. v. Cloutier (2002), 2002 CanLII 25577 (ON CA), 21 C.C.E.L.
(3d) 161 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 4.
[64]          
With respect to quantum of costs to which the defendant is entitled, I
note the following:
[65]          
In these circumstances, I am prepared to fix the defendant’s costs of
the action and the motion at $15,000 all inclusive, which the plaintiff shall
pay to the defendant within thirty days.
[66]          
For the reasons above, I make the following orders: