[1]              
This is a decision on a motion for summary
judgment, brought by the Children’s Aid Society of Ottawa (“the Society” or
“the CAS”). It pertains to three children, I.G. (11 years old), A.D. (8 years
old) and H.D. (6 years old). The father of I.G. is M.P. and the father of A.D.
and H.D. is Mr. O’Q. The mother of all three children is ND.
[2]              
The Society’s Notice of Motion seeks statutory
findings pursuant to s. 90(2) of the Child, Youth and Family Services Act,
SO 2017, c 14, Sch 1 (“CYFSA”), as well as a finding that the children are in
need of protection and an order that the children be placed with the Maternal
Grandmother, K.B., subject to the supervision of the Society for a period of
six months.
[3]              
Mr. O’Q. did not provide an Answer or Plan of
Care and therefore has not participated in these proceedings.
[4]              
There is no dispute about the parentage findings
for the children. Mr. P. is the father of I.D..  Mr. O’Q. is the father of
children A.D. and H.D..
[5]              
Ms. D. is the mother of all three girls.
[6]              
There has however, been some discussion about
the children’s identification as Inuit.
[7]              
On September 23, 2024, I issued a decision in
which I found that there was a triable issue on the question of whether the
children are First Nations, Inuit or Métis. My decision was based on the fact
that the mother, Ms. D., and the maternal grandmother, Ms. B., had given
contradictory evidence with respect to the children’s ancestral connection to
an Indigenous community. The mother self-identifies as Inuk, but the maternal
grandmother denied any connection to an Inuit community. At that time, I did
not have any information about the children’s self-identification. Therefore, I
exercised my additional powers under subrule 16(6.1) to hold a “mini-trial” on
that issue only to avoid the need to go to a full trial on all issues.
[8]              
The “mini-trial” on the issue of the children’s
First Nations, Inuit or Metis identification was held on October 16, 2024. At
the outset of the mini-trial, counsel for the children, Mr. Pender, indicated
that the parties had all consented to having him present information about the
children’s views. The Ontario Court of Appeal has approved this practice,
provided it is on the consent of all parties.[1]
[9]              
Mr. Pender explained that the children strongly
and consistently self-identify as Inuit. They attend the Innuqatigiit Centre
and participate in activities there. They have had access visits with their
mother at the Innuqatigiit Centre. The children see themselves as Inuit
children.
[10]          
Mr. Pender argued that the children’s
self-identification as Inuit is a material and significant consideration. He
acknowledged that the biological connection to the children’s Inuit ancestry is
somewhat uncertain. However, the legislation does not require blood quantum
proof of Indigenous ancestry.
[11]          
The definition of a First Nations, Inuk or Métis
child is contained in s. 1 of Ontario Regulation 155/18, General Matters Under
the Authority of the Lieutenant Governor in Council under Child, Youth and
Family Services Act, 2017, S.O. 2017, c. 14, Sched. 1. This definition
reads as follows:
[12]          
In the present case, the children’s
identification as Inuit meets the definition under s. 1(a) of the Regulation. I
am mindful of the statements of Justice Bale in CCAS v. M.P. et al.,
2021 ONSC 6788 wherein she joined with other justices in calling for a solid
evidentiary basis before determinations of Indigenous identity are made. As
Justice Bale stated:
[13]          
In this case I find that the children’s
self-identification as Inuit is not “simple” or “casual”. Rather, it is based
on years of participation in cultural and educational activities in the Inuit
community. The children’s self-identification is based on their perception that
they have been included in and accepted by the Inuit community as Inuit
children.
[14]          
Ms. D.’s evidence was that the children have
been accessing services from Innuqatigiit and the Inuit community for many
years. In her affidavit, Ms. D. states that the girls have traditional Inuit
headdresses and a Qulliq (traditional soapstone oil lamp often used in prayer)
at home. They have also learned to speak some Inuktituk at school.
[15]          
Innuqatigiit is not a recognized community for
the purposes of the CYFSA or the statutory findings. However, the Inuit
Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK) community, which is the sole band or community that has
been established on the list of First Nations, Inuk or Métis communities as per
s. 1(b) of Regulation 155/18, was given notice of these proceedings. ITK has
not raised any objections or participated in this matter.
[16]          
I find that the children’s self-identification
as Inuit children is based on their experiences of being treated as such. This
is sufficient, in my view, to meet the definition of “Inuit” under the CYFSA.
As noted by Justice Bale, there is no minimum blood quantum threshold for
determining the legitimacy of self-identification.[3] Therefore, the fact that
there is some uncertainty with respect to the children’s ancestral connection
to an Indigenous community does not rule out a determination that the children
are Inuit children.
[17]          
It should be noted that my finding that the
children are Inuit children is restricted to the definition of “Inuit” under
the CYFSA and does not extend to the children’s rights beyond that legislation
and An Act respecting First Nations, Inuit and Métis children, youth
and families, SC 2019, c 24 ("the Federal Act").
[18]          
On the basis of the evidence and analysis above
I make the following statutory findings:
[19]          
When making a decision on a summary judgment
motion in child protection proceedings the court must be mindful of the
following principles that were set out by the Court of Appeal in Kawartha-Haliburton
Children’s Aid Society v. M.W[4]:
[20]          
As Justice Corthorn noted in The Children’s Aid Society v. S.P. and K.L., 2019 ONSC 5624, the Court of
Appeal has directed
judges on motions for summary judgment in child protection proceedings to undertake
a best interests analysis (paras. 31 and 49).  Above all, a cautious
approach should be taken on motions for summary judgment in child protection
proceedings (paras. 63 and 70-79).  The Court of Appeal described the
requisite approach as “highly cautionary” (para. 74).
[21]          
I have kept these considerations in mind as I
have reviewed the evidence and made determinations in this matter.
[22]          
In early August 2023, through investigation, the
Society verified concerns that the children were being exposed to adult
conflict between the Mother and the Maternal Grandmother, and that the Mother
was allowing the Father unsupervised time with the Children, in breach of his
criminal conditions.
[23]          
Mr. O’Q. was charged by Cornwall Police Service
on or about February 3, 2023, with making sexually explicit material available
to a person under 16 years of age, contrary to s. 171.1(1)(b) of the Criminal
Code. Mr. O’Q. was subject to a number of conditions resulting from the
criminal charges, including the requirement that he not be alone with a child
under the age of 16 unless they are supervised by a person who is aware of his
charges and conditions.
[24]          
On November 6, 2023, Justice Shelston made an
order on a temporary and without prejudice basis, placing all three children in
the care of the mother, Ms. D., subject to the supervision of the Society
pending disposition of the Application, with terms and conditions on the
mother, and father. The conditions required that Ms. D. ensure the children
were never left unsupervised with Mr. O’Q., and that she not be the person to
supervise their time with Mr. O’Q.
[25]          
On November 20, 2023, the Society made the
decision to remove the children to a place of safety based on information it
had received. The Protection Application was amended on November 22, 2023,
seeking a six (6) month Supervision Order to the Maternal Grandmother, K.B.
[26]          
On November 24, 2023, Justice Audet, granted a
temporary without prejudice order placing all three children in the care of
their maternal grandmother, K.B.
[27]          
At present, the Society's main protection
concerns relate to:
[28]          
Ms. D. argues that there are two triable issues
in this case that cannot be resolved by way of summary judgment: (1) are the
children in need of protection; and, (2) is it in the children’s best interests
to be placed with the maternal grandmother, K.B. subject to the Society’s
supervision for six months?
[29]          
Ms. D. states that a trial is needed to
determine these issues because there are credibility determinations that need
to be made in order to properly answer those questions.
[30]          
Ms. D. is ultimately seeking the return of all
three children to her care. She states that she loves the children very much
and is prepared to work with the Society to ensure their safety and well-being.
[31]          
There is no genuine issue requiring a trial if I
can reach a fair and just determination on the merits based on the evidence
before me. The summary judgment process is appropriate where the evidence
provided allows the judge to adjudicate the dispute fairly and justly in a
timely, affordable, and proportionate manner. (Hyrniak v. Mauldin, 2017
SCC 7 at paras 66-67).
[32]          
In this case, I find that the evidence provided
on the motion allows me to adjudicate the dispute fairly and justly. The
Society provided nine affidavits in support of the motion. In addition, M.P., I.D.’s
father, and K.B. both provided affidavits in support of the motion. The
children’s lawyer, Mr. Pender, provided the children’s views and preferences,
which generally supported the Society’s motion, with the exception of
requesting only one visit per week with Ms. D., instead of the two visits
provided for in the Society’s motion. Ms. D. provided an extensive affidavit in
which she detailed her disagreements with the evidence provided in the other
affidavits supporting the motion.
[33]          
The affidavits in support of the motion for
summary judgment contain a number of child statements. These are out of court
statements which, if tendered for the proof of their contents, are hearsay and
therefore prima facie inadmissible. However, I agree with the Society’s
argument that some of the children’s statements are admissible as expressions
of the children’s “state of mind,” which is an exception to the hearsay rule. I
have been careful however, to consider only those statements made by the
children in the moment of the experience.
[34]          
I have also taken into account the children’s
lawyer’s statements about the children’s wishes and preferences. Indeed, s.
74(3) of the CYFSA requires the court to consider the views and preferences of
the children. I have therefore, considered the preferences of the children, as
expressed by their counsel.
[35]          
In her affidavit, Ms. D. states that K.B. has
alienated the children from her by speaking negatively about her to the
children. She states that a trial is needed to determine the truth of the
matter. She does not disagree with all the evidence in the affidavits in
support of the motion, but states that on the key issues of whether the
children are in need of protection and whether it is in their best interests to
be with K.B., credibility will be determinative.
[36]          
The fact that Ms. D. disagrees with the evidence
in the affidavits in support of the motion does not prevent me from arriving at
a just determination on the merits of this case. There is a significant amount
of evidence in support of the motion, and it is consistent, thorough, and
detailed. The weight of this evidence very strongly supports the findings of
fact that I make in the next section of these reasons. Based on those facts, I
have arrived at the conclusion that the three children are in need of
protection and that it is in their best interests to be in their maternal
grandmother’s care for six months under the Society’s supervision. I further
conclude that a minimum of two visits per week between the mother and the
children is in their best interests.
[37]          
There is no dispute that Mr. O’Q. was charged
with sexual offences involving minor children.
[38]          
Mr. O’Q. was court-ordered not to attend Ms. D.’s
residence and not to be unsupervised with the children. Access to the father
was to be supervised by the Society or a third party pre-approved by the
Society, at the discretion of the Society in terms of location, duration,
frequency and level of supervision, in keeping with the children’s wishes and best
interests.
[39]          
Ms. D. states in her affidavit that Mr. O’Q. was
never left alone with the children while in her care. I do not accept this
statement. Ms. D.’s mother, K.B., states in her affidavit that she personally
saw Mr. O’Q. alone with the children on numerous occasions. K.B. lives close to
Ms. D.’s apartment and has seen Mr. O’Q. in the neighbourhood frequently in the
past nine months. On the basis of what she saw, K.B. also believed that Mr.
O’Q. stayed at Ms. D.’s home when the children were there, which he was not
permitted to do. Supervision of his parenting time was to happen with someone
other than Ms. D.
[40]          
K.B. provided a police report from August 26,
2024, in which the police reported that Mr. O’Q. told the police that he often
stays with Ms. D. Mr. O’Q. was taken into custody at that time for uttering
threats and breaching the conditions not to be in contact with Ms. D. and
around the children.
[41]          
Ms. D. states that her mother, K.B., is not
truthful about Mr. O’Q.’s actions. I do not accept this statement. K.B.’s
evidence about Mr. O’Q. was corroborated by other evidence that was presented
on the motion.
[42]          
In October 2023, K.B. and Ms. D. informed Child
Protection Worker Priska Speck that A.D. had allegedly seen Mr. O’Q.
masturbating (“playing with himself”) in the bathroom and that he had not told
her to leave or close the door. There were also additional concerns that Mr.
O’Q. had allegedly been “grooming” A.D. from previous Society involvement. The
Society contacted the Ottawa Police Services (OPS) Sexual Assault and Child
Abuse (“SACA”) Unit with the above concerns on October 27, 2023.
[43]          
Ms. D. did not deny this event in her affidavit
but stated that it occurred prior to the charges being laid against Mr. O’Q.
She also suggested that A.D. may have misunderstood Mr. O’Q. She stated that
she did everything she could to get information about what happened.
[44]          
H.D. and A.D. were each individually interviewed
by OPS Detective Hull on November 1, 2023. Child Protection Worker Portia Gadd
was present during the interviews with the two girls. Both children made
statements in Ms. Gadd’s presence that supported the claim that they were
sometimes alone with Mr. O’Q.
[45]          
On November 20, 2023, Child Protection Workers,
Ryley Freeman and Priska Speck visited Ms. D.’s home. Ryley Freeman observed Mr.
O’Q. leaving Ms. D.’s apartment. The children were present. It was contrary to
the temporary order of Justice Shelston for Mr. O’Q. to be in the home with the
children under Ms. D.’s supervision. The Society had received multiple reports
from various sources including Ottawa Community Housing and Ottawa Police
Services that Mr. O’Q. was with the children alone.
[46]          
As a result, the Society initiated the removal
of the three children to a place of safety, placing them with their maternal
grandmother, K.B.
[47]          
I find as a fact that Ms. D. did leave the
children alone with Mr. O’Q., contrary to the criminal conditions, and she also
permitted them to be with her while Mr. O’Q. was present, contrary to the order
of Justice Shelston dated November 6, 2023.
[48]          
Ms. D. states that she is no longer with Mr.
O’Q. and therefore, there should not be any concerns that he will be with the
children. However, as recently as two months ago, on August 25, 2024, Ms. D.
was out with Mr. O’Q. She ended up passed out on a sidewalk and had to attend
the hospital. Mr. O’Q. was charged that night with uttering threats against K.B.
Ms. D. has very little recollection of the event.
[49]          
In her order of November 24, 2023, Justice Audet
stipulated that the children were to have access to Ms. D. at the discretion of
the Society in keeping with the best interests and wishes of the children, a
minimum of three times a week with the level of supervision and the location to
be determined by the Society.
[50]          
Some of the access visits between Ms. D. and the
three children have gone well, according to the affidavits of the Society
workers. Ms. D. has, at times, been very attentive to the children’s needs
during the visits. However, other visits, particularly those done on short
notice, have not gone well, according to the workers. Ms. D. blames the Society
for those visits, stating that the rooms were not equipped with toys, that
there were miscommunications about the times or that she wanted the visits to
take place in a home.
[51]          
In January 2024, there were a high number of
cancellations of the access visits by Ms. D. The children reported to K.B. and
Society workers that they wondered and worried about whether the visits would
happen each day.
[52]          
Ms. D. states in her affidavit that if she has
missed visits, it has been due to health issues, namely seizures and liver
problems leading to hospitalizations. She states that she is seeing her doctor
regularly to treat her seizures. Ms. D. feels that she is being penalized for
missing visits due to her health problems. However, those health problems are
affecting her ability to attend access visits and ultimately to meet her
parenting obligations. Unfortunately, Ms. D. has not provided any information
about her medical conditions that would allay the concerns about her ability to
safely parent the children.
[53]          
The Society attempted to move the access visits
into the home in early February 2024. However, the Society received feedback
from the school, K.B., the girls, and their lawyer that the girls were not
comfortable with home visits.
[54]          
Ms. D. had difficulty following through on her
visits with the children and as a result, did not have any access between
mid-April and June 2024.
[55]          
During the month of June, several more access
visits were scheduled. The girls sometimes refused to go, and other times went,
and visits were positive with affectionate exchanges between the mother and
children, according to the Society workers who were present.
[56]          
I find that K.B. and the Child Protection
Workers have consistently encouraged the girls to visit their mother, even when
the girls have expressed an unwillingness to attend the visits.
[57]          
The Society has attempted to work with Ms. D. to
address her relationship with the girls and their fears about visiting her and
returning home. She seems to focus a lot of the blame for the situation on
other people and feels she is being treated unfairly. Ms. D.’s own affidavit
speaks to her belief that others are at fault for the situation in which she
presently finds herself.
[58]          
In her affidavit, Ms. D. states that her mother
coaches the children to lie about her and tells them that their mother hates
them. Ms. D. also states that K.B. is in an unstable relationship with a man
who has criminal convictions; he is unsafe around the children. Ms. D. states
that her brother helps care for the children. She states that her brother has a
history of addictions, including overdosing on painkillers. Ms. D. contends
that her brother has needles lying around in his place and he is not a safe
individual for the children to be around.
[59]          
The Society has investigated Ms. D.’s concerns
and does not have any worries with respect to K.B. or her son, who is not
living with her. The Society meets frequently with the children in private to
determine if there are any concerns about the way they have been treated by K.B.,
M.P. and K.B.’s son. There have been no substantiated concerns.
[60]          
Lately, the children have been consistently stating
to their lawyer that they do not want to go back to their mother’s care. In the
past, they have become very emotionally upset at school when faced with a visit
to their mother’s. K.B. has been asked to come and take them home because they
were so upset.
[61]          
Ms. D. has trouble regulating her emotions. She
is sometimes able to control her emotions when she is around the children, but
not consistently. At times, during her visits with the children, Ms. D. has had
prolonged yelling exchanges with I.D. in the other two girls’ presence. She
seems unable to control her emotions and the girls became very upset.
[62]          
Ms. D. has had and continues to have particular
difficulty parenting I.D., whose behaviour can be challenging. Ms. D. has asked
K.B. to care for I.D. for periods of time in the past when she has not felt up
to the task I.D. has been diagnosed with ADHD, a processing delay and anxiety.
[63]          
A series of videos were produced that date back
several years. They were taken by Ms. D. Ms. D. sent the videos to K.B. apparently
to show how difficult I.D.’s behaviour is. In one of the videos, I.D. is seen
begging her mother to stop video-recording her. Ms. D. refuses to do so and
tells I.D. to wait until the police get there. Mr. O’Q. also tells her the
police are coming.
[64]          
In another recording made by Ms. D. of an
interaction between I.D., Ms. D. and Mr. O’Q., Mr. O’Q. states “yeah it’s (the
video) for proof to the other people that it’s not us.” I.D. later says, “yeah
but it is you guys, you both hit me” Ms. D. then states: “nobody’s hitting you
today.” Ms. D. later says, “wait until the police get here.” In yet another
video clip, Ms. D. tells I.D., who is trying to get her to stop recording her,
“If you fuckin’ touch my phone, I’ll smack you.”
[65]          
I find Ms. D.’s behaviour in the videos
involving I.D. to be very concerning. I.D. was clearly in a high state of
emotional distress, yet Ms. D. was doing nothing to calm her down. In fact, Ms.
D. escalated I.D.’s distress by threatening to smack her, claiming that the police
were coming, calling her rude and refusing to stop recording I.D. when it was
clearly upsetting her.
[66]          
Ms. D. responded to the video evidence by
stating in her affidavit that she has never hit I.D. except for spanking her on
the bum over her clothes. She acknowledged that there were better ways for her
to behave but blamed the situation on the lack of resources that were provided
to her at the time to cope with I.D.’s behaviour. I acknowledge that the video
evidence dates back several years. However, the evidence presented on this
motion for summary judgment convinces me that the difficult relationship
between Ms. D. and I.D. continues to this day.
[67]          
Ms. D. has stated that she is willing to go to
counselling with I.D. to improve that relationship. But she has not committed
to getting help for her own emotional dysregulation. She continues to believe
that her difficulties regulating her emotions are caused by other people’s
behaviour. She states that the other people in the children’s lives must also
get counselling and that it will not help if she is the only one forced to get
counselling.
[68]          
The court determines whether a child is “in need
of protection” by applying the criteria in s. 74(2) of the CYFSA. In this case,
the Society’s application alleged that the children are in need of protection
for the following reasons:
[69]          
Under Section 74(2)(b) of the CYFSA, the Society
has the onus to prove, on balance of probabilities, that there is a risk of
physical harm. To prove a risk of physical harm, the Society must prove that
the risk is real and likely, not speculative. It is not necessary for the
Society to prove that the parent intended to cause harm – physical harm can be
caused by neglect or error in judgment. However, the risk must be more than
trifling physical harm. (Children’s Aid Society of Toronto v. E.B., 2018
ONCJ 333 at para 33)
[70]          
In the present case, I conclude that there is a
real risk of physical harm to the children if left in the care of Ms. D. My
conclusion is based on the fact that Ms. D.’s mental and physical health issues
are not sufficiently resolved at this time to ensure that she would not neglect
the children when she is not well. There is a real risk, in my view, that the
children would experience physical harm if Ms. D. were unable to attend to
properly attend to their needs and to protect them from danger.
[71]          
With respect to section 74(2)(d) of the CYFSA,
the Society must prove, on a balance of probabilities that:
[72]          
In the present case, I find, on a balance of
probabilities, that there is a risk of sexual abuse of the children by Mr. O’Q.
[73]          
In January 2023, the Society received an
anonymous call from C.P. School reporting that Ms. D. had told the school
administrator that Mr. O’Q. had raped her. The Child Protection Worker spoke
with Ms. D. who confirmed that there was an incident where Mr. O’Q. had
sexually assaulted her while she was having a seizure, and the children were in
the apartment. Ms. D. called the police and reported the sexual assault and
other abuse. Ms. D. did not deny that this happened in her affidavit.
[74]          
During a subsequent home visit by Child
Protection Worker Priska Speck with K.B. and Ms. D. on January 26, 2023, both K.B.
and Ms. D. expressed concern that Mr. O’Q. may have exposed himself to A.D.
They told Ms. Speck that A.D. had described seeing him naked in the bathroom
and wanting to leave. They expressed concerns that he would spend a lot of time
with A.D. and be very nice to her, but not to H.D. The women discussed and
agreed to a safety plan with Child Protection Worker Priska Speck, which
included calling police if Mr. O’Q. attended the home. Ms. D. did not deny this
event.
[75]          
Ms. D. acknowledged in her affidavit that Mr.
O’Q. may have exposed himself to A.D. and may have allowed her to watch him
masturbate. She stated that A.D. may have misunderstood what Mr. O’Q. was
saying when she saw him masturbating in the bathroom, but I am concerned that Ms.
D. was making excuses for Mr. O’Q.
[76]          
One of the conditions of Mr. O’Q.’s criminal
charges was that he was not to be left alone with children under the age of 16.
Justice Shelston ordered that Ms. D. not be permitted to supervise Mr. O’Q.’s
time with the children. Nevertheless, I find that Ms. D. has permitted Mr. O’Q.
to be in the home with her and the children and she has left the children alone
with Mr. O’Q. She denies this and states that it will not happen in the future
because she is no longer with Mr. O’Q. However, as noted above, Ms. D. has very
recently been with Mr. O’Q. and was found unconscious on the sidewalk.
Therefore, I think there is a high risk that Ms. D. will continue to associate
with Mr. O’Q. and will not protect the children from the risk of sexual abuse
by him.
[77]          
My concern about the risk of sexual abuse by Mr.
O’Q. is all the greater, given Ms. D.’s poor state of health. She suffers from
seizures that render her unconscious and unable to respond. It takes her some
time to recover from a seizure. She alleged that Mr. O’Q. sexually assaulted
her during one of her seizures. The children were apparently present when that
happened. I find there is a serious risk that Ms. D. will not be able to
protect the children from Mr. O’Q. in the event of a seizure.
[78]          
Regarding section 74(2)(h) of the CYFSA,
evidence that the child is merely sad or experiencing some minor emotional
unhappiness in the care of a parent is not sufficient for the Society to meet
its burden of proof that the child is at risk of emotional harm. The evidence
must show on a balance of probabilities that the harm to the child is
“serious.” (Children’s Aid Society of Toronto v. E.B., 2018 ONCJ 333 at
para 4)
[79]          
In the present case, the evidence convinces me
that there is a real risk of emotional harm to the children if they return to Ms.
D.’s care at this time. Ms. D. has, at times, demonstrated that she has the
skills to be an attentive and caring mother. However, she has also demonstrated
poor control over her emotions, a tendency to blame others, including her
children, for her problems and unwillingness to engage with the supports needed
to help her parent better. She has not attended all access visits as required
and as a result, lost her visits for a period of time. She blames her health
conditions for her poor attendance at some of the visits, but there too, Ms. D.
has not provided any reassurances that the children are safe with her in spite
of her seizure and liver problems. Given Ms. D.’s emotional and physical health
problems, I find she is not able to ensure a safe home environment for the
children at this time. There is a risk that she will not be able to care for
the children and they will suffer from emotional neglect.
[80]          
Based on these findings, it would not be in the
children’s best interests to return to Ms. D.’s care at the present time.
[81]          
I turn now to a consideration of whether the
Society’s proposed Plan of placing the children with K.B. for six months under
the Society’s supervision is in the children’s best interests.
[82]          
The paramount purpose of the CYFSA is to promote
the best interests, protection and well-being of children, and accordingly, the
focus of any case must be on the needs and interests of the children.
[83]          
An additional purpose of the Act is to consider
the least disruptive course of action that is available and appropriate in a
particular case to help a child, but only to the extent that they are
consistent with the best interests, protection and well-being of the child.
[84]          
In determining the child's best interests, I must not only
consider the evidence and apply it to the best interests factors set out in section 74(3) of the CYFSA, but I must also have regard to the
Federal Act since the children have been found to be Inuit children.
[85]          
Recently, in FCS v T.W., 2023 ONSC 4050, at paras 53-56,
Justice Fraser provided a helpful analysis of the interplay between the Federal Act and the CYFSA. She stated that the Federal Act
creates an "augmented best interests test for First Nations, Inuit, and
Métis children". In the words of Justice Fraser:
[86]          
The factors that must be considered under s. 10(4) of the Federal
Act are as follows:
[87]          
Section 74(3) of the CYFSA provides several additional factors to
consider in determining the best interests of the child. The factors found in s. 74(3) of the CYFSA that are not included in the Federal
Act are as follows:
[88]          
For the following reasons, I find it is in the
children’s best interests to be placed in the care of their maternal
grandmother, K.B., for a period of six months, under the supervision of the
Society and subject to the conditions set out in the draft order:
[89]          
As noted above, the Federal Act prioritizes placement with the
children’s parents, if it is in the children’s best interests to do so. If not,
the next in order of priority would be a member of the children’s family.
[90]          
K.B. is Ms. D.’s mother. It is not in the
children’s best interests to return to their mother’s care and this time and
therefore, the next best option is the placement of the children with K.B..
This fulfills the prioritization of family placements under the Federal Act.
[91]          
Although K.B. and Ms. D. disagree on whether the
children’s Inuit heritage can be traced through the maternal grandmother, K.B.
has consented to a finding that the children are Inuit. She has demonstrated a
willingness to respect the children’s involvement with the Innuqatigiit Centre.
She is committed to continuing research on the children’s heritage and to
helping them to learn more about their heritage.
[92]          
In addition, K.B. is supportive of the
relationship between the children and their mother, Ms. D., who identifies as
Inuk. As noted above, Ms. D. does not agree that her mother is supportive of
her. However, I find that the evidence establishes that K.B. has encouraged the
children to visit their mother, even when they are reluctant. I accept K.B.’s
statement that she wants the children to be able to return to their mother’s
care, when she is able to provide safe, stable care. I believe that K.B. will
work with the Society towards getting the children back into their mother’s
care when it is safe to do so.
[93]          
Subsection 10(3)(b) of the Federal Act
requires the court to consider the children's needs, given their age and stage
of development, in determining whether their best interests will be met by
placement in K.B.’s temporary care, subject to the Society’s supervision.
[94]          
As noted above, I.D. has special needs. She has been diagnosed
with ADHD, a processing delay and anxiety. She needs stability and
predictability. The other two children also have emotional issues relating to
the upheaval in their young lives. They are seeing a counsellor at Crossroads
Children’s Mental Health Centre. K.B. has brought the
girls to every appointment. She has also made sure that their dental care was
updated, something that had been lacking in Ms. D.’s care.
[95]          
K.B. has a consistent and stable routine with the girls. Their
needs are being met with her. Her apartment is small, but the girls each have
their own bed. K.B.’s plan of care is in the children’s best interests, in my
view. Therefore, I find that this factor weighs in favour of the children
remaining in K.B.’s temporary care.
[96]          
Subsection 10(4)(c) of the Federal Act requires the court to
consider the nature and strength of the children’s relationships with their parents, their care providers and any members of their family
who play an important role in their lives in determining their best interests.
[97]          
I find that Ms. D. undermines the relationships between the
children and their grandmother, K.B., and I.D.’s
father, M.P.. This is not in the children’s best interests. The evidence does
not support Ms. D.’s belief that K.B. and M.P. are harming the children and
alienating them from her. M.P. was candid with the Society about an incident
where he pulled I.D.’s sleeve when she was not listening to him. The Society
has not verified any of the other concerns raised by Ms. D. about K.B. and M.P..
[98]          
The relationship between I.D. and her father is important. M.P.
fears that if the children return to Ms. D.’s care now, she will prevent I.D.
from seeing her father. K.B. also fears that Ms. D. would cut off her contact
with the children. Based on Ms. D.’s statements in her affidavit
that her mother is alienating the children from her, I think it is unlikely
that she would support their relationship with their grandmother. And given Ms.
D.’s negative statements about M.P., I think his fears of losing contact with I.D.
if Ms. D. has full-time care of the children right now are well-founded. Thus,
I find that the analysis of this factor also leads to the conclusion that the
children’s best interests will be better met in K.B.’s care for the time being.
Ms. D. has the power to turn this situation around, should she choose to do so.
[99]          
Subsection 10(3)(e) of the Federal Act requires
the court to consider the children's views and preferences, giving due weight
to the children's age and maturity. The children’s lawyer states that
the children consistently say that they do not wish to live with their mother
at this time; they want to live with K.B. Although the
two youngest children are still quite young (6 and 8 years of age), I.D. is 11
years of age and is able to state her concerns. I.D. does have special needs
that may make it more difficult for her to have a clear understanding of the
situation. However, none of the children have expressed any uncertainty about
wishing to stay with K.B.
[100]      
The children have also stated that they wish to have only one
visit per week with their mother. My understanding is that they
have been disappointed when Ms. D. does not attend the visits. They also
experience anxiety before the visits with their mother and this is hard on
them.
[101]      
However, I note that the access visits with Ms. D. have generally
been going better of late. According to the child protection workers who have
been supervising the visits, Ms. D. has been attentive to the children’s needs,
has been able to redirect them when they are fighting and has been calm around
the children. The children have been expressing affection towards Ms. D.,
holding her hand and sitting closely with her. I find that it is important to
keep this momentum going. While she may not be ready yet to assume full-time
care of the children for the reasons set out in this decision, I find that the
children are building a better rapport with their mother and need to continue
doing so. Having a minimum of two visits per week with her will help to do
that. Those visits can increase if Ms. D. is able to demonstrate consistency in
attendance and in meeting the children’s needs during her visits.
[102]      
Subsection 10(3)(f) of the Federal Act involves a consideration
of the children's care, including care in accordance with the customs and
traditions of the Indigenous group to which the children belong. Subsection
74(3)(c)(vii) of the CYFSA requires the court to
consider the importance of continuity in the children's care and the possible
effect on the children of disruption of that continuity.
[103]      
Ms. D. has shown a commitment to raising
the children in accordance with Inuit customs and traditions. Although K.B.
supports the children’s identification as Inuit, she states that she herself
does not identify as Inuk. As the children’s grandmother, K.B. is providing
continuity of care within the family circle. However, it is in the children’s
best interests to have a strong sense of cultural belonging and continuity of
care within the Inuit community. K.B. has shown a sensitivity to that in
accepting the children’s self-identification.
[104]      
Subsections 10(4)(g) of the Federal Act requires the court to
examine any family violence and its impact on the child, including whether the child is directly or indirectly exposed to the
family violence as well as the physical, emotional and psychological harm or
risk of harm to the child. Subsection 10(4)(g) of the Federal Act requires the
court to consider any civil or criminal proceeding, order,
condition, or measure that is relevant to the safety, security and well-being
of the child.
[105]      
The children have been exposed to the threat of physical violence
by Ms. D. In the videos, which are dated, Ms. D. threatened to smack I.D. In
addition, the children have been exposed to extreme emotional conflict between Ms.
D. and her mother. A.D. may also have been exposed to sexual harm by Mr. O’Q.
[106]      
There may be a risk that remaining in K.B.’s care for six months
will further damage the relationship between K.B. and Ms. D., thereby putting
the children at risk of further exposure to conflict. However, the alternative of being returned to Ms. D.’s care at this
time is not acceptable, given my findings of the children’s need for
protection. I am satisfied that K.B. is committed to ensuring that the children
are protected from all forms of violence, including emotional conflict between
her and Ms. D.
[107]      
Mr. O’Q. is facing criminal prosecution for charges of sexual
offences against a minor. He has shown a tendency to disregard the conditions
arising from those charges and has had unsupervised or improperly supervised
contact with the children. This increases the need for them to be in a
protective environment where the chances are low that they will be in contact
with Mr. O’Q.  K.B. is more likely to provide that protective environment at
this time.
[108]      
Subsection 74(c)(ix) of the CYFSA requires a consideration of the
effects on the children of delays in the disposition of the case. The Society’s
order for the children to remain in K.B.’s care is only for another six months.
Although the children have already been out of their mother’s care for a year,
I find that another six months will not significantly contribute to a
deterioration in their relationship with their mother, provided she is diligent
in attending her visits with them and in working with the Society to increase those visits.
[109]      
Subsection 74(3)(c)(x) of the CYFSA mandates a consideration of
the risk that the child may suffer harm by being removed from, kept away from,
returned to or allowed to remain in the care of a parent. In this case, the
risk of harm from returning the children to their
mother’s care is greater than the risk of keeping them in K.B.’s care for
another six months.
[110]      
Finally, subsection 74(3)(c)(xi) of the CYFSA
requires the court to consider whether the degree of risk that justified the
finding that the children were in need of protection has changed such that it
would be in the children's best interests to vary the final order. In the
present case, I find that the degree of risk to the children has not changed
substantially. Ms. D. continues to have significant health difficulties. She
has not provided evidence of the treatment she is receiving nor committed to
ongoing psychotherapy to deal with her emotional volatility.
[111]      
Ms. D. states that she is no longer in a
relationship with Mr. O’Q. and therefore, the children will not be exposed to
potential sexual interference. However, for the reasons set out above, I am not
convinced that Ms. D. has ended her relationship with Mr. O’Q.
[112]      
Therefore, I find that while her access visits
with the children have been going better, Ms. D. has still not addressed the
issues that created the risks of having the children in her care.
[113]      
The children are in need of protection. It is
not in their best interests to return to Ms. D.’s care at this time. Ms. D.
needs to demonstrate that her mental and physical health are sufficiently
stable that she can consistently meet the children’s needs and that she can
protect them from danger.
[114]      
The Society’s motion for summary judgment is
granted. I make the following Order, pursuant to Rule 16 of the Family Law
Rules, O.Reg. 114/99 as am:
[115]      
I make the following findings pursuant to s. 74(2)(b)(i);
74(2)(b)(ii); 74(2)(d); 74(2)(h) of the CYFSA.
[116]      
I make the following orders, pursuant to s. 101(1)(1) of the CYFSA: