[1]              
This is a decision on an application for a
declaration of a prescriptive right-of-way, as well as damages for nuisance and
interference with the right-of-way in the amount of $25,000.
[2]              
The Applicants, Jane Owen-Brash and Alexander
Brash (the Brash’s) are the owners of 15 Sumac Court, which is a waterfront
property on Faraday Lake, near Bancroft, Ontario. The Brash’s allege that for
many years, they have used a 100-foot path (the 100 ft path) that traverses the
land owned by the Respondents, John and Eileen Sims, (the Sims and the
Property) to access their cottage at 15 Sumac Court.
[3]              
The Brash’s contend that when the Sims took
ownership of the Property in 2018, the 100 ft path was well-established and
accepted as the sole means of accessing the Brash property at 15 Sumac. They
say that despite there being no formal easement or right-of-way registered on
title, no issue with the use of the 100 ft path was raised for decades until
September 2021 when the Sims delivered a "Notice of Trespass" to the Brash’s.
[4]              
Originally, the Brash’s also sought a
prescriptive easement over an additional 1500 feet of walking trails that they
alleged had been openly developed, groomed, used and enjoyed by them and their
family for decades without objection. However, they alleged, on or around July
2022, the Sims (or their agents) effectively destroyed a significant portion of
those trails and rendered their continued use virtually impossible. The Brash’s
withdrew their claim for a prescriptive easement over the walking trails but retained
the claim for damages arising from their loss of enjoyment of the walking
trails. That claim forms part of the Brash’s claim for damages for nuisance and
interference.
[5]              
The Sims’ response to the Application is that
the Brash’s are simply seeking to convert their water access only property to a
road access property, without compensation through trespass. They have had
opportunities in the past to purchase property from the previous owner, Frank
Spena, which would have permitted them to build a road to access their property
at 15 Sumac. In the Sims’ view, the Brash’s failed to avail themselves of these
opportunities and cannot now obtain the right-of-way to the 100 ft path without
providing compensation.
[6]              
The Sims point out that it is a prerequisite to
finding an easement that the Sims (or Mr. Spena) knew or ought to have known of
the alleged use of the land and consented and acquiesced to such use. The Sims
contend that there is no evidence that they or Mr. Spena knew of the alleged
use of the lands. Mr. Spena denied that he knew of the existence of the paths
and his evidence is supported by evidence from other witnesses who were
cross-examined on their affidavits, according to the Sims.
[7]              
It is well established that the threshold for
establishing a prescriptive easement is high, and for the following reasons, I
find that the threshold has not been met in this case. The Brash’s have failed
to establish the basis for a declaration of a prescriptive right-of-way over
the 100 ft path and to prove that they are entitled to damages arising from the
actions taken by the Sims on the Property.
[8]              
At the outset of the hearing on the Application,
the Sims brought a motion to strike two affidavits delivered by the Brash’s
after the completion of cross-examinations. The Brash’s alleged that the
affidavits of Alexander Brash and Terry Twine are necessary to respond to the
affidavit of Wally Scheurer, which was served but later withdrawn by the Sims.
[9]              
For the reasons that follow, I find that the
affidavits of Alexander Brash and Terry Twine are inadmissible. The affidavit
of Wally Scheurer was not filed with the court and therefore does not need to
be formally withdrawn. However, even if the rule regarding the withdrawal of an
affidavit does apply to an unfiled affidavit, I find that it does not apply in
the present case.
[10]          
The Application was commenced by a Notice of
Application issued January 25, 2023. Jane Owen-Brash filed an affidavit, dated
January 25, 2023, in support of the Application. She filed a supplementary
affidavit, dated August 8, 2023.
[11]          
Jane Owen-Brash’s cross-examination took place
on November 20 and 21, 2023.
[12]          
Just prior to Ms. Owen-Brash’s cross-examination,
the Sims, through their lawyer, served the affidavit of Wally Scheurer, sworn
on November 17, 2023. Mr. Scheurer’s affidavit was illegible so on November 20,
2023 at 11:10 a.m., counsel for the Sims served a legible version of Mr.
Scheurer’s affidavit and a number of photographs, as well as emails between
Eileen Sims and a William Schofield, discussing the use of a boat launch across
Faraday Lake.
[13]          
On November 20, 2023, counsel for the Sims
advised that Frank Spena (the former owner of the Sims Property) was very ill
and unable to participate in examinations the next day or in the short or mid
term.
[14]          
The Application was due to be heard on December
11, 2023. However, a case conference was held instead during which Justice
Hurley endorsed a timetable for the delivery of further affidavits and completion
of further cross-examinations.
[15]          
Counsel for the Sims stated that he advised the
Brash’s at the December 11, 2023 case conference that he would not be relying
on the Scheurer affidavit.
[16]          
On December 19, 2023, counsel for the Sims sent
an email repeating that his clients would not be relying on the affidavit of
Wally Scheurer and that it had not, in fact, been filed with the court.
[17]          
On January 11, 2024, through counsel, the Brash’s
delivered the affidavit of Alexander Brash, sworn January 9, 2024 as well as an
affidavit of Terry Twine, sworn January 10, 2024. Terry Twine and his wife
owned 15 Sumac from 1990 to 1998.
[18]          
The Brash’s take issue with the Sims’ withdrawal
of Wally Scheurer’s affidavit. They say that it is a tactical manoeuvre
designed to prevent them from being able to file the affidavits of Terry Twine
(Twine) and Alexander Brash (A. Brash).
[19]          
However, in my view, if the only reason for
filing the affidavits of A. Brash and Terry Twine was to respond to the
information in the Scheurer affidavit then surely the withdrawal of the
Scheurer affidavit would obviate the need for the Twine and A. Brash
affidavits. There should then be no objection by the Brash’s to the withdrawal
of the Scheurer affidavit.
[20]          
The Brash’s continued objection to the withdrawal
of the Scheurer affidavit reveals that they have other reasons for wanting the
Twine and A. Brash affidavits to be admitted. As discussed below, I find that
those reasons do not justify the admission of the Twine and A. Brash
affidavits.
[21]          
The case law provided by the parties on the
withdrawal of affidavits deals with those that have been filed with the court.[1] The Scheurer affidavit
was not filed with the court. Therefore, the case law dealing with withdrawals
does not apply to the present case.
[22]          
I understand the Brash’s frustration over the
fact that the service of the Scheurer affidavit and the other material, whether
it was filed with the court or not, took them off guard and may have taken the
cross-examinations in different directions than they had prepared for. However,
as will be further discussed below, the Brash’s could have refused to proceed
with the cross-examinations, pending a resolution of the late delivery of the
Scheurer affidavit.
[23]          
The rule against the withdrawal of affidavit
evidence is to prevent a party from avoiding cross-examination on the affidavit
for tactical reasons or from altering the court record upon which judicial
directions might have been made.[2]
[24]          
In this case, no such prejudice or harm to the
administration of justice is alleged. The court has not made use of the
Scheurer affidavit and the Brash’s are not alleging that the affidavit was
withdrawn to avoid cross-examination. Therefore, I find that even if the rule
against withdrawal of affidavits applies to affidavits that have not been filed
with the court, it does not apply in the present circumstances.
[25]          
As noted above, the evidence presented in the
Twine and A. Brash affidavits was purportedly provided in response to the
Scheurer affidavit. The Brash’s maintain that they should be admitted even
though they were proffered after the close of cross-examinations and despite
the fact that the Sims have withdrawn the Scheurer affidavit.
[26]          
The situation is governed by r. 39.02(2) of the Rules
of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990 Reg. 194. Rule 39.02(2) states:
[27]          
The legal test for admission of further evidence
after cross-examination under r. 39.02(2) is set out in Catalyst Fund
Limited Partnership II v. IMAX Corporation,[3]:
[28]          
All four criteria should be weighed evenly when
considering the facts of each case in determining whether it is appropriate to
grant leave.[4]
[29]          
There is a tension in the case law regarding the
application of r. 39.02. On the one hand, it has been held that the rule should
be applied in a flexible, contextual manner to ensure a just, timely resolution
of the dispute.[5]
The preference for adjudicating disputes on a full and complete record with all
relevant evidence before the Court is a significant consideration in
assessing whether to exercise discretion to admit new affidavits.[6]
[30]          
On the other hand, some cases reflect a stricter
interpretation of the Rule stating that leave under r. 39.02(2) should be
granted sparingly.[7]
[31]          
In the present case, the evidence is clearly
relevant. However, it is not properly responsive to issues raised in
cross-examination and the Brash’s have not provided an adequate explanation as
to why the evidence in the two affidavits could not have been included in
earlier affidavits. I find that the information provided in the Twine and A.
Brash affidavits is not necessary for a fair resolution of this case.
Furthermore, it would be unfair to permit the Brash’s to present that evidence
after the close of cross-examinations.
[32]          
The Brash’s state that the delivery of the
Affidavit of Wally Scheurer, sworn November 17, 2023, and the unsworn photographs
and emails introduced the following new information, which required a response:
[33]          
The Brash’s also state that the supplementary
affidavits were necessary to respond to the affidavit of Frank Spena, sworn
July 18, 2023, and his unavailability for cross-examination. Frank Spena’s
affidavit was delivered to the Brash’s on July 18, 2023, through counsel.
[34]          
I find that the evidence provided in the
supplementary affidavits is, in part, designed to rehabilitate the evidence Ms.
Brash gave in cross-examination on her affidavit. This is improper. At
paragraph 19 of her affidavit sworn on January 25, 2023, Ms. Brash stated:
[35]          
In her cross-examination, Ms. Brash conceded
that it is possible that the Brash’s could access the shore road allowance from
Ms. Brash’s sister’s property instead of walking through the Sims’ Property. In
answer to the question about using her sister’s property at 13 Sumac to access
her property at 15 Sumac, Ms. Brash stated in cross-examination:
[36]          
Paragraphs 26 to 30 of A. Brash’s affidavit
would seem to be an effort to rehabilitate Ms. Brash’s testimony. The title of
these paragraphs is “Shoreline Allowance Impractical/Impossible to Access”. The
paragraphs in question do not refer to Mr. Scheurer’s affidavit or the
photographs and emails that were provided to the Brash’s on November 20, 2023.
[37]          
Furthermore, Mr. Brash’s affidavit and Terry
Twine’s affidavit deal with issues that were already raised in Ms. Brash’s
January 25, 2023 affidavit and in her supplementary affidavit of August 8,
2023. Thus, these were not new issues raised in Mr. Scheurer’s affidavit and
Mr. Spena’s affidavit. They were issues that could have been discussed in
greater detail in Ms. Brash’s two affidavits that pre-date the
cross-examination.
[38]          
For example, in her affidavit of January 25,
2023. Ms. Brash discussed the historical use of the 100 ft path. She referred
to the use of the paths by the “preceding owners,” who were the Twines. She
also referred to the Twine’s ownership of 15 Sumac Court and use of the 100 ft
trail in her supplementary affidavit. These were not new issues that were
raised in Mr. Scheurer’s affidavit.
[39]          
Similarly, the issue of parking and storage
options at the public boat launch was discussed in Ms. Brash’s supplementary
affidavit. Further detail and pictures could have been provided with that
affidavit.
[40]          
Finally, Ms. Brash responded to Mr. Spena’s
evidence in her supplementary affidavit. Mr. Spena specifically referred to 15
Sumac Court as being a water access property. Therefore, that issue was not
raised only in the Scheurer affidavit and could have been addressed in more
depth by Ms. Brash in her supplementary affidavit.
[41]          
I find that the Brash’s have not therefore,
provided a satisfactory explanation as to why they did not present the impugned
evidence prior to the cross-examinations.
[42]          
Furthermore, it is not in the interests of
justice to permit the Brash’s to file lengthy affidavit material after the
cross-examinations were completed. The principles of finality and fairness
require that I draw the line and refuse admission of this additional material.
[43]          
Undoubtedly, the discovery that Mr. Spena was
not available for cross-examination would have been extremely disappointing for
the Brash’s. However, it was open to them to argue that his evidence should
therefore be given very little weight. That is preferable to giving leave to
the Brash’s to file additional evidence after cross-examinations have been
completed.
[44]          
I recognize that Justice Hurley endorsed a
schedule for the delivery of additional affidavits and cross-examinations on
December 11, 2023. However, in doing so he did not grant his approval for the
filing of additional affidavits by the Brash’s, nor did he make any comment as
to whether the affidavits would be admissible at the hearing.
[45]          
Finally, if the Brash’s were unprepared to
proceed with the cross-examination on November 20, 2023, given the late
delivery of the Scheurer affidavit and the pictures, it was their prerogative
to refuse to proceed. Counsel for the Sims put it on record that if they
proceeded that day, he would oppose any request for additional affidavits to be
filed after the cross-examination. Although the parties finally agreed that Ms.
Brash could file a short three-page responding affidavit to the Scheurer
affidavit, this is not what was done. Rather, the Brash’s filed affidavits from
Mr. Brash and Mr. Twine that were essentially a rehashing of the issues raised
in Ms. Brash’s previous affidavits as well as an attempt to counter the
admission that Ms. Brash made in cross-examination. This cannot be permitted.
[46]          
Mr. Spena, who owned the Property from 1992 to
2018, provided an affidavit, but due to serious health issues, he could not be
cross-examined on that affidavit. The Spena evidence is therefore hearsay evidence.
Given that it does not meet any of the exceptions for hearsay evidence, it must
meet the principled exception to the hearsay rule if it is to be admitted.[8]
[47]          
Under the principled exception, hearsay can be
admitted into evidence when the party tendering it demonstrates that the
evidence meets the twin criteria of necessity and threshold reliability on a
balance of probabilities.[9] The
court must act as a gatekeeper and only admit necessary and sufficiently
reliable hearsay.[10]
[48]          
With regard to the necessity of the evidence,
the party seeking to tender the evidence must demonstrate that it is unable to
obtain evidence of a similar quality from another source.[11] In the present case, I
find that Mr. Spena’s evidence could not have been provided by anyone else. He
is the only person who could give evidence as to his knowledge of and
acquiescence to the use of the 100 ft path on the  Property prior to the
arrival of the Sims, which was relatively recent.
[49]          
With regard to reliability, the fact that Mr.
Spena took an oath and swore that the statements contained in the affidavit
were true is a sufficient guarantee of procedural reliability to meet the test
for threshold reliability.[12]
[50]          
Thus, I find that the Spena affidavit meets the
test for admissibility. However, the question that remains is how much weight
to give to the evidence. The lack of cross-examination makes it more difficult
for me to assess factors relevant to ultimate reliability, namely, Mr. Spena’s
credibility and reliability, including his perception, memory, narration and
sincerity.[13]
[51]          
Nevertheless, I am prepared to give some weight
to Mr. Spena’s affidavit because it is consistent with other evidence presented
in this case.
[52]          
In his affidavit, Mr. Spena stated that he was
very protective of the Property and did not permit people to trespass upon it.
He put up signs and markers to show the boundaries of the Property. Mr. Spena
stated that he did not witness the Brash’s or their relatives walking on the
Property. Mr. Spena further stated that at some point, Ms. Brash’s father, Ken
Querengesser, approached him to purchase some of his land to allow them to
build a legal road. Mr. Spena quoted him a price of $25,000 for the land. Mr.
Querengesser declined the offer because it was too high, according to Mr.
Spena. Mr. Spena also stated that he told Mr. Querengesser that their property
was water access only and that trespassing on Mr. Spena’s property was
prohibited.
[53]          
In their affidavits in support of the Sims’
response to the Application, Dan Bierworth and Steve Campbell stated that Mr.
Spena was very protective of the Property and did not allow people to trespass
without his permission. They stated that they have never witnessed the Brash’s
or Mr. Querengesser walking the paths. In fact, like Mr. Spena, Mr. Bierworth
and Mr. Campbell stated that there were no paths on Mr. Spena’s land. Both
gentlemen stated in their affidavits that it was apparent from their
discussions with the Brash’s that the Brash’s knew they needed Mr. Spena’s
permission to build a road because they did not have a right-of-way over the
land. They both stated that they knew the Brash’s had attempted to purchase
part of the Property to build the road but there was no agreement on the price.
[54]          
Mr. Spena’s affidavit is also consistent with
the statutory declaration that he provided to the Sims upon purchase of the
Property. In that declaration, Mr. Spena stated that he was not aware of any
person who had a claim or interest in the Property that would be adverse to or
inconsistent with registered title.
[55]          
I find that although Mr. Spena’s evidence was
untested through cross-examination, some weight should still be attributed to
it because it is consistent with other evidence provided in this case. However,
I have not relied exclusively on Mr. Spena’s affidavit in my assessment of the
evidence for and against the prescriptive claim made by the Brash’s. I have
given it some weight, but not substantial weight.
[56]          
The following issues are raised in the
Application:
[57]          
A prescriptive easement may be established in
two ways under the Real Property Limitations Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L. 15
(“RPLA”), and a third way pursuant to the doctrine of lost modern
grant.[14]
[58]          
At common law, prescription was based on the
legal fiction that if there were 20 years of uninterrupted use by the owner of
the dominant tenement, it could be presumed that there had been a grant of an
easement and that the grant had been lost.[15]
[59]          
Section 31 of the RPLA sets a 20-year
period or a 40-year period for the creation of prescriptive easements. The
period of alleged prescriptive use is specified to be the period immediately
before the commencement of an action, whereas for an easement created by the
doctrine of lost modern grant, the duration of use does not have to be a
20-year or 40-year period immediately preceding the bringing of an action. [16]
[60]          
To establish a prescriptive easement, the
claimant must demonstrate the continuous, uninterrupted, open and peaceful use
of the land, without objection by the owner.[17]
[61]          
The characteristics of a prescriptive easement
are:
[62]          
The dominant tenement in this case is 15 Sumac
Court and the servient tenement is the Property on which the 100 ft path is
located.
[63]          
In Talukder v. Edward G. Murray Holding
Company Inc., Justice Hooper noted that there are two additional
requirements to establish a prescriptive easement under the RPLA.
Firstly, the use must be uninterrupted, open, peaceful, and without permission
for a twenty-year period prior to conversion to Land Titles.[19] Secondly, the applicant must prove that the usage of this property was
known.[20]
[64]          
The threshold for meeting the criteria for
establishing a prescriptive easement under the RPLA or by lost
modern grant is high, and courts are hesitant to recognize an easement by
prescription.[21] In Henderson
v. Volk, the Court of Appeal for Ontario warned against granting an
easement in the absence of clear evidence of both continuous use and
acquiescence in such use by the owner. [22]
[65]          
Furthermore, the Court of Appeal has urged the
courts to proceed cautiously in finding that an easement exists for the
following reasons:
[66]          
In the present case, the Sims argue that the
Brash’s have not met the burden of establishing a prescriptive easement because
they have not proven that the easement is necessary nor have they proven the
uninterrupted, open and peaceful use of the subject property without permission
for a 20 or 40 year period.
[67]          
To establish a prescriptive easement, the use of
the servient tenement (the 100 ft path on the Sims’ Property) by the dominant
tenement (the Brash property) must be continuous, uninterrupted, open and peaceful.
[68]          
In the 1950s and 1960s, Jane Owen-Brash's
father, Ken Querengesser, began visiting Faraday Lake.
[69]          
Mr. Querengesser established a footpath that
travels approximately 100 feet over the Sims’ Property to a 66-foot-wide
shoreline road allowance and then approximately 515 feet along the shoreline to
the Brash property. The Sims presented evidence that questioned whether any
paths existed on the Sims’ Property, but I find the Brash’s evidence, which
included pictures and videos depicting a well-worn path that meet the
description of the 100 ft path, to be credible.
[70]          
The Sims argued that Ms. Brash would have been
too young to know whether her father had established the 100 ft path in the
1950’s and 1960’s. That may be the case, but it is undisputed that in 1973, Mr.
Querengesser purchased 13 Sumac Court (the Querengesser Mills property), and in
1981, he purchased 15 Sumac Court (the Brash property). The Querengesser Mills
property was approximately 750 feet from the Brash property. I accept the
Brash’s evidence that the 100 ft path was used by Mr. Querengesser and his
family, including Jane Owen-Brash, to access the Brash property from at least
1981. I also accept that in 1990, when the Twines purchased 105 Sumac Court,
they used the 100 ft path to access their “bunky” at 105 Sumac Court. The
Twines were friends of Ms. Brash’s parents, and they visited one and other
using the 100 ft path.
[71]          
In 1999, the Brash’s purchased the Brash
property from the Twine family. On August 8, 2007, Ms. Brash’s sister, Anne
Mills, purchased 13 Sumac Court from Mr. Querengesser. I accept Ms. Brash’s
evidence that she and her sister’s family use the 100 ft path to travel between
the cottages and to access the Brash property at 15 Sumac Court.
[72]          
On May 26, 2008, the Brash property was
converted to Land Titles.
[73]          
I find that there was uninterrupted use of the
100 ft path from at least 1981 until the litigation was commenced in 2023,
which is a period of 42 years. Therefore, the time requirements under s. 31 of
the RPLA have been met.
[74]          
The conduct required to establish continuous use
depends on the type of property. For a cottage property, such as the Brash property,
seasonal or weekend use may be considered consistent.[24]
[75]          
The Sims concede that in the case of seasonal
properties, continuous use on 24 hour/7 days/full year basis is not required.
[76]          
Ms. Brash kept a record of the visits to the
Brash property from 1999 to 2023 in a logbook. The logbook reveals that the
Brash property was typically in use for a total of about a month a year,
although that time was usually broken up into two to six segments. Although a
total of about a month per year is not a lot of use, I find that the Brash’s
continuously used the property over the years.
[77]          
Ms. Brash indicated in her affidavit that the
Twines spent every summer, as well as weekends in late spring and through the
fall, at 15 Sumac Court from 1990 to 1998.
[78]          
Based on this evidence, which was
uncontradicted, I find that the Brash property was in continuous use throughout
the 40 year period. I also find that it was used peacefully.
[79]          
Usage is open if an ordinary diligent owner
would have a reasonable opportunity to become aware of the use of their land.[25]
An applicant must show that the owners of the disputed property knew or ought
to have known of the notorious use of the property over the period in question.[26]
In situations where the owner can readily be taken to know of the notorious use
of their property and no objection is made, their acquiescence to that use of
the property is sufficient to infer and establish a prescriptive title.[27]
[80]          
As this court noted in Carpenter v.
Doull-MacDonald, it is not easy to tell whether there was, in fact,
acquiescence in a particular case. Yet, acquiescence lies at the root of
prescription.[28]
[81]          
In this case, I conclude that Mr. Spena and the
Sims did not have knowledge of the use of the 100 ft path and did not acquiesce
in its use by people at the Brash property. I further find that an ordinary
diligent owner of the Property would not have become aware of the use of the
100 ft path to access the Brash property. My conclusions are based on the
following findings of fact:
[82]          
Another characteristic of a prescriptive
easement is that it must be reasonably necessary. A reasonably necessary
easement will “usually involve a very practical purpose.” The easement rights
must have “utility and benefit” to the dominant tenement (the Brash property),
rather than being ones of “mere recreation and amusement.”[29]
[83]          
In the present case, there are two alternate
means by which the Brash’s could access their property: by boat from the public
boat launch of Faraday Lake; and by foot using the shore allowance path.
However, the Brash’s maintain that neither of those two alternatives are
feasible.
[84]          
The Brash’s maintain that there is no practical
option of accessing their property by boat because the public boat launch on
Faraday Lake does not have any docking capabilities for boats and does not
provide sufficient car parking options to those who wish to utilize it.
[85]          
The Brash’s maintain that theoretically, the
Brash property is accessible from the Querengesser Mills property and then
along the shoreline allowance. However, the part of the shoreline closer to the
Querengesser Mills property is uneven, steep in parts, treed and cannot
accommodate a wide or straight footpath. In her cross-examination, Ms. Brash
admitted that it was possible to access the Brash property using the shoreline
allowance path. She stated that trees would have to be cut and stairs
constructed. However, there are already stairs leading down from the
Querengesser Mills property that could be used. This, of course, would require
that an easement or permission be granted by the Querengesser Mills to make use
of the stairs.
[86]          
The case law establishes that the existence of
an alternate route does not preclude the finding of an easement.[30]
When the proposed alternatives are less convenient and practical than the
proposed easement, the courts may find that the proposed easement significantly
contributes to the normal enjoyment of the dominant tenement beyond mere
recreation and amusement.[31]
[87]          
In this case, the alternatives of boat access
and the shoreline allowance path are less practical and convenient than the 100
ft path. However, there was an alternative that was explored at some point in
the past that I find would have been even more practical and convenient than
using the 100 ft path. That alternative involved the purchase of some of the
Property to construct a legal access road either along the 100 ft path or in
another location.
[88]          
There is a dispute between the parties as to
whether the offer to purchase land from Mr. Spena was for an access road to 15
Sumac Court or for the land at the Point of the Property. Ms. Brash stated in
cross-examination that the discussions with Mr. Spena were not about purchasing
land for an access road. In contrast, Mr. Spena and Mr. Campbell both stated
that the discussions were about an access road to 15 Sumac Court. Mr. Campbell
stated that the Brash’s contacted him regarding a possible road that they
wanted to build from Pine Drive, through Mr. Spena’s land, to their cottage.
Mr. Campbell understood from his discussions with the Brash’s that they had
spoken with Mr. Spena about purchasing the land but could not reach an
agreement with him about the price. Mr. Campbell’s evidence on this point was
not shaken in cross-examination.
[89]          
Mr. Spena stated that after his discussions with
Mr. Querengesser about purchasing land to build a road to access their
property, Alexander Brash approached him with an offer of $1,000 per acre. Mr.
Spena rejected Mr. Brash’s counter-offer and told him that the price of $25,000
was firm and that the Brash property was water access only. Mr. Spena told Mr.
Brash that trespassing on his Property was prohibited.
[90]          
I find that the offer to purchase land was for
an access road to 15 Sumac Court. The evidence of Mr. Campbell is corroborated
by that of Mr. Spena and is uncontradicted.
[91]          
The Brash’s had the opportunity at some point in
the past to purchase the land from Mr. Spena. The purchase of the land from Mr.
Spena would have allowed them to create a legal access road to their property.
They declined that opportunity. The Brash’s cannot now argue that it is
reasonably necessary for them to use the 100 ft path on a gratuitous basis,
when they had the opportunity to obtain the land for fair market value.
[92]          
I find that it would be contrary to the legal
policy considerations set out by the Court of Appeal for Ontario in 1043
Bloor Inc. v. 1714104 Ontario Inc.,[32] to
find that the proposed easement is reasonably necessary, given that a practical
and convenient alternative was offered to them in the past which would have
resulted in a fair and reasonable resolution of this dispute. In 1043 Bloor,
the Court of Appeal stated:
[93]          
I understand that the Brash’s may have believed
that Mr. Spena was demanding an unreasonable price for the land and therefore,
this did not appear to them to be a reasonable alternative at the time.
However, in comparison to the expense and hard feelings generated by litigation
such as this, the option of purchasing the land, even at an elevated price,
should have been viewed as a reasonable alternative to trespassing on Mr.
Spena’s property. Although they may not have previously been aware of Mr.
Spena’s hard line against trespassing on the Property, after their discussions
with him about the purchase of the land, whether it was at the Point or on the
100 ft path, the Brash’s had to know that Mr. Spena did not acquiesce to their
use of his land without compensation. Therefore, the option of purchasing the
land was a more reasonable alternative than trespassing on it.
[94]          
The Brash’s have failed to establish a
prescriptive easement over the 100 ft path. Mr. Spena and the Sims did not have
knowledge of the use of the 100 ft path and did not acquiesce in its use by
people at the Brash property. Furthermore, a reasonably diligent landowner
would not have been aware of the use of the land. Finally, it was not reasonably
necessary for the Brash’s to use the 100 ft path.
[95]          
The Brash’s contend that the Sims have
undertaken extensive roadwork, construction, and tree-clearing projects within
250 feet of the Brash property, which infringe local zoning bylaws and
interfere with their enjoyment of their property and established trail system.
[96]          
The Brash’s state that in February 2021, they
discovered that the Sims had clearcut a large area (approximately 500 metres in
length by 8-10 metres wide) on the Property. In the process, they state, the
Sims destroyed a section of the trail system that the Brash’s and their
predecessors had maintained for decades. They state that additional clearing
and construction work has been completed periodically on the Sims’ Property.
[97]          
Finally, the Brash’s contend that the Sims have been
interfering with their enjoyment of their property by denying them use of the 100
ft path, which is their traditional means of travelling to and from the Brash property.
[98]          
On September 8, 2021, the Applicants received a
Notice of Trespass from the Respondents. At some uncertain point, a "No
Trespassing" sign was placed near the entrance of the 100 ft path.
[99]          
I do not accept that the Sims have prevented the
Brash’s from using the 100 ft path pending the court’s determination of the
easement issue. On the contrary, I accept Ms. Sims’ evidence that they put the
notices up as a safety precaution when they were constructing a road to reach
the point on their land. The road was close to the 100 ft path, and they did
not want anyone using it while the road was being built. The road work required
the clearing of some of the trees on the Property. The Brash’s have otherwise
been permitted to use the 100 ft path.
[100]      
The Sims inquired as to whether they were
required to have a permit to build the road and were told that a permit was not
required since the road is a private road which connects to another private
road.
[101]      
I find that the Sims did not violate any by-laws
or public ordinances in the development and use of their own property. They did
not interfere with the Brash’s enjoyment of their property any more than
creating the usual noise and commotion that happens whenever a neighbour
chooses to build on their own property.
[102]      
The Brash’s have withdrawn their claim to an
easement over the trail system on the Property (with the exception of the 100
ft path). They acknowledge that the trail system is on the Property, which the
Sims now own. They cannot now claim that the Sims have created a nuisance to
them by depriving them of the use of the trail system.
[103]      
The Brash’s claim for damages arising from
nuisance is dismissed.
[104]      
The Application is dismissed in its entirety.
The Sims are presumptively entitled to their costs. I would encourage the
parties to agree to costs, failing which an appointment may be scheduled to
address that issue before me. Five days prior to the scheduled appearance, the
parties are to file short written submissions of no more than three pages
including the Bill of Costs.