[1]                  
Two officers from the London Police Service
attended at the defendants’ home on the morning of February 21, 2022, to
enforce a court order for the return of six-year-old C.M. to the care of her
mother. C.M. had been in the care of her father, the defendant L.M., and her
father’s common law partner, the defendant B.W., for approximately five months,
during a custody dispute with C.M.’s mother.
[2]                  
Police were shocked by the condition in which
they found C.M. that morning. She was in her bedroom, on her bed, laying on her
stomach with an absorbent pad underneath her. The bottom half of her body was unclothed
and exposed. She had obvious burns to her buttocks, low back, and upper thighs.
Police understood that she had not been medically assessed and that she
sustained the injuries about two days earlier. The child was immediately taken
to London Health Sciences Centre by ambulance, where she was admitted for
treatment of partial thickness burns. She was assessed by a physician who
advised the significant burns appeared to have been caused by a substance like
hot water and that the burns were “certainly nonaccidental in origin.” She was
discharged approximately three weeks later into her mother’s care.
[3]                  
The defendants L.M. and B.W. are each charged
with failing to provide the necessaries of life to six-year-old C.M. in
February 2022, thereby endangering her life contrary to s. 215(2)(b) of the Criminal
Code. B.W. is further charged with committing an aggravated assault on C.M.
in February 2022 contrary to s. 268(2) of the Code.
[4]                  
There is no dispute that C.M. was burned and
that the injury occurred while she was in the bathtub of the defendants’ home
in February 2022. At issue is how the burns were caused and the defendants’
subsequent management of her condition. The Crown alleges the defendant B.W.
used hot water on C.M.’s buttocks in an angry outburst and caused significant
burns to C.M.’s behind, low back and upper thighs. The Crown further alleges
that the defendants’ failure to provide medical attention for these burns
reflected a marked departure from what a reasonable parent or caregiver would
have done in the circumstances.
[5]                  
The defendant B.W. submits there is no credible
or reliable evidence that proves beyond a reasonable doubt that she
intentionally caused an injury to the child. She contends there are other
plausible theories and reasonable possibilities to be drawn from the evidence
that are inconsistent with guilt. Both defendants deny they failed to provide
the necessaries of life. They deny that their efforts at home treatment was a
marked departure from what a reasonable parent or caregiver would do in the
circumstances or that it was foreseeable that this would endanger C.M. The
court should use restraint in reviewing their exercise of judgment in the
circumstances at the time. They took steps to manage and monitor her symptoms
and would have taken her to hospital that day but for the coincidental
involvement of the police.
[6]                  
The court heard evidence from now nine-year-old C.M.,
C.M.’s mother, and the police officers who attended at the defendants’ home. Jurisdiction
and identity were admitted. Photographs of the child’s injuries and the
defendants’ home, including the bathtub, were admitted on consent. It was also
agreed that the hot water tank, bathtub, and downstairs faucets in the
defendants’ home were inspected by a qualified plumber, who advised the hot and
cold water were functioning properly and were within normal temperature
settings.
[7]                  
Crown witness Dr. David Warren was under summons
to testify as to his assessment of C.M.’s injuries; however, he was out of the
country at the time of trial. The Crown was unable to obtain reliable
information as to the timing of his return, which gave rise to concerns about a
pending Jordan date. Ultimately, Dr. Warren’s report and the transcript
of his cross-examination at the preliminary hearing held in September 2023, were
admitted on consent subject to redactions.
[8]                  
The Crown also filed L.M.’s voluntary police
statement on consent.  He explained what he knew of how C.M. was burned and the
defendants’ management of her injury. Neither defendant otherwise testified at
trial, nor were they required to do so. They are each presumed innocent of
these charges and are not required to prove a thing.
[9]                  
At the close of the Crown’s case, the defendants
applied for a directed verdict of acquittal on the charge of the failure to
provide the necessaries of life. That application was dismissed with reasons
reported at 2024 ONSC 4549.
[10]              
I will now briefly review the evidence received
at trial before turning to my assessment.
[11]              
C.M. is the child of C.H. and the defendant L.M.
She was born in March 2015 and was about to turn 7 years old at the time of the
material events in February 2022.
[12]              
C.M.’s parents separated in or about December
2020. They initially had an informal agreement to provide for parenting time.
In August 2021, C.M.’s mother, C.H. raised concerns about L.M.’s partner, the
defendant B.W. and withheld C.M. from parenting time with her father for
approximately three weeks. Parenting time resumed in September 2021 after the
Children’s Aid Society made inquiries and addressed the concern.
[13]              
The defendant refused to return C.M. to her
mother’s care after the first visit resumed following child protection
involvement. L.M. told police that C.H. and her mother had made statements that
led him to believe they were seeking to end his involvement in C.M.’s life. For
reasons that are not clear and that I need not resolve, C.M. remained in the
care of her father and B.W. for the next five months, with little contact with
her mother or extended maternal family. L.M. regularly worked outside the house.
B.W. cared for the child, including home schooling C.M. during this time.
[14]              
Nine-year-old C.M. testified at trial from the
CCTV suite on a promise to tell the truth. The Crown relied on her in court
testimony and did not seek to rely on her original police statement as part of
her examination in chief.
[15]              
C.M. remembered that she lived for a while with
her father and B.W., who she knew as her stepmother at the time. C.M. recalled
that she used to have a problem with holding onto her bowel movements and that
she would sometimes have accidents in her underwear. On this occasion, she had
a “skid mark” in her underwear. C.M. said that B.W. got really mad about the
skid mark. B.W. shouted and said some “mean words”. C.M. could see the anger in
B.W.’s eyes. C.M. tried to escape but B.W. made her get into the shower. B.W.
took the shower hose into her hands and told C.M. to turn around. B.W. then
directed the really hot water at C.M.’s backside and told her to “stay there”.
The water was immediately hot from the time B.W. directed it at her backside. C.M.
described that it hurt right away and that she cried from the pain.
[16]              
C.M. admitted that she could reach the faucet in
the bathtub but maintained that she did not touch them because she was not
allowed. She denied burning herself from playing with the taps or the shower
hose. She denied putting her own buttocks under the tap.
[17]              
C.M. recalled B.W. picking what appeared to be
tissue paper pieces away from her buttocks after the shower was over and
realizing that that it was pieces of her skin. Her father was not around at the
time, and she did not see him until later. She remembered overhearing B.W. tell
L.M. not to “freak out” when he checked on her.
[18]              
She remembered that the defendants were really
kind to her afterwards. She could listen to music and play games. She was not
very hungry but could eat meals in bed. They kept her in bed and her father
gave her a cooling pack shaped like a frog and used cool gel and Tylenol for
the pain. She had to stay laying on her front and could not have any clothes or
blankets on her bottom because “fuzzies” would get stuck. She was “wobbly” on
her feet and fell when she tried to walk. She could not get out of the bed. She
demonstrated how she would try to shimmy across the bedroom floor on her
stomach. She would throw a stuffed animal at a camera the defendants had
installed in her bedroom so that she could get their attention for assistance. They
would hold her over the bowl so she could use the toilet. She did not like to
sleep because it hurt more. They did not take her to see a physician. She
remembered that after the ambulance arrived, her father told her she was going
to the hospital.
[19]              
C.H. testified that she obtained an urgent court
order for C.M.’s return to her care on or about February 15, 2022. She was
unsuccessful in securing L.M.’s cooperation and eventually went to the
defendants’ home on the evening of February 20, 2022, around 8:30 pm to get her
daughter. No one answered the door in response to her knocks and she could see
the lights turn out. She called police for assistance to enforce the order. An
officer arranged to meet her next morning to review the court order and take
steps from there.
[20]              
Police Constables Morrow and Mailloux attended
at the defendants’ home on the morning of February 21, 2022, for the purpose of
removing C.M. from the home and returning her to her mother’s care in
accordance with the court order. The defendants asked the officers to speak
with them in the basement of their townhouse. The defendants raised concerns
about C.H.’s parenting capacity. Police called the Children’s Aid Society and
confirmed the child could be placed in her mother’s care.
[21]              
Officer Morrow testified that he was not
initially suspicious to be met with the defendants’ resistance to C.M.’s
removal from their home. Their reactions seemed to be a normal response in the
context of his experience with difficult calls of this nature. The defendants’
dog was barking on the main floor of the house and their request to go to the
basement also made sense. In contrast, Officer Mailloux testified he found the
defendants’ request to go to the basement to be a little odd and that the
defendants seemed intent on changing the subject from the officers’ goal of
enforcing the court order.
[22]              
In any event, Officer Morrow testified he became
suspicious after the initial half-hour of the officers’ attendance in the home.
At that point, the defendant B.W. made an utterance that C.M. had burned
herself and should go to the hospital instead of going to her mother’s house. L.M.
stated that C.M. was bed ridden. Without the officers asking, B.W. also offered
a reason why they had not taken the child to the hospital earlier. She had no
response to the officer’s question as to why C.M. had to go to the hospital now
when the injury was between two and three days old. Officer Mailloux similarly
questioned why the defendants had not previously mentioned the burn and why
they had not sought medical attention earlier.
[23]              
The officers went to C.M.’s bedroom to check her
welfare. Their observations led them to immediately call for an ambulance. They
found her on her bed, unclothed from the waist down, laying on an absorbent pad.
Officer Morrow described her injuries as significant burn marks on her buttocks
down to the tops of her inner thighs. In his words, the burns were the “worst I
have ever seen”. Although he did not notice or recall that the absorbent pad
was soiled at the time, he was concerned to learn she was toileting on the
absorbent pad, which gave him a concern about infection. Officer Mailloux
recalled that the absorbent pad was full of urine, although he did not document
this in his duty book. He described that the child was crying, which the
officer interpreted to be a sign of distress and pain. She was unable to walk
or move from the bed and had to be carried to the stretcher.
[24]              
Officer Morrow was suspicious about the
circumstances of the child’s injury, both because of way in which it was
disclosed by the defendants to the officers and because of the location of the
burns. That the burns were isolated only to the child’s buttock area made no
sense to him.
[25]              
Dr. Warren was qualified at the preliminary
hearing as an expert in pediatric medicine, with a special expertise in
emergency medicine and child maltreatment. On consent, his opinion was received
on that basis at trial.  Dr. Warren assessed C.M. on February 21, 2022 upon her
presentation at hospital. The child was unwilling to divulge details around the
circumstances of her burn at that time. Her burns were localized to the central
lower back, bilateral buttocks, and upper thighs. It was very difficult to date
a burn, but its appearance indicated it occurred several days previous and that
it was caused by a hot fluid, likely water. The absence of burns on her hands
and feet indicated that she did not climb into a hot tub. If she had sat on her
own in a hot water tub there would also have been sparing of the mid buttocks. As
well, one would expect the child would try and climb out of significantly hot
water and would also have burns on their hands and feet. He concluded that a
hot fluid was either poured on the area or that she was held, and her buttocks
were placed in hot water. In any event, he found “These burns certainly
represent a nonaccidental injury.”
[26]              
Dr. Warren explained that a typical scald burn
from fluid such as hot water usually includes the person’s torso or extremities
from pulling something down on to themselves. It was extremely difficult to
envision an area where a person could injure themselves on this area of their
buttocks. In Dr. Warren’s view, the burn was “externally created”, meaning that
another person was involved in creating the burns. While nothing was impossible
in medicine, Dr. Warren could not envision the possibility that a six-year-old
could cause the localized injury to herself with the shower wand spraying water
at maximum heat without also involving her upper torso or back. He would also
expect to see other splash marks on the body. If she had been sitting on the
edge of the tub, he would expect to see burns on her torso and thighs, not only
her buttocks. He thought it implausible that she could balance herself on the
edge of the tub, take the wand which is now conducting hot water and apply it
to only her buttock area and not be burned elsewhere. He did not believe that it
was possible that a six-year-old child would do this to herself or would be
able to cause this injury to herself without splash marks or burns to other
areas of her body.
[27]              
Dr. Warren confirmed that the child was given
pain medication for his physical examination. Dr. Warren explained that the
appearance of eschar or dead skin on the wound surface meant it was not a
recent or acute injury. There was a sparing of her perineal area, suggesting
that she was likely awake and aware of the circumstances of the burn and had
been holding her buttocks together at the time of the injury. Although the wound
had fortunately not involved the vulvar area, she required catheterization
because urination would feel like pouring acid on a burn. The dead tissue or
eschar obscured full assessment of the injury; however, because she reported
significant pain in this area, his initial impression was that she had a deep partial
thickness burn involving the dermis, being the layer below the epidermis. The
risk of infection would be a significant concern because it would be difficult
to keep the area of the perineum and buttocks totally clean in its management.
Over time, it appeared that fortunately none of the burn progressed to full
thickness burns, which would have required more management such as grafting.
She had ongoing almost daily examinations during her hospital admission with
burn clinic follow-up and therapy.
[28]              
The defendant father gave a police statement
under caution several days after the incident, on March 1, 2022. Voluntariness
of the statement was conceded. L.M. said C.M. had a recent history of hurting
herself, such as picking at her nails and that she had been holding her stools
to the point of having accidents in her underwear. He believed the bowel
accidents were intentional. He suspected her mother encouraged the child to do
this when staying with him. He explained that when C.M. soiled herself, the
routine was to instruct C.M. remove her soiled clothing in the bathroom, clean
herself in the bathtub and then rinse out her own clothing.
[29]              
L.M. was confused about the precise date but thought
the injury occurred about one and ½ to two days between when he first saw his
daughter’s injury and the morning that police arrived at his house on February
21, 2022. He had come home from work in the late afternoon. He thought that
C.M. was upstairs and just getting into the bathtub. He went out to buy supper.
When he returned with the food, B.W. told him that C.M. had been crying when
she went to check on her in the bathroom and that the child had been playing
with the taps. B.W. did not think it was a bad burn. It just looked a little
red with what looked like a little blister or tissue paper on her buttocks.
L.M. decided he was not concerned and that C.M. could stay in her room for the
night as discipline for playing with the taps against the rules. He did not go
in to check on her. Later that night, B.W. was upset and told him that she
thought C.M. was burned and that it might be worse than she had thought. L.M.
decided they would look at it in the morning. He first saw his daughter’s
injury the next morning. He thought it was “kinda bad”. It was “red and
bubbly”. He was confused by the injury. The burn looked big and strange, kind
of terrible and there were no burns on her feet. He wondered if she had burned
her buttocks while sitting in the tub and turning on the tap. That was the only
thing he could think of.
[30]              
Nevertheless, he did not take C.M. for medical
assessment and treatment because he thought they would be able to manage it at
home. His reasons for this decision were that they did not see any sign of
infection, that B.W. was in a nursing program at Fanshawe and had previously
worked in a hospital for six years and his online computer research about the
injury. Based upon his research, he thought C.M. had a second-degree burn. He understood
from his online research that: “…you can kind of deal with at home if it’s
not too terrible. And I mean, it was big, but, like, we just put lots of aloe
on it and we were hoping for the best.”
[31]              
L.M. went to a nearby drugstore and bought three
bottles of aloe vera. He described managing C.M.’s injury with applying a lot
of the aloe gel, using an ice pack, and giving her a cool bath. He gave her
Tylenol at the recommended dosage on the bottle. C.M. would cry “here and
there” and he would give her Tylenol or put more aloe gel on it to try and
help. At first, they tried helping her to walk to the bathroom, but it was
hurting her bottom.  They instructed her to urinate in a dustpan because they
did not have a bed pan. They told her just to have bowel movements in the bed
and they would clean her up with wipes.
[32]              
L.M. noticed that the injury appeared to be
worse on the morning that the police arrived at the defendants’ house. She was
crying and in pain. He had decided they would go to the hospital that very day
after breakfast but was trying to think of how to transport her there other
than by ambulance. The police then arrived about the parenting order.
[33]              
I will first review the essential elements of
the offences of aggravated assault and failure to provide the necessaries of
life. I will then provide my findings of fact arising from my assessment of the
evidence on each count.
[34]              
To prove aggravated assault, the Crown must
establish beyond a reasonable doubt that B.W. intentionally applied force to
C.M. and that this force wounded, maimed, disfigured, or endangered the life of
C.M. Counsel did not address consent as an essential element on these facts.
This is appropriate, given the circumstances and the child’s age.
[35]              
While the Crown does not have to prove that B.W.
intended to wound C.M., the Crown does have to prove that a reasonable person
in the circumstances would realize that the hot water would put C.M. at risk of
suffering some kind of bodily harm, although not necessarily serious bodily
harm or the precise kind of harm that she suffered.
[36]              
B.W. raised an issue as to whether the resulting
burn was a “wound” as required by s. 268(1) of the Code.  In R. v.
Pummings, 1995 ABCA 129, one issue on appeal was whether the trial judge
was correct in finding that a “wound” had to break through all three levels of
skin. I do not find that this decision assists the defendant. The court entered
an acquittal on other grounds but commented that had they ordered a new trial,
the trial judge ought to have considered the extent or spread of the burn
injury over the exterior level of the skin in deciding whether the burn was
“wound”.
[37]              
In any event, the Court of Appeal has also
recently made it clear that in Ontario, to “wound” within this section of the Code
means to injure someone in a way that breaks or cuts or pierces or tears the
skin or some part of the person’s body. It must be more than something
trifling, fleeting or minor, such as a scratch:  R. v. Brown, 2021 ONCA
678 at paras. 23-25. In my view, that this resulting burn is a “wound” within
the meaning of the Code is available on this evidence. The photographs amply
demonstrate that this was not a fleeting or minor “scratch”, but an extensive
burn area affecting the skin surfaces on the entirety of the child’s buttocks,
and then areas of her low back and upper thighs, with peeling, blistering,
swelling and redness. This is also consistent with Dr. Warren’s opinion.
[38]              
The issue on this count accordingly turns on
whether the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that B.W. intentionally
sprayed or applied hot water to C.M.’s body, and if so, if this happened in
circumstances where a reasonable person would realize it would put the child at
risk of suffering some kind of bodily harm. It therefore comes down to whether
the incident in the bathroom took place as alleged by C.M.
[39]              
There is no dispute that s. 215(1) of the Code
puts the defendants under a legal duty to provide the necessaries of life to
C.M.: L.M. as the child’s parent and B.W. given the child’s age and her role as
the child’s caregiver. On this indictment, the Crown must prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that each defendant’s failure to provide C.M. the necessaries
of life “endangered” the life of C.M.
[40]              
The phrase the “necessaries of life” is not
defined in the Code. A “necessary” is something which, if not provided by the
parent or caregiver, will result in harm to the child’s health or safety:  R.
v. C.O., 2022 ONCA 103 at para. 49. Medical attention is a necessary of
life within the meaning of s. 215(1) of the Code:  R. v. S.J.,
2015 ONCA 97 at para. 52.
[41]              
My reasons on the directed verdict application
already considered what is required to establish that a defendant’s breach of
this duty “endangers” the life of the person to whom the duty is owed. That
analysis continues to apply and will not be repeated herein:  R. v. L.M.,
2024 ONSC 4549. In summary, “endangers” means exposing someone to danger, harm
or risk but does not connote actual injury or damage:  R. v. R.P., 2004
CanLII 47791 (ON SC) at para 38. This is consistent with the Oxford English
Dictionary definition of “endangers”:  to put someone or something at risk
or in danger.
[42]              
The Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that the defendants’ failure to get medical treatment for C.M. in the course of
one and one-half to two days following the injury was a “marked departure” from
what a reasonably prudent parent or caregiver would do in the circumstances: R.
v. Alexander, 2011 ONSC 980 at para 60. The section is aimed at
establishing a uniform minimum level of care to be provided. It does not
purport to prescribe parenting or caregiving techniques but does serve to set
the floor for the provision of necessaries. The section punishes a marked
departure from the conduct of a reasonably prudent person in circumstances
where it was objectively foreseeable that the failure to provide the
necessaries of life would lead to a risk of danger to the life of the child. The
effects of a negligent failure to perform the duty will be as serious as an
intentional refusal to perform the duty:  R. v. Naglik, 1993 CanLII 64 (SCC), [1993] 3 S.C.R. 122
at p 141-142.
[43]              
I will first consider the alleged aggravated
assault and then the alleged failure to provide the necessaries of life as it
relates to each defendant’s situation.
[44]              
As with most trials, the court heard evidence
from which it is impermissible to make findings. This includes the child’s
statements about other disciplinary conduct by one or both defendants which
could be construed as bad character and the father’s evidence as to
out-of-court statements by the co-accused, B.W. As I will explain, this
evidence played a limited role in understanding the child’s narrative and in
assessing the father’s response to the child’s injury as he understood it.
However, it otherwise plays no role and receives no weight in my analysis.
[45]              
I accept that C.M.’s evidence establishes that
the defendant B.W. intentionally caused her burn injury beyond a reasonable
doubt. She did this through the intentional application of hot water to the
child’s buttocks as punishment or in anger. In reaching this conclusion, I rely
upon the following:
[46]              
I have carefully considered the defendant’s
contention that it remains possible that there are other reasonable
explanations for C.M.’s injury that arise from the circumstantial evidence that
are inconsistent with the hot water being intentionally used on the child. The
defendant notes that Dr. Warren was not available to testify at trial. While he
rejected a few alternative scenarios as being consistent with an injury caused
by the child, he allowed that anything was possible and so it follows, in the
defendant’s submission, that there are other possible scenarios that remain
unaddressed. There is a gap in the evidence from which it would be unreasonable
to infer that the only explanation for the injury is an intentional act by B.W.
I do not agree. No other plausible theories or reasonable possibilities that
are inconsistent with B.W.’s role in applying hot water on the child’s
posterior area arise on the whole of this evidence. The child was unshaken in
her testimony that the hot water was sprayed on her after the defendant was angry
and said loud and really mean words about her soiling her underwear.
[47]              
Several alternative theories were put to the
physician during the preliminary hearing. He noted the absence of burns to the
hands and feet, the absence of splash marks, and the localized injury in an
area that would have been hard for the child to reach with a shower wand
without involving other parts of her body. He repeatedly noted it was unlikely
a child would intentionally expose themselves to that type of burn. He
explained it was extremely difficult to envision that a person could cause a localized
scalding injury to this area of the body without another person creating them.
While he allowed that “anything is possible” in medicine, he maintained that
only the most implausible of circumstances would see the child harming herself
in this manner. I agree. His theory of the mechanism of nonaccidental injury is
consistent with the child’s evidence. I note the witness arrived at this theory
based upon his experience and the features of the child’s injury. The child
herself was not prepared at the time to discuss the incident with him at the
time he assessed her.
[48]              
I must then consider whether the Crown has
proven beyond a reasonable doubt that a reasonable person in the circumstances
would realize that the hot water would put C.M. at risk of suffering some kind
of bodily harm, although not necessarily serious bodily harm or the precise
kind of harm that she suffered. I find that the Crown has proven this for the
following reasons:
[49]              
The Crown has therefore proven count 2 on the
indictment beyond a reasonable doubt.
[50]              
I now turn to whether the Crown has proven the
charge of failure to provide the necessaries of life as against each defendant.
I will first consider whether the evidence demonstrates a marked departure from
the conduct of a reasonably prudent parent or caregiver in the circumstances as
it relates to L.M. and then as it relates to B.W. Depending on this
determination, I will then consider whether it was objectively foreseeable that
this conduct “endangered” C.M.’s life within the meaning of the offence.
[51]              
L.M. told police that he researched the injury
and thought he would be able to treat it at home. He also relied on B.W.’s
experience. He conceded the burn looked worse on the morning of February 21, 2022,
and had already planned to take her to the hospital. Considering L.M.’s
exculpatory statements, and the modified objective standard for the mens rea
of this offence, I will need to consider whether I accept his evidence and
whether, on the basis of it, I have a reasonable doubt about whether the Crown
has satisfied any one of the essential elements required to prove that L.M.
failed to provide the necessaries. Even if I do not accept his evidence, if,
after considering it alone or in conjunction with the other evidence, I have a
reasonable doubt whether the Crown has satisfied any one of the elements
required to prove he failed to provide the necessaries of life, I must find
L.M. not guilty:  R. v. Ibrahim, at paras. 61-64.
[52]              
I agree with the defendants’ submissions that
the issue of when a dependent should be taken for medical treatment is a matter
of degree. We accept that parents and those with similar legal duties are not
required by law to rush a child under their charge to medical attention
whenever sickness or the prospect of injury arises. An error in judgment or a
failing on the part of a parent or caregiver in accessing medical attention for
a person in a position of dependency not amounting to a marked departure from
the relevant standard attracted by the circumstances does not attract
liability. A range of discretion is accorded to a parent respecting the
discharge of the duty to provide medical attention to a child but is
constrained by the minimum threshold of the marked departure standard:  R.P.
at paras. 34, 35.
[53]              
However, circumstances may arise where a parent
should seek out a precautionary medical examination. The child’s observable
symptoms by a parent or caregiver may recommend resort to medical professionals
for assistance and treatment. A triggering incident or event may itself be of
such a nature as to reasonably raise the prospect of serious and permanent
endangerment of health and demand that a person be assessed to rule out serious
injury or to receive treatment. When the gravity of the potential harm is
great, there can be endangerment, even where the risk of harm is slight:  R.P.
at para. 36.
[54]              
I accept that L.M. was unaware of the cause of
the injury and was also initially unaware of its extent. However, by his own
admission he knew it was “kinda bad” or “terrible” looking from the moment he
first saw it with his own eyes the morning after he understood it occurred.
While it may not have formed the appearance with dead skin or eschar as when
she was later found by the officers and Dr. Warren, L.M. conceded it was big
and strange and red and bubbly when he first saw it. His explanation that his
research informed him that he could treat the injury at home was unconvincing
and lacked clarity. He could only say that he learned that you could “kind of
deal with at home” if it was not “too terrible”. His plan was to “hope for the
best”. However, the burn was over large area of her buttocks, and he knew it
was “kinda bad”. Hope was not a reasonable plan in these circumstances,
particularly where he recognized that the injury looked, in his words, “terrible”.
[55]              
It is arguable that the size and location of the
burn, and his questions about how it could have happened ought to have prompted
immediate medical attention at least when he first saw it. I will give him the
benefit of the doubt on the fact that he did not check his daughter on the
first evening and even when he first saw the injury and accept that it may be
reasonable for a parent in those circumstances to use their judgment to initially
try home treatment. However, as he gathered more information about his child’s
situation over the course of that day and even the day following, as he
remembers, he knew that the child was incapacitated, in pain despite Tylenol
and the profuse use of aloe gel and unable to move from her bed to the point
that he resorted to having her toilet on the bed. When these circumstances are
considered along with his confusion about the cause of the injury and his recognition
of its size and potential severity, I find that a reasonably prudent parent in
those circumstances, gaining more awareness of the seriousness of the
situation, would have opted to seek medical treatment once he had a fuller
appreciation of the situation after his initial assessment of the injury. He
may have initially thought that the injury was minor and insignificant. That
impression ought to have changed once he saw the injury and his daughter’s
symptoms. Her condition demanded continual reassessment. He knew he was dealing
with a mysterious and large injury that was causing his daughter considerable
pain and limitation. These circumstances called for precautionary medical
treatment.
[56]              
The photographs of the child’s injuries do not
demonstrate superficial wounds. These images demonstrate that the officers’
reaction to what they saw in the bedroom was not an overreaction or
melodramatic. At its highest, the father can only say the wound did not
initially look as bad as what the pictures later showed. However, through his
own words he still acknowledges the wound was remarkable for its size, redness
and blistering, and that it was “bad” and “terrible”.
[57]              
He previously did not hesitate to bring his
daughter for medical assessment for far less concerns. He volunteered in his
police statement that he had just recently taken C.M. to a walk-in clinic for a
suspected yeast infection.  In contrast, in these circumstances, the father
made an irresponsible decision to persist with his strategy of “hoping for the
best” in the face of a “kinda bad” and “large and strange” burn, ultimately resorting
to have his daughter toilet into a dustpan or onto an absorbent pad while
laying on her bed. Would a reasonable parent resort to such desperate toileting
measures for a child in pain with open wounds without seeking medical attention?
I find the answer is “no”. This is a marked departure from the conduct of a
reasonably prudent parent in those circumstances.
[58]              
I do not accept that he was about to take C.M.
to the hospital when the police coincidentally arrived. I allow that L.M. might
have been struggling with this eventuality given his observations of his daughter’s
symptoms, but I find no support on this record that he had already actively
determined on this plan of action when the police came to his door. The
defendant submits that C.M. herself agreed that he told her that morning that
they would go to the doctor after they had breakfast. I have carefully reviewed
this testimony. I find no such corroboration. When this was first put to C.M.
she answered that her father saw the ambulance and said she was going to the
hospital today. When pressed to agree that she overheard the defendants
discussing a plan to take her to the doctor that day, she denied this and said
they did not want to take her to the doctor. When she was again asked this question,
she answered that she forgot.
[59]              
I also make note of the police officers’
testimony as to how their attendance at the defendants’ home unfolded. I allow
that L.M. would be apprehensive about the police presence, given the custodial
conflict; however, I otherwise share the officers’ skepticism about the timing
of the disclosure of the injury on this visit. If L.M. had already decided to
take her but was just trying to figure out how to transport her without an
ambulance, why would he not ask the police for assistance? The defendants
suggested I should entirely reject the testimony of Officer Mailloux as being
unfair and biased. I do not agree. Both officers may have had a different
timing of onset of suspicion, but they shared similar suspicions and concerns
about the child’s welfare when they first understood the child was bed ridden
and needed medical attention after about a half-hour was spent in persuading
the defendants to cooperate in getting C.M. ready to return to her mother.
[60]              
From a consideration of the totality of the
evidence, I find that L.M. did not take his daughter for medical treatment
because of concerns about how such an injury occurring on his watch might
affect his ongoing custody conflict with her mother. He minimized the severity
of the injury and was reckless to the risks it posed for his daughter’s health
and safety. It is the only reasonable conclusion that can be drawn from the
whole of the evidence after considering other reasonable possibilities that are
inconsistent with a marked departure. His efforts persisted through to attempting
to dissuade the police from acting on the court order. Even at the time of his
police statement he was preoccupied by his beliefs about the mother’s
motivations, suggesting that the mother told C.M. to have bowel accidents in
her underwear. He subordinated his daughter’s welfare to his own personal
priorities. I neither accept his evidence nor am I left in reasonable doubt as
to whether the Crown has satisfied me that his conduct was a marked departure.
[61]              
The general principles that guide consideration
as to when a parent or caregiver should take a child for medical assessment
apply with equal force for B.W. Unlike with L.M., I have no direct evidence
from B.W. as to an explanation for her conduct in failing to take the child for
medical treatment.
[62]              
Nevertheless, I find that the Crown has also
proven beyond a reasonable doubt that B.W.’s failure to seek medical attention
for C.M. was a marked departure from the conduct of a reasonably prudent caregiver
in the same circumstances.
[63]              
I have already explained that I accept from
C.M.’s testimony that B.W. caused the injury with hot water that she
intentionally applied directly to the child’s buttock area. Unlike L.M. this
defendant had immediate and direct knowledge as to the circumstances of the burn.
[64]              
B.W. was present with L.M. throughout the time
that home treatment was attempted. She would have seen how the injury
developed. C.M.’s testimony referred to both L.M. and B.W. attending to her in
her bedroom, being kind to her, bathing her, bringing her food and
entertainment, and helping her with toileting and self-care. As with L.M., I
will allow that B.W. may have reasonably thought the injury was minor on her
initial assessment. However, she was then faced with further signs that this
injury had potential severity requiring medical intervention. B.W. had the same
opportunities as L.M. to see the burn with her own eyes and its effect on the
child as I have just reviewed. Those same findings I have made regarding L.M.’s
failures to act apply to this defendant with equal force and need not be
repeated. B.W. would know about the appearance and extent of the wound, the child’s
pain, limitations, and vulnerabilities, yet she participated in the home
treatment and did not take steps to take the six-year-old for medical
treatment.
[65]              
The police’s suspicions about the defendants’
behaviour and the timing of disclosure also applied to both L.M. and B.W. B.W.
was present for the discussion and debate with the officers about returning the
child to her mother. She made the utterance that C.M. was “bed ridden”, which prompted
the officers to make further inquiries about the child’s welfare and why she
had not gone to hospital before then.
[66]              
Considering the totality of the evidence, I find
that B.W. did not take steps to arrange for medical treatment because she knew
the burn was suspicious and would attract scrutiny with a risk for criminal
consequences. Like L.M. she subordinated the child’s welfare to her own
personal priorities. Again, I find this is the only reasonable inference that
can be drawn from the whole of the evidence after considering other plausible
possibilities that are inconsistent with her conduct being a marked departure. In
explaining his decision-making and management of the child’s condition at home,
I note that L.M. repeatedly referred to “we” or B.W. being part of those
activities. To the extent that L.M.’s exculpatory reasoning for delaying
medical treatment are shared by B.W., for the reasons already explained, I
neither accept that evidence nor am I left in reasonable doubt as to whether
the Crown has satisfied me that her conduct was a marked departure.
[67]              
For these reasons, I find that B.W.’s failure to
cause earlier medical treatment for C.M. was a marked departure from the
conduct of a reasonably prudent caregiver in the circumstances.
[68]              
I also find the Crown has proven beyond a
reasonable doubt that it was objectively foreseeable for each defendant that
the failure to obtain timely medical treatment endangered the child’s life. As
previously noted, both the common definition and the meaning of this term
within this offence are understood to mean exposing someone to danger, harm or
risk:  R. v. Thornton, (1991), 1991 CanLII 7212 (ON CA), 3 C.R. (4th) 381 (ON CA) at 389, aff’d
1993 CanLII 95 (SCC), [1993] 2 S.C.R. 445; R. v. Letourneau, 2007 CanLII 345 (ONSC) at para.
94; R v. R.P., 2004 CanLII 47791 (ONSC) at para. 38.
[69]              
The following evidence supports the conclusion
that it was objectively foreseeable in the circumstances that the failure to
provide the necessaries of life through the timely provision of medical
treatment endangered C.M.’s life through exposing her to danger, harm, or risk:
[70]              
The totality of these conditions and circumstances are such that they
posed a danger, harm or risk for the child that was objectively foreseeable.
[71]              
I therefore find that it is proven beyond a reasonable
doubt that it was objectively foreseeable for both defendants that the failure
to provide the necessaries of life through the timely provision of medical
treatment endangered C.M.’s life.
[72]              
For these reasons, I find that the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable
doubt that the defendants failed to provide C.M. with the necessaries of life
and that B.W. committed an aggravated assault on C.M.  I find both defendants
guilty on Count 1 of the indictment and B.W. guilty on Count 2 of the
indictment.