[1]         This is a motion to strike out the Amended Statement of Claim (“Amended Claim” or “Amended Statement of Claim”) the in this action.  The motion is brought by two groups of Defendants.  The first group consists of 54 Non-Governmental Defendants.  The second group consists of His Majesty the King in Right of Ontario, Ontario Premier Doug Ford, former Minister of Health Christine Elliot, current Minister of Health Sylvia Jones, and Minister of Long-Term Care Paul Calandra.
[2]         The action against the governmental entities was presumptively stayed due to the application of s. 17(2) of the Crown Liability and Proceedings Act (“CLPA”).[1]  Ontario waived the presumptive stay.
[3]         The action is brought by 473 plaintiffs.  The plaintiffs complain that a directive issued by the government of Ontario to healthcare facilities in Ontario in response to the Covid-19 pandemic led to the suspension or termination of their employment because they refused to be vaccinated against the Covid-19 virus.  In addition, the plaintiffs object more generally to measures the government of Ontario took in response to the Covid-19 pandemic.  The plaintiffs say that the directive and other measures breach their Charter rights, breach various forms of legislation, amount to misfeasance of public office, conspiracy, intimidation, and intentional infliction of mental anguish.
[4]         The Defendants move to strike the Claim for want of jurisdiction, abuse of process and failing to disclose a reasonable cause of action.  For the reasons set out below, I strike the Amended Statement of Claim in its entirety for each of those grounds with leave to amend in accordance with these reasons.  In addition, I grant the Plaintiff Beth Ann Dick leave to amend her statement of claim in the form attached as Exhibit “B” to her affidavit sworn August 7, 2024.
[5]         A defendant may move under Rule 21.01(3)(a) to have an action dismissed on the ground that the Court has no jurisdiction over the subject matter of the action.[2]
[6]         The Defendants submit that the court has no jurisdiction over the claims of 387 Plaintiffs because they are unionized employees who are subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the grievance and arbitration procedures set out in their collective agreements.
[7]         In addition, the Defendants submit that the court lacks jurisdiction over the claims of eight additional plaintiffs whose claims relate to hospital privileges because such claims are subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the arbitral regime set out in the Public Hospitals Act.[3]
[8]         Section 48 (1) of the Ontario Labour Relations Act[4]  provides that:
[9]         Courts have interpreted that provision, and its counterparts in other provinces, broadly to preclude court actions relating to claims that arise under a collective agreement and to restrict the remedies available in such cases to those that the collective agreement contains.[6]
[10]      The Supreme Court of Canada has made clear on numerous occasions that provisions like s. 48(1) give labour arbitrators “exclusive jurisdiction” over disputes that expressly or inferentially arise out of a collective agreement.  When determining whether a particular dispute falls within section 48 (1) the Supreme Court of Canada has stated that the decision-maker must examine the factual context of the dispute and determine whether “its essential character concerns the subject matter that is covered by the collective agreement”:[7]
[11]      The Supreme Court of Canada has similarly emphasized that in conducting this analysis, the court ought not to be tied to the legal characterization that the plaintiffs have placed on their claims.  Rather, it is the “essential” character of the dispute that matters:
[12]      As a result, the simple fact that a claim is pleaded in tort does not mean that a court will have jurisdiction if its essential character arises out of the employment relationship.  Thus, in New Brunswick v O’Leary, the Supreme Court of Canada held unanimously that the labour arbitrator had jurisdiction over tort claims if they arise out of the collective agreement:
[13]      The plaintiffs’ core complaint is that their employment was suspended or terminated as a result of their employer’s COVID-19 vaccination policy.  Suspension and termination are core elements within the jurisdiction of labour arbitrators under the labour relations regime.  The fact that the plaintiffs also go on to characterize their claims as ones for conspiracy, intimidation, intentional infliction of mental anguish and breach of the Charter does not change the analysis.  All of those complaints remain rooted in the employment relationship and its suspension and termination.[11]
[14]      In National Organized Workers Union v. Sinai Health System,[12] the Ontario Court of Appeal made clear that alleged harms inflicted on employees by their employers’ Covid-19 policies are properly the subject of grievance proceedings:
[15]      That the claims of the unionized employees belong in the grievance regime under the Labour Relations Act is further demonstrated by the fact that 270 policy, group, or individual grievances have been filed on behalf of the unionized Plaintiffs.
[16]      In addition, the collective agreements at issue here, like most collective agreements, contain provisions that are known as management rights clauses.  Management rights clauses give management the right to establish, alter and enforce reasonable rules and regulations to be observed by employees provided that such rules and regulations are not inconsistent with the provisions of the collective agreement.  This provides further support for the fact that the implementation of Directive 6 by the Defendants arises out of the collective agreement because it relates to the management rights clause in each agreement.
[17]      In my view, the Amended Claim clearly arises out of the “interpretation, application, administration or alleged violation of” the collective agreements at issue.  The fundamental issue in the Amended Claim against the 54 Non-Governmental Defendants is whether they had the right to suspend or terminate the unionized Plaintiffs.  Rights to suspend or terminate employment or not to have one’s employment suspended or terminated go to the very heart of the employment relationship and the collective agreement.  The adjudication of those rights belongs before an arbitrator, not a court, other than on judicial review.
[18]      The Plaintiffs represented by Mr. Galati[14] raise a number of responses to this.
[19]      First, they argue that that they need access to the courts because they are seeking relief under the Charter, including a declaration, which the Plaintiffs say arbitrators have no jurisdiction to grant.  I am unable to accept that submission.  The Supreme Court of Canada stated clearly in Weber v. Ontario Hydro,[15] that arbitrators do have the power to grant declarations, under the Charter.[16]
[20]      Next, the plaintiffs argue that the courts have never excluded tort actions simply because there was a collective agreement.  I agree.  That is not, however, what the Defendants are saying.  A collective agreement does not exclude tort actions if the tort does not arise out of the “interpretation, application, administration or alleged violation” of the collective agreement.  Here again the issue is not how the Plaintiffs characterize their claim but what the essential character of the claim is.
[21]      Next, the Plaintiffs argue in their factum:
[22]      This misses the point.  A sexual assault does not arise out of the “interpretation, application, administration or alleged violation” of the collective agreement.  The essential character of a claim for sexual assault is just that, a claim for sexual assault.  Its essential character has nothing to do with the employment relationship.  As the Supreme Court noted in Weber:
[23]      Finally, on this point, the Plaintiffs say that the gravamen of their case is not about wrongful dismissal but about a violation of Charter rights as a result of a government directive.  The directive at issue is known as Directive # 6 (“Directive 6”).
[24]      Directive 6 was issued by the Ministry of Health on August 17, 2021 and was revoked on March 14, 2022.  It required health organizations, including the Non-Governmental Defendants, to develop and implement COVID-19 vaccination policies.   Directive 6 did not set out consequences for refusing to be vaccinated.
[25]      The simple answer to characterizing the claim as being about Directive 6 is that it does not matter.  That would still mean that the issue arises out of the employment relationship because the policies promulgated under Directive 6 are workplace policies.  Moreover, the Court of Appeal for Ontario has already determined that issues arising under Directive 6 are issues that arise out of a collective agreement and are subject to the grievance procedure of the labour relations regime rather than to actions in court.[18]
[26]      Eight Plaintiffs,[19] seven physicians and one midwife, bring claims related to their privileges to work at certain hospitals.   The Non-Governmental Defendants submit that the court has no jurisdiction to hear those claims because they are subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the governing body of the respective hospitals and the Health Professionals Appeal and Review Board (“HPARB”) as set out in the Public Hospitals Act.[20]
[27]      The Public Hospitals Act sets out a comprehensive code for granting and revoking hospital privileges.[21]  The Act requires the Board of each hospital to create a Medical Advisory Committee.  The Medical Advisory Committee is charged with making recommendations to the hospital Board about granting and revoking hospital privileges.[22]  The person subject to any such recommendation is entitled to notice of the recommendation and can request written reasons for it.  The person subject to any such recommendation is also entitled to a hearing before the hospital Board with respect to any such recommendation and Board decision.
[28]      If the subject of a Board decision is not satisfied with it, they have a right of appeal to the Health Professionals Appeal and Review Board (“HPARB”), an independent administrative tribunal.  Decisions of HPARB are then subject to judicial review to the Divisional Court.[23]
[29]      In Beiko v Hotel Dieu Hospital St Catherine’s, Morawetz J. (as he then was) conducted a detailed review of these procedures and their relationship to court proceedings:
[30]      The Plaintiffs’ principal response to the issue of jurisdiction in relation to the health professionals is that the Supreme Court of Canada held in Canada (Attorney General) v. TeleZone Inc.[25]  that judicial review does not preclude an action for damages.
[31]      On my reading, TeleZone is more nuanced than that.  The essence of the analysis in TeleZone was that the simple existence of a judicial review regime did not automatically preclude actions for damages but that:
[32]      The legislature has established a detailed scheme to accord and revoke hospital privileges.  There is good reason for that.  Those decisions involve technical, scientific evaluations of an individual’s skill set as well as strategic considerations within a particular hospital.  Courts are less well-equipped to deal with those issues than are hospital Boards and the HPARB.
[33]      TeleZone is further distinguishable on its facts.  In TeleZone, the plaintiff had applied for a personal communication services license in response to a statement by Industry Canada that it would issue up to six licenses on the basis of certain criteria.  TeleZone submitted an application which met all of the criteria.  Industry Canada then issued only four licenses from which TeleZone was excluded.  TeleZone commenced an action in the Ontario Superior Court of Justice for breach of contract, negligence and unjust enrichment claiming losses of $250 million.  It claimed that it was an express or implied term of Industry Canada’s policy statement that it would issue fewer than six licenses only if fewer than six applications met the criteria.  The Federal Government challenged the jurisdiction of the Superior Court on the ground that the claim constituted a collateral attack on the decision which was barred by s. 18 of the Federal Courts Act which grants the Federal Court exclusive jurisdiction for judicial review of decisions of federal boards, commissions, or tribunals.  The Superior Court dismissed the objection.  The Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court of Canada upheld.  The Supreme Court focused on the fact that s. 17 of the Federal Courts Act granted concurrent jurisdiction to the provincial superior courts with respect to claims against the Federal Crown.  The Supreme Court interpreted the grant of exclusive jurisdiction to judicially review federal decision-makers in s. 18 of the Federal Courts Act as an exception to the more comprehensive grant of concurrent jurisdiction which should therefore be strictly construed.  The Court also noted that judicial reviews before the Federal Court had to be brought within 30 days but that actions of the sort that TeleZone brought could not necessarily be commenced within 30 days because the civil cause of action may not have emerged within that short time frame.  The court analysed the plaintiff’s pleading and concluded that it pleaded all of the elements of a private cause of action and was dominated by private law considerations.  Finally, the Court concluded that TeleZone’s action was not attempting to nullify or set aside a decision, nor did it try to remove the legal effect of the decision.
[34]      The Plaintiffs’ action here is not subject to any of those considerations.  It does not involve the interpretation of concurrent jurisdiction of courts.  It does not involve a private cause of action.  There is no private right to have or retain hospital privileges.  That is a public right governed by a particular statutory regime.  On the face of the Amended Statement of Claim, the claims of these eight individuals are clearly based on the revocation of their privileges and their request that those privileges be reinstated.[27] In doing so, the Plaintiffs are asking the court to nullify a decision that is subject to a well-thought-out regulatory regime.  That, to use the language of the Supreme Court in Telezone, is “a claim for judicial review with only a thin pretence to a private wrong.”  Indeed, given the nature of the regulatory regime, the Plaintiffs can never get to damages for the revocation of privileges until the revocation is set aside on judicial review.
[35]      The Plaintiffs further rely on Solgi v College of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan,[28] where the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal allowed a claim by a physician for the allegedly wrongful suspension of his licensing process.  In doing so, the Court noted that Solgi was not seeking to set aside the decision of the College of Physicians and Surgeons.  Rather, he was content to let the decision stand but was suing for damages.  The Court of Appeal went on to note that
[36]      As noted above, the claim of the eight healthcare professionals is different.  They want to nullify the decision that was made and want to have their privileges reinstated.  That is a matter for judicial review.
[37]      To the extent that the Plaintiffs argue that the regime created by the Public Hospital Act does not address their Charter rights, I disagree.  In Gill v. Health Professions Appeal and Review Board,[29] the Divisional Court reviewed a decision of the HPARB which expressly considered the applicant’s Charter rights and in which the Divisional Court affirmed the correctness of the Board’s analysis of those Charter rights.
[38]      The Defendants submit that the action constitutes an abuse of process because:
[39]      I find in favour of the Defendants on each of these submissions.
[40]      This is a claim by 473 different plaintiffs against 59 separate healthcare and government entities.
[41]      Although actions can be consolidated when doing so would lead to greater efficiency in the use of  the Court’s time and resources, this is generally done where the actions appear to have questions of law or fact in common or where they claim relief arising out of the same transaction or series of transactions or occurrences.[30]  An overarching principle in determining whether to consolidate is to determine whether consolidation would achieve the just, most expeditious and least expensive determination of the proceedings in accordance with Rule 1.04.
[42]      In my view, this case does not meet any of those tests.  As pleaded, the action would allow what are effectively 473 individual actions to proceed as one claim. Even if the unionized employees and healthcare professionals are removed, that would still leave 78 separate claims being heard together.
[43]      The claims are essentially wrongful dismissal claims arising out of the suspension and/or termination of the Plaintiffs’ employment for refusing to adhere to their employer’s vaccine policies. Determining whether an employer was within its rights in dismissing an individual employee will require the court to analyse and balance the facts of each case.  By way of example, in each individual case the court may have to consider:
[44]      Aggregating 473 such cases together does not make trying them easier but makes doing so entirely impractical.
[45]      Geography is a further factor militating against consolidation.  Although the Action was commenced in Toronto, the vast majority of the Plaintiffs and Non-Governmental Defendants are located outside of Toronto.  Locations range from Thunder Bay to Windsor and from Windsor to Kingston.  Here too, consolidation will hinder the convenient administration of justice.
[46]      In Action4Canada v British Columbia (Attorney General),[32] the British Columbia Supreme Court dealt with a similar (albeit 391 page) statement of claim prepared by the Plaintiffs’ lawyer in this case in relation to Covid-19 measures which it struck out in its entirety stating:
[47]      Similarly, in Adelberg v. Canada,[33] the Federal Court struck out another statement of claim drafted by the Plaintiffs’ lawyer in this case in relation to federal covid policies saying:
[48]      The Amended Statement of Claim is characterized by the same problems.  It is 58 pages long, and contains a nine page prayer for relief.  It makes allegations of conspiracy, seeks rulings on issues of science and alleges criminal conduct, including crimes against humanity.  For example, it asks the court to declare that the policies of the Ontario government in response to Covid-19:
[49]      The Amended Statement of Claim is, at best, unusually drafted.  A statement of claim is supposed to contain material facts on which the action is based.  The Amended Statement of Claim contains few material facts about the employment of any of the 473 plaintiffs or the circumstances of their suspension or termination.  Mr. Galati explained in oral argument that if the claim contained such facts, it would run into the hundreds of pages and would be challenged as unwieldly.  That perhaps speaks to the advisability of pleading this as a consolidated claim.
[50]      As set out in greater detail below, the allegations of conspiracy in relation to what the plaintiffs say was a manufactured pandemic are untenable.  Numerous courts in Ontario have taken judicial notice of the Covid-19 pandemic.  In R v Morgan, the Ontario Court of Appeal stated:
[51]      Similarly, in R v Rajan, the Court stated that “proof with respect to many COVID-19 factual issues, including the importance of physical distancing, is quintessentially a matter for judicial notice. No evidence need be tendered”.[35]
[52]      The Ontario Court of Appeal has noted that the doctrine of abuse of process is, among other things, aimed at preventing legal proceedings from being misused for improper purposes.[36]  In doing so it quoted from Blair J.A. in dissent in Foy v. Foy (No. 2), saying:
[53]      I have the distinct impression from reading the Amended Claim as a whole that its object is not to vindicate the employment rights of the plaintiffs so much as it is to mount a political crusade in which the court will be used as a grandstand to conduct an inquiry into the effectiveness of vaccines and the effectiveness of government measures in response to the Covid-19 pandemic by opponents of those measures.  Although there may well be room for that sort of inquiry in the appropriate case, in circumstances where a worldwide pandemic was declared by the World Health Organization and in which governments of all stripes around the world took draconian public health measures to prevent the spread of Covid-19, this is not a case in which it would be appropriate for the court to wade in and determine for itself whether, and if so, what,  public health measures were necessary.  Public health measures are a matter of policy.  They depend not only on the science of a particular disease and its spread but also on the resources of the health system and its ability to treat certain levels of illness.  Public health policy is generally for the government to determine unless there is some credible argument to the effect that the government was misusing public health measures.  Had Ontario taken steps that were fundamentally out of line with what other jurisdictions around the world were doing, the plaintiffs might have a more credible argument in this regard.  Given that Ontario reflected a mainstream of scientific thought, it does seem frivolous and vexatious to be embarking on an inquiry that focuses not on the individual circumstances facing the plaintiffs but that focusses on whether public health measures were based on fraudulent testing and  amounted to crimes against humanity.
[54]      In oral argument Mr. Galati responded to this critique of his approach by saying: “Today’s science is tomorrow’s disproved theory.”  While that is no doubt often the case and while there may be a legitimate debate about whether public health measures could have been more effective; that inquiry is better conducted in the form of a “lessons learned” inquiry by responsible scientists and public health authorities than it is in this action.
[55]      A further indicator of the frivolous and vexatious nature of the action as pleaded is the difficulty of discerning which allegations are made against which Defendants.  By way of example, paragraph 37 of the Amended Statement of Claim states:
[56]      Does this mean that each of the 50 to Non-Governmental Defendants is alleged to have made such a claim and to have made it falsely?  The Amended Statement of Claim is replete with broad statements of that nature from which no one defendant could determine whether it is the subject of that allegation or not.
[57]      The Amended Claim names one Jane Doe and two John Does as Plaintiffs.   They are said to have been employed by Hotel Dieu Grace, Quinte Healthcare and Unity Healthcare Toronto.  Given the specifics of the employer, one would think that those employees could be identified.  There is no basis advanced in the Amended Statement of Claim for identifying those plaintiffs by a pseudonym.
[58]      Unidentified Plaintiffs cause particular concern here because a number of the identified Plaintiffs do not appear to have been employed by the Defendants at the relevant time.  The Plaintiffs Jennifer Correia, Clayton Lewis, and Jacqueline Watson are identified as having been employees of the William Osler Health System.   Jennifer Correia and Clayton Lewis do not appear to have ever been employed by that organization.  Jacqueline Watson was has not been employed by the William Osler Health System since 2007.  Any claims by those Plaintiffs against the William Osler Health System must therefore be struck out.
[59]      Given the absence of any pleaded grounds for using pseudonyms rather than real names, I also strike out the claims of Jane Doe and the two John Does.
[60]      The principles surrounding the striking of a statement of claim for disclosing no reasonable cause of action are well known and are not in dispute on this motion:
[61]      By way of summary, I am satisfied that the Amended Claim should be struck out in its entirety.  It does not plead material facts to support its various causes of action. It pleads bald allegations without material facts. Critical elements of many of the alleged torts are not pleaded.  The Amended Statement of Claim alleges a number of intentional torts.  Plaintiffs must provide full particulars in support of allegations involving malice or intent.[43] The Ontario Court of Appeal has held that claims involving malice must “meet a stringent standard of particularity.”[44]  Despite these requirements, the claim provides no material facts to support these claims, let alone the full particulars required to establish liability in tort.  I turn then to the particular causes of action that have been pleaded.
[62]      In Normart Management Ltd. v. West Hill redevelopment Co. Ltd.,[45] the Court of Appeal for Ontario adopted the following test to plead conspiracy:
[63]      This test has been and continues to be widely followed.[47]
[64]      Paragraph 54 of the Amended Statement of Claim alleges that the Defendants “are engaging in the tort of conspiracy”.  It continues stating:
[65]      The claim continues in paragraph 55 to demonstrate the conspiracy by stating:
[66]      That paragraph is illogical.  The bald allegation that certain measures allegedly breach the Charter and a number of statutes does not establish a the conspiracy and is not a substitute for pleading the particulars of a conspiracy.
[67]      The claim does not describe the relationship of the alleged conspirators to each other, does not refer to any alleged agreement between the parties, does not refer to the acts that led to such an agreement and does not refer to the acts of each alleged conspirator in furtherance of the conspiracy.
[68]      Paragraph 54 of the claim states:
[69]      It strains all credulity to accept that the Premier of Ontario, a number cabinet ministers and 54 Non-Governmental Defendants somehow conspired to concoct a plan to declare a “false pandemic” all for the predominant purpose of harming the plaintiffs.  The outlandish nature of that allegation becomes even more obvious when one considers that the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a to be a pandemic on March 11, 2020, and Ontario declared an emergency on March 17, 2020 as did governments of a variety of political stripes in a large number of industrial democracies.
[70]      For the conspiracy allegation to succeed, the plaintiffs would have to prove that the predominant purpose of any Covid measures the Ontario government took was not to protect public health and safety but to harm the Plaintiffs in this action.  The allegation becomes still more impossible to establish given that a number of courts have taken judicial notice of the Covid-19 pandemic.[48]
[71]      To assert a successful claim for intimidation, the Plaintiffs must prove that:
[72]      The Plaintiffs’ claim does not allege that the Plaintiffs complied with the Defendants’ demands.  Indeed, the whole basis of the Plaintiffs’ claim is that they did not comply with public health measures and therefore suffered harm.  In that light the Plaintiffs could not have been intimidated. As a result of that alone the claims for intimidation must be struck out.
[73]      In addition, the Plaintiffs have not pled any facts regarding the Defendants’ intent to injure the Plaintiffs.  I accept that those facts may sometimes be difficult to ascertain given that a plaintiff is not always privy to evidence of intention.  On the facts of this case, however, it is important to plead facts surrounding intention for the same reason that it is important to plead specific facts to demonstrate a predominant purpose to injure for the conspiracy claims.  It is simply so unlikely on the facts of this case that the Defendants had any intention to harm the Plaintiffs as opposed to having an intention to safeguard public health and safety that the claim should be struck out in the absence of pleaded facts.
[74]      The tort of intentional infliction of mental suffering comprises three elements which a plaintiff must plead:
[75]      Here too the claim must fail because of the lack of material facts to demonstrate that the Defendants acted for the purpose of harming the Plaintiffs as opposed to acting to protect public health and welfare.
[76]      In addition, the Plaintiffs’ claim for intentional infliction of mental anguish is based on the allegation that:
[77]      The allegedly reckless act is therefore the imposition of “illegal and unconstitutional vaccine mandates and passports.” As noted later in these reasons, those mandates have been held to be legal and constitutional.
[78]      As a result to the foregoing, I am satisfied that it is plain and obvious that the allegations concerning conspiracy, intimidation and intentional infliction of mental anguish do not disclose a reasonable cause of action and must be struck out.
[79]      The Non-Governmental Defendants submit that the Charter applies to only 7 of their 54 members.[51]  The remaining 47 Defendants are private entities.  The issue arises because s. 32 of the Charter provides that it applies to the Parliament and government of Canada[52] and to the legislature and government of each province in respect of all matters within the authority of Parliament or the legislature of each province respectively.  The question then becomes: What constitutes government?
[80]      In Eldridge v. British Columbia (Attorney General)[53] the Supreme Court of Canada confirmed that the Charter can apply to an entity in one of two ways.  In the first category, the Charter applies because the entity is itself “government” for the purposes of s. 32. This involves an inquiry into whether the entity is government “either by its very nature or in virtue of the degree of governmental control exercised over it”.[54]  If so, all of the activities of the entity will be subject to the Charter.
[81]      The second category applies to entities that are not themselves “government.”  In those cases the Charter applies where the entity carries on a particular activity that can be ascribed to government. The focus is not on the nature of the entity but on the nature of the activity. As the Supreme Court explained,
[82]      An examination of two Supreme Court of Canada decisions helps clarify the distinction.
[83]      In the first decision, Stoffman v. Vancouver General Hospital,[56] a hospital passed a regulation that required all physicians to retire at age 65 unless it could be shown that they had something unique to offer the Hospital.  The Regulation was approved by the hospital's Board and was subsequently approved by the provincial Minister of Health as required by statute.  Although the hospital was run by a Board, the government had power to appoint 14 of its 16 members.  The Minister's power with respect to the by-laws of the hospital extended beyond the power of veto and included the positive power to require the Board to adopt new or amend existing by-laws.  When the Board decided not to renew the admitting privileges of  a number of physicians, they challenged the regulation on the basis that it violated s. 15 of the Charter.
[84]      A majority of the Court held that the Charter did not apply because the requirement for ministerial approval was supervisory in nature to ensure that the hospital's actions did not contravene the government's power to prescribe standards for hospital administration.  The Court highlighted that the regulation was initiated by the Board and did not reflect government policy with respect to hospital privileges.
[85]      In addition, the responsibility for hospital privileges lay with the Board and was not subject to government control, except in unusual circumstances.  The simple fact that the Minister could require the hospital to adopt or amend by‑laws did not undermine the hospital's responsibility for rules that it adopted on its own initiative.
[86]      In the second decision, Eldridge, two deaf patients challenged a hospital’s decision not to provide sign language interpreters for its patients. The Court found that the legislative regime governing hospitals provides for the delivery of a comprehensive social program and that hospitals were the mechanism through which the legislature had decided to deliver this social program.  In that light, when providing medical services, hospitals were carrying out a specific governmental objective and were therefore subject to the Charter.    The Court summarized its analysis and distinguished Stoffman as follows:
[87]      Here the alleged government policy is Directive 6.  Directive 6 was issued by Ontario’s Chief Medical Officer of Health. It has four material paragraphs. They read as follows:
[88]      What is clear from the Directive is that each health organization has the discretion to make its own decision about what the consequences for non-compliance with the policy should be.  This was not a directive from the provincial government directing health organizations to terminate the employment of unvaccinated employees.  Had it been that, the policy might be subject to Charter scrutiny under Eldridge as a category two case.  The Directive is silent on that point. There could be a wide variety of consequences possible for non-compliance.  These might include assigning unvaccinated employees to virtual work environments, having them work in person but not in front facing roles, having them work in environments with reduced exposure to others, or having them work together in a segregated space.  I am not saying that any of these options would necessarily be appropriate.  I list them merely to demonstrate that termination is not necessarily a foregone conclusion depending on the circumstances.
[89]      Directive 6 also contains a sample, minimum requirements policy.  Under the heading “non-compliance with the policy” it states:
[90]      There again, the minimum requirements policy does not require termination or any other particular form of sanction.  It leaves it entirely to the individual health organization to determine how best to respond.  It is worth reiterating here that the Directive contemplates an unvaccinated person being in compliance with the directive provided they have taken the educational sessions and comply with weekly testing requirements.
[91]      The Plaintiffs’ complaint is that their employment was suspended or terminated.  That decision is not subject to Charter scrutiny under Directive 6 because it has not been directed by a governmental authority.  The decisions taken with respect to the employment of the Plaintiffs were independent decisions made by healthcare organizations exercising their own judgment and discretion in how best to conduct the daily operations of their facilities.
[92]      In this regard it is also worth noting that each of the Non-Governmental Defendants was obliged to protect employees from health and safety dangers by the Occupational Health and Safety Act.  The policy required by Directive 6 is not conceptually different from the requirement that each employer develop a written occupational health and safety policy and a program to implement that policy under s. 25(2)(j) of the Occupational Health and Safety Act.[58]  That does not mean that every private employer’s Occupational Health & Safety policy is now subject to Charter scrutiny.
[93]      As noted earlier, the Defendants include His Majesty the King in Right of Ontario (“Ontario”), Ontario Premier Doug Ford, Former Minister of Health Christine Elliot, Current Minister of Health Sylvia Jones, and Minister of Long-Term Care Paul Calandra (collectively, the “Government Defendants”).
[94]      The Government Defendants submit that all allegations against them should be struck out because they are based on pandemic precautions that have not been in force for over two years.  They describe this as a “classic example of mootness”,[59] which has eliminated the live controversy between the plaintiffs and the Government Defendants[60]  or has rendered it academic.[61] They rely in particular on the Ontario Court of Appeal’s decision in Harjee v. Ontario,[62]  where the Court of Appeal dismissed a challenge to COVID-19 public health measures as moot.
[95]      I do not accept that argument.  In Harjee, the appellants were challenging public health measures that required proof of vaccination to enter a restaurant, bar, sporting arena, movie theatre, fitness facility and certain other businesses.  The appellants were seeking a declaration in this regard.  In circumstances where the appellants were seeking only a declaration with respect to a regulation that was no longer in force, the issue was indeed moot.  In this case, however, the Plaintiffs seek more than declarations.  They also seek damages which they say they suffered as a result of the allegedly unconstitutional measures.  To the extent that the right to damages turns on a finding of unconstitutionality, the issue is not moot or academic but remains very much alive.
[96]      The claim first alleges that Directive 6 was unconstitutional[63] because it required de facto mandatory vaccines which the Plaintiffs allege violate sections 2, 7, and 15 of the Charter.  The Claim also alleges that all steps taken pursuant to Directive 6 are unconstitutional because the Constitution Act, 1867 does not give any jurisdiction to decree any medical treatment and because forcing such medical treatment would violate s. 7 of the Charter and its right to bodily and psychological integrity.
[97]      In my view, all such pleadings must be struck out as disclosing no reasonable cause of action.
[98]      The only thing the government did in issuing Directive 6 was require health authorities to implement a Covid-19 vaccine policy.    It left it to each local health authority to determine what the consequences of noncompliance with the policy should be.  There can be nothing unconstitutional about a government, during a medical emergency, requiring health authorities to have policies in place which address that medical emergency.
[99]      Moreover, although the Amended Statement of Claim alleges that Directive 6 breached s. 2 of the Charter.  That section encompasses four rights: (a) freedom of conscience and religion; (b) freedom of thought, belief, opinion, and expression, including freedom of the press and other media of communication; (c) freedom of peaceful assembly; and (d) freedom of association.  The claim does not indicate which of those four rights Directive 6 allegedly breached nor does it plead any material facts to demonstrate how Directive 6 allegedly breached any of those rights.
[100]   The second broad allegation in the Amended Statement of Claim is that:
[101]   Those allegations must also be struck out.  The Amended Statement of Claim does not contain any description of what PCR testing is, nor does it allege that the antigen testing referred to in paragraph four of Directive 6 is in fact PCR testing.  There is no allegation in the claim that any of the Plaintiffs were required to undergo PCR testing; what, if any, harm they suffered as a result; or how PCR testing breaches the Genetic Non-Discrimination Act.
[102]   The third broad allegation of unconstitutionality involves the request for:
[103]   All allegations relating to that claim must also be struck out.  Recall that the Governmental Defendants are all related to Ontario.  There is no allegation in the Amended Statement of Claim that Ontario enacted any requirement for “travel on trans-provincial routes”.  Indeed, that would be for the federal government, not for a province, to regulate.  In addition, there is no allegation that any of the Plaintiffs were subject to the requirement of a vaccine passport to obtain a particular service.  Moreover, what the Plaintiffs referred to as “vaccine passports” have been abolished for well over two years.  In the absence of any specific claim for damages arising out of “vaccine passports” the claim in this regard is moot and should be struck out for the reasons articulated by the Court of Appeal in Harjee.
[104]   In my view the constitutional challenges to Directive 6 and the other measures challenged in the Amended Statement of Claim should also be struck out.  As the Court of Appeal for Ontario noted in Harjee:
[105]   In support of this statement the Court cited to, among other things, cases that upheld proof of vaccination and masking requirements;[65] self-isolation requirements;[66] hospital visitation restrictions;[67] restrictions on religious and other in-person gatherings;[68] and restrictions on inter- provincial travel.[69]
[106]   In Ontario (Attorney General) v. Trinity Bible Chapel, 2023[70] the Court of Appeal gave the following additional guidance applicable to the consideration of constitutional challenges to Covid-19 restrictions:
[107]   This guidance largely disposes of the Plaintiffs’ claim. The Amended Claim asks the court to choose between potentially competing theories about public health measures. As the court noted in Trinity Bible Chapel, that is not the court's role.  The role is to determine whether Ontario did what was reasonable at the time.  The fact that the Plaintiffs might introduce information to challenge what Ontario did is irrelevant because Ontario's actions are not assessed with the benefit of hindsight but against the knowledge that existed at the time.
[108]   None of this is to say that a government’s reaction to something like the Covid-19 pandemic is immune from Charter scrutiny.  It is simply to say that the standard is not perfection, the regulations must be interpreted and judged against the context of the time in which they were enacted and that the courts have developed a well-thought-out analytical framework in which those regulations should be assessed and in which they have almost invariably been approved.
[109]   A number of the cases to which the Court of Appeal cited in the passage quoted in paragraph 104 above are of particular relevance here.  Examining some of those cases briefly helps demonstrate how impossible the plaintiffs’ Charter challenges are.
[110]     In Toronto District School Board v. CUPE, Local 4400,[80] a labour arbitrator addressed a challenge to a policy of the Toronto District School Board that required all employees to provide evidence of up‑to‑date vaccinations or proof of a valid medical exemption in order to return to work, failing which they would be put on an unpaid leave of absence.   In finding that the policy did not violate section 7 of the Charter, Arbitrator Kaplan stated:
[111]   In Syndicat des métallos, section locale 2008 c. Procureur général du Canada,[82] a group of employees challenged a ministerial order that required those working on trains, ships, and planes to be vaccinated. The plaintiffs alleged that the requirement that they be vaccinated violated their s. 7 right to liberty and security of the person, as it amounted to government influence regarding a deeply personal decision falling within the scope of s.7.[83]
[112]   Section 7 provides that
[113]   The court held that the order did infringe on s.7 rights, because the potential loss of employment introduced an element of coercion into the decision to become vaccinated[84]   but concluded that the employees were deprived of s. 7 rights in accordance with principles of fundamental justice.  In doing so  the court first identified the objective of the order as being to prevent the spread of COVID, to prevent those who were already sick from being exposed to variants of the virus, and to protect the operational integrity of the provincial supply chain.[85] Although the consequences of the policy were wide-reaching and severe, given the expansive nature of the underlying objective, there were no demonstrated effects of the policy that were not rationally connected to the accepted objective.[86]  Similarly, while the court recognized that the personal consequences of the policy for the plaintiffs were important, they were no more important than the underlying objectives of protecting public health and critical infrastructure. [87]
[114]   The court also found that the infringement of the right was justified under s.1 of the Charter.  In conducting that analysis the court concluded that the objective of protecting the travel and supply chain industries  and the health of those working in them was pressing and substantial.[88]  The scientific evidence about the effectiveness of vaccination at preventing illness was sufficient to establish a rational connection between the objective and the means used to achieve it.[89]  Given the lack of available alternatives to reduce the spread of the virus, and the various exceptions to the policy on grounds such as religious beliefs and medical exemption, the policy, although wide reaching, was nevertheless minimally impairing.[90]  Finally the court held that any potential health risks or side effects of the vaccine were exceedingly rare. Although side effects they were serious when they did occur, that minimal risk was outweighed by the proven effectiveness of the vaccine at reducing the spread of the virus, and protecting the integrity of the Canadian transportation industry.[91]
[115]   In Costa, Love, Badowich and Mandekic v. Seneca College of Applied Arts and Technology,[92] the applicants challenged the College’s regulation requiring students to be vaccinated before returning to campus, including on the grounds that it allegedly violated sections 2 (a), 7 and 15 of the Charter.
[116]   The court rejected the applicants’ request for an interlocutory injunction.  The court found that s.2(a) was not breached because the applicants could not establish a particular religious code or moral value system under which vaccination would be "wrong".[93]    Section 7 was not breached because the applicants made a choice not to become vaccinated.  As a result, the policy did not coerce them to violate their bodily integrity.  Section 15 was not violated because vaccination status was not an analogous ground of discrimination.[94]
[117]   In Banas v. HMTQ,[95] a restaurant owner objected to requirements for restaurant patrons to be masked and vaccinated.[96] The court held that s. 2 was not engaged because the law did not infringe on the plaintiff's ability to hold a conscientious objection to the regulation. Nor did it prevent her from expressing those views, peacefully assembling to express those views, or associating with others who shared them.[97]
[118]   In Sprague v. Her Majesty the Queen in right of Ontario,[98] the applicant challenged regulations that restricted visitors to hospitals during the pandemic.  The court ruled that the regulation did not breach s. 7 of the Charter because the policy was not overly broad, arbitrary, or grossly disproportionate. There was a legitimate connection between preventing the spread of Covid-19 to and from those that are already sick, and the policy restricting visitors. The restriction was not an absolute one, and was rooted in the prevailing science at the time.[99]
[119]   The plaintiffs have not pleaded any facts that could lead a Court to come to a different conclusion in this case than in those cited above.  The plaintiffs do not plead any facts to support a claim that their right under any section of the Charter were infringed.  They plead only bald conclusory statements.  Where a person challenging a law’s constitutionality fails to provide an adequate factual basis to decide the challenge, the challenge fails. Charter cases cannot be considered in a factual vacuum.  The absence of a factual base is not a mere technicality but is fatal.[100]
[120]   Section 7 does not protect the right to practice a profession.[101] Although s. 7 does protect the right to make fundamental personal decisions like refusing medical treatment or making “reasonable medical choices” without threat of criminal prosecution,[102] the plaintiffs do not allege that they were required to undergo any form of medical procedure under threat of criminal prosecution. They in fact remained unvaccinated and free of any such medical procedures.[103]
[121]   If courts have regularly upheld vaccine requirements for travel, school attendance, or restaurant visits where the populations involved are relatively healthy, they are all the more supportable in health facilities where the populations are more vulnerable.
[122]   The Plaintiffs point to a number of cases that they say indicate that courts have found Covid-19 measures to be unwarranted.  The cases the Plaintiffs rely on in support of their position are not helpful.  They rely primarily on a number of American cases and a case from the Supreme Court of India.  Given the ample law from Canadian courts on the issue, I do not find it necessary to address decisions from the United States or from India given that they deal with different legal regimes and do not bind me.
[123]   The Plaintiffs do refer to several Canadian decisions which are easily distinguishable.
[124]   The plaintiffs first refer to Sgt. Julie Evans et al. v. AG Ontario et al. and M.A. v. De Villa,[104]  both of which are short decisions which decline to dismiss an action under rule 2.1 which addresses dismissal of claims that are on their face frivolous and vexatious.  A dismissal under rule 2.1 is substantially more difficult to obtain than are orders to strike under rule 21.
[125]   The Plaintiffs then refer to J.N. v. C.G.,[105] a decision involving a dispute between separated parents about whether their children should receive the Covid vaccine.  The father was self represented.  The judge dismissed his application because it was not based on evidence but “focussed extensively on labelling and discrediting the mother as a person.”
[126]   Teamsters Local Union No. 31 v Purolator Canada Inc.[106], is a labour arbitration case challenging an employer's vaccine policy. The arbitrator upheld the challenge on the particular facts of that case, principally that after June of 2022 and the lifting of the Federal vaccine mandate, banning unvaccinated workers from the workplace did not contribute to workplace safety and was no longer a reasonable or proportionate workplace safety measure.
[127]   R. v. Fernando,[107] was an appeal from a fine imposed for refusing to comply with a random covid screening under the Quarantine Act after entering Canada. The appeal was ultimately granted on the basis that the Act expressly did not authorise any form of insertion into the body as apart of the test, and the nasal swab test the enforcement officer requested was such an insertion.
[128]   Canadian Constitution Foundation v. Canada (Attorney General),[108] is simply the formal judgment of a judicial review striking a regulation.  There are no reasons provided and no details of the nature of the regulation.
[129]     The Canadian Charter cases the plaintiffs relies on are beside the point.   For example, they rely on cases that hold that medical treatment without informed, voluntary, consent violates s.7 of the Charter and not saved by s.1.[109]  There is, however, no treatment here without consent.
[130]     In light of the overwhelming trend of the case law upholding Covid-19 regulations as constitutional in a wide variety of contexts and the Plaintiffs’ failure to plead any new facts that would distinguish this case from those already decided, it is plain and obvious that the Plaintiffs’ charter challenge does not disclose a reasonable cause of action and must be struck out.
[131]   Paragraph 1 (e) (i) of the claim seeks a declaration that the Covid measures and the declaration of an emergency invoked by the Defendants do not meet the prerequisite criteria of an “emergency” as prescribed by s.7.0.1(3) of the Emergency Management Civil Protection Act, and further contravenes s.7.0.2(1) and (3) of that Act.
[132]   Section s.7.0.1(3) of the Emergency Management Civil Protection Act provides:
[133]   Sections 7.02(1) and (3) of the Act which the Plaintiffs say Ontario breached require that the purpose of making orders is to promote the public good by protecting the health, safety and welfare of the people of Ontario in times of declared emergencies in a manner that is subject to the Charter and that the orders under the Act: shall be exercised in a manner that limits their intrusiveness;  shall apply only in the areas of the province where necessary and shall be effective only for as long as necessary.
[134]   The Plaintiffs have pleaded no facts to support their allegation that the prerequisites of s. 7.0.1(3) of the Act have not been met or that s. 7.0.2(1) and (3) of the Act were breached.
[135]   A number of courts have taken judicial notice of the severity of the Covid pandemic which put it beyond doubt that Ontario had reasonable grounds at the time for believing that an emergency existed.  Statements of that sort include the following:
[136]   In light of that broad judicial consensus and in the absence of any pleaded facts to challenge the declaration of the state of emergency I am satisfied that it is plain and obvious that the Plaintiffs’ request for a declaration that Ontario had not met the prerequisites for the declaration of an emergency has no reasonable chance of success.
[137]   As noted earlier, in Trinity Bible Chapel, the Court of Appeal noted, among other things, that:
[138]   In light of those findings and the consistent findings that Covid-19 regulations did not breach the Charter, there can be no doubt that there was no violation of s. 7.0.2 (1) and (3) of the Act.
[139]   Justice Perell usefully summarized the elements of misfeasance in public office in Muirhead v. York Regional Police Services Board,[118] as follows:
[140]   The Amended Claim contains no factual allegations to make out any of the foregoing requirements for misfeasance of public office.  In light of the statements courts have made about the pandemic and in light of the fact that Ontario’s measures were not out of line with measures taken by other democratically elected governments,  it is plain and obvious that the allegations that Ontario and its ministers were disregarding their official duties when enacting Covid -19 measures have no reasonable chance of success. Nor is there any reasonable chance of success for allegations that Ontario and its ministers knew that what they were doing was wrongful.
[141]   Finally, in their prayer for relief, the Plaintiffs allege in para. 1 (i) (iii) that the Government Defendants engaged in
[142]   There is no further reference to either tort in the Amended Statement of Claim nor are there any material facts pleaded in respect of either claim.  There is no reference to which, if any, of the plaintiffs were charged with any offence, which, if any, of the Government Defendants had any involvement in those charges or any facts to support malice in respect of any such charges.  Those claims must therefore also be struck out.
[143]   The pleading also advances a variety of miscellaneous claims in relation to various pieces of legislation and international treaties which have no chance of success. By way of example, the Plaintiffs assert that “coerced and mandatory testing” amounts to an offence under the War Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity Act; that “promoting, and executing, PCR testing” constitutes a criminal act under the Genetic Non- Discrimination Act; and that COVID-19 vaccines are “medical experimentation” amounting to a “Crime Against Humanity born out of the Nuremberg Code” and “also contrary to the Helsinki Declaration”.
[144]   Once again, there are no material facts to support any of these claims.  Similar claims were struck out in Action4Canada v. British Columbia.21 I do so hear as well. Those claims have no reasonable chance of success.
[145]   The general approach of courts when striking a statement of claim is to grant leave to amend unless the defects in the claim are clearly not capable of amendment.  In my view the claims of at least the non-unionized employees are capable of amendment.
[146]   The plaintiff Beth Ann Dick provides an example of the sorts of considerations at issue here when determining whether leave to amend should be granted.  Ms. Dick was initially represented by Mr. Galati.   She says that she was not informed about the specific claims   that Mr. Galati made on her behalf, did not speak with him, and did not meet him to discuss the individual circumstances of her claim, nor was she aware of the types of legal argument that would be made on her behalf.
[147]     She has since retained Mr. R.  P.  O’Connor who has delivered a more conventional fresh as amended statement of claim.  It narrows the claim to solely that of Ms. Dick against her former employer, removes the allegations of Charter breaches, removes outlandish allegations of false pandemics and crimes against humanity, and clearly pleads the necessary facts underlying causes of action in tort, contract, and breach of statute that she advances.
[148]   Mr. O’Connor’s proposed amended statement of claim is an example of a pleading that survives a challenge under Rule 21.  I grant leave to Ms. Dick to file the amended pleading she proposes.
[149]   I note that in the two other cases with statements of claim similar to the one filed here, the courts struck out the statement of claim but nevertheless granted leave to amend in accordance with the overall comments in the reasons to strike.[120]  I do so hear as well.
[150]   As in those two other cases, it would serve no useful purpose here to conduct a paragraph-by-paragraph analysis to determine which paragraphs are struck out and which struck out paragraphs may be capable of amendment.  I strike out the entire Amended Statement of Claim with leave to amend in accordance with these reasons.  The overriding guidepost on amendment is that a claim in the nature of Ms. Dick’s fresh as amended pleading will withstand scrutiny.  One that departs from its general tenor is likely to face challenges.
[151]   The Non-Governmental Defendants seek costs of $208,456.69 plus disbursements of $27,132.55 for a total of $235,589.24.
[152]   Ontario has delivered a bill cost which sets out its partial indemnity costs at $21,425.00 but in respect of which it seeks only $15,000.
[153]   The Plaintiffs submit that no costs should be awarded because they are public interest litigants but that if costs were awarded, they should be fixed at an amount no higher than $47,462 which reflects their own partial indemnity costs.
[154]   I do not accept that this was legitimate public interest litigation.  Although I am prepared to accept that those Plaintiffs with knowledge of the contents of the Amended Statement of Claim may have subjectively believed in its merits, that does not make it in the public interest to advance the claim as drafted.  The Amended Statement of Claim is so outlandish and so far outside of the spectrum of what is reasonable that there is no legitimate public interest in its pursuit. If this was not clear from the outset, it should have become clear by the time the British Columbia Supreme Court, the British Columbia Court of Appeal, the Federal Court, and the Federal Court of Appeal struck out similarly drafted statements of claim prepared by the same lawyer.  While the interests of a free and democratic society may warrant leeway with respect to the pursuit of unconventional claims at the outset, when such claims continue to be pursued after being struck out by four courts, they amount to an abuse of public resources.
[155]   There is no doubt that it would have taken considerable time for the Non-Governmental Defendants to investigate the facts underlying the 473 plaintiffs with respect to issues of jurisdiction. Although plaintiffs’ counsel criticizes the Non-Governmental Defendants for the amount of time they spent on the motion, it is worth noting that the time claimed comes to approximately $500 per plaintiff.  No one would think twice about a costs order of $500 on a successful motion to strike out a statement of claim.  The simple act of communicating about the particulars of each plaintiff, reviewing, understanding, and absorbing information in response and distilling that information into a motion record and factum would easily come to $500.
[156]   It is also relevant to take into account the claim's inflammatory, unfounded, and outlandish allegations of conspiracy and misrepresentation.[121]
[157]   Plaintiffs’ counsel sets up his own partial indemnity costs of $47,462.00 as a proxy for a reasonable costs award.  It should be kept in mind, however, that Plaintiffs’ counsel is a sole practitioner with a different cost structure than that of counsel for the Non-Governmental Defendants and that this is the fifth time that Plaintiffs’ counsel has litigated a motion to strike with respect to a claim of this nature. I expect having done this four times before, that there were significant cost efficiencies for Plaintiffs’ counsel, especially with respect to the factum.
[158]   I am, however, alive to the likelihood of duplication of time given the number of lawyers the Non-Governmental Defendants had working on the file and would therefore reduce their costs, including disbursements to $175,000.
[159]   I fix Ontario’s costs at $15,000 as requested.
[160]   The parties have agreed that there will be no costs in respect of the motion of Ms. Dick.