[1]             
The
parties bring cross-motions for interlocutory injunctions. One, dealing with
the confidentiality of corporate documentation has been resolved on consent.
The remaining one, brought by the Applicants is in essence a request to restore
the Applicant, Nelson Penelas (“Penelas”) to his role as director of the
Respondent, Stanmech Technologies Inc., (“Stanmech”), upon certain terms
regarding his involvement with that corporation, until trial.
[2]             
The
Respondent, Trevor Cruise (“Cruise”), cast the only vote to remove Penelas from
his role as officer and director of Stanmech. He claimed the right to do so
because of his role as President of NT&T Investment Partners Ltd. (“NT&T”),
the holding company which owns 95% of the shares in Stanmech. Cruise voted all
of the shares in NT&T against Penelas’ wishes and interests even though he
and Penelas were both officers, directors and (through their personal holding
companies) equal shareholders of NT&T.
[3]             
Cruise
took that step because, he claimed, Penelas had “abandoned his post” with
Stanmech. Cruise asserts that Penelas was not paying sufficient attention to
the company, had permanently moved to Spain and that Penelas was giving orders
that countermanded his own.
[4]             
Cruise
argues that his role as President entitled him to oust Penelas, despite the
equity of their interests in NT&T and through it, Stanmech. Cruise adds
that he had good cause to do so and that he was acting in the best interests of
Stanmech.
[5]             
While
both Penelas and Cruise agreed that they must go their separate ways and that
one has to buy out the interests of the other in Stanmech, they cannot agree on
who will be the buyer and how that process will occur. That is an issue for
trial.
[6]             
While that
is a matter for another day, Penelas argues that the parties are unable to
agree on how Stanmech will be operated and by whom during the period until that
process is resolved. This motion is intended to make that determination.
[7]             
Penelas
argues that Cruise lacked the authority to oust him and that in purporting to
do so, he acted in a conflict of interest. That is, Cruise preferred his
interests to those of both Penelas and Stanmech. Penelas contends that in
ousting him, Cruise placed himself in a superior position in the ultimate
determination of who controls Stanmech. With Penelas out, Cruise can run
Stanmech as he sees fit, including hiring and firing allies, without Penelas’
input.  It also gives him a superior position with Stanmech’s main supplier. That
all gives Cruise a leg-up in negotiations for whatever buy-sell arrangement is
agreed upon or any terms imposed by the court.
[8]             
The
parties agree that in this motion for a mandatory interlocutory injunction, the
test under RJR-MacDonald Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General), 1994 CanLII 117 (SCC), [1994] 1 SCR
311 (SCC) requires Penelas to
prove that:
[9]             
Of
course, the parties disagree about whether Penelas meets any elements of the
three-part test. For the reasons that follow, I find that he does and grant an
interlocutory injunction which reinstates Penelas as a director but not officer
of Stanmech, upon terms set out in detail below.
[10]          
Cruise
and Penelas are both sophisticated businessmen who until recently were friends.
In or about 2022 they decided to go into business together as equal partners in
the purchase and operation of mature companies. Their first purchase, in
February 2022, was a 95% interest in Stanmech. They did so through their holding
company, NT&T.
[11]          
NT&T was
in turn equally owned by Cruise and Penelas’ own holding companies, Tyrell
Corp. (“Tyrell”) for Cruise and Carlisle Investment Group Inc. (“Carlisle”) for
Penelas.[1]
The remaining 5% interest in Stanmech is held by a third party, Arun Kwinta
(“Kwinta”), who is not a party to this proceeding and has offered no evidence
in this motion.
[12]          
Stanmech
is a distributor of tools used in the application of heat and air, for example
during construction. Stanmech’s key contractual relationship is its role as a
distributor of products manufactured by Leister Technologies AG (“Leister”), a
Swiss manufacturer.
[13]          
In 2024 Cruise
and Penelas, through other holding companies, jointly purchased an interest in
a second company, Provix Inc. (“Provix”). They have already resolved that
Cruise will purchase Penelas’ interest in Provix for the amount paid for that
interest. I will have more to say about that below.
[14]          
Penelas’
evidence is that he and Cruise agreed that they would be equal partners not
only in ownership but also in the operation and management of Stanmech. Each
had their own separate roles in that regard. Until he was ousted by Cruise,
they were the only two officers and directors of both NT&T and Stanmech.
Penelas asserts that he and Cruise agreed that there would be “no unilateral
decision making about any significant issues.” Nothing of the sort occurred
until the events that led to this proceeding.
[15]          
Cruise
contends that he and Penelas agreed that he would be installed as the president
of NT&T because he was quitting his job and because he had a greater role
than Penelas in operating Stanmech. That contention is not confirmed by any evidence
before me but Cruise’s own word.
[16]          
Penelas’
version is corroborated, at least in part, in a NT&T “Confidential Information
Memorandum”[2],
prepared for lenders to assist NT&T in the acquisition of Stanmech[3]. In that memorandum, each of
Penelas and Cruise were described as “partner” and “co-founder” of NT&T.  
In an organizational chart of NT&T, Penelas and Cruise were described as
“Co-Presidents”. In a section of the memorandum labelled “Leadership”, the Role
of “Co-Presidents” is described as follows:
[17]          
While not
determinative, this memorandum offers some evidence of the intention of Cruise
and Penelas, at the time of the acquisition of Stanmech, to have co-equal
positions with the newly acquired corporation.
[18]          
Nonetheless,
Cruise claims that as the president of NT&T, he was entitled to utilize its
95% shares of Stanmech to oust Penelas as an officer and director of Stanmech.
He claims to have discovered further misconduct by Penelas after he ousted him.
Cruise asserts that if Penelas were reinstated to his previous role, he would
cause chaos in the operation of Stanmech.
[19]          
There is
no dispute that Penelas has moved to Spain, whether temporarily, as he claims
or permanently, as Cruise asserts. That is the ostensible reason for Cruise’s ouster
of Penelas.
[20]          
Penelas
deposes that he has spent time in Europe, where his family originates, over the
past few years. During that time, his two sons have played soccer with elite
European youth teams. He says that this summer his sons were offered the
opportunity to train with an elite Spanish youth team. Penelas asserts that he
and his wife decided to move temporarily to Spain, for 3 – 9 months. He made
the move in September 2024.
[21]          
Penelas
deposes that he has kept his Ontario home, maintained his Ontario car
insurance, and confirmed with his sons’ Ontario school that they can return
mid-term. He says that each of his and his wife’s families reside in
southwestern Ontario. His Spanish accommodations and car are rented.
[22]          
Cruise
denies the claim that the move is temporary. He points to correspondence, some
in draft form, that implies or says that the move will be permanent. Cruise also
relies on the affidavit evidence of Haseeb Javed (“Javed”), who is both the
Interim General Manager as well as a 15% shareholder of Provix (through a
holding company). In his affidavit, Javed complains about Penelas’ lack of work
for Provix, in the time between late June 2024 and his affidavit of October 15,
2024. Javed further asserted that in a telephone call of August 9, 2024,
Penelas “told me about the move, he said that it would be ‘permanent’”
[emphasis added].
[23]          
However,
in cross-examination, Javed conceded that his understanding of the permanence
of the move was only his assumption. It was based on the fact that the Penelas
children being admitted into the Spanish soccer programme. In other words, it
was not something that Penelas said to him.
[24]          
All told,
the evidence relied on by Cruise to prove the permanence of Penelas’ move to
Spain is far from determinative and must be met with caution at this stage. As
set out below, while I have issues with the credibility of each of Cruise and
Penelas, I have more issues with that of Cruise. In addition, I find that Javed
is not a credible witness. Javed only assumed that Penelas’ move was permanent.
But he deposed that this is something Cruise told him. That is clearly not
true. I add that Javed is not an objective witness. His interests are clearly
aligned with those of Cruise. Thus, Javed fails to corroborate Cruise’s assertions.
[25]          
Penelas also
replies that in any event, the permanent vs. temporary dichotomy is a “somewhat
of a red herring” because he can do his work by Zoom from anywhere as he has
done in the past, even when in Ontario. There is some merit to that claim. I
will have more to say about the evidence supporting that contention below.
[26]          
On August
7, 2024, Penelas advised Cruise of his plan to move to Spain. Cruise’s response
was that he no longer wished to be in business together with Penelas and that
they should work to separate their business interests. Cruise says that on
August 9, 2024, Penelas agreed to sell his interest in Provix to Cruise for the
price that they paid for it the previous month. Penelas does not deny this but
contends that the agreed upon sale of his Provix interest was conditional on a
resolution of the issue of ownership of Stanmech, i.e. who would buy the other
out and for how much.
[27]          
Penelas
says that the parties agreed to a “shotgun” buy/sell of their interests in
NT&T. Cruise denies that claim. But Penelas produced a August 12, 2024
email from Cruise to him, in which Cruise accuses Penelas of backing off on an
agreement to make an offer for Cruises’ shares through a shotgun arrangement.
Cruise wrote:
[28]          
The
buyout discussions broke down towards the end of August. There has still been
no transfer of the Provix shares, as Penelas appears to see them as a package
deal.
[29]          
When
those discussions broke down in late August 2024, Cruise decided to take steps
to oust Cruise from his role with Stanmech. He lacked the authority to call a
special meeting of the Stanmech shareholders to do so. Instead, he prepared a
shareholder’s resolution to amend the Stanmech by-laws to allow the CEO to call
the meeting. He then signed the draft resolution on behalf of NT&T. The
resolution was also signed by the 5% shareholder, Kwinta, but not shown in
advance to Penelas. To no surprise, the resolution passed.
[30]          
Cruise
then called the special meeting of Stanmech’s shareholders for the sole purpose
of removing Penelas as a director. On September 9, 2024, he gave notice of the
meeting, called for September 19, 2024.
[31]          
Three
days before the special meeting, Penelas’ solicitors wrote to Cruise’s counsel
and Kwinta, stating that the resolution to amend Stanmech’s by-laws was invalid.
They cited two reasons, First, it had not been put to the Stanmech directors
(including Penelas), as required by s. 103(1) of the Canada Business
Corporations Act (“CBCA”) and if approved by the directors, put to
the shareholders for a vote as required by s. 103(2).   Those provisions state:
[32]          
Second, Penelas’
counsel asserted that Cruise lacked the right to vote NT&T’s shares without
the consent of Penelas as the NT&T by-laws provide that its board can only
act on a majority vote. Lacking Penelas’ vote, Penelas’ counsel stated that Cruise
could not act on behalf of NT&T.
[33]          
Despite
Penelas’ objection, Cruise held the meeting on September 19, 2024. It was not
much of a meeting as neither Penelas nor Kwinta attended. As Penelas’ counsel archly
observed: “[n]ot surprisingly, he was able to persuade himself to sign his own
resolution giving him sole authority”.
[34]          
The
parties disagree on the manner in which Penelas performed his duties on behalf
of Penelas before his removal. Cruise asserts that Penelas:
[35]          
Cruise
also offered evidence regarding concerns allegedly offered to him by unnamed Stanmech
staff. But that evidence is unreliable hearsay. I give it no weight.
[36]          
That
being said in his cross-examination, Cruise conceded that prior to an August 7,
2024 meeting with Penelas, he never:
[37]      
Further,
as Penelas points out, in 2024, Stanmech was named Leister’s “Distributor of
the Year” and awarded “Gold Partner” status for its sales and collaboration
efforts. Sales was Penelas’ key area of responsibility with Stanmech. Further,
Penelas asserts, without contradiction, that Stanmech’s earnings have grown
significantly since he and Cruise purchased their majority interest in Stanmech
through NT&T.
[38]      
In light
of Cruise’s allegations of neglect of duty, Penelas’ counsel examined
Stanmech’s sales manager, Peter Borris, under r. 39.03. Mr. Borris testified
that:
[39]      
Counsel
for Cruise objected to the Borris examination, both before and while it took
place. He asks the court to refuse to consider Borris’ evidence. He complains
that the notice of Borris’ examination was very last minute (the day before
other examinations were already scheduled to take place). In fact, Cruise, who at
present is effectively Borris’ boss, and his counsel tried to convince Borris not
to attend the examination and that the notice of examination was “ridiculous”
and illegitimate.
[40]      
I do not
agree and see no need to reject Borris’ evidence. While r. 39.03(3) states that
the right to an examination “shall be exercised with reasonable diligence”, the
examination of October 17, 2024 was conducted in response to allegations made
only two days earlier in Cruise’s affidavit of October 15, 2024.
[41]      
Cruise
seeks to impugn Borris’ evidence on the basis that he is an employee of
Stanmech yet spoke to Penelas after the latter was ousted from Stanmech. I do
not see that fact as impeaching the credibility or reliability of Borris’
evidence. It was Cruise and his lawyer who directly communicated with Borris to
attempt to dissuade him from testifying. But Borris was served with a notice of
examination and was required to attend.
[42]      
In light
of the fluid issue of who should be in charge of Stanmech as well as the fact
that Borris worked closely with Penelas, I do not find that Borris’ evidence is
impugned by his contact or relationship with Penelas. No evidence has been
raised that points to any impropriety in Penelas seeking out Borris’ evidence.
It was open to Cruise’s lawyer to cross-examine Borris on that point but he
chose not to do so.
[43]      
Further,
the fact that Cruise has effective control of Stanmech and thus could have fired
Borris at any time, makes his evidence, which in many ways contradicts that of
Cruise, very credible. It is far more objective that the evidence of either
party, each of whom have a strong financial interest in the result of this
motion and proceeding.
[44]      
The jurisdiction to grant an interlocutory injunction is found in
s. 101 of the Courts of Justice Act, RSO 1990 c. C-43, as am. That
provision allows the court to grant an interlocutory injunction “where it
appears to a judge of the court to be just or convenient to do so”.
[45]      
At para. 54 of RJR MacDonald, the Court stated that when
the strong prima facie test applies, the court must undertake “a more
extensive review of the merits of the case” than it would when the test is
merely a serious issue to be tried.
[46]      
In that review of the merits, the moving party must prove that
there is “a strong likelihood on the law and evidence” that the moving party
will succeed in the proceeding”: Ali v. New Spadina Garment Industry Corp.  2020 ONSC 3244 (Ont. Div Ct.) at para. 38.
[47]      
The difference between a serious issue and a strong prima facie
case was discussed by the Divisional Court in Loops, L.L.C. v. Maxill Inc.,
2020
ONSC 5438 (Ont. Div. Ct.), at para. 44. There the court described the
difference, as follows:
[48]      
In Loops,
the Divisional Court added that when the moving party is held
to the “strong prima facie case” requirement, “the weight to be given to
the second and third parts of the test may be reduced. They may become less of
a concern depending on the strength of the plaintiff's case”: at para. 15.
[49]          
In
supporting his removal of Penelas, Cruise points to s. 3.8 of Stanmech’s by-laws
which allows the “shareholders…by ordinary resolution passed at an annual or
special meeting of the shareholders to remove a director from office before the
expiry of his term…” The shareholder in question here is NT&T, not Cruise
or Penelas personally.
[50]          
As set
out above, Cruise used his position of president of NT&T to vote all of its
shares to remove Penelas as a director. He relies on s. 5.4(c) of the NT&T
by-laws which sets out the role of the president of NT&T, to justify his
right to take that action. The provision reads as follows:
[51]          
No
managing director was ever appointed for NT&T, thus those powers accrued in
the role of the president.
[52]          
Cruise
argues that NT&T’s only business is to own shares in Stanmech. He states
that “it is not controversial” that he was the one who always exercised
NT&T’s shareholder rights in Stanmech and actually signed the resolution
appointing Penelas as a director of Stanmech in the first place. Of course,
until he ousted Penelas from the Stanmech board, there was no controversy about
the exercise of his power to vote the NT&T shares, nor was an issue raised
that required the oversight of the NT&T board.
[53]          
Cruise
contends that Penelas “fixates” over the “subject to the authority of the
board” clause in by-law 5.4(c). His counsel writes in his factum that Penelas’
argument means that he “holds a veto over any decision of Mr. Cruise in his
role as President”.  That implies that Cruise has, by virtue of his title as
NT&T president (Penelas was secretary), the right to effectively rule
NT&T and by extension, Stanmech, by fiat. His counsel is more direct in his
factum, writing: “Mr. Penelas’ individual protests [i.e. prior to Cruise
holding the meeting in which Penelas was ousted] did not impose a restraint on
Mr. Cruise’s power as President to vote NT&T’s shares in Stanmech”.
[54]          
Cruise
appears to be taken aback by the notion that his equal shareholder and partner,
Penelas, has any say in any of these matters, even when they strip Penelas of
his rights to the benefit of Cruise.
[55]          
Cruise
continues, arguing that Penelas does not constitute the board of NT&T. He
states that s. 3.2 of the NT&T by-laws provides for directors to transact
business by resolutions passed at meetings or by unanimous written resolution.
Votes at the meetings are governed by a majority and if there is a split, the
Chairman of the meeting (which he says is himself), has the deciding vote.
Cruise adds that the NT&T board never restricted his rights to exercise his
presidential powers. Again, of course, it never had to.
[56]          
 Cruise
contends that in the absence of restraint, he can act as he pleases to vote the
NT&T shares. He points out that s. 140(2) of the Canada Business
Corporation Act, RSC 1985, c. C-44, as am. (“CBCA”), which governs
Stanmech, requires the board of a subsidiary corporation to recognize the duly
authorized representative of a parent corporation. That provision reads as
follows:
[57]          
Cruise
then goes further, drawing the spectre of country-wide corporate chaos if he is
found unable to vote the NT&T shares as he pleases. His counsel argues in
his factum that if Penelas succeeds in his interpretation of CBCA s. 140,
it would “would instantly invalidate millions of corporate decisions in
Canada”. That complaint is extravagant in light of the fact that my decision is
based only on the particular factual context of this case.
[58]          
I agree
with Penelas that the entire argument in regard to a serious issue comes down
to whether Cruise is correct that as president of NT&T he had authority
delegated from its board of directors to vote its shares in Stanmech as he did at
a special shareholder’s meeting to remove Penelas.
[59]          
Penelas
says that Cruise is wrong for four reasons. First, s. s. 5(4)(c) of NT&T’s
by-laws make the president’s role in the management and supervision of the
business of the corporation “subject to the authority of the board”. While
Cruise may wish to downplay the import of those words, they have meaning. Any
delegation of power to the president was limited by the authority of the
board.
[60]          
Second
and related to the first point, Cruise lacked the authority of the NT&T
board to vote its shares to oust Penelas. As he stated in cross-examination, Cruise
felt that he had the authority to deal with the shares of NT&T as he saw
fit. Yet Cruise knew that the NT&T board, of which Penelas was one of two
directors, did not approve his actions to oust Penelas. He had formally
registered his objection through his counsel’s letter.
[61]          
Third,
Penelas argues that Cruise failed to deliver to Stanmech a resolution of
NT&T confirming his authority to vote NT&T’s shares. This is a
technical argument based on the wording of s. 140 of the CBCA, set out
above, which requires a subsidiary to recognize “any individual authorized by
resolution of the directors or governing body of the body corporate or
association to represent it at meetings of shareholders of the corporation.” No
such resolution was presented to the Stanmech board.
[62]          
That
being said though, I must note that even if that were the case: 1) Cruise previously
voted NT&T’s shares without objection, and 2) CBCA s. 140 does not
require the delivery of that resolution as a condition precedent to voting a
parent company’s shares. Rather it prohibits the subsidiary from refusing the
recognize the person properly voting on behalf of the parent company.  That did
not occur.
[63]          
Fourth
and finally, Cruise failed to declare his obvious conflict of interest and for
that reason alone, the resolution is invalid.
[64]          
Cruise’s
argument in favour of his conduct and against the finding of a strong prima
facie case is that he was correct that 1) he had the authority to
unilaterally oust Penelas from the Stanmech board; and 2) Penelas’ ouster was
in the best interests of Stanmech because Penelas had essentially “abandoned
his post”.
[65]          
Based on
the evidence presently before me, I do not agree with either assertion.
[66]          
The only
way that Cruise could have taken the steps he took to oust Penelas was if he
had the unlimited authority to vote NT&T’s shares as he pleased. Yet his
authority under s. 5.4(c) was with regard to the “general supervision of the
business and affairs” of NT&T. I do not accept that the defenestration of
an equal shareholder and director “partner” is part of the general supervision
of the business of NT&T; even accepting that the role of NT&T is simply
to hold shares of Stanmech.
[67]          
Further,
the words “subject to the authority of the board” cannot be devoid of meaning
or they would not have been included in the by-law. I cannot simply ignore the
term. That view is in accord with rules of contractual interpretation, which
attempt to avoid an interpretation which omits terms of a contract and avoids
commercial absurdity.
[68]          
As Chang
J. summarized in the context of commercial contracts in 1201466 Ontario Inc. v. 1799144 Ontario Inc., 2024 ONSC 1511, at para. 65:
[69]          
That
means that the provision regarding the authority of the board must be read as a
limit on the scope of the president’s role. Here, Cruise went behind the back
of the NT&T board by failing to give notice to his sole fellow board member
and equal shareholder. He did so, knowing that Penelas would never approve.
[70]          
Cruise
relies on the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal decision in Mann v. Mann,
2023 SKCA 99, which, he argues, confirms his authority to act as he did. He
asserts that the facts and principles set out in Mann are analogous
to this case.
[71]          
In Mann,
two brothers were equal shareholders in a holding company (“the Holdco”) which
owned two subsidiary corporations (the “subsidiaries”). One brother was the
president of the Holdco.
[72]          
The
Holdco’s by-law setting out the powers of its president were similar but not
identical to those of NT&T. It stated that the president: “shall be charged
with the general supervision of the business and affairs of the
corporation" and, except when the board has appointed a general manager or
managing director, "shall also have the powers and be charged with the
duties of that office".
[73]          
The two
brothers did not agree on certain financing arrangements for a capital
investment that the Holdco wished to engage in through the subsidiaries.
[74]          
When the
brothers deadlocked, the brother who acted as president of the Holdco used his
role to vote the shares of the Holdco to pass four resolutions in the
subsidiaries, which included a change in the board structure of the
subsidiaries to add a representative of an investor, but did not remove the
dissenting brother.
[75]          
Both the
Saskatchewan Court of Queens Bench and then the Court of Appeal approved the
conduct of the president. It found that the resolutions allowed the president
to act as he had, particularly because there had been a deadlock of the Holdco
board. In that case, there had been days of fruitless board meetings regarding
various financing options, including the one that was adopted. At para. 48 of
its decision, the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal wrote that “[t]he simple fact is
that the directors were deadlocked, and this impasse prevented the board of
directors, as a deliberative body, from making any decision about these
matters.”
[76]          
I find
that the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal decision in Mann does not assist
Cruise in the manner he claims. There are three key differences between the
facts of Mann and those in this case.
[77]          
First, unlike this case,
a provision of the Holdco by-law in Mann gave its president explicit
powers to change the board’s composition. The relevant by-law section stated that
the general manager (and by implication, the president, since the Holdco had no
general manager):
[78]          
Those explicit powers are not invested in the President of
NT&T.
[79]          
Second, while
Mann referred to days of deadlock in the Holdco board, there was no
deadlock here of the NT&T board. Cruise avoided the deadlock by arrogating the
right to vote the shares without a meeting of the NT&T board.
[80]          
Third,
unlike this case, there was no hint of conflict of interest in Mann. Here,
as set out below, there is more than a strong whiff of that concern. Cruise
ousted what he determined to be his rival for control of Stanmech when he
realized that he no longer wanted Penelas as his partner.
[81]          
The
correspondence set out above shows that in the days before he removed Penelas,
Cruise was aware that one of them would have to buy out the interests of the
other in Stanmech. He originally insisted on a “shotgun” resolution and claimed
that they agreed to the term; a position from which he now resiles.
[82]          
It is
clear that in the parting of the ways between NT&T’s two principals, there
was and continues to be a jockeying for position as to who would be able to buy
out the other and ultimately control Stanmech. Cruise did what he could to make
sure that he was the winning jockey.
[83]          
By
removing Penelas, Cruise gave himself control of Stanmech and the stronger
position in their negotiations over its control.  He could control all aspects
of Stanmech’s operations, including hiring and firing, and financial decisions.
He could do so in a manner that would favour his position, whether it was to
buy out Penelas at a low figure or have him buy Cruise out at a high price.
[84]          
In his
factum, Cruise complains of the “unfair” effects of a shotgun buy/sell
arrangement to which he appears to have originally agreed and then resiled. He
states that a shotgun would “reward Mr. Penelas for his own misbehaviour”. It
would allow him to:
[85]          
However,
by maintaining control of Stanmech, Cruise can be said to be doing just what he
accuses Penelas of attempting to do.
[86]          
One example
of the advantage that Cruise seized for himself by ousting Penelas relates to
their dealings with Leister. Penelas had earlier planned a meeting with Leister,
Stanmech’s main supplier. The meeting was scheduled to take place on October 24
and 25, 2024. Maintaining that relationship is vital to Stanmech’s success.
Cruise points to the result of Penelas’ ouster in regard to Leister when his
counsel writes in his factum that:
[87]          
In fact,
when this motion was argued, Cruise’s counsel advised the court that he was not
present in court because he was meeting with Leister personnel. Being shut out
of that meeting, Penelas was present at court.
[88]          
It is not
known what was discussed during the two days of meetings, but it is hard to
imagine that the subject of Penelas’ absence was not raised, if not already
discussed. In light of Cruise’s evidence in this motion, including his
characterization of Penelas’ “misconduct” any such discussion would not have
been favourable to Penelas.
[89]          
Thus,
Cruise gained himself an advantage with Stanmech’s main supplier. That
advantage may serve to significantly disadvantage Penelas in his negotiations
for the purchase of Cruise’s shares or in any argument regarding the ultimate
disposition of control of NT&T and Stanmech.  For example, if Penelas is
the successful party, he may find his relationship with Stanmech is damaged,
which in turn may affect the value to him of Stanmech.
[90]          
Turning
to the merits of Cruise’s claim that Penelas had abandoned his post, to
Stanmech’s detriment, the evidence cited above does not support his claim. In
saying this, I point to Stanmech’s awarding of Leister’s Gold Leaf award, its
increasing sales figures and the most objective evidence before the court; that
of Borris. Recall that at present, Borris remains subject to Cruise’s sole
supervision. Yet his evidence directly contradicted Cruise’s evidence regarding
Penelas’ alleged dereliction of duties while abroad. Borris also pointed out
that most of Penelas’ work had been and can continue to be conducted remotely.
I do not accept that Cruise “abandoned his post” or that his removal was in the
best interests of Stanmech. It was in the best interests of Cruise.
[91]          
Cruise
points to subsequently discovered “misconduct” by Penelas. He says that Penelas:
[92]      
Based on
the evidence before me, I do not accept these allegations. I say that for the
following reasons:
[93]          
The applicable
corporate by-laws and statutes do not allow Cruise to utilize his powers in a
manner that places him in a conflict of interest regarding NT&T or its subsidiary,
Stanmech, or the interests of Cruise’s equal shareholding partner, Penelas.
[94]          
Both
NT&T by-law 4.10 and Stanmech by-law 4.11, which are identical, require the
disclosure of conflicts of interest as follows:
[95]          
Similarly,
both s. 132(1) of the OBCA and s. 120(1) of the CBCA require a
director or officer to disclosure any conflicts of interest regarding a “material
contract or transaction”.
[96]          
Section
132(1) of the OBCA states:
[97]       OBCA s. 132(5) prohibits a
conflicted director from attending “any part of a meeting of directors during which the contract
or transaction is discussed and shall not vote on any resolution to approve the
contract or transaction.” The exceptions to this rule arise when the vote is
regarding the remuneration of a director or affiliate, indemnity for insurance
or a contract or transaction is “one with an affiliate”.
[98]       Similarly, CBCA s.
120(1) requires disclosure when a director or officer is a party to the
contract or transaction or has a material interest in it. The provision reads
as follows:
[99]          
CBCA s. 120(5) is similar to OBCA
s. 132(5). It prohibits a conflicted director from “[voting] on any resolution
to approve the contract or transaction, subject to the same exceptions found in
OBCA s. 132(5)”.
[100]       
During
oral argument, I raised the question, to which the parties responded in writing,
whether the resolutions which ousted Penelas amounted to a “material contract
or transaction” as defined in the applicable by-laws and statutes. I have
reviewed the parties’ written responses.
[101]       
The
Oxford Canadian Dictionary, 1998, Barber ed., Oxford U. Press, defines the term
“transaction” as including
[102]       
Black’s
Law Dictionary defines the term, transaction, as “[a]ct of transacting or
conducting any business; negotiation; management… It must consist of an act or
agreement … in which more than one person is concerned and in which the legal
relations of such persons between themselves are altered”.
[103]       
In Venini
v Venini, 2023 ABKB 524, Marion J. considered the meaning of the term, “transaction”,
found in s. 120 of the Alberta Business Corporations Act (“ABCA”)
regarding conflicts of interest. That provision is substantively the same as OBCA s. 132 and CBCA s.
120. Marion J. found that the term should be given a liberal rather than narrow
or technical interpretation. While the term is not defined in the ABCA, it is used
liberally in the ABCA. That is equally true for the OBCA and CBCA. The ubiquity of
the term in the ABCA led to Marion J. to state at para. 83 that “[a]ll of this
suggests ‘transaction’ in section 120 is intended to have a broad meaning.”
[104]       
Marion J.
then concluded at para. 84 as follows:
[105]       
Nonetheless,
Cruise argues that he did not have an “interest in a material contract or transaction”
or an economic interest in removing Penelas because it did not change Penelas’
equal shareholding rights in NT&T. That exceeding narrow view of a conflict
of interest ignores the facts set out above regarding the advantages that
Cruise granted himself and the disadvantages that his ouster imposed on Penelas.
 Cruise adds that disclosure would have made no difference because NT&T
knew of his conflict. Thus any disclosure would not have affected any vote.
[106]       
I do not
accept that interpretation. Rather, adopting a broad interpretation of the term
“transaction” called for in Venini, I agree with Penelas that Cruise’s signing
of the resolutions in question amounted to transactions, as cited in the
relevant NT&T and Stanmech by-laws as well as s. 132 of the OBCA and
s. 120 of the CBCA. He should not have been in a position to be the sole
vote to oust Penelas when he had a clear economic interest in the vote. This placed
him in a clear conflict of interest.
[107]       
For all
of the reasons set out above, I find that there is a strong prima facie
case that the ouster of Penelas through the corporate manoeuvres described
above, will be set aside, whether on technical grounds or based on Cruise’s
conflict of interest in removing Penelas.
[108]       
At para. 59 of RJR MacDonald, Sopinka
and Cory JJ. wrote for the Supreme Court that "[i]rreparable' refers to
the nature of the harm suffered rather than its magnitude. It is harm which
either cannot be quantified in monetary terms or which cannot be cured, usually
because one party cannot collect damages from the other."
[109]       
The
removal of a shareholder who is an officer and director of a corporation can
constitute irreparable harm to that person. In Cheema v. Dhjaliwal, 2023
ONSC 6693, a case dealing with a closely held family corporation, the president
was accused of acting contrary to the interests of the corporation and the
applicants, whom he ousted from the corporation. Doi J. found irreparable harm.
He wrote at para. 21 that: “there is real risk of
damage to the Corporation and its business if the Respondents are not
restrained to act in the best interests of the Corporation and without
prejudice to the Applicants. There would be no amount of money that could
compensate the Applicants for loss of their ownership, control, and oversight
of the family business.”
[110]       
Doi J. concluded at para. 22 that “the
Applicants would suffer irreparable harm if the Respondents were not restrained
from exercising their powers including taking any measures with respect to the
ownership, management, business, or operation of the Corporation, that are
prejudicial to the rights and interests of the Applicants.”
[111]       
In Matter Corp. v. Southside Construction
Management Ltd., 2024 ONSC 4879, Kimmel J. of Toronto Commercial List, adopted the
reasoning of Doi J. in Cheema as well as other authorities, writing at
paras. 61 - 62:
[112]       
Cruise
argues that Penelas will suffer no irreparable harm if his injunction request
is dismissed. He states that Cruise’s financial interests as an equal
shareholder in NT&T will be preserved if the injunction is rejected. He
adds that there is no risk that Leister will change its contractual
relationship with Stanmech as a result of the change in management
arrangements. He states, without confirmatory evidence from Leister, that it
consented to the change. What he fails to say is what he told Leister about the
Penelas ouster to obtain that consent and when he did so.
[113]       
Cruise
has taken a number of steps with his unilateral control of Stanmech. They
include hiring a new comptroller and engaging in the dealings with Leister, cited
above. Those steps, particularly regarding Leister, will likely prejudice
Penelas, whether in regard to the sale of his interest in NT&T or the
purchase of Cruise’s interest. Those steps may be difficult to reverse.
[114]       
In all of
the circumstances cited above I find that the test of irreparable harm is met.
[115]       
In Quiznos
Canada,[5]
Perell J. spoke to the role of the relative strength of parties’ cases in
considering the balance of convenience. He wrote at para. 46
[116]       
I have
already made a finding that Penelas has a strong prima facie case.
[117]       
Cruise
argues that reinstating Penelas now would create chaos in Stanmech. It would
confuse staff who would be unclear as to who is in charge. Cruise points to the
fact that Borris has offered evidence in this proceeding. He also points to the
fact that Penelas has contacted Stanmech’s bank to challenge Cruise’s attempts
to oust his signing privileges. He also points out that Penelas cites his
hiring of a new employee as part of his argument of irreparable harm.
[118]       
Cruise
refers to Gal v. Lavine, 2012 ONSC 592, where Perell J. declined to
restore an ousted equal shareholder of a corporation operating a daycare centre.
Perell J. cited “dysfunctional business and personal relationships” to find
that there would be irreparable harm to both parties if the moving party were
restored. He noted at para. 27 that “the business seems to be getting on
without her”.
[119]       
However,
Perell J. did offer injunctive relief to each party, including restoring the
moving party’s salary, which the respondent had unilaterally cut off.
[120]       
Gal v.
Lavine is a
case decided on its facts and even then does not offer any broad principle that
buttresses Cruise’s case.
[121]       
The
finding I made regarding irreparable harm is relevant to the balance of
convenience analysis. Penelas would be strongly prejudiced if the present
status quo were allowed to continue.
[122]       
Following
the argument of this motion, I asked the parties for supplemental submissions
as to the appropriate corporate governance of Stanmech were I to grant an
injunction. I have considered those submissions in determining whether the
imposition of terms could fairly balance the convenience of the parties without
harming Stanmech.
[123]       
Penelas
cites the decision of Corthorn J. in Scullion v. Munro, 2016 ONSC 116, as
an example of the manner in which the “playing field “can be leveled between
the parties without interfering with the proper operation of Stanmech. He submits
that the court order as follows:
[124]       
For his
part, Cruise argues against an injunction. But if one is to be granted, he
requests that it impose very limited terms which do not reinstate Penelas to
the role of director. Rather, Cruise sets out a list of actions that he will
not engage in as “management” of NT&T and Stanmech, while retaining his
exclusive role in that regard. Those terms are set out below:
[125]       
In Scullion
v. Munro, Corthorn
J. declined to grant an injunction despite the moving party, an equal
shareholder to the party who ousted him, demonstrating a serious issue with
regard to their removal from a corporate board. But Corthorn J. did not find
that the second and third elements of the RJR MacDonald test were met,
mainly because the moving party failed to come to court with clean hands (there
were allegations of impropriety against the moving party).
[126]       
Nonetheless,
utilizing the OBCA’s oppression remedies Corthorn J. took steps to
“level the playing field” until a final determination. Those terms allowed for
joint management of the subject corporation. Details of the terms that were
impose covered three pages. Those terms gave each of the parties, as
shareholders, an equal right of approval of various corporate actions, rules
regarding the deposit of money into the corporate bank account, equal access to
corporate records and facilities, equal rights to direct employees, equal
rights to remuneration, and a term that in the event of disagreement, an
unnamed person will make the relevant decision in the best interests of the
court.
[127]       
Here, Cruise
is adamant in his submissions that Penelas “not” (emphasis
in Cruise’s submissions) be allowed to have any active role in Stanmech’s
business, have a company email; have veto rights over normal business
management activities like hiring or firing; or have the title of “director”.
All of that would be, in his estimation, confusing.
[128]       
If any confusion
arises from any form of reinstatement of Penelas to any element of his previous
responsibilities, it arises from Cruise’s unilateral actions. The evidence
shows that Penelas’ conduct in his role on behalf of Stanmech was in the
corporation’s best interests, while those of Cruise, removing a valuable leader
for his own ends, was not.  Stanmech was thriving under the previous status quo
of its two equal “partners”, each with their own area of responsibility.
[129]       
It was
open to Cruise to seek a less drastic resolution to the dispute that he created
by purporting to remove Penelas, through negotiation and even an application to
the court. He did not choose those routes.
[130]       
The terms
that Penelas is seeking are not as extensive as those imposed in Scullion v.
Munro or set out in Penelas’ notice of motion. They do not seek to
reinstate Penelas as an officer or to have him interfere with Cruise’s day-to-day
operation of Stanmech. They do put him on an even footing with Cruise with
regard to the corporate issues moving forward.
[131]       
I find
that the if terms set out at para. 112 above are adopted until trial, the
balance of convenience would favour Penelas. They are fair and reasonable in
the circumstances and in the best interests of both NT&T and Stanmech.  It
will be the job of Cruise and Penelas and in their mutual interest, to make
that arrangement work.
[132]       
Interlocutory
order to go as follows:
[133]       
On
November 6, 2024, Mr. Brown-Okruhlik wrote to the court, presumably with the
consent of Mr. Adair, to request a case conference before me regarding the sale
of Penelas’ interest in Provix to Cruise. I direct court staff to arrange such
a conference. It should be in person.
[134]       
Penelas
was the winning party in this motion. He is presumptively entitled to costs of
the motion.
[135]       
The
parties should attempt to resolve the issue of costs on their own. If they are
unable to do so, Penelas may submit his costs submissions of up to three pages,
double-spaced, one-inch margins, plus a bill of costs/costs outline and offers
to settle within 14 days of release of this endorsement. He need not include
the authorities upon which he relies so long as they are found in the commonly
referenced reporting services (i.e. CanLII, LexisNexis Quicklaw, or
WestlawNext) and the relevant paragraph references are included. Cruise may
respond in kind within a further 14 days. No reply submission will be accepted
unless I request it. If I have not received any submissions within the time
frames set out above, I will assume that the parties have resolved the issue
and will make no costs order.