[1]              
In this action the Plaintiff claims relief under
Part V of the Succession Law Reform Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S. 26, as
amended (the “SLRA”). The Plaintiff seeks an order requiring the Estate of
August Karl-Heinz Scharfenberg to pay a lump sum payment of $300,000 to provide
for her needs for the balance of her life expectancy.
[2]              
The Plaintiff, Liebgard Scharfenberg (“Lee”)
cohabited with August Karl-Heinz Scharfenberg (the “Deceased”)
for 30 years, during the last 23 of which they were married. When they met, each
had assets that were acquired during the dissolution of their previous
marriages.
[3]              
The Deceased did not provide for Lee in his
will, explaining that he was doing so because of their domestic agreement.
[4]              
The Defendants are three of the Deceased’s adult
children from his first marriage, for whom the will makes provision in three
equal shares.
[5]              
This case raises the issue of a claim for
dependant’s relief after a long-term, second marriage where the parties entered
into a cohabitation agreement shortly after they began to live together, in
which they released all claims to one another’s estate.
[6]              
By Order Giving Directions made on July 19,
2021, the issues to be tried are as follows:
[7]              
I intend to approach these issues in a different
manner than laid out above, as follows:
[8]              
The parties have agreed upon certain facts, as
summarized below.
[9]              
The Deceased died on February 8, 2021, at the age of 90. He was
survived by his wife, Lee.
[10]          
The Deceased was also survived by his children from a previous
marriage: Peter Scharfenberg (“Peter”); Rainer Scharfenberg (“Rainer”); Gabrielle
Brown (“Gabrielle”); Ingrid Davidson, also known as Ingrid Cole (“Ingrid”); and
Dietmar Scharfenberg (“Dietmar”). Peter, Rainer and Ingrid are collectively
referred to as the “Defendants”.
[11]          
The Deceased died with a Last Will and Testament dated August 2,
2006, a First Codicil dated May 31, 2007 (the “First Codicil”), and a Second
Codicil dated July 25, 2018 (the “Second Codicil”). These three testamentary
documents are collectively referred to as the “Will”.
[12]          
The Will appoints Peter as the estate trustee of the Deceased’s estate
(the “Estate”). Peter’s wife, Karen Scharfenberg, is appointed as the alternate
estate trustee. The Will directs that the residue of the Estate is to be
divided equally between Peter, Rainer and Ingrid. It indicates that the
Deceased made no provision for Gabrielle and Dietmar because he did not feel
close to them.
[13]          
The Will makes no provision for Lee, citing their domestic
contract.
[14]          
Peter was appointed as the Deceased’s sole attorney for property
and personal care pursuant to Powers of Attorney for Property and Personal Care
dated July 25, 2018.
[15]          
As at the date of the Deceased’s death, his largest asset was the
property municipally known as 14 Moreau Parkway, Tiny, Ontario (the “Home”). The
Home is a cottage, which was registered solely in the Deceased’s name.
[16]          
The Home sold in or around May 17, 2021 for $675,000. The
Deceased’s personal property was sold for $2,800. He had one bank account with
$1,792.49 on deposit on the date of his death.
[17]          
The Deceased had a monthly income of approximately $2,244.58. He
was receiving monthly CPP payments of $727; OAS payments of $615; a German
pension of approximately $810; and GST credits of $92.58 on a bi-monthly basis.
[18]          
Lee was previously married to Oskar Zerfas (“Oskar”). Lee moved
to Toronto from Germany in or around September 1957 after replying to an
advertisement Oskar listed in a German religious newspaper. Prior to moving to
Toronto, Lee resided with her family in Germany.
[19]          
Oskar and Lee’s marriage lasted from October 15, 1957 to October
1, 1990. Together, Oskar and Lee had three children: Karen Sapsworth; Shirley
Zerfas (“Shirley”), and David Zerfas.
[20]          
In or around 1964, Oskar and Lee purchased a poultry farm (the “Farm”).
They raised chickens and turkeys that they sold to Schneider Meats. Over time,
through Lee and Oskar’s hard work, the Farm business grew. The Farm sold for
$782,000 in or around 1979.
[21]          
In or around July 1979, Oskar and Lee used a portion of the sale
proceeds to purchase a property east of Cambridge which Lee and Oskar referred
to as “Edgewood Cedars”. Edgewood Cedars was purchased for $135,000. Oskar, Lee
and their children lived at Edgewood Cedars until it was sold in or around
March 1988.
[22]          
In or around April 1988, Oskar and Lee bought a condo municipally
described as Unit 502, 400 Champlain Boulevard, Cambridge, Ontario (the
“Condo”). They owned the Condo as joint tenants.
[23]          
Lee and Oskar separated on or about July 30, 1990.
[24]          
As part of the separation, it was decided that Oskar and his new
partner would stay in the Condo. Lee moved into an apartment at Kressview
Spring Condo in Preston (the “Preston Apartment”).
[25]          
The Deceased and Lee commenced a relationship shortly after Lee’s
marriage to Oskar ended.
[26]          
The Deceased and Lee met in their mid-life. At the time of
meeting each other, Lee was 52 years old, and the Deceased was 60 years old.
The Deceased and Lee do not have children together.
[27]          
As part of their separation and divorce, Lee and Oskar signed a Separation
Agreement dated August 14, 1990 (the “Separation Agreement”). Prior to signing
the Separation Agreement, Lee received independent legal advice.
[28]          
The Separation Agreement provided a mutual release of support
with an acknowledgement that each party was self-supporting and did not need
support from the other.
[29]          
The Separation Agreement notes the estimated value of the Condo
as $200,000. Oskar was provided with rights of possession to the Condo. As part
of the Separation Agreement, they agreed to sever the joint tenancy such that
they owned the Condo as tenants-in-common.
[30]          
If Lee had predeceased Oskar while still owning an interest in
the Condo, she was to leave her interest to Oskar as part of her estate plan. If
the Condo was sold prior to either Oskar or Lee’s death, the sale proceeds were
to be divided equally between them.
[31]          
The sale proceeds were not divided between them. On April 21,
2011 Lee released her rights and interest in the Condo in exchange for a
payment of $38,000.
[32]          
Further to the Separation Agreement, Lee was entitled to a total
net payment of $220,000. The Separation Agreement set out that Lee and Oskar
held various GICs with a total value of $252,500. Lee’s settlement funds from
her divorce with Oskar were invested in GICs and drawn on as needed.
[33]          
In September 1990, the Deceased listed an advertisement in the
German Echo Newspaper, looking for a companion. Oskar saw the advertisement and
brought it to Lee’s attention. Lee responded to the advertisement and after
meeting a few times, the Deceased and Lee began cohabiting [at the Home] in or
around December 1990.
[34]          
Shortly after beginning their relationship, the couple travelled
to Germany together for three weeks to visit the Deceased’s sister. Lee paid
for the trip to Germany, including all meals.
[35]          
The Deceased and Lee were married on December 19, 1997, and
remained married as at the date of the Deceased’s death.
[36]          
The Deceased and Lee were in a relationship for seven years prior
to their marriage. The Deceased and Lee were married for 23 years. The total
length of the Deceased’s and Lee’s relationship was 30 years.
[37]          
In total, Lee spent in or around six months on her own, after her
divorce from Oskar and before cohabiting with the Deceased. Lee had a 12-month
lease with monthly rent of $800 at the Preston Apartment. At the request of the
Deceased, Lee moved into the Home with him in or around December 1990.
[38]          
Lee attempted to break her lease at the Preston Apartment in
order to move in with the Deceased. The landlord of the Preston Apartment
successfully obtained an order from the Landlord and Tenant Board compelling
Lee to pay a years’ worth of rent in accordance with her lease agreement. Lee
used a portion of her savings from the funds she received as part of her
divorce from Oskar to pay off her debt to the Preston Apartment landlord, who
sued her for rental arrears and costs.
[39]          
Lee used a portion of her divorce settlement proceeds as well as
a portion of her employment earnings for certain personal and household
expenses.
[40]          
Shortly after moving in with the Deceased, Lee started working at
Tim Hortons. At the Deceased’s request, Lee quit working at Tim Hortons shortly
after starting, as the Deceased preferred Lee to be at the Home taking care of it
and his dog. Lee worked in a school cafeteria and the kitchen of a local
restaurant on and off for approximately seven years. In or around September
1997 Lee retired, as the work became more difficult with her age.
[41]          
The Deceased was trained as a carpenter and worked out of
Toronto. He injured his shoulder in or around 1991, which resulted in three
operations. Due to his shoulder injury, the Deceased remained at home from in
or around 1993 onwards.
[42]          
The Deceased and Lee’s first husband Oskar held generational
views about the role of a woman.
[43]          
Despite being together for 30 years, the Deceased and Lee did not
always have a positive relationship. In or around August 1997, Lee attempted to
end the relationship, and moved to live with her daughter Karen in Cambridge. Lee
returned to the Deceased after about two weeks of attempting this living situation,
after which the Deceased and Lee married on December 19, 1997.
[44]          
On June 11, 1991, the Deceased and Lee entered into a
Cohabitation Agreement (the “Cohabitation Agreement”). Prior to signing
the Cohabitation Agreement, Lee obtained independent legal advice from Robert
MacKinnon.
[45]          
The Deceased was responsible for the maintenance of the property
and Lee was responsible for cooking and cleaning.
[46]          
In or around November 2018, the Deceased had a stroke and his
driver’s licence was revoked. The Deceased’s health gradually declined
thereafter. On December 29, 2020, the Deceased was admitted to the hospital.
[47]          
On January 3, 2021, Lee left a note for the Defendants stating:
[48]          
When Lee left the Home, she left behind a key to the property and
to the mailbox, and moved to live with her daughter Shirley.
[49]          
The following day, on January 4, 2021, Lee received a letter from
William J. Leslie purporting to act for the Deceased in finalizing a separation
agreement (the “January 4th Letter”). After receiving the January 4th
Letter, to protect Lee’s interest in the Home, Lee caused a Matrimonial Home
Designation to be registered on title (the “Designation”). An agreement was
reached between Lee and Peter, acting in his capacity as the Deceased’s Power
of Attorney for Property, to have the Designation removed.
[50]          
Lee and Peter agreed that on the sale of the Home, the proceeds
of sale would be held in trust pending written agreement or court order. The
authorization and direction to Stewart Esten LLP to hold the sale proceeds in
trust, was signed by Peter in his capacity as attorney for property for the
Deceased on February 3, 2021.
[51]          
The Deceased died less than a week later, on February 8, 2021.
[52]          
The authorization and direction was updated on March 21, 2021 to
allow for the payment of the Estate’s just expenses and liabilities from the
sale proceeds.
[53]          
Lee has a modest annual income of approximately $29,026.08. Lee
has no capacity to work or return to the workforce. Lee owns a 2005 Chrysler
300 V8.
[54]          
It is also undisputed that as of September 23,
2024, the amount of the sale proceeds of the home remaining in trust was
$490,302.56.
[55]          
Pursuant to s. 57(1) of the SLRA, “dependant”
means,
[56]          
The court’s jurisdiction to make an order for
the support of a dependant out of the estate of a deceased under Part V of the SLRA
is prescribed by s. 58(1):
[57]          
The adequacy of provision for support must be
determined as of the date of the hearing of the application: s. 58(4) of the SLRA.
[58]          
The proper and adequate support of a dependant
is to be assessed having regard to the relevant factors set out in s. 62(1),
and in accordance with the relevant case law. All the circumstances of the case
are to be taken into account. In this case, if Lee is found to have been a
dependant, this court is required to consider:
[59]          
The provisions of the SLRA, as well as
the jurisprudence, indicate that the terms of the Cohabitation Agreement do not
act as an automatic bar to Lee’s claim for support. Subsection 62(1)(m)
provides that any agreement between the spouses is only one of the factors to
be considered. For further certainty, s. 63(4) provides:
[60]          
The case law also establishes that a domestic
contract containing a full and final release may not prevent the court from
making an award of support under the SLRA: Germana v. Fennema Estate,
2024 ONSC 2011, at para. 147; Phillips-Renwick v. Renwick Estate (2003),
2003 CanLII 64219 (ON SC), 229 D.L.R. (4th) 158 (Ont. S.C.), at para. 3; Butts Estate v. Butts,
1999 CarswellOnt 1435 (Ont. C.J.), at para. 42; Virey v. Virey, 2021
ONSC 2893, at para. 25; Anderson v. Anderson, 2019 ONSC 5627, at paras.
17 and 19; and Dagg v. Cameron (Estate), 2015 ONSC 6134 at para. 48.
[61]          
A determination of the adequacy of support must
also take into consideration the moral obligations that arose “as a result of
society’s expectations of what a judicious person would do in the
circumstances”: Tataryn v. Tataryn Estate 1994 CanLII 51 (SCC), [1994] 2 S.C.R. 807 (S.C.C.),
at p. 821.
[62]          
In the leading case of Cummings v. Cummings
(2004), 2004 CanLII 9339 (ON CA), 69 O.R. (3d) 398 (Ont. C.A.), leave to appeal to the S.C.C. refused,
[2004] S.C.C.A. No. 93, at para. 50, the Ontario Court of Appeal directed that
when examining all of the circumstances of an application for dependants’
relief, the court must consider: (a) what legal obligations would have been
imposed on the deceased had the question of provision arisen during his
lifetime; and (b) what moral obligations arise between the deceased and his or
her dependants as a result of society’s expectations of what a judicious person
would do in the circumstances.
[63]          
The SLRA is remedial legislation, which
is to be given a broad and liberal interpretation: Re Mannion (1984), 1984 CanLII 2007 (ON CA), 45
O.R. (2d) 339 (Ont. C.A.) at para. 9.
[64]          
Pursuant to s. 62(3) of the SLRA, this
court may accept such evidence as it considers proper of the Deceased’s
reasons, so far as ascertainable, for making the dispositions in his Will, or
for not making adequate provision for Lee if she is found to be a dependant,
including any statement in writing signed by the Deceased.
[65]          
In Anderson, the court relied on the
Ontario Court of Appeal’s decision in Re Duranceau,  1952 CanLII 102 (ON CA), [1952] O.R. 584
(Ont. C.A.), to hold that “to determine whether a testator has made adequate
provision for the dependant, the Court must consider whether the testator
provided sufficient support to enable the dependant to live ‘neither
luxuriously nor miserably, but decently and comfortably according to his or her
station in life’”.
[66]          
It has also been stated that “it is…not a viable
option for the court to approve a disposition that substantially prefers the
moral claims of adult independent children to those of a long-term, caring and dedicated
spouse[:]” Picketts v. Hall Estate, 2009 BCCA 329, 95 B.C.L.R. (4th) 83,
at para. 62.
[67]          
Lee bears the burden of proof in this case.
Because she and the Deceased were often the only witnesses to their
interactions and the events of their lives, she is an important witness in this
case. Before proceeding further into the analysis, it is important to provide
the court’s assessment of her credibility.
[68]          
Lee swore an affidavit in support of her
initiating application on March 24, 2021. Lee’s evidence is that she and the Deceased
did not have a positive relationship, as described in paragraphs 16 through 28
of that affidavit. She stated that “he was controlling and possessive such that
he often threatened to lock me out of our house, if I disobeyed him. He was
emotionally, psychologically and verbally abusive towards me”.
[69]          
She also said that the Deceased did not have a
positive relationship with her children, and they and their families were not
welcome in the Home. She stated that the Deceased made it difficult for her to
leave the Home to see them. Her relationship with the Deceased’s children and
their families was not positive either, according to the affidavit. It was her
evidence that, on certain occasions when invited to family functions, she would
usually be left alone for long periods of time and would always be excluded
from family photos. She said that the Deceased’s children often took him out
for the day while she was left at home and forbidden to leave.
[70]          
The affidavit also states that the Deceased
treated her so poorly that in August 1997, she tried to terminate their
relationship but returned to him after about two weeks when he proposed
marriage over the phone, as she had nowhere else to go and could not support
herself financially. Although he made promises to change his abusive behaviour,
after they were married he continued to treat her in the same abusive manner as
before.
[71]          
The affidavit also talks about the circumstances
of signing the Cohabitation Agreement. Lee first stated that the Deceased
induced her to move into the Home, and then pressured her into signing a
Cohabitation Agreement. She alleges that in May 1991 the Deceased came home
with a copy of the Cohabitation Agreement and made it clear that she was
expected to sign it in the form it was in. He made it clear that unless the
Cohabitation Agreement was signed, she would not be allowed to continue living
with him. Because she felt that she had no choice, she signed the Cohabitation
Agreement. The deceased later pressured her to see a lawyer to ensure that the
Cohabitation Agreement was legal, from his perspective. She “found a lawyer
through the Yellow Pages and reviewed the Cohabitation Agreement with him.”
When she attempted to address the terms of the Cohabitation Agreement, the
Deceased was not prepared to negotiate, nor did he provide financial disclosure
of his assets. Feeling that she had nowhere else to go and being unable to
support herself financially, she was forced to sign the Cohabitation Agreement.
[72]          
At trial she gave evidence that, had she not
signed the Cohabitation Agreement, she would have had to pack up and would have
been on the street.
[73]          
Portions of her examination for discovery were
read into evidence. The questions and answers that modify or change her affidavit
evidence are reproduced below:
[74]          
In evidence are two letters addressed to Lee
from Mr. MacKinnon. The first is dated June 4, 1991, in which he provided
advice and suggested changes to many paragraphs in the Cohabitation Agreement. One
of the specific pieces of advice that he gave to Lee was that the agreement
should be changed to include a provision that it should be effective only
during cohabitation and should terminate on marriage, at which time a new
agreement could be negotiated based on their financial and emotional
circumstances at the time of marriage.
[75]          
The second letter, dated June 5, 1991, states:
[76]          
At trial, Lee explained that although she
acknowledged that Mr. MacKinnon made suggestions that would have been better
for her, she either did not want to pay or did not have the money to proceed
with the suggested revisions. The latter is patently untrue, as she had
received over $200,000 in her divorce settlement less than a year earlier.
[77]          
Written on the bottom of the letter of June 5,
1991 is a note in Lee’s handwriting, as she admitted, dated March 30, 2001.  It
reads:
[78]          
As will be discussed, these statements are
untrue.  By 2001, Lee still retained most of the investments that she received
through her divorce. Lee did not explain why she wrote this note, ten years
after the Cohabitation Agreement was signed. However, as explained below, it
was a false statement.
[79]          
I conclude that by signing the Cohabitation
Agreement, Lee was acting in reckless disregard of the advice provided to her,
and did not want to spend more money to make changes to the Agreement.
[80]          
The evidence from the transcript continues:
[81]          
During her cross-examination at trial, Lee
admitted that her allegations that the Deceased was psychologically, mentally
or verbally abusive toward her were not her own words and were not true. Each
of the Defendants testified that the Deceased was not an abusive person, and
that they had never heard Lee say anything during his lifetime that is akin to
the allegations found in her affidavit.
[82]          
Lee admitted that from the time that she first
met the Deceased until the Cohabitation Agreement was signed, there were never
any threats, abuse or bad behaviour on the part of the Deceased.
[83]          
She also agreed during cross-examination that
the Defendants would come to visit, and that they invited her to family events
and took her and the Deceased out to restaurants. Her evidence was “they were
kind to me”. She acknowledged sending handwritten notes thanking the Defendants
for their behaviour.
[84]          
She was asked at trial whether she signed the Cohabitation
Agreement because she was happy with it and wanted to live with the Deceased
and her answer was “yes, he was a good man”. Minutes later in her testimony,
she asserted that she had not ever seen the document, and then quickly
corrected herself to say that she did not think that she had ever read it.
[85]          
Lee has kept a diary in which she has recorded
her life events. On August 20, 1990, she recorded that she met the Deceased,
and that they had spent time at the Kressview Apartment and at “his chalet
close to Midland”. On August 25, 1990, she recorded that they were going to
Germany for three weeks. She recorded the date on which the Deceased said that
she could live in his house, being December 1, 1990, after which she noted that
she moved three quarters of her belongings from her apartment. During the 1991
year, she recorded events such as her daughters coming to the Home to visit,
and starting jobs at Tim Horton’s and at a high school in Penetanguishene. No
mention was made of the Cohabitation Agreement or the events surrounding it.
[86]          
I find that this absence assists in confirming
that being asked to sign the Cohabitation Agreement was not a dramatic or
traumatic event in her life, and that it was not a source of conflict between
Lee and the Deceased at the time.  She did not feel forced, coerced or induced
to sign it, but did so, contrary to her lawyer’s advice, because she was
prepared to accept its terms and get on with living with the Deceased.
[87]          
Where a witness provides very different versions
of events on separate occasions, there is good reason to question their
credibility. In this case, the stark inconsistencies between Lee’s affidavit
and her trial evidence are not about minor or inconsequential details, but
about issues that are central to this proceeding. Where a witness has lied
under oath in a sworn affidavit and attempted to mislead the court, it is a
serious matter and taints the entirety of their testimony.
[88]          
Any suggestion that this is because English is
not Lee’s first language, I reject entirely. There is a large body of evidence,
primarily from her diary, notebook, cards and letters, showing that she has an
extensive English vocabulary. Any suggestion that this is because of Lee’s age,
I reject entirely. Observing her provide her oral testimony during the trial,
she easily read all the documents unless they were blurry or dark because of
photocopying issues, and she did not appear to be confused by the questioning
unless she indicated that she was unable to hear the question. In addition, she
was often combative or evasive on key issues under cross-examination.
[89]          
I find that Lee allowed her affidavit to be
written as it was –and to unfortunately place this litigation on an
unnecessarily acrimonious trajectory –because she decided that this narrative
would better serve her goal. I also find that Shirley has reinforced that
narrative. Shirley described that she found the Deceased “quite controlling and
a very insecure man”, although acknowledged that both he and her mother had
domineering personalities.
[90]          
Shirley also testified that she has assisted her
mother during this litigation process, particularly helping her when a computer
was needed.  She referred Lee to her initial lawyer and paid the initial
retainer so that they could understand “what we could do”. She testified that
she would “help her to compile all of the information”. I reach the inescapable
conclusion that Shirley has assisted her mother to present this false narrative
in the affidavit, which raises the issue of her motive for doing so.
[91]          
The fact that Shirley is the executor and sole
beneficiary named under Lee’s current will, made after Lee came to live with
her, may provide some understanding. That will replaced a will made in 2011,
the terms of which benefitted all of Lee’s children equally.
[92]          
With good reason, I do not find Lee credible and
so cannot place much reliance on her testimony. Where her testimony conflicts
with that of any other witness, it is the evidence of the other witness that I
accept as being the more likely version of events unless otherwise stated in
these Reasons.
[93]          
Lee was a spouse, as she and the Deceased
remained married at his death.
[94]          
The Deceased was not under a legal obligation to
provide support to Lee at the time of his death, as there was no agreement or
order that imposed such an obligation. To the contrary, the Cohabitation
Agreement purports to remove any legal obligation for either spouse to support
the other, whether during their lifetimes or from their estates.
[95]          
The relevant questions are whether the Deceased
was providing support to Lee immediately before his death, and if so, whether
he failed to make adequate provision.
[96]          
In Shafman v. Shafman, 2023 ONSC 1391,
Sanfilippo J. considered cases which attempt to define the scope and meaning of
“providing support”. He determined that “providing support” for the purpose of
establishing a relationship of dependency under the SLRA requires an
ongoing, systematic provision of money or money’s kind, including food,
shelter, or the funding of expenses, to support or sustain a recipient where
the recipient is otherwise unable to support themselves: para. 40. In reaching
this conclusion, he cited Bolte v. McDonald et al., 2022 ONSC 1922 (Ont.
S.C.J) as authority for the proposition that support, for dependency purposes,
means, at the very least, “some of the necessities of life, such as food or
shelter”: Bolte, at para. 50, citing Bilics v. Hirjac, 1986
CarswellOnt 1684.
[97]          
Up until the time that the Deceased was taken to
the hospital on December 29, 2020 and Lee vacated the Home on January 3, 2021,
they had lived together continuously for 30 years, other than for two weeks in
1997 before their marriage. During that entire period, they always kept
separate bank accounts.
[98]          
Lee testified that they took a trip to Germany
very soon after they met, in the fall of 1990, where she paid for everything.
She said that by the time that she signed the Cohabitation Agreement, she knew
that all that the Deceased had was his house, his job as a carpenter, and his
truck. She acknowledged that they did not do much as a couple because there was
not enough money to do things. They would go to the Hansa Haus in Brampton, a
German Canadian social club, for New Year’s Eve and attend four membership
meetings every year. She testified that she paid the cost of the entrance fee
and the food, and the Deceased paid for the gas.
[99]          
Throughout the years, the arrangement was that
Lee would give the deceased a monthly cheque consisting of $400 plus one half
of the hydro and gas bills. The evidence shows that this typically combined to
be between $600 to $650 monthly. The amount of $400 never increased. Peter saw
this as a source of tension between the couple. Shirley testified that the
Deceased and her mother often argued because he wanted a larger monetary
contribution from her.
[100]      
There was no direct evidence about the purpose
of the $400 payment. Lee said that this is what she offered in return for the
Deceased’s offer that she come to live at the Home. Lee moved into the Home
only months after meeting the Deceased; in her words “he took me on”. Less than
a year into their relationship, when they signed the Cohabitation Agreement,
they included a clause dealing with the expenses related to the Home. It
states:
[101]      
It further provides, at paragraph 9, that “the
parties will contribute to the cost of their common support according to their
respective financial abilities”.
[102]      
In Mr. MacKinnon’s letter, dated July 4, 1991,
he wrote:
[103]      
During that entire period, the Deceased looked
after fixing things and the costs of maintenance of the Home. Any supplies for
fixing or maintaining the property were purchased from a line of credit that
was his sole debt, and in the later years, he paid for hired assistance with
yard work and snow removal. Lee, Peter and Rainer collectively provided this
evidence.
[104]      
Lee looked after the inside of the home and the
domestic tasks and the Deceased cared for the outside until ill health made him
slow down, particularly after a stroke in the fall of 2018.
[105]      
When Peter began to take over doing his father’s
banking once the Deceased’s driver’s licence was taken away after his stroke,
he would tell Peter to deposit Lee’s cheques and put the money against his line
of credit. Peter’s evidence was that the Deceased used the line of credit to
pay for necessary repairs around the house. At the time of his death, there was
$34,304.98 owing on it.
[106]      
The Deceased had additional debts at the time of
his death: a Bank of Nova Scotia Visa with a balance of $1094.47; electricity
and gas bills totaling $448.50; house insurance of $88.25 and realty taxes and
water charges of $208.24 monthly.
[107]      
With respect to food, Lee’s evidence was that
the Deceased would contribute $100 each week and she would “make up the
difference” when she was still buying the groceries. In the later years, Rainer
and Peter took over the task of grocery shopping; no evidence was given about
their respective contributions at that time other than Lee’s evidence that Peter
would withdraw money from the Deceased’s account.
[108]      
Lee’s evidence was that she always paid a part
of large purchases. For example, if the parties needed a new fridge, her
evidence is that the Deceased would pay “like 60% and I’d make up the
difference”. However, when the Deceased asked her to co-sign for a van early in
their relationship she refused because she did not want to be liable for the
debt if he defaulted.
[109]      
Lee also testified that “he paid all the bills
and hydro and I looked after myself. What was his was his and what was mine was
mine. I had no expenses, only what I had to give him”. When asked whether she
only consumed what she paid for over those 30 years, her response was “maybe I
did”.
[110]      
In the final year of their married life, Lee’s
T1 General indicates that her Line 150 income was $12,791 for 2020. According
to a draft Form 13.1 prepared on behalf of the Deceased following his
declaration of a separation, his income in 2020 was $26,598, which is
consistent with his 2019 Notice of Assessment showing Total Income of
$26,986.
[111]      
The evidence leads me to find that the purpose
of the $400 payment was to contribute to living expenses associated with
shelter, food and maintenance of the home. However, their contribution was not
equal, even more so after Lee stopped working. Lee would never have been able
to live on her own at a cost of $600 to $650 per month for 30 years.
[112]      
I reject Lee’s evidence that they “didn’t
discuss money” throughout their years together. There is an abundance of
evidence that supports a finding that Lee has been quite focused on money
throughout her adult life, as one can see from her diary entries. It is far
more likely, as Peter and Shirley testified, that the Deceased did ask her to
increase her contribution because it no longer accorded with their Agreement as
time passed.
[113]      
Collectively, this evidence leads me to the
conclusion that Lee was in a relationship of dependency on the Deceased up
until January 3, 2021 when she vacated the Home. The Deceased supplied her with
a residence, owned entirely by him. The Deceased performed functions, such as
home repair, yard work and maintenance that Lee would otherwise have had to pay
for had she been maintaining her own residence. He played a larger role in funding
the costs associated with providing shelter and food, including maintaining a
line of credit. He also assisted in funding and facilitating their relatively
limited social life. He offered Lee extended family supports, in which his own
children seem to have played a significant role. Thank you notes and cards sent
by Lee to the children establish these interrelationships.
[114]      
Together they formed an interdependency – emotional,
physical and financial – in which, by pooling resources, they had a better standard
of living from an economic point of view than either would have had living alone.
[115]      
Had Lee predeceased the Deceased and had he
chosen to make a similar SLRA application, the same conclusion could
have been reached about his dependency.
[116]      
The Defendants have led evidence to attempt to
establish that Lee abandoned the Home and the Deceased, intending to separate
from him. Rainer gave evidence that on December 29, 2020 Lee insisted that the
Deceased be removed from the home saying “take your father, I can’t take care
of him anymore”. Evidence was given by Ingrid about a phone conversation that
she had with Lee on December 30, 2020 in which Lee told her that she could not
take care of her husband anymore and that if he was brought back to the Home,
she would not be there. During that conversation, Lee told her that “my people
say that I can sue for 50%”.
[117]      
On January 3, 2021, after repeatedly trying to
call Lee to update her on their father’s health, Rainer and Peter decided to go
to the house. They found Lee, Shirley, Karen and other family members packing
up Lee’s belongings. The family was also in the process of leaving two notes.
The first was the one referenced in the Agreed Facts, written by Lee and
stating, in part “I am unable to stay in this home alone and maintain this home
anymore. I am incapable of caring without full-time assistance for your
father”. The other note, written by Karen, indicated that the water main valve
had been shut off to prevent water damage, but no utilities had been
disconnected because everything was in the Deceased’s name. It stated that Lee
could be contacted about her husband on Shirley’s cell phone, and that she was
leaving the house and mailbox keys. Lee’s evidence was that she intended to
vacate the Home permanently.
[118]      
When Lee’s departure was relayed to the Deceased
by his children through a video call while he was in the hospital on January 4,
2021, according to Peter his response was to say “get rid of her”. Peter asked
him if he wanted him to call a lawyer, saying that his father was still
coherent that day. That same day, arrangements were made to have the Deceased
speak with Mr. Leslie. The January 4th Letter was sent to Lee on
that same date, indicating that Mr. Leslie had been instructed to negotiate a
separation agreement as a result of the “long-standing separation”. Peter
agreed that this characterization was not accurate.
[119]      
Lee’s evidence was that she had no intention of
separating from the Deceased. This does raise the question of why she referred
to obtaining one-half of the assets when she was speaking to Ingrid. This type
of aggressive comment is, I find, in keeping with Lee’s general temperament,
both as observed during the trial and as supported by the evidence.
[120]      
There are other examples: Ingrid testified that
on December 27, 2020, she and her husband went out to check on the couple
because Peter informed her that he had been getting many frantic calls from Lee
about snow removal. On that date, Ingrid broached the topic of the older couple
moving into town so that they could access services for seniors. Lee’s abrupt
response, which I believe was made, was to suggest that Ingrid was trying to
“throw your dad out like a dirty old dog”.
[121]      
Ingrid gave other evidence, which is
corroborated by a note made by the Deceased bearing the date of August 14,
2002, that the Deceased had to call Karen to inform her that Lee had made a
comment that she was going to kill him with in axe because of a tree stump that
he had left sticking up from the ground. Ingrid would receive phone calls
throughout the relationship in which her father would start the conversation by
saying “I have a big problem”, and these words would be a prelude to him
telling her something troubling about his relationship with Lee.
[122]      
Rainer testified that on June 21, 2020 he had to
ask the police to do a wellness check on the couple after receiving a call from
his father after midnight, in which the Deceased sounded very upset. He
reported that his father told him that Lee was running around the cottage going
crazy, and he did not know what to do. The police attended and Rainer was
informed that Lee refused to go to the hospital and that she had settled down. Rainer’s
evidence was that Shirley took Lee to her doctor the next day.
[123]      
Rainer also testified about her treatment of the
Deceased on December 29, 2020, when Lee called him because she wanted him to be
removed from the Home. The Deceased came out of the Home using his walker, with
Lee walking behind him, and he said that she literally pushed the Deceased into
him with his walker.
[124]      
Lee testified that after they were married, the
relationship continued as it had been before, which was “when it was good, it
was very good, when it was bad, it was terrible”.
[125]      
In summary, the portrait painted by the evidence
is that Lee has a volatile personality that likely contributed to the
“terrible” periods. There is strong evidence that it was a hostile and toxic
marriage at times. However, there is also photographic evidence of celebratory
times and obviously none of these earlier events caused the Deceased sufficient
concern to end the relationship, or to speak to his children about a settled
intention to do so.
[126]      
There is also evidence from Shirley that she
tried to help her mother attempt to contact the hospital following the
Deceased’s admission, and evidence from Ingrid that someone from the hospital
spoke with Lee to update her on her husband’s condition. The note left by Lee
offers a means by which the Defendants could get in touch with her. There is
also no evidence, during the time that Peter and Rainer were at the home on
January 3 with Lee and her family, that the issue of a permanent marital
separation was ever raised.  Lee’s comment that she “would not be here” if the
Deceased was brought home must be taken in the context of her other note,
expressing the difficulties she was having as a caregiver.
[127]      
Upon the Deceased’s admission to hospital on
December 30, 2020 he received a geriatric consult, where, in a report dated
January 3, 2021 from Dr. Darvesh, several observations were made: “as per the
assessment of physio- and occupational therapy, this gentleman is a two or
three person assist, and in fact, cannot provide care for himself. He would be
most likely a total care dependant”; “per the documentation, there is a
significant degree of caregiver burnout and that his wife, who is a stepmother
to his two sons, is no longer able to provide care for him”; “Mr. Scharfenberg
is a 90-year-old gentleman with dense expressive aphasia, possibly residual
from a previous CVA and significant cognitive and functional decline… Currently
he likely has advanced mixed dementia. His mobility status is quite poor and
this certainly can be a discharge barrier for him”; and “he has two sons that
live in Barrie but they, unfortunately are also unable to provide the level of
care he needs”. The LHIN records note that Peter took his father to a hearing
test a week prior to his admission to hospital where the deceased was unable to
follow simple instructions.
[128]      
The evidence does not persuade me on a balance
of probabilities that Lee had formed the intention to live separate and apart
from the Deceased on a permanent basis, although it is clear that she was
planning to leave the Home and was overwhelmed by her caregiving role.  I find that
it was Lee’s caregiver burnout and recognition that she could no longer care
for her husband in the Home if he was discharged from hospital that led to her
decision to leave the Home permanently. I do not accept that she was intending
a marital separation. Unfortunately, arrangements were not made through the hospital
co-ordinator that would allow her to speak to her husband after his admission.
Events were relayed through his children, undoubtedly with their own
interpretation of Lee’s intentions. I am also not convinced, based on the
medical records, that the Deceased had the facility on January 4, 2021 to fully
assess the possible motivations behind Lee’s actions and make a permanent
decision to end his marriage.
[129]      
Lee has met the burden of establishing that she
was a dependant of the Deceased at the time of his death.
[130]      
The Deceased made no provision for Lee in his
Will, nor did he own any assets for which she could be named as a beneficiary
other than a pension that the Deceased was receiving from Germany. Lee is now
receiving a survivor benefit from that pension in the amount of $6,702.27
annually.
[131]      
Lee’s position is that by failing to make any
provision for her in his Will, the Deceased failed to make adequate provision
for her current and future needs and fell far short of his moral obligation to
her.
[132]      
The factors listed in s. 62(1) must be
considered, along with all the circumstances of the case, to determine the
amount of support, if any, and its duration.
[133]      
Lee provided evidence that as of May 6, 2024,
she had assets of $167,620.44, corroborated by a TD Canada Trust statement
detailing her TFSA, GIC and savings accounts. It was her evidence that she only
deals with that bank. Also in evidence is a TD Canada Trust statement from the
month of the Deceased’s death, showing that she had $147,354.23 at that time.
This amount, according to her, is what remained from the amount that she
received from her first marriage.
[134]      
Her testimony was that she does not need any
more money right now, but her concern was how long her savings would last.
[135]      
There is contradictory evidence: Peter’s
affidavit provides evidence that his father had knowledge that Lee had $500,000
at the time that she signed the Cohabitation Agreement. At paragraph 8, his
affidavit provides:
[136]      
Peter also testified that he overheard her
speaking to someone else at some point, telling them that she had $500,000 in
savings. Even more compelling is Ingrid’s evidence that Lee spoke to her a good
deal about her life before meeting the Deceased and told Ingrid that she came
away from her divorce with $500,000.
[137]      
Lee may have lived under the shadow of her first
husband’s control, but I find that she is financially shrewd. As I have
indicated, she kept careful track of the cost of acquisitions made over the
years. She knew the legal result of co-signing for a debt. She remains in
charge of her banking and investments. Shirley testified that her mother is a
very good bookkeeper. Shirley received a loan from her mother of $20,000 in
recent years and has paid it back in increments of $1,000 per month. She
testified that one or two payments remain, and stated that her mother would
certainly let her know if that was not accurate.
[138]      
Additional evidence was led on the issue of
whether the investment summary produced by Lee is the sum total of her savings,
relating to the issue of Lee’s release of her interest in the Condo in 2011. Lee’s
decision was never satisfactorily explained. She accepted only $38,000 for 50%
of its value, and this was 21 years after Lee and Oskar’s separation agreement
was signed. In 1990, according to the Separation Agreement, the Condo was worth
$200,000. It was purchased for $157,000 on October 17, 1987. There is no
evidence of what it was worth in 2011. Oskar continues to live in the Condo,
with his spouse Rita.
[139]      
Significantly, the Condo is an asset that could
still belong to Lee. Under the terms of her and Oskar’s Separation Agreement,
his right to occupy the Condo lasted only during his lifetime. If still married
to Rita at the time of his death, Rita was to have the right to occupy it for
twelve months thereafter, following which it was to be sold and Lee was to
receive 50% of the proceeds of sale.
[140]      
Oskar, now 94 years of age, testified at the
trial. He testified that the GICs that Lee received from the marriage,
referenced in the Separation Agreement and amounting to $220,000, was all that
was left from the sale of the Farm even though he recalled that it sold for
approximately $800,000.
[141]      
He stated that $38,000 was a number that the two
of them reached for his buyout of Lee’s interest in the Condo because “at that
time housing was so low.” It was his evidence that the Condo was only worth
$160,000 to $170,000 when Lee transferred her share, even lower than what it
was worth 21 years earlier. Other than his assertions of the reduced housing
market, Oskar provided various other reasons for Lee not receiving one-half of
the equity, such as Lee not being a greedy person, that he had paid various
things after the divorce, and that they were Christians and did not work for
money. With respect to his second point, the Separation Agreement shows that
many of the items that Oskar paid for after the divorce came from a jointly
held GIC worth $40,000. None of his testimony adequately explains why Lee
received such a low figure.
[142]      
Lee had a different story, that had nothing to
do with real estate prices or any of the other justifications given by Oskar.
She said that Oskar told her that that amount was all that she was getting, and
that he said “because you got money before”. She admitted that she knew that
the Condo was worth more but insisted that there was nothing that she could
have done.
[143]      
Her decision becomes even more difficult to
understand when one considers what occurred when Edgewood Cedars was sold.
Oskar testified that when it sold for $300,000, he held a vendor-take back
mortgage for the full sale price. At some undefined point in time, the mortgage
was paid out. Oskar’s recollection was that the mortgage was not held for very
long, but he was searching his memory from 35 years ago since he did not retain
any of the documents. Their separation agreement addresses this mortgage,
indicating that Lee assigned her interest in the mortgage, in the approximate
amount of $200,000, to Oskar. All of which shows that Oskar also received
significant funds resulting from the marriage breakdown. The suggestion that
Lee received such a low amount for the Condo because she had received money
before is not persuasive.
[144]      
Lee did not need the money in 2011, so this
cannot account for her decision. As she acknowledged, most of her expenses were
covered beyond her monthly contribution of $400 and a portion of the utilities.
There was no explanation in the evidence for what triggered the transfer of the
Condo in 2011.
[145]      
The Defendants have asked that an inference be
drawn that Lee did not insist on receiving her share of the equity from the
Condo either because she had enough money to provide for her needs over her
lifetime, or because she had already received an amount of money through her
divorce proceeding that ultimately left her and Oskar in an equal position even
with this unequal division on the Condo.
[146]      
However, Lee’s income tax returns show that 1990
was the year in which she had the highest interest earnings, in the range of
$25,000. Since that year, her earned interest income has reduced. If she is
hiding money, it is not on deposit in a bank. I find it is not a reasonable
leap to conclude that she kept only a portion of her savings invested from 1990
onward, especially since the Cohabitation Agreement protected those assets.
[147]      
On a balance of probabilities, I conclude that
Lee currently has savings of approximately $167,620.44.
[148]      
Lee’s income now appears to be comprised of Old
Age Security and Canada Pension Plan payments, investment interest, and the
German survivor pension, totalling $29,783.20 in 2023. There is no evidence
that this income is anticipated to change unless she draws down on her
investments.
[149]      
Lee stopped working in 1997 and is now 86 years old.
She has no capacity to contribute to her own support.
[150]      
Lee is in relatively good health other than
having varicose veins and bilateral hearing loss. She has also been
investigated for asymptomatic atrial fibrillation. Several of the medical notes
reference her being at risk for or having diabetes mellitus; by 2021 she
appears to have received a diagnosis of type 2 diabetes. She takes medication
for her heart and/or blood pressure; it was not clear on the evidence. Lee uses
dentures; last year she may have paid $3,000 for new dentures according to a
notation on a bank statement. However, there is no evidence of how often this expense
will be required.
[151]      
Lee suffered a fall on ice while still living at
the Home and hurt her knee. There is no evidence that she has received
investigation or treatment for her knee; her evidence was that Shirley has told
her that they must wait until the trial is over to do anything about her knee.
She now uses a walker or cane. She continues to drive. She goes out for little
walks and takes her daughter’s dog with her.
[152]      
Shirley’s evidence was that she sees a decline
in her mother’s mobility and cognition, but she is still in good health. She
anticipates that her mother’s health will deteriorate over time.
[153]      
Lee’s counsel asks that this court apply
Statistics Canada’s Life Expectancy Charts to conclude that Lee has a life
expectancy of approximately seven years.
[154]      
Lee currently lives in Shirley’s home, in a
family room that has been modified to become Lee’s bedroom. Shirley also
refurbished a bathroom when her mother came to live with her.
[155]      
There is no evidence that Lee has any current
needs that are not being met, beyond the need for an exterior ramp to the front
door.
[156]      
Lee and Shirley have different views about this
arrangement. Shirley testified that having Lee there has had a large impact on
their family life, as she also has her two adult children, her husband and a
dog living in the home. Lee has been living there for three years and Shirley
would like to see her in her own home, whether that is an apartment or an
assisted living facility.
[157]      
Shirley has not placed her mother on a waiting
list for a nursing home or assisted living facility because of Lee’s relatively
good health, and because she is waiting for the outcome of this litigation.
[158]      
Lee testified that she would rather live with
her daughter than in an apartment and is not ready to go to a retirement or
nursing home. She stated that she was very happy in her current arrangement.
She pays Shirley $700 per month, and Lee and Shirley both testified that she
contributes to housekeeping as she is able. It was Lee’s evidence that she does
the dishes, unloads the dishwasher, takes care of the laundry and washes
floors.
[159]      
Shirley lives in Keswick. She has provided
evidence of the cost of apartments in her area. She has also investigated the
cost of personal support workers from one agency that she is familiar with, providing
a quote for the monthly cost for one long-term care home, Aspira Cedarvale
Lodge Retirement Living (“Aspira”), which she stated was the only such home
available in Keswick.
[160]      
Three possible scenarios have been put forward
based on these options. The first is that Lee would move to rented accommodation
costing $2,000 per month and have assistance from a personal support worker
four hours daily, seven days per week at a cost of $4,088 per month. She would
run an annual deficit of $73,671 according to this scenario and expend all her
assets into 2.29 years. The total shortfall remaining over the balance of her assumed
life expectancy would be $359,513.
[161]      
The second scenario is the same as the first,
except with the personal support worker’s assistance reduced to four days per
week. In this scenario the total shortfall remaining over the balance of her assumed
life expectancy is $234,733.
[162]      
In the third scenario, Lee would live at Aspira
at a cost of $4,390 per month. This leaves a total shortfall over the remainder
of her life expectancy of $213,714.
[163]      
There are many concerns with this evidence,
which has been used to substantiate Lee’s claim that she should receive a lump
sum of $300,000. First is with respect to the cost of a personal support
worker. There is no medical evidence that Lee currently requires a personal
support worker or that she will in the future. Other than needing help with
stairs, she lives independently. She performs housekeeping tasks. She looks
after her finances. There is no evidence that she is unable to carry out any of
her personal care activities. There is no evidence that she has cognitive
difficulties.
[164]      
If her knee is currently limiting her mobility
and requires surgery as suggested – about which there is no medical evidence
providing a diagnosis or treatment recommendations – there is no evidence that
she would require a personal support worker after she recovers mobility
following any potential surgery.
[165]      
Removing a personal support worker from the
equation results in a projected lifetime shortfall of only $7,867.
[166]      
With respect to the cost of a residential or
long-term care home, no evidence was provided of the costs any other options in
the larger communities surrounding Keswick, such as Innisfil, Barrie, Alliston
or Newmarket. And there was no evidence of the cost of nursing homes in this
geographic area, for when or if that time comes.
[167]      
The other issue with these calculations is that
there is no evidence of whether Lee’s projected life expectancy should be
adjusted for premorbid factors such as diabetes or her cardiac dysrhythmia. The
reliability of the assumed life expectancy is in question.
[168]      
Lee has no potential to provide for her own
support other than from her own savings.
[169]      
As previously stated, Lee and the Deceased began
the relationship in September 1990 and began cohabiting in or around December
1990. They married on December 19, 1997 and remained married as of the date of
the Deceased’s death.
[170]      
The evidence is clear that Lee looked after the
domestic tasks at the Home, and assisted with the outside tasks including yard
work and snow shoveling. As the Deceased aged, and particularly following his
stroke, she provided increased care to the Deceased until it became too
challenging for her.
[171]      
I also accept the evidence of the Defendants
that Lee rebuffed any suggestions and efforts made by them to enlist
third-party, professional help for their father, as well as their suggestion
that the property be sold and they move into Barrie or Midland where they could
access more services for the elderly. There was reliable evidence that the Defendants
had reached out to services to assess the couple’s needs, and both declined the
help.
[172]      
There is evidence that Lee made a contribution
to part of the cost of purchasing new appliances when necessary. As previously
discussed, she also provided the deceased with $400 a month and a contribution
toward some of the utilities.
[173]      
Peter testified that as his father aged, he
began to pay to have yard work and snow removal done by Conrad Deroches. Usually
the Deceased would pay, but when Lee called Conrad she would take money from the
Deceased’s wallet to pay for his services.
[174]      
Peter’s evidence is that Lee did not
consistently pay this money to the Deceased, as there were missed payments over
the years. He has reviewed the Deceased’s bank statements and determined that
Lee owed the Deceased $9,593.70 when she left on January 3, 2021. Although Lee
gave Peter a cheque for December 2020, she did not deny the unpaid amounts.
[175]      
The Deceased stopped working permanently in
1993, less than three years into their relationship. There is no evidence that Lee
contributed to the Deceased’s career as a carpenter, which he had been carrying
out for decades before meeting her.
[176]      
Lee has no other dependants.
[177]      
The Home was the Deceased’s largest asset, which
sold for $675,000. The Defendants testified that the Home was all that the
Deceased wanted at the time of their parents’ divorce. When the Deceased and
the Defendants’ mother divorced, she received the house in Brampton and all of
the furniture, while he received the Home.
[178]      
The Deceased built it himself when the children
were young, using the money from the family’s baby-bonus cheques. It was the
family cottage throughout their lives and, according to the Defendants, was
very important to their father.
[179]      
The Deceased also had a chequing account with
less than $2,000 on deposit, some tools, and a lawn tractor with attachments.
Peter has valued the total estate at $679,592.49. The Deceased had liabilities
totalling $36,144.44 at the time of his death. The net value of his estate was
$643,448.05.
[180]      
The Cohabitation Agreement is a comprehensive
document, prepared by a lawyer. I have already discussed the extent to which
Lee obtained legal advice in respect of it. The relevant provisions of the
Cohabitation Agreement are set out below:
[181]      
The Cohabitation Agreement also containes
standard clauses indicating that each party had received and was satisfied with
the financial disclosure from the other, that each personally and through their
lawyers had jointly prepared the Agreement, that each had received independent
legal advice, understood his or her respective rights and obligations under the
Agreement and was signing the Agreement voluntarily.
[182]      
All of the Defendants testified about the
creation of the Cohabitation Agreement.
[183]      
Rainer testified that when he learned that Lee
had moved into the Home he expressed his concern to his father that he was
putting himself in a “position”. Rainer reminded his father that he did not
want to lose the other half of what he had just lost through his divorce.
[184]      
As a result of this conversation with Rainer,
the Deceased went a lawyer in Brampton and engaged him to prepare the
Cohabitation Agreement. After it was signed, his father gave him a copy and
told him to hang onto it because it was important. Rainer kept his copy from
that point on.
[185]      
Ingrid also received a copy from her father in
or around June 1991. He told her that he was protected, his house was protected
and “what’s mine is mine and hers is hers”. He frequently referred to the Cohabitation
Agreement when he was speaking with Ingrid about his difficulties with Lee. It
was her evidence that she often heard her father make the same refrain, “what’s
mine is mine…”.
[186]      
After Lee expressed to Ingrid that she was being
advised by “her people” that she could sue for 50%, Ingrid spoke to her father
the next day by telephone. They discussed Lee’s declaration that she was not
going to stay at the house if the Deceased came home. He once again referenced
the Cohabitation Agreement. When the Defendants were having their virtual calls
with him at the hospital and discussing the decision to sell the Home, he again
referred to the Cohabitation Agreement.
[187]      
Peter was working out of the province at the
time of his parents’ separation. He returned to Ontario for Christmas 1990, which
was when he learned that Lee had entered his father’s life. After he moved back
to Ontario permanently in February 1992, his father gave him a copy of the
Cohabitation Agreement. The Deceased instructed him to hang onto it and told
him that it was very important.
[188]      
After the Deceased had his stroke, the
defendants began to have suspicions about Lee’s intentions. Peter testified
that they saw a lawyer to review the Cohabitation Agreement, at which point the
Deceased updated his Will.
[189]      
When they were cleaning out the Home, the Defendants
found a handwritten note in the Deceased’s bedside table bearing the date of
January 31, 1997 and signed by him. It reads, in part:
[190]      
The content of the note leads me to conclude
that it is incorrectly dated, as it references events that occurred later than
January 31, 1997.
[191]      
Lee’s former and most current testamentary
documents are in evidence. The first three of these were made during the time
of her cohabitation and marriage with the Deceased. None of them made any
provision for the Deceased.
[192]      
There was no previous distribution or division
of property.
[193]      
There are none.
[194]      
In addition to the evidence already reviewed,
there is further evidence of the turbulent relationship between Lee and the
Deceased.
[195]      
In his note dated January 31, 1997, the Deceased
recounted an incident in which Lee grabbed the arm that had muscle damage and
he wrote that he thought she was going to break his arm. The note states: “At
this time she told, she would throw me down the stairs to kill me, and nothing
is going to happen to her. She would be insane in this moment. She spoke many
times over killings witch (which) happening, what people did wrong to be cut”.
[196]      
At the end of the note he wrote “I am not get
over this. I am sorry but I have to speak to some one, I am almost on the end”.
[197]      
There is no evidence that he ever gave this note
to anyone or discussed this incident with his children.
[198]      
The Defendants believe that Lee did push their
father down the stairs at some point, and have provided photographs that they
say he took of his facial bruises. None of them observed this event, and he did
not speak to any of them about it. Lee denies that she ever tried to harm the
Deceased, stating that she was “always good to him”.
[199]      
I also accept the evidence that in December
2020, Lee insisted to Rainer that the Deceased be removed from the home. It was
in this time that she expressed her intention that she would not participating
in caring for him if he was brought back home, and that she would leave. She
was not open to reasonably speaking with the Defendants about a plan for her
husband’s care.
[200]      
Lee’s affidavit states that the Deceased treated
her so poorly that in August, 1997, she tried to terminate their relationship
but returned to him after about two weeks, when he proposed marriage over the
phone, “as I had nowhere else to go and could not support myself financially”.
[201]      
In her evidence, Lee attempted to rationalize
her decision to separate at that time on the basis that she had to do too much
work “every day”, such as raking 80 or 100 bags of leaves, and because of “all
of the troubles that I went through every day”. She moved to her daughter
Karen’s home for two weeks. But life at Karen’s home turned out to be worse, as
Karen had small children and Lee did not enjoy living there. According to her,
the marriage was his idea, he asked that she return because he missed her, and
she agreed.
[202]      
Like most of Lee’s evidence, I do not accept her
rendition of events. It is impossible to know how the marriage came about, but
the evidence leads me to conclude that Lee’s primary motive in pursuing and
remaining in the relationship was that it provided her with a home and was
financially beneficial to her.
[203]      
In her affidavit, she stated that one of the reasons
that she left the Home in January, 2021 was that she was concerned that the
Defendants would force her to pay the full cost of maintaining the Home if the
Deceased did not return from the hospital. There is no evidence showing that
any of the Defendants had ever expressed such an intention, and Ingrid
specifically denied that such a suggestion was ever made.
[204]      
They cohabited for 30 years.
[205]      
Lee’s affidavit states that she retired in
September 1997, as she found working to be more and more difficult. At that
point she would have been 60 years old. She also stated that she worked outside
the home to escape his abuse, which she later agreed did not exist.
[206]      
I find that it was not the responsibilities that
Lee assumed during cohabitation that caused her to stop working. She stopped
working because she had secured the Deceased’s promise to marry her only a few weeks
before she stopped working.
[207]      
Lee provided housekeeping and other domestic
services, and attended to the care needs of the Deceased after his stroke and
as his health declined.
[208]      
Although this point was not argued by Mr.
Leslie, Lee has a legal right to be financially supported by her children as
prescribed by s. 32 of the Family Law Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. F.3.
[209]      
Section 32 of that statute provides that every
child who is not a minor has an obligation to provide support, in accordance
with need, for his or her parent who has cared for or provided support for the
child, to the extent that the child is capable of doing so. See Pecore v.
Pecore, 2007 SCC 17, [2007] 1 S.C.R. 795, at para. 36.
[210]      
I agree with the submissions of Ms. Osmar that
the SLRA restricts the Deceased’s testamentary freedom by providing for
correction where the testator fails to make adequate provision for the support
of a dependant. The court must be prepared to remedy situations in which the
law and public policy considerations dictate that a dependant be provided with
support, where the testator failed to do so.
[211]      
This is not such a situation. No quantum should
be provided in the circumstances of this case even though Lee was a dependant
at the time the Deceased passed away.
[212]      
Lee was self-sufficient when she and Oskar
divorced, as their Separation Agreement acknowledges.  She was only 52 years
old when she met the Deceased, had her own apartment, was in good health, and
had approximately $220,000 in investments. She had assisted in operating a
business on the Farm for 15 years. She opted to move into the Deceased’s
residence very quickly after meeting the him so that her costs of living were substantially
reduced. The evidence leads me to conclude that this was a relationship and
cohabitation formed primarily out of Lee’s desire for self-preservation,
motivated by money.
[213]      
While I have not placed great weight on this
evidence, there is certainly evidence of strife in the marriage that has led me
to the conclusion that Lee’s motives in remaining in the marriage were
questionable. I find that she has been opportunistic throughout, and that she
has had her eye on “50%” for some time prior to the Deceased’s death, with
Shirley’s encouragement.
[214]      
While there is some evidence that Lee
contributed to some appliances and the cost of replacement flooring, at the end
of 30 years of cohabitation she still had a substantial portion of the
investments that she had received from her first marriage. Meanwhile, the
deceased was having to access a line of credit to meet their needs. Just
because there is some evidence that Lee’s $400 payment was being applied to the
line of credit (and there is no evidence of how long that had been occurring)
does not mean that Lee contributed equally, or at all, to the cost of the
maintenance and upkeep of the Home. I accept that the Deceased wanted her to
pay more because he understood that $4,800 per year, a figure that never changed,
was inadequate to pay for the expenses related to the Home and their other
living expenses. I find that over the course of the cohabitation and marriage,
she did not comply with the terms of the Cohabitation Agreement that required
her to share equally the expenses related to upkeep and repair of the
residence, and for the insurance and taxes as required. In summary, Lee did not
suffer any financial detriment from this relationship; instead, it benefitted
her financially.
[215]      
None of the above, on its own, would compel the
conclusion that I have reached in this case.  However, against this backdrop,
in April 2011 Lee opted to allow her ex-husband to have her interest in a major
asset for only $38,000, without even having its value determined. The Condo was
not encumbered by any secured debt. She did not need the money at the time and
her explanation for doing so makes no sense. As I weigh the testator’s moral
duty to provide for his wife, I question how it is reasonable to provide for
Lee out of this estate when she was reckless with respect to her own security.
As a result of her actions, she divested herself of her own asset, which, as of
the date of the trial, she still could have owned. The Condo is located in
Cambridge, ON. While its value is unknown, her share may well have provided for
all of Lee’s projected needs in the future.
[216]      
Lee’s counsel has argued that what may have
occurred over twenty years ago at the time of Lee’s divorce is irrelevant to
the issues that this court has to decide. While I would never want this ruling
to be interpreted as encouraging the need for a forensic examination of a dependant’s
financial history, on the facts of this particular case, Lee’s acquisition and
ownership of the Condo and her subsequent decision to divest herself of it are important.
[217]      
Even though Lee was in two marriages in which
her husbands held “generational views of women”, this alone cannot excuse
signing over her interest without insisting on her fair share. As I have
concluded, she is both financially astute and an assertive individual. In 2011,
when she released her interest in the Condo, contemporary standards and social
norms had moved well beyond expecting women to do as their husbands (or
ex-husbands) dictated. I find that she was simply willfully blind to her legal
rights for reasons that will never be known, just as she was when she ignored
legal advice from Mr. McKinnon when he advised her not to sign the Cohabitation
Agreement.
[218]      
Had this obligation arisen during the Deceased’s
lifetime, Lee’s inability to account for why she divested herself of this major
asset would, in my view, likely bar any spousal support claim.
[219]      
In Cummings, the court considered the
differences between the wording of the British Columbia Wills Variation Act,
R.S.B.C 1979, c. 435 that was at issue in Tataryn, and the language of
s. 62 of the SLRA. At paras. 42 and 43, the Court in Cummings
concluded:
[220]      
The SLRA is remedial legislation that
compels a just and equitable outcome, and confers on the court a broad
discretion. Moral considerations are relevant to the exercise: Cummings,
at para. 45.  In my view, any fair-minded person would find it repugnant and
unconscionable that Lee be provided with support from this estate when she has
failed to give any rational explanation for why she walked away from the Condo
as a substantial source of money, thereby failing in her own obligation to be
self-supporting. Her self-sufficiency was one of the grounds upon which the
Cohabitation Agreement was premised.  Society would not expect a judicious
person to provide support from his estate in these circumstances.
[221]      
Lee is by no means destitute and has no needs
presently. She does not want to change her situation until required to do so. Her
life expectancy and her future needs remain uncertain on the evidence. I am not
persuaded that she does not have adequate money currently to survive her
lifetime and to meet her modest needs. Further, those needs have not been
adequately proven. She is being supported, in part, by a person who also has a
legal obligation to support her. There is no evidence that she will become a
charge on the state. In many ways, she is not in a much different position now
than when she was living with the Deceased. She is living in someone else’s
home and contributing to her costs through a monthly payment and by performing
domestic work.
[222]      
Weighing all the above and considering all the
factors in s. 62(1) of the SLRA, the just and equitable result is to
hold Lee to the bargain that she made with the Deceased when she signed the
Cohabitation Agreement.
[223]      
For the foregoing reasons, this court orders:
[224]      
If the parties are unable to agree upon the
issue of costs within 14 working days from the date of these Reasons, they may
make submissions in writing. The Defendants’ submissions are due by January 8,
2024, the Plaintiff’s by January 17, 2024 and any reply, if necessary by January
21, 2025. Written submissions are limited to 5 double-spaced pages, plus a Bill
of Costs and any settlement offers. Counsel may extend these dates by mutual
agreement, with notice to me through BarrieSCJJudAssistants@ontario.ca.
[225]      
The submissions are to be filed with the court,
with a copy emailed to my judicial assistant at BarrieSCJJudAssistants@ontario.ca,
in addition to being uploaded to Case Center with hyperlinks as required.