[1]              
Former investors in a Brampton land development
project are raising competing claims for the distribution of funds related to
the project, including funds paid into court.[1]
Broadly speaking, the claimants consist of two groups. The first is made up of claimants
who settled their claims with the Defendants before trial and now seek judgment
with equitable liens over funds traced to the sale of the subject property. The
second consists of claimants who, after a hard-fought 41-day trial and three appeals,
successfully obtained judgment with constructive and resulting trusts for
having been defrauded in the land development scheme.[2]
[2]              
The funds paid into court are not sufficient to
satisfy all of the completing claims.
[3]              
On this distribution motion, the court is asked to
evaluate the competing claims and decide how funds paid into court should be
allocated and distributed.  The preserved funds are subject to equitable lien
claims by the parties who settled before trial, as well as constructive and
resulting trusts granted to the parties who went to trial.  Ultimately, the
court must examine the conduct of the parties in all the circumstances to
assess the equities and decide the priority of the competing interests to
achieve an equitable and just result in allocating the funds for distribution.
[4]              
For the reasons that follow, I find that the
parties that proceeded to trial should have priority over the distribution of the
preserved funds that were paid into court.
[5]              
The following settled their claims and did not
proceed to trial: a) Jurica Biondic, Renato Biondic, Roberta Biondic (the
“Biondics”), and Milena Boland (collectively, the “Biondic Group”)[3]; b) Robert Sokich
(“Sokich”) and Jose Faria (“Faria”)[4];
c) Anton Granic and Katarina Granic (the “Granics”); d) Frank Samardzic (“Samardzic”)
and e) Boris Klecina (“Klecina”).[5] 
Those who settled their claims are collectively referred to as the “Settling
Parties.”
[6]              
Three (3) groups of plaintiffs proceeded to
trial.  The first and largest group consists of the following parties: Aleardo
Caroti, Jacinta Caroti, Ian Grounds, Moraig Grounds, Nancy Kostelac, Brian
McDowell, Biljana Nizalek, Marielle Pelchat-Morris, Wilma Jesus, and Monica
Savona (the “Caroti Group”).  The second consists of: Peter Pichelli, 958041
Ontario Limited, Todd Leslie, and Frank Toth (the “Pichelli Group”). The other
party who proceeded to trial was Anna Bilich (“Bilich”).  Collectively, the
Caroti Group, the Pichelli Group and Bilich are referred to as the “Trial Parties”. 
They are judgment creditors in this litigation.
[7]              
The Defendants vigorously defended the claims
against them at trial.  However, they did not appear on this distribution
motion.
[8]              
To some extent, all of the claimants on this
distribution motion share a common story.  Over 20 years ago, each invested in
a real estate project (the “Project”) that involved acquiring and developing 12.5
acres of land located at 78 Cliffside Drive in Brampton, Ontario (the
“Property”).  Each contributed funds to invest in the Project that the
Defendants promoted.
[9]              
According to the Settling Parties, the only
difference between the groups is that the Settling Parties settled their
disputes, purportedly at a discount, to achieve “finality and certainty”
(i.e., in keeping with the court’s well-established policy to encourage
settlement) while the Trial Parties chose to litigate their claims.  The
Settling Parties now seek judgment based on the respective terms of their
settlements with the Defendants and seek an equitable lien over funds traced to
the sale of the Property by asserting that the Defendants were unjustly
enriched by not paying the settlements. The Settling Parties seek payment of their
settlements based on a pro rata share of the preserved funds paid into
court by claiming that this approach would allow for a fair and equitable
distribution of available funds. They further assert that the punitive damages,
interest, or costs awarded to the Trial Parties at trial fall outside of any
constructive or resulting trusts and, therefore, should be excluded from the pro
rata distribution of preserved funds sought on this motion in favour of
giving priority to each party’s settlement amount or compensatory damages award,
respectively, before any entitlements to punitive damages, interest, or costs
are paid out.
[10]          
The Settling Parties claim that their respective
interests in the preserved funds stand in equal priority to the interests of
the Trial Parties in those funds because the equitable liens asserted by the
Settling Parties are functionally equivalent to the constructive and resulting
trusts awarded at trial to the Trial Parties.  The Settling Parties also note
that all parties agreed at the start of trial that the Settling Parties’
entitlements to Project funds would be decided after trial to avoid any prejudice
to the Trial Parties’ claims that were to be adjudicated at trial.
[11]          
The Trial Parties oppose the payouts proposed by
the Settling Parties and claim that any equitable liens granted on this distribution
motion should not displace the constructive or resulting trusts awarded to the
Trial Parties at trial.  The Trial Parties claim that the Settling Parties had
many prior opportunities to bring motions to preserve funds to properly secure
their settlements with the Defendants, or to otherwise enforce their settlements
when the Defendants had available funds to pay the settlements.  The Trial
Parties submit that it should not be the court’s function or responsibility to
rehabilitate the Settling Parties’ failure to exercise appropriate diligence to
secure funds to pay out or enforce the settlements at this time.
[12]          
The Trial Parties submit that the Settling
Parties are now seeking to prop up their settlement agreements with a form of
judgment that will put them on par with, or in priority to, the judgment
awarded to them after a lengthy and difficult trial to effectively “leap
frog” the trial determinations.  The Trial Parties also take the position
that the relief sought by the Settling Parties is neither fair nor equitable
given the Settling Parties’ unexplained lack of action or delay in taking
diligent steps to protect or enforce their settlements with the Defendants in the
circumstances of this litigation.
[13]          
All of the parties to this distribution motion invested
in a land development scheme that never materialized.  Instead, the land was
sold in September 2016 for about $15.386 million as undeveloped land to
Brampton G&A Holdings Inc. (“Brampton G&A”), a third-party developer.
[14]          
This litigation involves two (2) companion
actions, being the Pichelli Action (CV-17-1481) and the Caroti/Bilich Action
(CV-17-5302).
[15]          
In April 2017, the Pichelli Group investors brought
their action against the Defendants for breach of contract, fraud, conspiracy,
and breach of fiduciary duty, among other claims.
[16]          
In December 2017, the Caroti Group investors
brought their separate action against the Defendants for fraud, negligence,
unjust enrichment, conspiracy, breach of contract, breach of fiduciary duty,
and remedies for constructive and resulting trusts.  Bilich, another investor, brought
and defended a crossclaim in the Caroti Action in respect of her interest in
the Project.
[17]          
Both actions were defended at trial by the
Defendants Anthony, John and Mira Vuletic (the “Vuletics”), Embleton Properties
Corp., and 1857325 Ontario Ltd. (“185 Corp.”) (collectively “the Defendants”).
[18]          
At the beginning of 2018, then-counsel for the
Caroti Group wrote to other investors, including Faria, Sokich, and the Granics,
to ask if they wanted to join the action.  Sokich and the Granics chose not to
join the Carotis after the Defendant Anthony Vuletic threatened them with a
lesser share in the Project if they joined the action.
[19]          
In April 2018, Jesus and Savona joined the Caroti/Bilich
action.  In addition, Boland, Demaria and the Biondics joined the Caroti Group
in April 2018 but left by 2019 and retained separate counsel.  Klecina was part
of the Caroti Group until just a few days before trial when his estate settled
his claim with the Defendants on September 12, 2021.
[20]          
On February 5, 2019, the Defendants counterclaimed
against the Biondics, Sokich, Bilich, Faria, and the Granics.[6] Other than as against the
Granics, the counterclaim sought a) either a declaration that these investors’ agreements
of purchase and sale in the Project be terminated and monies returned, or that
they receive nothing, or alternatively b) an accounting to determine their entitlement
to funds, if any.  The Defendants proposed that the Granics receive Lot 60 in
the Project, or an accounting of their share of the proceeds.[7]
[21]          
The Biondics, Bilich and Sokic served statements
of defence and counterclaims.  Shortly before Faria settled, he delivered a
statement of defence and counterclaim. Although told to get independent legal
advice, the Granics did not deliver a pleading nor bring a claim against the
Defendants despite knowing that the Vuletics were accused of fraud, allegedly had
taken more than $500,000.00 from the Project for personal expenses, and allegedly
had provided them with incorrect or false information. Mr. Granic is a
sophisticated businessman.  I accept that the Granics’ lack of action reflected
a calculated decision to cooperate with the Vuletics to realize a return on
their investment in the Project.  Among other things, Mr. Granic indicated that
he was content to receive Lot 60 or some other distribution.  After the close
of pleadings and over 2 years after the trial was heard, the Granics somehow had
a statement of defence and counterclaim issued on March 27, 2024 shortly before
the distribution motion returned. By issuing a claim in 2024, they implicitly
conceded that they should have brought proceedings years ago to assert the
claims they now seek to pursue.
[22]          
As noted earlier, the Defendants sold the Property
to Brampton G&A in September 2016 for a price of about $15.386 million plus
interest with a vendor-take-back mortgage.
[23]          
On September 12, 2017, the Pichelli Group brought
a motion for a Mareva injunction in their action against the
Defendants.  In turn, a consent order was granted on September 12, 2017 for
Brampton G&A to make all vendor-take-back mortgage payments to 185 Corp. in
accordance with the mortgage terms and to pay $1.65 million in trust when the
final mortgage payment for the sale proceeds came due.  On February 2, 2018, a
related order was made in the Pichelli Action to require, among other things,
that the Defendants not assign, sell, transfer or dispose of any rights or
interest in the vendor-take-back mortgage with Brampton G&A without leave
of the court.[8] 
The February 2, 2018 order, later amended on April 3, 2018, dismissed the
claims against Brampton G&A and, among other things, directed Brampton
G&A to not make payments for the vendor-take-back mortgage to anyone other
than 185 Corp. that itself could not assign its interest in the
vendor-take-back mortgage to any other entity or individual.  The order also prevented
Lots 49, 50, and 60 to the Project from being transferred, assigned, or
conveyed by 185 Corp. or Brampton G&A, respectively. The affiant for the Pichelli
Group conceded in her affidavit for this distribution motion that the group obtained
both orders to protect the interests of all investors in the Project,
including those who had not yet initiated a claim.  The Pichelli injunction motion
was resolved with the Defendants agreeing to pay $1.65 million in trust to
their own counsel when Brampton G&A made the final mortgage payments.[9]  The funds were preserved
only in the Pichelli Action, leaving the interests of others, including those
of the Caroti/Bilich Group unprotected.  Thereafter, the Defendants continued
to receive the sale proceeds and interest payments under the terms of the vendor-take-back
mortgage.
[24]          
In June 2019, the Caroti Group (i.e., that
included Klecina at the time) changed counsel and, among other things, brought
a motion to preserve and protect a) sale proceeds from the sale of the
Property, and b) three (3) lots in the Project, being Lots 49, 50 and 60,
respectively.  Bilich and Sokic joined the Caroti Group motion.  No other party
moved to preserve proceeds or lots for the Project.  By then, the Defendants
had received over $2.3 million (i.e., excluding mortgages paid on closing).  In
total, the Defendants received $6.164 million of the $15.386 million purchase
price, the payout of existing mortgages on closing, and vendor-take-back
interest (i.e., in addition to other benefits, such as the Vuletics living
rent-free on the Property).  Also by this time, it was well-known that the
Defendants had placed various liens and mortgages on the Property.
[25]          
On June 27, 2019, the Caroti/Sokich/Bilich Group
obtained an interim preservation order to restrain the Defendants from
disposing of, encumbering, or assigning the lots for the Project.  The
Defendants opposed the interim preservation motion.
[26]          
The Caroti/Sokich/Bilich Group and Brampton
G&A exchanged materials with respect to the preservation motion.  Three
business days before the motion, Brampton G&A advised that it was not opposed
to the motion to preserve the sale proceeds and the lots, but would oppose the motion
for a certificate of pending litigation.  Two business days before the motion, the
Defendants advised that they were not opposed to the remaining sale proceeds
being paid into court.  By that point, the Caroti/Sokich/Bilich Group had
assumed the risk and spent time and effort to bring the preservation motion,
and successfully obtained a preservation order for the sale proceeds to be paid
into court.  To this end, LeMay J. granted an order on September 9, 2019, later
amended on November 25, 2019 (the “Preservation Order”), that provides as
follows:
[27]          
Pursuant to the Preservation Order, Brampton
G&A paid the balance of the mortgage and principal payments from the sale
of the Property into court to the credit of the Caroti/Bilich Action pending a decision
of the claims on their merits.  The funds paid into court, with interest,
amounted to $11,281,847.15 as of May 29, 2024.
[28]          
The CPL motion brought by the Caroti/Sokich/Bilich
Group was unsuccessful and they were ordered to pay costs.
[29]          
On this distribution motion, the Biondics
suggest that little value ought to be placed on the Caroti/Sokich/Bilich Group’s
preservation efforts because the Defendants eventually capitulated.  However,
the Biondics chose to do nothing and, in doing do, clearly prejudiced their
position by not securing or enforcing their settlements.  After the Preservation
Order was granted, the Biondics belatedly tried to “piggy-back” on the
same order obtained by the Caroti/Sokich/Bilich Group.  When the issue came before
LeMay J. on October 30, 2019, the case management judge pointedly declined the Biondics’
request to revisit or reopen the terms of the Preservation Order.
[30]          
Significantly, during the October 30, 2019 attendance,
Le May J. made a rather prescient observation about priorities to the funds
paid into court and whether these preserved funds were sufficient to satisfy
all of the competing claims:
[31]          
As noted earlier, the motion by the Caroti/Sokich/Bilich
Group effectively preserved about $11.2 million from the sale of the Property that
is now being held in court to the credit of the Caroti/Bilich action.  As LeMay
J. predicted, these funds paid into court are insufficient to cover the
judgment and costs awarded at trial to the Trial Parties.
[32]          
All of the claimants to this distribution motion
had notice of the Preservation Order at the time they entered into their pre-trial
settlement agreements with the Defendants except the Granics who chose to not
retain counsel and were self-represented at that time.
[33]          
On March 3, 2020, the Defendants and the
Pichelli Group advised of their intention to vary the Preservation Order to
access the sale proceeds paid into court to pay their respective legal fees. 
The Caroti Group and Bilich objected to the proposed payouts.  On March 11,
2020, LeMay J. endorsed that the Defendants had to show that they had exhausted
their own funds to pay for their living expenses and legal costs to
successfully move to access preserved funds.  Thereafter, the Defendants and
the Pichelli Group chose to not pursue the motion to vary the Preservation Order.
[34]          
Prior to trial, certain claimants settled with
the Defendants.
[35]          
On or about March 6, 2020, Sokich and Faria
settled with the Defendants who agreed to pay $250,000.00 to Sokich and
$145,000.00 to Faria by September 30, 2020. Sokich had paid $69,187.20 to 185 Corp.
and a further $35,000.00 to Granic for half a lot in the Project.  Faria paid 185
Corp. the amount of $35,000.00.  On April 22, 2020, the Defendants indicated that
Sokich and Faria had settled but did not disclose the settlement terms.  On
June 12, 2020, LeMay J. ordered the terms of the settlement to be disclosed.
[36]          
On or about June 6, 2020, the Biondic Group
settled with the Defendants who agreed to pay them $920,000.00 by September 30,
2020.  It is unclear how the $920,000.00 is to be divided amongst the Biondic Group
members.  Boland and her then-husband De Maria paid $55,975.00 to 185 Corp.,
while Roberta and Renato Biondic paid $55,975.00 and Jurica Biondic paid $37,975.00,
respectively.[10]
[37]          
On July 2, 2020, Samardzic settled with the
Defendants who agreed to pay him $160,000.00 by September 30, 2020.  Although
Samardzic settled, he did not serve a distribution motion until June 9, 2024
(i.e., 9 days before the distribution motions returned for hearing) nor participate
in any steps leading up to the motion other than the initial case scheduling
conference.
[38]          
On July 21 2020, Granic settled with the
Defendants who agreed to pay him $250,000.00 by September 30, 2020 even though he
never made a claim. The Granics initially bought two lots in the Project for a
total of $114,000.00 and then received $35,000.00 from Sokic for the first
lot.  They paid cash calls of $9,500.00 despite paying a premium for their lots
on the Defendants’ assurance that there would be no further fees.  In total,
the Granics paid $79,500.00 directly to Embleton/185 Corp. and $70,000.00 to
Joe Vieira for a lot he recently bought from Embleton, and they received
$35,000.00 from Sokic for the lot purchased through Vieira and not the second
lot paid directly to Embleton.  The Granics dealt exclusively with the Defendant
Anthony Vuletic on both lot purchases, and the agreements of purchase and sale
between the Granics and Embleton stipulate a price of $70,000.00 that presumably
reflects the consideration the Defendants received.
[39]          
Around the time of the settlements (i.e., from
March 6 2020 to July 21, 2020), the Caroti Group was bringing a motion for a
further and better affidavit of documents from the Defendants.  The Caroti
Group succeeded on the motion and obtained an order on August 28, 2020 for the Defendants
to produce various bank statements and tax returns: Caroti v. Kegalj, 2020
ONSC 5109 at para 34.  As a result, the Settling Parties, albeit not the
Granics, were privy to productions showing that the Vuletics had little to no
income during the Project.
[40]          
Around September 12, 2021, Kelcina left the
Caroti Group and settled his case with the Defendants just before trial. 
Klecina’s decision to settle was his alone and based on an apparent inability or
unwillingness to pay to have his claims litigated at trial.  His settlement
required the Defendants to pay him $530,000.00 in damages plus interest at the
rate prescribed under the Courts of Justice Act.  Klecina retained new
counsel to deal with his settlement.
[41]          
Collectively, the Settling Parties claim to be
owed $2,425,500.00 plus interest based on their settlements with the
Defendants.  To date, none have been paid their settlements.
[42]          
In general, the parties who settled their claims
with the Defendants entered into minutes of settlement with the following
terms:
[43]          
Other than the Granics, the Settling Parties each
had independent legal advice when making their settlement agreements wit the
Defendants.  As Granic is a sophisticated businessman, I accept that the
Granics chose to settle on terms that they understood and agreed upon.
[44]          
The Preservation Order was intended to preserve
the sale proceeds pending a determination of who owned these proceeds and
effectively: a) prohibited any assignments, encumbrances, or liens to be made
on the lots to the Project, either directly or indirectly; b) required that the
preserved proceeds be held in court pending a determination of the actions at
trial; and c) required leave of the court to vary its terms to give effect to
the settlements. Without leave, the various settlements could not be
implemented by operation of the preservation order.
[45]          
The Settling Parties now seek an order that
would give effect to their settlements with the Defendants by accessing the
preserved funds at the expense of the Trial Parties who were not part of the
settlements and instead went to trial and obtained judgment on their claims.
[46]          
The Settling Parties did not take steps to
ensure that they were paid on their settlements when they made their minutes of
settlement with the Defendants to obtain the “finality” they now claim to have
sought. To this end, the Settling Parties made the following admissions or assertions
under cross-examination in relation to their settlement agreements:
[47]          
Klecina’s terms of settlement differ from those
of the other parties who settled their claims with the Defendants.  No assets
are specifically listed in his minutes of settlement, but they refer to the
Defendants’ consent for the payment out of court of funds paid to the credit of
this action.  Klecina seeks payment of $700,000.00 from the Caroti Group’s
share under the judgment with nothing from the Pichelli Group or Bilich’s
share.  He seeks equitable remedies although no such terms are set out in his
minutes of settlement with the Defendants.  Klecina admitted that when he
signed the minutes of settlement: i) he was no longer part of a lawsuit going
to trial; ii) he was aware that funds paid into court were subject to the
Caroti Group’s claims; iii) he knew about the Preservation Order; iv) he knew
that the Vuletics personally-owned assets at the time, such as the property on Grandview
Court and the Dorham Funds;[11]
v) he knew that he was binding only himself to the minutes and no other party;
vi) he knew about the appeals from the trial judgment and did not intervene in
the appeals to amend the judgment to include his settlement; and vii) he did
not take any steps after he signed the minutes of settlement to ask the
Vuletics to do anything to give effect to the provisions in the settlement. 
When he signed the settlement, he knew that ownership rights over funds paid
into court had not yet been determined but, nevertheless, believed that he had
a right to take $700,000.00 from those funds.
[48]          
During a case conference on June 8, 2020,
Defendants’ counsel advised the Trial Parties of the existence of some
settlement agreements that had been executed by that date.
[49]          
On June 12, 2020, LeMay J. scheduled the
Defendants’ payout motion (i.e., to satisfy the payout terms in the minutes of
settlement) for July 29, 2020 with a timetable for the exchange of motion
materials.
[50]          
By Endorsement released June 15, 2020, LeMay J.
referred to the settlement agreements and next steps:
[51]          
On June 19, 2020, the Defendants served a notice
of motion for an order to pay out the Sokich, Faria and Biondic/Boland
settlements from funds paid into court (the “Payout Motion”).
[52]          
On June 23, 2020, the Caroti Group and Bilich
objected to the Payout Motion. The Caroti Group opposed the motion by arguing that
it was prejudicial to their interests in the preserved funds.  At the time,
Bilich did not specify the basis of her objection.  However, the Caroti Group
and Bilich asserted that the Defendants had sufficient funds to satisfy their
various settlement obligations.  In addition, the Caroti Group and Bilich argued
that there would be no prejudice by having the parties who settled wait for a
proper adjudication of their claims at trial to allow the merits of the case to
be decided before considering which parties were entitled to the funds paid in
court (i.e., given the possibility that the Defendants might not be entitled to
any of the sale proceeds paid into court).  The Defendants and the various Settling
Parties disagreed with the objection by the Caroti Group and Bilich and proceeded
with the Payout Motion.
[53]          
On June 23, 2020, the Pichelli Group advised
that it took no position on the Payout Motion.
[54]          
On July 20, 2020, the Defendants late-served
their materials for the Payout Motion (i.e., after the June 30, 2020 deadline for
serving their materials had lapsed).  The Defendants also had not served the
productions ordered from the earlier production motion.  As a result, the July
29, 2020 date for the Payout Motion was adjourned.  The Defendants then served
a supplementary record to add the Granics’ settlement to the Payout Motion. A
revised schedule was proposed for the Payout Motion to return sometime in
September 2020 when the court was available.
[55]          
On August 11, 2020, the Caroti Group (including
Klecina) served their responding record for the Payout Motion on the
Defendants, Sokich, Faria and the Biondic Group, that included an affidavit sworn
by Nancy Kostelac (the “2020 Affidavit”).  In the 2020 Affidavit, she stated:
[56]          
In addition, the Caroti Group objected to the
Payout Motion by arguing, among other things, that their interests would be
significant prejudiced if the motion were granted as damages and costs awarded
at trial could exceed the available preserved funds and force them to trace
funds and chase the Defendants for recovery.  This outcome would clearly defeat
the very purpose of the Preservation Order.
[57]          
On this distribution motion currently before the
court, the Settling Parties point to the 2020 Affidavit to show why the earlier
Payout Motion was not pursued.  However, the 2020 Affidavit also shows why it
would have been prudent for the Settling Parties to press the Defendants for
payment on their settlements at that time, or take steps to preserve additional
funds or assets to protect their settlements and prevent the further dissipation,
transfer, or encumbrance of assets.[12] 
Notably, the Grandview Property was further encumbered by $1.7 million shortly after
the first minutes of settlement were signed before being further encumbered
multiple times through April 2022.  Had the Settling Parties moved diligently to
protect or enforce their settlements in 2020 or any time before trial, the
Defendants may well have had sufficient funds to pay their settlement obligations
that would have left the Settling Parties with no need to infringe on the
preserved funds paid into court.  Instead, the Settling Parties did nothing to
enforce their settlements, even after trial, and the Defendants dissipated Project
funds, including $1.2 million in Dorham funds that they apparently sent
offshore to Croatia, and further encumbered the Grandview Property.
[58]          
As Granic was self-represented and without
counsel, he was not served with the materials for the Payout Motion in 2020.  But
even after not receiving payment on his settlement agreement by September 30,
2020 as required by its terms, he did not ask the Vuletics whether the Payout Motion
had been brought, did not request a copy of the materials for the motion, and did
not ask Defendants’ counsel any questions about the motion or when the
settlement would be paid.
[59]          
The other Settling Parties were served with materials
for the Payout Motion. However, on cross-examination, Boland claimed to: a) not
recall that the Caroti Group had opposed the payout motion; b) not know why preserved
funds were not paid out; and c) not have read the responding materials that
opposed the motion.
[60]          
In August 2020, the Defendant Anthony Vuletic was
cross-examined on his affidavit for the Payout Motion.  During his
cross-examination, it became clear that the Defendants had other assets that
they could have used to pay out the settlements. However, they preferred to use
funds not actually in their possession to pay the Settling Parties.
[61]          
On this distribution motion, the Settling Parties
claim that the Caroti Group did not oppose their settlements.  However, the
Caroti Group’s responding record for the Payout Motion in 2020 shows this to be
clearly incorrect.
[62]          
On September 21, 2020, LeMay J. endorsed that
the trial date of January 2021 was extended to the May 2021 trial sittings and
that the Payout Motion would need to be heard after a pre-trial conference (i.e.,
that the Pichelli Group had asked to adjourn from December 2020 to a date in
February 2021) was conducted and the schedule for exchanging motion materials
was adjusted.  By letter dated September 30, 2020, the Defendants agreed to
adjourn the pre-trial conference and asked to schedule the Payout Motion after
the pre-trial conference as the motion might be rendered unnecessary if the
Caroti/Bilich actions were resolved at the conference.
[63]          
Thereafter, the Defendants changed counsel and
postponed the Payout Motion to at least after the pre-trial conference with the
Caroti Group’s agreement as set out in an email exchange between counsel on
October 28, 2020.
[64]          
By endorsement dated April 28, 2021, Ricchetti
RSJ adjourned the trial date from the May 2021 trial sittings to September 13,
2021.  For greater clarity, Ricchetti RSJ also confirmed that the funds paid
into court would remain in court pending further order.
[65]          
Over time, it became apparent to the Trial
Parties that the Defendants had effectively chosen to abandon the Payout
Motion.  As part of the distribution motion now before the court, the Caroti Group
asked the Defendants and the Settling Parties for disclosure of their post-settlement
communications. Apart from Granic, the Settling Parties refused to produce any
such communications by asserting settlement privilege over them.  Granic chose
to produce an email dated September 16, 2020 that Defendants’ counsel had sent to
each of the Settling Parties with a proposed strategy for dealing with the Payout
Motion.[13] 
The Settling Parties objected to the email being entered into evidence by asserting
settlement privilege over this communication.
[66]          
Settlement privilege is an important common law
rule of evidence that promotes settlement by making settlement communications
inadmissible so parties may engage in candid settlement discussions knowing the
communications cannot be used against them in litigation.  This promotes honest
and frank discussions that can make it easier for parties to reach a
settlement: Sable Offshore Energy Inc. v. Ameron International corp., 2013
SCC 37 at paras 12-14; Union Carbide Canada Inc. v. Bombardier Inc., 2014
SCC 35 at paras 31-35.  Whether settlement privilege applies in any given case calls
for a contextual, fact-specific analysis of certain conditions: Emery
Silfurtun Inc. (Re), 2018 ONCA 485 at para 22.  Settlement privilege will
attach to a communication or record where a) a litigious dispute must be in
existence or within contemplation, b) the communication must be made with the
express or implied intention that it would not be disclosed to the court in the
event the negotiations failed, and c) the purpose of the communication must be to
attempt to effect a settlement: Re Hollinger, 2011 ONCA 579 at para 16,
leave to appeal denied 2012 CanLII 23665 (SCC); R. v. Delchev, 2015 ONCA
381 at para 24; Emery at para 22.  The privilege is invoked based on the
intent of the parties to settle a matter so any negotiations undertaken with
this purpose are inadmissible: Sable Offshore at para 14.  Settlement privilege
applies even after a settlement is reached leaving the content of successful
negotiations protected: Sable Offshore at paras 15-18; Union Carbide
at para 34.
[67]          
In my view, the September 16, 2020 email is
subject to settlement privilege and should be excluded from the evidentiary
record on this distribution motion.  I accept that a litigious dispute was contemplated
when Defendants’ counsel circulated the email as a failure by the Defendants to
bring the Payout Motion would have breached the terms of settlement and allowed
the Settling Parties to resume their respective actions.  I also accept that
the communication was made to effect a settlement by arriving at terms for dealing
with the Payout Motion (i.e.,  as the Defendants and the Settling Parties
achieved) with the intention of not disclosing the email to the court in the
event that negotiations failed: Hollinger at para 16; Sable Offshore
at para 14.  Although Granic, who was self-represented, disclosed a copy of the
email, settlement privilege belongs to all parties to a settlement overture and
cannot be unilaterally waived: Williams v.
Williams, 2020 ABCA 15 at para 22; Howes
v. Howes, 2018 ONSC 6297 at para 17.
[68]          
Having regard to the circumstances of this case,
I see no principled basis or compelling policy reason for invoking an exception
to the general application of settlement privilege in this matter. Settlement
privilege is a class privilege with a prima facie presumption of
inadmissibility, subject to exceptions when justice requires it: Sable
Offshore at paras 12 and 19.  To fall within an exception, a party must
show on balance that, “a competing public interest outweighs the public
interest in encouraging settlement”: Sable Offshore at para 19,
citing Dos Santos Estate v. Sun Life Assurance Co. of Canada, 2005 BCCA
4 at para 20; Union Carbide at para 34.   As Chief Justice Finch wrote
for the Court of Appeal for British Columbia in Dos Santos Estate at
para 20, “[a]n exception should only be found where the documents sought are
both relevant and necessary in the circumstances of the case to
achieve either the agreement of the parties to the settlement, or another
compelling or overriding interest of justice.” [Emphasis in original] 
Exceptions are narrowly defined and seldom applied: Heritage
Duty Free Shop Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General), 2005 BCCA 188 at para 25; Howes at para 19.   The
law has always encouraged resolution discussions between parties to civil
litigation by encouraging them to speak freely and without concern that
statements will be used against them to foster the resolution of disputes: R.
v. Pubani, 1994 CanLII 8723 (ONCA) at para 12; leave to appeal denied [1994]
SCCA No 294. I am not persuaded that excluding the privileged email would
facilitate an abuse of settlement privilege or that an overriding interest of
justice requires the email to be disclosed: Myers
v. Dunphy, 2007 NLCA 1 at para 27.
[69]          
The Defendants ended up adjourning the payout motion
in 2020 on the basis that no new evidence could be filed.  They later brought
and lost a motion to stay the entire proceedings by the Caroti Group that, if
successful, would have entitled the Defendants to the preserved assets paid
into court.  Thereafter, on May 30, 2021, LeMay J. asked the Settling Parties
whether they intended to bring a motion to have the preserved assets paid out of
court before trial.  The Settling Parties advised that they would not be
bringing any such motion.  Instead, they opted to appear on the first day of
the trial to seek instructions from the trial judge on how to deal with the
settlements.
[70]          
On September 13, 2021, the Caroti Group, the
Pichelli Group, and Bilich went to trial against the Defendants.  On that first
day of trial, Mr. J. Macdonald (for Faria and Sokich) and Mr. Ebrahim (for the
Biondic Group) appeared to advise that their clients’ settlement agreements with
the Defendants had not been paid and that they would be seeking judgment in accordance
with the terms of their settlements, although the minutes of settlement were
not shown or filed at that time.  The settlement admissions the Defendants were
to make pursuant to the minutes of settlements were not made on the first day
of trial nor at any other time during the trial.  Instead, the Settling Parties
adopted the Defendants’ proposal made on September 11, 2021 (i.e., shortly
before the first day of trial) for the settlement payouts and distribution of
proceeds paid into court (i.e., including any priority issues between the Settling
Parties and the Trial Parties) to be dealt with or addressed after the
trial was concluded.  In submission made to the court on September 13, 2021,
Defendants’ trial counsel, Mr. Breedon, specifically stated that the settlement
payouts might raise priority issues (i.e., as between the Settling and Trial Parties,
respectively) depending on how the court decided the various claims and issues at
trial. Despite this, Mr. J. Macdonald and Mr. Ebrahim advised that their
clients would not be participating in the trial and asked to be advised of any
hearing to address the preserved funds after trial given their intention to
seek judgment pursuant to their settlements at that time. The Caroti Group and the
Pichelli Group agreed to this approach, for which Bilich did not express any concern
or opposition.
[71]          
Following a 41-day trial that unfolded over
several months, the court found in favour of the Trial Parties after determining
that the Defendants had perpetrated a large and complex fraud.  The court
granted judgment to the Trial Parties of about $13.8 million along with other remedies
against the Defendants including constructive trusts and purchase money
resulting trusts over $19.52 million in sale proceeds for the Property comprised
of the following: a) the proceeds of sale of the Property; b) the Defendants’
interests in certain lots for the Project; c) the Grandview Property; d) any
other assets that any of the Defendants had acquired or improved with, (i)
funds taken from the sale proceeds available for distribution that the Vuletics
had misdirected for personal and non-Project use, and (ii) funds that the
Defendants appropriated by redirecting Project funds to unjustly enrich
themselves. The Defendants’ counterclaims were dismissed with no relief or
remedies granted to them.
[72]          
Judgment for trial was issued on August 15,
2022, and amended reasons for judgment were released on October 11, 2022.  At
the time, the court was aware of the settlements between the Defendants and the
Settling Parties, and that a distribution motion was to be scheduled and
heard.  In addition, the Preservation Order as amended on November 25, 2019 was
extended on October 11, 2021. The Trial Parties and the Defendants consented to
costs judgments for the trial amounting to over $3.53 million for the Caroti
Group, $869,616.64 for the Pichelli Group, and $554,203.83 for Bilich, all
figures inclusive of disbursements and taxes.
[73]          
In total, the Defendants owe the Trial Parties $16,368,576.53
plus interest.  However, the constructive or resulting trusts awarded to the
Trial Parties, both individually and collectively, fall short of the total
amount of preserved funds paid into court.  The trial judgment did not
expressly grant priority to the Trial Parties’ interests over those of the
Settling Parties, or vice versa, nor state that any trust interests
applied retrospectively or retroactively.  Instead, the trial judgment left
open the matter of the Settling Parties’ claims.[14]
[74]          
The trial judgment was the subject of three (3) separate
appeals by the Defendants against the Pichelli Group, the Caroti Group, and Bilich,
respectively.[15] 
The Settling Parties knew of the appeals but did not intervene nor suggest to
the Court of Appeal that the trial judgment was missing relief that should have
been included.
[75]          
While the appeals were pending, the Caroti Group
brought a motion in the Court of Appeal to prevent John and Mira Vuletic from
dissipating assets to put them beyond the reach of judgment creditors.  The
Pichelli Group and Bilich attended the Caroti Group motion to make submissions to
support the motion but without formally bringing a similar motion themselves.  The
Defendants did not concede the motion, but George J.A. found it “patently
obvious” that they had dissipated, encumbered, transferred, and tried to
sell property after trial to shield their assets.  John and Mira each had a
4.2105% interest in Dorham Holdings Inc. and Dorham Partnership (“Dorham”).
Three months after the close of trial, and while the trial decision was under
reserve, Dorham sold the Oakville property for $30 million with a $15 million
vendor-take-back mortgage.  In April 2022, John and Mira received $1.263
million as a first tranche of funds that apparently was sent offshore to
Croatia. Around that time, both also sought to sell their Dorham shares. In
addition, after the close of trial and before the release of the trial
decision, Anthony Vuletic further encumbered the Grandview Property by
$840,000.00, tried to sell it for $4.48 million, and later tried to sell it once
again after a CPL was registered on title.  Mortgage enforcement proceedings
were taken against the Grandview Property but no excess funds were realized from
the sale.  On December 23, 2022, George J.A. granted the Caroti Group’s preservation
motion and ordered the Vuletics to post a letter of credit for the first $1.263
million tranche of Dorham funds, and to pay the second tranche into court once
the funds are due (i.e., that may be as late as April 29, 2026).  On June 6,
2023, a panel of the Court of Appeal upheld the preservation decision: Caroti
v. Kegalj, 2023 ONCA 455.
[76]          
Although aware of the Dorham shares and the Grandview
Property as early as 2020, the Settling Parties did nothing to secure any of
the assets held by the Defendants or to enforce their settlements with them.
[77]          
The Trial Parties made efforts to preserve the
Defendants’ assets and assumed the risk of doing so.  But for their efforts,
there would be no further Dorham-related funds and the shares would have been
sold to a bona fide purchaser leaving the associated second tranche out
of reach.  On this motion, the Caroti Group has undertaken to transfer the
Dorham funds from the Court of Appeal to the Superior Court action if their
$29,000.00 in costs awards (plus HST) is first paid out.
[78]          
The Caroti Group claims to have spent over
$462,511.26 on preservation efforts that apparently included, i) obtaining the Preservation
Order, ii) responding to the Payout Motion previously started by the Defendants,
iii) communicating with an expert, iv) obtaining a CPL on the Grandview
Property, v) securing the Dorham-related funds, vi) responding to the
Defendants’ appeal of George J.A.’s order in connection with the Caroti Group’s
motion to secure the Dorham funds, vii) communicating with Dorham’s counsel following
the release of the trial judgment, and viii) communicating with Brampton
G&A’s counsel after the trial judgment was released.  In addition, the
Caroti Group has tried to enforce the trial judgment against the Defendants, although
those efforts have netted only $1,450.56 to date.
[79]          
In contrast, none of the Settling Parties took
any steps before trial to enforce their settlement rights or to protect their
settlements even after the Defendants failed to pay out the settlements by
September 30, 2020 pursuant to the terms of their minutes of settlement.  The
Settling Parties made very little effort to pursue their rights or to even
comprehend basic underlying facts or evidence in this litigation.  Although all
of the Settling Parties sought to rely on the trial reasons in arguing the
distribution motion, most under cross-examination indicated that they were
unfamiliar with the findings in the reasons or the steps taken to preserve
funds in the Court of Appeal.
[80]          
During a case conference on October 11, 2022,
the Settling and Trial Parties agreed that a motion to address the preserved
funds paid into court did not need to be scheduled then.  At the time, the
appeals from the trial decision were pending before the Court of Appeal.
[81]          
In February 2023, the Granics learned that the
Trial Parties were disputing their entitlement to be paid their settlements with
the Defendants from the funds paid into court.  As a result, they retained
counsel.
[82]          
The Defendants’ appeals in respect of the Caroti
Group and Bilich were administratively dismissed on February 16, 2023.  The
Defendants’ appeal in relation to the Pichelli Group was administratively
dismissed on April 20, 2023.
[83]          
On February 28, 2023, the Biondic Group wrote to
other counsel to propose asking for a case conference to timetable a distribution
motion.  The Caroti Group disagreed with the request, took the position that
such a distribution motion was premature, and advised through counsel that they
would give notice of their request to have funds paid out of court in due
course.
[84]          
On May 5, 2023, the Granics’ counsel, on behalf
of his clients and Faria, Sokich, and the Biondic/Boland Group, wrote to the
court to request a case conference to arrange for a motion for judgment on
their settlements with the Defendants.
[85]          
On July 11, 2023, I endorsed that any party could
request a conference to address the return of the judgment and priority motions
after the Court of Appeal had decided the Defendants’ motion to set aside the
dismissal orders, consolidate the appeals, and perfect the appeals.
[86]          
In the end, the Court of Appeal dismissed the
appeals due to the conduct of the Defendants who seemed to dissipate, encumber
and transfer their assets while not complying with the order to post a $1.263
million letter of credit, not paying multiple costs orders, not adhering to
court-imposed deadlines, and not perfecting the appeals with dispatch, among
other things: Reasons for Decision of Coroza J.A dated September 5, 2023 at
paras 10-13.  As of January 2024, Dorham has paid into court only $24,908.53 to
the credit of the Caroti appeal in the Court of Appeal.  The exact amount
expected for the second tranche of Dorham funds is unknown at this time.
[87]          
On September 22, 2023, the Caroti Group wrote to
the other parties to propose a conference for the Settling Parties’ motion for
judgment and payment of funds held in court as the appeals before the Court of
Appeal had been determined. On October 13, 2023, Granics’ counsel wrote on
behalf of his clients and Sokich, Faria and the Biondic/Boland Group by suggesting
that the motion for judgment should be decided prior to the distribution/priority
motions.
[88]          
On November 30, 2023, I timetabled the return of
the judgment and distribution/priority motions as an omnibus distribution
motion.
[89]          
There is no real dispute that the Settling
Parties are entitled to judgment for the amounts owed under their settlements
with the Defendants.  The real issue in dispute is whether, or to what extent,
the Settling Parties should have an equitable lien along with judgment on the
settlements.
[90]          
I am satisfied that the Settling Parties should
have judgment on their respective settlement agreements with the Defendants. 
Settlement agreements are binding contracts over which a court may grant
judgment under Rule 20.04(2): Bross v. Bross, 2023 ONSC 2104 at para 11.[16]  I am satisfied that the
various Settling Parties settled their claims with the Defendants, and that the
court’s discretion should be exercised to enforce the settlements: North York Excavating & Contracting Limited v. D’Urzo, 2023 ONSC 473 at para 36, citing Srajeldin v Ramsumeer, 2013
ONSC 6178 at para 36.  Having not paid the Settling Parties under the
settlements, the Defendants are in breach of the agreements.  The court’s
authority to award judgment to the Settling Parties is not negated by the trial
judgment granted to the Trial Parties.  Accordingly, I find that judgment on
the settlement agreements should be awarded to the Settling Parties.  Doing so
would allow them to enforce their settlements with the Defendants and align
with the court’s broad policy of encouraging and enforcing settlement
agreements.
[91]          
I decline to refuse judgment on the settlement
agreements on the basis that they are statute-barred.  As the Settling Parties
correctly assert, the Trial Parties lack standing to raise any limitation
defences that only the Defendants could raise to oppose judgment on the
settlement agreements: Strong v. Paquet (2000), 2000 CanLII 16831 (ON CA), 50 OR (3d) 70 (CA) at
paras 34-36, leave to appeal refused [2000] SCCA No. 532 (SCC); Rule 25.07(4).
Indeed, the Defendants had indicated that they would consent to judgment on the
settlements. The Granics did not file timely pleadings, but their motion for
judgment is grounded on their minutes of settlement with the Defendants, as set
out in their notice of motion, that arose from the Defendants’ counterclaim for
an accounting of what they were owed.  In any event, the Granics delivered
pleadings within two years of the trial decision being released and about a
year after they learned that the Trial Parties were disputing their entitlement
to be paid from the funds paid into court. Before then, the Granics expected to
be paid on their settlement agreement with the Defendants.
[92]          
I am satisfied that the court should not award
equitable liens to the Setting Parties in relation to their respective settlement
agreements.
[93]          
By settling their claims, the Settling Parties
effectively discontinued or abandoned their claims against the Defendants: Fanelli v Fanelli-Bruno, 2023 ONSC 6501 at para 17.  As a result, the basis of their claims
for equitable interests arise contractually from the minutes of settlement they
entered into with the Defendants.
[94]          
The test for a valid agreement to create an
equitable interest is whether equity would degree that the agreement be
specifically performed: Fraser v. Atkinson, 1982 CanLII 1292 (ABKB) at
para 19. An equitable lien is a form of equitable charge that is based upon
general considerations of justice or upon the principle that a person who seeks
equitable relief to enforce some claim must admit the equitable rights of
others associated with the subject matter: Silaschi v. 1054473 Ontario Ltd.,
2000 CanLII 3021 (ONCA) at para 8, citing Halsbury’s Laws of England at
Vol. 28, 4th ed. Reissue (1997) para 704 at p. 354.  Although an equitable
lien arises by operation of law, the term “equitable lien” may refer to an
agreement between parties, also described as an “equitable charge” to ground an
interest in property until certain claims are satisfied: Snell’s Principles
of Equity, P.V. Baker and P. St. J. Langan, eds. 29th ed
(London: Sweet & Maxwell Ltd., 1990), p. 456 as quoted in Barbara E.
Cotton, “The Equitable Lien: New Life in an Old Remedy,” (1994) 16
Advocates’ Quarterly 385 note 68 at 2.  It is not possible to state a general
principle to account for the diversity of situations in which an equitable lien
may arise: Silaschi at para 8.  However, on a proper interpretation of such
an agreement and upon considering all the surrounding circumstances, the court
may find that it would be inequitable to enforce the lien:  Freeborn v.
Goodman, 1969 CanLII 23 (SCC), [1969] SCR 923 at 938-939; 4345142
Ontario Inc. v. Access Self Storage Inc.,
2008 CanLII 34362 at para 21.
[95]          
Before setting out my
reasons for not granting equitable interests to the Settling Parties, I shall
address a number of threshold issues raised by the Trial Parties on this
motion.
[96]          
Respectfully, I am not persuaded by the Trial
Parties’ submission that the constructive and resulting trusts awarded to them
at trial operate to bar the Settling Parties from having an equitable interest
in the funds paid into court.
[97]          
A constructive trust is a remedy that must be
judicially declared: Leclair v. Leclair Estate, 1998 CanLII 4805 (BCCA)
at para 46; Darte v. The Queen, 2008 TCC 66 at para 20.  Proprietary
rights flowing from a constructive trust can only arise and be exercised once a
court has formally declared or recognized the existence of the constructive
trust, thereby establishing the right to this relief: Leclair at paras
45-47, citing Rawluk v. Rawluk, [1990] 1 SCR 79 at 91-92; Darte at
para 20; 306440 Ontario Ltd. v. 782127 Ontario
Ltd. (Alrange Container Services), 2014
ONCA 548 at paras 24-25, citing Lac
Minerals Ltd. v. International Corona Resources Ltd., 1989 CanLII 34 (SCC), [1989] 2 SCR 574 at 579 and 678.  Once a declaration
by a court of equity is made to find a constructive trust in property, the
constructive trust is deemed to have come into existence when the unjust
enrichment arose: Rawluk at 91; Ellingsen
(Trustee of) v. Hallmark Ford Sales Ltd.,
2000 BCCA 458 at para 38; Darte a para 20.  The constructive trust crystallizes once the
right to relief is established: Ontario Securities Commission v. York Rio
Resources Inc., 2019 BCSC 776 at para 19.
[98]          
Based on the foregoing, the Trial Parties submit
that a declaration of a constructive or resulting trust establishes a priority
claim over the assets in question that allows them to collect on the trial
judgment and costs judgment: Alrange at paras 24-25. But the
constructive and resulting trusts awarded to the Trial Parties do not confer
complete ownership over the property funds paid into court to fully preclude or
extinguish the equitable interests that the Settling Parties are seeking.
[99]          
Constructive and resulting trusts do not
automatically bestow full beneficial ownership over the subject property. 
Where a claimant’s loss is less than the value of the property over which the
trust is imposed, the claimant has a partial beneficial interest in proportion to
their actual loss: Taylor v. Wallbridge, [1879[ 1879 CanLII 1 (SCC), 2 SCR 616 at 682; A.H.
Oosterhoff, Ooserhoff on Trusts, 6th ed (Scarborough:
Carswell, 2004) at 703; Sidhu v. Bilin, 2023 BCCA 361 at paras 54-56.
This reflects the general principle that a constructive trust cannot provide a
claimant with a windfall: Vellenga v. Boersma, 2020 ONCA 537 at para 32.
A constructive trust is a form of equitable relief that is imposed specifically
to prevent windfalls from occurring: Nortel Networks Corporation (Re), 2010
ONSC 3061 at paras 50 and 52.  A resulting trust arises when a party
contributes funds for the purchase of a property but does not take legal title
to the property: Nishi v. Rascal Trucking Ltd., 2013 SCC 33 at paras 1
and 29.[17] 
Similar to a constructive trust, a resulting trust arises at the moment of
transfer but crystalizes only when formally declared by the court: Archer v.
St. John, 2008 ABQB 245 at para 8.
[100]      
In this case, the court granted trust interests
to the Trial Parties on a value survived approach by which their proportionate
contributions to the value of the Project entitled them to a comparative share
in its value: Caroti v. Vuletic, 2022 ONSC 4695 (“Trial Reasons”) at
para 597.  The Defendants were found to hold the proceeds of the Property in
trust for the Trial Parties who were awarded trust interests in proportion to
their contributions for the Project, thereby entitling them to a pro rata
share of the sale proceeds of the Property: Trial Reasons at paras 605 and
607.  The proportionate contribution was also applied to recognize
contributions to the Project by the Vuletics, who were granted a pro rata
share of the available proceeds based on their respective capital contributions
to the Project: Trial Reasons at para 645-649.  The total distribution awarded
to the parties at trial was found to be $12,776,159.00 (i.e., just over 65% of
the total sale proceeds of $19,520,490.00) and included a share of
$2,158,966.10 for Anthony and John Vuletic.  It follows that the trial judgment
granted the Trial Parties a partial beneficial interest in the
Property.  Applying this reasoning, the Settling Parties now seek equitable
interests to effectively prioritize the payment of their settlements ahead of
the Trial Parties’ costs judgment for the trial.
[101]      
The Trial Parties invoked the rules of tracing
to assert a proprietary interest in funds paid or to be paid into court. They obtained
a trial judgment granting them a constructive trust and, alternatively, a purchase
money resulting trust over these funds that are said to be valued as much as $19,520,490.00.
But their compensatory damages (i.e., based on their pro rata
contributions to the Project) collectively amount to a lesser amount totalling
$10,617,194.30.  Even if prejudgment interest, punitive damages and costs were
to be rolled into the trust interest (i.e., over the objections of the Settling
Parties, who submit that doing so is contrary to trust law), the Settling
Parties submit that total entitlement of the Trial Parties would still be less
than the $16,368,576.53 value of the Property, leaving them with beneficial
interests in the property funds that is only partial, not full.
[102]      
As the Trial Parties only have a partial
beneficial interest in the property funds, I accept that their interests do not
extinguish the equitable liens that the Settling Parties are seeking over the sale
proceeds for the Property to enforce their settlements with the Defendants.  Generally,
there is an overriding public interest in favour of settlements to promote the
interests of litigants by avoiding the expense of trial of disputed issues and
reducing the strain upon an overburdened court system: Sable Offshore Energy
Inc v. Ameron International Corp., 2013 SCC 37 at para 11, citing Sparling
v. Southam Inc. (1988), 1988 CanLII 4694 (ON SC), 66 OR (2d) 225 (HC) at 230. The court has a
well-established policy of upholding and enforcing settlement agreements absent
a real risk of injustice: Srajeldin
v. Ramsumeer, 2015 ONSC 6697 (Div Ct) at
para 43; Brzozowski v. O’Leary, 2004 ONSC 4805 at para 44. Courts are not quick to find ambiguity or a lack of
agreement for a settlement: Olivieri v. Sherman, 2007 ONCA 491 at para
44; Fehrman v Goodlife
Fitness Centres Inc., 2017
ONSC 4348 at para 21. The
discretion to not enforce a settlement agreement is exercised in only rare and
exceptional circumstances: Srebot v. Srebot Farms Ltd., 2013
ONCA 84 at para 6; Catanzaro v.
Kellogg’s Canada Inc., 2015 ONCA 779 at para 9; Silvera v. Taylor, 2021 ONSC 2214 at paras 31-34, affirmed 2022 ONCA 120. 
All of this furthers the court’s broader policy to promote settlement,
particularly in complex litigation.
[103]      
I am not persuaded that any prejudice arose from
the Defendants’ failure to formally acknowledge the equitable interests that
the Settling Parties are claiming under their settlements.
[104]      
The Defendants did not acknowledge the Settling
Parties’ equitable interest at the outset of trial, as contemplated by the minutes
of settlements, that may have resulted in a breach of the agreements.[18]  On their face, the
various minutes of settlement expressly contemplate each Settling Party having
an equitable interest in the property funds and the court affirming these
interests so the Settling Parties could be paid their settlements from funds
paid into court. Despite this apparent omission, I accept that no prejudice
resulted from the omission as all interested parties knew of the settlement
terms and were aware of the Settling Parties’ intention to seek equitable interests
after the Trial Parties’ interests were determined at trial.  In any event, the
principle that equity considers done what ought to have been done applies here
as: i) the minutes of settlement imposed obligations on the Defendants to make settlement
payments that were not done, ii) the settlements can be specifically enforced,
and iii) the principle is being invoked by the Settling Parties who are entitled
to enforce the settlements: Grant Forest Products Inc. (Re), 2010 ONCA
355 at paras 11-15; Centurion Mortgage Capital
Corp. v. Brightstar Newcastle Corp.,
2022 ONSC 1059 at para 33.  But this is not the end of the analysis.
[105]      
The simple fact that the minutes of settlement
contemplate the Settling Parties being granted equitable interests does not
automatically grant them this relief.
[106]      
The Settling Parties submit that their
settlement agreements with the Defendants expressly contemplate the court
granting equitable liens over funds paid into court and other Project assets. 
But an equitable lien is a form of equitable charge upon property until the
claims are satisfied: Silaschi at para 8; Ristimaki at paras 10
and 21.  Equitable liens arise by operation of equity from the relationship of
the parties, and not by any act of theirs: Trez
v Wynford, 2015 ONSC 2794 at paras
24-25; Pierce v. Belows, 2019 ONSC 3014 at para 43.  To this
end, an equitable lien does not arise from a common intention or
agreement of the parties.  In Steeves v. Steeves, 1995 CanLII 10369
(NBKB) at 8, the court adopted an observation made by Professor G.B. Klippert, Unjust
Enrichment (Butterworth) 1983 at pp. 201-202 who described the fundamental
nature or character of an equitable lien as follows:
[107]      
The general approach that courts have taken is
to declare an equitable lien where there is a finding of an unjust enrichment
or a constructive trust.  The equitable lien is then impressed upon the trust
property as a security interest: St. Paul
(County) v. Genereux Workshop (Bonnyville) Ltd., 1984 ABCA 218 at para 10.  Professor Duggan summarized
the distinction between equitable liens and constructive trusts as follows:
[108]      
The Defendants do not own the preserved funds
paid into court.  It follows that the Settling Parties cannot be granted an
equitable interest over these funds based on their minutes of settlement with
the Defendants.
[109]      
As noted earlier, the Settling Parties are
claiming equitable liens over the preserved funds based on their respective
minutes of settlement with the Defendants.  To show an unjust enrichment to
justify awarding the Settling Parties with equitable liens in this case, I
accept that the Defendants needed to beneficially own the preserved assets at
the material time when the equitable lien purportedly arose. As noted earlier,
the remedy of an equitable lien enables a claimant to secure a monetary claim
against a definable piece of property in the hands of a defendant: Steeves
at 8, citing Klippert at 201-202.  However, the Defendants had no such
ownership.  The remedial rights over assets that the Settling Parties seek are
contractually derived and flow from the Defendants’ ownership of the assets.  By
not enforcing or securing their settlements prior to trial, and by not going to
trial, the Settling Parties effectively chose to wait and see whether the court
would declare that the Defendants owned any assets from the Project, including
any of the preserved assets.  As it turned out, the court determined that the
Defendants did not own any such funds and dismissed their counterclaims with no
relief being granted to them.
[110]      
I am satisfied that the Settling Parties cannot
bolster their position on this distribution motion by seeking to argue an entitlement
to trust interests based on facts or circumstances going beyond their
settlements with the Defendants.
[111]      
The Settling Parties seek to raise an unjust
enrichment argument by alluding to the fact that they, like the Trial Parties, contributed
funds to the Project that should result in all such investors having beneficial
interests in Project assets in proportion to their contributions.  Applying the
reasoning in Re Ontario Securities Commission and Greymac Credit Corp.
(1986), 1986 CanLII 2693 (ON CA), 55 OR (2d) 673 (CA), affirmed 1988 CanLII 56 (SCC), [1988] 2 SCR 172, as approved in Law
Society of Upper Canada v. Toronto Dominion Bank (1998), 1998 CanLII 4774 (ON CA), 42 OR (3d) 257
(CA), leave to appeal denied [1999] SCCA No 77, the Settling Parties submit
that they are innocent beneficiaries who should be allowed to share equally
with the Trial Parties in the protected funds in proportion to their respective
traceable contributions. In making this submission, the Settling Parties submit
that each of the Settling and Trial Parties contributed to the Project and,
therefore, should have an interest in the protected funds with all ranked
equally to the other in proportion to their respective contributions.  However,
by entering into the settlement agreements, the Settling Parties effectively relinquished
their rights to pursue relief for any pre-settlement conduct and agreed to
exchange full and final mutual releases on completion of the terms of
settlement: Fanelli at para 17. It follows that the basis of the
Settling Parties’ claims for judgment and equitable relief on this motion arises
from their minutes of settlement and the failure by the Defendants to pay the
amounts owed under the settlements.
[112]      
The Settling Parties submit that they have
standing to argue for equitable relief by relying on evidence of their
purported beneficial interests in the Property based on their proportional investments
or contributions to the Project.  To this end, and in seeking to interpret the
settlement agreements to establish a binding contract to be enforced, they
submit that they are entitled to give context on this distribution motion in
seeking summary judgment to enforce the settlements and obtain the equitable
relief sought.  They claim that this contextual evidence includes providing
evidence of the underlying agreements of purchase and sale and the Defendants’
pre-settlement conduct.  With respect, I do not accept this submission.
[113]      
A settlement agreement is a contract that is
subject to the general law of contract regarding offer and acceptance.  For a
concluded contract to exist, the court must find that the parties mutually
intended to create a legally binding contract and reached agreement on all of
the essential terms of the settlement: Olivieri v. Sherman, 2007 ONCA
491 at para 41. Where the agreement is in writing, it is to be measured by an
objective reading of the language chosen by the parties to reflect their
agreement: Olivieri at para 44. Whether the parties mutually intended to
be bound by an agreement is an objective inquiry to be made in light of the words
and actions of the parties and surrounding circumstances: Owners Strata Plan
LMC 3905 v. Crystal Square Parking Corp, 2020 SCC 29 at para 37; S&J Gareri Trucking Ltd v.
Onyx Corporation, 2016 ONCA 505 at paras 7-8.
[114]      
To establish that the Settling Parties entered
into binding minutes of settlement with the Defendants, I accept that they may
adduce some contextual evidence in support of their summary judgment motion to
enforce the settlements.  This reasonably includes leading some contextual
evidence of the underlying facts giving rise to the settlements for the limited
purpose of being able to understand that the parties mutually intended to
create a binding contract by agreeing on the essential terms of the settlement. 
However, I am not persuaded that this limited purpose should somehow allow the Settling
Parties to adduce evidence for the further purpose of obtaining rulings beyond
relief to enforce obligations under the settlements that were not performed.  Having
settled with the Defendants and agreed as a term of settlement to exchange
mutual releases on completion of the settlement, I find that it would be unfair
for the Settling Parties to obtain equitable relief in the nature of
constructive or resulting trusts not arising from their settlements with the
Defendants but rather a post-trial application of the trial reasons to have
what the Trial Parties successfully got at trial to displace their claims by
gaining priority over Project funds, including protected funds.
[115]      
The Settling Parties essentially seek to be
awarded the same or higher priority in respect of the claims of the Trial
Parties who endured years of pre-trial discovery, motions, and preparation
before ultimately succeeding after a lengthy and hard-fought trial and related
appeals, all of which involved rather significant litigation burdens and risks.
 In contrast, the Settling Parties assumed no such burdens or risks yet now
seek equitable relief at the Trial Parties’ expense by using the same trial
reasons the Trial Parties successfully obtained to claim a beneficial interest and
ground an equitable lien over preserved funds in priority to costs and other
relief granted at trial to the Trial Parties.  Such an outcome would effectively
deprive the Trial Parties of priority to their trial costs, after succeeding at
trial and on appeal, and be manifestly unfair and unconscionable.
[116]      
The Settling Parties notionally seek judgment
and equitable liens based on their settlements with the Defendants, but
effectively seek to align themselves more closely with the Trial Parties by
claiming that the Defendants equally duped and defrauded all of the Settling
and Trial Parties (i.e., as all invested in the Project) by seeking to apply the
trial reasons to their own situations.  In effect, the Settling Parties submit
that they should equally be entitled to relief by virtue of the same
constructive and resulting trusts that the Trial Parties obtained at trial by
arguing that all Project investors were equally defrauded by the Defendants.  The
Settling Parties claim to refer to the trial reasons to show what the court has
already decided and what issues are outstanding.  But they also clearly seek to
raise equitable lien claims by inviting the court to make substantive findings about
the nature and implications of their investments in the Project that should properly
have been pursued at trial had they wanted any such findings, and not on a
post-trial distribution motion after they had relinquished their rights to
pursue the Defendants for their pre-settlement conduct or behaviour. On this
distribution motion, the Settling Parties cannot relitigate aspects of the
trial by inviting the court to make new or expanded findings to place them on equal
or more favourable footing vis-à-vis the Trial Parties. Indeed, the Settling
Parties seek findings of constructive and resulting trusts on disputed evidence
of what they purportedly invested in the Project without any expert evidence to
appropriately quantify their losses. Although I am not prepared to preclude the
Settling Parties from referring to the trial reasons on this distribution
motion, I am mindful that their claims on the motion should properly be grounded
by their minutes of settlement and not on substantive findings related to their
pre-settlement claims against the Defendants that they clearly abandoned by settling
their claims.
[117]      
A key issue on this distribution motion is
whether the Trial Parties should be entitled to their costs judgment and other
relief awarded at trial from the preserved funds in priority to any equitable
interest granted to the Settling Parties.
[118]      
Applying the equitable principle of
indemnification, I find it to be fair and equitable for the Trial Parties to be
awarded just allowances for having obtained the constructive and resulting
trusts over the subject funds: Sproule v. Clements, [1939] BCR 28 (CA)
at 39.  To this end, I accept that
litigants who create or protect a fund may recover their reasonable costs from
the fund, or from other beneficiaries of the fund: Hollander v. Mooney,
2017 BCCA 238 at para 65, leave to appeal denied 2018 CanLII 28109 (SCC); P.D.
Maddaugh and J.D. McCamus, Law of Restitituion, Looseleaf Edition § 33.7. Solicitor-client
costs have been paid from recovered funds where a trial judgment established the
entitlement to the fund and others seek to benefit from the judgment: Shabinsky
v. Horwitz, 1971 CanLII 729 (ON SC), [1973] 1 OR 745 (HCJ) at 751-752; Macdonald v. McCall,
[1887] OJ No 292 (HCJ) at paras 7-8.
[119]      
The trial judgment
provides that the Trial Parties are awarded their costs of the trial as agreed
upon by the Defendants.  The costs judgment specifies the amount of costs
agreed upon by the parties who went to trial.  However, neither the trial
judgment nor the costs judgment confers an equitable interest or priority for
the Trial Parties over their judgment for costs of the trial.
[120]      
The Settling Parties seek equitable priority
over the Trial Parties to the protected funds by arguing, among other things,
an equitable interest based on the Defendants’ failure to pay the amounts owed
under the settlement agreements (i.e., despite knowing that the Defendants could
not be trusted to honour their commitments after purportedly duping or
defrauding them and other investors in the Project). Granting this relief to
the Settling Parties would effectively reward their clear inactivity in this
litigation and their strategic decision to side with the Defendants (i.e., in
the hopes that they would be awarded sufficient funds at trial to pay the
settlements) while taking no steps to enforce or secure their settlement, and thereby
penalize the Trial Parties by depriving them of their trial costs after
succeeding at trial and on appeal.  Granting the Settling Parties an equitable
interest on this basis would result in a perverse outcome that, if supported by
the courts, would encourage parties to settle and stand back, avoid the burdens
and risks of trial, have others perform heavy lifting at trial on their behalf,
use the trial reasons obtained by others to seek substantive equitable claims,
and unfairly burden those who went to trial by displacing their priority to
their trial costs and other relief. In my view, allowing the Settling Parties
to achieve such an outcome would be grossly unfair to the Trial Parties.
[121]      
I am satisfied that fairness and equity favour the
Trial Parties.  They took on the burdens and risks of litigating a lengthy and
hard-fought trial and, therefore, should have their costs and other remedies
awarded at trial: Sproule at para 27.[19] 
In the particular circumstances of this case, I am satisfied that the
indemnification principle outweighs the broader policy goals of promoting
settlements. The minutes of settlement filed by the Settling Parties on this
distribution motion do not direct nor require immediate payment, and do not provide
for the earlier enforcement of the settlements when the Defendants had sufficient
assets available to satisfy what they owed under the settlements.  The
settlements purport to confer certain rights on the Settling Parties but
without prejudice to any positions taken by the Defendants or the other parties
to the litigation.
[122]      
Given the settlement amounts at issue, I accept
that many if not all of the Settling Parties negotiated settlement amounts with
the Defendants that include compensatory amounts for legal costs and interest,
if not additional remedies, even though the settlements do not disclose or
reveal the various component elements of each settlement.  Based on this, I am
satisfied that it would be unjust for the court to award equitable interests to
the Settling Parties on their settlements (i.e., that compensate them for costs
and interest, among other things) in priority to what was granted to the Trial
Parties for their legal costs, interest or other relief simply because these
items of relief fell outside of any equitable interests.  In my view, such an
outcome would be quite unfair.
[123]      
In any event, the Defendants were not found to
have any interest in Project or preserved funds, as noted earlier. Accordingly,
I am not persuaded that the Settling Parties should be awarded an equitable
interest in any such funds based on their settlements with the Defendants.
[124]      
Equitable remedies are discretionary and are
awarded to prevent unfairness.  Having considered the entire record as filed, I
accept that the Settling Parties made a strategic decision to settle with the
Defendants on the terms they did rather than litigate their claims at trial. 
In the circumstances, I am satisfied that it would be unfair to impair the
Trial Parties’ ability to recover their trial costs and other remedies to enrich
the Settling Parties who did not contribute to the legal battle at trial nor to
the financial burdens associated with the litigation.
[125]      
In general, equitable remedies operate on the
maxim that, “equity aids the vigilant, not the indolent:” Perry, Farley & Onyschuk v. Outerbridge Management
Ltd., 2000 CanLII 22491 (ONSC) at
para 40, citing P.V. Baker and P. St. J. Langan, Snell’s Equity, 29th
ed (London: Sweet & Maxwell, 1990) at 35, reversed but not on this point
2002 CanLII 5678 (ONCA).  In addition, equity operates on the maxim: “between
equal equities the first in order of time shall prevail,” subject to an
exception to the “first-in-time rule” where a party has the “better
equity”: McKillop & Benjafield v. Alexander, 1912 CanLII 31
(SCC) at 554;  Everingham Brothers Ltd. (In Bankruptcy), 2000 CanLII
5709 (ONCA) at paras 76-78, leave to appeal denied [2000] SCCA No 259.  Further,
the doctrine of laches provides that a claimant will be precluded from bringing
a claim if: a) there is acquiescence on the claimant’s part, or b) a change of
position arising from reasonable reliance on the claimant’s acceptance of the status
quo: M.(K.) v. M.(H.), 1992 CanLII 31 (SCC), [1992] 3 SCR 6 at 76-80; Manitoba Metis Federation Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General),  2013 SCC 14 at paras 145-146; Fram Elgin Mills 90 Inc. v. Romandale Farms Limited, 2021 ONCA 201 at para 289.  Acquiescence in the context
of laches leads to an inference that the parties’ rights have been waived: M.(K.)
at 78; Intact Insurance Company of Canada v. Lombard General Insurance
Company of Canada, 2015 ONCA 764 at paras 10 and 61.
[126]      
Here, the Settling Parties chose to settle their
claims with the Defendants before trial, did not actively seek to enforce their
settlements before assets were dissipated, and did not previously take action
to protect their settlements even after the Defendants failed to pay the
settlements by September 30, 2020 as required under the terms of settlement.  In
light of this, and the equitable principle of indemnification, I find that it
would be unfair and inequitable to give the Settling Parties an equitable priority
over Project and protected funds to displace the Trial Parties’ ability to
recover their trial costs and remedies from these funds.
[127]      
In support of their position, the Trial Parties
rely on the basic rule that equitable interests primarily rank in the order in
which they are created: Mamillan Inc. v. Bishopsgate Investment Trust (No.
3), [1995] 1 WLR 978 at 99-1000; Molinski v. Chebib, 2012 MBQB 123
at para 21; Diamond Mines Inc. v. Tahera Diamond Corp., 2009 NUCJ 5 at
paras 14-18; Elias Markets Ltd., Re, 2006 CanLII 31904 (ON CA) at para 69; Boreta v.
Primrose Drilling Ventures Ltd., 2010 ABQB 381 at para 63, affirmed 2010
ABCA 387.  They also rely on the maxim that the one who is earlier in
time is strong in law: McGee et al., Snell’s Principles of Equity, 33rd
Ed. (London: Sweet & Maxwell, 2015) at 4-002. Based on these rules, the
Trial Parties submit that in cases of competing equitable interests, the
general rule of equity is that the person whose equity attached first to the
property has priority over the other: Ibid.  However, the basic rule and
the maxim do not always prevail as all of the equities must be
considered in deciding the priority of equitable interests: McDougall v.
MacKay (1922), 1922 CanLII 52 (SCC), 64 SCR 1 at 12, citing Rice v. Rice, (1853), 2 Drewry
73, 61 ER 646; Canada Life Assurance Co. v. Kennedy, 1978 CanLII 1433
(ONCA). As Anglin J. noted in McDougall at 12,
[128]      
I am mindful that the Preservation Order was
obtained on motion brought by the Caroti Group, Bilich, Sokich, and Klecina,
respectively.  As a result, Sokich and Klecina seek to have at least a portion
of their settlements paid in priority to the other Settling Parties from the
preserved funds.  However, the record filed on this motion does not provide a
breakdown of their settlements to meaningfully understand them. Moreover,
Sokich and Klecina, along with all of the other Settling Parties, chose to strategically
settle their claims with the Defendants who were found at trial to not have an
interest in the protected funds.  Both knew that the ability to collect on
their respective settlements would  depend on the Defendants winning sufficient
funds in the Project at trial to pay their settlement obligations.  In the
circumstances, I decline to award Sokich or Klecina equitable interests over
Project or preserved funds to avoid prejudicing the Trial Parties’ ability to
recover their costs and other remedies from these funds.
[129]      
I am not persuaded that Klecina should have his
$700,000.00 settlement claim paid from the Caroti Group’s share of the preserved
funds.  Like the other Settling Parties, Klecina knew full well that payment of
his settlement was contingent on the Defendants succeeding with their case.  The
Defendants did not succeed.  In addition, Defendants’ counsel acknowledged at
the start of trial that there may not be enough money to pay the Settling and
Trial Parties.  This followed an email exchange where the Settling Parties were
clearly advised of the Trial Parties’ position that, a) any recovery of the
settlements would follow any judgment granted in favour of the Trial Parties,
and b) the Settling Parties would have no claim to the preserved funds if the
Defendants had no entitlement to these funds.  In the circumstances, I find
that it would be unfair and unreasonable to award Klecina his settlement claim as
requested.
[130]      
I have some sympathy for Klecina’s claim for
reimbursement of the legal fees that he contributed to the Caroti Group before
he settled his claim.  Klecina was a founding member of the Caroti Group.  He
claims to have paid $400,000.00 for the Caroti Group’s legal costs before he
left the group and settled with the Defendants.  Based on this, he seeks
reimbursement for this funding in priority on equitable principles: Re
4519922 Canada Inc., 2015 ONSC 4648 at para 35.  The $400,000.00 figure
includes all of his litigation costs before his claim was settled and does not necessarily
relate to any preservation efforts. That said, I accept that Klecina settled
his claim against the Defendants for an amount that included his litigation
costs.  He now seeks to have the Caroti Group pay for all his legal costs after
contractually settling these costs through minutes of settlement with the
Defendants, even though the Caroti Group was not a party to the settlement.  Notably,
the Caroti Group entered into post-trial negotiations to settle costs of the
trial with the Defendants.  They did not include Klecina’s legal costs in these
negotiations as he had separately resolved those costs through minutes of
settlement with the Defendants and gave no notice that he would be seeking to
have the group reimburse these costs.  In light of this, I find that it would
be unjust and inequitable to require the Caroti Group to pay for Klecina’s
legal costs at this time.
[131]      
I am not persuaded by the Trial Parties’
position that the minutes of settlement violate the terms of the Preservation
Order.  Although the order clearly requires the Defendants to not assign, well,
dispose of, or transfer their rights, interests, or obligations in the Property
without first obtaining leave of the court, the settlements clearly contemplate
leave of the court being sought to affirm the settlement terms including the
equitable interests (i.e., to which the Defendants agreed to give their consent)
as contemplated in the settlement agreements.  In light of this, I accept that
the minutes were drafted to conform with the terms of the Preservation Order,
and that the Settling Parties took adequate steps to enforce their rights under
the settlements. Taking this all into consideration, I am satisfied that there
is no mischief arising from the settlement agreements as the Trial Parties have
suggested.
[132]      
I do not accept the Pichelli Group’s submission
that the minutes of settlement between the Settling Parties and the Defendants
constitute unjust preferences that are contrary to ss. 4(2) of the Assignments
and Preferences Act, RSO 1990, c A.33 (the “Act”).  Subsection 4(1)
to (3) of the Act provides as follows:
[133]      
 To establish that a transaction is void as an
unjust preference under ss. 4(2) of the Act, the onus is on the Pichelli
Group to prove, on a balance of probabilities, that
[134]      
I am satisfied that the Pichelli Group cannot
meet its onus to show an unjust preference under ss. 4(2) as no transfer or
conveyance has been made. In addition, whether the Defendants were on the eve
of insolvency when they entered into the minutes of settlement or now is, at
best, unclear on the evidentiary record before the court. In any event, I am
satisfied that the language of the minutes of settlement show that they were
made without prejudice to the rights of the Trial Parties or others and, therefore,
were not intended to unjustly prefer the Settling Parties.
[135]      
I am not persuaded by the Trial Parties
submission that the Settling Parties ought to have taken further steps to
enforce the minutes of settlement by intervening at the Court of Appeal.  During
the case conference held on October 11, 2022, all of the Settling and Trial Parties
agreed that an omnibus motion to enforce the settlements and distribute the
preserved funds should be heard after the appeals.  Thereafter, on July 11,
2023, I endorsed that the parties could seek to return for a case conference to
address the judgment and priority motions after the Court of Appeal had decided
the motion by the Defendants to restore their appeals.  Having regard to the
directions of this court, I do not find that the Settling Parties were obliged
to intervene in the appeals.
[136]      
I do not accept Bilich’s position that the
Settling Parties ought to have sought a stop order under Rule 72.05.[20]  In my view, there is
nothing in that rule to suggest that such relief was appropriate in this
matter.  A stop order is used to ensure that parties claiming an interest in
funds held in court are given notice of any attempt by another party to deal
with such funds.  In this case, there is no need for the Settling Parties to
obtain a stop order as the issue of entitlement to the preserved funds paid
into court is being addressed on notice to all parties. Indeed, Caroti Group’s
counsel expressly advised that notice would be given, and the court agreed to
hear the Settling Group’s motion for judgment and corollary relief.
[137]      
As set out earlier, I find that the Settling
Parties should have judgment on their respective minutes of settlement with the
Defendants together with post-judgment interest of 5% per annum starting
September 30, 2020.
[138]      
I am not persuaded that the Settling Parties
should have an equitable lien over Project funds to remedy the Defendants’
non-payment of their obligations under the settlement agreements.  The minutes
of settlement themselves contemplate that any equitable lien is without
prejudice to the rights or claims of other parties.  In addition, the
Defendants have not been shown to have ownership interests in the preserved
funds or other Project funds to ground an equitable interest. The Settling
Parties were well aware that their ability to be paid their settlements
depended on the Defendants gaining ownership of sufficient Project assets at
trial to pay out the settlements.  The Settling Parties essentially “rolled the
dice” by entering into their respective settlements and simply lost.  In my
view, not granting the Settling Parties an equitable lien is a just and fair
outcome in the circumstances of this case as it gives them exactly what they
knowingly bargained for.  Accordingly, no equitable remedies are granted to the
Settling Parties.
[139]      
The following chart summarizes the claims of the
Trial Parties in the two actions that were heard together at trial and on appeal:
[140]      
As of June 21, 2024, the total amount of the
judgments plus legal costs and interest came to a total of $17,521,614.10 that
cannot be satisfied by the $11,281,847.15 in funds paid into court with further
accrued interest.  In the circumstances, I find that the amounts should be paid
out on a proportional or pro rata basis amongst the Trial Parties,
subject to the Pichelli Group not collecting on the assets of the Defendant
Mira Vuletic as they did not sue her, and further subject to Bilich collecting
only her costs judgment against Mira’s assets.
[141]      
But for the actions of the Caroti Group and
Bilich to preserve funds paid into court, there is a good chance that nothing would
have been preserved from the sale proceeds beyond the amount of the Mareva
injunction obtained by the Pichelli Group.  Although the Pichelli Group did not
participate in the Caroti Group/Bilich motion to pay funds into court, I accept
that all of the Trial Parties collaborated throughout the litigation, including
the trial and the appeals, in largely a joint effort to reasonably share the litigation
burdens and realize costs savings or efficiencies.  As a result, I decline to
limit the Pichelli Group’s recovery to the Mareva-related funds and find
that it is just and equitable for all of the Trial Parties to share in all of the
preserved funds paid into court on a pro rata basis in light of how they
worked collaboratively throughout the litigation.
[142]      
There are competing claims to other assets of
the Defendants, namely ownership of Lots 49, 50 and 60 in the Project (i.e.,
purportedly retained by the Vuletics upon the sale of the Property and
confirmed by Brampton G&A to be ascertainable), and the over $1.2 million of
the so-called Dorham funds (i.e., of which $12,997.06 has been paid into court to
the credit of the Caroti Appeal in COA-22-CV-0106).[21]  To the extent that the
distribution of those assets may require the court’s ongoing assistance to
resolve valuations or allocations of proceeds amongst judgment creditors, or
preserving assets pending resolution, I am prepared to remain seized to deal
with those issues.
[143]      
As set out below, I am not persuaded that the
Caroti Group should have $120,000.00 on a quantum meruit basis for their
efforts to preserve the Dorham funds. In claiming this relief, the Caroti Group
claims that their efforts benefitted others to warrant being paid on a restitutionary
quantum meruit basis: Nicholson v. Brown Estate, 2018 BCSC 141 at
paras 87-88; Reichmann v. Vered, 2003 ONSC 49295 at para 241. But for
the Caroti Group’s efforts, there would be no further Dorham-related funds and
the shares likely would have been sold to a bona fide purchaser leaving
the associated second tranche out of reach.  I accept that the Caroti Group
undertook the burden and risk of preserving the Dorham funds.  The Pichelli
Group and Bilich submit that the Caroti Group did comparatively little to
preserve the Dorham funds that have been or will be paid into court on
consent.  However, I accept that the Caroti Group undertook reasonable efforts to
preserve the funds and successfully responded to an appeal.  Although Dorham
agreed, through its counsel, to pay these funds into court to the credit of the
Caroti Appeal, I am mindful that this consent may not have been forthcoming unless
the preservation motion was brought. However, George J.A. awarded $6,000.00 in
costs to the Caroti Group for the preservation motion, and a panel of the Court
of Appeal dismissed an appeal from the decision on the motion with costs.  In
light of this, I see no basis to award further costs for these efforts at this
time, let alone $120,000.00 in super priority costs over the Dorham funds that
were paid into court on consent.
[144]      
On this motion, the Caroti Group has undertaken
to transfer the Dorham funds from the Court of Appeal to the Superior Court
action if their $29,000.00 in costs awards plus HST is first paid out.  I find
this proposal to be fair and reasonable.
[145]      
Orders shall issue in accordance with these
reasons.
[146]      
I encourage counsel to settle the issue of costs
for the distribution motion.  However, if they are unable to do so, a case
conference may be requested to address costs for the motion.