[1]        Marina
Tsatskin is the owner of a condominium unit which is known municipally as Suite
226, 280 Howland Ave., Toronto. She moved into the building in October 2022. The
applicant, Toronto Standard Condominium Corporation No. 2931 (TSCC 2931) states
that soon after Ms. Tsatskin moved into the building, she exhibited dangerous
and anti-social behaviour.
[2]        TSCC
2931 brought a motion without notice for an interim injunction to restrain Ms.
Tsatskin from entering the common elements and from residing in the
condominium. The matter came before me on November 1, 2024. TSCC 2931 argued
that Ms. Tsatskin had engaged in uncivil, abusive, and harassing behaviour,
which included spray painting swastikas on the doors of unit owners. By order dated
November 2, 2023, I granted the interim injunction.
[3]        
The motion to continue the order was scheduled for November 10, 2023. At Ms.
Tsatskin’s request I adjourned the motion to December 11, 2023.The motion was
later adjourned to February 8, 2024.
[4]        By endorsement
dated April 8, 2024, I found that Ms. Tsatskin had exhibited conduct that was
not consistent with condominium living. I made the following findings of fact:
[5]        I
concluded that Ms. Tsatskin’s conduct caused emotional upset and psychological
harm that was not of a trifling or transitory nature. I was satisfied that Ms. Tsatskin
had demonstrated that she is unable or unwilling to abide by the rules and
regulations of the condominium and that she had “repudiated the cooperative
foundation of condominium living”.
[6]        I
granted the injunction restraining Ms. Tsatskin from:
[7]        I
did not order that Ms. Tsatskin was required to sell her unit. I provided her
with a “last opportunity to demonstrate that she can comply with the Act
and the declaration, rules and regulations of the condominium, before requiring
her to sell the unit”. I stated that “if there is a breach of the restraining
order, the applicant may return to this court for an order to compel Ms.
Tsatskin to sell the unit”.
[8]        TSCC
2931 argues that Ms. Tsatskin is in breach of the order. It
is alleged that after the order was granted on April 8, 2024, Ms. Tsatskin and
her family members made unwarranted complaints to the Law Society of Ontario
(LSO) and the Human Rights Tribunal of Ontario (HRTO) for the purpose of
harassing and intimidating persons involved in these proceedings. The TSCC
2931 brings this motion for an order compelling Ms. Tsatskin to sell her unit.
[9]        A
separate application is brought by Cristina Gagliese,
her father Tony Gagliese and her husband Vince Messina (the Gagliese
Applicants). They seek an order prohibiting Ms. Tsatskin and her parents, Faina
and Mark Zilberman from having any contact with them or any persons associated
with them. They also seek an order restraining the respondents from commencing
any proceedings against them including proceedings before a regulatory body
such as LSO or the HRTO.
[10]      For the reasons set out below, I find that Ms. Tsatskin is
in breach of the order dated April 8, 2024. She has continued her harassing
and intimidating behaviour. I order that she sell her condominium. I also grant
the relief sought by the Gagliese Applicants and order that Ms. Tsatskin, and
Mr. and Ms. Zilberman are prohibited from contacting them or any persons
associated with them.
[11]      The
following issues will be addressed in this endorsement:
[12]      TSCC
2931 states that after I granted the order on April 8, 2024, Ms. Tsatskin continued
to harass and intimidate persons who affirmed affidavits against her, the owners
of other units in the condominium and counsel for the applicant.
[13]      In
support of its motion, the TSCC 2931 relies on the following conduct:
[14]      TSCC
2931 argues that the complaints to the LSO and to the HRTO are revenge/reprisal
actions against persons involved in the original application against Ms.
Tsatskin.
[15]      On
November 15, 2023, Ms. Tsatskin submitted a complaint to the LSO against Ms. Gagliese.
The complaint was made shortly after I granted the interim injunction in favour
of TSCC 2931. Ms. Tsatskin alleged that Ms. Gagliese behaved improperly and
provided inaccurate information to support the position of the condominium.
There appears to have been no substance to the complaint, and it was dismissed
by the LSO.
[16]     In November 2023, Ms.
Tsatskin’s mother, Faina Zilberman sent a threatening email to Mr. Gagliese in
which she states that Ms. Gagliese had struck Ms. Tsatskin. This was denied by
Ms. Gagliese.
[17]      On June 19, 2024, Ms. Zilberman initiated a HRTO
complaint with respect to Cristina Gagliese. The respondent to the complaint
was Ms. Gagliese’s employer, Steven Monk, the founder of CEO Law. In the
complaint Ms. Zilberman alleges that Ms. Gagliese had been stalking Ms.
Tsatskin. She states that Ms. Gagliese is abusing the law and tricking the
police into laying charges against them. She also alleges that Ms. Gagliese was
racist against Jewish people and had said that Jewish people are making the
area look cheap. Ms. Gagliese denied all allegations set out in the HRTO
application. Mr. Monk advised that he has never had any contact with either Ms.
Zilberman or Ms. Tsatskin. Mr. Monk and CEO Law filed a response to the HRTO
application.
[18]      There are two HRTO complaints
involving Mr. Droulias. Ms. Tsatskin’s sister Michelle
Zilberman brought a HRTO application alleging that he was harassing Ms.
Tsatskin. The respondent to the complaint is Mr. Droulias’ employer EdgePoint
Wealth.
[19]      The other HRTO complaint involving
Mr. Droulias was brought by Faina Zilberman. She alleges that Mr. Droulias and
his wife listened to their conversations. She also alleged that Mr. Droulias made
comments about immigrants, the fact that Ms. Tsatskin and her family were
Jewish and had made the property look cheap. Mr. Droulias denied all
allegations.
[20]      On June 2, 2024, Ms. Tsatskin
named Lash Condo as a respondent in a complaint to the LSO. She alleged that
Mr. Fine behaved improperly towards her. The LSO dismissed the complaint.
[21]      Ms. Tsatskin also made a
complaint to the HRTO in which Lash Condo Law was a respondent. The complaint
alleged that Ms. Aziz a law clerk at Lash Condo Law, had been rude to Ms.
Tsatskin and had sent the same email five times. Ms. Aziz denied the
allegations set out in the complaint.
[22]      Ms.
Tsatskin denies that she breached the order dated April 8, 2024. She has not
resided at the condominium since the order was made. She denies that she
engaged in any uncivilized or harassing behaviour.
[23]      Ms.
Tsatskin argues that the LSO complaint with respect to Ms. Gagliese was submitted
on November 15, 2023, before I made my order on April 8, 2024. She argues that
this complaint cannot be evidence of a breach of my order or ongoing harassing
conduct. I note that the LSO complaint was brought shortly after I granted the
interlocutory injunction restraining Ms. Tsatskin from entering the common
elements of the building or from residing in the condominium.
[24]      Ms.
Tsatskin argues that she has a right to make complaints to the HRTO and LSO.
Engaging those institutions is an exercise of a statutory right and not a
contravention of the order or a collateral attack. If the complaints made to
the HRTO or LSO are inappropriate, those organizations will dismiss the
complaints. Ms. Tsatskin states that my order does not specifically provide
that Ms. Tsatskin or her family are not entitled to make a complaint to these
organizations.
[25]      Ms.
Tsatskin also takes that position that she was entitled and justified in
bringing the complaints. She states that Tony Gagliese, (the father of
Christina Gagliese) sent two emails to the condominium board dated September 5
and 7, 2024, in which he refers to Ms. Tsatskin as the “Nazi girl”.
[26]      Ms.
Tsatskin also argues that the order dated April 8, 2024, applied to Ms.
Tsatskin and did not expressly apply to her family members. Because her parents
are not subject to the court orders, and are not in breach, Ms. Tsatskin cannot
be held accountable for their actions.
[27]      Ms.
Tsatskin states that she has a mental illness and that it is the
responsibility of the applicant to accommodate her. Ms. Tsatskin filed a letter
from Ms. Wendy Kirk, a psychotherapist, dated August 1, 2021. Ms. Kirk did not
deliver an affidavit. The letter is very brief. It states that in 2021, Ms. Tsatskin
experienced stress related to her condominium and had been “significantly
inconvenienced by them.” In my view the letter is not properly in evidence
before me. In any event, the letter states that Ms. Tsatskin was under “stress”
and was “inconvenienced” by the Board in 2021. I am of the view that the letter
does not support Ms. Tsatskin’s claim that she has a mental illness.
[28]      Ms. Tsatskin
also filed a letter from Dee Hope dated August 28, 2024. Ms. Hope is a community
service worker at Sound Times Support Service. The letter was written to
support a release from custody request for Ms. Tsatskin. Ms. Hope states that
she is happy to assist Ms. Tsatskin in making referrals for mental health counselling.
Ms. Hope does not state in her letter that she met with Ms. Tsatskin. She does
not provide any diagnosis or prognosis. There is no evidence that Ms. Tsatskin
went to a mental health program.
[29]      I
am satisfied that Ms. Tsatskin is in breach of the order dated April 8, 2024. The
 endorsement provided as follows:
[30]      I
find that Ms. Tsatskin engaged in “improper, harassing and intimidating”
conduct when she made the LSO complaint against Jake Fine and the HRTO
complaint against Ms. Aziz. I also find that the HRTO complaints against Mr.
Droulias and Ms. Gagliese’s employers constitute harassing and intimidating
conduct.
[31]      Ms.
Tsatskin argues that there is nothing improper in making a complaint to the LSO
or HRTO, and that she is entitled to make complaints to these regulatory
bodies.  Although there is nothing that prevents someone from making a HRTO or
LSO complaint, the complaint must be legitimate and not made for a collateral
purpose. I find that the complaints to the LSO and HRTO were not bona fide.
[32]      Ms.
Zilberman is the applicant for the HRTO complaint against Ms. Gagliese. The
HRTO complaint was not brought against Ms. Gagliese but instead against her
employer, Steven Monk and CEO Law. One of Ms. Gagliese’s emails indicated that
she was a lawyer. Ms. Zilberman and Ms. Tsatskin conducted research on the
internet to find out where Ms. Gagliese worked. Although Ms. Tsatskin was
subject to a court order to not harass Ms. Gagliese, she assisted her mother in
completing the form. The form itself contains a number of errors. It states
that the preferred language of the applicant is French. Ms. Zilberman does not
speak French. The form also provides that the applicant resides in Aroura. In
fact, Ms. and Mr. Zilberman live in Pennsylvania.
[33]      The
HRTO complaint involving Mr. Droulias was brought against his employer,
EdgePoint. There was no connection between Ms. Tsatskin and her family with EdgePoint.
[34]      Counsel
for Ms. Tsatskin was unable to provide a reasonable explanation for why the HRTO
applications were brought against the employers. There was no connection
between Ms. Zilberman or Ms. Tsatskin with Mr. Droulias or Ms. Gagliese’s
employers.  I find that the HRTO complaints were intended to embarrass Ms.
Gagliese and Mr. Droulias with the intent to affect the relationship with their
employers. I accept the submission of counsel for TSCC 2931 that the HRTO
complaints were an act of retribution and revenge because Ms. Gagliese and Mr.
Droulias had made complaints about Ms. Tsatskin.
[35]      Ms.
Tsatskin argues that the complaint to the HRTO involving Ms. Gagliese was
appropriate because her father Tony had described Ms. Tsatskin as a “Nazi
girl”. Mr. Gagliese swore an affidavit in which he deposes that he did not know
Ms. Tsatskin’s name. He only knew her as the person who had made anti-Semitic
remarks and had spray painted a swastika in the hallway. His identification of
Ms. Tsatskin as the “Nazi girl” was not unreasonable in the circumstances. I do
not find his identification of her to be a justification for the HRTO
complaint. In any event this “justification” does not explain why the HRTO
complaint was made against Ms. Gagliese’s employer and not against Mr. Gagliese.
[36]      The
fact that the complaints were initiated by Ms. Tsatskin’s family is no answer.
The family members had no relationship with Mr. Gagliese, Mr. Droulias or their
employers. The only connection was that Ms. Gagliese and Mr. Droulias had made
complaints against Ms. Tsatskin. Ms. Zilberman testified
that she and Ms. Tsatskin completed the complaint form together. I find that
Ms. Tsatskin instructed and influenced her mother and sister with respect to
the HRTO complaints.
[37]      TSCC
2931 seeks an order compelling Ms. Tsatskin to sell the condominium unit. A
forced sale of a condominium unit is “extraordinary relief”: York
Condominium Corporation No. 136 v. Roth, 2006 CanLII 29286 (ON SC), at
paras. 3, and 8.
It is the
“ultimate and harshest remedy available. As such, it is a remedy of “last
resort” and should be reserved for the most egregious cases”: York
Condominium Corporation No. 137 v. Hayes, at para. 55.
[38]      TSCC
2931 relies on the decision of Justice Code in MTCC 747 v. Korolekh, 2010
ONSC 4448.  In that case, the court held that the forced sale was appropriate because
of Ms. Korolekh’s extreme conduct. The court held that, “Ms. Korolekh
has irreparably broken the bond with her community and an effective order
cannot be made that would force these parties to now join together again”: at
para. 88.
[39]
    Ms. Tsatskin argues that the conduct alleged against her is entirely
different from the conduct described in the Korolekh case. She denies
engaging in any physical assault or mischief against property. She states that since
the date of my order, her conduct has not been “incorrigible or unmanageable”. I
disagree.
[40]      In
my endorsement dated April 8, 2024, I found that Ms. Tsatskin had engaged in
extreme conduct. She had painted swastikas in the hallway of the building. I
also found that she had assaulted Ms. Tobe when she spraypainted her in the
face. She had made offensive, racist and anti-Semitic comments to other unit
owners. I concluded that Ms. Tsatskin had demonstrated that she is unable or
unwilling to abide by the rules and regulations of the condominium and that she
had “repudiated the cooperative foundation of condominium living”.
[41]      Although
I found Ms. Tsatskin’s conduct to be extreme, I did not order that she
immediately sell her unit. I provided her with a “last opportunity” to
demonstrate that she can comply with her responsibilities as an owner in a
condominium: Toronto Standard Condominium Corporation No. 2581 v. Paterno,
2023 ONSC 4343, at paras. 57 and 60. Instead of demonstrating an ability to
comply with her responsibilities, Ms. Tsatskin’s unacceptable conduct has
continued.
[42]      Ms.
Tsatskin continues to harass Ms. Gagliese, Mr. Douglias and the Applicant’s
lawyers. I find that she directly or indirectly with the assistance of her
mother and sister brought the HRTO and LSO complaints to intimidate and harass the
persons connected with this application. There is simply no explanation for why
the respondents to the HRTO applications were Ms. Gagliese and Mr. Droulias’
employers. Ms. Tsatskin fails to take responsibility for her actions and
continues to deny any wrongdoing. Although a forced sale of the unit is drastic,
I am satisfied that no other reasonable remedy is available: Waterloo North
Condominium Corporation No. 168 v. Webb, 2011 ONSC 2365.
[43]      Ms.
Tsatskin argues that it would be unfair to order a sale of the unit because she
has a mental illness. As noted earlier in this endorsement Ms. Tsatskin filed
the letter from Wendy Kirk. Ms. Kirk did not deliver an affidavit. Even if the
letter from Ms. Kirk was properly before me, she did not provide the opinion
that Ms. Tsatskin suffers from a mental illness. Ms. Kirk simply states that
Ms. Tsatskin has “stress” and has been “significantly inconvenienced” by the
condominium board.
[44]      A
sale of a condominium unit may be ordered even if there is evidence of a mental
illness.  In
Metropolitan Toronto Condominium Corporation No. 946 v. J.V.M (Litigation
Guardian of),
2008 CanLII 69581 (ONSC) the unit owner suffered from paranoid schizophrenia.
Despite the respondent breaching the condominium’s rules and by-laws by
exhibiting improper and uncivil conduct, the respondent was given one last
chance to comply with the Act and remain in her unit. The respondent
continued to behave in an improper manner. The court granted the order for the
forced sale of the condominium.
[45]      Ms.
Tsatskin has demonstrated that she will not be bound by an order of this court
to not harass or intimidate persons involved in the application. I am satisfied
that an order forcing Ms. Tsatskin to sell the unit is the only remedy that
remains available.
[46]      The
Gagliese Applicants bring the application seeking a permanent injunction restraining
Ms. Tsatskin and her family members from engaging in any harassing conduct
against them. The Gagliese Applicants also seek an order of damages “at large”
to show the condemnation of the court.
[47]      The
Gagliese Applicants state that since Ms. Gagliese and Mr. Messina moved into
the condominium, they have been the subject to Ms. Tsatskin’s harassing and
abusive behaviour. Mr. Gagliese took the lead in attempting to have the
condominium board enforce the rules with respect to Ms. Tsatskin. When TSCC
2931 commenced the application against Ms. Tsatskin, the material mentioned Ms.
Gagliese and Mr. Messina by name and identified their unit number. The Gagliese
Applicants state that as a result of the disclosure they have been subject to
further harassment by Ms. Tsatskin.
[48]      
In support of their application, the Gagliese Applicants rely on the following:
[49]      The
Gagliese Applicants argue that if the injunction is not granted, they have a
real and legitimate concern that the respondents will continue to harass them.
[50]      Ms.
Tsatskin denies that she harassed the Gagliese Applicants. She argues that she
is not in breach of the order because the LSO complaint was brought before my
order dated April 8, 2024. She also argues that she did not bring the HRTO
complaint. The complaint was brought by her parents who were trying to help
her.
[51]      The
Gagliese Applicants seek a permanent injunction against the respondents. The three-part
test for granting an injunction is as follows:
[52]      The
three elements of the test are to be considered as a whole. Strength in one
part of the test can make up for the weakness in another. The court is then to
consider whether the injunctive relief is appropriate in all of the circumstances:
Struik v. Dixie Lee Food Systems Ltd., 2006 CanLII 27574 (ON SC), at
paras. 35-36.
[53]      I
am of the view that the three-part test has been satisfied.
[54]      The
Gagliese Applicants must establish there is a serious issue to be tried. Essentially
this requires a determination that the case is not frivolous or vexatious: RJR-MacDonald,
at p. 337. For the reasons set out above, I find that the respondents breached
the order and have continued to harass and intimidate the Gagliese Applicants. I
am satisfied that the Gagliese Applicants’ claim is not frivolous or vexatious.
[55]      I
find that if the injunction is not granted the Gagliese Applicants are at an
increased risk of harm. The reputation of the Gagliese Applicants may be
damaged. Ms. Gagliese is the subject of two HRTO complaints. The complaints make
serious allegations and involve her employer. As noted above, I find that the HRTO
complaints are intended to embarrass Ms. Gagliese and affect her relationship
with her employer. Damages for the loss of reputation would be difficult to
quantify. I am satisfied that the Gagliese Applicants have established
irreparable harm.
[56]      
I am also satisfied that the Gagliese Applicants would suffer greater harm from
the refusal to grant the injunction than the respondents will suffer if the
order is not granted. If the injunction is not granted, the Gagliese Applicants
will continue to be subject to ongoing harassment. However, there would be no
prejudice to the respondents if the injunction is granted. The respondents
would simply be required to comply with a court order and not harass the
Gagliese Applicants. Mr. and Ms. Zilberman state that they have no objection to
being subject to an injunction that they do not harass the Gagliese Applicant.
[57]      I
grant the injunction sought by the Gagliese Applicants.
[58]      The
Gagliese Applicants argue that the respondents are in contempt of my order
dated April 8, 2024. They seek an order for the payment of a fine, or an award
of damages.
[59]      I
am not prepared to order the payment of a fine or make an award of damages at
this time. This relief would be available only after a finding of contempt in
the liability phase of a contempt hearing. Although the Gagliese Applicants
argue that Ms. Tsatskin breached the order dated April 8, 2024, a motion for
contempt was not brought.
[60]      Although
I am not prepared to award damages at this time, this is without prejudice to
the Gagliese Applicants bringing a separate motion for contempt should the
respondents breach this or any other order made in these proceedings.
[61]      I
make the following order in favour of TSCC No. 2931:
[62]      I
make the following order in favour of the Gagliese Applicants:
[63]      The
TSCC 2931 and the Gagliese Applicants are successful on their applications and
are presumptively entitled to their costs.
[64]      TSCC
2931 seeks its costs on a full indemnity basis. It argues that the other
condominium owners should not be required to absorb the costs incurred because
of Ms. Tsatskin’s unacceptable conduct.
[65]      Section
134(5) of the Condominium Act (the Act) provides that if a
condominium corporation obtains a compliance order that includes a cost
component, the condominium can charge the actual costs incurred by the
corporation to the common expenses for the unit. There is a distinction between
the costs that are awarded by the court as between the parties and the actual
costs incurred by the condominium as a result of a condominium owner’s conduct:
Metropolitan Toronto Condominium Corp. No. 1385 v. Skyline Executive Properties
Inc., 2005 CanLII 13778 (ON CA), at paras. 45 and 49. Section 134(5) of the
Act does not derogate from the court’s obligation to determine the
reasonable award of costs between the parties: TSCC No. 1446 v. Weinstein,
2021 ONSC 3526, at para. 9.
[66]      Section 131(1) of
the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, provides the court with
discretion in the determination of costs. The exercise of this discretion is
guided by the factors set out in Rule 57.01, having regard for the overriding
principles of reasonableness, fairness, and proportionality: Barbour v.
Bailey, 2016 ONCA 334, at para. 9; Beaver v. Hill, 2018 ONCA 840,
143 O.R. (3d) 519, at para. 12, leave to appeal refused, [2019] S.C.C.A. No.
82; Boucher v. Public Accountants Council for the Province of Ontario
(2004), 71 6 O.R. (3d) 291 (C.A.), at para. 38; Zesta Engineering Ltd. v.
Cloutier, 2002 CanLII 25577 (ON CA), [2002] O.J. No. 4495 (C.A.), at para. 4.
[67]      The
rules and principles pertaining to the issue of costs have three principal
purposes:
[68]      I am of
the view that the third purpose is most relevant. I am satisfied that Ms. Tsatskin’s
inappropriate behaviour justifies an award of substantial indemnity costs in
favour of both TSCC 2931 and the Gagliese Applicants.
[69]      TSCC 2931,
seeks its costs on a substantial indemnity basis in the all-inclusive amount of
$39,369.20. Ms. Tsatskin argues that the costs claimed are excessive. Her
counsel submitted a cost outline which provides that if successful she would
have sought costs in the amount of $30,808.27 on a substantial indemnity basis.
[70]      In fixing costs of the motion, I am not
undertaking the same task as an assessment officer or fixing costs with
mathematical precision. I am fixing an amount for costs that is fair and
reasonable in the circumstances.
[71]      I award costs of the motion to TSCC 2931,
fixed in the amount of $30,000 inclusive of counsel fee, disbursements and
H.S.T. I am satisfied that costs in the all-inclusive amount of $30,000 is
proportional, fair and within the reasonable expectations of Ms. Tsatskin to
pay. The costs are payable by Ms. Tsatskin to TSCC No. 2931 within 30 days of
the date of this endorsement.
[72]      The Gagliese Applicants seek their costs on a
substantial indemnity basis in the all-inclusive amount of $28,396.62. Counsel
for Ms. Tsatskin submitted a cost outline in which she states that if
successful she would have sought costs on a substantial indemnity basis in the
amount of $27,764.90.
[73]      I award costs of the application to the
Gagliese Applicants fixed in the all-inclusive amount of $25,000. I am
satisfied that costs in the all-inclusive amount of $25,000 is proportional,
fair and within the reasonable expectations of the respondents to pay. The
costs are payable by the respondents to the Gagliese Applicants within 30 days
of the date of this endorsement.