[1]              
The Applicant Mother (“Melody”) and Respondent
Father (“Andrew”) are parents to an eight-year-old boy, M.  Melody and Andrew
separated in 2022.  Ever since, they have been in litigation regarding M.  The
central issues in this trial focused on whether Andrew should have more parenting
time with M., whether Andrew owes Melody child support arrears, and how M.’s prospective
section 7 expenses should be handled. To Melody’s and Andrew’s credit, they
have managed to resolve many of their other issues.
[2]              
For the reasons set out below, I have determined
that it is not in M.’s best interests for his parenting time with Andrew to be
increased beyond the current parenting schedule which has M. residing with
Andrew 5 out of 14 overnights. I have calculated the child support arrears
owing to Melody, which include both table and s. 7 expenses for 2022-2024
inclusive, and decided how the parties are to determine and share M.’s s. 7
expenses going forward.
[3]              
Melody and Andrew, who never married, began
cohabiting on May 1, 2015.  They had their only son, M., in late January 2016.
[4]              
Melody is a real estate broker, and Andrew is a
Rogers technician.  The parties have deemed their respective 2023 incomes as
$75,000 for Melody and $160,766 for Andrew.   Table child support for Andrew is
$1,377 per month.
[5]              
Since M.’s birth, Andrew has lived in the same
house in Stouffville, Ontario (“Lakeview”).
[6]              
The parties often lived apart.  In 2020, they
began living together at Lakeview.  They separated on May 22, 2022, after Andrew
was charged with two counts of assault against Melody, including assault by
choking.  The alleged incident happened at home while M. was present.  Since
that day, M. has lived primarily with Melody in North York.
[7]              
Melody commenced an Application in this Court on
June 23, 2022.
[8]              
After the criminal charges were laid, Andrew did
not see M. for three months.  He then had four supervised parenting visits. Since
fall 2022, Andrew’s parenting has been unsupervised.
[9]              
On March 6, 2023, Justice Shore issued an order addressing
interim parenting, child support, and section 7 expenses.  As a result:
[10]          
Andrew’s criminal charges were withdrawn in
March, 2024.
[11]          
On September 18, 2024, the parties executed a partial
consent agreement addressing decision-making responsibility for daily and major
decisions, holiday and summer vacation parenting time, travel, relocation, and
dispute resolution.
[12]          
In September 2024, M. entered grade 3.  His school
is approximately 5 minutes from Melody’s home, and 30-45 minutes from Andrew’s
home.
[13]          
M. is involved in numerous activities, including
sports.
[14]          
The York Regional Children’s Aid Society (“CAS”)
has opened three files on the family, including one just before this trial.  Two
of the files are closed.  CAS has made recommendations about how the parties should
relate to one another.
[15]          
A clinician prepared two Voice of the Child (VOC)
reports.
[16]          
The issues in this trial are:
[17]          
Melody has grave misgivings about Andrew having
additional parenting time.  She says that M. already has difficulties with the
current schedule, in part, because of Andrew’s alleged domestic violence which
M. witnessed and has greatly affected him.
[18]          
Despite Melody’s misgivings, she is not seeking
to reduce Andrew’s parenting time.  She seeks to maintain the status quo of
Andrew having 5 overnights with M. every two weeks.
[19]          
Melody believes that Andrew only wishes to
increase his parenting time in order to reduce his child support.
[20]          
Melody believes that M. thrives under his
current roster of activities.  She thinks that Andrew’s resistance to M’s activities
is financial, not based on what M. wants or what is in his best interest.
[21]          
Melody seeks the following retroactive child
support:
[22]          
Melody seeks the following retroactive section 7
expenses:
[23]          
Relying on section 7 of the Ontario Child
Support Guidelines, O. Reg. 391/97, Melody wants numerous expenses to be
shared by the parties on a proportionate-to-income basis including hockey,
baseball, and tutoring.
[24]          
Melody says that Andrew is unable to communicate
effectively with her.  As a consequence, she believes that she should have sole
decision-making on M.’s extracurricular activities.
[25]          
Melody believes everything that M. tells her,
including several disturbing things he has said about Andrew.  She acknowledges
that others, including CAS, do not share this belief.
[26]          
Andrew believes that it is in M.’s best
interests to have additional time with him.  He describes M. as his “best
buddy”.
[27]          
The current parenting schedule is challenging.  Andrew
and M. are separated every other week for six nights in a row.  This is hard on
both of them.  Taking M. to and from school takes at least a half-hour. Wednesdays
are very rushed, and the weekends are dominated by M.’s activities.  Andrew
says that he and M. need more “down time”.
[28]          
Andrew denies that he was ever abusive, that he
ever choked Melody, or that he “yells” at M.  He admits that his tone may be
harsher than he intends.
[29]          
Andrew does not mind M. being enrolled in
various activities.  He objects to Melody having the sole say in what they are.
[30]          
Andrew thinks that neither parent should be able
to control how the other spends their parenting time.
[31]          
Andrew says he wants more time with M. regardless
of whether his child support is reduced.
[32]          
Andrew says that he and Melody have difficulty
communicating.  He avoids contact with her as much as possible.  He admits using his car’s dashboard camera to capture
their exchanges as security against possible future complaints by Melody.  He
is afraid that she will get him criminally charged again.
[33]          
The facts as I find them are set out in the
following analysis.
[34]          
Before turning to the issues, I briefly set out the
law regarding credibility and my assessment of the parties.
[35]          
Credibility is a primary vehicle for determining
the truth of alleged facts.  This task can be rendered “unenviably difficult”
depending on the narrative put forward by the parties: Konstan v Berkovits,
2023 ONSC 497, 2023 CarswellOnt 932 at para. 8.
[36]          
In R. v. Gagnon, 2006 SCC 17, [2006]
1 S.C.R. 621 at para. 20, the Supreme Court
of Canada cautioned that evaluating witness credibility is not “a science.”
[37]          
Traditional criteria used to assess witness
evidence include witness demeanour, inherent probability in the circumstances,
and internal and external consistency: Prodigy Graphics Group Inc. v.
Fitz-Andrews, [2000] O.T.C. 237, at para. 46 per
Justice Cameron.
[38]          
Witness credibility is critical to the burden of
proof: Konstan.  Where a party has the burden to discharge a legal onus,
I must satisfy myself, on a balance of probabilities, of “the credibility and
reliability of the evidence in order to be in a position to make the relevant
findings of fact”: Konstan at para. 9.
[39]          
It is necessary to distinguish credibility from
reliability.  Credibility has to do with whether parties’ testimony is honest,
while reliability concerns whether testimony is accurate: R. v. Sanichar, 2013
SCC 4, [2013] 1 S.C.R. 54, at para. 19.  One may find a witness generally
credible yet doubt their reliability.  Conversely, a witness who is not
credible may nonetheless offer reliable testimony.
[40]          
Generally, I find Melody to be a credible
witness.  Her testimony was consistent.  She seemed to make genuine efforts to
answer the questions put to her.  In her examination-in-chief, she tended to go
into more detail than necessary, but I did not perceive this as an effort to
distract or confuse proceedings.  Under cross-examination, she was neither
combative nor defensive.
[41]          
I also find Melody generally reliable, with some
exceptions.  As I will explain further in these reasons, I do not entirely accept
her account of the incident between the parties on May 22, 2022.
[42]          
Melody can appear rigid and unyielding.  She firmly
believes that M. benefits from a myriad of activities and she is resistant to
the idea that his schedule might be trimmed.  While this does not render her less
credible, it does make her less reliable in her account of M.’s enjoyment of
all of his activities or what would happen if M. had fewer of them.
[43]          
I find Andrew credible in some respects and not
credible in others.  His love for M. appears genuine.  I do not doubt that
Andrew sincerely wants to have more time with M.  Andrew also comes across as
reflective about their relationship than Melody does.  I find him willing to
entertain compromises.
[44]          
Andrew originally listed his mother Suzan Shia
as a witness but removed her shortly before trial.  At several points during
the trial, Melody’s counsel implied that there was something suspicious about
this.  In his examination-in-chief, Andrew stated that his mother was physically
and emotionally unwell.  The fact that Ms. Shia was not called as a witness
does not affect my assessment of Andrew’s credibility.
[45]          
Andrew reported Melody to the York Regional
Police in July 2024.  I discuss this incident further in these reasons.   I do
not believe Andrew’s account of why he did this.
[46]          
Andrew also lacked credibility on the nature of
his connection with a company called Innovative Signs.  This connection was
raised as part of Melody’s narrative that Andrew is hiding income.  Andrew
testified that his relationship with Innovative Signs was limited to his
friendship with its owner. I do not find this credible. However, after 2020 there
is no evidence of any relationship at all.  In addition, the parties agreed they
should each be imputed with income for child support purposes. Therefore, while
this testimony weakens Andrew’s credibility, his relationship with Innovative
Signs in 2020 or 2021 is otherwise irrelevant to the issues in this trial.
[47]          
For the following reasons, I find Andrew much less
reliable than Melody.  First, in his testimony Andrew had enormous difficulty
conveying information.  This was especially evident during his
cross-examination, which took much longer than Melody’s. While Andrew was not
evasive, he frequently became confused.  Andrew appears to have difficulty processing
information, particularly when reading from a screen, which he was frequently asked
to do.  On numerous occasions, after an extended back and forth with Melody’s
counsel, he would simply accept whatever was being put to him.
[48]          
The second reason I find Andrew less reliable
than Melody is that he did not do nearly the same amount of trial preparation as
she did.  Strikingly, he admitted to failing to review his own documents before
trial.  Because he could not recognize many documents put to him, such as the
parties’ partial consent executed on September 18, 2024, he could not speak to
them.
[49]          
The third reason I find Andrew less reliable than
Melody is that he frequently would refer to facts or prior assertions that were
not in evidence.  I find that this tendency sprang from his overall confusion
and not a deliberate effort to deceive the court.  I find Andrew unfocused and easily
flustered.
[50]          
Melody called two additional witnesses: Hailey
Fisher, an intake and assessment worker with the York Region CAS, and A.D.,
Melody’s current partner.
[51]          
Andrew called one additional witness, Q.C., his
former wife.
[52]          
I discuss the credibility and reliability of
these witnesses under Issue One.
[53]          
Andrew’s parenting time is at the core of this
case.  There are many aspects to this issue, including allegations of family
violence.
[54]          
I begin by setting out the law I must consider.
[55]          
I then organize the evidence chronologically:
[56]          
In addition to what was provided from Melody and
Andrew, the evidence includes testimony from A.D., Q.C., and Hailey Fisher, the
York Region CAS reports, and the two VOC reports, which the parents agreed to
admit in lieu of calling the assessor.
[57]          
Section 24(1) of the Children's Law Reform
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.12 (“CLRA”) states that, in making a
parenting order, the court shall only take into account the best interests of
the child.  In determining best interests, “the court shall consider all
factors related to the circumstances of the child, and, in doing so, shall give
primary consideration to the child’s physical, emotional and psychological
safety, security and well-being”: CLRA, at s. 24(2).
[58]          
Section 24(3) of the CLRA outlines that
the factors relevant to “the circumstances of the child” including:
[59]          
Section 18 of the CLRA defines “family
violence” as “any conduct by a family member towards another family member that
is violent or threatening, that constitutes a pattern of coercive and
controlling behaviour, or that causes the other family member to fear for their
own safety or for that of another person, and, in the case of a child, includes
direct or indirect exposure to such conduct.” Such conduct includes physical
abuse, psychological abuse, and threats to kill or harm an animal or damage
property.
[60]          
In considering the impact of any family
violence, the court shall take into account:
[61]          
Although it is not a source of law, and
therefore not binding on the court, the Association of Family and Conciliation
Courts of Ontario Parenting Plan Guide (December, 2021) is helpful in
understanding the social science research in respect of parenting schedules at
various ages and stages. In respect of an “Early School Age Child” (ages 6-9),
the Parenting Plan Guide provides in part:
[62]          
When M. was born in 2016, Melody and Andrew were
living together at Lakeview.  Within 12 months, Melody took M. and two dogs to live
in North York.  The couple lived together off and on for the next several years
with the longest period together being from March 2020 to May 2022.
[63]          
When asked why she kept moving in and out of
Lakeview, Melody said the couple experienced a lot of conflict.  They could not
“talk things out” – rather, Melody was told what to do.  When the water line
broke in the basement, Andrew called her “stupid” for not knowing where the
shut off was.  Andrew took out his frustrations on Melody by swearing at her
and telling her to leave.  Andrew would yell at her repeatedly, for example,
about “leaves being in the driveway.”  Melody’s hands would “shake” from being
yelled at.
[64]          
Melody described conflict over the couple’s
dogs.  Her late dog, Pancake, would be aggressive towards another of the
couple’s dogs, Pico.  She said Andrew would get extremely angry at Pancake,
kick her crate, and threaten her.  Andrew sprayed Pancake with “dog spray”
which created an overpowering smell.
[65]          
Melody talked to friends and her mother-in-law
about her experiences.
[66]          
Melody says that Andrew had a habit of “going
quiet” when he was upset with her or with M.  He would refuse to speak for days
or weeks. Melody felt like she had to “walk on eggshells” around him.
[67]          
Melody testified that she has been M.’s primary
caregiver since birth.  When she required help, she turned primarily to her own
mother, followed by Andrew and his mother, Suzan Shia.  M. attended daycare and
preschool until the COVID pandemic shut everything in March 2020.  As a
realtor, Melody was mostly at home.
[68]          
When M. was born, Andrew had an irregular
schedule with shift work.  He worked overtime although Melody was unsure whether
that started during COVID.  Andrew was involved with M.’s activities and care
when his work schedule permitted it.
[69]          
M. started junior kindergarten, virtually, in
September of 2020 and did not attend school in person until November of 2021.
[70]          
The beginning of COVID was a relatively stable
period in the couple’s relationship.  Eventually, things changed.  Melody
recounted a conflict about the Lakeview septic tank which Andrew ordered her to
locate.  She spent months digging up the cover, with M. “helping.”  Melody
stated that the issue with the septic tank was “a very big deal” for Andrew.  Melody
gave the impression that Andrew ordered her and M. to dig a large hole.
[71]          
Another incident stemmed from what Melody
described as Andrew’s irritation at the “shit” cluttering the house.  While
Melody acknowledged that M. had a lot of toys, the dispute escalated to Andrew
actually throwing out both Melody’s and M.’s things, sometimes in M.’s presence.
[72]          
Melody recounted an incident where Andrew shot
and killed some raccoons that were destroying the family’s chickens.
[73]          
Under cross-examination, Melody testified that:
[74]          
Andrew has lived in Stouffville at 83 Lakeview
Avenue, which he co-owns with his mother, since 2015.  He lives with the
following people:
[75]          
There was considerable testimony about the above
persons.  I find this evidence largely irrelevant to the issues before me and
will not address it in detail.
[76]          
Andrew has been a Rogers technician for 19
years.  He is a “maintenance tech, level 2”. His formal schedule is Monday to Friday,
8:00 am to 4:30 pm.  Every fifth week, he has a 7-day standby period where he
must be available to respond to outages from 12:00 pm to 9:00 pm.
[77]          
Andrew works all over the Greater Toronto Area.
[78]          
Andrew agrees that he and Melody had an
unconventional relationship and did not always live together.  He agrees that Melody
moved back to Lakeview when M. was born in 2016.
[79]          
After M’s birth, Andrew took parental leave for
3 months.  To ensure that he would receive full pay, he took a full year’s
paternity leave spread over 18 months.  He described being home with M., performing
infant care.
[80]          
Once Andrew’s parental leave ended, he performed
childcare duties whenever he was around and said: “There wasn’t anything I was
not prepared to do.”  He took M. to school, and to all of his vaccinations
since “Melody doesn’t like needles.”
[81]          
During COVID, Andrew and Melody shared caring
for M.  Andrew introduced a number of photos showing happy outings with M.,
including one featuring a memorable camel outfit.
[82]          
Andrew said that the couple shared household
expenses and would each buy things for M.  They did not do strict accounting.
[83]          
Andrew’s dynamic with Melody had its “ups and
downs.”  They had “minor arguments every few months”, and larger ones every 8
months.  He acknowledged that M. was present for these arguments, and that he
and Melody sometimes raised their voices.
[84]          
Andrew denies that Melody “walked on eggshells”
around him.  He could not recall a time pre-separation that he tried to throw Melody
out of the house.
[85]          
Andrew had a very different account of the septic
tank incident.  He said that Melody agreed to help find the tank, that its
cover was only 18 inches below grade and that M. was with Melody because he was
too young to be left alone.
[86]          
Andrew said that he had to kill the raccoons to
save the family’s chickens.  Lakeview is a rural property where these things sometimes
happen.  The raccoons were trapped on the property but disposed of at a
neighbor’s farm.  Andrew insists that M. was not present and would not have
heard any gunshots since he used an air rifle.
[87]          
Andrew said that he never “threw out” Melody’s
and M’s things.  Rather, the family instituted a rule where, when new toys came
into the house, some old toys were to be donated or disposed of.  He acknowledged
that M. was upset at having to cull his toys.
[88]          
Andrew denied ever threatening any of the
family’s dogs.
[89]          
Andrew said that Melody “loves M. like there’s
no tomorrow.”
[90]          
When asked to describe M., Andrew became
extremely emotional.  Andrew sees a lot of himself in M.
[91]          
Before M. was born, Andrew was frequently out at
the cabin, or riding bikes.  Andrew said that he now does everything with M. in
mind.  Andrew works so that M. can enjoy life in Lakeview and have the childhood
Andrew wishes he could have had.
[92]          
On or about May 22, 2022, Andrew was charged
with two counts of assault against Melody including assault by choking.
[93]          
Melody said the incident occurred at Lakeview during
a power outage.  Melody, Andrew, and M. were due to travel to Kelowna.
[94]          
The outage and resulting property damage created
tension and led to an argument, after which Melody told Andrew she no longer
wanted him to come on the trip.  Andrew responded that he did not want any of
them to go.  Melody said that Andrew “threatened to throw out [their] stuff.” 
He closed the door to M.s’ room, where M. was at that time.
[95]          
In trying to get to M., Melody had to go past
Andrew.  Andrew pushed her and knocked her to the floor.  Melody tried to call
the police, but Andrew knocked the phone out of her hand, hard, and pulled her
to the floor and locked her legs.  Melody says she could see M. standing at the
open door, watching everything.
[96]          
According to Melody, Andrew “positioned
[himself] on top of me”, with “his arm around my neck”.  M. came out of the
room.  Melody told M. to run to the neighbor to get help and M. did so without
shoes.  Eventually, Andrew let Melody go so that he could go retrieve M. 
Melody ran out of the house through the basement and went to the neighbor’s
driveway.  Andrew threw Melody’s phone to her but would not let M. go.  Melody
called the police.
[97]          
After Andrew’s arrest, Melody took M. to her
mother’s home at 2085 Bayview, which is where she currently lives.
[98]          
Melody says she was informed in or around March
2024 that the charges had been withdrawn.  She was not notified in advance or
asked to provide input into that decision.
[99]          
Melody says that after the incident she sought
therapy, which she continues to attend approximately once every two weeks.
[100]      
Deeply concerned that M. was present during this
incident, Melody started play therapy for him.
[101]      
Under cross-examination, Melody’s story remained
consistent.  She did admit to “mutual shoving” when she was trying to get past
Andrew to reach M.  She acknowledged that she declined the paramedics’ offer to
take her to the hospital.
[102]      
Melody has not initiated any other charges
against Andrew and did not testify to other family violence.
[103]      
Andrew acknowledged that the two had an argument
on May 22, 2022 “over multiple things” including a fallen tree in the driveway.
He acknowledged Melody saying she would take M. to Kelowna on her own was an
escalatory factor in the fight.  Andrew denied telling Melody that she could
not take M. on the trip.
[104]      
Andrew said that M. was on the couch watching
the fight, and Andrew moved him into a separate room because “Mel and I were
starting to raise our voices and telling each other ‘Watch your voice.’”  Telling
Melody “We need to separate”, Andrew took M. into a room on the same floor (he
clarified that the Lakeview house is a bungalow).  Andrew said M. was “2-3 feet
into the room and [that he] was 1-2 feet in.”  He continued:
[105]      
According to Andrew, Melody stepped onto his foot
(most likely accidentally).  Andrew is not sure why she fell.  Andrew had
grabbed Melody’s wrists because she was “throwing elbows at my face to get to
M.”  Andrew blocked Melody because he was aware of M. right behind them and did
not want him to get in the middle.
[106]      
Andrew testified that, after the couple fell on
the floor, Melody yelled at M. to get help and M. went to the door and
“froze.”  M. was wearing shorts, but no shoes, socks, or hat.  Andrew picked M.
up and “told him it would be ok.”  Eventually, Andrew locked himself in the
house.  When he would not let Melody back in, she called the police and Andrew was
arrested.
[107]      
Andrew denies ever choking Melody.
[108]      
I will now consider the evidence of post-parenting
since May 22, 2022.  First, I note an evidentiary ruling made during the trial.
[109]      
In July 2023, Melody recorded a call with M. when
he was with Andrew at Lakeview.  The recording was made without Andrew’s
knowledge, and his voice can be heard in the final ten or twenty seconds.
[110]      
Melody argued that the recording is probative of whether an
increase in Andrew’s parenting time is in M.’s best interest. 
In particular, she claimed, the video substantiates the allegation that Andrew “yells”
at M.
[111]      
Andrew objected to admitting the video.  His
counsel indicated that should it be admitted, Andrew would seek to admit his
own video.
[112]      
After a voir dire, I reviewed the video
as well as caselaw helpfully provided by counsel.
[113]      
My oral ruling noted that some courts have
admitted surreptitious recordings in proceedings involving family violence, or
where a recording can shed light on the best interests of the child. Nevertheless,
courts have expressed serious concerns about introducing such evidence
in family law proceedings.  Generally, in order to be admitted, a surreptitious
recording must have strong probative value.  Ideally, it should provide
information that is not available by other means.
[114]      
I found that, because the video in question shows
Andrew’s behaviour while parenting, it is probative to a material issue: whether
an increase in Andrew’s parenting time is in M.’s best interests.  However, for
the following reasons I found the video to lack strong probative value:
[115]      
I ruled that the video was inadmissible: its
probative value was slight and outweighed by its prejudicial effect.
[116]      
Melody says that after Andrew’s arrest, she
proposed (a) mediation and (b) that Andrew see M. in June, 2022.  Andrew did
not reply for a few months.
[117]      
Melody proposed 4 supervised visits.  Once these
visits occurred, Melody agreed to unsupervised visits.
[118]      
The current schedule for Andrew is alternate
weekends Friday after school until Monday morning, and every Wednesday
overnight until Thursday morning.
[119]      
Melody said that the current schedule presents
several challenges:
[120]      
Melody says M. has refused to have phone calls
with Andrew and must be cajoled into doing so.
[121]      
M.’s teacher is concerned with images M. draws.
[122]      
M. has broken down crying at school. Before the
current parenting schedule, Melody says, M. did not have many crying episodes;
now they occur once a month, “predominantly” following Andrew’s weekends.  M.
is “bouncing off the walls” and “unable to talk.”
[123]      
Despite these challenges, M. excels at school.  Melody
submitted very positive report cards.  Having a private tutor for him has been
especially helpful.
[124]      
Melody introduced several photos of M. looking relaxed,
silly and  happy.
[125]      
Under cross-examination, Melody testified that:
[126]      
A.D. is Melody’s current partner. He first met
Melody in 2022 when their kids were on the same baseball team.  They started
dating about one year later.
[127]      
A.D.’s own son is the same age as M. and the two
are close.
[128]      
A.D. is clearly fond of M. and cares about his
welfare.
[129]      
A.D. is very happy to have Melody in his and his
son’s life.  She is a “great mom”. When M. is “naughty”, Melody’s response is
measured, most frequently sending him for a time-out.
[130]      
Having gone through a separation himself, A.D.
understands that strong emotions can arise. A.D. said he and Melody try not to
discuss the current conflict in M’s presence.  While Melody is “not perfect”,
she responds positively when A.D. tells her to be self-aware.
[131]      
A.D. has had a few casual conversations with
Andrew at M.’s activities.
[132]      
A.D. has observed M. both before and after his
visits with Andrew.  Before a visit, M. “seems nervous, quiet, anxious.”  When
A.D. tries to speak with him, M. goes even quieter. At times after a visit, M.
breaks down, acting like a much younger child.  These reactions can last up to
several hours.
[133]      
A.D. thinks Andrew “is trying” and is not “a
terrible person.”
[134]      
Under cross-examination, A.D. admitted that M.
has breakdowns at other times.  He said that Melody occasionally has outbursts
about Andrew in M.’s presence.
[135]      
I find A.D. both credible and reliable.  He
appeared sincere.  He did not make grandiose or sweeping statements.  His
answers were measured.  He was even-handed, for example, in describing Andrew. 
I am persuaded on a balance of probabilities that A.D. has observed M. breaking
down after parenting with Andrew.  A.D.’s evidence bolsters my impression that,
because of M.’s distress over his parents’ separation and their fights over
him, M. is not doing as well as he should or could be.
[136]      
Andrew testified that he was subject to a
pre-trial criminal release condition to not communicate with Melody except for
the purposes of childcare.
[137]      
Andrew said that after his arrest, he and M. had
one video call in early June 2022.  He had supervised visits in August.
[138]      
Andrew spoke extensively about his participation
in the Partner Assault Response Program (PARS), which he started on or about
August 15, 2022.  Andrew described the program as oriented towards conflict
management.  He gained insight into how a person’s body language and tone can
convey aggression even if they do not intend to or raise their voice.  Andrew
said he realized that “M. doesn’t like stern talk” and equates it to
“yelling.”  Andrew is adjusting his parenting strategy because “if [my tone]
makes him uncomfortable I have to stop.”
[139]      
Andrew tries to keep his written communication
with Melody “as neutral as possible.”
[140]      
Andrew never consented to Melody relocating M.
away from Lakeview, or to M.’s registration in his current school.  He is
concerned that M. left an existing social network at the public school he had
been attending for a year.  M.’s old school has a small student body and big
open spaces.  The new one has many more students.  It takes extra time and money
to ferry M. to and from the new school which is 30 kilometres away from
Andrew’s home.
[141]      
In the VOC reports (discussed below) M. does not
say that he wants more time with Andrew.  When asked to comment on this, Andrew
testified that “I have gotten along really well with M.”  He says that M. is
very comfortable at Lakeview, in particular because it was his first home.
[142]      
Andrew says that his “first instinct” is to
“trust your child.”  Nevertheless, he does not share Melody’s unshakeable
belief in everything M. says.  Andrew does not believe Melody would ever harm
M.  Andrew said that M. has made inconsistent statements (discussed below).
[143]      
Andrew agreed that M. “flip flops.”.  For
example, with regard to an incident where M. said that Melody put a “rock” on
him (discussed below), Andrew said:
[144]      
Andrew explained that he went to CAS about the
rock because of something he read about CAS “being here to help.”  He did not
appreciate that CAS would immediately begin an investigation.
[145]      
Andrew talked about I.D.V. who lives with him
part-time and does nanny duties for M.  Andrew uses her predominantly when he
is on-call.  Andrew said that I.D.V. tutors M. four hours a week, usually on Wednesdays.
[146]      
When talking about the hockey banquet from
spring 2024, Andrew said that he did not yet know his charges had been withdrawn. 
Accordingly, he assumed he was under a no contact order.   When Andrew arrived
at the arena, he saw Melody.  Andrew continued:
[147]      
Andrew left with M. before the end of the
ceremony.
[148]      
As Melody had not been specifically asked about
the above details, I permitted Melody to be recalled to the stand where she
denied that M. appeared “frozen” at the hockey banquet.
[149]      
When asked why he has changed his initial
request for equal parenting and decision-making, Andrew said he is “tired of
these proceedings.”  He is sure that M. is conflicted by the parties’ legal
dispute and, therefore, “someone has to make the first step.”
[150]      
Andrew feels “shut out” of decision-making and
“excluded from M’s life.”  It took him a “really long time”, but he eventually
told himself “I have to trust Melody.”
[151]      
Andrew believes that M. feels “caught in a tug
of war” between Andrew and Melody.
[152]      
Andrew acknowledged that he uses his dashcam to
capture Melody when they are exchanging M. between visits.  He is afraid of
being criminally charged again.  While this practice does not promote the best
dynamic between the parents, I find it only tangentially relevant to my
decision on parenting.  I will not address it further in these reasons.
[153]      
Andrew was examined and cross-examined on his
income.  This included exchanges about the following items: whether his friend G.W.
is really a roommate who should be paying rent to him; the arrangements with
Andrew’s girlfriend and her sister who occasionally tutors M.; and Andrew’s
past relationship with a company called Innovative Signs.  Given that the
parties have agreed on each other’s 2023 income, I find this evidence
irrelevant to my analysis other than to support my earlier finding that Andrew
is less credible and less reliable than Melody.
[154]      
Q.C. is Andrew’s ex-wife.  The two were married for
approximately three years sometime between 2010 and 2014.  They have no children
together.  Q.C. has a daughter who is 5 years old.
[155]      
For the past two years Q.C.’s daughter and M. have
had approximately 10-15 play dates including fishing, visits to Niagara Falls,
and a carnival/arcade game called “Claw”.
[156]      
Q.C. describes M. as a “very sweet kid.”  She
has not seen him unhappy.  Q.C. has occasionally been at Lakeview with Andrew
and M.  She has no concerns about Andrew and M.’s relationship.
[157]      
Under cross-examination, Q.C. admitted that she
has only seen M. a handful of times in 2024.  She said they went fishing in
August.  Q.C. denied that the less frequent visits were because Andrew now
lives with his girlfriend.
[158]      
Q.C. denied pressing charges against Andrew
during their relationship. She acted as his surety in 2012 during a different
domestic assault complaint by a woman named J.M. While Q.C.’s account was not
entirely clear, I do not find this to go directly to her credibility or
reliability about Andrew’s parenting.  There is insufficient information before
the court about this prior charge to include it in my analysis.
[159]      
While I am persuaded that Q.C. and her daughter
had fun play dates with Andrew and M., she has only seen M. a few times in 2024. 
I therefore find Q.C.’s evidence only minimally relevant to whether Andrew’s
parenting time should be increased.
[160]      
CAS first become involved with the family the
week after the May 22, 2022 incident.
[161]      
The Intake Statement coded the incident as “3.3.
Child Exposure to Partner Violence”.
[162]      
On July 19, 2022, investigator Brittany Hunt,
sent an email to Andrew entitled “Supports” about the following programs he
might enrol in: Triple P Positive Parenting and Jewish Child and Family
Services.  Andrew did not take any courses in 2022 or 2023.
[163]      
In a report covering the period from May 23
until July 21, 2022, Ms. Hunt concluded that the file would close noting that:
[164]      
The CAS concluded that M. was not “in need of
protection” because “the parents are separated [and] the risk of the child
being exposed to further conflict has been mitigated.”  Every possible
indicator of “Safety Threats” on the July 2022 report is marked “No.”  M. is
described as “Safe.”
[165]      
During a follow-up call from Melody on December
5, 2022, Ms. Hunt logged that Melody stated that “she does not have any
concerns for the child with his father at this time, [and] believes [Andrew] is
on his best behaviour due to his court involvement.”
[166]      
The next CAS contact was instigated by Andrew. 
It was described by Hailey Fisher, an Intake and Assessment Worker who
testified at the trial.  Ms. Fisher acknowledged sending a letter to the
parties on September 20, 2024.
[167]      
On July 11, 2024, Andrew contacted CAS to report
that Melody was “putting a rock on [M.]”  Andrew said M. described the rock as
approximating a “12-inch by 12-inch brick that was heavier than a 6-pound box
of bolts.”  It would be placed on M’s body “including his head for 20 to 30
minutes.”  M. told Andrew that this had been happening for six months.
[168]      
After a private meeting with M. on July 17, Ms.
Fisher made the following notes:
[169]      
When Ms. Fisher told Andrew about M.’s inconsistent
statements, Andrew said that M. “flip flops.”
[170]      
Melody told Ms. Fisher that M. collects rocks
(Andrew confirmed this).  Melody denied ever putting a rock on M.  Melody
expressed concerns about Andrew “coaching” M. to say negative things about her.
[171]      
A different CAS worker, Hayley Dew, attended
Melody’s home on July 19, 2024.  M. seemed happy and comfortable.  After a
private meeting with M., Ms. Dew made the following notes:
[172]      
In a follow up conversation, Ms. Dew told Andrew
she had no immediate concerns about M. and would leave it to Ms. Fisher to
follow up upon her return from vacation. Andrew told Ms. Dew he had been
reluctant to contact the CAS in the first place.  Andrew said that M. “has an
active imagination.”
[173]      
A few days after Ms. Dew’s visit, the CAS
received a referral from York Regional Police that Andrew had made a police
complaint about the rock.
[174]      
On August 2, Melody advised Ms. Fisher that
Andrew was not feeding M. properly.
[175]      
After speaking to M. again at Andrew’s home on
August 8, Ms. Fisher noted:
[176]      
Ms. Fisher asked Andrew why he went to the
police in July.  Andrew said he had not understood that Ms. Dew had no
immediate concerns about M.  If he had, he would not have gone to the police.
[177]      
Ultimately the CAS decided that the rock incident
was not verified given M.’s “inconsistent and contradicting information.”  The
CAS did, however, verify “concerns against both
parents regarding M.’s exposure to post separation conflict”.  In particular,
CAS states that “it appeared that M. felt pressured to make statements against
the parent in whose care that he was not in at the time of the statement”.  The
CAS recommended that both Melody and Andrew “refrain from involving
[M.] directly and/or indirectly, in their conflict.”
[178]      
The CAS then closed the file.
[179]      
Ms. Fisher testified that both parents needed to
work on their mutual interactions to avoid exposing M. to their conflict.  While
CAS did not recommend supervised visits for Andrew, Ms. Fisher said that CAS generally
would not make such a recommendation.  Ms. Fisher noted that the PARS program
would be suitable for Andrew.  On cross-examination, Ms. Fisher said that M. had
not said anything about Andrew throwing out his toys.
[180]      
With respect to any pressure that M. feels to
make statements against his parents, Ms. Fisher said that it is not clear
whether that pressure is “internal” or “external”.
[181]      
Just prior to this trial, M.’s play therapist
contacted CAS to say that M. told her that he feels fearful at Andrew’s house, is
unable to sleep, is only fed “rice and noodles”, and “does pullups to make him
stronger”.
[182]      
Consequently, Ms. Fisher met with M. the day
before her testimony. During an exercise, M. revealed that he has two worries
about being at dad’s house: yelling and swearing directed at him; and concerns
that Andrew would “k-a-l-l” him (according to Ms. Fisher, M. spelled this out).
[183]      
Ms. Fisher said that M. gave no reason for this
fear but indicated that it began after his second VOC interview in September
(described below).  M. stated that Andrew yells and swears after M.’s nightly
phone call with Melody.
[184]      
According to Ms. Fisher, M. did not report being
“scared” of Andrew.  Ms. Fisher did not explain the difference between M.
saying his father would “k-a-l-l” him and saying he was “scared”.  I note that the
last investigation wrapped up only in September and this new information is
contrary to what was learned at that time.  That may be why the CAS has, for
the moment, assessed M. as safe.
[185]      
Under cross-examination, in response to the
question of whether M. “flip flops”, Ms. Hailey said: “M. provided
contradicting information on multiple occasions, yes.”
[186]      
Under cross-examination, in response to a
question about whether there is reason to doubt that M. has “fun” with his
father, Ms. Hailey said that in a drawing exercise she had done with M. the previous
day, M. indicated “nothing” positive at Andrew’s house.
[187]      
On re-examination Ms. Fisher agreed that it is
too early to come to any conclusions about this latest CAS contact.
[188]      
On re-examination, Ms. Fisher agreed with or
stated the following:
[189]      
I find Ms. Fisher credible.  She gave her
evidence in a careful and measured manner.  She did not extrapolate unless
explicitly invited to.  Her evidence was consistent with other evidence concerning
M.’s well-being and reactions to the parenting dynamic.  I also find her
reliable with regard to what M. said and did during his contacts with the CAS.
[190]      
Ricardo Theodoluz,
a registered social worker, was privately
retained by the parties to ascertain
M.’s views and preferences in respect of the residential schedule. Mr. Theodoluz created two VOC reports, one
in December 2023, and a follow up in September 2024.  The parties agreed to
admit his reports in lieu of calling him as a witness.
[191]      
For the first report, Mr. Theodoluz had two
meetings with M. and one with each parent.  At the time, M. was seven years
old.
[192]      
The report states that:
[193]      
In the second report dated September 16, 2024,
for which Mr. Theodoluz had two meetings with M., he reported that:
[194]      
Mr. Theodoluz described M. as “reluctan[t] to
speak”.  He did not believe his second report could offer much assistance.
[195]      
I find the VOC reports confirmatory of other
evidence concerning M.’s well-being and current emotional state.
[196]      
I make the following findings of fact regarding
the parties’ relationship and parenting dynamic before their separation.
[197]      
The parties often lived separately.  They lived together
for two years prior to their separation.
[198]      
The parties both cared for M. after he was born,
but Melody assumed the lion’s share of responsibilities.
[199]      
The parties’ relationship was fractious,
exacerbated by the stress of caring for a young child during a global
pandemic.
[200]      
I find that Andrew did not always know how to
handle frustration.  Melody sincerely felt that she had to walk on eggshells
around him.  Both parties raised their voices when arguing.  Andrew did so more
frequently and at a higher volume.
[201]      
I am more persuaded by Andrew’s account of the
septic tank incident than Melody’s account and, consequently, I do not find it to
be an example of abuse.  I am not persuaded that Andrew threw out M’s toys in a
rage.  I am not persuaded that M. was present when Andrew disposed of the
raccoons.  There is no evidence before this court that Andrew’s firearm
ownership poses a threat to M.
[202]      
Andrew was frustrated by the fact that the
family’s dogs did not get along.  I am not persuaded that Andrew physically
abused the dogs but, on occasion, he lost his temper and used overly harsh
disciplinary measures.
[203]      
Both parties love M. very much.
[204]      
I make the following findings of fact regarding
the incident on May 22, 2022.
[205]      
There was an incident of family violence on May
22, 2022.  Melody’s statement regarding the lead-up to the parties’ altercation
is consistent.  Both parties contributed to the altercation becoming physical
due to their focus on M.: Melody through her determination to reach him and
Andrew through his determination not to fall backward when Melody pushed past
him.  However, I am persuaded that Andrew was the primary aggressor.
[206]      
Given the nature of the physical struggle, which
involved both parties “locked” on the floor, it is possible that Andrew had his
hands close to or even touching Melody’s neck.  However, I am not persuaded
that Andrew actually had his hands around her neck.  M.’s descriptions of what
he saw do reference “choking” but also Andrew’s  “arm” being “around [Melody’s]
neck”.  This was a chaotic and confusing scene.  No evidence was presented
regarding the extent of Melody’s injuries, or that she was left with marks
consistent with a choking incident. Therefore, I am not persuaded on a balance
of probabilities that Andrew choked Melody on May 22, 2022.
[207]      
I find Andrew to be sincere in recounting what
he has done after this incident to gain insight into his behaviour and its
effect on M.  I find, however, that Andrew still has work to do.
[208]      
I make the following findings of fact regarding
the current parenting dynamic.
[209]      
M. is a naturally happy child.  However, his
parents’ relationship causes him distress, which he expresses through
breakdowns, and inconsistent statements concerning both of them.
[210]      
I am not persuaded that Melody ever put a rock
on M.  I am persuaded, however, that M. repeated this story to Andrew, and to
others, several times.
[211]      
Andrew testified that he went to CAS because M.
kept talking about the rock.  I believe Andrew when he says he did not go to CAS
to harass Melody.  However, I do not believe Andrew when he says he was
confused about his conversation with Hayley Dew on or about July 19, 2024, when
the CAS worker said she had no immediate concerns.  I find Andrew exercised
poor judgment in going to York Regional Police shortly after that conversation.
[212]      
Occasionally, Andrew either yells at M. or
speaks to him in a tone that M. interprets as yelling.  M.’s references to
“yelling” have been consistent.
[213]      
M. has picked up on the conflict between his
parents.  I find that both Melody and Andrew say negative things about each
other in M.’s presence.  A.D. confirmed this in relation to Melody.  I am
persuaded that Andrew has expressed irritation or frustration about Melody in
M.’s presence.  I believe that Andrew reacts negatively when he perceives
Melody to be intruding on his time with M., such as when M. has his nightly
phone call with Melody.
[214]      
M. is experiencing stress from the current
parenting dynamic.  One way that M. copes with this is by saying things that he
thinks will please his mother and father – including negative things about the
other parent.
[215]      
I am not persuaded of the truth of M.’s latest
statements to his play therapist, in particular, that Andrew is going to
“k-i-l-l” him or that Andrew “only feeds him rice and noodles.”  But these
statements do reflect M.’s intense inner conflict which appears to be
increasing.
[216]      
Neither parent poses a danger to M.  However,
M.’s current inner conflict – which Andrew acknowledges – is highly relevant to
whether the currenting parenting schedule should be changed.
[217]      
In sum, M. is not doing as well as he could or
should be.  He needs both of his parents active and involved in his life.  But
he needs to feel safer and to be more shielded from their conflict.
[218]      
In deciding whether the current parenting
schedule should be changed, my first and last consideration is what is in M.’s
best interest.  I have no doubt that both Melody and Andrew want to spend as
much as time with him as possible.  That, however, is not the primary
consideration.  M.’s best interest is.
[219]      
Relying on section 24 of the CLRA,
considering the circumstances of the child, I note the following as especially
relevant factors to this case.
[220]      
I find that both parents are capable of
caring for M.  I find that M. does enjoyable and enriching things with
Melody and with Andrew.  He has more activities with Melody. She has been the
primary caregiver since his birth and spends more time with him now.  I do not
find these facts dispositive of whether Andrew should have increased parenting
time with M.
[221]      
I am persuaded that Andrew sincerely wants to
spend more time with M.  Subsection 24(6) of the CLRA states that in
allocating parenting time, the court shall give effect to the principle that a
child should have as much time with each parent as is consistent with the best
interests of the child.
[222]      
M. has not expressed a strong preference to keep or change the current parenting schedule.  Given M.’s young
age, an expressed preference would not be determinative, but his apparent
indifference is noteworthy.  I find that M. does not want his parents to
reconcile, because he believes they cannot get along.
[223]      
I am not persuaded that Andrew choked Melody, or
that he poses an ongoing risk of violence to either Melody or M.  Nevertheless,
I find that M. has been traumatized by the parties’ arguments and the violent incident
that he witnessed on May 22, 2022.  There is therefore an aspect of family
violence relevant to determining M.’s best interests.
[224]      
I am persuaded that M.’s primary need at the
moment is stability in the parenting schedule.
[225]      
M. enjoys his time with Andrew.  I accept that Andrew
and M. have a close relationship.  However, I do not find that the current
schedule is causing M. harm or is contrary to his best interest such that I
should order that Andrew have more parenting time.
[226]      
A parenting order must respect, as far as it is
consistent with the best interests of M., the principle that M. should have as
much time as possible with each parent.  There is no presumption of equal
parenting time: J.P. v. W.W., 2023 ONSC 1931, 2023 CarswellOnt 4036 at
paras.12-18.
[227]      
M. is clearly in distress because of the current
parenting dynamic.  I do not solely fault Andrew for this.  Melody can be rigid
in her approach to resolving issues.  This is especially apparent with respect
to M.’s extracurricular activities, which I discuss further in these reasons. 
Nevertheless, for the following reasons I am not persuaded that changing the
parenting schedule is in M.’s best interests:
[228]      
Melody has asked that the sequencing of the
weeks be switched so that M. can spend more time with A.D.’s son.  Her request
has been outstanding for a year.  Andrew’s only objection is that it should
wait until the end of this trial.  An order will therefore issue to this effect. 
The order, however, represents a one-time change.  It is not a precedent for
Andrew’s parenting time to forever more accommodate Melody’s partner.  Future
changes must be worked out between the parties or set by court order.
[229]      
Andrew and Melody are unable to communicate
effectively.  For this reason, it is appropriate for Melody to exercise sole
decision-making, subject to the following caveat. At present, on Wednesdays,
which is when Andrew exercises his midweek parenting time, M. has no activities
scheduled by Melody. I find it is in M.’s best interest to retain this day free
of extracurricular activities selected by Melody. Therefore, absent Andrew’s
consent, Melody shall not schedule any new activities for M. on
Wednesdays.  Should the parties change the day on which Andrew exercises
mid-week parenting time, they shall observe the spirit of these reasons with
respect to any new activities for M.
[230]      
Conditional on his parenting request being
granted, Andrew requested a reduction in child support. Given that I have ruled
against increasing Andrew’s parenting time, it is not strictly necessary to
analyse this question.  In the interest of completeness, I will explain why,
had I ruled that Andrew’s parenting time should be increased, I would not
have decreased his monthly child support.
[231]      
Under section 9 of the Child Support
Guidelines, where each parent
exercises parenting time at
least 40 percent of the time over the course of a year, the amount of a child support order must be determined by taking into account:
the table amount; the increased costs of a shared parenting arrangement; and “the
condition, means, needs and other circumstances of each parent or spouse and of any child for whom support
is sought.”
[232]      
Section 9 is a discretionary provision.  It does
not automatically reduce child support once a parent surpasses the 40 percent
threshold.  Instead, section 9 changes “the method used” to determine child
support from the presumptive amount set out in the tables: Contino v. Leonelli-Contino, 2005 SCC 63,
[2005] 3 S.C.R. 217 at paras. 30-31.
[233]      
A decision to
modify child support under section 9 involves two questions: first, whether the
applicant has surpassed the 40 percent threshold; and second, considering the
overall situation of the parents (their conditions and means) and the needs of
the children, whether it is appropriate to modify child support: Contino,
supra.  The applicant (here, Andrew) bears the burden of proof.  The
analysis is, necessarily, highly fact-driven: M.A. v. N.M., 2021 ONSC
5468 (CanLII).
[234]      
There is no standard way to calculate parenting
time.  Courts have used hours, overnights, or partial or full days.
[235]      
Andrew provided a detailed breakdown of the
increase in his parenting time based on hours.  Had it been necessary to
consider section 9, I would have accepted Andrew’s calculations that his time
with M. would increase to 40.09 percent, rounded up to 41 percent.  Therefore,
Andrew would have satisfied the first question.
[236]      
Andrew provided a child-care budget dated
September 27, 2024 which purports to show how an increase in parenting time would
affect his expenses.  Andrew added up his total daily costs in various
categories (for example, “food”, “clothing and personal care”, “activities and
entertainment”, and “transportation”).  To this, Andrew added the costs of his
housing.  Using this formula, Andrew calculated that it would cost him $2,745.56 a month to have M. with him for the total
ten days every month he requested.
[237]      
Andrew’s method of calculation was not
persuasive.  He did not provide receipts for how much he actually spends per
month on M. for things like clothing, personal care, and activities.  While it
is clear that having M. for more time would require more money for food and
transportation, I am not persuaded this is true for other expenses. I am not persuaded
that Andrew buys M. half of his clothes.  Andrew includes things like a daily
share of video subscriptions, but did not say that he purchases them solely for
M’s benefit or use.  It is not clear why school supplies and sports equipment
would be affected in the way Andrew describes.  Finally, Andrew cites a daily
amount for tutoring but this is a fixed monthly expense of $400 that has been
in place for some time.  M. does not receive tutoring on every day he is with
Andrew.
[238]      
Therefore, on a balance of probabilities I do
not find reliable Andrew’s estimate of his parenting costs relative to the
amount of time M. is with him.
[239]      
I add this: The current disparity between Melody
and Andrew’s income, and the need to maintain M.’s current standard of living, would
make it inappropriate to take such a fine-grained approach to determining
Andrew’s child support.  Andrew is asking that his child support be reduced by $400
a month, a reduction of 29 percent.  Given that Melody would still have M. for
the majority of the time and would continue to bear the majority of expenses
for him, such a reduction would not be in M.’s best interests.
[240]      
Therefore, had it been necessary to reach this
issue, I would not have reduced Andrew’s child support by $411 per month.
[241]      
At trial, the parties agreed that Andrew owes
the following arrears:
[242]      
Based on Andrew’s 2023 income, table child
support beginning July 1, 2024 is $1377.  The parties dispute whether Andrew
has paid this amount.  Melody introduced a statement of account dated September
4, 2024, which she obtained online from the Family Responsibility Office (FRO). 
The statement shows that the FRO is enforcing Justice Shore’s March 2023
order.  Andrew’s counsel suggested that the FRO is not always up to date.
[243]      
Andrew testified that he has been paying the
full amount of child support.
[244]      
An order shall issue for payment forthwith of child
support arrears for $5800.  Andrew must establish that he is not in arrears post
July 1, 2024.  Should Andrew fail within 30 days of this order to prove that he
has paid $1377 per month between July 1, 2024 and September 30, 2024, he shall
forthwith pay $645 in additional arrears.
[245]      
Melody claims the following section 7 and other expenses:
[246]      
The parties’ disagreement on section 7 and other
expenses was a significant contributing factor to this trial.  However, in his
closing submissions Andrew agreed to share proportionately in the following:
[247]      
Below, I will set out the relevant law, Justice
Shore’s order, the parties’ evidence, and my findings and analysis.
[248]      
Section 7 expenses are those additional costs of
raising a child that are not subsumed into table child support: Ostapchuk v. Ostapchuk, 2003 CanLII 57399 (ON CA), 171 O.A.C. 132 , at para. 13.
[249]      
The expense categories under section 7(1) include:
[250]      
For the purposes of clauses (d) and (f), whether
an expense is “extraordinary” is determined, inter alia, by considering
the following: the amount of the expense in relation to the income of the
requesting parent; the nature and number of educational programs and
extracurricular activities; any special needs and talents of the child; the
overall cost; and any other similar factors that the court considers relevant: Child
Support Guidelines, s. 7(1.1).
[251]      
Among
the factors that courts have considered in awarding section 7 expenses are: whether
the expenses are necessary “in relation to the child’s best interests”,
and reasonable “in relation to the means of the spouses and those of the
child and to the family’s spending pattern prior to the separation”: Titova
v. Titov, 2012 ONCA 864, 299 O.A.C. 215, at para. 23.
[252]      
In her March 2023 order, Justice Shore set
Andrew’s share of section 7 expenses at 60 percent, specifically noting the
following activities: hockey, volleyball, baseball, and Kumon.
[253]      
Justice Shore’s interim order does not specify
who decides on M.’s activities.
[254]      
Melody says she has always organized M.’s
activities, including his first swimming lessons at 19 months old, and his
introduction to hockey at age 3.  She testified that she has paid for most of
M.’s activities including daycare, nursery, vacations, clothes, toys, a cell
phone, and all of his extracurricular activities.  Melody also pays for school
lunches and field trips, bikes, scooters, and skateboards.  Melody acknowledged
that the parties share and exchange M.’s sports gear.
[255]      
M’s current fall schedule is:
[256]      
For the past four summers, M. has played
baseball. He has also attended camps.
[257]      
In 2024, Melody enrolled M. in muay thai.  She
also takes him go-karting which he greatly enjoys.  Melody has enrolled M. in
hockey skating lessons called “PowerSkate” to improve his performance.
[258]      
Melody seeks an Order that the parties share the
following expenses in proportion to income:
[259]      
With the exception of post-secondary and related
expenses, which are addressed in the partial consent order, Melody also seeks an Order that the parties
only contribute to M.’s additional future section 7 expenses if they consent
to the expenses in advance, in writing. Neither party should
unreasonably withhold consent.
[260]      
Melody prepared three charts noting M.’s section
7 expenses with backup documentation for 2022, 2023, and 2024 to date.  While
Andrew objected to some of the expenses included, he did not object to the
charts themselves and so I rely on them in my analysis.
[261]      
According to Melody, Andrew owes the
following:
[262]      
Under cross-examination, Melody said:
[263]      
Andrew has two complaints about section 7
expenses.
[264]      
First, Andrew complains that Melody enrolls M.
in a bunch of programs.  Andrew wants a more balanced approach, both in terms
of M.’s schedule and Andrew’s input into it.  Andrew thinks M. should “find his
own path.”
[265]      
In Andrew’s telling, he has “a total of 8
useable hours in a two-week period.”  I understood this to mean that he has 8
hours where he and M. can truly “chill out” without being required to go
anywhere.
[266]      
Andrew spoke to a series of messages between him
and Melody on Our Family Wizard ending on July 30, 2024.  These messages
reflect the conflict between Andrew and Melody over M’s activities – hockey in
particular. M. recently tried out for and made a higher level of team (“MD”) which
would increase his hockey playing to four times per week.  Andrew thought this
should have been a joint decision.
[267]      
The discussions show Melody asking Andrew on
several occasions whether she could sign M. up for the MD team.  On July 17,
Melody states: “I am still going to sign him up…because I do not want [M.] to
miss this wonderful opportunity.”
[268]      
In response, Andrew wrote (msg 156):
[269]      
Andrew insisted that M. frequently tells him
that he does not want to participate in all the activities for which he is
scheduled.
[270]      
I have already stated that I will order that Melody
cannot schedule new activities for M. on Wednesdays without Andrew’s consent.
[271]      
Andrew’s second complaint is financial.  Andrew
says he and Melody are “middle class people.”  Andrew objects to what he views
as extravagant expenditures like PowerSkate – a specialized hockey skating
lesson.  Andrew’s counsel pointed out that there is no evidence that M. has a
particular talent for hockey that requires nurturing.
[272]      
Andrew is not convinced that M. needs Melody’s
tutoring since he is providing his own through M.’s part-time nanny, I.D.V.,
who tutors M. for up to four hours per week. However, Andrew did not provide tutoring
receipts.  I add that, given Andrew’s concerns and his and M’s “down time”, it
is puzzling that Andrew would schedule up to 4 hours of tutoring during the one
weeknight he spends with M.
[273]      
With respect to M.’s health premiums, Andrew
selected the highest level of insurance under his own employer.  Therefore, he does
not think that extra premiums for M. are necessary.  However, he could not
demonstrate that his plan provides 100 percent coverage for M.’s insurable
expenses.
[274]      
Andrew has not submitted any section 7 claims of
his own.
[275]      
In terms of extracurricular activities, Andrew wants
to stick closely to Justice Shore’s order.  At that time M. played hockey in a
non-specialized league, baseball, and volleyball.  Andrew accepts swimming as
the alternative to volleyball.  Andrew does not consent to anything else.
[276]      
Andrew agrees to paying $270.90 for 2022.  For
2023 he removed the amounts Melody paid for the insurance and claims that his
actual contribution exceeds the remaining amount.
[277]      
For 2024, in addition to the health insurance
premiums Andrew excluded the following activities as not falling within section
7(1)(f):
[278]      
In order to address the parties’ remaining
disputed section 7 expenses I will proceed as follows.  First, I will determine
whether the disputed expense falls within an enumerated section 7 category. 
Second, I will examine any of M.’s needs or talents to determine whether
an expense is in his best interests.  Third, I will look at cost. 
Fourth, I will look at the family’s previous spending patterns.  Fifth,
as an additional “similar factor” open to me under the Child Support Guidelines
for extracurricular activities, I will look at the family dynamic between
these parties on extracurricular activities.  This dynamic has been a key
contributor to the parties’ conflict, which I find is very detrimental to M.’s
emotional well-being. Identifying a better approach is therefore necessary.
[279]      
Turning first to the relevant category under
section 7, the remaining disputed expenses are:
[280]      
Turning next to whether the claimed expense
meets a need or talent and is therefore related to M.’s best interests,
I find the following:
[281]      
Turning to cost, I find the following:
[282]      
Looking next at family spending patterns, M.
swam and played baseball and hockey before separation.  Baseball and hockey have
become more expensive as M. matures and Melody enrolls him in more elaborate
programs.  Melody has also added to his activities.
[283]      
Looking, finally, to what I call family
dynamics, I find that Melody’s approach to M.’s activities is peremptory. 
She tends to inform Andrew about M.’s activities, not seek his input.  This has
happened with muay thai, go-karting and M.’s more competitive, M.D. hockey
league.
[284]      
Melody stresses that Justice Shore’s order does
not require that Andrew consent to any of these activities.  While that is
true, Justice Shore also does not award Melody the authority to select M.’s
activities and insist that Andrew contribute to each one.
[285]      
Melody does not view any of M.’s extracurricular
activities as falling within her table child support.  She regards every one of
M’s extracurricular activities as “special or extraordinary” but, apart from
listing them in charts, she has not explained why.
[286]      
The court must balance the following factors:
M.’s needs and interests; the costs of the activities; and the fact that, in
order to merit a contribution over and above table child support, an extracurricular
expense must be “extraordinary.”
[287]      
On a balance of probabilities, I find that, for
this family, baseball and hockey count as “extraordinary extracurricular
expenses.”  M. has been engaged in these activities for several years.  Their
costs exceed what Melody might reasonably be expected to cover from the table child
support she receives from Andrew.  I am persuaded that they meet physical and
emotional needs for M.  Therefore, I will order Andrew to share these costs on
a proportionate to income basis.  However, I find it necessary and reasonable to
limit those costs in order to maintain some predictability for the parties and
avoid future conflict.  I set out those limits below.
[288]      
I am not satisfied on a balance of probabilities
that, for this family, muay thai and go-karting are “extraordinary
extracurricular expenses.”  These are new activities that Melody selected for M.
in the past year.  Neither activity is nearly as expensive as baseball and
hockey.  I am not persuaded that they fall outside of Andrew’s table child
support.  Both activities are discretionary or ad hoc in the sense that
M. attends them on a per-class or per-visit basis.  I am not persuaded that
they are necessary to meet M.’s best interests.
[289]      
I shall therefore order Andrew to pay all
retroactive expenses as reflected in the 2022, 2023, and 2024 charts prepared
by Melody with the exception of:
[290]      
Going forward, the parties shall share the
following section 7 expenses on a proportionate to income basis:
[291]      
For clarity, “baseball” includes:
[292]      
For clarity, “hockey” includes:
[293]      
The parties shall treat the cost of M.’s cell
phone as a section 7 expense.
[294]      
Currently, on a proportionate-to-income approach
Andrew is to pay 68 percent, and Melody is to pay 32 percent.
[295]      
With the exception of post-secondary and related
expenses, the parties shall
contribute to M.’s additional future
section 7 expenses
only if they consent
to the expenses, in advance, in writing.  With respect to
section 7 expenses the parties shall not unreasonably withhold consent.
[296]      
In conclusion, I made the following order: