[1]              
At approximately 1:57 a.m., on September 21, 2022, Toronto Police
Service (“TPS”) officers entered unit 417 at 27 Bergamot Avenue in response to two
911 calls made by the defendant, Alpha Henry. Upon entry, officers discovered the
lifeless bodies of Veronica and Colin Henry in the bathtub doused in gasoline.
[2]              
The defendant, who was found inside the unit, was directed to the
hallway. While there, the defendant told officers that his brother had arrived
home from Japan and attacked his parents with a knife.
[3]              
Defence counsel agrees that the defendant’s statements to the 911
dispatcher and to officers while in the fourth floor hallway of 27 Bergamot
Avenue were given voluntarily. The defence consents to the Crown’s request that
these statements be admitted as evidence in the trial proceedings without the
need for a voluntariness voir dire.
[4]              
At issue is a ninety-minute videotaped statement given by the
defendant to the lead homicide investigator, Detective (“Det.”) Michael McGinn,
at 4:51 p.m. on September 21, 2022.[1]
[5]              
As Det. McGinn is a “person in authority”, the admissibility of this
statement is dependent on the Crown proving beyond a reasonable doubt that the statement
was made voluntarily: see R. v. Oickle, 2000 SCC 38, [2000] 2
S.C.R. 3. The defence argues that on the record before me, there is a
reasonable doubt about the voluntariness of this statement. The record raises a
reasonable doubt about whether it is the product of an operating mind and/or oppressive
circumstances created by several officers neglecting the defendant’s medical
and personal circumstances.
[6]              
The parties consented to a blended statement voir dire for the purposes
of determining the admissibility of this statement. This procedure became
possible because, pursuant to s. 473(1) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C.,
1985, C. c-46, and with the consent of the Attorney General, the defendant
elected to a trial before me, sitting without a jury.[2]
[7]              
On November 18, 2024, I made a brief oral ruling with reasons to follow
admitting the defendant’s statement to Det. McGinn. These are those reasons.
[8]              
The defendant did not testify or call any evidence on the voir dire.
[9]              
The parties agree that the vast majority of the defendant’s contact with
officers preceding his interview with Det. McGinn was captured by the audio
and/or video recordings made by officers’ body worn cameras. The defence agrees
that periods for which there are no recordings are of no consequence in determining
the voluntariness of the defendant’s statement to Det. McGinn.
[10]          
Officers Cilia, Loughlin, Hofland, McGinn, Saini, Stone, Gandhi, Tang
and Special Constable (“SC”) Axon testified about their contact with the
defendant on September 21, 2022.
[11]          
Police Constable (“PC”) Siobhan Best, who was with the defendant from
about 1:57 a.m. to 7:15 a.m., did not testify due to health issues.[3]
On consent, four recordings from PC Best’s body worn camera were admitted into
evidence under the principled exception to the hearsay rule. These four
recordings cover the period of 1:52 a.m. to 4:33 a.m.
[12]          
As noted above, the defendant waived the need for a voluntariness voir
dire to determine the determine the admissibility of his two calls to 911.
[13]          
At the start of the defendant’s first call to 911, when asked if he
needed the assistance of “police, fire, or ambulance” the defendant said “police”.
During this call, the defendant said that his brother returned home from “flying”
and “started to stab us”, “murdered my two parents” and “pulled my parents to
the washroom”. The defendant stated after his brother returned home about “two
hours ago”, “he [his brother] stabbed all of us” and then ran off with the
knife.
[14]          
At about 1:47 a.m., the defendant called 911 again. When asked if he
required “police, fire, or ambulance” the defendant replied “police”. The
defendant immediately stated “my brother, my brother came to our house and he
[…] he murder my two parents, and he attack me, and he ran off with the knife.”
He said his parents were dead in the bathroom tub. He told the dispatcher that
he tried to protect himself but was also stabbed “quite a bit”. During this
call, the police arrived on scene.
[15]          
In response to the 911 calls, Sergeant (“Sgt”) Cilia and PCs Loughlin,
Hofland, Stone and Best were the first to arrive on scene. Immediately upon
entering unit 417, Sgt. Cilia directed the defendant to wait in hallway with PC
Best. For about the next thirteen minutes, the defendant sat in the fourth
floor hallway with PC Best.
[16]          
PC Best’s body worn camera recorded the defendant as he explained that
at about 1:20 or 1:30 a.m. his brother came back from Japan. The defendant and
his parents stayed up waiting for his brother. They were “worshipping” when his
brother came in, got a knife from the kitchen and then “came for” his mom and
then his dad.
[17]          
At approximately 2:10 a.m., the defendant was escorted from the fourth
floor hallway to the outside of 27 Bergamot to await the arrival of an
ambulance. While waiting, the defendant was placed in the back of a police cruiser
for about ten minutes. At 2:28 a.m., PC Best took custody of the defendant’s
cell phone.
[18]          
By 2:28 a.m., the ambulance had arrived. The defendant was given a
blanket to cover his head for privacy as media were on scene. As PC Best guided
the defendant to the ambulance, she called him “my friend”.
[19]          
At 2:30 a.m., the defendant was transported to Etobicoke General
Hospital (“EGH”). PC Best accompanied the defendant. The defendant arrived
at EGH at approximately 2:53 a.m.[4]
[20]          
At 2:56 a.m., PC Stone joined his partner, PC Best in the emergency bay
of the hospital where the defendant was lying on a stretcher. PC Stone placed the
defendant under arrest for murder and attempt murder. After reading the
standard rights to counsel from the back of his police memorandum book, PC
Stone asked “do you understand?” The defendant nodded his head and replied
“yeah”. PC Stone then asked “do you wish to call a lawyer now?” The defendant said
“no”. PC Stone told the defendant that he was still going to call duty counsel
and cautioned that “you’re not obliged to say anything in answer to the charge
[but] whatever you say may be given in evidence”. PC Stone repeated this
caution and asked “do you understand”. The defendant nodded in the affirmative.
[21]          
At 2:58 a.m., PC Stone stepped away to call duty counsel. In his
absence, PC Best asked the defendant if he understood everything that was
happening explaining that he was under arrest for murder and attempt murder.
The defendant said that he did not understand “of who”. He was “confused”
because his “parents got attacked, me, got attacked […] because he had came
back today from Japan”.
[22]          
At 3:14 a.m., a nurse spoke to the defendant. When asked for an
emergency contact, the defendant gave his parents. At one point while lying on
a hospital bed in a hallway, the defendant appeared to hear a voice and asked
PC Best “that’s my dad?” PC Best replied “I don’t believe so”.
[23]          
Duty counsel, Mr. Murphy, called back. At 3:21 a.m., the defendant began
speaking with Mr. Murphy. The call lasted a little more than eleven minutes. During
this period, PC Best and Stone waited down the hall with their body worn
cameras muted. When the call finished, the defendant held up the cell phone to
signal its end. PC Best asked the defendant if he was satisfied with the call.
The defendant nodded in the affirmative.
[24]          
At 3:52 a.m., a nurse came and asked the defendant “what happened”. The
defendant replied “the duty counsel person said not to talk.” PC Best overheard
this and explained to the defendant that he could speak to the nurses about
anything medically related.
[25]          
As they waited for a hospital room, PC Best and Stone stayed several
feet away from the defendant and were silent. By 4:28 a.m., the defendant was
moved from the hallway into a room. This ended the recordings by the body worn
cameras of PC Best and Stone as their batteries ran out. The next recordings of
the defendant commence upon the arrival of the relieving officers.
[26]          
At 7:15 a.m., PC Best and Stone were relieved by PC Gandhi and PC Saini.
By now, the defendant was receiving intravenous medication in preparation of a
CT Scan.[5]
On arrival, PC Gandhi explained to the defendant that he was going to again
advise him of his rights to counsel. PC Gandhi then advised the defendant that
he had been arrested for murder and attempted murder. The defendant appeared
confused, repeatedly asking “of who”. PC Gandhi explained that he did not have this
information as he was there to relieve the other officers. After PC Gandhi read
the standard rights to counsel, he asked “do you understand?” and “do you wish
to call a lawyer?” The defendant said he understood and that he had already
spoken with duty counsel. PC Gandhi then cautioned the defendant that “you’re
not obliged to say anything” but “whatever you say will be given as an [sic]
evidence in the court of law. Do you understand that?” The defendant replied
“yeah”.
[27]          
At 8:00 a.m., the defendant was taken for x-rays. By 8:50 a.m., he back
in a hospital room. He also had a CT Scan of his head.  Ultimately, the
defendant received twenty-five to thirty stitches to his left hand, five
stitches to his left upper thigh, and three stitches to the bottom of his left
foot. He also received a tetanus shot. The defendant is described as “awake and
alert” in the hospital records.
[28]          
At approximately 9:05 a.m., the emergency physician advised that the
defendant would be discharged. The defendant was prescribed two drugs: Keflex, an
antibiotic, and Arthrotec, a non-steriodal anti-inflammatory that helps with
pain. The defendant was given a follow-up appointment date of September 26,
2022. At no time did PCs Gandhi or Saini have any concerns about the
defendant’s mental health.
[29]          
During cross-examination, PC Gandhi and Saini agreed that they did not
make any note of, or inquiries about, the medications prescribed to the
defendant. Nor were any inquiries made of PCs Best or Stone about the
defendant.
[30]          
At approximately 9:30 a.m., PC Gandhi and Saini escorted the defendant
to their police scout car. The defendant was cuffed to the front. During the
drive to 23 Division, PC Gandhi asked if the defendant was feeling okay. PC
Gandhi explained that he knew the handcuffs can sometimes cause numbness so he
was concerned for the defendant’s wellbeing. The defendant replied he was
“good” and then proceeded to talk to the officers about the weather. While
waiting by the sallyport of 23 Division, the defendant joked with the officers.
[31]          
 At 10:07 a.m., the defendant was brought into the booking room at 23
Division. He was booked into 23 Division by the Officer-in-Charge of the
station, Staff Sergeant (“S/Sgt.”) Jansz, with the assistance of SC Axon.
[32]          
Before starting the booking process, PC Gandhi again told the defendant
that he was under arrest for two counts of murder and read the standard rights
to counsel. When asked “do you understand? Do you wish to call the lawyer?” the
defendant twice replied “no, I’m good”. S/Sgt. Jansz told the defendant “if
you change your mind, […] just let the booker know and the booker will make
that call for you”. S/Sgt. Jansz also told the defendant that while at 23 Division,
he would have “reasonable use of the telephone” to call anyone else he wished.
[33]          
S/Sgt. Jansz asked the defendant if he had any mental health issues or medical
concerns. The defendant replied “no” and shook his head. He also denied
consuming any intoxicants. When asked if he received any medication at the
hospital, PC Saini told S/Sgt. Jansz that the defendant had an IV in his arm at
the hospital. The defendant pointed to his arm and said he received anti-biotics
and a tetanus shot. PC Saini detailed the stitches received by the defendant
for his injuries.
[34]          
At the end of the booking process, the defendant was brought to a side
room where he changed into an orange jumpsuit. S/Sgt. Jansz explained that the
jumpsuit would keep him “a little bit warmer and a little bit more
comfortable.”
[35]          
The booking process was finished by 10:23 a.m. Before leaving the
booking room, S/Sgt. Jansz asked the defendant if he had eaten. When the defendant
said he had not, S/Sgt. Jansz said that they would arrange for food and water.
[36]          
After leaving the booking room, the defendant was brought to cell #15. The
defendant was the sole occupant. The cell had a cement slab in the shape of a
bed. It had its own toilet and sink with running water. The defendant was given
a cup for water. At 10:41 a.m., SC Axon gave the defendant his first of two
meals.
[37]          
SC Axon testified that he did cell checks on the defendant throughout
the day. His desk was only about forty or fifty feet away.
[38]          
From about 10:54 a.m. to 11:53 a.m., the homicide team had a briefing to
discuss the investigation. During the briefing, there was no discussion of the
defendant’s mental health or how he presented. Det. McGinn agreed that he did
not make any inquiries about whether the defendant was medicated at the
hospital, or how he presented when with other officers. Det. McGinn explained that
he relied on the other officers to advise him of any concerns as they are
legally obliged to do so.
[39]          
After the briefing, Detective Constable (“DC”) Eric Tang was directed to
re-arrest the defendant for two counts of first degree murder, to re-caution
the defendant and to facilitate another call with counsel. This was to occur
before the defendant met with Det. McGinn.
[40]          
At 12:46 p.m., DC Tang did as he was instructed. He attended at cell #15,
introduced himself and then asked the defendant if he was “doing okay”. The
defendant replied “oh yeah”. DC Tang then told the defendant that he was a
member of the homicide unit investigating the matter and that based on what had
been gathered so far, he needed to inform the defendant that he was now being
arrested for two counts of first degree murder. The defendant replied “how? If
I was attacked […]  I can’t attack myself.” DC Tang immediately interjected
with “Alpha stop”. DC Tang explained that “absolutely we’re gonna talk to
you about what happened, but we wanna make sure that you’re protected and that
you don’t say anything that might put you in under (sic) jeopardy
without you knowing.” The defendant replied “but my parents are dead and I’m
being, I was attacked by the same person. I kind of and got away and ran away.”
DC Tang told the defendant that the investigators would sit down with him and
“talk with you about what happened,” but he first had to read him his rights to
counsel.
[41]          
DC Tang then cautioned the defendant that he was “not obliged to say
anything” but “anything you do say to me or any other officers may be given in,
in as evidence.” When asked if he understood, the defendant said he did not
“because I don’t know who is arresting me and who’s putting those charges on
me”. When told the charges were being laid by Toronto Police based on the
investigation, the defendant said “that makes no sense”. DC Tang then read the
secondary caution explaining that if the defendant had spoken to any other
officers it was not to influence him in making a statement because he did not
have to give a statement.
[42]          
When DC Tang explained that they would not speak with him until after he
had spoken with counsel, the following exchange occurred:
[43]          
The defendant said he did not want to “waste time” but DC Tang explained
that contacting counsel was not wasting time. The defendant then said that he
needed “to be free today” as he had “property [that] could go missing”, he was
paying rent there, and he had kids he had to see.
[44]          
By 1:44 p.m., duty counsel called back. DC Tang told the defendant that
after he spoke with duty counsel, it would be up to him whether or not he spoke
with the police. The defendant replied “I have a lot to say”. After speaking
with duty counsel, the defendant appeared in video bail court.
[45]          
During the appearance before the bail justice, DC Tang learned of the
name of the lawyer who had previously represented the defendant. Consequently,
at about 2:45p.m., DC Tang advised the defendant that attempts were being made
to contact Mr. Erskine and that if Mr. Erskine called back, the defendant could
speak with him. The defendant replied “about what?” The defendant again
questioned why he was there, saying “I’m a victim, you get it?”
[46]          
When DC Tang explained that “we’ll talk about that after”, the following
exchange occurred:
[47]          
The defendant continued to insist that the charges were “a false
allegation” for which there was “no proof”. DC Tang explained that while
waiting for the lawyer to call back, another officer would take photographs of
him, document all of his injuries and take a couple of swabs. The defendant replied
“counsel said not to swab”. When DC Tang explained that he did not have a
choice, the defendant again replied “duty counsel told me and pictures as well
and say all that. They said no.” The defendant then said “I talked to those
therapists three times already”. When DC Tang asked “which therapist”, the
defendant replied “the duty counsellors”. The defendant again asserted “I’m a
victim guy”.
[48]          
DC Tang did not press the issue of photographs or swabbing. DC Tang did
not follow up on the defendant’s complaint of dizziness or that his hand was
broken. Although DC Tang knew that the defendant had been at EGH before
arriving at 23 Division, he did not make any inquiries of other officers about
how the defendant was presenting or the treatment received despite a concern
that he viewed some of the defendant’s conduct as erratic and abnormal. DC Tang
explained that this was “not at the forefront of my mind” given the many other
issues discussed at the briefing. During cross-examination, DC agreed that he
appeared as if the defendant did not know all of the “legal ramifications.” He
explained that this lack of understanding related to the legal process and
terminology, not legal jeopardy. DC Tang never told Det. McGinn of his concerns.
[49]          
While waiting to make contact with Mr. Erskine, at 3:40 p.m., the
defendant was given a second meal of two pizza pockets. At 4:09 p.m., the
defendant complained to SC Axon about his left hand and asked to return to the
hospital for a cast. SC Axon asked whether the defendant had any new injuries
or was experiencing any new pain. The defendant confirmed that his pain was not
getting worse. Nor did he have any new injury. SC Axon testified that he looked
at the defendant’s bandage and saw there was no bleeding. The defendant was
told that he would not be brought back to the hospital because his hand had
already been x-rayed. The defendant then asked for the medication prescribed by
the hospital.
[50]          
At 4:43 p.m., the defendant told SC Axon that his medication was due at
6 p.m. The defendant appeared fixated on getting his medication. When SC Axon
explained that the defendant would receive his medication at the detention
centre, the defendant said “okay” and appeared “perfectly fine”. SC Axon
described the defendant as “very pleasant to deal with”. SC Axon had no
concerns about the defendant’s mental health. The only thing SC Axon found odd
was a request by the defendant to call his mom. Knowing that the defendant was charged
with murdering his parents, SC Axon told the defendant that he could not
facilitate the request to call his mom.  SC Axon did not tell anyone of
this request. Nor did SC Axon tell anyone from the Homicide Unit of the
defendant’s request to go to the hospital or for his medication.
[51]          
SC Axon testified that another detainee at 23 Division that day also
complained that he was in need of medical attention. SC Axon called an ambulance
for this detainee. SC Axon explained that unlike the defendant’s circumstances,
this other detainee had a medical emergency: the male complained of swelling in
the hands, numbness in the left arm and a “sore heart”.
[52]          
At 4:56 p.m. the defendant was brought to the interview room to speak
with the officer-in-charge of the homicide investigation, Det. McGinn.
[53]          
At the start of the interview, Det. McGinn confirmed that the defendant
had spoken to duty counsel. Det. McGinn explained that they had tried to
contact the defendant’s former lawyer, Mr. Erskine but Mr. Erskine was now
a Crown Attorney. Det. McGinn told the defendant that if he wanted to speak
with a lawyer again, he could (p. 5). Det. McGinn then told the defendant that
he was being charged with two counts of first degree murder. Det. McGinn
cautioned the defendant that he was not obliged to say anything but “whatever you
say may be given in as evidence” (p. 8). When asked “do you understand”, the
defendant replied “oh yeah”. Det. McGinn then read the secondary caution to inform
the defendant that if he had spoken to any other officer, or anyone in a
position of authority, this was not to influence him in making a statement.
Det. McGinn asked if the defendant was “happy” with the advice he received from
duty counsel. The defendant replied “that’s with Murphy, yeah, yeah” (p. 9).  Det.
McGinn offered to call duty counsel again but the defendant said “nah, nah I
heard, I heard” (p. 9). Det. McGinn then explained the penalty for first degree
murder to which the defendant replied “two lifes in jail”.
[54]          
Before asking the defendant any questions about the incident, Det.
McGinn confirmed that the defendant had something to eat and drink, and had used
the washroom. Det. McGinn then asked “facilities treat you good, pretty good
here?” The defendant replied “oh, yeah, very good” (p. 13). Det. McGinn then
asked the defendant about his injuries and asked “what happened” (p. 14). The
defendant explained that when his brother returned home from Japan he was angry
and “start attacking me from behind”. This caused the defendant to “run out of
the apartment” and start knocking on doors (p. 19).
[55]          
Approximately forty-seven minutes into the interview, Det. McGinn produced
a photograph of the defendant purchasing gas at the Esso station (p. 89). Initially,
the defendant denied it was him. When Det. McGinn presented a close-up
photograph and asked “who do you think that is?” the defendant replied
“probably me” (p. 90). The defendant then began to explain why he purchased gas.
Det. McGinn told the defendant that “this is one of those times where honesty
goes a long way” (p. 95).
[56]          
During cross-examination, Det. McGinn agreed that near the end of the
interview (pp. 170-175) the defendant asked about when he would be released and
“what did Erskine say”. Det. McGinn explained that the defendant was not
going to be released and that Mr. Erskine was no longer a defence counsel. The defendant
also told Det. McGinn that he had “medication to take” (p. 174). Det. McGinn
explained that he was not concerned by any of these remarks. Nor was he
concerned that at four points during the interview, the defendant started
singing. Det. McGinn explained that the singing was consistent with what the
defendant was describing at that point of the interview. Had there been any
concerns that the defendant lacked an operating mind, Det. McGinn said he
would have stopped the interview.
[57]          
At issue is whether the defendant’s videotaped
statement to Det. McGinn on the afternoon of September 21, 2022, is voluntary.
[58]          
The Crown submits that it has proven
beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant’s videotaped statement to Det.
McGinn was voluntary. It was the product of an operating mind and there are no
circumstances that cast doubt on its voluntariness. Specifically, the statement
was not induced by any threats, promises or any other inducement. Nor was it
the product of oppressive circumstances, or police trickery. Rather, the
evidence overwhelmingly shows that the defendant was alert, coherent, and eager
to give the police his account of what happened and to cast the blame for what
happened on his younger brother.
[59]          
The defence argues that based on the
record there is a reasonable doubt about the voluntariness of the defendant’s statement
to Det. McGinn. A review of the totality of circumstances applying a contextual
analysis demonstrates that there is a reasonable doubt that the defendant had
an operating mind when giving the statement due in part to the oppressive
circumstances created by police conduct, including their failure to take certain
steps.
[60]          
The oppressive circumstances arose from a constellation of the following
factors:
[61]          
The confessions rule is aimed at ensuring that statements made by
an accused to persons in authority are admissible in evidence only in
circumstances where the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt it was given
voluntarily. In other words, that the accused made a meaningful choice to speak:
R. v. Singh, 2007 SCC 48, [2007] 3 S.C.R. 405, at para. 35.
[62]          
The confessions rule strikes a balance “between the individual and societal
interests at play in police questioning”: R. v. Tessier, 2022 SCC 35,
473 D.L.R. (4th) 317, at paras. 4, 69-72. On the one hand, it protects
accused persons from improper police interrogation, thereby guarding against
the admission of unreliable confessions and simultaneously promotes the right
to silence, the right against self-incrimination and the overall repute of the
criminal justice system. On the other, the confessions rule recognizes “the legitimate
law enforcement objectives of the state relating to the investigation of
crime”: Tessier, at para. 69; Oickle, at para. 33; Singh,
at paras. 44-45. As such, the test of voluntariness “extends to a broader ‘complex
of values’ animated by both reliability and fairness”: Tessier, at para.
72; Singh, at para. 30. It follows that a statement may be found to be
involuntary based on concerns about its reliability or because of the unfair
manner in which it was obtained: Tessier, at para. 70.
[63]          
In Oickle, the Supreme Court of Canada identified the following relevant
factors for consideration when determining the voluntariness of a statement to
a person in authority:
[64]          
These factors, while relevant, are not a checklist that supplants a
contextual fact-specific inquiry having regard to all of the circumstances
surrounding the making of the statement. The key issue ultimately is whether
the will of the accused was overborne by state conduct and the circumstances:
see R. v. Spencer, 2007 SCC 11, [2007] 1 S.C.R. 500, at paras. 11-13, 48;
Tessier, at para. 68.
[65]          
There is no onus (evidentiary or otherwise) on an accused person to
establish the existence of one or more of the Oickle factors.
Rather, the onus is always on the Crown to establish beyond a reasonable doubt
that the will of the accused was not overborne: See R. v. Alas, 2016 ONSC 5709, at
para. 31. This onus applies even where, as in this case, the statement in issue
is not a “confession” but is an exculpatory account.
[66]          
Counsel for the defendant conceded that there is nothing in the record
to suggest that the defendant’s statement to Det. McGinn was influenced by any
threats, promises, or other inducements. Nor is there any concern of police
trickery. I agree.
[67]          
A near complete recording exists of all contact the defendant had with
persons in authority from the time of his 911 calls to the time that he sat
down with Det. McGinn. Having viewed this extensive collection of recordings,
they demonstrate beyond any doubt that the defendant was treated with much
compassion and respect for his privacy interests and Charter rights. For
instance, the defendant was actively discouraged from making a statement before
he had spoken with counsel. When being escorted to the ambulance, he was given
a blanket to cover his head for privacy from the media on scene. When being
escorted from the hospital to 23 Division, he was cuffed to the front of his
body for comfort given his injuries. After being booked at 23 Division, he was
given warm meals and a change of clothing. The police interactions with the
defendant are a model of courtesy and professionalism.
[68]          
I will now focus on the two Oickle factors that are in dispute:
(i) whether the statement was influenced by oppressive circumstances; and, (ii)
whether the defendant had an operating mind when he spoke with Det. McGinn. However,
I am mindful that the Oickle factors are not an exhaustive checklist.
Rather, they form part of the fact-specific analysis required based on the totality
of circumstances.
[69]          
Oppression is a question of the circumstances. The oppression must arise
from police conduct and have influenced the making of the statement. In
other words, a causal connection is required between the police conduct and the
making of the statement: Singh, at para. 44. Even if oppressive
circumstances are found to exist, on their own, they will not necessarily
render a statement involuntary.
[70]          
The issue is whether the will of the accused person is overborne by the
conduct of the police and the circumstances caused or created by the state: Oickle,
para. 71.  Oppressive conditions that are not caused or created by the state
are irrelevant. For example, oppression arising from the accused’s own
anxieties, absent state actions, will not invalidate a confession: see R.
v. Fernandes, 2016 ONCA 772, at
para. 36.
[71]          
In Oickle, Iacobucci J. writing for a majority of the court, at
para. 60, described the following factors as potentially creating an atmosphere of oppression: “depriving the suspect of food, clothing,
water, sleep, or medical attention; denying access to counsel; and excessively
aggressive, intimidating questioning for a prolonged period of time.”
[72]          
In the instant case, defence counsel argues that the
defendant was deprived of sleep and medical attention. I disagree.
[73]          
At most, the evidence establishes that the defendant was awake before
his brother returned home at about 1:30 a.m. on September 21, 2022. His
statement to Det. McGinn started approximately 15½ hours later. However, it is
unknown whether the defendant slept while in his cell at 23 Division. What is known
is that there is no evidence of officers actively preventing him from sleeping.
Further, having viewed his statement with Det. McGinn, the defendant presents
throughout as alert and engaged. He showed no signs of sleep deprivation. Nor
did the defendant ever complain of being sleep deprived, or about how he was
treated while in police custody.
[74]          
This is not like the circumstances in R. v. Hoilet, [1999]
O.J. No. 2358, 1999 CanLII 3740 (C.A.). In Hoilett, the accused fell
asleep five times during questioning. Further, there was evidence that Mr.
Hoilett was intoxicated when arrested and left naked in a cold cell for two
hours before being given inadequate clothing.
[75]          
I am also satisfied that the defendant was not unfairly deprived of necessary
medical attention. I agree that the police could have and arguably ought to
have done more to inform themselves of the defendant’s medical needs. In
particular, knowledge of the medications administered and prescribed could have
been important to ensure that the defendant received any further doses required.
Also, Det. McGinn ought to have been informed of the defendant’s requests to
return to hospital and for his medication. This would have allowed Det. McGinn
to satisfy himself that these factors were not an impediment to him proceeding
with the interview. I am satisfied, however, that this was of no consequence.
It did not create an atmosphere of oppression.
[76]          
The instant case bears no similarity to the circumstances in R. v. C.
(S.E.), 2009 MBQB 242. In that case, a statement was excluded because of
oppressive circumstances arising from a deprivation of medical attention. In C.(S.E.),
the police refused to provide prescribed blood pressure medication despite five
requests and they continued questioning over an extended period of time despite
the accused’s repeated refusal to give a statement. The police were also found
to have failed to provide proper nourishment and rest to the accused.
[77]          
In contrast, the defendant was given two warm meals, clothing, and, his
own cell where he could rest. Notably, the defendant never said he did not want
to speak with the police. Nor was he ever subjected to aggressive or prolonged questioning.
In fact, the opposite is true. Det. McGinn asked open ended questions allowing
the defendant to give his account. Even when Det. McGinn challenged the
defendant’s account, he never raised his voice and simply told the defendant
that he would appreciate “a little bit of honesty” (p. 91) as the defendant’s
account made no “sense” (pp. 95, 106).
[78]          
The Crown analogized the instant case to that of R. v. Alas, 2016
ONSC 5709, in which Trotter J. (as he then was) admitted Mr. Alas’ statement in
circumstances where the police failed to provide Mr. Alas with prescribed
medication. I agree. That said, the circumstances in Alas were more
egregious than those present in the instant case.
[79]          
 In Alas, the accused asked several times for his prescribed
medication for his stomach. His prescribed medication was brought to the
station but never given to Mr. Alas. During his interview, Mr. Alas winced as
if in pain but the interview continued for a further forty-five minutes despite
Mr. Alas saying he was “dying” to have his medication as his stomach was
“burning”. At the end of the interview, Mr. Alas was transported to hospital
where he was given his medication. In Alas, Trotter J. expressed concern
about how the police responded to Mr. Alas’ medical needs, but noted that
otherwise the police were polite, gentle and showed concern for Mr. Alas’
wellbeing. Further, throughout the interview, Mr. Alas appeared relaxed and did
not present as a person in distress. Ultimately, Trotter J. found that Mr.
Alas’ will was not overborne by the circumstances in which he found himself,
nor by anything said or suggested to him by any of the officers.
[80]          
In the instant case, the police did not have the defendant’s medication
– only a prescription. SC Axon testified that in circumstances where a detainee
arrives from the hospital with a prescription, the prescription is filled on
release or once the person arrives at the detention centre. SC Axon testified
that the defendant’s requests for his medication and to be returned to hospital
were not granted as neither were a medical emergency. As explained by SC Axon,
the defendant said his pain was not worsening and he had no new injuries.
[81]          
I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant’s will was
not overborne when he spoke with Det. McGinn.
[82]          
A voluntary confession is one that is the product of an
operating mind. To have an operating mind, an accused must possess a “limited
cognitive ability to understand what they were saying and to comprehend that the
statement might be used as evidence in criminal proceedings”: Tessier, at
paras. 8, 50 quoting R. v. Whittle, 1994 CanLII 55 (SCC), [1994] 2 S.C.R.
914, at p. 939. See also: Oickle, at para. 63.
[83]          
This is not a high threshold. It does not require the
capacity to act in one’s own best interest. Nor does it require actual knowledge
of the consequences of speaking: Tessier, at
paras. 12, 53-56. It does, however, require proof “that the accused was capable
of making a meaningful choice to speak to the police and that the choice was
not improperly influenced by state action”: Tessier, at para. 51. In
other words, a “free choice” that was not frustrated by the conduct of the
police or other factors that would compromise voluntariness: Tessier, at
para. 52.
[84]          
Defence counsel submits that there is a reasonable doubt that the
defendant’s statement is the product of an operating mind. In particular, there
is no evidence that the defendant comprehended that his statement to Det.
McGinn could be used in criminal proceedings. Rather, when considered in the
context of all the circumstances, including his lack of sleep, bizarre
behaviour, and the failure of officers to address the defendant’s medical and mental
health issues, it is clear that he lacked the cognitive capacity to understand
his legal jeopardy. The defendant’s decision to speak was as a victim, not as
someone who faced any legal jeopardy and therefore it was not a meaningful
choice.
[85]          
I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant had an
operating mind when he spoke with Det. McGinn.
[86]          
First, the defendant’s presentation was consistent over the 15½ hours
that he was in police custody before he met with Det. McGinn. Throughout, he
was alert, clear, coherent and appeared quite eager to tell the police his
narrative of how he and his parents were attacked by his brother.
[87]          
Second, while the defendant had physical injuries, he received medical
treatment. He did not appear to be in pain or any discomfort when speaking with
Det. McGinn. Further, during the booking process at 23 Division, the defendant
confirmed that he had not ingested any alcohol or other intoxicants and said
that the medication administered at hospital was an anti-biotic and a tetanus
shot.
[88]          
Third,  the defendant was advised of his rights to counsel and cautioned
three times before he met with Det. McGinn. He spoke to duty counsel twice. The
defendant’s capacity for meaningful choice is evident by his refusal to tell a
nurse what happened and his refusal to DC Tang to have swabs and
photographs taken.
[89]          
Fourth, the defendant confirmed his understanding at the start of the
interview with Det. McGinn. When Det. McGinn informed the defendant of his
rights to counsel and re-cautioned him that he was “not obliged to say anything
in answer to the charge” but whatever was said “may be given in as evidence”, the
defendant said “oh yeah” (p. 8). Having viewed the recording of this
interaction, I reject the suggestion that the defendant was merely “parroting”
what he was told by officers. Rather, the defendant’s own comments – that he
was facing “two lifes in jail” – demonstrate his understanding of the jeopardy
he faced.[8]
Further, there was no impropriety on the part of the police. They did not attempt
to obscure the defendant’s legal jeopardy. They employed no strategies of
deception. Nor did they attempt to uncover any vulnerabilities that could be
exploited. In fact, the opposite is true. All officers took active steps to
ensure the defendant was properly informed and discouraged him from making any
statements until after he had spoken to counsel.
[90]          
Fifth, while there is evidence that the defendant had some mental health
issues at the time of his arrest, I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that
this did not deprive him of an operating mind. The defendant was eager to share
his account of the events with persons he knew to be police officers.
[91]          
I agree that Det. McGinn ought to have been informed of the concerns that
some officers had about the defendant’s odd behaviour. However, I am satisfied
that this omission was without consequence. The defendant understood that he
did not have to speak with the police and that what he said could be used
against him. The video recording of the interview and the defendant’s other
contact with officers belies his complaint that his cognitive functioning was compromised.
He was, at all times, alert, engaged and responsive. His motivation was
self-created. It stemmed from his confidence that the police had “no proof” and
his desire to implicate his brother. In fact, even at the end of the interview,
the defendant told Det. McGinn “I don’t need a lawyer cause I, I didn’t do
anything” (p. 172).
[92]          
In all of the circumstances, I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
that the defendant had an operating mind when speaking to Det. McGinn.
[93]          
I am satisfied that the Crown has proven the voluntariness of the
defendant’s statement to Det. McGinn beyond a reasonable doubt.
[94]          
Accordingly, the statement given to Det. McGinn is admissible.