[1]             
The Respondents Mehdi Ebrahimieshratabadi
(a.k.a. Mike Robertson a.k.a. Mike Robinson a.k.a. Tony Newman), Maleksabet
Ebrahimi, 5M Capital Investment Pty. Ltd. and Mohammad Ebrahimieshratabadi
(a.k.a. Emanuel Ebrahimieshratabadi) seek to set aside or vary three related
Orders of this court under Rule 59.06 on grounds of
fraud and facts arising or discovered after the Orders were made. These prior orders
relate to the implementation of the minutes of settlement between the parties
dated October 19, 2020 (the "Minutes of Settlement"). These
Respondents (collectively sometimes referred to as the "Ebrahimi
Parties") are also asking for a declaration that the Applicants are in
breach of the Minutes of Settlement and a declaration that the Minutes of
Settlement are void ab initio. This motion by the Ebrahimi Parties is
referred to as the "Set-Aside Motion".
[2]             
The  prior orders and decisions that the
Respondents seek to have set aside are:
[3]             
The Applicants (collectively referred to as
"PCCI") have brought their own motion to enforce the court's January
30, 2024 Order regarding the implementation of the Minutes of Settlement and
some ancillary relief (the "Fourth Implementation Motion").
[4]             
If the Respondents are successful on their
motion, the Applicants' motion will become moot, as the Respondents are seeking
to set aside the prior implementation orders and the Minutes of Settlement.
[5]             
For the reasons that follow, the Set-Aside
Motion is granted (for the most part), the Fourth Implementation Motion is dismissed
(for the most part). Given what has transpired since the January 30 Decision
and the conduct of the parties, it is no longer appropriate for this court to
make further orders to implement and enforce the Minutes of Settlement and they
are declared to be no longer of any force or effect.
[6]             
The Minutes of Settlement settled various
criminal and/or civil proceedings initiated by PCCI in 2018 and 2019 against
the Respondents in multiple jurisdictions, including Iran, Malaysia, Singapore,
Cyprus, Australia, Portugal and Ontario, all arising out of the same alleged USD
$71 million fraud (collectively the "International Proceedings").
[7]             
Pursuant to the Minutes of Settlement, the
Respondents agreed to transfer various assets to PCCI, including cash,
cryptocurrency, corporate shares, real property, and gold bullion. Many of those
assets were frozen pursuant to a worldwide Mareva Injunction Order made by
Penny J. of this court on January 8, 2019 and subsequently extended and
confirmed (the "Mareva Order"), which was predicated on an order
issued by the court in Malaysia on January 3, 2019. In exchange, PCCI agreed to
withdraw all civil claims and support the Ebrahimi Parties' efforts to have the
criminal claims being pursued against them in the various International
Proceedings withdrawn or dismissed.
[8]             
PCCI's position on the First, Second and Third
Implementation Motions, was that they were acting in good faith to fulfil their
obligations under the Minutes of Settlement. On the Second Implementation
Motion, PCCI sought the court's assistance to require the Ebrahimi Parties to
fulfill their obligations.
[9]             
After the release of the January 30 Decision, the
Ebrahimi Parties say they discovered two memoranda filed by the Applicants in
the ongoing criminal proceedings against them in Iran (the "Fresh
Evidence"). The Ebrahimi Parties maintain that this Fresh Evidence is
demonstrably inconsistent with the Applicants' positions, assertions and
evidence before this court on the First Implementation Motion (heard in June
2022) and on the Second and Third Implementation Motions
(heard in January 2024).
[10]         
The first piece of Fresh Evidence that the
Ebrahimi Parties seek leave to tender in support of their Set Aside Motion is a
February 6, 2023 memorandum the Applicants filed in the Iranian criminal
proceedings (the "February 2023 Memo") in which they:
[11]         
The second piece of Fresh Evidence that the
Ebrahimi Parties rely on is a February 4, 2024 memorandum filed in the Iranian
criminal proceedings by the Applicants (the "February 2024 Memo"). In
that memo, the Applicants continued to accuse the Ebrahimi Parties of money
laundering and asked for an order of restitution in the amount of approximately
USD $71 million.
[12]         
On or about October 4, 2020, the parties executed a document in Farsi called 'mutual agreement'
("Mutual Agreement"). It was a term of the Mutual Agreement that the
parties would enter into formal minutes of settlement, which would be filed
with the courts in all applicable jurisdictions. They entered into the Minutes
of Settlement shortly afterwards, which this court has previously held to have
superseded the Mutual Agreement (see for example, Petrochemical Commercial Company International Ltd. v.
Nexus Management Group SDN BHD, 2023 ONCA
308, at para. 19, affirming the July 22, 2020 decision and finding of Dietrich
J).
[13]         
This is now the fourth set of motions relating
to the implementation, and alleged breaches, of the Minutes of Settlement.
[14]         
Following a hearing on January 16, 2024, the
January 30 Decision was released disposing of the Second and Third
Implementation Motions. That decision was unreported. It contains a detailed
procedural history, made some findings and provided some directions to the
parties that are relevant to the present motions, which are reproduced below for
convenience (the font has been changed to differentiate these extracts):
[15]         
PCCI's counsel had been sent proposed language
for a further letter to be provided by PCCI to the prosecutor and the court in
the Iranian proceeding long before the hearing of the January 16, 2024 Second and Third Implementation Motions. On May 9, 2023, the Ebrahimi Parties set out the points that they wanted PCCI to
address and confirm in this letter, as follows:
[16]          
As of the hearing on January 16, 2024, PCCI had not provided any comments on the proposed follow-up letter
to be sent by them to the Iranian court and prosecutor. PCCI's position on that
motion was that the Minutes of Settlement did not require them to send a
further letter and that they had complied with their obligations under the
Minutes of Settlement, to: "request, and to cooperate, in ways available
to them, to facilitate the withdrawal of the criminal proceedings and the
removal of the Interpol Red Notices" by their letters in October and
November 2021 and their meeting with the Iranian prosecutor in November 2021sent
a year after the Minutes of Settlement were entered into.
[17]          
The court directed otherwise in the January 30
Decision, requiring the Applicants to provide some form
of letter in the Iranian criminal proceedings and directing the Applicants to
revise the draft letter that they had been provided with in May 2023 to accord
with what was factually accurate and specific to the parties to the Minutes of Settlement
and to provide those comments to counsel for the Respondents. That was
"the quid pro quo that the court imposed on the Applicants when it
granted certain orders and directions in their favour on their Second
Implementation Motion."
[18]          
The Iranian court rendered its verdict against
the Ebrahimi Parties (and others) on February 14, 2024
(discussed in more detail below).
[19]          
Two weeks after the verdict had been rendered, by
email dated February 27, 2024, counsel for PCCI transmitted
to counsel for the Ebrahimi Parties draft declarations (for both the Portuguese
and Iranian courts), in which counsel for PCCI stated that: "Provided the
language is acceptable to you [sic] clients, these will [sic] executed
and I will hold them in escrow, to be released on completion of the transfers
ordered by Justice Kimmel and payment of the costs owed to my clients."
[20]          
PCCI's proposed wording for the declaration to (letter)
be provided in Iran included the following statements:
[21]         
The 94-page verdict of the Iranian court was
released on February 14, 2024. It records that the
proceeding was initiated by the filing of complaints by the Applicants against
various individuals on charges of fraud and money laundering. It reviews the
positions of the various parties and records that a request had been made for
the examination and issuance of a verdict to penalize the accused accordingly.
[22]         
The Minutes of Settlement were disclosed and
summarized in the verdict as follows: "A subsequent agreement was reached
on 19 October 2020, stipulating that Mr. Ebrahimi was
to transfer all assets derived from the crime to PCCI. In return, the client
company was to declare its satisfaction with the case. Unfortunately, Mr.
Ebrahimi did not fulfill his obligations."
[23]         
The Iranian court did not accept the defences
presented by the lawyers for the Respondents based upon the Minutes of
Settlement, nor was it prepared to accept any request for a declaration of
final forgiveness by the plaintiffs in its ultimate verdict. This was explained
in the verdict to be due to the Respondents' failure to comply with the Minutes
of Settlement, as is noted in the following extracts have been taken from the
English translation of the Iranian court's decision filed:
[24]         
 In or about early March of 2024, Mr.
Ebrahimieshratabadi learned, from reading the news, that a group of Iranian
"hacktivists" hacked the computer system of the Iranian judiciary and
copied millions of documents, which were subsequently "leaked" on the
Internet in the form of a searchable database ("Database").
[25]         
The February 2023 Memo was among the documents
that Mr. Ebrahimieshratabadi found when he accessed the Database. This led him
to instruct another lawyer in Iran to search the court file in the Iranian
criminal proceedings, which then led to the discovery of the February 2024
Memo.
[26]         
The February 2023 Memo had been filed on behalf
of PCCI in the Iranian criminal proceedings before the Second and Third Implementation
Motions were heard. The Ebrahimi Parties say that, despite their requests made
to the lawyer representing them (or some of them) in abstentia in the
criminal proceedings in Iran, they were not provided with a copy of this memo
at the time or specifically made aware of its existence. The Applicants have
filed uncontradicted evidence from an expert on Iranian law indicating that the
Iranian lawyer would have, at the very least, been notified of, and had access
to, all documents filed and was under a professional duty to send the documents
to their client upon request.
[27]         
 The Applicants suggest that the court should
not believe Mr. Ebrahimieshratabadi's testimony that the Ebrahimi Parties were
not aware of the February 2023 Memo as of the January 16, 2024 motion. But, even
if they were not aware of the February 2023 Memo, the Ebrahimi Parties were
generally aware (and complaining to the court) at the January 16, 2024 motion
that the Applicants were actively opposing the motion
for dismissal of the criminal charges against the Respondents in Iran, which
the Ebrahimi Parties relied upon in support of their position that the
Applicants were not complying with the Minutes of Settlement.
[28]         
Unlike the February 2023 Memo, the February 2024
Memo did not exist at the time of the January 16, 2024 motion, and the timing
of its discovery in or about March or April of 2024 is not a point of
contention.
[29]         
The Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O.
1990, Reg. 194, provide a limited exception to the general
principle of res judicata and finality of orders and judgments: see
Mehedi v. 2057161 Ontario Inc., 2015 ONCA 670, 391 DLR (4th) 374, at para.
13. Pursuant to r. 59.06(2)(a), a party may make a
motion in the proceeding to have an order set aside or varied on the ground of
fraud or facts arising or discovered after the order was made.
[30]         
In Maguire v. His Majesty the King et
al., 2024 ONSC 2392, the test for leave to file fresh
evidence on a motion to set aside an order on the grounds of newly discovered
facts under r. 59.06(2) was recently described as
follows (at para. 21):
[31]         
The test dates back to the Supreme Court of
Canada's decision in 671122 Ontario Ltd. v. Sagaz Industries Canada Inc.,
2001 SCC 59, [2001] 2 SCR 983, at para. 20, considered and  by the Court of
Appeal for Ontario's in Mehedi. There, the Court of Appeal observed that
the court may go on to evaluate "other factors such as the cogency of the
new evidence, any delay in moving to set aside the previous judgment, any
difficulty in re-litigating the issues and any prejudice to other parties or
persons who may have acted in reliance on the judgment"  in deciding
whether to admit fresh evidence and set aside or vary a prior court order: see Mehdi,
at para. 13.
[32]         
Where the order being attacked arises from a
motion as opposed to a trial, the test will generally be applied more
stringently against the moving party: see Maguire, at para. 18.
[33]         
A summary of the factors to be considered when
considering whether to set aside or vary an order under r. 59.06(2)(a) on the basis of fraud is provided in Maguire, at para. 15:
[34]          
Re-opening the evidentiary record after a
decision has been rendered occurs only in exceptional circumstances to avoid a
very serious injustice: see Geliedan v. Rawdah, 2020 ONCA 339, at para
8; and Sagaz, at para 61.
[35]         
If the Applicants committed a fraud on the court
(as the Ebrahimi Parties allege) by misrepresenting that they were making good
faith efforts to comply with the Minutes of Settlement while they were at the
same time, and thereafter, asking the Iranian court to convict the Ebrahimi
Parties of fraud and money laundering and order restitution, then the Ebrahimi
Parties ask the court to go further and declare the Minutes of Settlement to be
void ab initio, based on the following reasoning:
[36]         
 The following issues must be decided on the Set
Aside Motion:
[37]         
The third issue is the inverse of the
Applicants' Fourth Implementation Motion by which they seek to enforce the
Minutes of Settlement.
[38]         
The February 2023 Memo did not exist at the time
of the Consent Implementation Orders, or at the time of the order of Dietrich
J. dated July 15, 2022 on the First Implementation Motion. Until the January
30, 2024 Decision was released, PCCI's position was that it was not required to
do more than it had already done back in October and November 2021 to
co-operate in the efforts of the Ebrahimi Parties to have the Iranian criminal
proceedings dismissed.
[39]         
In the meantime, the Applicants explain in their
factum on this motion that they were trying to protect themselves throughout
the period in which the Ebrahimi Parties were challenging the Minutes of
Settlement: before Dietrich J., the Court of Appeal and then again at the
return of the January 16, 2024 Second and Third Implementation Motions. While
those challenges remained extant, the Applicants were concerned that they would
have been deprived of the benefit of the uncompleted transfers under the
Minutes of Settlement. The Iranian criminal proceedings were their fallback.
[40]         
The February 2023 Memo was filed in the Iranian
criminal proceedings more than eighteen months after the hearing and decision
on the First Implementation Motion and while the Respondents' appeal of that
decision was pending. In the circumstances, I do not consider it to have been
inconsistent with PCCI's positions before the Ontario courts up to that point for
them to have filed the February 2023 Memo in the Iranian criminal proceedings. I
take particular note of the fact that the court had ruled on the First
Implementation Motion that the Applicants’ letters to and meetings with the
Iranian prosecutor in the fall of 2021 were compliant with the Minutes of
Settlement. I also note that in the February 2023 Memo, the Applicants
acknowledged that there was a Settlement that the Respondents were challenging.
[41]         
The February 2023 Memo existed at the time of
the Second and Third Implementation Motions heard on January 16, 2024
(resulting in the January 30 Decision).
[42]         
Based on the uncontested evidence of the
Applicants' expert on Iranian law, it may be presumed that the Ebrahimi Parties
had a copy of the February 2023 Memo prior to those motions, or at the very
least could have obtained a copy of it from their Iranian counsel with
reasonable diligence. Their evidence about unanswered requests for copies of
materials filed is difficult to reconcile with the standard practice attested
to by the Applicants' expert on Iranian law, and the Ebrahimi Parties offered
no evidence directly from the counsel representing them in Iran at the time to
contradict the evidence about the practice.
[43]         
Furthermore, even if I accept that the Ebrahimi
Parties did request copies of the materials filed in the Iranian criminal proceedings
in a timely manner and those requests were ignored, the main point addressed in
the February 2023 Memo (that PCCI continued to support a guilty verdict against
the Ebrahimi Parties in the Iranian criminal proceedings while the Ebrahimi
Parties continued to challenge the Minutes of Settlement) was, in general
terms, already part of what was before the court and taken into consideration
in the January 30 Decision. For example, the court observed that:
[44]      Even if the Ebrahimi Parties did not have the February 2023 Memo, the
Second and Third Implementation Motions were argued on the basis that PCCI
continued to support a guilty verdict against the Ebrahimi Parties in the
Iranian criminal proceedings, and had not done enough to cooperate and
facilitate the withdrawal of those proceedings as against them. That was the
basis for the court's further direction in the January 30 Decision that PCCI
provide the requested letter to the Iranian prosecutor and court.
[45]      In these circumstances, I am unable to conclude that the February
2023 Memo probably would have changed the result had it been presented to the
court in the Second and Third Implementation Motions. Accordingly, the Ebrahimi
Parties have not met their onus to satisfy the two-part test for leave to file
the February 2023 Memo as Fresh Evidence: see Maguire, at para. 21; Sagaz,
at para. 20. Leave is not granted for the February 2023 Memo to be considered
as Fresh Evidence on this motion.
[46]      The situation is different for the February 2024 Memo. It did not
exist and could not have been put forward by the Ebrahimi Parties with any
reasonable diligence at any of the prior motions. That memo is cogent because
it was filed in the Iranian criminal proceedings after the January 30 Decision
was rendered. That decision was predicated on the court's finding that PCCI was
not, at that time, doing enough to meet its obligations under the Minutes of
Settlement.
[47]      The question of whether PCCI was in compliance with its own obligations
under the Minutes of Settlement was directly before the court on the Second and
Third Implementation Motions. In the January 30 Decision, PCCI's compliance
with the Minutes of Settlement was considered to be relevant to the question of
whether the Applicants could compel performance of the Minutes of Settlement if
they were themselves in breach; the court held they could not and that they needed
to comply if they wanted to invoke the assistance of the court to force the
Respondents to comply. That was the quid pro quo for the relief sought
by PCCI that the court granted.
[48]      It is a fundamental principle of the law of contracts that a party
to an agreement cannot demand that the other party comply with its obligations
while the first party is unwilling to perform its own obligations: see Porter
Airlines Inc. v. Nieuport Aviation Infrastructure Partners GP, 2022 ONSC
5922, at para. 495.  This is consistent with the law of specific performance which
requires the party requesting performance must not fall into breach by failing
to meet their own obligations:  see 117577 Ontario Ltd. v. Magna
International Inc. (2000), 2000 CanLII 22698 (ON SC), 50
OR (3d) 579, at para. 31, citing Robert
Sharpe, Injunctions and Specific Performance, 2d ed., looseleaf (Aurora, Ont.:
Canada Law Book, 1992), at para. 10.750.
[49]      Instead of following the court's directions and providing comments
on the proposed letter to the Iranian prosecutor and court, PCCI filed the February
2024 Memo, seeking a criminal verdict of fraud against the Ebrahimi Parties
(and others) and restitution. That relief was granted by the Iranian court in
its verdict rendered ten days later, on February 14, 2024. I find that if this
court had been apprised of the contents of the February 2024 Memo (the planned
requests for findings of criminal responsibility on the part of the Ebrahimi
Parties and restitution in the Iranian proceedings) at the time of the Second
and Third Enforcement Motions, it probably would have changed the results of
those motions (contained in the January 30 Decision).
[50]      It would have cast significant doubt on the bona fides of
PCCI's assertion that they were making good faith efforts to fulfill their
obligations under the Minutes of Settlement by cooperating "in ways
available to them, to facilitate the withdrawal of the criminal proceedings." 
That was the quid pro quo for the granting of the Enforcement Orders in
favour of the Applicants at that time.
[51]      There was no delay by the Ebrahimi Parties in bringing their
Set-Aside Motion (including the request for leave to file this Fresh
Evidence).  The other factors under the r. 59.06 test will be further
elaborated upon in the consideration of the request to set aside the
Implementation Orders.  For the immediate purposes, the two-part test under r.
59.06 is satisfied and leave is granted for the February 2024
Memo to be considered as Fresh Evidence on this motion.
[52]         
The January 30 Decision dealing with the Second
and Third Implementation Motions was an extension of the original Consent
Implementation Orders, insofar as it addressed any remaining outstanding
aspects of the original orders that had not yet been fulfilled during the
intervening delays and provided further clarity and directions. The Consent
Implementation Orders and the orders made in the January 30 Decision are
collectively referred to as the "Implementation Orders".
[53]         
The January 30 Decision clarified PCCI's obligations
under the Minutes of Settlement and directed them to provide comments on the
letter that was to be sent to the prosecutor and the court in Iran in
furtherance of their obligation to "request, and to cooperate, in ways
available to them, to facilitate the withdrawal of the criminal
proceedings." In light of that, filing the February 2024 Memo with the
Iranian court that requested that the court enter a verdict of fraud and
restitution undermined the integrity of this court's process. It would be
tantamount to a fraud on this court if it was done intentionally or recklessly.
[54]         
PCCI says that this was not done intentionally. PCCI
says that after receiving the January 30 Decision, they moved as quickly as
possible to provide comments on the draft letter that had been sent to them in
May 2023 regarding what the Ebrahimi Parties wanted PCCI to tell the
prosecutors in Iran (and in Portugal). However, they only sent their comments
back on February 28, 2024, after the Iranian criminal judgment for restitution
had already been rendered on February 14, 2024.
[55]         
Counsel for PCCI conceded he has no explanation
for why the February 2024 Memo was filed in the Iranian criminal proceedings
after the January 30 Decision had been released. It was suggested that it was
due to the lawyers acting in the criminal proceedings in Iran not sharing the February
2024 Memo that they intended to file with Canadian counsel or with the person
instructing them on behalf of PCCI before they filed it. However, there is no direct
evidence from the persons involved in the filing of the February 2024 Memo in
Iran about what they knew at the time or who they shared it with in advance of
it being filed.
[56]         
The facts that have been established disclose
that:
[57]         
The failure to effectively communicate within
PCCI may explain how it happened that the February 2024 Memo was filed in Iran
after the January 30 Decision was rendered in Ontario, but this sequence of
events does not paint the picture of a diligent effort to comply with the
Minutes of Settlement by PCCI after they received the January 30 Decision. Their
delay has now made their compliance (e.g. sending a letter or declaration to
the prosecutors and the court in Iran) futile since a verdict was rendered in
the Iranian criminal proceedings in the meantime.
[58]         
I do not accept PCCI's submission that its only
obligation under the Minutes of Settlement was to provide comments on the draft
letter/declaration to be sent to the Iranian prosecutor and court. The comments
also had to align with the Minutes of Settlement  and the comments needed to be
provided in a timely manner.  The delay in providing the comments and the
intervening verdict in the Iranian criminal proceedings has negated the
intended purpose of the fulfillment of those obligations.
[59]         
PCCI points to earlier decisions in this case in
which the court clearly recognized that the Minutes of Settlement did not
require them to assure the withdrawal of criminal proceedings (which was never
guaranteed or required under the Minutes of Settlement). They argue that even
if they had provided their comments in a timely manner and the declaration had
been delivered to the Iranian prosecutor and court prior to February 14, 2024,
it might not have made any difference to the verdict. That
is not something that I need to decide on this motion.
[60]         
The court has recognized that PCCI had no
ability to control the outcome of the Iranian criminal proceedings and that the
Minutes of Settlement did not require them to do
something that they had no capability or authority to do directly. However, the
contention they face now is that they failed to do something that they could
have done, namely finalize the proposed draft letter (or declaration) so that
it could be sent to the Iranian prosecutor and court. What is significant for
the immediate issue to be decided is that PCCI failed to comply with their
obligations under the Minutes of Settlement which was the quid pro quo
for the court granting the Second Implementation Motion and order that they
sought in the January 30 Decision. A finding of fraud is not necessary in these
circumstances.
[61]         
Having regard to the factors to be considered
(summarized in Maguire, at para. 15), I am satisfied that the Ebrahimi
Parties have met their onus and find that the Implementation Orders should be
set aside in the circumstances of this case:
[62]         
PCCI asked the court to consider some other
factors that it argued should have led the court to decline to grant the
extraordinary relief of setting aside the Implementation Orders (see Mehedi,
at para. 13). They assert they will be prejudiced if the Implementation
Orders are set aside. The court recognizes the obvious consequence, that if the
Implementation Orders are set aside PCCI will no longer have the benefit of the
Implementation Orders requiring the transfer of specific assets by the Ebrahimi
Parties to PCCI. However, as I understand it, the prejudice that the court should
be concerned with when considering whether to set aside prior court orders must
arise from PCCI's reliance upon those orders.
[63]         
The circumstances of this case do not support a
finding of such reliance. According to their own submissions on this motion, since
shortly after the Minutes of Settlement were signed in October 2020 and throughout
the entire period that the Ebrahimi Parties were challenging the Minutes of
Settlement, PCCI have been trying to protect themselves. While those challenges
remained extant, the Applicants were concerned that they would be deprived of
the benefit of the uncompleted transfers under the Minutes of Settlement. They
assert that they were not willing to face that risk without protecting their
position before the Iranian court which they did by continuing to pursue the
Respondents in that proceeding.
[64]         
In other words, they admit that they were
hedging their bets by keeping open both the option of enforcing the Minutes of
Settlement through the proceedings in Canada and pursuing the criminal
proceedings in Iran predicated on the Minutes of Settlement not being fulfilled.
In these circumstances, it cannot be said that PCCI was relying to their
prejudice upon the Implementation Orders or the Minutes of Settlement while
they were continuing to pursue the verdict in the criminal proceedings in Iran.
[65]         
PCCI further contends that the court should not
grant any relief now to the Ebrahimi Parties on the Set-Aside Motion because they
are still in breach of Minutes of Settlement themselves. For example, they have
not transferred certain shares and assets in Germany and certain real property
in Ontario. In response to this, the Ebrahimi Parties explain that these
transfers have been impeded by legal technicalities and requirements in Germany
and Canada. Their position now is bolstered by PCCI's failure to abide by the
January 30 Decision in the lead-up to the verdict in the Iranian criminal
proceedings and their contention that the Minutes of Settlement have been
vitiated and should not be enforced (discussed in more detail later in this
endorsement).
[66]         
In terms of the Set-Aside Motion, I have
determined that this is one of those extraordinary cases in which the
Implementation Orders should be set aside under r. 59.06 to avoid a serious
injustice of the Ebrahimi Parties having lost the last chance for PCCI re-affirm
their support for the implementation of the Minutes of Settlement (after all
that had transpired) and to re-affirm their request for the dismissal of the
Iranian criminal proceedings against the Ebrahimi Parties before the verdict
was rendered (see Geliedan v. Rawdah, 2020 ONCA 339, at para 8; and Sagaz,
at para 61).
[67]         
This court cannot predict what the Iranian court
would have done if that support had been provided.  Although the verdict in the
criminal proceedings distinguishes between what the Applicants were seeking and
what the court was concerned with as a matter of public policy, the verdict
(including not only criminal penalties and an order for incarceration but also
restitution to be made to the Applicants) was predicated upon the Minutes of
Settlement not having been fulfilled and transfers of assets not having been
made pending challenges to the Minutes of Settlement that had been advanced by
the Ebrahimi Parties prior to the January 30 Decision.
[68]         
Having determined that
the last Implementation Order should be set aside, it follows that the two
prior Consent Implementation Orders should also be set aside. The July 15, 2022 order of Dietrich J. on the First Implementation
Motion that was upheld by the Court of Appeal simply dismissed the motion by
the Ebrahimi Parties for an order based on the court's interpretation of the
Minutes of Settlement. That interpretation is not being set aside.
[69]         
However, for the reasons detailed in the next
section of this endorsement, I have also determined that the Minutes of
Settlement are no longer capable of performance and have been superseded by the
verdict in Iran. Accordingly, they have been vitiated and this cycle of alleged
non-performance by both sides is at an end.
[70]         
The Ebrahimi Parties first argued that a fraud
was committed by PCCI and the Minutes of Settlement should be declared to be
void because PCCI knowingly or recklessly misrepresented to the court that they
were complying with the Minutes of Settlement at the Second and Third
Implementation Motions and failed to disclose that they had filed the February
2023 Memo in the Iranian criminal proceedings requesting a verdict against the
Ebrahimi Parties. The court denied them leave to tender the February 2023 Memo
as Fresh Evidence. Even if leave had been granted for it to be filed, the
content and timing of the February 2023 Memo and its alignment, or
misalignment, with PCCI's obligations under the Minutes of Settlement have been
found not to amount to fraud in the circumstances of this case.
[71]         
The Respondents further contend that PCCI
committed their final, irreversible act of repudiation, which amounts to a
fundamental breach of the Minutes of Settlement, when they filed the February
2024 Memo. Several days later, the Iranian court issued a judgment finding the
Ebrahimi Parties guilty of criminal offences in Iran and awarding PCCI over USD
$71 million in restitution.
[72]         
In the previous section of this endorsement, it
was determined that PCCI failed to fulfill its obligation under the Minutes of
Settlement to provide a further letter to the Iranian prosecutor and court, as
directed by the court's January 30 Decision, and acted in a manner contrary to
those obligations by instead filing the February 2024 Memo in the Iranian
criminal proceedings. In these circumstances, the court must decide whether
that act:
[73]         
It is open to the court to find the Minutes of
Settlement, which are a contract, to be null and void on the basis of the
Applicants' fundamental breach in having filed the February 2024 Memo after the
January 30 Decision, seeking a verdict of fraud and an order of restitution in
the Iranian criminal proceedings that was inconsistent with the quid pro quo
for the Enforcement Order that it had sought and been granted in the January 30
Decision: see Suddaby v. 864226 Ontario
Inc., 2003 CanLII 43000 (ON SC), at para. 66.
[74]         
When PCCI brought its Second Implementation
Motion (that it was largely successful on in the January 30 Decision), it
affirmed the Minutes of Settlement. When PCCI asked the Iranian court to find
the Ebrahimi Parties guilty and to order them to pay restitution, it acted in a
manner that was contrary to its obligations under the Minutes of Settlement,
which required PCCI to discontinue all monetary claims they were making in the
International Proceedings and make good faith efforts to assist the Ebrahimi
Parties with the dismissal of the International Proceedings, including the
Iranian criminal proceeding. PCCI cannot both affirm and disaffirm their
contractual obligations under the Minutes of Settlement, to suit the particular
position they wish to assert in a given proceeding: see Rothwell Corp. v.
Amstel Brewery Canada Ltd., 1991 CanLII 7296 (ON SC).
[75]         
Faced with the prospect of now having to rely
solely on the verdict in the Iranian criminal proceedings, PCCI says they would
rather maintain the ability to enforce the Minutes of Settlement through the Implementation
Orders in Ontario then having to commence proceedings in multiple jurisdictions
to enforce a verdict rendered by the Iranian court.
[76]         
To avoid the possibility of double recovery, during
the hearing of these motions PCCI offered to provide the following undertaking:
[77]         
The Ebrahimi Parties are not satisfied with this
undertaking. First because they cannot control what happens in Germany, where
funds have been paid into court and there is an ongoing money laundering
investigation and no guarantee that those funds will be released. Second
because there is a legislative restriction in Ontario that prevents the
transfer of the Thornhill house to PCCI (foreign nationals) and the work-around
of a court supervised sale (previously approved in the January 30 Decision) is
not likely to result in a transfer within the specified two-month timeframe. Third,
they have concerns about whether the undertaking that PCCI proposes would be
enforceable outside of Canada.
[78]         
I agree that the undertaking offered by PCCI is
not sufficient to address the concerns that are created by the verdict in Iran.
It is not even consistent with the release language in the Minutes of
Settlement because the Minutes of Settlement require that all claims be
released upon payment of all funds and transfer of all assets specifically
provided for therein, whereas this undertaking would not stop PCCI from
collecting more under the verdict in the Iranian proceedings if the remaining
assets to be transferred under the Minutes of Settlement have not all been
transferred within two months.
[79]         
I find the Minutes of Settlement were vitiated
by the filing of the February 2024 Memo in the Iranian criminal proceedings and
the verdict rendered thereafter. The Minutes of Settlement are no longer
capable of performance and have been superseded by the verdict in Iran.
[80]         
Having disavowed the Minutes of Settlement
through the continued pursuit of the verdict in the criminal proceedings in
Iran, and given that the Ebrahimi Parties are not seeking to enforce or rely
upon the Minutes of Settlement themselves, the time has come for the Minutes of
Settlement to be declared null and void and of no further force and effect.
[81]         
That said, the Settlement need not be unwound. The
Applicants shall give credit against the order for restitution in the Iranian
criminal proceedings for any assets or sums of money that they have received to
date under the Minutes of Settlement.
[82]         
The following relief is granted in favour of the
Ebrahimi Parties on their Set-Aside Motion:
[83]         
The following relief sought on the Set-Aside
Motion is not granted:
[84]         
As long as the Applicants account for what they
have received thus far under the Minutes of Settlement towards any enforcement
of the restitution order made in their favour in Iran, they will not be
required to return the assets and funds they have received under the Minutes of
Settlement.
[85]         
The Fourth Implementation Motion was brought by
PCCI to compel the Respondents to fulfill their obligations under the Minutes
of Settlement, because they:
[86]         
As was noted at the outset of this endorsement,
because the Respondents were successful in their Set Aside Motion in having the
Implementation Orders set aside and because the Applicants were found to have disavowed
the Minutes of Settlement, they cannot continue to rely upon and seek to enforce
them. The Fourth Implementation Motion has been rendered moot by the court's
decision on the Set-Aside Motion.
[87]         
In the circumstances of this case detailed in
the previous sections of this endorsement, it would result of a serious
injustice to allow the Applicants to enforce the Minutes of Settlement now that
they have the benefit of the verdict in the Iranian criminal proceedings
[88]          
PCCI's failure to fully embrace the Minutes of
Settlement and ensure that they remained at all times in compliance with their
obligations thereunder, and their continued pursuit of the verdict in the
Iranian criminal proceedings against the Ebrahimi Parties, disentitles the
Applicants from the continued assistance of this court in upholding and
implementing the Minutes of Settlement.
[89]         
The balance of the relief sought by the
Applicants on their Fourth Implementation Motion is denied and the motion is
dismissed. The only exception to this is the order requiring the Respondents to
direct their counsel to release the funds they placed in trust with their counsel
on May 24, 2024 on account of the unsatisfied prior costs awards. This is
addressed fully in the costs reconciliation in the next section of this
endorsement.
[90]         
Both sides seek substantial indemnity costs of
both motions from the other on the basis of the others' conduct and the nature
of the allegations. Each side uploaded a Costs Outline. The total costs of the
Applicants are $136,604.62, comprised of fees of $127,787.50, estimated
lawyer's fee for appearance of $5,400 and disbursements (inclusive of taxes) of
$3,417.12. The total costs of the Respondents are $79,372.94 (inclusive of all
applicable taxes and disbursements of $1,339).
[91]         
The Ebrahimi Parties asked the court to consider
reducing costs, if awarded in favour of the Applicants, on the basis that the
Applicants costs were significantly higher due to both significantly higher
hourly rates for the lead counsel and more total hours spent on the motions by
the Applicants' counsel. Given the outcome of these motions, there will be no
award of costs in favour of the Applicants. The amount the Applicants claimed
does, however, provide some guidance to the court as to the reasonableness and
proportionality of the lower quantum of costs claimed by the Respondents. The
issues on these motions were important to both sides, and they were complicated
by the long procedural history.
[92]         
Since the Respondents' Set-Aside Motion was for
the most part successful and the Applicants' Fourth Enforcement Motion was for
the most part not successful, the Respondents are the overall successful
parties and entitled to their costs of these motions. Costs are discretionary.
[93]         
There is no justification for an award of
substantial indemnity costs in favour of the Respondents. No finding of fraud
was made against the Applicants. The Respondents' claimed partial indemnity
fees, including HST, totalling $51,256.80, plus
disbursements of $1,339, bringing their total partial
indemnity costs to $52,595.80.
[94]         
In the exercise of my discretion under s.
131 of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43,
and having regard to the relevant factors under r. 57,
I am awarding the Respondents their partial indemnity costs of these motions
fixed in the all-inclusive amount of $52,595.80.
[95]         
The sum of $154,678.90
is being held in trust by counsel for the Respondents. This represents the
costs of the Second and Third Implementation Motions awarded in favour of PCCI
in the January 30 Decision in the amount of $25,000,
which has now been set aside, and the costs awards of Dietrich J. and the Court
of Appeal in favour of PCCI in the aggregate all-inclusive amount of $129,678.90 which have not been set aside.
[96]         
The costs now payable by PCCI to the Respondents
of $52,595.80 and the $25,000
in costs awarded to PCCI and now set aside should be deducted from the trust
funds. The sum of $77,083.10 shall be paid from the
cost monies held in trust by counsel for the Respondents to counsel for PCCI in
trust for PCCI. This represents the net costs that the Applicants are entitled
to from the various motions relating to the interpretation and enforcement of
the Minutes of Settlement that have not been set aside. If my math or
assumptions are incorrect in terms of how this net costs amount has been
calculated the parties may request a case conference for further directions
about this.
[97]         
This endorsement and the orders and directions
contained in it shall have the immediate effect of a court order without the
necessity of a formal order being taken out. Any party may draft and present an
order for signing, issuance and entry by the court by following the procedure
under the rules for settling, issuing and entering orders.