1.                 
A
Notice of Motion was filed in this 2017 proceeding which appears to seek to set
aside a declaration of vexatious litigant resulting from the Reasons for
Decision of Corthorn J. dated November 16, 2017. The
Notice of Motion also seeks a number of declarations by the court which relate
in part to the 2017 decision of Corthorn J.
2.                 
Prior to the hearing of this matter, the
moving party, Mr. Raymond Carby-Samuels, filed a 251-page affidavit where he
now seeks a motion to set aside the vexatious litigant ruling in order to apply
for relief from the Ottawa Small Claims Court to pursue three claims for
defamation and other relief. Some of the other relief claimed seeks “leave from
the Ottawa Small Claims Court to pursue punitive and aggravated damages against
the Defendant in the Ontario Civil Court Division”. This statement is
incomprehensible. The affidavit also includes what appears to be three draft Statements
of Claim.
3.                 
I
am not aware of any jurisdiction for me to set aside the Corthorn J. decision
based on the materials filed for the following reasons:
4.                 
Accordingly, the request to set aside the
decision of Corthorn J. is denied.
5.                 
It should be noted that s. 140 of the Courts
of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, (“CJA"), sets out the following which is relevant to the relief requested:
6.                 
While there is not an abundance of case
law dealing with s. 140(4), the jurisprudence set out in Falardeau v. Owen
Sound Police Services Board, 2021 ONSC 6180, is instructive at many levels:
7.                 
Furthermore, in Peoples Trust Company
v. Atas, 2020 ONSC 3471, the court commented on the application to rescind
a finding of vexatious litigant and confirmed that it was not their purpose to
review the correctness of the original order. A motion to rescind must establish
that the individual should once again be granted unfettered access to the
courts. The type of evidence that may be of assistance to the application judge
could be:
8.                 
In this case, Mr. Carby-Samuels has not
filed any evidence to support his draft claims against Tia Kausalya Sudhakar, the
Public Service Alliance of Canada and Nora Loreto. The evidence to support
those claims must be included in an affidavit. For example, he alleges that the
Public Service Alliance of Canada is indirectly operating a website where he
was defamed. The evidence supporting such allegation must be provided.
9.                 
His material demonstrates that he seeking
to re-litigate the declaration of vexatious litigant despite the Court of
Appeal’s dismissal of his appeal.
10.             
He has not filed evidence to satisfy the
court on the relevant criteria. Mr. Carby-Samuel’s behaviour during the virtual
motion was unhinged as set out below. This raises concerns about his ability to
have unfettered access to the courts. Also, there is no evidence that notice
was given to the Attorney General.
11.             
In addition, the rules of pleadings
require that a Statement of Claim be a concise statement of facts that are
relied upon to prove the claim. Parties are not to plead evidence and they are
not to plead the caselaw that they rely upon. In the present case, the three draft
statements of claim must be revised in order to remove the case law except
general reference to the state of law and focus on simply setting out a concise
statement of the facts relied upon to allow a reasonable opportunity to the
defendants to properly respond. Here, the three statements of claim cannot
properly be responded to as they include a significant amount of evidence and
case law which must be revised in order for the court to make a proper
assessment on the reasonable grounds for the proceedings.
12.             
Accordingly, the request for leave is
refused. If Mr. Carby-Samuels wants to proceed under ss. 140(3) and 140(4), he
is directed to file a proper Notice of Application setting out the relief he
seeks and he needs to file an affidavit which contains the evidence which
supports his requests along with the evidence relating to the three statements
of claim he seeks to issue.
13.             
During the course of this hearing, it was
apparent to Mr. Carby-Samuels that I was not in agreement with the form and
content of his motion. He made allegations that Justice Doyle was in agreement
with the documents that he filed. I am not aware of an endorsement by Justice
Doyle and I have no transcript of what she is purported to have said. Mr.
Carby-Samuels sought an adjournment for the matter to proceed before another
judge who would see the case differently than I do. That is not a proper ground
for an adjournment, and I refused his request for an adjournment.
14.             
Mr. Carby-Samuels then accused me of
racial discrimination and stated that he wanted to bring a motion to require
that I recuse myself. Mr. Carby-Samuels is a black man. He requested an adjournment
to bring a motion for my recusal. I denied that request. There are no issues in
this case related to Mr. Carby-Samuels’ race. This motion is decided solely on
the basis of a lack of jurisdiction to set aside and the failure by Mr.
Carby-Samuels to follow the requirements of s. 140 of the CJA and the
applicable jurisprudence. Mr. Carby-Samuels is not prejudiced by this decision
as he will be able to bring his application once he complies with the
applicable law.
15.             
The motion is dismissed, without prejudice
to Mr. Carby-Samuels being able to bring the matter back as an application in
accordance with s. 140 of the CJA and the rules relating to pleadings.