[1]              
The defendants seek an order dismissing this
2018 action for delay.  Despite the passage of almost six years since the
statement of claim was issued, the plaintiff has not delivered his affidavit of
documents and, consequently, the action has stalled.
[2]              
The defendants rely on rules 3.04(4), 24.01(1) and
60.12(b), in support of their motion.
[3]              
Since pleadings closed in May 2021, the
defendants have made multiple efforts to obtain the plaintiff’s affidavit of
documents and to schedule examinations for discovery.  A review of the record demonstrates
that the defendants have been scrupulously fair with the plaintiff, who is self
represented, and provided him with many opportunities and reminders of his
obligation to produce his affidavit of documents.
[4]              
The defendants wrote to the plaintiff in July, August,
and November 2021 to request his affidavit of documents and his availability
for examinations for discovery. He did not respond to any of those emails until
December 2021 when he advised that he did intend to continue with his claim,
but stated “my clients are my priority right now”.  He indicated that he could
not address the issues raised until after the New Year.  The action was three
years old at that stage.
[5]              
When the defendants did not hear back from the
plaintiff in the New Year, they wrote him in February, March and May 2022
asking whether he intended to proceed with his action. When there was no
response to those emails or letters, the defendants wrote to the plaintiff in
July 2022 and requested a response within 30 days, failing which they advised
him that they intended to bring a motion.  It was not until August that the
plaintiff responded and then only to advise that he was unable to attend to the
matter due to the accident in question and other factors.
[6]              
As the action was not progressing, the
defendants proceeded in November 2022 to book a motion to dismiss the action
for delay, which they scheduled for 1 September 2023. They served the plaintiff
with the notice of motion in November 2022 so he had nine months’ notice that
the defendants would be seeking an order dismissing his action for delay if he
continued to let it languish.
[7]              
In a further attempt to obtain an affidavit of
documents and avoid a motion, the defendants wrote to the plaintiff in January
2023 advising that they would request a case conference and seek a proposed
timetable. The plaintiff responded in February 2023 that he would “not be in a
position to meet any timelines in March or April “but may be able to deal with
this litigation by May 2023”. At that point pleadings would have been closed
for two years.
[8]              
In response, the defendants wrote the plaintiff
in late February 2023 advising him “if we can agree on a date for the
examinations for discovery, the motion can be avoided altogether and your case
can proceed in the normal course.”  After some additional follow up emails, the
plaintiff agreed to a case conference.  In August 2023 the defendants sent the
plaintiff a proposed timetable.
[9]              
The case conference took place in August 2023
and resulted in an order of Associate Justice McAfee. The order required the
parties to deliver a sworn or affirmed affidavit of documents by 31 October
2023 and to complete examinations for discovery by 29 March 2024. The plaintiff
was also required to set the action down for trial by 13 December 2024.  In
exchange, the defendants withdrew their motion to dismiss the plaintiff’s
action for delay. It is of note that this order was as a result of the
defendants’ efforts to move the action forward and that the plaintiff consented
to it.
[10]          
Relying on the court order, the defendants
scheduled discoveries in September 2023 for November 10, 14, 21 and 24, 2023.
This was to accommodate the plaintiff’s request that the discoveries take place
on non-consecutive days and for half days only. When the defendants did not
receive the plaintiff’s affidavit of documents by the 31 October 2023 deadline,
they wrote to him reminding him of the court order and indicating that they
would be required to cancel the scheduled examinations for discovery without
the affidavit and would reinstate their motion to dismiss for delay.
[11]          
In November 2023, when the defendants sought the
plaintiff's availability for a motion, he asked them to postpone bringing any
motion and indicated that he would organize his materials over the holidays and
provide the defendants with his list in the New Year.
[12]          
The affidavit of documents was not forthcoming, but
the plaintiff did send an email on 10 January 2024 indicating that he would
deliver it “as soon as possible.”  Some days later, the defendants reached out
to the plaintiff to obtain his availability for this motion. The plaintiff
chose his preferred date of 6 December 2024 and the defendants booked that date
eleven months in advance.
[13]          
Despite having booked the motion months earlier,
in August 2024, counsel for the defendants advised the plaintiff that if he
served his affidavit of documents by 7 October 2024, she would speak to her
clients about whether the December motion to dismiss for delay was necessary.
The plaintiff did not respond.  The defendants followed up on August 27 and
September 17, 2024.
[14]          
The plaintiff emailed on 23 September 2024,
advising that he would respond later that week. He then sent a further email on
1 October 2024 which included his request that the defendants simply withdraw
their motion. As of the date of the motion, 6 December 2024, the plaintiff had
not delivered an affidavit of documents.
[15]          
The plaintiff did not serve, file or upload any
responding materials for this motion. He advised at the start of the hearing
that he had sent defendants’ counsel multiple emails at approximately 4:00 or 5:00
a.m. that morning.   He asked that he be permitted to send the multiple emails
to me for my consideration before I released my decision.
[16]          
I refused his request for two reasons.  First,
it would have been unfair to the defendants, who had not any time to review the
emails, for me to rely on them.  Second, the plaintiff had known about this
motion for eleven months.  It was unfair to the defendants and to the court to
accept such late materials or be asked to adjourn a motion that had been booked
on consent almost a year ago and had been in the works for two years.
[17]          
The plaintiff offered two explanations for his
failure to provide an affidavit of documents since 2021.  First, he advised
that he has been busy with other important things.  Second, he took the
position that he could not swear the oath required in the affidavit of
documents that he had produced all his documents when he knew he had other
documents that he had not had time to review and assemble.
[18]          
While I accept that the plaintiff has been busy,
the defendants cannot be prejudiced by this amount of delay because the
plaintiff has prioritized other matters. He indicated that he has a busy
immigration consulting practice and his clients take priority. While that is
laudable, it cannot excuse his failure to comply with his obligations to the
court.
[19]          
He also indicated that he had been occupied with
two other litigation matters. The first was litigation brought by his
commercial landlord and the second was litigation by his residential landlord.
[20]          
He requested that, rather than dismissing his
action, I order a peremptory timetable requiring him to serve an affidavit of
documents by the end of February 2025. The difficulty I have with that request
is I have no confidence that the plaintiff would obey my order any more than he
did the order of McAfee, A.J. in August 2023.
[21]          
Rule 60.12(b) provides the court with authority
to dismiss an action in circumstances, as here, where a party has failed to
comply with an interlocutory order.  Rule 3.04(4) provides that same relief
specifically with respect to a party’s failure to comply with a timetable
order.
[22]          
Rule 24.01 permits a defendant to move to have
an action dismissed for delay where the plaintiff has not set it down for trial
within six months after the close of pleadings.
[23]          
While preferring to have matters heard on their
merits, the court must also be mindful of upholding its own orders and ensuring
that they are not disregarded or take a back seat to a party’s subjective more
pressing interests. (see Leblon Carpentry v. QH Renovation &
Construction Corp. 2023 ONSC 3182).
[24]          
While the plaintiff acknowledges that the delay
was unfortunate, I find it was also intentional. The plaintiff determined to
focus his time and energy on other matters, to the detriment of this action for
at least the last 3 ½ years.  While the plaintiff may not view his actions as
inappropriate or disrespectful, his multi-year delay in serving his affidavit
of documents has prevented the defendants from examining him for discovery on
an accident that took place more than eight years ago.
[25]          
I echo the comments of my colleague Associate
Justice Robinson in 1833761 Ontario Inc. v. 2253659 Ontario Inc., 2024
ONSC 5336, where he held at paragraph 4:
[26]          
While the plaintiff in this case, like Mr. Yehya,
above, argues that his personal circumstances prevented him from moving this
action forward, I note that those circumstances did not impact his ability to
retain counsel initially, to, as a self-represented defendant, successfully
bring a motion against his commercial landlord to set aside a default judgment
against him or to manage his immigration consulting practice.
[27]          
I am satisfied that the delay gives rise to a
risk that a fair trial of these issues will not be possible. The plaintiff
himself has noted that the defendants have a very different view of how the motor
vehicle accident occurred. Given the accident took place in 2016, memories of
the participants and witnesses are critical and they have not even been tested
at examinations for discovery.  The court in Deutsch Postbank AG v Kosmayer
2019 ONSC 6997 noted in that case that the significant passage of time since
the events in question would impact the witnesses’ ability to offer reliable
evidence.  It also held at paragraph 38 that “because there have not yet been any
examinations for discovery, these witnesses cannot even rely on the discovery transcripts
to refresh their memories.  Similarly, this Court would be deprived of the
benefit of such evidence.”
[28]          
In Kosmayer, pleadings had been closed
for eight years by the time the motion to dismiss was heard.  There had been no
examinations for discovery and no meaningful steps to advance the ligation,
other than the exchange of affidavits of documents, which has not occurred in
the case before me.  The court dismissed the action, recognizing that
inordinate delay results in prejudice.
[29]          
The plaintiff has not rebutted the presumption
of prejudice noted in Langenecker v Sauvé, 2011 ONCA 803 as follows:
[30]          
The plaintiff has not attested that he has
preserved all relevant documents, that he has spoken to the witnesses he needs
or that he can now proceed expeditiously with this action.
[31]          
The delay in this case is simply too extensive
to permit a fair trial which, at this stage, which would take place at least
eleven years after the accident.
[32]          
In this case, all attempts to move the action
forward have been initiated by the defendants.  More than sixteen months after agreeing
to provide his affidavit of documents, the plaintiff remains in default of that
consent order, an order to which the defendants agreed in lieu of their first
position that the action should have been dismissed for delay back in 2023.
[33]          
There has been inordinate delay in moving this
action forward.  There is no reasonable explanation proffered that would excuse
the delay.  As a result of the delay, I find there is a substantial risk that a
fair trial will not possible.  Given the competing versions of how the accident
occurred, and the lack of confirmation that the plaintiff has kept all relevant
documents, I accept the defendants’ argument that their ability to defend the
action has been compromised due to the inordinate and inexcusable passage of
time.
[34]          
Further, the plaintiff is in breach of a court
order, without reasonable explanation, warranting the dismissal of his action
under rules 3.04(4) and 60.12(b).  For all the reasons set out above, the
defendants’ motion is granted.
[35]          
The defendants seek a modest all-inclusive amount
of $3,238.13 as their partial indemnity costs of this motion.  They have not
sought costs of the steps they took along the way to attempt to move this
action forward.  I find the costs sought to be reasonable in all the circumstances
and an amount that the plaintiff should have expected to pay in the event the
defendants were successful.
[36]          
Order to go dismissing this action with costs
fixed in the all inclusive amount of $3,238.13 on a partial indemnity basis,
per the draft order which I have signed.  The order is effective without
further formality.