[1]              
The Applicant is charged with numerous sexual
crimes relating to five child complainants. Some of the offences charged are
enumerated in section 278.2(1) of the Criminal Code. The Applicant seeks
to obtain the police notes and statement of the psychotherapist of one of the
complainants. He seeks directions on whether the police notes and the statement
are Stinchcombe disclosure. The Crown argues that the Applicant must
seek the notes pursuant to the Mills regime in s. 278.2 to 278.92 of the
Criminal Code.
[2]              
One of the complainants, C.D., received the
services of a psychotherapist, Michelle Cru. In September 2023, Detective
Constable M. Iordache of the Ontario Provincial Police spoke to Ms. Cru and
obtained a statement. The statement addresses the content of C.D.’s therapy
sessions. While Ms. Cru read portions of C.D.’s therapy records verbatim to the
detective, the police did not obtain a copy of the therapy records as part of
the investigation.
[3]              
For the reasons that follow, I find that the
records regime contained in ss. 278.2 to 278.91 of the Criminal Code
governs the disclosure of the investigative materials relating to Ms. Cru.
[4]              
In September 2020, the Ontario Provincial Police
investigated concerns raised by C.D.’s parents regarding the conduct of Mr. Woloschuk.
The parents alleged that the Applicant frequently texted their daughters and
spent time with C.D., who was 10 years old.  The police warned the Applicant
about his conduct but did not lay charges at that time.
[5]              
Police interviewed C.D. in August 2023. She
disclosed that the Applicant touched her sexually when she was between 8 and 11
years of age.
[6]              
On August 28, 2023, C.D. and her mother signed a
general “Authorization for Release of Medical Information”. The document
authorized Ms. Cru to provide Detective Constable Iordache with access to C.D.’s
health/hospital records for the purpose of review and examination. Copies were
to be provided if requested. The authorization was confined to the records in
the psychotherapist’s file concerning C.D. and her “sexual victimization.” The
authorization specified that the information was to be used by the police for
investigating criminal allegations of sexual assault, sexual interference,
invitation to sexual touching and luring a child.
[7]              
C.D. and her mother initialled the following
statements on the form:
[8]              
The authorization was valid for 90 days from the
date of the signature. C.D. was 14 years old when she initialled the
authorization with her mother. The record before me neither discloses what was
said to C.D. or her mother before signing the authorization nor whether they
spoke to legal counsel before signing the document.
[9]              
The police interviewed Ms. Cru on September 28,
2023. The Supplementary Occurrence Report reflects the following information:
[10]          
The Crown received Ms. Cru's statement to the
police on January 16, 2024. Two days later, the Crown advised the defence that
it possessed Ms. Cru’s statement and considered it third party disclosure.
[11]          
The defence has repeatedly requested disclosure
of this statement as Stinchcombe disclosure.
[12]          
Maryse Renaud was subsequently appointed as
counsel for C.D. She advised the parties that C.D. opposes the disclosure of
Ms. Cru’s statement.
[13]          
On September 24, 2024, the Crown preferred a
direct indictment against the Applicant.
[14]          
This motion for directions raises one issue:
[15]          
The defence argues that Ms. Cru’s statement is
explicitly excluded by s. 278.1 of the Criminal Code because that
section exempts from protection “records made by persons responsible for the
investigation or prosecution of the offence.” They submit that Ms. Cru’s
statement falls within that exception.
[16]          
The defence relies on the discussion regarding
the purpose of this exemption in R. v. Quesnelle 2014 SCC 46, at paras
55-56:
[17]          
Finally, the defence argues that the statement
is Stinchcombe disclosure and should be available to the Applicant to
establish the likely relevance of the therapy records under the Mills
regime.
[18]          
The Crown maintains that private information
that the Mills regime would otherwise protect does not lose its
statutory protection simply because it is discussed or replicated in police
investigative materials. The Crown argues that I must focus on whether the
document contains private information of a complainant or witness and not how
or when it came into the possession of the police. The Crown submits that
sections 278.1 to 278.91 apply, and Crown/police possession cannot transform
records that meet the section 278.1 definition of “record” into Stinchcombe
disclosure.
[19]          
Both parties agree that I have jurisdiction to
hear this motion for directions—it flows from a trial judge’s trial management
power.
[20]          
In R. v. J. J., 2022 SCC 28, at paras
103-104, the Supreme Court recognized the need for judicial guidance concerning
record applications:
[21]          
In this case, at the motion's commencement, I
inquired whether the complainant was participating. The Crown advised me that
the complainant had declined to participate but that her position was contained
in an email from her counsel in the material before me. C.D.’s position is that
Ms. Cru’s statement to the police about the contents of her psychotherapy
records is a “record” under s. 278.1 of the Code.
[22]          
The legislative background and purpose of the Mills
regime inform my analysis.
[23]          
In R. v. Stinchcombe, 1991 CanLII 45 (SCC), [1991] 3 S.C.R.
326, the Supreme Court held that section 7 of the Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedoms requires the Crown to disclose to an accused all documents
that are not clearly irrelevant. Subsequently, frequent requests were made for
“third-party records” or records that were not in the possession of the Crown
or the police. This led the Court to develop a new regime to address defence
requests for third-party records: see R. v. O’Connor, 1995 CanLII 51 (SCC), [1995] 4 S.C.R.
411. O’Connor, in turn, paved the way for the enactment of Bill C-46.
The amendments introduced in Bill C-46 established the codified regime
concerning third-party records in sections 278.1 to 278.91 in relation to cases
involving enumerated sexual offences.
[24]          
At its essential core, Parliament intended the
new legislation to afford greater protection for the privacy rights of
complainants. In my view, to give effect to Parliament’s intention, my analysis
must focus on the substance of the privacy interest over the form of the
information.
[25]          
The preamble to Bill C-46 cited the following
principles and concerns as underlying the disclosure regime enacted by it:
[26]          
In R. v. Mills, 1999 CanLII 637 (SCC), [1999] 3 S.C.R. 668, the
Supreme Court found that the provisions provided a balanced approach that gives
appropriate weight to the competing rights and interests at stake, such as:
[27]          
The Supreme Court recognized that the right to
make a full answer and defence is a principle of fundamental justice. However,
the Court also acknowledged that the principles of fundamental justice embrace
more than the rights of the accused—concerns about equality and privacy inform
the analysis and application of the right to full answer and defence.  The
Applicant's right to make a full answer and defence is not absolute. The
principles of fundamental justice do not entitle "the most favourable
procedures that could possibly be imagined"—it "embraces more than the
rights of the accused": Mills at paras 70-73.
[28]          
A “record” is defined as any form of record
relating to the complainant in which they have a reasonable expectation of
privacy. The section enumerates records that fall within the definition, such
as “medical, psychiatric, therapeutic, counselling, education, employment,
child welfare, adoption and social services records, personal journals and
diaries and records containing personal information which is protected by any
other Act of Parliament or provincial legislature.”
[29]          
Concerning these records, absent evidence to the
contrary, it must be presumed that a reasonable expectation of privacy in the
record exists and the Mills production regime governs: R. v. Clifford
(2002), 2002 CanLII 14471 (ON CA), 58 OR (3d) 257, at para 49. C.D.’s counselling records fall into this
category because they are an enumerated category of record in section 278.1. Even
were they not, however, applying the analytical framework for assessing a
reasonable expectation of privacy articulated in J.J., at paras 46-60, I
find that C.D. enjoys a reasonable expectation of privacy in her psychotherapy
records.
[30]          
The Applicant submits that there is an important
distinction between the physical therapeutic records from Ms. Cru in the
possession of the police and the interview of Ms. Cru created by the police. The
Mills regime covers the former, and Stinchcombe governs the
latter. The defence submits that they are entitled to rely on the statement in
support of their application to obtain the records.
[31]          
Respectfully, I disagree with the Applicant's
position. C.D. has a clear expectation of privacy in her counselling records. In
my view, her expectation of privacy is not diminished or extinguished by the
fact that the information in the counselling records is now in the possession
of the police and reduced to a witness statement. I cannot interpret the Mills
regime as governing private information contained in a complainant’s physical
psychotherapy records but not identical information found in a witness
statement that emanated directly from the same psychotherapy records.
[32]          
Converting excerpts of counselling information
from records in the possession of psychotherapist Ms. Cru into a witness
statement does not alter the fundamental nature of the information itself and
its attendant significant privacy interest. The form of the records is not
determinative of the issue—the reasonable expectation of privacy persists. In
my view, the production of Ms. Cru’s statement is governed by the Mills
regime.
[33]          
Section 278.1 exempts records “made by persons
responsible for the investigation or prosecution of the offence.” In this case,
while the police created the statement, the information and recollections
recorded in it were created or made by a psychotherapist, not an investigator,
as part of the investigation. Considering this distinction, the production of
the notes and the statement is governed by the Mills regime.
[34]          
In R. v. G.(W.G.), 2002 CarswellOnt 1289
(C.A.), the Court found that records from a sexual assault centre were covered
by section 278.1 in circumstances where the police had reviewed the records
with the victim’s permission. The police would have presumably taken notes or written
a report of their review of the records. While the decision in G.(W. G.)
related to records and not police notes, reports or statements, the Court
concluded that “the fact that the police had reviewed the records with the
complainant’s authorization had no bearing on her expectation of privacy as it
related to the appellant: see R. v. Mills…Counsel for the appellant
conceded that the complainant’s expectation of privacy in the records remained
a live issue for determination on the application”. Here, the police conducting
interviews with the complainant’s psychotherapist cannot extinguish the
complainant’s reasonable expectation of privacy in the contents of those
records—whether they are contained in the physical records or the police-obtained
statement.
[35]          
In my view, the Authorization signed by C.D. and
her mother does not impact the analysis of whether the Mills regime or Stinchcombe
obligation governs. It has no impact on the interpretation and application of
s. 278.1 of the Code.
[36]          
The Applicant also relies on Quesnelle at
para 55-56 for the proposition that records created in the investigation of the
offence are presumptively relevant and that there “is no need to consider such
records under the second step of Mills because the records will always be
produced anyway—the exemption is eminently logical.”
[37]          
This must be read in the context of paragraph
55, which states, “[t]he definition of “record” in s. 278.1 serves a
gatekeeping function within the regime. The reasonable expectation of privacy
test sweeps in records that merit the protection afforded by the Mills
regime. The exemption further contributes to the gatekeeping role of the
section by bypassing the balancing process for records that Parliament recognized
should always be produced.” Normatively, the sensitive and private information
contained in the psychotherapy records merits the protection of the Mills
regime despite the exemption for records “made by persons responsible for the
investigation or prosecution of the offence.” In the circumstances of this
case, the court’s gatekeeping function is fulfilled by finding that the Mills
regime applies regardless of the format of the private information.
[38]          
Finally, in J.J., the Supreme Court
stated that “[o]nly if the judge is clearly satisfied that the proposed
evidence does not constitute a "record" should they direct that the
accused need not bring an application.” In light of my preceding analysis, I am
not clearly satisfied that the proposed evidence does not constitute a “record.”
[39]          
The police interview of Ms. Cru, dated September
28, 2023, constitutes a “record” within the meaning of s. 278.1 of the Criminal
Code. As such, the Applicant must seek its production pursuant to the Mills
regime.