1.                 
The Applicants,
Melissa Taurasi and Nelda Taurasi seek:
2.                 
Defined terms
in this Endorsement have the meaning given to them in the Application materials
unless otherwise stated. I refer to the individual Applicants by their
respective first names where appropriate given the commonality of surname.
3.                 
The
Applicants Melissa Taurasi and Nelda Taurasi
are the spouses of Carlo Taurasi and Dino Taurasi respectively.
4.                 
Carlo
and Dino are brothers, founders, Co-Presidents and 90% owners of StateView Homes.
Carlo is also the Chief Executive Officer. StateView Homes is the operating
name of a group of companies based in Woodbridge, Ontario owned and controlled
by the Taurasi family, and which builds residential homes.
5.                 
Melissa
is also the Senior Vice President, Business Operations of StateView and is
Chair, President and Director of Live Inspired, the charitable arm of
StateView.
6.                 
Nelda
is the Director and Treasurer of Live
Inspired.
7.                 
The
Toronto-Dominion Bank registered a global charge (the “TD Charge”) in the amount
of $37,134,091.23 on title to 30 different properties owned by StateView,
Carlo, Dino and their family members, including four properties co-owned by
Melissa and Nelda (the “Melissa and Nelda Properties”):
8.                 
The TD Charge
was a term of a settlement agreement entered into among TD, Carlo, Dino and
StateView together with its subsidiary corporate entities (the “Settlement
Agreement”).
9.                 
The TD Charge
came about after TD discovered a cheque kiting fraud against the Bank resulting
in unauthorized overdraft losses exceeding $37 million. The fraud was
perpetrated by StateView Homes. TD had not provided any material credit
facilities to StateView, which spread its banking across multiple financial
institutions.
10.             
Upon
discovering the fraud, TD set about to seek urgent relief from this Court,
including a Mareva injunction and Norwich orders. As those
interim and interlocutory motions were being prepared, TD was approached by
counsel for StateView and the Taurasis, who requested that TD agree to resolve
and settle the motions on the basis of a settlement.
11.             
The settlement
terms agreed to effectively provided that StateView would pay off the
unauthorized overdraft of approximately $37 million over time, and TD would be
protected in the interim by security in the form of mortgages. These terms were
reflected in the Settlement Agreement referred to above. The hope and
expectation was that TD would be repaid while allowing StateView to continue as
a going concern.
12.             
Neither Melissa
nor Nelda was a signatory to the Settlement Agreement. However, they consented
to the registration of the TD Charge as was required since they were co-owners of
the properties against title to which the TD Charge was registered. To that
end, they signed an Acknowledgement and Direction to facilitate registration of
the TD Charge as contemplated by the Settlement Agreement. The Taurasis made
the first payment due under the Settlement Agreement, with Melissa contributing
$2,275,000 of her own funds to do so.
13.             
Unfortunately,
the Settlement Agreement did not achieve the desired outcome, and was never
fully performed, since StateView was placed into receivership a few weeks after
the Settlement Agreement had been entered into. The Taurasis defaulted on all
payment obligations due under the Settlement Agreement after the first payment
referred to above.
14.             
Melissa and
Nelda now bring this Application for a declaration that the TD Charge is of no
further force or effect on the basis that they consented to the registration of
the TD Charge under duress and undue influence, for no consideration, and
without the benefit of independent legal advice. While they acknowledge that the
cheque kiting scheme resulted in the loss to TD, their position is that the
scheme was carried out by StateView’s Chief Financial Officer, Daniel Ciccone,
without their knowledge or involvement.
15.             
TD's position
is that at the time it entered into the Settlement Agreement, it believed that
StateView was a successful home builder and that StateView was a victim of the
fraud just like it was. As such, the Settlement Agreement provided a path
forward pursuant to which TD would be paid back over time, it would have security
in the interim, and StateView would continue as a going concern.
16.             
TD’s position
on this motion is that it was only after StateView went into receivership, with
the effect that the Settlement Agreement would not be performed, that Melissa
and Nelda took for the first time the position they now advance on this Application
as they seek to be released from the mortgages. That, despite the fact that they
acknowledged and consented to the mortgages in support of the Settlement Agreement.
17.             
For the reasons
set out below, the Application is dismissed.
18.             
On the
application of an aggrieved person, this Court has wide discretion to make an
order directing that the Register be rectified in such manner as is considered
just: Land Titles Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L.5, ss. 159 and 160.
19.             
The issue on
this Application is whether the Court should exercise that discretion to delete
the TD Charge from title to the Melissa and Nelda Properties[2]
based on the factors advanced by the Applicants, which I address in turn.
20.             
Melissa and
Nelda submit that an evidentiary presumption of undue influence arises wherever
one spouse guarantees the other’s debt and the transaction is disadvantageous to the guaranteeing
spouse. They further submit that whenever a wife offers to stand surety for her
husband’s debts, the bank “is put on inquiry”: Toronto-Dominion Bank v. PMJ
Holdings Limited et al, 2019
ONSC 7297 at paras. 29, 31, quoting with approval from CIBC Mortgage Corp.
v. Rowatt (2002), 2002 CanLII 45110 (ON CA), 61 OR (3d) 737 (Ont. C.A.). They allege undue influence, and that the presumption
arises here. I pause to observe that there is no allegation on their part of
duress; the issue is whether there was undue influence.
21.             
TD submits that
the presumption of undue influence is not automatic and arises only in certain
close relationships based on the nature of the relationship and the nature of
the transaction. To trigger the presumption in a commercial transaction, the
party seeking to rely on it must be able to show that they were truly
disadvantaged by the contract or that the responding party was unduly benefitted
by it. The doctrine of undue influence is not designed to protect people from
their own folly, but rather to save them from being victimized by other people:
Sansalone v. Qiu, 2022 ONSC 286, at paras. 111-113, citing with approval
Geffen
v. Goodman Estate,
1991 CanLII 69 (SCC), [1991] 2 S.C.R. 353, at paras. 23, 26, 39 and 43.
22.             
In my view, no
presumption of undue influence arises here in favour of Melissa or Nelda.
23.             
TD, upon
becoming aware of the significant overdraft in the StateView accounts, wrote to
Carlo, Dino, and Mr. Ciccone on March 20, 2023. Two days later, Carlo replied,
introducing TD to counsel from the law firm RAR Litigation Lawyers (“RAR”). RAR
advised that they would like to resolve the issue as soon as possible and
contain the issue as much as possible.
24.             
On March 24,
2023, TD commenced an action naming the StateView corporations, Carlo, Dino,
Melissa and Nelda as defendants, among others.
25.             
TD named
Melissa and Nelda given both its limited information as to the StateView
entities (TD’s knowledge was limited since TD had not been StateView’s primary
banker) and the flow of funds that appeared to TD to circulate between
StateView and Live Inspired (of which, as noted above, both Melissa and Nelda
were officers and directors). The address for service of each of Melissa and
Nelda in the corporate profile of Live Inspired was the same as the StateView
head office.
26.             
I accept that
there was a sense of urgency to reach an agreement on both sides, albeit for
different but rational reasons. StateView and the Taurasis wanted to resolve
the matter quickly and with minimal disruption to the business and their
reputations. TD, on the other hand, was reeling from the discovery of a massive
fraud and wanted to move quickly to contain and limit losses, and to freeze and
hopefully subsequently recover on whatever assets were available.
27.             
The result was
that both sides, directly and through their respective counsel, were anxious to
move quickly. This was reflected in the clear expression of the desire to move
quickly from RAR, and the efforts of TD to bring an urgent motion for Mareva
and Norwich relief.
28.             
As those
motions were being prepared, RAR contacted counsel for TD on behalf of
StateView and its principals. The relevant evidence on this point comes from
the affidavit of Peter Hanke (“Hanke”), TD’s Manager of Commercial Credit in
the Commercial Banking Group who had been involved in this matter since the
discovery of the fraudulent scheme. Hanke attests that when RAR, on behalf of
StateView, implored TD to not “pull the trigger” on its imminent motions for
injunctive relief, it did so with a view to avoiding steps that would ruin an
otherwise legitimate and solvent homebuilding business that they claimed could
quickly make good on the fraudulent debt it had unwittingly accumulated (Affidavit
of Peter Hanke, sworn April 4, 2024, at para. 20).
29.             
Hanke’s
evidence on this Application was that, at all times, RAR led TD and its counsel
to believe that it acted for all StateView entities and principals aside from
Mr. Ciccone, and that they spoke as one. “This was a family business, and the
family was trying to save their business after the damage caused by the rogue
Mr. Ciccone” (Affidavit of Peter Hanke, at para. 22).
30.             
In contrast
with TD's understanding, Melissa and Nelda took the position on this
Application that they in fact did not have legal representation in connection
with the settlement negotiations. They submitted that they routinely deferred
to and depended on their husbands in financial matters, had no involvement in
StateView, and in particular were not involved in the Settlement Agreement.
They also submitted that no one recommended that they get independent legal
advice before signing the Acknowledgement and Direction as they did.
31.             
I pause to
observe that each of Melissa and Nelda provided an affidavit in support of this
Application; however, there is no evidence from either Carlo or Dino.
32.             
I accept that
the issue of separate legal representation for Melissa and Nelda never came up
as a separate topic in the initial discussions between the Taurasis and
StateView on the one hand and TD on the other, or between their respective
counsel.
33.             
However, all of
the evidence is consistent with RAR acting for Melissa and Nelda, or at a
minimum, leading TD to reasonably believe they were doing so. The
communications and correspondence from RAR were all to the effect that
StateView and the Taurasi family, as one, had been victimized by Mr. Ciccone
just as TD had been. The representations were further to the effect that the
family and the company wanted to enter into the Settlement Agreement to
preserve StateView as a going concern and repay TD, while they considered their
remedies as against Mr. Ciccone.
34.             
In addition, during
negotiations leading to the Settlement Agreement, RAR voluntarily offered to
include the Melissa and Nelda Properties with the other
properties over which they were offering TD security. An offer of security on
the Melissa and Nelda Properties obviously and necessarily depended on their
agreement, even though they themselves were not parties to the Settlement
Agreement.
35.             
Moreover, the
real property security arrangements were reviewed by StateView’s independent
transactional lawyer in addition to RAR.
36.             
I also observe
that while Melissa and Nelda were not parties to the Settlement Agreement,
Melissa witnessed the signatures of Carlo and Dino on the Settlement Agreement.
In her evidence, she acknowledged that she had had the opportunity to review
the terms of the agreement if she had wanted to, while maintaining that she in
fact did not.
37.             
Melissa and
Nelda admit that they signed the Acknowledgement and Direction on April 6, 2023
to facilitate the registration of the TD Charge contemplated by the Settlement
Agreement. Melissa and Nelda expressly confirmed in the Acknowledgement and
Direction that they had reviewed the associated documents, confirmed their
accuracy, and had the effects of the Acknowledgement and Direction fully
explained to them by counsel.
38.             
As noted above,
they now allege that they did not have independent legal advice, and moreover
that they individually received no consideration or benefit by consenting to
the TD Charge.
39.             
TD properly and
reasonably requested the Acknowledgement and from all the owners of the
properties to be encumbered as security, through RAR. While both Melissa and
Nelda took the position on the Application that they had not read the
Acknowledgement and Direction, they conceded on cross-examination that if they
had done so, they would have understood that the four properties were being
mortgaged. They further conceded that they would have understood the
confirmations they had provided as set out in the paragraphs above.
40.             
Also in this
regard, and as noted above, Melissa personally paid the sum of $2,275,000 from
her TD account as a contribution towards the first payment due under the
Settlement Agreement. In my view, this is consistent with the conclusion that
she was aware of the circumstances, the obligations pursuant to the Settlement Agreement,
and that she and her family wished to perform the Settlement Agreement in their
collective attempt to have the StateView business continue as a going concern.
41.             
There is no
allegation (or evidence) of any undue influence on Melissa with respect to that
payment (as opposed to the allegation of undue influence on her with respect to
signing the Acknowledgement).
42.             
Moreover, and
with respect to the payment by Melissa personally, she seeks no relief in this
Application to have those funds returned to her on the basis that the
Settlement Agreement and/or the Acknowledgement and Direction are invalid or
unenforceable against her or her properties.
43.             
Melissa and
Nelda state that they felt significant time pressure, and that in the absence
of an agreement, TD would not release its hold on funds that StateView needed
to pay the Canada Revenue Agency and another lender. They accept the statements
made on the examinations of the RAR lawyers to the effect that the Settlement
Agreement was designed to allow StateView access to funds so it could continue
operations. I accept this.
44.             
However, when RAR
contacted TD initially, it advised TD that it had obtained the Statement of Claim
relating to TD’s first action from a public court file search (not from TD).
Both Melissa and Nelda were aware both of the fact of TD’s claim, and of the
fact that they were named as individual defendants. It was as against this
background that RAR then approached TD as discussed above and expressed the
desire on behalf of “our clients” (plural) to resolve matters consensually as
soon as possible.
45.             
As noted above,
all parties were under significant time pressure, albeit for their respective
self-interested reasons. However, this does not amount to undue influence in
the circumstances.
46.             
Moreover, there
is an additional reason that I do not accept the submission that Melissa and
Nelda did not have the benefit of legal advice. They initially took the
position on this Application that RAR did not act for them. However, it was
subsequently revealed that in fact, each of Melissa and Nelda has commenced an
action against RAR in which they take the position that RAR was indeed their
counsel in March and April, 2023 in relation to these matters.
47.             
Each of the actions
of Melissa and Nelda against RAR specifically includes the allegation that RAR,
as their counsel in relation to these matters, breached its duty of care owed
to them and is liable in solicitors’ negligence.
48.             
Indeed,
paragraph 5 of the Statement of Claim in Melissa’s action states: “The RAR
Defendants acted as legal counsel to Melissa in March and April, 2023, as part
of a retainer for persons and entities related to StateView Homes.” Nelda’s
Statement of Claim is even clearer and states that “the RAR Defendants acted as
legal counsel to Nelda in March and April, 2023, as part of a retainer, for
persons and entities related to StateView Homes who were named in an action
commenced by the Toronto Dominion Bank."
49.             
At paragraphs 31/32[3],
the Statements of Claim state: “There was an express or implied retainer
agreement between Melissa/Nelda and the RAR Defendants. The terms of the
retainer agreement include, but are not limited to … The RAR Defendants would
act in Melissa’s/Nelda’s best interests … and … the RAR Defendants would
provide legal services to Melissa at the standard of a reasonably competent and
diligent lawyer under the circumstances”.
50.             
At paragraphs 32/33,
the Statement of Claim pleads that “the RAR Defendants owe Melissa/Nelda a duty
of care by virtue of their solicitor-client relationship."
51.             
While I make no
determination with respect to the merits of those claims, the position taken by
Melissa and Nelda in those claims is completely inconsistent with the position
they now take in this Application that RAR did not provide them with legal advice,
and they did not have the benefit of counsel.
52.             
Moreover, on April
25, 2023, Melissa and Nelda (together with Carlo and Dino) served a Notice of
Change of Lawyers, removing RAR as counsel of record and appointing new
counsel. That step, again undertaken with the assistance of (new) counsel, is
inconsistent with the assertion that RAR had not previously acted for them and
provided them legal advice.
53.             
Also, I do not
accept the proposition that Melissa and Nelda received no benefit from the
Settlement Agreement. StateView was the only source of income for the Taurasi
family. None of Carlo, Dino, Melissa or Nelda earned income from any other
source to fund their lifestyles and ordinary living expenses. StateView was the
only source of revenue for Live Inspired. It was clearly of critical importance
to the Taurasi family that StateView continue as a going concern, precisely as
RAR had represented to TD.
54.             
Each of Melissa
and Nelda gave evidence to the effect that by late March and early April, 2023,
they were both aware that the $37 million overdraft in StateView’s TD accounts
was caused by a cheque kiting scheme, and moreover that RAR was retained to
deal with this issue with TD. They also admitted on cross-examination that it
was important to them personally that StateView keep operating as a business as
their families were dependent on the income derived from StateView since it was
the only source of income for their households.
55.             
The evidence of
TD was to the effect that it would not have entered into the Settlement
Agreement but for the fact that the payment obligations were secured by, among
other things, the TD Charge.
56.             
I am satisfied
that Melissa and Nelda received or obtained a benefit from the Settlement
Agreement and the TD Charge to which they consented. In all the circumstances,
the Settlement Agreement and the Acknowledgement and Direction authorizing the
TD Charge cannot be concluded to have been manifestly disadvantageous to
Melissa or Nelda.
57.             
I also agree
with the submission of TD that it is not determinative of the issue on this
Application that there is no established connection between the four Melissa
and Nelda Properties and the fraudulent scheme. TD does not allege that
fraudulent funds can be traced into those properties.
58.             
Rather, those
properties are relevant because RAR specifically offered them up as properties
over which security could be placed. In seeking to have the TD Charge remain
registered on title to the Melissa and Nelda Properties, TD is simply seeking
to enforce the bargain that the parties made as reflected in the Settlement
Agreement and confirmed in the Acknowledgement and Direction.
59.             
For all of
these reasons, I find that there was no presumption of undue influence on
Melissa or Nelda. On the contrary, I find that Melissa and Nelda willingly and
knowingly signed the Acknowledgement and Direction and consented to the TD Charge
being registered against title on the Melissa and Nelda Properties for all of
the above reasons. In doing so, they had the benefit of the legal advice from
RAR just as they allege in their respective actions.
60.             
When StateView
was put into receivership, their source of income was clearly not going to
continue. They subsequently changed lawyers, and then sued RAR in respect of
the very advice that they initially took the position in this Application that
they had not received. They then sought to avoid the clear terms of the bargain
they had entered into.
61.             
As noted in Sansalone
at para. 111, the doctrine of undue influence is not designed to protect
people from their own folly, but rather to save them from being victimized by
other people. Whether the actions of Melissa and Nelda amount to a folly, in my
view they were not victimized by others (i.e., their own husbands, Carlo and
Dino or other stakeholders of StateView), but rather they consented to the TD
Charge for their own good and valid reasons at the time. Even if I were to
accept that Melissa and Nelda did not take the time to read the documents they
were signing or think about their effect, that does not meet the test for undue
influence: see Bank of Nova Scotia v. Anozie, 2023 ONSC 1183, at para.
21.
62.             
In my view,
Melissa and Nelda have not put forward any evidence of conduct sufficient to
rise to the level of undue influence by respective husbands, Carlo and Dino.
Their evidence is to the effect that they were directed to sign the documents
that had been emailed to them and that they trusted and deferred to their
husbands. They have not established undue influence, pressure or coercion.
63.             
If I am in
error in concluding that no presumption of undue influence arises in the
circumstances of this case, I would in any event find that the presumption was
rebutted by TD. As stated by the Court of Appeal for Ontario in JGB Collateral v. Rochon, 2020 ONCA 464, 151 O.R.
(3d) 601, at para. 13:
64.             
Finally in this
regard, while independent legal advice can be a factor to be considered in an
analysis of undue influence, it is neither required nor determinative to rebut
the presumption of undue influence: Bank of Montréal v. Duguid, (2000),
2000 CanLII 5710 (ON CA), 47 OR (3d) 737 (Ont. C.A.), at paras. 25-27.
65.             
I find that
there was no undue influence, such that the presumption is rebutted and does
not apply for all of the above-noted reasons.
66.             
Finally, Nelda
submits that she was intoxicated at the time of signing the Acknowledgement and
Direction, and that this in some way intersects with her allegation of undue
influence. In my view, it does not.
67.             
I pause to
observe that obviously, this allegation has no relevance to Melissa and relates
to Nelda only.
68.             
On her cross-examination,
Nelda stated that she was “intoxicated slightly that day so I didn’t read [the
Acknowledgement and Direction].” Nelda further stated that she suffers from
anxiety and alcohol-related issues, and that she [sic] “had drank that day.”
69.             
I note that no
reference to intoxication on that day, alcohol-related issues or anxiety, was
made in either of her two affidavits sworn on this Application, the first sworn
in October, 2023 and the second sworn in April, 2024.
70.             
In any event,
there is no evidence in the record of the extent of the alleged intoxication,
the type or quantity of alcohol consumed or when, whether and how any consumption
on the date in question compared to Nelda’s typical consumption. There is no
evidence of the effect, if any, of the alcohol on Nelda, no other evidence of
intoxication (including but not limited to any corroborating evidence from
Melissa or from her husband Dino as to alcohol-related issues for Nelda
generally, or intoxication specifically on the date in question) and there is
no medical or clinical evidence of any kind about addiction or mental health
issue such as anxiety.
71.             
In the
circumstances, I cannot conclude that intoxication on the date in question was
a factor that bears on the analysis of Nelda’s capacity on the date she signed
the Acknowledgement and Direction, and nor can I conclude that it assists me
with respect to the allegation of undue influence at all.
72.             
For all of
these reasons, the Application is dismissed.
73.             
The parties
advised at the conclusion of oral argument that they had agreed on the quantum
of costs payable to the successful party(ies) at $90,000 inclusive of fees,
disbursements and HST.
74.             
As TD has been
successful on the Application, it is entitled to its costs from Melissa and
Nelda in the amount of $90,000, all-inclusive, which amount is payable within
60 days.
75.             
Order to go in
accordance with these reasons.