[1]              
The Defendant,
The Toronto-Dominion Bank (“TD”), seeks an order pursuant to Rule 5.05 severing
from one another certain allegations advanced in this action by the Plaintiff, and
directing that the two sets of allegations be pursued and tried in two separate
actions.
[2]              
The requested
relief is opposed by the Plaintiff, Tarion Warranty Corporation (“Tarion”) and
by Carlo and Dino Taurasi.
[3]              
 For the
reasons that follow, the motion is dismissed.
[4]              
Tarion brings
this action against TD, and against the Taurasis and a number of corporate Defendants
that, for the purposes of this motion, can be described collectively and
together with the Taurasis as the StateView Defendants.
[5]              
Carlo and Dino
Taurasi were the principals and controlling shareholders in a series of related
businesses operating together and under the name StateView Homes (“StateView
Homes”). StateView Homes was a major developer based in York Region.
[6]              
Several of the
StateView companies held deposit accounts with TD. As a result of a cheque
kiting scheme, TD incurred losses exceeding $37 million. The Taurasis do not contest
that the fraud occurred, but maintain that it was perpetrated by StateView’s
former Chief Financial Officer, Daniel Ciccone, and that they had no
involvement in it.
[7]              
Many of the
StateView Defendants are now in receivership. The Receiver consented to a
lifting of the stay of proceedings solely for the purpose of issuing the
statement of claim in this action. While served with all motion materials, the
Receiver takes no position on this motion.
[8]              
Tarion seeks
damages from TD as a result of the fraud and losses referred to above. Carlo
and Dino Taurasi, also Defendants in this action, have filed almost identical
statements of defence and counterclaims within which they also allege
negligence by TD.
[9]              
The fraud was
apparently carried out between April 2022 and March 14, 2023, the latter date
being the date on which TD discovered the cheque kiting scheme.
[10]          
Shortly after
TD discovered the fraud, it commenced its own action against StateView Homes
and the Taurasis. It entered into negotiations with StateView Homes and the
Taurasis resulting in a settlement agreement (the “Settlement Agreement”) dated
March 31, 2023 pursuant to which TD would not proceed with litigation against
the StateView Defendants, and they, in turn, would pay out TD to recover its
losses over time. The debt was to be secured by mortgages, guarantees and other
security until repaid. The Settlement Agreement was the subject of a consent
Court order.
[11]          
The Settlement
Agreement was never performed because shortly after it was entered into,
StateView Homes was placed into receivership and no further payments were made.
[12]          
Tarion
administers Ontario’s new home warranty program and alleges in this action that
it will have to pay out significant claims to homebuyers as a result of the
collapse of StateView Homes. In this action, Tarion alleges claims against TD
as follows:
[13]          
TD’s position
on this motion is that these two categories of allegations are discrete,
separate and should be severed from one another. It submits that the claim in
negligence is a personal claim advanced by Tarion in respect of losses it has
incurred or will incur as a result of making payments to homebuyers under its
program. TD further submits that this claim is therefore conceptually different
than its claim to set aside the Settlement Agreement as a fraudulent conveyance
or preference, since that latter claim is one advanced on behalf of all
creditors of StateView Homes.
[14]          
Accordingly, TD
submits on this motion that the two principal components of Tarion’s claim are
temporally separate since the first relates to the time period from April 2022
until March 14, 2023, while the second relates to the time period from March
24, 2023 to April 6, 2023. It follows, submits TD, that there is no overlap
between those two components of Tarion’s claim, that there is no risk of
overlapping evidence, and that these two components of the claim ought to be
severed and tried separately.
[15]          
Both parties
agree and I accept that relief from joinder is the corollary to joinder. The
question in either case is whether justice and judicial efficiency are best
achieved by having multiple claims determined together in a single action or
separately in separate actions.
[16]          
Rule 5.01 of
the Rules of Civil Procedure provides as follows:
[17]          
Rule 5.05 of
the Rules of Civil Procedure provides as follows:
[18]          
Rule 5.02
provides as follows:
[19]          
As observed by
this Court in Dumais
v. Hobbs,
2015 ONSC 5643 at para. 23, at the heart of the inquiry are questions of
overlap, efficiency, delay, prejudice and judicial economy.
[20]          
In addition,
s.138 of the Courts of Justice Act provides that as far as possible,
multiplicity of legal proceedings shall be avoided.
[21]          
This is
consistent with the observations of the Court of Appeal for Ontario, that it is
a basic right of a litigant to have all issues in dispute resolved in one trial, with the result that the
ability of the court to sever, bifurcate or separate an action is a narrowly
circumscribed power: Elcano Acceptance Ltd. et
al. v. Richmond, Richmond, Stambler & Mills, 1986 CanLII 2591 (ON CA), 55 OR (2d) 56 (ONCA) at para. 11.
[22]          
In my view,
there is no basis upon which the Court should sever the two categories of
claims advanced in this action.
[23]          
As is clear
from Rules 5.01 and 5.02, the joinder of claims and parties is permitted even
if each defendant does not have an interest in each head of relief claimed, provided
that (and the factors are disjunctive):
[24]          
Rule 5.05,
which is the Rule under which TD moves here, in a sense expresses the factors
in the reverse: relief from joinder is available only where joinder may unduly
complicate or delay the hearing or cause undue prejudice to a party. The onus
is on the moving party.
[25]          
In my view, there
is no undue complexity, delay or prejudice to TD if all of these claims
continue to be determined within a single action. There is no evidence of
prejudice to TD in the record so as to justify the severing of the claims.
[26]          
I am satisfied
that there are common questions of law or fact. The claims clearly arise out of
the same series of transactions: the underlying cheque kiting scheme that is at
the heart of the entire matter. Many findings of fact that will be central to
the requisite determinations in respect of each category of claims overlap.
These would include the facts relating to the underlying fraudulent scheme
itself, the knowledge of TD of that scheme and the knowledge (as well as
alleged participation) of its employees.
[27]          
In the first
category of claims, TD is alleged to have been negligent in failing to detect
the scheme. In the second, TD is alleged to have entered into the Settlement
Agreement with knowledge of the scheme and an intent to obtain a preference for
itself. Notwithstanding that the facts underlying the alleged fraudulent scheme
occurred (obviously) before the negotiation and execution of the Settlement
Agreement, it is practically impossible in my view to consider the facts as
comprising two different, temporally separate sets of facts. Rather, what needs
to be considered by the Court is one continuing set of facts along a continuum,
beginning with the commencement of the cheque kiting scheme and concluding with
the Settlement Agreement that is under attack. It will be more efficient, and
also fair to all parties, to have all of the claims determined in a single
proceeding.
[28]          
As noted above,
the StateView Homes companies are currently in receivership. The
Court-appointed Receiver has custody of the books and records of those
entities, and those are going to be relevant to both categories of claims. The
Receiver is necessarily going to have to be involved. More broadly, there is
very significant overlap in the facts relevant to both categories of claims.
[29]          
In my view,
trying to separate these two categories of claims while avoiding the creation
of inefficiencies and the risk of inconsistent findings would be extremely challenging.
[30]          
The fact that
the statutory claims advanced in respect of the alleged fraudulent conveyance
or preference are advanced on behalf of all creditors does not justify severing
that claim as against all of these other factors. This Court routinely
determines actions within which a fraudulent conveyance or preference is
alleged in respect of some but not all transactions at issue, and/or alleged as
against some but not all defendants.
[31]          
For all of
these reasons, the motion is dismissed.
[32]          
At the
conclusion of argument, counsel advised that the parties had reached an agreement
with respect to costs depending on the result. Accordingly, I make no order as
to costs and leave that issue to the parties as agreed.
[33]          
Order to go to
give effect to these reasons.