[1]              
In May 2023, the respondent companies were placed in receivership on the
application of Canadian Western Bank. MNP was appointed Receiver. The
respondent corporations operated seven franchised restaurants and had commenced
construction on three more in the Greater Toronto area. Abdul Muqeet is the
sole officer and director of the respondents.
[2]              
Once appointed, the Receiver identified a number of questionable
transactions which required further investigation. The Receiver was granted an
order by Justice Cavanagh requiring Mr. Muqeet to attend an examination under
oath and to produce the books and records of the respondents. Mr. Muqeet failed
to attend. The Receiver initially sought an order finding Mr. Muqeet in contempt.
However, the parties agreed to a revised schedule. Mr. Muqeet attended and was
examined in December 2023. Many questions resulted in undertakings and many
more were refused or taken under advisement.
[3]              
Justice Steele made an order in February 2024 requiring Mr. Muqeet to
make adequate answer to the undertakings, to answer the questions refused and,
prior to April 15, 2024, to reattend for a continuation of his examination to
answer all enquiries arising out of his answers to undertakings and refusals.
Mr. Muqeet was ordered to pay $10,000 on account of the Receiver’s costs. Mr.
Muqeet did not attend the hearing. There is no doubt, however, that Mr. Muqeet
was served with the order of Justice Steele.
[4]              
Mr. Muqeet failed to answer the undertakings and refusals and failed to
attend on his continued examination.
[5]              
The Receiver brought a motion for contempt against Mr. Muqeet. There is
no doubt Mr. Muqeet was served with the motion – he attended the hearing before
Justice Black on June 7, 2024 and expressly admitted he received the material.
[6]              
Justice Black found that the three-part test for a finding of contempt
had been met. He found that: 1) Justice Steele’s order was unambiguous and
stated clearly and precisely what had to be done; 2) Mr. Muqeet had knowledge
of Justice Steele’s order and admitted as much; and, 3) Mr. Muqeet
intentionally breached the order in that he intentionally failed to do what the
order required him to do. His excuse, that he had family troubles, “did not
excuse… an abiding failure to comply with a clear order of this court.” Justice
Black had “no difficulty” finding Mr. Muqeet in contempt.
[7]              
Justice Black did not sentence Mr. Muqeet immediately, however. Rather,
Mr. Muqeet was first provided with an opportunity to purge his contempt and to
obviate or at least attenuate the consequences of that contempt. Mr. Muqeet was
given 30 days to provide responsive answers to the outstanding questions and
was then ordered to attend for a further examination on those answers on July
17, 2024. Following these steps, the Receiver was to schedule a further hearing
for the sentencing phase of the contempt motion.
[8]              
Justice Black emphasized to Mr. Muqeet that the Receiver was seeking a
term of incarceration and that Mr Muqeet’s timely, good faith cooperation with
the Receiver in providing the required information could weigh in his favour at
the sentencing hearing. Justice Black explained to Mr. Muqeet the concept of
“purging” his contempt and urged Mr. Muqeet to take advantage of the
opportunity to do so.
[9]              
While Mr. Muqeet provided answers and attended an examination on July
17, 2024, he again gave numerous undertakings which he agreed would be answered
within 10 days. When he failed to do so, he claimed he had been unwell and
promised the requested information by August 13. That date came and went
without compliance. On August 17, he promised responsive answers by the next
day. Again, he failed to comply. In was not until October 8 that any answers
were provided, and a number of them were inadequate, non-responsive or
incomplete. After more prodding, some additional information was provided on
October 11. Indeed, the final bits of outstanding information were not provided
until I questioned Mr. Muqeet about his behaviour at the sentencing hearing on
October 16.
[10]          
After hearing from counsel for the Receiver and from Mr. Muqeet, I took
the matter under reserve.
[11]          
On October 24, 2024, I order that Abdul Muqeet appear before the court
in person at the Courthouse, 361 University Avenue, Toronto, at 10:00 AM on
November 28, 2024 for the purpose of the court pronouncing his sentence for the
finding of contempt made against him by Justice Black on June 7, 2024.
[12]          
On November 27, 2024, yesterday, Mr. Muqeet submitted three new
documents by emailing them to the Commercial List Trial Co-ordinator: pay stubs
and a doctor’s note. These documents are not properly before the court. There
is no accompanying affidavit, nor is there any explanation why these documents,
particularly the doctor’s note, could not have been tendered at the time of the
sentencing hearing on October 16, 2024. Even considering the doctor’s note on
its merits, it is of no assistance to Mr. Muqeet. The note says Mr. Muqeet
attended at a medical clinic on August 12 and September 4, 2024. The note
contains no explanation, no opinion – nothing. These documents do not establish,
nor are they capable of establishing, that Mr. Muqeet was, by reason of medical
infirmity beyond his control, incapable of co-operating with the Receiver and
complying with the disclosure obligations clearly ordered by Justices Steele
and Black on a timely basis.
[13]          
There are two issues to be decided. First, what is the appropriate
penalty for the contempt as found by Justice Black? Second, should I accept the
Receiver’s request for an award of substantial indemnity costs?
[14]          
Rule 60.11(5) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg.
194 provides that in disposing of motion for a contempt order, the judge may
make such order as is just, and where a finding of contempt is made, the judge may order that the
person in contempt,
[15]          
The applicable principles in sentencing for civil contempt are
well-established. The purpose of sentencing for civil contempt is somewhat
different than for criminal contempt. The purpose of a sentence for criminal
contempt is primarily about punishment whereas the purpose of a sentence for
civil contempt is primarily about coercion and is designed to protect and
enforce the rights of a private party: see Business Development Bank of
Canada v. Cavalon Inc., 2017 ONCA 663, at para. 77.
[16]          
However, the courts have recognized that while gaining compliance with
the court’s orders is the primary aim of sentencing in civil contempt
proceedings, acts of civil contempt, like criminal contempt, undermine the
authority of the courts and diminish respect for the law: see Cavalon,
at para. 78.
[17]          
As stated in Cavalon, at para. 81, “[b]ecause civil contempt
engages issues of public law and the need to condemn acts which undermine the
authority and dignity of the court, punishment has been recognized as a secondary
purpose for sentencing in such cases.” In Boily v. Carleton Condominium
Corporation 145, 2014 ONCA 574, at para. 79, the court observed that
one of the purposes of a penalty for civil contempt is to “to ensure societal
respect for the courts” and “to enforce the efficacy of the process of the
court itself.”
[18]          
The principles of sentencing for contempt are:
[19]          
Contempt undermines the authority of the court. Conduct that
undermines the fundamental principles of the courts should not
be treated with leniency and courts have not taken a lenient approach where the
contemnor has knowingly breached an order of the court.
[20]          
The overriding principle is general and specific
deterrence. Parties in contempt must be deterred from further acts of contempt,
respect for court orders must be maintained and violations punished adequately
in order to deter future violations.
[21]          
A fine is not an appropriate remedy where there is little likelihood
that the contemnor will pay it.
[22]          
Applying these principles to the circumstances of this case I find as
follows.
[23]          
The Receiver was appointed by the court. The Receiver, as an officer of
the court, has an obligation to the court and obligations to all creditors and
stakeholders generally. After its appointment, the Receiver reported evidence
of suspicious transactions. By failing to attend his examination and produce
relevant documents, Mr. Muqeet delayed and caused unnecessary expense to the
Receiver and to the principal creditor, Canadian Western Bank. When finally
cross examined on the documents, Mr. Muqeet admitted he was part of a scheme to
defraud the Canadian Western Bank by submitting false invoices to make draws on
the respondents’ credit line with the Bank.
[24]          
The effective and efficient conduct of a receivership requires that
those associated with the business, especially a sole officer and director like
Mr. Muqeet, must cooperate with the Receiver and respond to requests for
information in a timely way. In this case in particular, Mr. Muqeet was the
only person who was in a position to provide books and records of the
respondent corporations and to answer questions about the respondents’ business
and financial affairs. As noted earlier, the order of Steele J. was clear and
unambiguous. Mr. Muqeet intentionally did not comply with it.
[25]          
Counsel for the Receiver has provided the court with numerous precedents
in which sentences of three to six months were given for behaviour somewhat
comparable to that of Mr. Muqeet. The Receiver asks for a sentence of 30 days
incarceration in this case. The Receiver points out that Justice Black
explained the concept of purging contempt and explained that timely and
effective cooperation with the Receiver would weigh in Mr. Muqeet’s favour at
the sentencing portion of this hearing. Notwithstanding being offered this
opportunity, Mr. Muqeet failed to respond to the Receiver’s follow-up requests
on a timely basis. Mr. Muqeet was only responsive to constant prodding and,
ultimately, to the threat of the sentencing hearing being scheduled before the
court.
[26]          
However, unlike several of the precedents submitted by the Receiver, by
the time of the sentencing hearing itself, Mr. Muqeet had in fact managed to
provide almost all of the information requested. By the end of the hearing, counsel
for the Receiver conceded that all the material requests had now been answered.
[27]          
Taking this, and all of the circumstances, into account, I find that a
sentence of 30 days would be excessive and unwarranted.
[28]          
By the same token, a fine is not a viable option. Mr. Muqeet has not
paid any cost awards against him in these proceedings. He indicated that he has
been on unemployment insurance for two years and only recently found a job. Mr.
Muqeet admitted during cross-examination that he was impecunious. In such
circumstances, imposing a fine that will never be paid is no penalty at all. A
term of incarceration is, therefore, the only viable penalty to bring home to
Mr. Muqeet the seriousness of his contempt and to convey to the community at
large the necessity of strict and prompt compliance with orders of the court.
[29]          
For all these reasons, I sentence you, Mr. Muqeet, to a jail term of
five consecutive days, to commence immediately. A warrant for committal shall
issue forthwith.
[30]          
Although the Receiver requested costs, no cost summary was submitted.
Further, given the circumstances outlined above, there is little likelihood any
cost award will ever be paid. In the circumstances, I make no further order as
to costs.