[1]              
This is a motion for summary judgement on
property issues brought by the Respondent, Tamara Janice Enei (“Ms. Enei”). 
More specifically, Ms. Enei seeks the following orders:
[2]              
The Applicant, Giorgio Mirro Enei (“Mr. Enei”)
seeks the dismissal of the summary judgement motion.  In addition, he brought
his own motion seeking a long list of relief, which can be summarized as
follows:
[3]              
For reasons set out in more detail below, Ms.
Enei’s summary judgement motion is granted, except on the issues of Mr. Enei’s
beneficial entitlement to certain investment accounts and equalization. Mr.
Enei’s motion for the various relief set out above is dismissed, except for the
severance of the divorce from the other issues in this case, and for disclosure
(which I grant in part only).
[4]              
The following facts, relevant to the motions
before me, are not disputed.
[5]              
The parties were married for 34 years and
separated on February 16, 2023. They have three children together, who were
born between 1991 and 1994, and who are all adults and living independently now.
[6]              
The parties’ marriage was a very traditional one
in which Mr. Enei was the family’s main breadwinner and Ms. Enei’s primary
focus was raising the parties’ three children, taking care of the home, and
managing the household.  Mr. Enei worked for the Federal Government for over 34
years. At the time he retired in 2021, he was a Senior Assistant Deputy
Minister and Advisor for the Office of the Chief Science Advisor of Canada,
earning employment income of over $250,000 per annum during the last two
years.  He worked hard and had a very successful career.
[7]              
At the time the parties married, Ms. Enei worked
full-time in an office doing administrative work. After she gave birth to the
parties’ first child in 1991, Ms. Enei remained at home for the most part,
working part-time to supplement the household income when possible (for
instance, by doing wedding dress alterations in the evenings). In 2007, Ms.
Enei completed a bookkeeping course at Algonquin College. Thereafter, she worked
part-time at a quilting store (a few hours per week), and for certain periods
of time she worked (part-time) as a bookkeeper. However, she had to quit her
job twice to care for the parties’ younger child who was suffering from mental
health issues and, later, substance abuse. Ms. Enei worked hard at home to
raise the children, care for and manage the household, and support her
husband’s career.
[8]              
Together, the parties did very well and, after
34 years of marriage, had accumulated a combined net worth exceeding five
million dollars.
[9]              
For almost the entirety of the parties’
marriage, Ms. Enei was solely responsible for the day-to-day management of the
parties’ financial affairs; she would take care of all the banking, manage the
parties’ income, pay household bills and the children’s expenses, manage the
parties’ credit card and line of credit, and move money around as needed to
cover the parties’ expenses.  The only exception to this was the management of
the parties’ various investments which was the primary (if not exclusive)
responsibility of Mr. Enei.  He would deposit his yearly bonusses in the
parties’ joint Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce (“CIBC”) savings account, and
would then distribute them into various Tax-Free Savings Accounts (“TFSA”), Registered
Retirement Savings Plans (“RRSP”) and savings accounts held by the parties (or
one of them) at the Royal Bank of Canada (“RBC”) and CIBC.
[10]          
During their marriage, the parties had one joint
RBC chequing account, in which Mr. Enei’s pay was deposited. Although there is
disagreement over whether Mr. Enei had a bank card to access this joint
account, if he had one it is not disputed that he rarely, if ever, used it. Mr.
Enei would rarely go shopping without Ms. Enei, and she would always take care of
the payment.  Mr. Enei’s yearly charges on the parties’ RBC Mastercard ranged
between $1,863 (lowest) and $7,232 (highest) per year during the seven years
leading up to the parties’ separation. I think it is fair to say that, except
for managing the parties’ investments, Mr. Enei almost never touched the
parties’ money.  Ms. Enei would withdraw cash every month which she would hand
out to Mr. Enei to pay for small day-to-day expenses, such as getting his hair
cut or buying a coffee or pay for a restaurant outing.  Otherwise, Mr. Enei
paid his personal expenses with the use of a credit card, and Ms. Enei took
care of paying the credit card on a monthly basis, and all of the family’s
expenses.
[11]          
In addition to the parties’ joint RBC chequing
account, the parties had one Canadian Tire (“CT”) Mastercard which was in Mr.
Enei’s sole name, with Ms. Enei being a supplementary user with her own card. 
Much of the parties’ household and family expenses were paid with that credit
card, which was paid off monthly.  The parties also had a joint RBC line of
credit.
[12]          
In managing the family finances, Ms. Enei
maintained two accounts in her sole name, one personal savings account with RBC
and one personal chequing account with TD Canada Trust (“TD”).  Ms. Enei says
that she opened her personal RBC account many years before the parties’
separation to set funds aside for significant expenditures such as vehicles and
legal costs regarding claims brought against Mr. Enei at work. While the
majority of household expenses were paid out of the joint RBC account, she also
used her personal RBC account to cover the monthly home and car insurance
costs.
[13]          
Ms. Enei says that she only ever had two
personal TD accounts; one was opened when she was 16 and it was closed early in
the parties’ marriage.  She opened the second one on or about 2012, when she
returned to work, so that she could qualify for a Visa credit card in her sole
name and build her own credit separate from her husband. She deposited most of
her part-time work income in her TD personal account and used her TD Visa to
pay for business and personal expenses which would then be paid off with either
her TD personal account or the parties’ joint RBC account. A separate TD Visa
card was issued in one of the children’s names when she was attending school
outside of the home, and Mr. Enei was also added as a supplementary card holder
on that credit card some time before the parties’ separation (although I do not
believe that he ever used it).
[14]          
Although Ms. Enei says that Mr. Enei “ought to
have been aware” of the existence of Ms. Enei’s personal RBC and TD accounts,
and of her personal TD Visa credit card, for the purpose of this motion only I
accept Mr. Enei’s evidence that he was not.
[15]          
To summarize, it is not disputed that the
parties did most of their family day-to-day banking at RBC, and had the
following joint accounts:
[16]          
In addition, Ms. Enei had the following accounts
in her sole name:
[17]          
In addition to the above, the parties’
investments were managed exclusively by Mr. Enei via various CIBC and RBC
accounts.
[18]          
Mr. Enei retired from his employment with the
Federal Government in June 2021, with a full pension in the range of $180,000
per annum.  At the time of the parties’ separation, Ms. Enei was working
part-time as a free-lance bookkeeper for two clients. Ms. Enei vacated the
matrimonial home on February 16, 2023, moving out of Ottawa and taking the two family
dogs with her.  After she moved out of the home, Ms. Enei found employment as a
part-time receptionist, earning $17 an hour.
[19]          
At the time of the parties’ separation, Mr. Enei
was 57 and Ms. Enei was 54.
[20]          
After Ms. Enei left the matrimonial home on
February 16, 2023, Mr. Enei found out that she had made two withdrawals from
the parties’ joint RBC account: one in the amount of $15,000 on February 15 and
the other in the amount of $1,000 on February 16.  He then went to the bank to
organize himself in the absence of Ms. Enei, which is when, according to him,
he “learned that what he was led to believe was all a lie”.  He says that he
discovered that Ms. Enei had stolen money from him and diverted large sums of
money over the course of (at least) the past seven years of the parties’
marriage (he does not have access to older bank statements).
[21]          
Mr. Enei retained the services of an accountant,
Lorne Kirsch, to perform a forensic audit of the parties’ financial affairs in
2023.  In his report dated October 20, 2023, Mr. Kirsch concludes that at least
$465,707 went unaccounted for over the course of the seven and a half years
leading to the parties’ separation.
[22]          
It is on that basis that Mr. Enei seeks an
unequal division of the parties’ Net Family Property, unjust enrichment and a
beneficial interest in certain investments held in Ms. Enei’s sole name.
[23]          
Ms. Enei’s motion for summary judgment is brought pursuant to Rule 16
of the Family Law Rules O. Reg. 114/99, s. 16, (“FLR”).
Rule 16
was amended in May 2015 to broaden the powers of the court on a summary
judgment motion.
[24]          
In Gough v. Gough, 2019 ONSC 5441, I
summarize the legal principles applicable to summary judgment motions as
follows:
[25]          
Section 5(6) of the Family Law Act, R.S.O.
1990, c. F.3, (“FLA”) grants the court discretion in certain specific
circumstances to grant an unequal division of the parties’ Net Family Property.  
To be successful, Mr. Enei must show on a balance of probabilities that
equalizing the parties’ Net Family Property would be unconscionable (Serra
v. Serra, 2009 ONCA 105, at para. 1, Berdette v.
Berdette (1991), 1991 CanLII 7061 (ON CA), 3 O.R. (3d) 513 (Ont. C.A.), at pp. 525-526).
[26]          
The threshold of "unconscionability"
under s. 5(6) is exceptionally high. The jurisprudence is clear that
circumstances which are "unfair", "harsh" or
"unjust" alone do not meet the test. To cross the threshold, an equal
division of net family properties in the circumstances must "shock the
conscience of the court" (Serra v. Serra, at para. 47).
[27]          
Mr. Enei’s claim for an unequal division of the
parties’ Net Family Property rests on two themes.  Firstly, he argues that Ms.
Enei’s use of the CT Mastercard and joint RBC chequing account was excessive
for a two-person household.  Essentially, he takes the position that over the seven
and a half years leading to the parties’ separation, Ms. Enei engaged in
“out-of-control spending on credit cards”, and that her own income was never
deposited in the parties’ joint account.  This, in his view, amounts to an unconscionable
dilapidation of the parties’ assets, in accordance with s. 5(6)(d) of the FLA.
[28]          
Secondly, he alleges that over the seven and a
half years preceding the parties’ separation alone, Ms. Enei redirected at
least $465,707 from the party's joint chequing account to her own personal
accounts.
[29]          
Mr. Enei takes the position that there are
credibility issues which require a trial in relation to his claim for an
unequal division of the parties’ Net Family Property.
[30]          
First, he states that the parties disagree as to
whether he knew that Ms. Enei had opened bank accounts in her sole name with
RBC and TD.  In my view, nothing turns on this.  Whether Mr. Enei knew or not
is irrelevant.  Ms. Enei was perfectly entitled to open bank and credit card
accounts in her sole name, with or without Mr. Enei’s consent or knowledge. 
Marriage does not displace an individual’s capacity or ability to manage their
own affairs as they please.  The important question is: what were the accounts
and the money they contained used for?
[31]          
Second, Mr. Enei states that there is
significant financial disclosure that Ms. Enei has yet to provide, and which
the trial judge will have to carefully consider to ascertain his claims. For
the reasons set out below, as well as those set out in the section entitled
“Mr. Enei’s Motion”, I disagree.  The financial disclosure already provided in
this case far exceeds what is necessary and proportional for the court to
fairly and efficiently make relevant findings of facts.  I find that the
extensive financial information before me, which consists of hundreds of pages
of financial records, a forensic audit which reviewed the parties’ banking
history over the seven-and-a-half years preceding their separation, a detailed
and comprehensive Profit and Loss Document and Balance Sheet Document prepared
by Ms. Enei, as well as lengthy affidavits from the parties, allows me to
fairly and efficiently make findings of fact and law in this case, and there is
nothing to be gained by deferring the hearing to a trial.
[32]          
I find that it is appropriate to grant partial
summary judgment in this case on property claims that simply do not require a
trial.  A final adjudication of those issues will significantly reduce the cost
of this litigation and allow for a much more expeditious process on the balance
of the disputed issues.  There is no concern here that partial summary judgment
might result in inconsistent findings between myself and the trial judge.
[33]          
Mr. Enei claims that the parties’ fixed household
expenses during the last seven years of their marriage were less than $3,000
per month, leaving $7,000 per month as disposable income which ought to have
been saved or otherwise invested for the benefit of both parties.  Upon Ms.
Enei's departure, he says that he discovered that Ms. Enei’s use of the
parties’ monthly disposable income as well as her use of the parties’ credit
cards was excessive for a two-person household.  He says that after
scrutinizing his household expenses for both pre and post-separation periods, he
has observed a significant difference.
[34]          
Mr. Enei also scrutinized Ms. Enei’s TD Visa
statements, and points to the fact that almost all of Ms. Enei’s purchases on
this card were “for her own personal items”, such as clothing and sewing
accessories. Having reviewed food purchases on the parties’ Mastercard for the
seven years prior to the parties’ separation, he states that the food purchases
for their two-people household exceeded the data provided by Statistics Canada
for a four-person family by over 200 percent.  Over the course of those seven
years, he says, Ms. Enei put $547,286 on the parties’ Mastercard, which in his
view confirms a pattern of excessive use of credit cards by her.
[35]          
This, in Mr. Enei’s view, supports his conclusion
that his wife deliberately mismanaged and redirected the parties’ disposable income
“for the sole purpose of her self-gratification and with the express purpose of
re-establishing a new single life for herself post-marriage”.
[36]          
Section 5(7) of the FLA sets out the
rationale behind the equalization regime provided by s. 5, which imposes an
equal sharing of the family property acquired by the parties (or any one of
them) during their marriage.  It states:
[37]          
This rationale is affirmed in the preamble of
the Act, which states:
[38]          
Essentially, Mr. Enei is asking the court to
review years of family spending to pose its own judgement as to whether Ms.
Enei used the family income reasonably, or whether the way she spent “Mr.
Enei’s money” was questionable or excessive.  Notably, this is something that
Mr. Enei himself never bothered to do during thirty-four years of marriage.  In
my view, Mr. Enei’s allegations of excessive spending by his wife not only
disregard the realities and necessities of family life, including his own, they
are also simply not supported by the extensive financial evidence that is
before the court, as will be further explained in the section below.
[39]          
Based on all the evidence before me (including
as set out in the section below), I find that Ms. Enei has met her burden to
show that there is no genuine issue requiring a trial in relation to Mr. Enei’s
allegations of excessive spending on her part justifying an unequal division of
the parties’ Net Family Property.   I find that there is absolutely nothing
unconscionable about applying the equalization regime to the parties in this
case, and none of the evidence provided to me by Mr. Enei shakes this
conclusion.
[40]          
As stated earlier, Mr. Enei hired Mr. Kirsch to
complete a forensic review of the parties’ financial affairs for the period of
March 31, 2016 to April 4, 2023. Based on all the disclosure received, he
concluded that the amount of $465,707 was either diverted by Ms. Enei or
unaccounted for. More specifically, the quantum of funds that were unaccounted
or missing over that period was summarized by him as follows, by category:
[41]          
It is important to note at this juncture that in
the context of completing his forensic review, Mr. Kirsch had a copy of all
banks, credit card and line of credit monthly statements for all the parties’
accounts listed above in this decision, whether held in their joint or sole
names, for this entire period, with the exception of a few of Ms. Enei’s TD
Visa statements. This is important to point out because of Mr. Enei’s argument
that this summary judgement motion ought not be granted due to the lack of
financial disclosure from Ms. Enei (discussed in more detail below).
[42]          
Having thoroughly reviewed Mr. Kirsch’s forensic
report, I conclude that there are a number of very obvious problems with his
conclusions.
[43]          
The first problem is Mr. Kirsch’s assumption
that since Mr. Enei did not have access to a bank card for the parties’ joint
RBC chequing account[1],
all ATM (cash) withdrawals made in that account over the course of the period
under review were monies “diverted” by Ms. Enei for her sole benefit. These
amounted to $96,000 over the course of seven years.
[44]          
Similarly, Mr. Kirsch assumes that transfers
completed online with a debit card, which show on the joint RBC monthly
statements as “No Desc” or “online transfer”, were all made by Ms. Enei and,
therefore, were used and diverted by her for her sole benefit. These
transactions amount to $187,000, $23,500 of which comprised of expenses which
Mr. Kirsch was eventually able to identify, resulting in $163,500 of transfers
“unaccounted for”. Mr. Kirsch however acknowledges that there were $97,000 of
“No Desc” deposits in the account during that period of time as well, of which
$64,000 came from Ms. Enei’s personal RBC account.  Therefore, the net amount
that Mr. Kirsch assumes was diverted by Ms. Enei is in the range of $100,000.
[45]          
It is not disputed that Ms. Enei was solely
responsible for the management of the parties’ day-to-day financial affairs. 
Even if I accept that Mr. Enei did not have a bank card and, therefore, did not
withdraw or transfer money from the joint RBC account, it is a significant leap
to assume that all cash withdrawals made by Ms. Enei over the course of these
seven years were diverted to other bank accounts or used “for her sole
benefit”.
[46]          
Ms. Enei’s evidence is that the majority of the
withdrawals from the joint RBC account were for Mr. Enei’s benefit.  She
explained that the parties kept cash funds in the house in the event of
emergencies, to pay for haircuts, firewood and any other cash deals Mr. Enei arranged.
When dining out with Mr. Enei, cash was always used.  Additionally, Ms. Enei
explains that Mr. Enei also requested approximately $300 from each of his paychecks
to pay for his incidentals (personal expenses).  This evidence was not disputed
by Mr. Enei.  At $300 per paycheck (26 pay periods per year) over the course of
seven years, this alone would account for $54,600 of the cash withdrawals.
[47]          
Mr. Kirsch found that there was only $2,755
worth of unexplained withdrawals from the parties’ joint RBC line of credit
over these seven years.  Moreover, he notes that reimbursements towards the
parties’ joint RBC line of credit ($48,445) and Mastercard ($19,600) came from
Ms. Enei’s personal RBC account.  This is in addition to many specific
purchases that he acknowledges were paid out of Ms. Enei’s personal RBC account
(such as the payment of home and car insurance payments, the purchase of her
vehicle, a generator, and other smaller items).  This clearly supports Ms.
Enei’s evidence that she used her personal RBC account to save up money which
would then be used to pay for significant purchases or larger expenditures.
[48]          
Moreover, this was a traditional relationship in
which Mr. Enei was the main (and for many years, the only) breadwinner, while Ms.
Enei took care of the children, the home, the family’s finances, and many more
things.  To suggest that Ms. Enei’s purchase of personal items, services, and
clothing “for her sole benefit” amounted to reckless spending or to a diversion
of large sums of money sufficient to meet the threshold of unconscionability,
is simply absurd.
[49]          
Finally, Mr. Kirsch concludes that the amount of
$214,990 originally invested by the parties in various investment accounts,
were “re-directed by Ms. Enei to unknown locations”, and that $118,257 of “Mr.
Enei’s money” was used by her to pay her TD Visa credit card (which she also
used, according to his assumption, for her sole benefit).
[50]          
I note that it is undisputed that Mr. Enei alone
was responsible for the parties’ various investments at the RBC and CIBC. To
suggest that Ms. Enei was able to divert almost $215,000 out of these
investments that he managed himself, over a period of seven years, without his
knowledge, is simply impossible to believe.
[51]          
It is to be noted that Mr. Kirsch used a cash flow
method to reach his findings and attached the document as a schedule to the
report. This, in an of itself, is another significant problem with his report. 
This is because in his analysis, Mr. Kirsch did not take into consideration the
expenses paid by Ms. Enei with the use of her personal TD Visa, nor does it
account for a considerable number of transactions which will be further
discussed below.
[52]          
To counter the conclusions found in Mr. Kirsch’s
forensic report, Ms. Enei undertook an exhaustive reconciliation of all bank
and credit card accounts held by the parties (or either one of them), based on
all the monthly statements exchanged, over the course of those seven and a half
years.  She produced a detailed and comprehensive Profit and Loss Document, as
well as a Balance Sheet Document to address the sums of money that have been
transferred between savings accounts during that period, but not expended.
[53]          
Ms. Enei is not an expert nor is the product of
her work an expert report.  It is a compilation of all the transactions that
can be found in the hundreds of bank statements produced for that seven-year
period.  It was served on Mr. Enei well in advance of the motion hearing, and
Mr. Enei had every opportunity to have it reviewed and critiqued by Mr. Kirsch
or anyone else of his choosing. He did not.
[54]          
What is shown in the Profit and Loss document is
that other than the amount of $1,617, all monies spent by Ms. Enei are
accounted for.
[55]          
In addition to this, Ms. Enei provided evidence
of the following major expenditures made by the parties over the course of
those same seven years which were unaccounted for in Mr. Kirsch’s forensic
report:
[56]          
Finally, Ms. Enei provided a detailed
reconciliation of all the monies allegedly “diverted” to her personal RBC
account from the parties’ joint RBC account or various investment accounts. 
All monies transferred to her personal RBC account have been accounted for (to
the cent), and documentary evidence of the way they were used was also provided
(paras. 52-55 of her March 25, 2024 affidavit).
[57]          
In her reply affidavit sworn on April 8, 2024,
Ms. Enei provides a detailed response to all the significant amounts that Mr.
Enei claims to be unaccounted for. To demonstrate how precisely she has
addressed all alleged unaccounted expenses, I feel it is necessary to provide a
short excerpt from her affidavit:
[58]          
This detailed response for all amounts allegedly
unaccounted for goes on for all subsequent years (until March 2023).
[59]          
Mr. Enei’s claim for an unequal division of the
parties’ Net Family Property has no chance of success unless he is able to
prove on a balance of probabilities that Ms. Enei spent so excessively during
the marriage, or diverted such large sums of money, that it would be
unconscionable for her to receive one half of the parties’ family property
acquired during their 34 years of marriage.
[60]          
There are no credibility issues to be decided at
trial on these issues. The documentary evidence provided, which includes seven
years’ worth of bank and credit card statements, bank drafts, invoices,
receipts, cheques and transaction confirmations (as listed in exhibit “I” of
Ms. Enei’s March 25, 2024 affidavit), and which have been summarized in a
forensic report, a Profit and Loss Document, a Balance Sheet and several
detailed reconciliations found in Ms. Enei’s evidence, speaks for itself.
[61]          
Mr. Enei is essentially asking Ms. Enei to
account for every single dollar of family income (“his” income) that she spent
over the course of the past seven years (and beyond), which is not only
unreasonable, but also completely ignores the realities of a family’s life. In Serra
v. Serra, the Court of Appeal described Ontario's property regime (in the
context of a discussion about section 5(6)) as follows:
[62]          
Although it was entirely unreasonable for Mr.
Enei to ask Ms. Enei to account for every single dollar spent over the last
seven years of the parties’ marriage, Ms. Enei did just that. She provided
cogent evidence accounting for every single dollar spent by her over those past
seven years (except for an amount of less than $2,000). Other than bare
allegations to that effect made by Mr. Enei, there is simply no evidence
supporting Mr. Enei’s claim that Ms. Enei spent excessively, or that she
diverted large sums of money anywhere.
[63]          
This claim is therefore summarily dismissed.
[64]          
In order to successfully prove a claim for
unjust enrichment, Mr. Enei must show that Ms. Enei has been enriched, that he suffered
a corresponding detriment, and that there is no "juristic reason" for
the enrichment. If Mr. Enei successfully proves a claim for unjust enrichment, he
may be entitled to a monetary award and/or a proprietary award by way of
constructive trust.
[65]          
The parties in this case are married.  In McNamee
v. McNamee, 2011 ONCA 533, the Court of Appeal held that the court must resolve
questions of ownership – including beneficial ownership – before it determines
each party's net family property and calculates the equalization payment. 
Therefore, where a party is claiming a remedial constructive trust, the court
is to determine the claim for unjust enrichment (and the appropriate remedy, if
any) before determining the claim for equalization (see also Martin v.
Sansome, 2014 ONCA 14).
[66]          
The Court of Appeal also emphasized that, in the
vast majority of cases, any unjust enrichment that arises as a result of a
marriage will be fully addressed through the operation of the equalization
provisions under the FLA, including under s. 5(6) of the Act.
[67]          
In his Application, Mr. Enei seeks “a
declaration that Ms. Enei has been unjustly enriched by Mr. Enei’s
contributions to the respondent’s assets, the remedy for which is either a
constructive or resulting trust interest in up to 50 percent of the
respondent’s assets or a monetary award in an amount to be determined by the
court”. The facts upon which he relies to make this claim are the same facts as
those that he relies on to claim an unequal division of the parties’ Net Family
Property, namely: excessive spending by Ms. Enei, and diversion of large sums
of money into her own bank accounts.
[68]          
I have already concluded that the evidence
before me does not support either of these allegations. Even if it did, the
effect of granting Mr. Enei a beneficial interest in some, or all, of Ms.
Enei’s assets would not lead to a different result, mathematically.  This is
because such beneficial interest would be granted to Mr. Enei prior to
equalizing the parties’ Net Family Properties. Ultimately, Ms. Enei would still
get one half of the accumulated net value of the property acquired by them
during their 34-year marriage.
[69]          
This claim, therefore, is summarily dismissed.
[70]          
This claim is framed as follows by Mr. Enei in
his Application:
[71]          
Many of the facts relevant to Mr. Enei’s claim
for a declaration that he is the beneficial owner of investment accounts held in
Ms. Enei’s name by way of resulting trust are not disputed.
[72]          
Mr. Enei’s father, Angelo Enei, passed away on
August 22, 2015, and Mr. Enei retained Johnston Family Law to assist him with
the administration of the estate. At Mr. Enei’s instruction, the inheritance
amount ($350,000) was made payable to both parties and was deposited into the
parties’ joint RBC account.
[73]          
It is not disputed that prior to receiving his
inheritance, Mr. Enei instructed Ms. Enei to open a number of accounts at
CIBC.  Within days of receiving the inheritance, the funds were disbursed as
follows:
[74]          
The remaining $52,000 was used as follows by Ms.
Enei:
[75]          
It is important to note that there is no dispute
about the above.  Indeed, Mr. Enei in his own affidavit included a copy of all
bank drafts confirming how these monies were distributed by Ms. Enei.  This
left less than $4,000 which were either withdrawn in cash or used to pay for
household expenses.
[76]          
Over the course of the next five years when the
joint GIC purchased matured, the parties generally reinvested the funds into
each of their TFSA accounts. As was the case for older investments, Mr. Enei
was responsible to re-invest these monies, which he did until the parties
separated.
[77]          
Mr. Enei makes no claims in relation to the
monies that were gifted to the parties’ children.  However, he takes the
position that all monies invested in accounts held in Ms. Enei’s sole name are
beneficially owned by him by way of a resulting trust and are therefore
excluded from his Net Family Property since they are part of his inheritance
from his father received during the marriage.
[78]          
A resulting trust arises when title to property
is in one party's name, but that party, because he or she "is a fiduciary
or gave no value for the property", holds the property in trust for the
other party and is under an obligation to return the property to the other
party (Pecore v. Pecore, 2007 SCC 17 at para. 20). The effect of a
resulting trust is that the title to the property reverts back to the
beneficiary.
[79]          
The presumption of resulting trust is a
rebuttable presumption of law and of the general rule that applies to
gratuitous transfers. When a transfer is challenged, the presumption allocates
the legal burden of proof. Thus, where a transfer is made for no consideration,
the onus is placed on the transferee to demonstrate that a gift was intended.
This is so because equity presumes bargains, not gifts (Pecore v. Pecore,
at paras. 24 and 25).  However, s. 14 of the FLA alters the presumption
of resulting trust when in the presence of married spouses who own the property
in their joint names.  According to s. 14, the fact that property is held in
the name of spouses as joint tenants is proof, in the absence of evidence to
the contrary, that the spouses are intended to own the property as joint
tenants.
[80]          
In the case at hand, it is not disputed that the
inheritance money was paid to the parties by way of a cheque made in their
joint names, and that the money was subsequently invested by them in the
various TFSA, GIC and bank accounts listed above (some in the parties’
respective sole names and some in joint accounts). The issue to be decided,
therefore, is whether Mr. Enei intended to gift one half of his inheritance
(which would otherwise be excluded from his Net Family Property) to Ms. Enei at
the time it was received and paid to the parties’ joint names, or when it was
invested in various accounts, including joint accounts or accounts held in Ms.
Enei’s sole  name.
[81]          
Mr. Enei’s intention at the time of the
transfer, therefore, is at the heart of this claim.
[82]          
This question raises credibility issues which
must be determined at trial.  For this reason, I find that the focussed issue
of whether a gift was intended by Mr. Enei requires a trial.  Ms. Enei’s
summary judgement motion on this claim is therefore dismissed.
[83]          
It appears the value of the parties’ debts and assets
at the relevant dates are not in dispute.  However, given my decision immediately
above, it is not possible for the Court to rule on the issue of equalization at
this time.
[84]          
As stated above, Mr. Enei filed his own motion
in which he seeks the following orders:
[85]          
In my view, most – if not all – of these claims
for relief are being advanced to divert the Court’s attention from what is
otherwise a valid motion for summary judgement brought by Ms. Enei.  In other
words, I am of the view that Mr. Enei’s response to Ms. Enei’s motion for
summary judgement fits the adage of “the best defence is a good offence”.  The
many orders he requests in response to Ms. Enei’s motion were either
unnecessary or unreasonable based on the facts of this case.
[86]          
I will nonetheless address each of them
succinctly.
[87]          
The divorce is hereby severed from the other
issues in the case, as this was not disputed by Ms. Enei (I am not aware that
it was ever requested before Mr. Enei’s cross-motion was filed).  Either party
is free to seek a divorce on an uncontested basis.
[88]          
There was absolutely no need to seek an order
for exclusive possession of the matrimonial home.  Ms. Enei vacated the home
voluntarily on February 16, 2023, and except for one occasion where she
attended the home to retrieve her personal belongings, on notice to and with
the consent of Mr. Enei, she never returned to the home, nor did she ever
threaten to do so.  Mr. Enei has had de facto exclusive possession of
the home since February 15, 2023, with the acquiescence of Ms. Enei.  I decline
making an order for exclusive possession and there is no need for same.
[89]          
Justice Minnema in King v. Mann, 2020
ONSC 108 at para. 70, had the following to say about disputes related to pets:
[90]          
Recentl caselaw, such as Carhvallo v. Verma,
2024 ONSC 1183, reaffirmed this principle.  Although the court in some limited
cases (such as Coates v. Dickson, 2021 ONSC 992) broadened the scope of
the ownership analysis, ultimately it continues to focus on the issue of “who
is the legal owner of the pet”?
[91]          
The evidence before me, which is highly
disputed, does not allow me to determine who is the rightful owner of the two
dogs that Ms. Enei took with her on the day she left the home. This issue will
have to be resolved at trial.
[92]          
Further, it is not open to the Court to make a
joint custody order in relation to pets, as requested by Mr. Enei.
[93]          
Mr. Enei’s request to impute a higher income to
Ms. Enei on a temporary basis, so as to decrease his spousal support
obligations pending trial, is also dismissed.
[94]          
This was a 34-year traditional marriage during
which Ms. Enei’s primary responsibility was to care for the children and the
home. Her yearly income throughout the parties’ marriage, during the periods
that she engaged in part-time work, was always a small fraction of Mr. Enei’s
income. Any income she earned was seen as a means to supplement the husband’s
much more significant income.
[95]          
At the time of the parties’ separation, Ms. Enei
was self-employed as a bookkeeper earning $25 an hour on a part-time basis.  In
2023, her net self-employment income in 2023 was $11,954 with a gross of
$17,675.  Because of the financial hardship she suffered as a result of not
being financially supported by Mr. Enei, in 2024, she took on a part-time
position as a receptionist where she is paid $17 an hour.  She continues to do
some bookkeeping work on a part-time basis.  She is paying for day-to-day
expenses by drawing down in her savings and investments.
[96]          
At a Case Conference held in September 2023, the
court ordered Mr. Enei to pay interim without prejudice spousal support of
$2,180 per month. This is significantly lower than what the Spousal Support
Advisory Guidelines suggest for such a long, traditional marriage considering
Mr. Enei’s $184,890 yearly income and Ms. Enei’s current income. Mr. Enei’s
request to impute a $100,000 income to Ms. Enei, on a temporary basis, not only
ignores Ms. Enei’s age, qualifications, and employment history, it also
completely disregards the roles that each party played during their lengthy
marriage.
[97]          
In addition, Mr. Enei’s expectations with
regards to Ms. Enei’s obligation to maximize her own income ignores the fact
that he is currently enjoying his own retirement while expecting Ms. Enei to
work full-time.
[98]          
Mr. Enei’s request to impute a $100,000 income
to Ms. Enei on a temporary basis is dismissed.
[99]          
In her Factum, Ms. Enei sought to increase
interim spousal support to $6,305 per month.  However, she did not bring a
motion to seek an increase in spousal support. She cannot seek an increase of
spousal support as a response to Mr. Enei’s motion to impute an income to her
and reduce spousal support.
[100]       Mr. Enei’s request for disclosure is unreasonable. As detailed
above, the extent of the disclosure already provided by Ms. Enei so far in
these proceedings far exceeds what would otherwise be deemed reasonable and
proportional, in my view.  Mr. Enei’s request for disclosure is overly broad
and all-encompassing.  In his Notice of Motion, he seeks the following:
[101]       In his affidavit sworn March 25, 2024 (exhibit B), Mr. Enei includes
a letter from his counsel to Ms. Enei’s counsel setting out the specific
disclosure that is still missing from his perspective.  Such includes, for
instance (reproduced verbatim):
[102]       For good measure, counsel ends his letter by advising Ms. Enei that
“We trust that your client understands the gravity of this situation and
cooperates”.
[103]       I am of the view that disclosure requests are being used by Mr. Enei
at this stage of the proceeding as a weapon, rather than a means to ascertain
the parties’ reasonable claims.  It is not appropriate to simply engage in an
endless pursuit of information and documents.  Disclosure must be proportionate
to the issues before the court. While full and frank disclosure is a
fundamental tenet of the FLR, requests for disclosure must remain
proportional and the parties must show common sense and reasonableness (Frost
v. Frost, 2024 ONSC 2594, paras. 8 to 14, Saunders v. Saunders, 2015
ONSC 926, paras. 10, 13 and 15, Burton v. Burton, 2016 ONSC 62).
[104]       Mr. Enei’s requests for disclosure are not only disproportional to
the issues before the court, but some of these requests are also simply
impossible to satisfy (who can possibly explain how they have used the money
from each and every withdrawal made at an ATM over the course of seven
years???).  Despite the unreasonable nature of Mr. Enei’s requests, Ms. Enei
has provided more than satisfactory answers to most – if not all – of them. Mr.
Enei’s multiple additional requests for disclosure are simply excessive.
[105]       The only disclosure which I find relevant to the outstanding issues
in this case, and which I will require Ms. Enei to provide, is the following,
which is mainly related to the issue of spousal support (assuming it has not
already been provided):
[106]       Based on all the above, I make the following order:
[107]       Ms. Enei is the successful party in this case.  If the parties
cannot agree on costs, they may provide me with written submissions on costs
not exceeding five (5) pages, double-spaced, plus Bill of Costs and relevant
Offers to Settle, along the following timelines: