[1]              
B.W.  (the “respondent”) is charged with sexual
assault contrary to s. 271 of the Criminal Code. The complainant is the
respondent’s former spouse.
[2]              
The respondent and complainant married in 2001
and were divorced in 2016. They have three children together.
[3]              
During her statement to the police at the time
she made the complaint, the complainant alleged that the respondent had forced
her to have nonconsensual anal intercourse on three occasions during their
marriage. The offence is alleged to have occurred between January 1, 2012 and
December 31, 2014.
[4]              
The matter is being tried before a jury. The
Crown brought this application at the outset of trial for leave to adduce
uncharged discreditable conduct of the respondent. The complainant provided a
videotaped statement to the police, in which she conveyed the information that
is the subject matter of this application.
[5]              
The Crown sought to adduce the following other
discreditable conduct of the respondent:
[6]              
The Crown also sought to adduce evidence
considered relevant to the sexual assault charge before the court, but took the
position that it is not prior discreditable conduct requiring an application.
The information sought to be adduced was:
[7]              
After hearing submissions, this court provided
the following ruling, with reasons to follow:
[8]              
A succinct summary of the general principles of
admissibility of evidence is found in R. v. J.H., 2020 ONCA 165, at
para. 52, where Watt, J.A. stated:
[9]              
Discreditable conduct evidence is presumptively
inadmissible, and its admission requires that the Crown satisfy the trial judge
that the probative value of the evidence in relation to a particular issue, in
the context of the case, outweighs its potential prejudice and thereby
justifies its reception: R. v. Handy, 2002 SCC 56, at para. 55.
[10]          
There is a significant body of case law from the
Ontario Court of Appeal in which discreditable conduct evidence has been
admitted in cases in which the accused and complainant were in an intimate or
domestic relationship: R. v. D.S.F., [1990] O.J. No. 688 (Ont. C.A.); R.
v. Zang, [2000] O.J. No. 1617 (C.A.); R. v. P.S., 2007 ONCA 299 (CanLII), [2007] O.J.
No.1476 (C.A.); R. v. Stubbs, 2013 ONCA 514. Also see R. v. Trochym,
[2009] O.J. No. 3274 (S.C.J.).
[11]          
In the above cases, the basis for admission has
been to provide a contextual narrative to offer a full understanding of the
relationship in which the alleged offence occurred, and to provide evidence of
motive or animus to prove the alleged offence, as well as intent.
[12]          
The exclusionary rule aims to prevent the type
of prejudice that may accompany the admission of such evidence: (1) the jury
may accept the evidence of extrinsic misconduct to conclude that the accused is
a “bad person”, thus likely to be guilty of the events charged; (2) the jury
may tend to punish the accused for the extrinsic misconduct by finding him
guilty of the events charged; and (3) the jury may become confused and have
their attention deflected from the main purpose of the trial, and substitute
their conclusion on the extrinsic misconduct for their verdict on the
indictment they are trying: R. v. T. (J.A.), 2012 ONCA 117, at para 52; R.
v. Johnson, 2010 ONCA 646, at paras. 85-86.
[13]          
In R. v. B.(L.), 1997 CanLII 3187 (ON CA), [1997] O.J. No. 3042, at
para. 10, the court set out the procedural inquiry to be made by the court in
determining an application for the admission of discreditable conduct evidence,
as follows:
[14]          
In assessing the probative value of the proposed
evidence, the Court of Appeal in B. (L.) directed that consideration
should be given to such matters as (para. 23):
[15]          
B.(L.) also
directs, at para. 24, that an assessment of the prejudicial effect of the
proposed evidence requires that consideration should be given to such matters
as:
[16]          
This conduct is that of the respondent. It is
relevant to many live issues. It is relevant to whether the assault took place,
as the complainant told the police that these incidents occurred in the middle
of the night when the respondent was drunk, and possibly after having watched
pornography. It is relevant to the issue of the respondent’s animus toward the
complainant, his state of mind at the time of the alleged assaults, and could
help the jury understand why she did not go the to the police until 6 to 8
years after the assaults occurred. The state of the relationship between the
respondent and the complainant is necessary for the jury to have a context
within which to place the evidence of the offence and assists in unfolding the
narrative.
[17]          
This proposed evidence is discreditable to the
respondent, but to a lesser degree than the allegations of forced anal
intercourse. As the evidence does not raise allegations of criminal conduct, it
is unlikely to confuse the jury or mislead them from their primary task of
deciding whether the offence of sexual assault has been proven beyond a
reasonable doubt. The complainant will be able to be cross-examined on this
evidence by Mr. Gonzalez.
[18]          
It was argued by Mr. Gonzalez that there is no
evidence of proximity to this vague evidence to the offence dates. This is not
accurate, as right from the start of her interview, the complainant placed her
comments in context, saying that “he was never nice to me. It was a lot of
verbal, emotional abuse. Um the odd shoving, whatever.”
[19]          
There is always the potential for moral or
reasoning prejudice, however this can be curtailed by a limiting instruction to
the jury right at the beginning of the complainant’s testimony, to alert the
jury that such evidence will be coming and to direct them from the outset as to
the permissible and impermissible uses of it. Overall, the probative value of
this evidence is high and not outweighed by any potential prejudice.
[20]          
This is also discreditable conduct evidence on
the part of the respondent. This act, like the offence charged, also involves
intentional touching of the complainant. It is relevant to the respondent’s
state of mind, his intention, the issue of consent, the issue of animus and
again could also help to put the delayed complaint into context.
[21]          
This proposed evidence is also discreditable
conduct on the part of the respondent, but again to a lesser degree than the
charge. Shoving could be the underlying act for a criminal charge, but there is
little reason to be concerned that the jury will become confused when they are
trying the respondent on a charge of sexual assault.
[22]          
The potential prejudice of this evidence is not
severe enough that it could not be neutralized by the limiting instruction.
[23]          
This is also discreditable conduct of the
respondent. The issue of the respondent’s alcohol consumption is relevant for
the reasons previously stated.
[24]          
The alleged comments are of greater concern.
While they are also relevant to the same issues previously identified, they
carry a higher potential for moral or reasoning prejudice than any of the other
evidence. My decision would have been different if the proposed evidence was
that the respondent wanted to kill her, but there is nothing in the words that were
relayed by the complainant to suggest that he was going to be the one to cause
her death, or even that she was going to be killed. It is not a threat to cause
death.
[25]          
The comments were allegedly made directly to the
complainant; she can be cross-examined on them.
[26]          
I have determined that the potential prejudice
of this evidence is not severe enough that it could not be neutralized by the
limiting instruction.
[27]          
Evidence of the complainant’s explanation for
why the marriage broke down was material to the issue of whether the sexual
assaults ever occurred and was needed to provide background and narrative.
However, the admission of such evidence did not require the remarks of the
child, which were hearsay. Removing those remarks eliminated the evidence of
bad character implied by the child’s rejection of the father.
[28]          
As presented, this is not disreputable conduct
evidence. Evidence explaining why the complainant moved away from Innisfil was
material to understanding the narrative, and was relevant to the complainant’s
state of mind prior to going to the police. Mr. Gonzalez argued that the
evidence is immaterial to the issue of sexual assault because the relocation
did not occur until years after the assaults are alleged to occur.
Respectfully, this type of reasoning introduces the fallacy that victims of
sexual assault will or should act in a certain manner.
[29]          
However, the complainant told the police that
the information with respect to people following her was provided to her by one
of their children, who allegedly received such information from the respondent.
Even if that information was not provided for its truth, as Ms. Weis suggested,
but only to establish the complainant’s state of mind, there is potential
prejudice to the respondent if misused by the jury. And it may well have forced
the respondent to testify, given that the source of the information was said to
be him and its prejudicial effect in the mind of the jury may have been
significant. The prejudicial effect of the complainant providing testimony about
why she believed people were following her was too great. Accordingly, the
complainant was permitted to explain why she moved away from Innisfil, and
could even state her belief that she was being followed, but could not repeat
hearsay.
[30]          
With respect to the category of evidence, Mr.
Gonzalez did not object to its admissibility. I agree that evidence of the
complainant’s description of the marriage, and whether she found the respondent
controlling and domineering, are relevant to help the jury place the
allegations of sexual assault in context.  The complainant’s perception of the
respondent as being controlling and domineering was also relevant to the issue
of consent and delayed disclosure, both of which are live issues. I take issue,
however, with the characterization of the evidence, as I find that casting the
respondent as “controlling and domineering” is disreputable conduct. It is bad
character evidence that alleges morally reprehensible conduct by the respondent that
is extrinsic to the specific charge.
[31]          
The same analysis applies here as did to the
evidence that the respondent was verbally and emotionally abusive during the
marriage.
[32]          
The evidence with respect to having a friend
facilitate exchanges of children with the respondent is not disreputable
conduct evidence. It does not infer anything beyond the complainant wanting to
not see the respondent. The evidence was material to her allegation that she
was afraid of the respondent, and relevant to the issues of consent and delayed
disclosure. It is of minimal prejudice, if any, and so was admitted.
[33]          
As indicated, the potential dangers that may
arise from the introduction of the evidence can be addressed with an
instruction to the jury. The instruction that will be delivered follows below.