[1]              
The Defendant, Barrick Gold Corporation (“Barrick”), seeks to have
these companion actions dismissed or permanently stayed on the
basis that this Court lacks jurisdiction or, alternatively, on the basis of the
doctrine of forum non conveniens. Both actions raise the same claims and
are based on similar incidents. I will treat them as one.
[2]              
The Plaintiffs plead that they or their family
members were injured or killed at a mining site located in the United Republic
of Tanzania. The mine is owned by a company whose majority shareholder is Barrick,
and for which the Plaintiffs say Barrick is ultimately responsible. Barrick submits
that it is an owner but not manager and operator of the mining operation, and
that in any case all of the violent incidents alleged by the Plaintiffs were
perpetrated not by Barrick or its subsidiary but by the independent, sovereign
Tanzanian police.
[3]              
It is the Plaintiffs’ view that by seeking to
escape Ontario jurisdiction, Barrick is attempting to have the actions tried in
a foreign court that is not adequate to the task of conducting a trial of these
claims, and to thereby avoid responsibility for harmful corporate conduct. It
is Barrick’s view that it will answer all allegations made against it, but that
the only forum with any connection to the issues and where all of the evidence
and witnesses are located is Tanzania, and that the English common law-based
Tanzanian legal system is well up to the task of adjudicating these claims.
[4]              
Barrick began its life as an Ontario company, but some years ago
was continued a British Columbia corporation whose corporate head office is in
Vancouver. It is an international gold mining giant, with some 23,000 employees
engaged in mining projects located around the world. Among many other things, it
is 84% shareholder, along with the government of Tanzania as 16% shareholder,
of North Mara Gold Mine Limited (“NMGML”), a Tanzanian company
that owns and operates the North Mara Gold Mine (the “Mine”). Barrick and the
Tanzanian government are also the shareholders, in the same proportion, of Twiga Minerals Corporation (“Twiga”), a Tanzanian company that
provides various management services to the Mine.
[5]              
The Mine is located in a remote location in
northern Tanzania, near the country’s borders with Kenya and Uganda. The parties
agree that the Mine site is regularly accessed by local residents not employed
by NMGML and not authorized to access the site. These incidents have led to
violence, as those entering the Mine have clashed with the local police and,
reportedly, with each other.
[6]              
It is fair to say that although the parties
agree that confrontational and violent incidents have occurred at the Mine,
they describe the activity leading to these incidents in starkly different
terms. According to Plaintiffs, those entering the Minde site are local craftsmen
eking out a living at no one else’s expense; while according to Barrick, they
are looters forcefully invading the Mine property to steal what is not theirs. Thus,
in their factum counsel for the Plaintiffs state that, “Artisanal miners seek
to earn a subsistence living by entering waste rock dumps in an effort to
secure trace amounts of gold.” By contrast, counsel for Barrick state in their
factum that, “Unfortunately, the Mine is invaded
regularly by trespassers who attempt to steal gold-bearing rock and other
property.”
[7]              
Security at the Mine is provided by a
combination of unarmed private security guards contracted by NMGML and/or Twiga,
together with armed members of the Tanzanian Police Force (“TPF”), an agency of
the national government of Tanzania. All of the injuries and deaths referenced
in the Statements of Claim are alleged to have been perpetrated by the TPF.
[8]              
The TPF operate at the Mine site under contract
with NMGML. The arrangement is documented in two Memorandums of Understanding
(“MOUs”) dated April 2019 and May 2022, both between NMGML and the TPF.
[9]              
Under the MOUs, NMGML provides certain funding
and equipment for the police operation at the Mine. The MOUs confirm that the TPF
is, nevertheless, an independent police force of the sovereign government of
Tanzania, operating pursuant to Tanzanian law and under
the same chain of command as it does throughout that country. Barrick’s counsel
point out that the TPF would be responsible for policing and security in the
North Mara region with or without the MOUs.
[10]          
The Plaintiffs do not suggest that any NMGML
employee, and certainly no Barrick employee or officer, is engaged in security
activity themselves or commands and directs the actions of the TPF on the
ground. The Statements of Claim allege that the Plaintiffs or their family
members were injured or killed by acts of violence perpetrated by TPF members
at (or near) the Mine between April 2021 and July 2023. The pleading does not
allege that any of those acts of violence were committed
by NMGML or Barrick personnel.
[11]          
Rather, the Plaintiffs’ allegation is that Barrick
is responsible for management and oversight, and is thus legally answerable for
injuries that occur on the Mine property. The Plaintiffs also submit that Barrick
has undertaken to be responsible for human rights at its mine sites worldwide,
including in North Mara, and that Barrick arranged for certain training in that
respect for the Tanzanian police. The Plaintiffs also argue that the MOUs were
signed by NMGML directors and officers appointed by Barrick as majority
shareholder, making Barrick responsible for the conduct of the TPF thereunder.
[12]          
The Statements of Claim were both issued in Ontario. No claim has
been issued by the Plaintiffs in Tanzania, and no claim has been brought
against the TPL. Likewise, no claim has been issued against NMGML or any other
Barrick-related individual or entity; that said, the pleadings do not claim that
NMGML – a corporation in which, as indicated above, the Tanzanian government is
a minority shareholder – is a sham or a façade for Barrick. Rather, Plaintiffs
allege that Barrick is directly responsible for oversight of NMGML and the
Mine. Their counsel characterize the claims as aiming directly at the powerful parent
company and ultimate source of the wrongdoing in its home jurisdiction.
[13]          
On the other hand, Barrick characterizes the claims as targeting
the wrong defendant in the wrong court, all in an effort to avoid having to
prove any actual wrongdoing at the Mine. Its counsel submit that by suing the
geographically distant majority shareholder of NMGML in a jurisdiction detached
from the events giving rise to the claim, the Plaintiffs will be able to emphasize
generic pronouncements about corporate responsibility rather than focus on
rights and wrongs on the ground during the violent incidents at issue.
[14]          
In support of the view that Barrick is ultimately the source of
the wrongdoing alleged in the claim, the Plaintiffs cite notices of annual meetings,
website postings, reports, regulatory forms, and other public statements by
Barrick with respect to the “sustainability” policies that guide its
investments. They reference, for example, Barrick’s 2023
Notice of Annual Meeting, where it is stated that, “Our sustainability strategy
is our business plan. Sustainability is the foundation for how we conduct our business.” They likewise offer as evidence of top-down management
Barrick’s securities filings, where the company states, inter alia:
[15]          
Plaintiffs’ counsel go to some lengths to
demonstrate that these statements are not just platitudes, but are part of the
company’s structure of “bottom-up reporting” and “top-down leadership.” They
point out that Barrick has a number of committees at the board of directors
level engaged in sustainability efforts, including the Audit & Risk
Committee, the ESG and Nominating Committee, and the Compensation Committee. They
likewise point out that key responsibility for sustainability, including human
rights policies, “resides with Barrick’s Sustainability Executive, a position
held by Barrick affiant Grant Beringer.” In support of this claim, they adduce
evidence that Mr. Beringer’s compensation “is tied in part to attainment of the
company’s sustainability targets, including on human rights”, and that he
reports to Barrick’s CEO, Mark Bristow.
[16]          
Barrick’s counsel respond that none of this points to management
of NMGML, or of the Mine, being located in Ontario. The evidence shows that
Barrick has a decentralized structure, with regional teams responsible for key
functions and activities. Of its 23,000 employees, only 55 are at the company’s
office in Toronto, and are engaged in finance, communications, investor relations,
legal and corporate secretary matters, and human resources.
[17]          
No board member of Barrick is located in Ontario. Mr. Beringer,
the Sustainability Executive, resides in South Africa. The regional
sustainability lead for Africa is Thomas Wilson, who also lives in and works
out of South Africa, while his immediate predecessor in that position, Hilaire
Diarra, lived in and worked out of Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania. In addition, the
Chief Operating Officer for Africa, Sebastiaan Bock, lives and works in South
Africa, as did his predecessor in that position, Willem Jacobus Jacobs.
[18]          
The General Manager of Operations for Central and East Africa is
Tahirou Ballo, who lives in Tanzania. Most importantly, the Mine’s General
Manager, Apolinary Lyambiko, who is responsible for day-to-day management of
the Mine, lives in Tanzania and reports to NMGML’s board, not to Barrick’s. As
for Barrick CEO Bristow, he is a South African who is reported to have homes
and to alternately reside in a number of countries, including South Africa, the
UK, the US, and Mauritius, but has no residence in Ontario or Canada.
[19]          
Turning to NMGML, it employs
upward of 1,350 people, approximately 96% of whom are Tanzanian nationals and
none of whom is resident in Ontario. These workers engage in all mine-related
functions, with Mr. Lyambiko having final say on ongoing operational matters.
He is a Tanzanian national, as are 13 of his 17 department heads, the other 4
being nationals of other African countries. Furthermore, all NMGML staff involved
in security and community relations are Tanzanians.
[20]          
COO Bock has deposed that the business and management of NMGML are overseen by a five-member Board
of Directors, none of whom resides in or works out of Ontario. The Board meets
on a quarterly basis, with all meetings taking place in person in Tanzania. In
giving evidence in this motion, Mr. Lyambiko has stated categorically that “the
Mine is not operated on a day-to-day basis by employees of Barrick… [and that]
NMGML has its own board of directors, management, employees, business premises,
bank accounts, finance team and payroll. It makes its own personnel decisions.”
[21]          
In addition, while the sustainability concept
applies Barrick-wide, Mr. Lyambiko deposes that all applicable sustainability initiatives are implemented on the ground in North
Mara, Tanzania. They are not devised in or delivered from a corporate office in
Ontario or anywhere else. The initiatives are comprised of a number of
localized projects and goals, including NMGML’s procuring of goods and services
locally and its funding of various community projects.
[22]          
Mr. Lyambiko also describes that he chairs NMGML’s
Community Development Committee, which oversees investment by NMGML in
community projects identified by local stakeholders in the North Mara region.
He further explains that as part of NMGML’s sustainability initiatives, local
residents with concerns about the Mine’s operations and impacts can access and
seek a remedy in a grievance process established by NMGML.
[23]          
As indicated in the previous section, NMGML and Twiga hired a private Tanzanian contractor to provide
unarmed security services at the Mine. There is nothing in the record to
indicated that Barrick is a party to this contract or that it oversees it. These
security arrangements are between Tanzanian parties on both sides – i.e.
NMGML/Twiga on one side and the security company, Nguvu Moja, on the other. The
contracts were negotiated and concluded in Tanzania. The services thereunder
have been performed in Tanzania by Tanzanian personnel governed by Tanzanian law.
The compensation to Nguvu Moja is deposited by NMGML and/or Twiga directly into
Nguvu Moja’s Tanzanian bank account.
[24]          
As also indicated above, NMGML has contracted
with the TPF to provide additional security at the Mine. Tanzanian law
professor, Leonard Paulo Shaidi, has deposed that numerous
mining companies, financial institutions and other businesses and civil society
groups in Tanzania have entered into similar agreements with the TPF.
[25]          
 This type of security contract with local
police appears to be a standard arrangement in the resource industry. In Kalma
v. African Minerals Ltd., [2018] EWJC 3506, at para. 196, aff’d
[2020] EWCA Civ 144, a case arising out of events in Sierra Leone, an English
court has indicated that it “would be surprised if such payments [to Sierra
Leone police] had not been made [by the mine]… the fact finding exercise must
not be performed without regard to the prevailing social and political context
in which it falls to be carried out.”
[26]          
A contract with the TPF appears to have been a
necessary arrangement in North Mara because of the remote location and the
continuous entrance of local people, often armed, onto the Mine property. Mr. Lyambiko
has testified that the trespassers detonate live explosives and engage
in other hazardous conduct to access gold ore that they seek on the Mine’s
property, all of which requires a substantial security presence.
[27]          
The Plaintiffs seek to link Barack to the MOUs between
NMGML and the TPF by showing that they are in keeping with general corporate
policy with respect to sustainability, human rights, and security. There is,
however, no evidence that Barrick, as opposed to NMGML, directed the
negotiation of the MOUs or dictated their content. And although two of NMGML’s
directors signing the MOUs are Barrick appointees to the NMGML board, there is
nothing in the record to suggest that NMGML’s directors do not operate
independently or exercise independent judgment. Moreover, Barrick’s counsel
point out that there is no connection alleged to exist between the MOUs and
Barrack’s Ontario office.
[28]          
The MOUs are local Tanzanian agreements that
govern the involvement of the TPF and payment of Tanzanian police officers in
Tanzanian currency by deposit into Tanzanian banks. By their terms, they require the TPF to abide by national and international human rights
law and anti-corruption standards, together with Tanzanian and international
policing standards. But there is nothing about that content that implicates Barick
in Ontario – unless the Plaintiffs mean to say that human rights standards are
foreign to the contracting Tanzanian entities, and so must have been added or
insisted upon by the Canadian shareholder. But there is no evidentiary basis to
even suggest such a prejudicial conclusion.
[29]          
According to Mr. Lyambiko’s evidence, the Nguvu
Moja personnel for the most part monitor the Mine property via CCTV
surveillance, and call the TPF on an ‘as needed’ basis when trespassers enter
or other illegal activity erupts. According to the Plaintiffs, the TPF
typically responds with disproportionate and unnecessary force, injuring or
even killing non-threatening people.
[30]          
It is not the role of the court on this motion
to determine which side’s version is right or wrong about who uses force
against whom or whether the use of force is justified in any given
circumstance. But there is nothing in the record that runs contrary to the
provisions of the MOUs confirming that neither NMGML
nor Barrick directs, controls, or has the ability to command the TPF. To
the contrary, the TPF is a national police force that operates under its own
independent chain of command in all of Tanzania. This independence is expressly
recognized in the MOUs.
[31]          
Plaintiffs’ counsel point out that although the MOUs might assert
the TPF’s independence, Barrack’s deponents, including COO Bock, have stated on
the record that Mr. Bristow is a very hands-on CEO, and that he makes it his
business to ensure that the Mine applies Barrick’s policies. The
Plaintiffs point to evidence that Mr. Bristow, who, as previously indicated, resides
in South Africa, the UK, and elsewhere, typically visits North Mara at least 4
times per year, and that Mr. Bock, who resides in South Africa, visited North
Mara about half a dozen times last year.
[32]          
While those visits do take place, they do
not appear to have anything to do with the workings of the TPF or its involvement
at the Mine. The record shows that in the years since the MOUs have been in
place, there has been one visit – a courtesy call rather than a working meeting
– to the TPF by Messrs. Berringer and Bock when they were visiting the Mine from
South Africa. There is no evidence in the record that Mr. Bristow has ever met
with the TPF on his visits.
[33]          
The record also contains no evidence ant anyone from Barrick’s
Ontario office has ever spoken with a Tanzanian police officer or in any way sought
to direct the TPF. The sporadic visits by Barrick management to the Mine are
all by Barrick’s Africa-based regional executives. In fact, it is unclear from
the record whether anyone from the Ontario office, which has no particular involvement
in the North Mara project, has ever visited the Mine at all.
[34]          
To illustrate the nature of their claims, the
Plaintiffs have included in the evidentiary record affidavits sworn by 2 of the
29 Plaintiffs: Elizabeth Matiko Irondo and Charles Daniel Nyakina. This sworn
testimony relates the facts giving rise to the claims by these two Plaintiffs.
Given that the Plaintiffs’ record is submitted in response to a motion to stay
or dismiss where the moving party is out to demonstrate that another
jurisdiction is “clearly more appropriate” than the present one, one can
surmise that this record contains the Plaintiffs’ best evidence: Club
Resorts Ltd. v. Van Breda, 2012 SCC 17 (CanLII), [2012] 1 SCR 572, at
para. 108.
[35]          
In other words, Plaintiffs’ counsel presumably
canvassed their 29 clients and adduced the most cogent evidence available in
order to demonstrate the type of forum that their case demands. In this way, the
Court can properly assess whether the Plaintiff’s chosen jurisdiction or Barrick’s
proposed jurisdiction is better situated “for disposing of the litigation and
thus ensuring fairness to the parties and a more efficient process for
resolving their dispute”: Ibid., at para. 109. As in a summary judgment proceeding,
the Court is “entitled to proceed on the basis that the parties have put into
the record all [or at least some] of the evidence that would be
forthcoming at trial”: Switzer v. Petrie, 2024 ONCA 474, at para. 8.
[36]          
Accordingly, if the moving party – i.e. Barrick – puts its “best foot
forward” with evidence demonstrating the frailties of the present forum, then
the responding party – i.e. the Plaintiffs – must have also put forward their
best evidence and their best affiants. Otherwise, one or the other risks losing
the forum challenge: Combined Air Mechanical Services Inc. v. Flesch,
2011 ONCA 764, at para. 15. The court has nothing to rely on but the record
that the parties place before it; the parties will not have a second chance to
make their choice of forum case. While I do understand that the evidence in the
record is of two Plaintiffs who serve as examples for the rest, I have to
assume that the evidence before me is the best evidence that the parties have
at this time.
[37]          
With that in mind, the specific evidence put
forward by the Plaintiffs is instructive. Although articulated in the language
of human rights law, the claim against Barrick is essentially a negligence
claim. As Plaintiffs’ counsel put it, “The claim of direct negligence is
informed by the UK Supreme Court ruling in Vedanta Resources PLC v Lungowe
and others, 2019 UKSC 20 (“Vedanta”). In that case, the court
examined whether the role of the parent company in the management of its mine
in Zambia was sufficient to give rise to a duty of care in tort to local
residents.” Plaintiffs’ counsel go on to contend that “Barrick created,
directs, implements, and supervises the security strategy and human rights
policy at the North Mara mine, and Barrick’s negligence led to the deaths and
injuries to community members.”
[38]          
For its part, Barrick rejects the Plaintiffs’
allegations. More to the point, it contends that any oversight involvement that
it did have had nothing to do with hands-on security matters, and that in any
case all security at the Mine is directed and implemented in Africa, not in
Ontario. Plaintiffs’ counsel responds to this by emphasizing the duty of care,
which they submit is based on Barrick’s overall policy formulation and
coordination role. The Plaintiffs therefore focus on Barrick’s own policy
statements, publicly accessible regulatory filings, and website and other publications.
[39]          
Without determining for now the merits of the
duty of care argument, one element of the negligence claim that cannot be
established by Barrick’s publications alone, and that requires local,
on-the-spot testimony, is causation.  In a negligence claim, it is not enough
for a Plaintiff to allege that a duty of care exists and that he or she has suffered
an injury. The breach must be shown to have actually caused or contributed to the
injury; there must be a causal relationship “between the tortious act of
the wrongdoer and the injury to the victim in order to justify compensation of
the latter out of the pocket of the former”: Snell
v. Farrell, 1990 CanLII 70 (SCC), [1990] 2 SCR 311, at para. 26.
[40]          
In her affidavit, Plaintiff Elizabeth Matiko Irondo describes the
death of her son at the Mine. In an introductory paragraph, she states:
[41]          
She then describes how her son would search for gold in what she
calls the Mine’s “waste rock”, and explains that this was easier before the Mine
built a wall around the perimeter of its property. Once the wall went up,
individuals seeking access to the property had to breach the wall. She deposes
that, “[s]ince the mine built the wall around 2018, the violence by the police
has gotten worse.”
[42]          
Ms. Irondo goes on to describe being informed that on the night
her son was killed there had been some incident at the Mine, and that the TPF
was conducting a search and there was blood on the ground. She then forthrightly
states that she does not know the circumstances surrounding her son’s death, but
says that his body that she saw later in a morgue showed signs of a gunshot
wound. As she puts it, “I have never been told how and why Irondo died. Ms.
Irondo further laments that no one was ever charged criminally for the shooting
death of her son. She fears that, in her words, “The mine and government are
partners. I do not have faith in them to hold anyone responsible for Irondo’s
death.”
[43]          
In his affidavit, Plaintiff Charles Daniel Nyakina describes the
June 2022 death of his brother, Emmanuel Daniel Nyakina, at the Mine. Using the
identical phrasing as Ms. Irondo, Mr. Nyakina states:
[44]          
Mr. Nyakina’s family lives adjacent to the mine; he is a
subsistence farmer who grew up near the Mine but now lives some distance away. Mr.
Nyakina relates that his brother would search for gold in pits outside the
Mine’s property as well as in remnant gold piles on the Mine’s property inside
the perimeter wall. Mr. Nyakina was not present during his brother’s shooting
and has no firsthand knowledge of the incident. He says that on the day of his
death he first saw his brother in a nearby hospital where he was taken after
being shot. Mr. Nyakina then deposes that he managed to speak with his brother in
the hospital, and gives an unverifiable account of what he says his brother relayed
to him at that time.
[45]          
In addition, Mr. Nyakina speculates that “Barrick may have
information about the shooting of Emmanuel since he was killed inside the mine
and there are lots of cameras in the area.”  Much like Ms. Irondo, Mr. Nyakina
also laments that, as far as he knows, the TPF has not conducted an investigation
into the shooting. He states that, “The police have not interviewed me or my
family, or given us any information about Emmanuel’s death.” It is unknown
whether the TPF has, in fact, investigated the incident.
[46]          
It is perhaps not surprising that the police have not interviewed
Mr. Nyakin and his family. Mr. Nyakina deposes that none of them were present
when Emmanuel was shot, and that neither he nor anyone else in his family knows
what transpired. Mr. Nyakina only knows what he was told as hearsay. If the TPF
did an investigation into an alleged police shooting, they, much like a court
reviewing the matter, would likely be interested in hearing from actual
witnesses to the event.
[47]          
From the statements by these two affiants, one can reach a number
of significant conclusions with respect to the future trial of the claims. In
the first place, the Plaintiffs’ best evidence is not useful in determining the
cause of any of the injuries or deaths. No amount of references to Barrick’s
sustainability policies, its securities filings and other publications, its website
statements about community commitment, NGO statements about corporate
responsibility in resource extraction, international resolutions on human
rights and foreign investment, etc. will help to determine responsibility for
the two deaths. The trials will evolve around the question of factual causation,
and the evidence of the two Plaintiffs chosen for this motion is indeterminate
on that issue.
[48]          
Both of the Plaintiffs’ affiants concede that they do not know
what transpired during the incidents in which their family members died. Both deceased
were on the Mine property, presumably as trespassers since they were not
employees and had no legal reason to be there; and both appear to have died of
gunshot wounds.
[49]          
It seems likely that Ms. Irondo’s son and Mr. Nyakina’s brother were
shot by a TPF member since the police are armed on the site of the Mine. But
even this is not certain. Contemporaneous press releases contained in the
motion record describe several of the incidents in issue as armed intrusions by
masses of local people onto the Mine’s property, with some of the injuries and
deaths of the Plaintiffs being a result of those participating in these
intrusions fighting among themselves.
[50]          
The evidence in the record cannot not establish with any
certainty how or why the relatives of the Plaintiffs’ two deponents were shot.
Ms. Irondo and Mr. Nyakina have no first-hand knowledge of what their
respective family members were doing when they died. The record does not give
any insight into whether Ms. Irondo’s son and Mr. Nyakina’s brother – or any of
the other Plaintiffs and their family members – were innocent victims of the
police, were shot in self-defense by the police, or were attacked by others
invading the Mine at the same time and competing for the gold ore found there.
[51]          
The record likewise does not reveal whether the deceased
Plaintiffs were themselves armed or carrying implements that could be used as
weapons, whether the police opened fire unnecessarily on isolated individuals
or were overwhelmed by a large number of people invading the Mine property, etc.
If one takes as an example the kind of evidence marshalled to determine causation
and fault in an alleged police shooting in Canada, a conclusive finding as to
whether the shooting was justified or not will involve a thorough exploration
of the event on the ground, from multiple angles. Although any number of the
Plaintiffs themselves may testify at trial, the record here suggests that their
testimony alone will not suffice for their claim.
[52]          
The Plaintiffs assume that there is video
surveillance footage available of the incidents at issue. That may be
the case, although it is uncertain at this early stage what was captured on
camera. At the same time, the record indicates that a number of the incidents
in issue occurred outside of the Mine’s CCTV range. The accounts in the record for
the most part suggest that the violent occurrences were in the course of mass
invasions of the Mine property, presenting a complex and potentially confusing scenario
where multiple viewpoints will have to be explored. It is more than likely that
most of the relevant evidence will have to come from eyewitnesses at the time
of the event.
[53]          
The witnesses with evidence about the shooting incidents will
likely be other individuals who entered the Mine with the injured and deceased.
This will likely be accompanied by evidence presented by members of the Nguvu Moja security team, as well as NMGML staff who may have been
present, and, perhaps, medical personnel at hospitals where the injured were
treated. Most importantly, eye-witness testimony will have to come from the TPF
members on site at the time of the various incidents, along with the TPF
officers in command of those members.
[54]          
What is certain is that no one from Barrick’s finance or
communications or legal department in its Ontario office will be called as a
witness to the events in issue. To the extent that the trial will turn on
determining factual causation – who caused the injury and under what
circumstances – every witness will have been in North Mara, Tanzania on the relevant
date. Barrick’s limited personnel and corporate presence in Ontario is beside
the point. In fact, attempts to focus the analysis on corporate pronouncements
instead of events on the ground will inevitably distract from, rather than aid,
the court in its task.
[55]          
If the circumstances of the deaths can be established as a
wrongful police shooting, there may then be a subsequent question as to whether
any of Barrick’s corporate policies or actions are causally connected to the
deaths. But if the evidence turns out to reveal a justified police shooting,
or, depending on the circumstances, perhaps even an accidental one or a wound
inflicted by someone other than a TPF member, then Barrick’s policies may
become a non-issue; after all, Barrick and its policies will not be relevant to
any inquiry if it is determined that the death or injury of a Plaintiff was not
wrongfully inflicted.
[56]          
The primary determination of how the deaths were caused will be
based on possible video footage from the Mine and on witness accounts in Tanzania
alone. If the crucial witnesses cannot or do not come to Ontario to testify, a court
in Ontario will not be in a position to make a proper decision.
[57]          
In fact, even any subsequent analysis of Barrick’s policies and
their impact will be based on the evidence of witnesses in Tanzania or Barrick’s
regional personnel in South Africa. While documentary records can be digitally produced
anywhere, it is fair to say that no one has identified a single, truly relevant
witness from Ontario.
[58]          
As moving party in a forum non conveniens
motion, it is incumbent on Barrick to demonstrate that the forum selected by
the Plaintiffs is more than inconvenient. Barrick “must show that the
alternative forum is clearly more appropriate”: Van Breda, at para. 108.
[59]          
This, then, sets up a contest between Ontario and Tanzania as
competing forums for the action. As explained above, counsel
for Barrick have had little problem establishing that the vast majority of the
evidence and witnesses necessary for the trial will come from Tanzania; and that
the one or two witnesses who are Barrick representatives (as opposed to NMGML personnel
and others) will come from Tanzania or its regional team in South Africa, not
from Ontario.
[60]          
That said, Tanzania is not a jurisdiction that
is particularly familiar to Ontario lawyers and courts. That foreignness has created
an occasion for a full-scale exploration of its appropriateness as a forum for
litigation. As the Supreme Court of Canada noted in Van Breda, at para.
63, this exercise can create some tension between the need to consider the
effectiveness of the foreign jurisdiction’s litigation environment with the
need for comity and respect for a foreign jurisdiction’s legal system and
policy choices:
[61]          
The parties have, accordingly, invested
considerable effort into exploring the pros and cons of the competing systems.
And while the merits of Ontario litigation need no special consideration or
expert evidence, the Tanzanian system has come in for intense examination in
this motion. The Plaintiffs have produced a number of expert reports in an
attempt to demonstrate that the Tanzanian legal system does not provide an
appropriate forum to host their claim, and Barrick has produced a number of
expert reports in an attempt to demonstrate that the Plaintiffs’ attacks on the
Tanzanian system are unwarranted and that its justice system is up to the task
of trying this case.
[62]          
Relying heavily on Nevsun Resources Ltd. v.
Araya, [2020] SCR 156 (“Nevsun SCC”), at para. 50, counsel for the
Plaintiffs submit that, “the deference accorded by comity to foreign legal
systems ‘ends where clear violations of international law and fundamental human
rights begin.’” They go on to argue that Canadian courts may consider “the
nature of the justice system” in another jurisdiction in light of “the Canadian
sense of what is fair, right and just”: Ibid., at para 51.
[63]          
This approach is a springboard for the
Plaintiffs to launch an attack at large on the Tanzanian justice system,
comparing it to what the British Columbia courts and the Supreme Court of
Canada found in Nevsun:
[64]          
Thus, for example, citing Nevsun (BCCA),
at paras. 188-190, the Plaintiffs submit that if a moving party is unable to
show that the foreign jurisdiction in issue has a system for proper documentary
disclosure, that jurisdiction will not be an appropriate one to which to remove
the action. They further contend, again citing Nevsun SCC, at paras.
129-132, that unlike in Ontario and Canada, Tanzanian law does not provide a
basis for pursuing tort claims based directly on customary international law. As
Plaintiffs’ counsel put it in their factum, since their clients “advance claims
based on both negligence and on the violation of customary international law as
recognized by the Supreme Court of Canada in Nevsun v. Araya…if this
lawsuit is not heard in Ontario, it will not be heard at all.”
[65]          
There was, of course, good reason for
characterizing the alternative jurisdiction in Nevsun as one in which
there “never could” be a trial: the jurisdiction in question was a country lying
north of Tanzania along Africa’s eastern coast, Eritrea. That country was
described as a “dictatorial, one-party state which has never held
elections or implemented a constitution” and that is “one
of the most oppressive regimes in the world”: Nevsun BCCA, at paras. 5, 8.
[66]          
Eritrea is described by the Supreme Court as being on a “continuous war footing” where, in 2002, “the period of
military conscription in Eritrea was extended indefinitely and conscripts were
forced to provide labour…for various companies owned by senior Eritrean
military or party officials”: Nevsun SCC, at para 10. Masses of
conscripts were placed into this National Service Program and were “forced to
provide labour in harsh and dangerous conditions for years”…  They were
otherwise “confined to camps” for a period whose “tenure was indefinite”: Ibid.,
at paras. 10-12.
[67]          
Most significantly, Eritrea was characterized
as a jurisdiction in which “[t]he rule of law does not exist…It has no
constitution, functioning legislature or civil justice system, independent
judiciary, elections…”: Nevsun BCCA., at para. 8. It is against this background
of an undemocratic regime and the “absence of a ‘functioning system of justice’
in Eritrea”, ibid., at para. 5, that the Plaintiffs embark on an
analysis of the Tanzanian legal system. It is likewise against this background
that Plaintiffs’ counsel conclude in their factum that, “The
courts of Tanzania do not provide an adequate alternative forum for the
litigation of these complex claims…”
[68]          
As described by Professor Shaidi in his expert
report, Tanganyika (as it was then known) became a British colony at the end of
the First World War. In 1920, the colonial government adopted, as it had in
India and elsewhere in the British empire, an English common law-based legal
system. This legal system remained in place with independence in 1961, and was
continued in the 1964 Constitution enacted upon the union of Tanganyika and
Zanzibar for the formation of the United Republic of Tanzania.
[69]          
Professor Shaidi relates that, “Throughout its
history as an independent state…this inherited legal system and the body of
laws imported and developed by the colonial legislature have shaped Tanzanian
law and the Tanzanian legal system, which in turn has been developed and
refined by the National Assembly (the Legislature of Tanzania) and the
jurisprudence of the Tanzania Courts.” The political and legal system in
Tanzania was designed a century ago based on the English model, and, as in the
common law provinces of Canada, has remained so until today.
[70]          
As the Professor Shaidi and other experts
describe it, the Tanzanian legal system is structured around principles
familiar to all common law-based systems:
[71]          
This characterization of the justice system as
impartial and independent is echoed in the expert report of the former Chief
Justice of Tanzania, Mohamed Chande Othman:
[72]          
Chief Justice Othman was cross-examined by
Plaintiffs’ counsel, but it is safe to say that this description of the
Tanzanian justice system was, if anything, strengthened by the evidence brought
out in cross-examination. Plaintiffs’ counsel questioned him on a number of
speeches he has given at conferences and other forums, in which he expounded on
challenges faced by the legal system, the courts, and the bar. These challenges
included improving access to justice and the timeliness of justice, reducing the
expense of justice, improving funding for legal representation for indigent
litigants, and a concentration of lawyers in urban settings with too few
lawyers in rural areas.
[73]          
Chief Justice Othman’s extra-judicial remarks
may on one hand be seen as critical of Tanzanian justice. That is certainly what
Plaintiffs’ counsel tried to being out in cross-examination. However, Chief
Justice Othman’s points are at the same time rather familiar. In fact, they are
virtually identical to extra-judicial speeches and remarks on access to justice
and the expense of civil litigation made by Canada’s own former Chief Justice Beverly
McLachlin: “Access to Justice: A Fond Farewell”, Action Committee on Access to
Justice in Civil and Family Matters”, December 13, 2021, <https://www.justicedevelopmentgoals.ca/blog/access-to-justice-a-fond-farewell-beverley.
mclachlin >.
[74]          
The views of Tanzania’s former chief justice likewise
parallel remarks about expense and delay in Canadian justice expressed by former
Supreme Court Justice Michael Moldaver: “Moldaver: Major Overhaul needed in
criminal justice”, National, Canadian Bar Association, April 17, 2023,
< https://nationalmagazine.ca/en-ca/articles/people
/profiles/2023/major-overhaul-needed>. They also reflect the very themes
that were the subject of former Ontario Court of Appeal Justice Coulter
Osborne’s report on court funding and legal aid reform: “The Osbourne Report”,
Ministry of the Attorney General, November 2007, < https://wayback.archiveit.org/ 16312/20210402061409 /http://www.attorneygeneral.jus.gov.on.ca/english/about/pubs/cjrp/>
[75]          
In other words, what the cross-examination of Chief Justice
Othman brought out was the receptiveness of Tanzanian justice to thoughtful commentary by a well-informed jurist, in exactly the way
one would expect of a transparent legal system open to critique and reform. The
legal policy challenges outlined in Chief Justice Othman’s comments about
Tanzania apply equally to Canada and Ontario; and they are all legitimate
critique in an open and properly functioning legal system.
[76]          
On the other hand, no one would, or could, say
that this kind of critique would be permitted in, or that it even applies to,
Eritrea. Court delay and the expense of civil litigation represent issues that
are so far from what ails Eritrean society that they are not worth even
mentioning. Eritrea was described in Nevsun BCCA, at para. 12, as “a
‘rogue state’ with no functioning legal system.” The comparison of that legal
vacuum with Tanzania’s common law system simply is not apt.
[77]          
This is not a case where Canada is needed to ensure that the law
“percolates down from the international to the domestic sphere”, as Justice
Abella put it in Nevsun SCC, at para. 71. It is a negligence case about
allegedly wrongful corporate and/or police conduct, for which the domestic Tanzanian
legal system appears as well equipped as Canada’s legal system.
[78]          
It is noteworthy that Chief Justice Othman, besides having a
wealth of experience and being a well-qualified expert in his country’s legal
system, is acknowledged even by Plaintiffs’ experts as being more knowledgeable
about the Tanzanian system than they are. His report, together with that of
Professor Shaidi, establishes that Tanzania’s courts are fair, independent, and
competent. They administer a system, and approach adjudication, in a way that
is, warts and all, quite similar to Canadian and Ontario legal process.
[79]          
On a final note regarding the Tanzanian system at large, the
Plaintiffs allege that the Tanzanian judiciary lacks independence because the
Tanzanian constitution gives too much latitude to the country’s executive
branch of government in appointing judges and setting their remuneration. This
line of argument is premised on an expert affidavit submitted by Kenyan lawyer Donald
Deya, who has spent time doing a study of five east African countries –
Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda – and finds that Tanzania comes up
short on judicial independence because of these appointment and remuneration
issues.
[80]          
Counsel for Barrick point out that whatever Mr. Deya’s talents
might be as an east African comparativist, he is not a Tanzanian lawyer, has
never practiced in that country or appeared in its courts, and is at best a
superficial observer of the Tanzanian legal system. His evidence is directly
addressed by Chief Justice Othman, whose expertise in the Tanzanian judiciary
and legal system is beyond question.
[81]          
In particular, Chief Justice Othman explains that Tanzanian
judges are appointed with security of tenure. They cannot be removed
capriciously, and their remuneration is fixed not by the president’s office or
any other political actor but by an independent tribunal or commission. He also
points out that while the Tanzanian constitution gives the president of the
country the power to appoint judges, that power is exercised only after
consultation with an independent judicial commission composed of members of the
bar and current sitting judges. He states that, “This consultation is
constitutionally mandated, and in practice, no candidate has ever been selected
from outside a short list provided by the Commission to the President.”
[82]          
While Mr. Deya may have an interesting comparative perspective in
comparing Tanzania to several of its east African neighbours, he has no
expertise when it comes to comparing Tanzania to Ontario or Canada. And yet, that
is the only relevant comparison, since under the circumstances those are the
forums actually in issue.
[83]          
I need no expert report to know that in Canada, the appointment
of judges of the superior courts of the province (where the within action has
been commenced) is constitutionally the responsibility of the federal
government under section 96 of the Constitution Act, 1867, and that the
appointment process is a matter of prime ministerial prerogative in which no
consultation of any kind is required: P.W. Hogg and W.K. Wright,
Constitutional Law of Canada, 5th ed. (Toronto: Thomson Reuters, 2023),
Vol. 1, §8.4. Under the Tanzanian constitution, the president, as
described in the expert evidence before me, plays virtually the identical role
in judicial appointments as does the Canadian prime minister. If anything, the
Tanzanian constitution places more checks and balances on the executive branch
of government in appointing judges than does the Canadian constitution.
[84]          
In practice, of course, the Prime Minister of
Canada typically fills vacancies by selecting from a shortlist of candidates
submitted by advisory boards composed of members of the bar and sitting judges
in the various provinces. But, as indicated above, that is also the case in
Tanzania’s equivalent process. There is no sense in which the independence of
the appointment process in Tanzania is any less robust than that of the
appointment process in Canada. The same is true with judicial remuneration,
which in both Tanzania and Canada is fixed by an independent commission and not
by the executive branch – i.e. cabinet – or by any other political arm of
government.
[85]          
With respect, the Plaintiffs’ entire line of
argument relating to judicial independence leads nowhere.
[86]          
Counsel for the Plaintiffs submit that there are
juridical advantages to the selection of Ontario as a forum that will be lost
if the case were to be litigated in Tanzania. Counsel for Barrick responds
that, as a matter of logic, juridical advantage is a zero-sum game: one party’s
advantage is the other party’s disadvantage. For this reason alone, the notion
of juridical advantage is not particularly helpful in sizing up two competing
jurisdictions.
[87]          
Furthermore, arguments about juridical advantage
often gives way to little more than a subjective preference for the lawyers’ or
the court’s home rules. The Supreme Court of Canada has therefore warned that
these types of arguments are to be treaded upon with care.
[88]          
In Breeden v. Black,
2012 SCC 19 (CanLII), [2012] 1 SCR 666, at para. 26, Justice LeBel wrote that “a
focus on juridical advantage may put too strong an emphasis on issues that may
reflect only differences in legal tradition which are deserving of respect, or
courts may be drawn too instinctively to view disadvantage as a sign of
inferiority and favour their home jurisdiction.” Moreover, in Amchem
Products Incorporated v. British Columbia (Workers' Compensation
Board), 1993 CanLII 124 (SCC), [1993] 1 SCR 897, the Supreme Court warned that, “If
a party seeks out a jurisdiction simply to gain a juridical advantage rather
than by reason of a real and substantial connection of the case to the
jurisdiction, that is ordinarily condemned as ‘forum shopping’.”
[89]          
The advantages which the Plaintiffs identify for
Ontario include: a) the more expansive discovery process available in Ontario,
b) the availability of contingency fees in Ontario, and c) the ability in Ontario
to claim breach of obligations owed under international human rights law. The
latter two reflect relatively recent developments in Ontario, while the first
one is a more longstanding difference between the Tanzanian and Ontario civil
litigation rules.
[90]          
Turning first to contingency fees, these arrangements
are a relatively recent phenomenon in Ontario law. Legal fees based on a share
of awards were prohibited first in England, and then in Canada, for centuries: McIntyre
Estate v. Ontario (AG), 2002 CanLII 45046, at paras. 18-21 (ON CA). It has
only been authorized for Ontario lawyers to charge on a percentage of recovery basis
for the past two decades – i.e. since amendments to the Solicitors Act
were introduced by means of Bill 25, Solicitors Amendment Act (Contingency
Fee Agreements), 2002.
[91]          
While no longer prohibited in Ontario,
contingency fees are closely regulated by the courts. They will not be approved
if they are not within what the court considers to be a “fair and reasonable”
range: Raphael Partners v. Lam (2002), 2002 CanLII 45078 (ON CA), 61 OR (3d) 417
(CA). The fee cannot be out of proportion to the amount of work done by the
lawyer or firm, making contingency fees closer than they might otherwise be to
fees charged on an hourly basis: Halimi v. Certas Home and Auto Insurance
Company, 2023 ONSC 432, at paras. 6-7.
[92]          
Moreover, it is fair to say that the
availability of contingency fees is far from universal. Many democratic
countries with sophisticated legal systems and well entrenched rule of law
values prohibit the kind of contingency fees permitted in Ontario. In forum
non conveniens motions, this Court has not hesitated to find that, for
example, the courts of Ireland are an appropriate forum despite that country
having rules prohibiting lawyers from charging contingency fees: see Shirodkar
v Coinbase Global, Inc., 2024 ONSC 1399. Indeed, almost
all members of the European Union have such a prohibition. And yet, Canadian
courts have routinely deferred to the policy choices of those jurisdictions in
finding those forums to be appropriate alternatives for civil claims: see Leon
v. Volkswagen AG, 2018 ONSC 426, at para. 44.
[93]          
Simply put, the absence of contingency fee
arrangements does not disqualify a foreign jurisdiction or make it an
inappropriate alternative for forum non conveniens purposes. Different
jurisdictions make different policy choices at different times on issues of
this nature. Tanzania’s policy choice is neither aberrant nor unjust in any
objective sense.
[94]          
As for the limited pre-trial discovery rights
available in the Tanzanian civil litigation system, that too is not unusual. The
record contains an affidavit of Professor Scott Dodson of UC Law-San Francisco,
an expert in comparative civil procedure, that demonstrates that, if anything,
Ontario’s system of bountiful pre-trial discovery is the outlier in terms of
global litigation rules. Professor Dodson notes that in Tanzania, documentary
discovery and written interrogatories are done as a matter of right. Oral
examinations for discovery are available if a court, on application, determines
that they are appropriate in the circumstances.
[95]          
According to the uncontradicted evidence of
Professor Dodson, the Tanzanian system is similar to, and at times more
generous than, that prevailing in the courts of Belgium, Germany, South Africa,
and in commercial arbitration under the most prevalent international rules.
Although oral depositions are more widely available in the United States and
Canada than in virtually all other jurisdictions, that does not disqualify or
render objectively “unfair” all jurisdictions but those two.  As Professor
Dodson points out, discovery is a trade-off; increased discovery equates to
increased information available to the parties, but also equates to increased
cost and delay.
[96]          
I agree with Professor Dodson’s conclusion that,
“Different jurisdictions can justifiably adopt justice systems with more
limited opportunity for discovery in exchange for other litigation virtues –
such as low cost and minimal delay – without degrading the overall quality of
civil justice.” The expert reports of Professor Shaidi and Chief Justice Othman
demonstrate that the Tanzanian system has achieved a level of efficiency and
fairness in its operation with more limited discovery rules than in Ontario,
and that it remains an effective choice for civil litigation purposes.
[97]          
An alternative forum proposed in a forum non
conveniens motion does not have to mimic the Ontario system in every detail
in order to be a viable alternative. For example, in Lan Associates
XVIII L.P. v. Bank of Nova Scotia, 2000 CanLII 16943 (ON CA), the Court of
Appeal granted a stay of Ontario proceedings in favour of proceedings in the
Turks and Caicos Islands. In doing so, the Court noted that the law of that
jurisdiction “is based on English common law and English procedure with some
insignificant variations”: Ibid., at para. 4. The variations in detail
were considered insignificant in view of the proper functionality of the
alternative forum’s legal system overall. “Differences between legal systems…are
not prima facie signs of inferiority of one jurisdiction to
another”: Currie v. Farr’s Coach Lines Ltd., 2015 ONSC 2352, at para. 55.
[98]          
In addition to these process concerns,
Plaintiffs’ counsel submit that Tanzanian law lacks a substantive ground that
is central to the present claim – i.e. a cause of action based on violation of
international law. As Plaintiffs’ counsel put it in their factum, “This case,
as framed, focuses on the failure of Barrick’s senior management to exercise proper
oversight over its subsidiaries to ensure compliance with the human rights and
security standards which Barrick itself applies and considers mandatory at the
North Mara mine. The plaintiffs advance claims based on both negligence and on
the violation of customary international law as recognized by the Supreme Court
of Canada in Nevsun v. Arya.”
[99]          
If contingency fee arrangements are relatively new introductions
to the Ontario civil litigation system, claims based on international law are
even more recent. Nevsun, the Plaintiff’s source for the claim, was only
decided by the Supreme Court in 2020. The forum non conveniens analysis does
not size up the substantive law in the competing jurisdictions in order to
measure whether the foreign law is keeping up with every new nuance announced
by the Canadian courts. The pre-2020 law of Ontario was perfectly capable of
trying a case alleging wrongful death by the police, and the post-2020 law of
Tanzania is equally capable.
[100]      
In fact, Chief Justice Othman demonstrates that the Tanzanian law
reflects the same principles and values as Anglo-Canadian law when he responds
to this argument by pointing out that the claim is, in its essence, a version
of a police negligence claim. In his report, he sets out and elaborates on a
list of claims in which Tanzanians have successfully brought wrongful death
actions in the country’s courts.
[101]      
Chief Justice Othman also cites multiple cases in the Tanzanian
courts in which individuals have successfully sued the TPF, including a number
of past claims arising out of events at the North Mara mine. He also references
a number of cases in which the Tanzanian courts have taken jurisdiction and
proved themselves capable of handling claims against foreign corporations just
like Barrick, with trade and investments in Tanzania.
[102]      
In doing so, Chief Justice Othman makes the point that not only
are the courts in his country independent of government and objective in their
assessment of the police and foreign corporations with investments in the
country, but they are open and flexible in their application of the law. As he
puts it, in the field of tort law, plaintiffs in civil actions in Tanzania can,
and do, raise novel claims that have not to date been recognized by Tanzanian
law. In Chief Justice Othman’s words:
[103]      
In so elucidating on Tanzania’s approach to new legal
developments, Chief Justice Othman shows that the courts and substantive law in
that country are not only open to the Plaintiffs’ claim, but are open in just
the same way that Canadian courts are open. Just like Nevsun opened new
gates for Canadian litigation, so the Tanzanian judiciary is open to new and
innovative causes of action.
[104]      
Again, there is no sense in which the law of Tanzania, either
procedurally or substantively, comes up short in comparison with Ontario and Canada.
The Court of Appeal’s view that, generally, “comity… will often prevail
over any perceived loss of juridical advantage”, is entirely understandable in
the context of the Tanzanian legal system: Kaynes v. BP plc (2014), 22
OR (3d) 162, at para. 52 (CA). In my view, it is applicable to the case at bar.
[105]      
Finally, the Plaintiffs claim that they are unable to find a
lawyer to take their case in Tanzania for a number of reasons: the Plaintiffs
are poor and cannot afford a lawyer, Tanzanian lawyers are concentrated in
urban areas whereas the Plaintiffs are in remote village areas, and, finally, lawyers
are alleged to be fearful of themselves becoming the victim of discipline
proceedings by the Tanzanian bar.
[106]      
Interestingly, there is no evidence that any of the Plaintiffs
have approached other lawyers or the country’s legal aid clinics to see what
payment arrangements, or subsidized or even pro bono service, might be
available. No one has come forward to say that the case was turned down by a
Tanzanian lawyer or legal aid clinic. That seems to be a critical omission from
the record, and its absence makes it difficult to assess the veracity of the
Plaintiffs’ claim that local legal representation is unavailable to them.
[107]      
Evidence on this point is, however, provided by Chief
Justice Othman. He explains that there are dozens of legal aid centres and
clinics in Tanzania whose function it is to bring cases to court on behalf of
indigent persons. Another of Barrick’s witnesses, legal aid expert Ulimboka
Lugano Mwasomola, follows up on this information. He deposes that there is a
significant possibility that the Plaintiffs can obtain legal aid funded representation
in Tanzania all the way through trial. In fact, the record establishes that there
have been previous cases against Barrick in Tanzania that were funded by legal
aid.
[108]      
I will add that, in any case, the courts in Ontario have been
clear that in assessing competing forums, a Plaintiff’s access to litigation
funding is not in and of itself a relevant factor. As Strathy JA explained in Tamminga
v. Tamminga (2014), (2014), 2014 ONCA 478 (CanLII), 120 O.R. (3d) 671, at paras. 25 (CA), that
is a consideration that “only arises in the aftermath of the tort”. It cannot
serve to “bootstrap” the domestic forum over a more connected foreign one: Ibid.,
at para. 27, citing Gajraj v. DeBernardo (2002), 2002 CanLII 44959 (ON CA), 60 OR (3d) 68, at
para. 20 (CA). The domestic forum being less costly than a better connected
foreign forum does not make the case more appropriately litigated in the
domestic forum: Currie, supra, at para. 58.
[109]      
Secondly, the fact that Tanzanian lawyers are
more numerous in urban centres than in rural areas is equally true of Ontario
and, likely, every other jurisdiction in the world. Law is a profession with
certain barriers to entry, including years of higher education, which, for
better or worse, makes the services rather expensive and limits the social
origins of those gaining entry and the location of professional services.
[110]      
As a comparison, I note that even in
Saskatchewan, Canada’s most agrarian province, there is a dearth of rural
lawyers, with 80% of the profession concentrated in the two urban centres of
Regina and Saskatoon: Law Society of Saskatchewan, 2016 Annual Report
(2016), at 5. Law is simply not an inherently rural profession. If this kind of urbanization of the legal profession were to be
applied as a negative in assessing forums for litigation, it is hard to imagine
that there would be an adequate forum anywhere; every jurisdiction would fail
the test.
[111]      
Finally, the Plaintiffs have adduced evidence
from several Tanzanian lawyers who claim to have been disciplined by that
country’s Advocates Committee – its equivalent to the Law Society – because
they brought suits against the government. Barrick’s counsel point out that
while each of these lawyers did engage in litigation against the Tanzanian
government or police, and each of them was indeed disciplined by the Advocates Committee,
in none of the cases is there a causal link between the litigation and the
professional discipline.
[112]      
As in Ontario, a lawyer may be an activist advocate
and be free to litigate against and harshly criticize the police or government:
see R. v. Kopyto (1987), 1987 CanLII 176 (ON CA), 24 OAC 81 (CA). And that same lawyer may
be subjected to discipline proceedings and even disbarred for
violating one or more rules of professional ethics: see Kopyto v. Law
Society of Upper Canada (1999), 1993 CanLII 9433 (ON SCDC), 107 DLR (4th) 259 (Div Ct). Those two legal actions are not mutually exclusive as a matter of
logic, and they are not treated as such in either Tanzania or Ontario.
[113]      
Plaintiff’s witness Fatma Karune has testified that she brought a
constitutional challenge against government action, and was charged with
professional misconduct for doing so. The record shows, however, that she was
disciplined for being rude and insulting in her submissions – an act of
incivility for which one can face professional discipline charges in Ontario as
well: see Groia v. Law Society of Upper Canada, 2018 SCC 27 (CanLII), [2018]
1 S.C.R. 772. In her misconduct hearing, Ms. Karune apparently failed to call
any evidence in defense; moreover, she apparently abused court staff, all of
which led to her disbarment. The fact that she had previously brought a constitutional
challenge was not the source of her professional troubles.
[114]      
Similarly, Plaintiff’s witness, Tanzanian lawyer Boniface
Mwabukusi, brought a court challenge to a government transaction dealing with
management of the country’s ports, and claims to have faced professional
discipline proceedings as a result. The record establishes, however that he conducted
a media briefing while the case was pending and while wearing his court gown, acts
which are specifically prohibited under the Tanzanian rules of conduct.
[115]      
In Ontario, as a matter of professionalism it is also frowned
upon to wear a barrister’s gown during a press conference or otherwise outside
of court. New lawyers are advised that “Court apparel is to be worn in the
courthouse. Not on the street. When you leave the court, you should remove your
gown and tabs”: M. Waddell, “Some mid-winter musings on barrister basics”, Canadian
Lawyer, 14 February 2011, https://www.canadianlawyermag.com/news/general/some-mid-winter-musings-on-barrister-basics/268119.
[116]      
Expounding on an civl claim to the press
while wearing a barrister’s gown, as Mr. Mwabukusi apparently did, can lend an
unwarranted suggestion of authority to the unproven allegations. In Ontario, reading
an untried pleading to the press while wearing a barrister’s gown may be the grounds
of a punishingly high damages award in a libel suit against the lawyer: see Hill v. Church
of Scientology of Toronto, 1995 CanLII 59 (SCC), [1995] 2 SCR 1130. Given that Mr. Mwabukusi’s
punishment was a minor admonishment, the punitive effect of the Tanzanian
approach is a mild and reasonable one. It is not out of line with the same
principles of respect for the court and profession as those that prevail in
Ontario.
[117]      
Two other Tanzanian lawyers, Jebra
Kambole and Tito Magoti, deposed that they were disciplined because of their
anti-government stances. But it seems that Mr. Kambole was charged with having
engaged in inflammatory social media postings, while Mr. Magoti was charged
with economic crimes. Neither of them, however, has ever been disbarred or
dissuaded from acting against the government; in fact, the evidence indicates
that they continue to do so.
[118]      
 There is no cogent evidence to show that
the Tanzanian government or the Tanzanian bar intimidates lawyers or that there
are any negative consequences in Tanzania for lawyers using their legal skills
to litigate against the government, its officials, the police, or large
resource corporations – including Barrick. The courts appear to conduct
themselves, and the bar appears to regulate lawyers’ conduct, in much the same
way as in Ontario.
[119]      
Barrick’s expert witness on legal professionalism, Professor Adam
Dodek of the University of Ottawa, observes in his report that the system of
professional regulation in Tanzania appears to be in step with jurisdictions he
has examined elsewhere. He opines that nothing about it undermines the
independence of the bar. The Plaintiffs have produced no expert opinion, and
have no evidence anyone other than from patently self-interested witnesses – i.e.
other than lawyers who have themselves been subjected to professional
discipline in Tanzania – to counter Professor Dodek’s view.
[120]      
In all, there is nothing in the record that, for the purposes of
a forum non conveniens analysis, establishes that Tanzania must be
excluded from consideration due to some weakness in its justice system or legal
profession. To the contrary, the record establishes the Tanzanian system and
profession to be up to the task.
[121]      
Chief Justice Othman indicates in his evidence
that there is no provision in Tanzania’s civil procedure for enforcing letters
of request issued by a foreign court. He states that he knows of no Tanzanian
court that has taken the step of enforcing a foreign request to compel a
witness to testify, and he thinks it unlikely that a Tanzanian court would do
so at the request of an Ontario court.
[122]      
The former Chief Justice’s expert opinion in
this respect is uncontroverted. Accordingly, I take it as a fact that there
will be no means of compelling police officers and other necessary witnesses to
testify if this action were to remain in Ontario for trial.
[123]      
In Haaretz.com v. Goldhar, 2018 SCC 28 (CanLII), [2018]
2 SCR 3, the Supreme Court considered a forum controversy that
pitted Ontario against the State of Israel. Justice
Côté discussed, among other things, the comparative convenience and cost to
witnesses of proceeding in Israel or Ontario. During the course of this
discussion, she linked the concern for trial fairness with the risk that the
Israeli courts might refuse to enforce Ontario letters of request. At Haaretz,
para. 47, she warned against courts feeling wedded to the forum chosen by the
Plaintiff “in
cases where the evidence raises doubt as to whether proceeding in the chosen
forum will provide the defendant with a fair opportunity to present its case.”
[124]      
One hallmark of a problematic situation which
could deprive a defendant in Barrick’s position the ability to adequately
defend itself is the unwillingness of the foreign forum to enforce letters of
request. As Justice Côté put it, at paras. 64-65, 70:
[125]      
Justice Côté reasoned that the Court’s task is
to ensure that the Plaintiffs’ chosen court provides an even-handed forum in
terms of procedure. Where the foreign court lacks a mechanism for enforcing letters
of request from an Ontario court, fairness is not served by the action
remaining in Ontario. The foreign location of key witnesses, and the inability
to compel those key witnesses from the foreign jurisdiction to testify in the
home jurisdiction, is an important factor in moving the entire action to the
foreign court. In that way, the Court can more
adequately carry out its duty “to ensure that both parties are treated fairly”:
Haaretz, at para. 79.
[126]      
Chief Justice Othman’s evidence establishes that
Tanzania sits in the same position with respect to letters of request as Israel
did in the Haaretz case. Key witnesses – in particular, members of the
TPF – will not be required to testify at trial in Ontario. That will create
evidentiary gaps that would not be present if the trial took place in the same
country where the events in issue took place – i.e. in Tanzania – where third
parties, including the police, can be compelled to testify as a matter of
course.
[127]      
It is well established in law that there is a distinction
between whether the Court has jurisdiction over a matter, and if it does, whether
that jurisdiction should be exercised. As the Court of Appeal explained in Excalibur
Special Opportunities LP v. Schwartz Levitsky Feldman LLP (2016), 2016 ONCA 916 (CanLII), 135
OR (3d) 743, at para. 34, leave to appeal refused, [2017] SCCA No. 54, the
analysis always “begins with an inquiry into jurisdiction simpliciter”.
[128]      
This analytic approach had earlier been expounded upon by the
Court of Appeal in Muscutt v. Courcelles (2002). 2002 CanLII 44957 (ON CA), 60 OR (3d) 20, at para.
43, where Sharpe JA said that the analysis entails “a fact-specific inquiry,
but the test ultimately rests upon legal principles of general application. The
question is whether the forum can assume jurisdiction over the claims of
plaintiffs in general against defendants in general given the sort of relationship
between the case, the parties and the forum.” As Justice Sharpe went on to
explain, jurisdiction simpliciter asks “whether there is a real and
substantial connection between the court and either the defendant . . . or the
subject-matter of the litigation”: Ibid., at para. 69.
[129]      
The “real and substantial connection” test was ultimately
embraced by the Supreme Court of Canada in Club Resorts Ltd. v. Van Breda,
2012 SCC 17 (CanLII), [2012] 1 SCR 572, at paras 101-102. In that case, Justice LeBel, in a unanimous
decision, identified it as foundational to the concept of jurisdiction. He
further confirmed that the analysis for establishing jurisdiction is separate
and distinct from the subsequent question of whether the court should exercise
its discretion to hear the matter. The latter analysis arises as a secondary
step once jurisdiction has been found to exist, and only if a defendant seeks
such a discretionary order in a forum non conveniens motion.
[130]      
Although the jurisdictional analysis and the logically subsequent
forum non conveniens analysis have elements that are similar, the
Supreme Court has drawn a clear distinction between the two. Neither of them
are perfunctory issues; that is, each stage in its own way requires the court
to delve into a careful analysis of the appropriate geographical home for the
litigation. The overall approach prioritizes order and predictability by putting
the jurisdictional issue up front, before analyzing the subsidiary issue of
whether fairness and efficiency will be best served by the court exercising its
jurisdiction: Jacubovich v. Israel (State), 2021 ONSC 3558, at para. 58,
citing Haaertz, at para 28.
[131]      
Starting with the question of jurisdiction, the
Court of Appeal has indicated that there is nothing in the case law to suggest
that “an Ontario court should approach the issue of taking jurisdiction in a
restrained manner”: Airia Brands Inc. v. Air Canada, 2017 ONCA 792, at
para. 99. To the contrary, the entire analysis “begins with an inquiry into jurisdiction simpliciter,
on the principles set out in Club Resorts Ltd. v. Van Breda” – i.e.
with an application of the real and substantial connection test: Excalibur,
at para. 34.
[132]      
In Van Breda, the Supreme Court was careful not to leave
the applicable test without providing some guidance on how to apply it. Justice
LeBel elaborated, at para. 90:
[133]      
Justice LeBel then went on to clarify, at para. 95, that, “The
presumption of jurisdiction that arises where a recognized connecting factor —
whether listed or new — applies is not irrebuttable.”  It is open to
the party challenging jurisdiction to “establish facts which demonstrate that
the presumptive connecting factor does not point to any real relationship
between the subject matter of the litigation and the forum or points only to a
weak relationship between them”: Ibid.
[134]      
Accordingly, a court could conclude that it lacks jurisdiction either
“because none of the presumptive connecting factors exist or
because the presumption of jurisdiction that flows from one of those factors
has been rebutted”: Ibid., at para. 100 [emphasis added]. In either case,
it must dismiss or stay the action; the court cannot proceed with a case in the
absence of jurisdiction. On the other hand, if jurisdiction is established, “the
claim may proceed, subject to the court’s discretion to stay the proceedings on
the basis of the doctrine of forum non conveniens”: Ibid.
[135]      
Counsel for the Plaintiffs takes the position
that the question of a real and substantial connection to the forum is only
relevant where a plaintiff’s chosen forum is one where a defendant has no
discernable physical presence in the jurisdiction. This submission is further
elaborated in their factum: “The real and substantial connection test applies
only in cases of assumed jurisdiction, where the defendant is found
outside the province. It has no application where jurisdiction is exercised on
the basis of the defendant’s presence in the jurisdiction (‘presence-based
jurisdiction’).”
[136]      
In other words, it is the Plaintiffs’ view that once
jurisdiction has been prima facie established through application of one
of the factors listed in para. 90 of Van Breda, the ‘real and
substantial connection’ inquiry is done away with. That approach would, in
Barrick’s case, dispense with the need for any further analysis of Ontario
jurisdiction.
[137]      
Barrick, as previously indicated, does have a
physical presence in Ontario – its relatively small, but nevertheless its existing
finance, legal, and communications office is located in Toronto. It therefore falls
with the description of para. 90(b) of Van Breda – it “carries on business in the province”. In Plaintiffs’ counsel’s view,
that dispenses with any further need to establish jurisdiction or to show a
real and substantial connection.
[138]      
With the greatest of respect, Plaintiffs’ counsel overstate the role
played by the prima facie jurisdictional factors set out in para. 90 of Van
Breda. The ‘real and substantial connection’ analysis does not end with a
finding of prima facie jurisdiction; rather, the onus changes. In fact,
the Supreme Court has stated that if, prima facie, jurisdiction is
asserted in the absence of a real and substantial connection of the claim to
the location of the court, it would amount to “forum shopping”: Amchem
Products Incorporated v. British Columbia (Workers’ Compensation
Board), 1993 CanLII 124 (SCC), [1993] 1 SCR 897, at para. 32. The Court of Appeal has echoed that
view, stating that “forum shopping, while understandable, is unprincipled and
is not to be encouraged”: Vale Canada v. Royal & Sun Alliance Insurance
Co, 2022 ONCA 862, para 156.
[139]      
It was a feature of older English common law
that the presence of a defendant within a plaintiff’s chosen jurisdiction
sufficed to establish that jurisdiction as the forum for the action. In fact,
the rule was strict enough that once a party was served in the jurisdiction
with an originating process, jurisdiction simpliciter was firmly established.
As described by Lord Denning, this applied regardless of the circumstances that
made the service possible, including the fortuitous visit of a foreign
defendant to England to see the races at Ascot: Maharanee of
Baroda v. Wildenstein [1972] 2 QB 283, at paras. 12-13 (CA).
[140]      
In more recent times this strict,
one-dimensional jurisdictional rule has been reconsidered in the U.K.: see Spiliada
Maritime Corp v Cansulex Ltd. [1986] UKHL 10. In Canadian law, the
situation has become somewhat more complex, and presence-based jurisdiction, at
least where a defendant carries on business in the given province (although
not, presumably, where he or she merely visits for a day), is still a
recognized basis on which a court may assert its authority: Chevron
Corp. v. Yaiguaje, 2015 SCC 42 (CanLII), [2015] 3 SCR 69, at para. 81. As Justice LeBel went on to elaborate in Van Breda, at para. 96,
a defendant’s carrying on business within the territory of a plaintiff’s chosen
court is a prima facie indicator of jurisdiction, but that can be
rebutted where the real subject matter of the litigation “is unrelated to the
defendant’s business activities in the province.”
[141]      
Thus, while the Plaintiffs have established that Ontario has prima
facie jurisdiction over this action against Barrick, that is only the first
stage of the Van Breda analysis. As defendant, Barrick
can bring evidence to show that, despite its presence in the jurisdiction, there
is no relationship – no real and substantial connection – between the subject matter
of the litigation and the jurisdiction chosen by the Plaintiff. In Van Breda, Justice LeBel used this example in
explaining, at para. 96, how prima facia jurisdiction can be rebutted:
[142]      
It is Barrick’s position that the subject matter
of the litigation – the injuries and deaths that took place at the North Mara
Gold Mine and the acts responsible for those harms – is located in Tanzania.
Barrick further states that the business that it does carry on in Ontario –
finance, media relations, and legal affairs – does not amount to any
real relationship, or only to an unsubstantial relationship, between the
subject-matter of the litigation and Ontario: Kornhaber v. Starwood Hotels,
2014 ONSC 6182, at para. 8.
[143]      
More to the point, regulatory filings and other
communications about Barrick’s global policies of sustainability do not bring
the actual management, supervision, and security measures at the Mine into
Ontario. These filings and communications do not assign a geographic location
to matters at issue in the action, and the ability to rebut them is an
important check on jurisdiction. This is especially the case in the internet
age, where publications can be accessed anywhere and can otherwise appear to place
an action anywhere in the world: Haaretz, at para. 40.
[144]      
As an example, filings and communications by a global
mining company like Barrick, or postings and links on its website, are
analogous to the marketing efforts of an international hotel chain like the
Westin hotels. This Court has held that communications and website postings
about healthy cuisine do not bring an episode of food poisoning at a
China-based restaurant owned by Westin into Ontario jurisdiction: Ibid.,
at para. 11. The place where the injurious food was prepared, served, and
consumed is the jurisdiction with the real and substantial connection,
regardless of the general communications strategy carried out at Westin’s
Toronto office.
[145]      
The presence in Ontario of communications
personnel and policy statements may suffice as presumptive connecting
factors, but they “are tenuous and not sufficiently connected to the subject
matter of the litigation”: Jacubovich, at para. 98. The fact that the
Mine is operated by NMGML, which is a Tanzanian company managed in Tanzania and
overseen by senior management and board members based in Tanzania, makes the
connection to Tanzania a strong one and any connection to Ontario a tenuous one
at best. Added to that is the fact that the specific and crucial relationship
between the Mine and the TPF is pursuant to a contract formed in Tanzania
between that country’s police and the Tanzania-based NMGML.
[146]      
With all of this connection to Tanzania and disconnection from
Ontario, the presumption of presence-based jurisdiction in Ontario is rebutted.
[147]      
To find that this Court has jurisdiction over
this claim “would result in Ontario becoming an international ‘hosting court’
for any number of international disputes that have no real or substantial
connection to Ontario. This would be inconsistent with the principles of
fairness, predictability and comity set out in Van Breda…”: Jacubovich,
at para. 97. No invoking of solemn principles of human rights and corporate
responsibility can overcome the evidence that the corporate entity that manages
the Mine, the individuals responsible for security policies and other
operations, and the violent incidents resulting in the Plaintiffs’ injuries, are
all located in Africa and centred in Tanzania.
[148]      
In short, the evidence is conclusive that the
Mine at the centre of the claim is not operated or overseen from Ontario. It is
likewise conclusive that the incidents that are the subject matter of the claim
did not occur in Ontario, and that the human rights violations alleged in the
claim did not take place in Ontario. Any presumption of jurisdiction that flows
from Barrick’s unrelated presence in Ontario is thereby rebutted.
[149]      
Since I have concluded that Ontario does not
have jurisdiction simpliciter, it is not necessary to ask whether the court
should exercise its discretion to decline jurisdiction. However, in the event
that I am wrong in my conclusion about jurisdiction, I will at least briefly
engage in a forum non conveniens analysis.
[150]      
The Supreme Court of Canada has instructed that, “The party
raising forum non conveniens has the burden of showing that his or her
forum is clearly more appropriate”: Breeden v. Black,
2012 SCC 19 (CanLII), [2012] 1 SCR 666, at para. 37. As Justice Lebell explained it
in Van Breda, at para. 103, “The
defendant must show, using the same analytical approach the court followed to
establish the existence of a real and substantial connection with the local
forum, what connections this alternative forum has with the subject matter of
the litigation.”
[151]      
Justice LeBel then set out a non-exhaustive list
of factors to consider in sizing up the competing forums, at para. 105:
[152]      
Of these factors, only (a) and (f) are of
particular relevance or controversy here. In terms of a multiplicity of
proceedings, other cases have already been brought against Barrick in the
Tanzanian courts. Since the present actions now appear to encompass all known
claimants in respect of TPF shootings at the Mine, a multiplicity will be
avoided if this action is litigated in the Tanzanian courts.
[153]      
Furthermore, “…the law to be applied in torts is the law of the
place where the activity occurred, i.e. the lex loci delicti”: Tolofson v. Jensen;
Lucas (Litigation Guardian of) v. Gagnon, 1994 CanLII 44 (SCC), [1994] 3 SCR 1022, at
1050. And, according to the Court of Appeal, there is “no actionable wrong
without the injury. The place where ‘the activity took place’ which gives rise
to the action is in the [place where the accident/injury occurred]: Leonard
v. Houle (1997), 1997 CanLII 1218 (ON CA), 36 OR (3d) 357, at para. 20 (CA).
[154]      
The Plaintiffs’ claim is that Barrick should have interceded in,
and that it negligently monitored and oversaw, matters at the Mine in Tanzania.
As previously discussed, any involvement in the Mine’s affairs by Barrick will
turn on evidence regarding its executives in Tanzania and, regionally, in South
Aftica. The lawsuit does not realistically claim that the Plaintiffs were
injured by anything Barrick did in Ontario, although the Plaintiffs have in
their pleading – in what Barrick’s counsel says amounts to “pleading artifice” –
tried to place the alleged wrongdoing in Ontario: Das v. George Weston
Limited, 2017 ONSC 4129, at para. 236, aff’d 2018 ONCA 1053.
[155]      
In this respect, the claim is analogous to the Ontario class
action claim against Loblaws in respect of injuries and deaths caused by the
collapse of the Rana Plaza, a building in Bangladesh used by Loblaws’ contractors
in that country. In that case, “the [plaintiffs] framed their pleadings to
situate the wrongful activity in Ontario” by focusing on a lack of oversight
and structural audits by Loblaws. Nevertheless, the Court found that the
plaintiffs’ injuries, and the tort, “occurred in Bangladesh, the ‘jurisdiction
substantially affected by the [respondents’] activities”: Ibid. (CA), at
para. 34.
[156]      
It is likewise Tanzanian law that will apply to the management
and security protocols at the mine, and to the oversight and implementation of
those strategies during the incidents in which the Plaintiffs were injured or
in which their relatives died. It is in Tanzania that the tort occurred and the
injuries were incurred. That will be the only choice of law open to the court, whether
this case is litigated in Ontario or Tanzania.
[157]      
In any case, Chief Justice Othman’s evidence
establishes that Tanzanian tort law – and, especially, negligence law – is from
the same common law origin and embraces the same legal principles as Ontario
tort law. The former Chief Justice is also clear that Tanzanian courts are as
capable as any in flexibly applying the law and innovating with new causes of
action if the circumstances call for it. There will be no conflicting decisions
if the present actions are litigated in Tanzania.
[158]      
One consequence of the application of Tanzanian law is that the Family
Law Act (“FLA”) claims brought by surviving relatives of deceased
individuals who died at the Mine will have to be dismissed regardless of where
the case is tried: Prefontaine v Frizzle, 1990 Carswell Ont 347 (ON CA).
The courts have reasoned that FLA claims are derivative, and will be
struck if the main claims are not based on Ontario law: Bowes v. Chalifour,
[1992] OJ No 2960, at para. 12 (SCJ). Accordingly, those Plaintiffs whose claim
derives from rights conferred in the FLA will lack a cause of action
unless they can find a claim under Tanzanian law that parallels that under
Ontario’s FLA. I will add, parenthetically, that the Plaintiffs have not
pleaded any such Tanzanian source of the derivative family claims.
[159]      
Turning to the question of enforceability, there
should be no problem enforcing any eventual judgment against Barrick, since it
has indicated that it will attorn to the Tanzanian courts and submit itself to
Tanzanian law. Barrick is a corporation with a presence, and assets, in
multiple jurisdictions across the globe. A judgment from a court to which it
attorned would doubtless be enforceable in any of those jurisdictions; it
certainly would be in Ontario or across Canada, if that is where Barrick’s
assets are found. In fact, given that NMGML could easily be added as a
co-Defendant with Barrick if the case is litigated in Tanzania, enforcement
would be easiest, and would avoid a multiplicity of proceedings, if it took
place within the same legal system as the trial itself – i.e. in Tanzania: see Haaretz,
at para. 142.
[160]      
That leaves the first and last factors –
convenience and expense on one hand, and fairness and efficiency on the other. Convenience
and expense weigh in favour of Tanzania as the jurisdiction where virtually all
of the witnesses are located. Although the Plaintiffs argue that their expenses
will be greater in Tanzania due to the lack of contingency fees, the expert
evidence of Chief Justice Othman is that the Plaintiffs will indeed have access
to pro bono or subsidized representation by Tanzanian legal aid
organizations.
[161]      
Frankly, it defies logic to say that flying dozens of witnesses some
12,000 km across an ocean is more convenient and efficient than bringing them
from the North Mara region to the nearest courthouse in Tanzania. I will also
note here that the Court of Appeal has advised that the “new reality” of
virtual hearings does not lessen the significant weight given to the distance
and time change factor that one must account for in dealing with witnesses
located in foreign locations: Black & McDonald Limited v. Eiffage
Innovative Canada Inc., 2023 ONCA 91, at para. 22. The great distance of
Ontario from the witness’ location in terms of geography and time zone is of
great significance to the forum non conveniens analysis.
[162]      
And that is to say nothing of the costs involved
in housing the witnesses for the duration of a trial in Toronto, translating
all documents from Swahili to English and having Swahili-English simultaneous
interpretation throughout the trial. The time and resources for this language
effort would be necessary in an Ontario trial. But as Chief Justice Othman
indicates, Tanzania trials are conducted in Swahili and English as a matter of
course, and this combination of languages would engage no special allocation of
resources.
[163]      
In terms of fairness, the trial must be fair to
both parties: Haaretz, at para. 79. Given the unavailability of police
witnesses, a trial in Ontario would certainly be unfair to Barrick. It is also
possible that the Plaintiffs themselves or their witnesses will be unable to
travel the great distance, making an Ontario trial unfair to the Plaintiffs’
side as well. A trial in Tanzania, by contrast, would not suffer from these
problems.
[164]      
Again, Chief Justice Othman’s uncontradicted
evidence is that there no mechanism in Tanzania for compelling any witness –
and definitely not a police officer – to testify in a foreign proceeding. Without
that, Barrick would be limited to its own, NMGML’s, and perhaps Twiga’s
personnel as witnesses, but would not be able to call any police officers to
testify as to precisely what happened during the incidents in which the
Plaintiffs were injured or killed.  Justice Côté observed
the very same problem at play in Haaretz, at paras. 65, 70:
[165]      
Barrick’s counsel point out that in Haaretz,
at para. 79, the Ontario action was stayed on the basis
of a serious, but unproven concern that letters of request might not be
enforced in Israel. In the case at bar, that concern has crystallized into a
proven fact. There is undisputed expert evidence from Chief Justice Othman,
which is supported in the expert evidence of Professor Shaidi, that the Courts
of Tanzania will not enforce letters of request issued by this Court. This unchallenged
evidence establishes that the Tanzanian courts will not compel evidence from
residents of that country, including TPF officers, for use in a foreign (i.e.
Ontario) proceeding, but they will do so in a domestic (i.e. Tanzanian) proceeding.
[166]      
Accordingly, if this Court were to take
jurisdiction over the trial, Barrick would be severely hampered in its defense
of the Plaintiffs’ claims. Virtually all of the witnesses whose evidence will
be required for it to mount a viable defense reside in Tanzania. And as some of
the most important witnesses are not employees of either Barrick or, for that
matter, NMGML, Barrick cannot compel, and will likely not persuade, any of them
to testify or produce relevant documents for a trial in Ontario.
[167]      
In that case, the court in Ontario would hear no
witnesses with respect to the manner in which the incidents involving the TPF
occurred, or whether they happened at all. The court would then have no
evidence for determining whether the TPF actions were justified in the specific
circumstances of each incident. It would likewise have little or no evidence of
the ways in which the Plaintiffs’ injuries were incurred, the extent of each
injury and whether the injury was in fact the cause of the Plaintiffs’ family member’s
death, etc.
[168]      
Counsel for Barrick submit that it is unimaginable
that this Court could entertain multiple wrongful death claims in the absence
of first-hand witnesses to each incident that is alleged to have caused the deaths.
I agree. And yet, the record before me suggests that the Plaintiffs cannot
produce even one relevant witness to the incidents in question. As indicated at
an earlier stage of these reasons, the only Plaintiffs who testified in
connection with this motion confirmed that they have no such first-hand evidence.
The eye-witnesses will therefore have to be produced by Barrick as defendant,
but without a means to compel their attendance, Barrick would be stymied in its
efforts.
[169]      
There is really no comparison between Ontario
and Tanzania as jurisdictions that can properly try this case. A trial in Ontario
would either be bereft of relevant evidence, or it would focus its efforts on platitudes
about human rights and corporate responsibility without delving into the actual
facts at issue in the claim.
[170]      
Barrick, in effect, concedes that corporations
should make every effort to ensure safety and human rights compliance at the
sites of their operations and investments. But no corporation, including a
global giant like Barrick, is responsible for violence and/or deaths caused by
others or contributorily caused by the claimants themselves.
[171]      
I am cognizant of the fact that a forum non
conveniens analysis must also take into account any unfairness the
Plaintiffs would suffer if I decline jurisdiction in favour of Tanzania.
However, the record before me establishes to my satisfaction that the laws, the
judiciary, the bar, and the justice system of Tanzania overall, present no
insurmountable hurdle to a fair trial of this action.
[172]      
What the Plaintiffs offer as a reason to reject
Tanzania as an appropriate forum is an inapt comparison to a non-democratic,
non-rule of law country – Eritrea – and unfounded allegations of prejudice,
political intimidation, and a lack of independence by the judiciary. Those
suggestions are not based on the kind of cogent evidence – the “real risk”
rather than the spectre of hypothetical risk – that is required to counter an
otherwise appropriate foreign jurisdiction: Garcia v. Tahoe Resources
Inc., 2017 BCCA 39, at para. 124.
[173]      
On the other hand, cogent evidence of the common
law foundation and proper functioning of the Tanzanian court and legal system
has been provided by the former Chief Justice of the country and one of its
most prominent law professors. To overlook that evidence, and to use the Nevsun
case and its factual origin in Eritrea as a constant reference, risks undermining
comity and expresses unfounded insult on Tanzania as the forum under
consideration: see Das, at para. 288; Das (CA), at para. 37.
[174]      
Given the remoteness of Ontario from the matters
at issue, and the fact that crucial witnesses would inevitably be absent from
an Ontario trial, it is incumbent on me to decline jurisdiction over the trial
of this action. A trial in Tanzania is the only way for all the relevant
evidence on both sides to be aired in court.
[175]      
The evidence before me establishes that the
Tanzanian bar and the Tanzanian judiciary are capable of conducting a fair,
efficient, and just trial. As between Ontario and Tanzania, it is Tanzania that
is clearly the more appropriate forum in which to try the matters raised in
this claim.
[176]      
This Court lacks jurisdiction to determine the
matters at issue. The actions are dismissed.
[177]      
If the Court had jurisdiction, the actions would
be permanently stayed on the basis of forum non conveniens.
[178]      
The parties may make written submissions on
costs. I would ask counsel for Barrick to send their brief submissions by email
to my assistant within 10 days of today, and for counsel for the Plaintiffs to
send their equally brief submissions to my assistant within 10 days thereafter.