[1]              
This Motion was heard
on a “regular” motion day.
[2]              
There were 3 issues
argued at the motion, primarily:
[3]             
Upon completion of
those 3 issues, the court was asked to consider an expansion of the applicant’s
parenting time.
[4]              
It is important to put
this motion into context. The applicant commenced this application in late
2021.  It has been set down for trial on several occasions, but the case was
never “reached”.  Given that a part of this matter is parenting arrangements to
be made for Madeleine, it is not surprising that the passage of time, if
nothing else, has resulted in a series of motions.
[5]              
The applicant admits to
having a substance abuse issue, including alcohol and cocaine. It appears that
the extent of her sobriety is a “live” issue, but not the sole issue.
[6]              
For some 3.5 years,
Madeleine has had parenting time with her mother (the applicant) only through
supervised visits at the local centre (Merrymount), every second week.  This
child has never enjoyed a normal relationship with the applicant.
[7]              
I would be surprised if
either party anticipated that supervised parenting time would extend for
several years.  Regardless of the reasons why, that is the reality for
Madeleine today.  Madeleine is now 7 years old.
[8]              
This matter was not
reached at the October 2023 trial sittings.  In October 2023, the applicant
brought a motion to expand parenting time.  Her request was dismissed.  It
appears from the record that the extent of the applicant’s sobriety was not
proven to the point where the court was convinced that some lesser form of
supervision, or no supervision, was appropriate.
[9]              
The applicant brought a
third motion for expanded parenting time.  It was heard by Justice Tobin on May
29, 2024.  Justice Tobin released a detailed, typed endorsement. In context, at
the time, it was anticipated that the trial would be held in fall 2024.  We now
know that this will not happen.
[10]         
Justice Tobin noted
that both parties, tacitly, acknowledged that an increase in the applicant’s
supervised parenting time was in order. They could not agree on how to
accomplish this.
[11]         
Justice Tobin worked
through the procedural issues.  He opined that it was likely inappropriate to
try to argue the issue on a one-hour motion, based on untested affidavits;
however, a long motion date was not available prior to the anticipated trial
date.
[12]         
Following that
decision, the parties engaged in negotiations. Those negotiations resulted in
interim minutes of settlement executed on August 22, 2024.  Those interim minutes
of settlement are quite detailed and are 3.5 pages long.  I highlight and
summarize:
[13]         
The applicant states
that she uses cannabis to deal with anxiety, depression, sleep and appetite.  She
claims that the lawyers who negotiated the interim minutes of settlement agreed
that “cannabis use would not be an issue”.  In other words, she interpreted the
minutes of settlement to say that she would not consume alcohol or drugs,
except for cannabis. She states that she would not have signed the minutes if
this exception was not made.
[14]         
On September 7, 2024,
the applicant had her first visit with the child outside of Merrymount.  The
visit went well.
[15]         
On September 16, 2024,
the test results came back “positive” for cannabis.
[16]         
The respondent took the
position that the parenting time was to be returned to Merrymount.  The
parenting time continues, biweekly, for two hours.
[17]         
The answer is “no.”
[18]         
This motion was argued
in the course of 60 minutes.  I recognize that Justice Tobin made reference to
a special motion date.  However, he also made reference to “untested
affidavits”, meaning that no cross-examinations were completed.  It is not
proposed that this motion be adjourned to January 10, 2025 for the purposes of
completing cross-examinations.
[19]         
The parties have asked
this court to consider the record as it is, that is, without cross-examinations.
The court can do so now. The court would be in no better position if the
parties were given an additional two or three hours to argue.
[20]         
The answer is “no”.
[21]         
The Applicant’s former
counsel, Ms. Samuels, elected to file an affidavit with regard to the terms of
the interim minutes of settlement.  In doing so, she made herself a witness.  Quite
properly, she no longer acts for the applicant.
[22]         
Ms. Raithby, the
respondent’s counsel, acted during the negotiation and execution of the interim
minutes of settlement.  The respondent has elected not to file an affidavit by
Ms. Raithby.  That is his right.  Ms. Raithby cannot be compelled to give
evidence.
[23]         
Accordingly, there is
no basis to remove Ms. Raithby.
[24]         
The answer is “no”.
[25]         
The interim minutes of
settlement are clear and unambiguous.
[26]         
I have read the
affidavit of Ms. Samuels very carefully.  Ms. Samuels acknowledged that she was
informed by Ms. Raithby that the respondent would not sign the interim minutes
of settlement if cannabis testing was removed (see paragraphs 39 and 43).  While
there were assurances from Ms. Raithby that she didn’t believe that her client
would act in an unreasonable manner, there is nothing in this affidavit which
suggests that the inclusion of cannabis was an error, or a misunderstanding.  There
was a meeting of the minds.  Unfortunately, the parties were left with
different expectations.  This is not a sufficient basis to set aside his
agreement.
[27]         
The answer is that
parenting should be in accordance with the interim minutes of settlement.  This
applies to both parties.
[28]         
The sub-issue is
whether a positive test for cannabis constitutes a “positive test.”
[29]         
Paragraph 2 of the
interim minutes prohibits the applicant from consuming any alcohol or drugs
prior to or during parenting time.  However, an exception is made for
prescribed medication.  While the record is far from convincing, the
applicant’s affidavit states that she obtained a prescription for marijuana.
[30]         
However, reference
needs to be made to paragraph 4(a) of the interim minutes of settlement.  This
paragraph clearly states that the applicant’s parenting time shall be at
Merrymount if she receives a positive test for “… alcohol (ethanol), illicit
drugs, and or drugs for which the applicant does not have a valid prescription,
and/or cannabis…”
[31]         
What is the implication
of a “positive test”?  According to paragraph 5, the applicant’s parenting time
shall revert to Merrymount.  I cannot determine how long the visits are to
continue there, however.  There is reference at paragraph 6 that the
“progression” of the parenting schedule shall be paused until the next
scheduled negative test result.
[32]         
The bottom line,
accordingly, is that parenting time at Merrymount shall continue until a
negative test result is obtained.  At that point, “Phase One” of the expanded
parenting time shall be in place for the next eight weeks.
[33]         
At this moment, I need
to digress.
[34]         
Everything in the
applicant’s affidavit indicates that her use of cannabis is occasional (see
paragraph 20 of the affidavit of Ms. Samuels).
[35]         
It seems to this court
that a progression of the applicant’s parenting time has been derailed by the
applicant’s consumption of cannabis.  This is unfortunate.  If the applicant
did not consume cannabis, by this time, both graduated phases contemplated in
the interim minutes of settlement would have been completed, and this court
could have considered an application for unsupervised parenting time.  It
appears that cannabis use has become a “line in the sand”, resulting in a
further delay in the normalization of the relationship between the applicant
and her daughter.  This dispute was unnecessary.
[36]         
Accordingly,
[37]         
In terms of costs, I do
not recall which parties requested the adjournment to a special motion.  Even
if that was the request of the respondent, in totality, the respondent is the
successful party.  My presumptive view is that the respondent is entitled to
the costs of this motion.
[38]         
That being said, if the
parties cannot agree on this issue, the respondent shall have 30 days and the
applicant shall have 45 days to deliver written submissions.  The submission
shall not exceed three pages plus a bill of costs and any necessary attachments
(such as offers to settle).
[39]         
If the applicant takes
the position that costs, if ordered, should not be payable immediately, her
materials should provide a brief overview of her financial circumstances.