[1]                  
The plaintiffs, supported by the third parties,
seek summary judgment on what they characterize as a straightforward debt
collection.  The defendants resist and submit first that there are genuine
issues requiring a trial and second, that the moving parties are asking for
partial summary judgment that will not dispose of the litigation. They also
submit that there are limitation issues and suggest that they are entitled to
summary judgment dismissing the claim on that basis.
[2]                  
During the course of the hearing of the motion,
the plaintiff Lynne Hevey abandoned certain of her claims, tacitly
acknowledging that those claims might raise triable issues that would stand in
the way of summary judgment.
[3]                  
The material filed on the motion is voluminous. 
All of the non-corporate parties have sworn affidavits and supplementary
affidavits, and they were cross-examined.  Notably, there are no affidavits
from any of the parties’ legal or accounting professionals. Much of the
evidence is contradictory or in dispute. The third parties’ evidence reflects,
in part, information Lynne Hevey relayed to them.
[4]                  
The plaintiffs’ compendium consists of four
volumes, containing hundreds of pages.  The corporate structures involved and their
organization are byzantine.  There is an absence of or scant contemporaneous
documentation respecting the alleged loans.  The parties’ respective level of
sophistication and business acumen are in issue.  The subtext to the
proceedings is the acrimonious breakdown of Lynne and James Hevey’s marriage,
following their separation in the mid-2000’s.  They have been involved in
protracted litigation for many years since.
[5]                  
While it is true that the claim involves a debt
collection, I am not persuaded that it is one that is amenable to summary
judgment and the motion must be dismissed for the reasons that follow.
[6]                  
The plaintiff Lynne Marie Hevey (Lynne) and the
defendant Charles James Hevey (James) were married and are the parents of Ryan
Charles Hevey (Ryan) and Jeremy James Hevey (Jeremy) who are the third
parties.  They separated in 2006 or 2007.
[7]                  
James was a prominent land developer in London
for a number of years.  He now resides with his second family in Florida. 
James carried on business in London through a number of corporations, including
those named as defendants in this action.  In her affidavit dated August 12,
2020, Lynne describes her former husband no doubt pejoratively, as a developer
“perfecting the art of prioritizing projects, manipulating money to deal with
creditors and the CRA, and establishing elaborate corporate structures for the
same purposes”.
[8]                  
Lynne, Ryan and Jeremy were involved in some of
the corporations from time-to-time.  Ryan worked at Wonderland Commercial
Centre Inc. (WCC) from approximately 2006 until 2019.  Jeremy joined the
companies in approximately 2005 and remained until 2014.
[9]                  
Lynne worked as bookkeeper for Devlon Corporation
(Devlon) until 2004 when her services were no longer required.  She described
her duties as having included overseeing accounts receivable and payable;
completing staff payroll, completing HST, WSIB and EHT reports, reconciling
bank statements, and compiling information relevant to the preparation of
financial statements.
[10]              
Nevertheless, she deposes that she never had
“full knowledge” of James’ true assets and business affairs, which she says
were hidden from her.
[11]              
She resumed her bookkeeping duties in 2009 until
2019  and assisted from time to time, she says to protect her interests and
those of her sons, particularly on the WCC project.
[12]              
According to James, Lynne had access to various
corporate records.  She used a record keeping program to which he says he and
the corporate accountants did not have access.
[13]              
Lynne was a successful business woman in her own
right and ran her family company L&H Smith Fruit Co. Limited (L&H
Smith).  She was the director and majority shareholder of the plaintiff 2157313
Ontario Limited.  James says Lynne was known as “the Barracuda”, presumably a
description, also pejorative, of her business style.
[14]              
Lynne’s mother, Audrey Smith was the majority
shareholder and director of the plaintiff JFM & Associates Inc.
[15]              
James says his development companies were run as
separate entities, each with its own financial statements and advances between
corporations were treated and reported as loans. In contrast, Lynne, Ryan and
Jeremy say that although the companies were legally distinct, they were treated
interchangeably.  Money was accumulated in one corporation and was dispersed to
others as required.
[16]              
The defendant 737997 Ontario Limited (737) was
involved in a development project in the 1980’s at Wonderland and Commissioners
Roads in London.  Another defendant, 922012 Ontario Limited (922), developed
lands at Wonderland and Southdale Roads, which sold in 2012.
[17]              
The defendant WCC was incorporated in 2000 to
acquire and develop land located at Wonderland Road North and Beaverbrook
Avenue in London.  Ryan was a director and secretary treasurer of WCC from
September 30, 2006 to September 7, 2017.  He became a signing officer on
September 7, 2017 but his signing authority was removed on July 20, 2018 by
director’s resolution. Jeremy became a director of WCC on September 30, 2006. 
He remains a director and is also president and secretary/treasurer.
[18]              
In 1986 and 1996, two family trusts were created
– the Hevey Children’s Trust and the Hevey Family Trust.  They were created for
the benefit of Ryan and Jeremy (or for the Hevey family).  Their purpose was
apparently to protect the children and Lynne from the risks of James’
business.  James was not a beneficiary.
[19]              
The family trusts were restructured and in 2006
and 2007, the JLJR Trust and PMP Trust were created.  Lynne says she executed
documents related to the JLJR Trust without legal advice.
[20]              
JLJR owned a Florida property in Lighthouse
Point.  Lynne deposes that the Florida property was to be a family vacation
home.  Lynne paid the deposit and guaranteed the mortgage when the property was
purchased in May 2006.  The couple’s separation followed.  James began to
reside there with his then girlfriend and ownership was eventually transferred
from JLJR to him in January 2019.
[21]              
The plaintiffs say James caused PMP Trust to
transfer its assets to three of his companies as a result of which James became
the owner of PMP’s assets. The companies are:
[22]              
James owns the common shares of each of the
three companies.  Ryan and Jeremy are officers and directors of the companies.
[23]              
WCC purchased the Wonderland and Beaverbrook
property with the intention to build a retail development.  The property was
developed in three phases and portions were leased to commercial tenants.
[24]              
Addenda Capital provided mortgage financing,
including $2.9 million in 2009 and $4 million in 2014.  By the terms of the
mortgage, WCC was not permitted to obtain further financing. Apparently there
was sufficient funding to meet the project’s development costs.
[25]              
WCC sold a portion of the property occupied by a
Farm Boy grocery store to Manulife Property Portfolio in 2017.  A further
parcel was scheduled to be sold to Manulife in March 2019.
[26]              
Prior to the closing of the sale of the second
property, the plaintiffs and Ryan indicated that they intended to bring an
action against WCC and others for the repayment of loans.  This would have
interfered with the pending sale.
[27]              
In order to facilitate closing, the plaintiffs
and Ryan and James agreed that an amount equal to that claimed in the action
would be paid to their respective solicitors in trust and the balance held by
James’ lawyers.
[28]              
The plaintiffs say $1,843,774.00 was to be paid
to their lawyers but James transferred $95,000 to his American companies in
breach of the agreement, an allegation that James denies. He asserts that the
transfers were from accounts not covered by the settlement agreement.  It is
said he no longer has assets in Canada and the WCC project is the only way the
plaintiffs and Ryan can recoup what they say is owing.
[29]              
Following the agreement, the parties wrangled
over the payment of WCC debt to CRA, its lawyers, accountants and engineers. 
James brought an application seeking leave to commence a derivative action and
interim relief, primarily related to bill payment.  Ultimately, consent court
orders were made over the course of 2020 and most of the outstanding accounts
have now been paid.
[30]              
James says WCC incurred penalties and interest
arising from the delay in payment.  He also says that the plaintiffs have
failed to produce relevant documentation and the failure to pay accountants
prevented their timely review of records, the filing of income tax returns, and
the preparation of financial statements.  James deposes that they have been unable
to determine whether WCC received any benefit from the alleged loans or
intercompany transfers.
[31]              
He has filed a letter dated April 7, 2029 prepared
by the accountant for the Hevey group of companies.  The accountant concludes
that $874,356 is estimated to be owing to the Lynne, Ryan and Jeremy group.  He
also says there are potential offsetting amounts reducing the amount owing to
$214,755.
[32]              
The plaintiffs allege that in the 1980’s, James
approached Lynne’s parents Lloyd and Audrey Smith for a loan.  Timely repayment
is said to have been understood.  They agreed to advance $650,000 with 8%
interest through Lloyd’s Company, Lloyd K. Smith Holdings Ltd. to Devlon.  They
were granted security, the detail of which is not clear to me.  Lloyd and
Audrey separated in 1992 and the outstanding loan balance was divided equally
between them.  Lloyd K. Holdings Ltd. changed its name to JFM & Associates
– Audrey’s company.
[33]              
Lloyd’s portion of the loan was retired but the
plaintiffs say James persuaded Audrey to leave her money ($325,000) in the
project (the detail of and basis on which is also unclear to me).  However, it
appears that Audrey’s mortgage security was released upon Lloyd’s repayment. 
It is alleged that James convinced Audrey that she should permit the loan to be
unsecured to avoid adverse consequences for the project.  Simple interest only
payments were made until 2010.  The plaintiffs say the defendants have
acknowledged both the loan and the repayment obligation.  The sum of
$654,275.04 is said to be outstanding as of the time this claim was commenced,
which includes compound interest.
[34]              
Lynne says she has advanced over $6 million to
various corporate entities over the years.  She alleges that $1,189,498.96 has
been acknowledged by the defendants to be owing.  She also alleges that James
persuaded her that her loans should also be unsecured to avoid interfering with
other projects’ financing and that he repeatedly represented that her loans
would be repaid from various family projects including WCC.
[35]              
By way of example, she attaches an email from
James to her, copied to Jeremy dated November 10, 2011 in which he says “As I
promised this morning we have a pending deal…I will ask the boys to pay you
back $300,000 for this sale plus the $100,000 we are asking for how…The balance
of any advances you have made will be completed on the Sobeys transaction.”
[36]              
Lynne has appended to her affidavit copies of
her personal and corporate bank statements as well as general ledger entries
from records of some of the corporate defendants.  Unfortunately, the records
are excerpts only and while they do show what are described as loans to some of
the defendants over time, the records are not complete.  They also show what
appear to be loan repayments from time to time.
[37]              
Lynne has also advanced a claim for accounting
services she provided from 2018 and 2019 totalling $23,504.00, and for
“unsettled currency exchange” totalling $108,901.71.  At the conclusion of argument
at the hearing, she was willing to abandon those claims in the event the court
granted summary judgment on the alleged loan.  The plaintiffs also seek
punitive damages, a claim they are also willing to forego in the event summary
judgment is granted on the loan debts.
[38]              
Leaving aside the oral representations that
James is alleged to have made, the plaintiffs rely on a series of acknowledgments.
The first is dated February 13, 2019 from 737997 and JFM & Associates Inc.
addressed “To Whom It May Concern”. Ryan signed it on behalf of 737997 as
Secretary Treasurer. Lynne signed on behalf of JFM & Associates Inc. It
provides as follows:
[39]              
The second, also dated February 13, 2019, is
from Lynne and 2157313 addressed To Whom it may concern. It provides as
follows:
[40]              
Schedule A contains General Ledger entries of LH
Smith from January, 2010 through December 21, 2013, with an opening balance of
$220,000. It shows payments made for Devlon invoices and transfers to Devlon.
There are transfers to 922012 and for “GPI” and one to WCC for $40,000. A
balance is shown to be outstanding on December 31, 2013 of $1,080,597.25.
[41]              
I was not referred to any of the supporting
source documents. I also note that there are a number of credit entries for
funds paid by Devlon to L&H Smith.
[42]              
It is signed by Lynne personally and as
president of 2157313, by Jeremy and Ryan as president and secretary of Devlon respectively
and by Jeremy as president of WCC.
[43]              
A third acknowledgement dated March 10, 2019, is
also addressed To Whom It May Concern. It is signed by Lynne personally and as
president of 2157313. It is signed on behalf Jeremy and Ryan as president and
secretary respectively of Devlon and by Jeremy on behalf of WCC as president.
It provides as follows:
[44]              
Schedule B is a letter on Devlon letterhead
dated May 14, 2009.  It is signed by Lynne on behalf of L&H Smith and
Jeremy on behalf of Devlon.  It states that the parties are agreed that Devlon
owes L&H Smith $108,901.71 for unsettled currency exchange.
[45]              
On February 22, 2019, Jeremy signed a letter on
behalf of WCC addressed to plaintiffs’ counsel retracting the second Acknowledgement
of February 13, 2019, on the basis that he signed it recklessly and in breach
of his fiduciary duty to WCC. In particular, he stated:
[46]              
However, on March 9, 2019, Jeremy swore a
Statutory Declaration swearing that he signed the February 22, 2019 letter under
pressure from James. He deposed as follows:
[47]              
Exhibit B to the Affidavit are General Ledger
entries for Devlon which show loans and transfers to WCC between October 1,
2009 and December 31, 2013, with an opening balance of $374,024.28. There are
loans from WCC to Devlon as well. There is also an entry on January 16, 2013
referring to the assignment of lien file totalling $369,519.37. There is no
detail respecting these entries.
[48]              
James submits that the Acknowledgements were
signed after this litigation arose and neither Ryan, Jeremy nor Lynne had
signing authority when the documents were signed. His material contains an
email from him dated July 18, 2018 addressed to Jeremy and Lynne and copied to
Ryan stating as follows:
[49]              
I also note that the material contains an
Assignment dated January 1, 2014, between L&H Smith as assignor and 2157313
as Assignee signed by the president of L&H Smith  (whose signature is
illegible) and Lynne as president of 2157313. It purports to assign a debt
owing to the assignor by Devlon of $1,189,498.96 (the same figure used in the
subsequent Acknowledgement of March 10, 2019) to the assignee. How this squares
with the plaintiffs’ contention that WCC is responsible for the debt is not
clear.
[50]              
The plaintiffs submit that there is no genuine
issue requiring a trial.  The plaintiffs’ position is summarized in its factum,
which is paraphrased as follows:
[51]              
Turning to the defendants’ position, they seem
to acknowledge that some money is owing but submit that this is not a simple
case of repayment of a debt that would be amenable to summary judgment.  The
plaintiffs have provided no documentation as to what was loaned, by whom, and
on what terms.  They say the above described acknowledgments are not valid. They
also submit that there are limitation issues. Finally, they point out that
summary judgment will not dispose of the litigation because there is a third
party claim against Ryan and Jeremy.
[52]              
They also submit that there are genuine issues
for trial, including the quantum owed, to which companies loans were made, whether
WCC is liable to repay, and if James is personally responsible.
[53]              
The principles governing Rule 20 are well established.  Given
their importance to the disposition of this motion, I set out my appreciation
of those principles here.
[54]              
Rule 20.04(2)(a) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194
provides that “[t]he court shall grant summary judgment if the court is satisfied
that there is no genuine issue requiring a trial with respect to a claim or
defence.”
[55]              
Rule 20.04(2.1) lists the court’s powers on a motion for summary
judgment:
[56]              
In Hryniak v. Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7, the Supreme Court of Canada
had occasion to outline at para. 66 a two-part framework to guide judges
hearing motions for summary judgment:
[57]              
However, even with these expanded powers, summary judgment is
appropriate only if the material filed on the motion “gives the judge
confidence that she can find the necessary facts and apply the relevant legal
principles so as to resolve the dispute”: Hryniak, at para. 50.
[58]              
It is well settled that “both parties on a summary judgment motion have
an obligation to put their best foot forward”: Mazza v. Ornge Corporate
Services Inc., 2016 ONCA 753, at para. 9.  Given the onus placed on the
moving party to provide supporting affidavit or other evidence under Rule
20.01, “it is not just the responding party who has an obligation to ‘lead
trump or risk losing’”: See Ipex Inc. v. Lubrizol Advanced Materials Canada,
2015 ONSC 6580, at para. 28.
[59]              
The plaintiffs have made a valiant attempt to
persuade me that their claim is a simple and straightforward one, for which
summary judgment can readily be granted.  They submit that James’ evidence is
not credible, he is untruthful and he should not be believed.
[60]              
I have concluded that there are genuine issues
that stand solidly in the way of summary judgment.
[61]              
It is probably fair to say that the parties were
very casual in their financial dealings with one another, which is probably not
unusual in situations like this one when family members are involved in what is
essentially a family business.
[62]              
I do not believe that Lynne is as
unsophisticated as she suggests.  She appears to have been a successful
business woman with substantial assets of her own. It seems to me that the
parties may have ordered their financial affairs to their satisfaction and for
their mutual benefit while their marriage was intact.
[63]              
There is a lack of clear evidence regarding how
much the plaintiffs loaned, to whom,  who was obligated to repay and what was
repaid.  The claim’s success is predicated on establishing that WCC is
responsible for repayment because it appears to be the only entity with
remaining assets.  The strength of that outcome depends on establishing that
James made representations to the plaintiffs, which in turn raises triable
issues the resolution of which is almost entirely dependent on findings of
credibility.  In addition, there is an issue about whether James is personally
liable or whether WCC is responsible for debt incurred by other corporations
(absent an agreement).  The circumstances in which the Acknowledgments were
signed are also self-evidently unusual.
[64]              
As already noted, there is no first hand evidence
from the legal and accounting professionals retained by the parties.  There is no
affidavit evidence from Lynne’s mother.  I would have thought they would have
relevant evidence that might shed light on the issues.
[65]              
The Acknowledgments are problematic.  They were
executed at a time that litigation was being contemplated and after James had
communicated that no contracts could be signed on behalf of WCC without his
authorization.  Further, Jeremy wrote a letter to plaintiffs’ counsel saying he
had executed the Acknowledgement recklessly and did not verify the amount said
to be outstanding.  And yet, two weeks later he signed a statutory declaration
deposing that the letter was inaccurate and was signed under pressure.  In the
circumstances, I cannot be certain on the strength of this evidentiary record
that the Acknowledgments are valid and accurate.
[66]              
There are also limitation issues whether the
claims or some parts of them are statute barred.  Just as the claim is unsuitable
for summary judgment, so too are the limitation issues given the underlying
factual dispute. It is not even clear which Limitation Act might apply,
the 2002 version or its predecessor.
[67]              
Finally, summary judgment will not dispose of
the litigation in its entirety given the existence of third party proceedings. 
The Court of Appeal has repeatedly cautioned motion judges most recently in Passmore
v. Hamilton (City), 2024 ONCA 825 that granting partial summary judgment
can be unwise because of the risk of inconsistent findings. In that decision,
the Court referred to its decision in Malik v. Attia, 2020 ONCA 787,
which set out three considerations that support granting partial summary
judgment:
[68]              
I am not persuaded that any of these factors are
satisfied.
[69]              
Nor is this claim amenable to the use of the
expanded powers conferred on a motion for summary judgment pursuant to Rule
20.04(2.1).  There are simply too many substantial issues including credibility
that can be properly, efficiently and summarily canvassed in a “mini-trial”.
[70]              
The motion is dismissed. The parties may forward
brief written submissions on costs, not exceeding five pages, together with
Bills of Costs, within 30 days of the release of this decision.