[1]         
Companion
motions in each of these two related bankruptcy Applications were heard
together. This Endorsement has effect in each of the two above-noted
proceedings.
[2]         
Jasvir Johal and
Sulakhan Johal (individually “Jas” or “Sam” respectively, and collectively, the
“Johals”)[1]
each move in their respective bankruptcy Applications for the same relief: an
order staying the bankruptcy Applications and directing that the claims of the
Applicant, the Bank of Nova Scotia (“BNS” or the “Bank”) be pursued in the Companies
Creditors’ Arrangement Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-36 (“CCAA”) proceeding
currently ongoing in this Court in respect of the Pride Entities (the “Pride Entities”,
the "PGEs").[2]
[3]         
The Johals are
the main shareholders, directors and officers of the Pride Group. It includes a
group of companies that operate cross-border businesses in the trucking
industry including sales, leasing, service and logistics. At their peak, the
PGEs managed over 20,000 trucks and had over 550 employees. The Pride Entities
are the Applicants in the above-noted CCAA proceeding.
[4]         
BNS loaned
funds to each of the Johals in August 2023 pursuant to a line of credit issued
to each of them in the amount of $10 million.
[5]         
Both lines of
credit were effectively fully drawn almost immediately, and the funds were used
by the Pride Entities.
[6]         
The Johals
submit that BNS knew or ought to have known that the funds were borrowed for
the Pride Entities, with the result that any debt owed by the Johals to BNS is
stayed by operation of paragraph 19 (the stay of proceedings) of the Amended
and Restated Initial Order (“ARIO”) made in the CCAA proceeding, and
should be determined or resolved within that proceeding.
[7]         
In the
alternative, they submit that:
[8]         
BNS submits that:
[9]         
Defined terms
in this Endorsement have the meaning given to them in the motion materials
unless otherwise stated.
[10]      For the reasons that follow, the
motions are granted. In my view, these bankruptcy Applications should be stayed
and the claims of the Bank should be addressed within the CCAA proceeding.
[11]      The Johals had been clients of
another bank, Royal Bank of Canada (“RBC”), since 1993. RBC was also the
principal banker of the Pride Entities. At the same time, the Johals had had a
relationship since 2009 with Roynat Inc., a subsidiary of BNS.
[12]      One of the Roynat client
representatives who worked regularly on the Johals’ accounts was Evan Olsthoorn
(“Olsthoorn”).
[13]      In 2023, Olsthoorn transferred to
Scotia Wealth Management. He reached out to the Chief Financial Officer of PGE,
Mr. Kav Hamzavi (“Hamzavi”), to see whether and how BNS could provide private
banking services to the Johals personally. The Bank was understandably
interested in getting their personal banking business as they were high net
worth individuals.
[14]      All of Olsthoorn’s discussions were
with Hamzavi. He had no direct communications with either of the Johals. In
July 2023, he proposed to Hamzavi that BNS would advance a $10 million line of
credit to Sam. At the time, Sam was interested in borrowing funds to finance
the construction of a new home. Notwithstanding that, Olsthoorn represented to
Sam that the funds could be used for any reason.
[15]      On August 10, 2023, Olsthoorn
prepared a “Credit Presentation [Wealth Management]” (“Credit Presentation”),
an internal document used to seek approval of Olsthoorn’s superiors for the
proposed loan to Sam. In relevant part, the Credit Presentation was clear that:
[16]      The Credit Presentation was
approved immediately. BNS delivered a credit agreement to Sam the very next
day. In addition to the cross-default provision referred to above, the credit
agreement provided that the line of credit was payable on demand. It also
included a provision that entitled BNS to make such a demand for the immediate
repayment of the debt (i.e., the entire principal and interest outstanding) if
BNS ceased to be a lender to the Pride Group, or if there was a material
adverse effect on the Pride Group.
[17]      Sam’s line of credit was partially
secured by his matrimonial home.
[18]      Hamzavi then asked Olsthoorn if BNS
would make a $10 million line of credit available to Jas on similar terms. As
with Sam, Olsthoorn had no discussions with Jas about the line of credit. The
terms offered to Jas were similar to those offered to Sam, with the one
difference: the interest rate was 50 basis points (one half of 1%) higher since
there was no security for the indebtedness.
[19]      The Credit Presentation in respect
of Jas was similar in material respects to that for Sam: there were no
financial covenants imposed on Jas, but the Bank benefited from financial
covenants that the Pride Group was subject to through the cross-default
provision; and his personal free cash flow for 2022 of $156,000 was
insufficient to service the potential annual interest charges (in his case,
$800,000 if the line was fully drawn). Jas’ ability to service the debt would
be deficient if based solely on consideration of his personal income and the Bank
was dependent on the performance of the Pride Group for debt servicing,
notwithstanding that it was subordinate to the secured lenders of the Pride
Group.
[20]      Sam executed his credit agreement
on August 29, 2023, along with his wife Rashpal whose signature was required to
guarantee the line. The very next day, the CFO of the Pride Group, Hamzavi,
arranged for BNS to advance $9.5 million of the total credit availability of
$10 million.
[21]      Moreover, the advance was not made
directly by BNS to Sam, but rather to a Pride Group affiliate, Block 6 Holding
Inc. Olsthoorn was aware of this and had no objection.
[22]      Approximately two weeks later, on
September 12, 2023, Hamzavi arranged for an advance on Jas’ line of credit. It
too was almost in the full amount of credit availability: $9 million. Moreover,
it too was transferred at the request of the CFO, not to Jas but rather
directly to another Pride Group affiliate company, 933 Helena Holdings Inc.
Olsthoorn was similarly aware of the direct transfer of the funds to that
entity and had no objection.
[23]      There is no issue on these motions
that from the respective dates on which funds were advanced pursuant to the two
lines of credit, and continuing through January 2024, the Johals serviced the
interest payments on their respective lines of credit in accordance with the
terms of the credit agreements.
[24]      However, and notwithstanding that
the Johals were current in their servicing of the debts, BNS delivered letters
to each of the Johals on January 11, 2024, terminating their lines of credit
and demanding repayment in full.
[25]      The basis for the terminations was
that the Bank had become aware in December 2023 through its participation in a
syndicated loan to the Pride Group that the Pride Group was experiencing
liquidity issues.
[26]      As is clear from the Olsthoorn
affidavit, on December 15, 2023 the Pride Group provided BNS, in its role as a
member of the lending syndicate to the Pride Group, with an updated forecast anticipating
that they would breach the financial covenants for the syndicate loans over the
next three fiscal quarters (beginning with the last quarter of 2023). Shortly
thereafter, on December 19, 2023, RBC, as the senior member of the syndicate,
advised the other members that it appeared that the Pride Group had obtained
floorplan financing and asset financing from external providers outside the
syndicate, which granted security interests in the same vehicles already
pledged to the syndicate.
[27]      Indeed, this was expressly
acknowledged by Sam on behalf of the Pride Group a few days later still when on
or about December 22, 2023, he wrote to RBC, the leader of the Pride Group
syndicate, to advise the syndicate that the Pride Group was experiencing
liquidity issues. In that letter, Sam advised the syndicate (and therefore BNS
as well) that he and Jas had personally injected approximately $18.5 million
from their personal lines of credit into the operating business of the Pride
Group to address the liquidity issues.
[28]      Internally within BNS, Olsthoorn
received a copy of the syndicate letter within a day. He was therefore aware of
the confirmation from Sam that both of the Johals had used their personal lines
of credit to inject the approximately $18.5 million. However, he already knew
this as a result of the fact that the advances on the lines of credit went
directly to the corporate entities within or affiliated with the Pride Group,
and not to either of the Johals personally: $9.5 million on Sam’s line of
credit and $9 million on Jas’ line.
[29]      However, the termination and demand
letters delivered by BNS a few weeks later on January 11, 2024, terminating the
lines of credit, made no reference to the use of the funds for the Pride Group,
nor to any suggestion that such a use constituted a breach of the credit
agreements. In my view, this is inconsistent with the position now advanced by
BNS on this motion to the effect that the Bank would not have approved or
advanced the credit lines if the Johals had advised that they intended to use
the funds for Pride Group working capital. Even though the Bank knew that had
occurred, it did not rely on such as a basis to terminate the lines of credit.
[30]      Thereafter, the Johals continued to
pay interest on the lines of credit for the balance of January, and through
February and March 2024 until the Pride Group filed for and received protection
from its creditors under the CCAA on March 27, 2024.
[31]      The Applicant has the onus to
establish that the debt of the debtor amounts to $1,000 or more, and that the
debtor has committed an act of bankruptcy within six months preceding the
filing of the application: Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act, R.S.C., 1985,
c. B-3, s. 43(1) ("BIA"). A debtor commits an act of
bankruptcy if he or she ceases to meet their liabilities generally as they
become due: BIA s. 42(1)(j).
[32]      In general, the existence of more
than one unpaid creditor is sufficient to establish that a debtor ceased to
meet their liabilities generally as they came due:
Braich v. Clarke,
2023 BCCA 305, para. 43; Syndic de Cohen, 2023 QCCA 201, para. 14; ATB
Financial v. Coredent Partnership, 2020 ABQB 587, paras. 82-95.
[33]      Pursuant to s. 43(7) of the BIA,
the Court shall dismiss an application for bankruptcy if it is not satisfied
with the proof of the facts alleged, or if it is satisfied that either the
debtor is able to pay their debts, or that for other sufficient cause, no order
ought to be made.
[34]      While the burden of
proof on a bankruptcy application is the civil standard, the Bank has a high
onus. Proceedings under the BIA are quasi-criminal in nature, and the
acts of bankruptcy and all allegations set out in the application must be
proven on sufficient evidence: Re Levesque, 2016 ONCA 393, 36 CBR (6th)
217, at paras. 5 – 6 (“Levesque”).
[35]      The parties disagree on whether,
aside from the demand made by BNS in respect of the lines of credit, the Johals
remain current on all other debts as they become due.
[36]      The Johals rely on two principal
facts. First, the only debt referenced in the affidavits filed on behalf of the
Bank in support of these bankruptcy Applications are the lines of credit. I
accept that. In the Affidavit of Verification of Christopher Usas sworn in support
of each bankruptcy Application, the only debt referenced is that under the line
of credit. The affidavit in each Application confirms that the line of credit
is a demand credit facility, that demand has been made, and that there has been
no repayment.
[37]      Second, each of the Johals
confirmed on their respective cross examinations in these Applications that
they are not in default on any of the personal debt, and that all claims
related to the Pride Group are stayed pursuant to the ARIO. In addition, and as
noted above, the Johals were current on payments of interest under the lines of
credit from the dates of advance and continuing until the Pride Entities filed
for CCAA protection in March 2024.
[38]      The Bank submits that the Court
ought to reject such a bald assertion. The Bank states that notwithstanding the
lack of any admission, there is evidence of the inability of the Johals to meet
their obligations generally as illustrated by the fact that they were served
with a claim from Mitsubishi HC Capital Canada Inc. and Mitsubishi Capital
Canada Leasing Inc. issued on March 25, 2024(the "Mitsubishi claim").
[39]      The Mitsubishi claim, issued two
days prior to the commencement of the CCAA proceeding, seeks payment on
guarantees the Johals had given to Mitsubishi in respect of significant
creditor advances to the Pride Entities. Those proceedings, as with all claims
related to the Pride Group, have been stayed by the CCAA stay of
proceedings. This has been expressly acknowledged by Mitsubishi, which, as
described below, is taking steps within that CCAA proceeding with
respect to that debt. Moreover, in this regard, and as discussed more particularly
below in the section respecting the CCAA stay of proceedings, the
quantum of the indebtedness of the Johals to Mitsubishi is dependent on and
certainly affected by recoveries to creditors in the Pride Group CCAA proceeding.
The exact quantum is as yet undetermined.
[40]      In addition, BNS submits that an
inference ought to be drawn that the Johals cannot meet their obligations
generally from the fact that the Johals have borrowed other sums which remain
outstanding. Jas borrowed approximately $300,000 - $400,000 from close friends
to pay for his son’s wedding and other expenses. Sam borrowed over $1 million,
although the evidence is unclear as to the purpose or use of those funds.
[41]      Finally in this regard, BNS invites
the Court to draw an adverse inference from the fact that the Johals refused to
answer BNS' questions on cross-examination about whether they were failing to
meet other obligations within the six-month period preceding these
Applications, and BNS' requests for further information about their outstanding
debts within that time period.
[42]      As noted above, the onus is on the
Bank for these Applications. The clear evidence of each of the Johals on
cross-examination was that they were current in all of their debts as they
generally become due. I am satisfied that, for the purposes of these motions,
BNS brings these motions as a single creditor.
[43]      As has been well-established, the
provisions of the BIA are intended to be utilized for the benefit of the
creditors of a debtor as a class, not for the enforcement of an individual
debt:
Levesque
at para. 7. See also: Bankruptcy of the Jewish Foundation of Greater Toronto,
2022 ONSC 2120, 99 CBR (6th) 261, at para. 25; aff’d 2023 ONCA 268.
[44]      For this reason, courts grant
bankruptcy orders in single creditor cases only where special circumstances
exist, which have been recognized in three categories: Levesque at para.
10, quoting with approval from Re Valente, (2004), 2004 CanLII 8018 (ON CA), 70 O.R. (3d) 31 (C.A.)
at para. 8:
[45]      I am satisfied that none of the
special circumstances that justify the granting of a bankruptcy order on an
application by a single creditor are present in this case.
[46]      First, the record is clear that
there have not been repeated demands for payment: there was one demand based on
the liquidity crisis at the Pride Group entities. That is the demand upon which
each of the two bankruptcy Applications was based, as is clear from the
respective affidavits of verification. Moreover, the Johals continued to make
regular interest payment on the lines of credit through until March 2024 when the
debts were stayed pursuant to the CCAA Initial Order.
[47]      Second, and while the quantum of
each debt is material, there is no evidence of fraud or suspicious circumstances
here with respect to the manner in which debtors have handled their assets,
such as would require use of BIA processes.
[48]      Third and finally, as noted above,
neither debtor has admitted his inability to pay creditors generally.
[49]      I note that to these three
categories of special circumstances, BNS submits that Kimmel J. of this Court
added a fourth category in Sergio Grillone (Re), 2023 ONSC 5710 at
paras. 134, 161 and particularly 162.
[50]      In that case, Kimmel J. observed
that, in the particular circumstances of that matter, an order under s. 43(1)
of the BIA was necessary to achieve an orderly distribution of the
estate of the bankrupt to creditors, and to create a single forum in which the
multiplicity of claims involving the debtor could be determined while ensuring
that no creditor obtains an unfair advantage over the others in the interim. In
that case, the Court found that such was a special circumstance that supported
the granting of a bankruptcy order.
[51]      In my view, the special
circumstance to which Kimmel J. was referring militates, on the facts of this
particular case now before me, precisely in favour of the stay being granted
here and the claims of BNS being addressed within the Pride Group CCAA proceeding,
for the very rationale expressed by Kimmel J.: dealing with the BNS claims
within the CCAA proceeding will create a single forum in which the
multiplicity of claims involving the Johals related to claims against the Pride
Entities can be determined while ensuring that no creditor obtains an unfair
advantage over the others in the interim. For that reason, the facts here do
not give rise to a special circumstance justifying the bankruptcy Applications.
[52]      Finally, even if I were not
satisfied that these bankruptcy Applications were single creditor applications,
or if I were satisfied that special circumstances existed, in my view the
particular circumstances of this case are such that there is “other sufficient
cause” that a bankruptcy order ought not to be paid as contemplated in s. 43(7)
of the BIA.
[53]      In my view, it is equitable and
just in the particular circumstances of this case that the claims of BNS under
the lines of credit be determined as necessary and appropriate within the
ongoing CCAA proceeding of the Pride Entities.
[54]      I need not repeat the reasons above
with respect to the integration of these claims against the Johals, and the
liabilities of the Pride Entities in respect of which the advances under the
lines of credit were exclusively used.
[55]      As urged upon the Court by the
Court-Appointed Monitor in oral argument on this motion (without objection from
the Bank): it would be to the benefit of all stakeholders, and the fairness of
the process generally, to address all claims against all parties covered by the
stay of proceedings in the Initial Order in one comprehensive proceeding with
the benefit of oversight of a Court officer in the form of the Court-Appointed
Monitor. Again, that is consistent with the reasoning of Kimmel, J. in the Grillone
case.
[56]      Of all other creditors, no other
creditor has joined with BNS in these bankruptcy Applications. The only other
creditor who has indicated or demonstrated any intention to proceed as against
Sam and Jas is Mitsubishi, which extended commercial credit to the Pride
Entities guaranteed by the Johals.
[57]      As its claim was stayed by the CCAA
proceeding, Mitsubishi, unlike BNS, is taking such steps as it considers
appropriate within that CCAA proceeding. The Monitor as well as the
Johals submit that that is the proper process here. I agree. The Monitor can
then investigate such claims as are advanced with the benefit of its role in
that CCAA proceeding, and the corresponding information available to it
with respect to all corporate parties, the debts of each and the guarantees in
respect thereof. At a minimum, this will avoid all the inefficiencies and
unfairness that can flow from a multiplicity of proceedings.
[58]      For all of these reasons, I would
stay the bankruptcy Applications.
[59]      Even if I am in error with respect
to my conclusion reflected above that these Applications should be stayed under
the BIA, in my view, they are clearly subject to the stay of proceedings
made in the CCAA proceeding. For this reason also, they ought not to
proceed.
[60]      Both the Initial Order granted in
the CCAA proceeding on March 27, 2024, and the ARIO granted on the
comeback hearing dated April 5, 2024, included the standard stay of proceedings
consistent with the Model Order of the Commercial List, which in this case,
reads as follows:
[61]      Within the Initial Order, the
“Pride Entities” referenced in paragraph 15 above are described at Schedule “A”
to the Initial Order. They specifically include the two entities to which the $18.5
million advances made on the BNS lines of credit were directly forwarded: 933
Helena Holdings Inc. and Block 6 Holding Inc.
[62]      Moreover, Sam and Jas, while not CCAA
Applicants, were included within the scope of the stay of proceedings as
“Additional Stay Parties”.
[63]      The Endorsement of Chief Justice
Morawetz setting out the reasons for granting the Initial Order confirmed
expressly that the Chief Justice was satisfied that the relief set out at
paragraph 15 was appropriate in order to ensure that the intent and purpose of
the CCAA proceeding was not frustrated (See: Endorsement dated March 27,
2024 at paras. 32 – 36).
[64]      BNS received the CCAA
Application Materials and the Initial Order. It immediately requested of
counsel to the CCAA Applicants that Sam and Jas be excluded as
Additional Stay Parties with respect to the very claims on which these
Applications are now based pursuant to the demands made on the lines of credit,
failing which, BNS would bring an appropriate motion to be heard simultaneously
with the next return date in the CCAA proceeding.
[65]      The Court then granted the ARIO (which
continues this day). Counsel to the Applicants in the CCAA proceeding
responded to the request of BNS to confirm that the stay [in respect of Sam and
Jas]:
[66]      Counsel for the Applicants in the CCAA
proceedings referred counsel to BNS to the counsel representing the Johals in
the CCAA proceeding. Counsel to BNS then wrote to that counsel,
apparently referencing the above statements from CCAA Applicants’
counsel, but advised that:
[67]      I agree with the submission of the
Johals on this motion that the above is not an accurate summary of the
correspondence from counsel for the CCAA Applicants. That
correspondence, read according to the plain meaning of the words used, stated that
the stay of proceedings related only to any “agreement involving any of the
Pride Entities for the obligations, liabilities and claims of and against any
of the Pride Entities” and that the stay would not apply if the “Potential
Claim” (i.e., the demands under the lines of credit on which these bankruptcy
Applications are based) “does not in any way relate to any liability of Sam and
Jas involving the Pride Entities”.
[68]      BNS argues that the lines of credit
were intended for personal uses, and not for working capital or other operating
needs of the Pride Entities, and that if (as is clearly the case) the funds
were in fact used by the Pride Entities, this was contrary to the intention of
the Bank in advancing funds under the lines of credit in the first place.
Whatever the expressed or anticipated use of funds, this argument is belied by
what in fact happened.
[69]      The advances under the lines of
credit were made directly to Pride Entities or affiliates expressly covered by
the stay of proceedings, and those advances were made with the express
knowledge of BNS (which initiated those direct transfers). Then, the Bank
received the correspondence to the lending syndicate of the Pride Entities from
Sam expressly confirming that he and his brother Jas had injected $18.5 million
(the exact amount advanced under these lines) to the Pride Entities to
alleviate the liquidity crisis.
[70]      In short, the stay of proceedings
in the Initial Order captures any liabilities of the Pride Group entities
listed on Schedule “A” to that Initial Order, and those entities in turn
include the two entities to which BNS advanced the $18.5 million directly from
the lines of credit of the Johals. Finally, those advances “relate to
liabilities” of the Pride Group entities - it was precisely to deal with
liabilities of the Pride Group that the funds were forwarded directly to
entities covered by the stay in the first place.
[71]      Accordingly, the evidence satisfies
me that the funds advanced pursuant to the lines of credit are inescapably
“involving the obligations, liabilities and claims of an against any of the
Pride Entities”, and that one cannot reasonably conclude that they “do not in
any way relate to any liability of Sam and Jas involving the Pride Entities”.
They plainly do so.
[72]      This is further reinforced by the terms
of the credit agreements summarized above. The free cash flow of each of the
Johals was deficient (by an order of magnitude) to fund even the interest, let
alone repayment of the principal, on the lines of credit. This was recognized
by the Bank. Moreover, this is precisely why there is a cross-default provision
in each credit agreement entitling the Bank to demand repayment based not on
any change in circumstances of the Johals in their personal capacities, but
rather expressly and exclusively based on a change of circumstances in the
financial position of the Pride Entities. Ironically, and as described below,
that is precisely what happened and is precisely the event that triggered the
termination of the credit facilities in the first place.
[73]      Moreover, counsel for BNS clearly
understood that CCAA counsel for the Johals was taking the position that
the stay of proceedings applied, based on the email exchange of May 30, 2024,
where (excluding without-prejudice excerpts not before the Court) counsel for
BNS advised that it disagreed with counsel for the Johals and that “[w]e are
comfortable that BNS is not stayed”.
[74]      In light of that exchange, one
would have expected the Bank to have brought a motion within the CCAA proceeding
(and therefore on notice to all affected stakeholders on the CCAA
Service List) either for a declaration that the stay of proceedings did not
apply, or - precisely as BNS had originally requested - a motion to vary the
stay to exclude the Johals as Additional Stay Parties so the stay did not
apply.
[75]      I am reinforced in my conclusion
that the claims relate to liabilities of the Pride Entities by one further
fundamental and significant fact as described above: the only reason set out in
the correspondence of BNS terminating the lines of credit and demanding that
they would be repaid is the liquidity crisis at the Pride Entities, of which
the Bank was aware expressly because of its membership in the Pride Group
lending syndicate. Put differently, the Johals had not defaulted on these lines
of credit, and nor was any default alleged by the Bank.
[76]      In any event of how the above
exchange of correspondence is to be interpreted, in my view, a plain reading of
the stay of proceedings granted in s. 15 of the Initial Order and reproduced
above is clear that it applies to Sam and Jas in respect of any of their assets
with respect to any liability or claim that relates to any agreement involving
the Pride Entities or the obligations and liabilities of those Pride Entities.
The stay of proceedings clearly applies.
[77]      In addition to all of the above, in
my view, and considering the circumstances of these bankruptcy Applications as
against the ongoing CCAA proceeding, the latter proceeding is the one
within which these issues should be determined, precisely as Chief Justice
Morawetz recognized when granting the Initial Order.
[78]      The power of a CCAA court to
issue a broad stay of proceedings is the primary instrument provided by that
statute to achieve its legislative purpose, establish order and preserve the
status quo, which is crucial to the orderly administration of the estate: Sproule v. Nortel
Networks Corporation,
2009 ONCA 833, 99 OR (3d) 708, at para. 16; Romspen Investment Corporation
v. Courtice Auto Wreckers Limited, 2017 ONCA 301, 138 OR (3d) 373, at para.
72.
[79]     
A broad
stay of proceedings is appropriate if it advances the policy objectives of the CCAA
and flows from the broad powers afforded to a CCAA judge: Century Services Inc. v.
Canada (Attorney General),
2010 SCC 60, [2010] 3 SCR 379, at paras. 66 and 70.
[80]     
Accordingly, in my view the stay of proceedings, both generally and in
the particular circumstances of this case, ought to be interpreted broadly and
so as to include the claims on the lines of credit now advanced by BNS.
[81]      In my view, either of the two
principal reasons above (i.e., that no bankruptcy order ought to be made
pursuant to s. 43(7) of the BIA; or that the bankruptcy Applications
should be stayed by the Initial Order and the ARIO), is sufficient to grant the
requested relief here. I have found that both apply here.
[82]      For the reasons above, the
bankruptcy Application in respect of each of Sam and Jas is stayed, and the
claims of BNS on the lines of credit should be determined as necessary and
appropriate within the ongoing CCAA proceeding of the Pride Entities.
[83]      The parties made submissions as to
costs and submitted Costs Outlines. BNS’ Outline reflects substantial indemnity
costs of $21,900.54 and partial indemnity costs of $15,142.57. The Costs
Outline of the Johals reflects substantial indemnity costs of $50,590.09 and
partial indemnity costs of $34,290.97. All amounts are inclusive of fees and
disbursements.
[84]      The Johals have been successful on
the motions. They
are presumptively entitled to their costs. They seek an order that costs be
assessed and paid now. BNS submitted that if it were unsuccessful on the
motions, costs could be awarded, but that they should be made payable by way of
set off as against the much more significant debt owing by the Johals to BNS,
and not be made payable by BNS now.
[85]      Pursuant to s. 131 of
the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43 ("CJA"),
costs are in the discretion of the court, and the court may determine by whom
and to what extent the costs shall be paid.
[86]      Rule 57.01 provides that
in exercising its discretion under s. 131, the court may consider, in addition
to the result in the proceeding (and any offer to settle or contribute), the
factors set out in that Rule.
[87]      The overarching
objective is to fix an amount that is fair, reasonable, proportionate and
within the reasonable expectations of the parties in the circumstances: Boucher
v. Public Accountants Council for the Province of Ontario (2004), 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R.
(3d) 291 (C.A.), at paras. 24-26.
[88]      Rule 57.03 provides
that, on the hearing of a contested motion, unless the court is satisfied that
a different order would be more just, the court shall fix the costs of the
motion and order them to be paid within 30 days.
[89]      In my view, the amounts owing on
the lines of credit ought to have been pursued within the CCAA proceeding
without the preparation and hearing of these motions. Taking all of these
factors into account, a just and equitable award of costs is in the amount of
$17,000, inclusive of fees, disbursements and HST, which amount is payable by
BNS to the Johals within 30 days.
[90]      Order to go in accordance with
these reasons.