[1]   By Endorsement dated October 4, 2024, this Court decided the within Application
in favour of Ms. Rosanna Di Frangia (“Rosanna”).  She and the Respondent, Mr.
Maurizio Campolucci (“Maurizio”) were embroiled in a dispute as to who should
be the guardian of their mother’s property.  Rosanna proposed that it be her
alone.  Maurizio suggested that it be both parties jointly.  This Court agreed
with Rosanna.
[2]   The parties have been unable to settle the issue of costs of the
Application commenced by Rosanna.  Rosanna’s counsel filed written submissions
on costs, as per the Court’s direction.  Maurizio has not filed any submissions
on costs.  The deadline for filing has passed (they were due before the end of
November 2024).
[3]   Notwithstanding that Maurizio filed no submissions on costs, this
Court must still analyze carefully the submissions made on behalf of Rosanna. 
She is certainly entitled to some costs, being the successful party in the
proceeding, however, the appropriate scale of costs must be determined (Rosanna
is asking for full recovery of her costs), and the quantum must be decided
(Rosanna is asking for a total of $136,362.66).  Although Maurizio has elected
not to participate, this Court has a duty to ensure that the award of costs is
fair, just, reasonable, and proportionate, and that it meets the modern
objectives of a costs order – to at least partially indemnify successful
litigants, and to encourage settlement, and to discourage bad faith or
inappropriate conduct on the part of litigants.
[4]   On the degree of success, Rosanna was entirely successful on the
Application.
[5]   With regard to efforts to settle the matter, I am not aware of any
significant efforts on the part of Maurizio, while I know that Rosanna made a
reasonable offer to settle the Application, or alternatively to settle
Maurizio’s request to adjourn the Application, way back in March 2024.
[6]   In terms of the conduct of the parties, I agree with counsel for
Rosanna that Maurizio has acted unreasonably throughout the proceeding.  He put
forward a position, joint decision-making responsibility for Livia’s property,
that held no prospect of success given the acknowledged high level of conflict
and distrust between the parties.  He failed or refused to comply with the
Order of Justice Kurz made on March 28, 2024.  He stalled the proceeding being
finalized, and that could not have been in the best interests of Livia.
[7]   I have reviewed the Costs Outline and the dockets filed by counsel
for Rosanna, which materials include dockets from Rosanna’s prior lawyer. 
There is nothing excessive or unreasonable about the time spent or the hourly
rates charged.
[8]   This Court orders that Maurizio shall pay costs to Rosanna in the
total amount of $100,000.00.  Those costs shall be paid in full by the end of
January 2025.  If the costs are not paid by the time that Maurizio is to
receive his share of Livia’s estate, then the outstanding amount shall be paid
out of Maurizio’s share of the estate.
[9]   The $100,000.00 quantum is not full indemnity, but it represents elevated
partial indemnity of about 70% of full recovery, and that is warranted for the
reasons stated above.