[1]              
The plaintiffs move for (i) a declaration that a
document (the “Proffer”) provided by the defendant Saad Aljabri to the Attorney
General for Canada (“AGC”) pursuant to s. 38 of the Canada Evidence Act
(“CEA”) is not subject to any form of privilege and/or that any such
privilege has been waived, and (ii) an order directing Dr. Aljabri to produce a
copy of the Proffer (as redacted by the AGC) to the plaintiffs.
[2]              
Dr. Aljabri opposes this motion and asserts that
the Proffer is protected from disclosure by litigation privilege.
[3]              
For the following reasons, the plaintiffs’
motion is dismissed.
[4]              
The plaintiffs are corporations which were
established to pursue commercial and counterterrorism activities in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia (“KSA”).
[5]              
The defendant Saad Aljabri was an official with
the Ministry of the Interior of the KSA.
[6]              
In this action, the plaintiffs allege that Dr.
Aljabri orchestrated a massive fraud, misappropriating at least USD $5.36
billion from the plaintiffs for his personal gain and that of his alleged
co-conspirators. The plaintiffs obtained Mareva injunctions against Dr.
Aljabri and certain of his family members which remain in force.
[7]              
Dr. Aljabri has defended the action. He denies
that he defrauded the plaintiffs and asserts that funds paid to him by the
plaintiffs were provided and authorized by the Saudi government and used for
counterterrorism purposes and to compensate him for his faithful and hazardous
service.
[8]              
The background to the creation of the Proffer
includes proceedings between the parties in the United States.
[9]              
On March 24, 2021, after a receivership order
was granted by this Court, the plaintiffs commenced an action in the State
Court of Massachusetts because, under applicable state law, an action is
required to register and enforce foreign orders such as the receivership order.
The plaintiffs sought an order enforcing the receivership order and then to
stay the Massachusetts action pending the resolution of this action.
[10]          
Dr. Aljabri and his son filed a notice to have
the case remanded to Federal Court. After removal of the Massachusetts action
to the U.S. Federal Court, the U.S. Department of Justice appeared in the
Massachusetts proceeding. On December 29, 2021, the U.S. District Court of
Massachusetts dismissed the Massachusetts action, ruling that Dr. Aljabri could
not defend the recognition and enforcement proceedings in the U.S. on the
merits without reference to information covered by the assertion of state
secrets privilege. The U.S. decision was upheld on appeal by the U.S. First
Circuit Court of Appeals.
[11]          
On April 21, 2021, Dr. Aljabri moved to stay
this action in Ontario as an abuse of process.
[12]          
On July 3, 2021, then counsel for Dr. Aljabri
gave notice to the AGC under s. 38 of the CEA that he believed that Dr. Aljabri
would be required to disclose sensitive or potentially injurious information in
this action. In Dr. Aljabri’s affidavit filed in support of his stay motion, he
appended a fully redacted “Confidential Appendix” setting out material subject
to the CEA notice. The AGC completed its review of the Confidential
Appendix in July 2022 and returned a redacted copy to counsel for Dr. Aljabri.
The plaintiffs were provided with a copy of the redacted Confidential Appendix
on September 30, 2022.
[13]          
Following the decision of the U.S. District
Court in December 2021, Dr. Aljabri sought to re-schedule the motion he had
previously brought to stay this action on the basis that his inability to
adduce evidence of information for national security reasons fundamentally
compromised his defence.
[14]          
The deadline for Dr. Aljabri to provide his
motion record on that stay motion was June 6, 2022.
[15]          
On May 31, 2022, an official from the Canadian
Security Intelligence Service delivered a s. 38 notice covering any materials
that Dr. Aljabri may intend to file on the stay motion. The AGC sought an
injunction to prevent Dr. Aljabri from filing his motion materials. Before a
hearing was scheduled, the Federal Court issued an interim injunction (on
consent, after Dr. Aljabri retained s. 38 counsel) prohibiting Dr. Aljabri from
filing any material on the stay motion that may infringe his s. 38 obligations.
[16]          
Dr. Aljabri’s counsel prepared and delivered the
Proffer to the AGC in September 2022 so that a s. 38 review may be conducted.
[17]          
The AGC has now returned the Proffer to Dr.
Aljabri with redactions meant to prevent disclosure of information the AGC has
determined is sensitive or potentially injurious to Canada’s national defence,
national security, and/or international relations.
[18]          
In June 2022, the AGC commenced an application
in the Federal Court which resulted from the s. 38 notice and the prohibitions
on disclosure. The plaintiffs and Dr. Aljabri, along with the AGC, are parties
to Federal Court application.
[19]          
Within those proceedings, the plaintiffs brought
two separate motions seeking an order for production of the redacted Proffer.
Kane J. dismissed both motions. Kane J. held that the determination of whether
the Proffer is subject to litigation privilege is beyond the jurisdiction of
the Federal Court and that the Federal Court has no role in ordering its
production. See Canada (Attorney General) v. Al Jabri, 2023 FC 1338, at
paras. 98-108.
[20]          
The plaintiffs appealed these decisions. The
Federal Court of Appeal heard the two appeals together and dismissed the
appeals in May 2024. The Federal Court of Appeal did not rule on whether the
Proffer was protected from disclosure in this action by litigation privilege.
[21]          
When Dr. Aljabri was examined for discovery, he
was asked to produce the Proffer. His counsel refused to produce the Proffer
but undertook to provide a summary, as detailed as it can be, of all material
facts that have not been redacted from the Proffer by the AGC for s. 38 concerns.
[22]          
In Canada (Attorney General) v. Al Jabri,
2023 FC 40, Kane J., at para. 6, noted that the AGC had
not then yet completed the review of the Proffer and addressed whether the process of the s. 38 proceeding would be unfair to the
plaintiffs:
[23]          
At the hearing of this motion, counsel for Dr.
Aljabri confirmed that the undertaking will include provision of all
non-injurious summaries of any redacted information prepared and provided by
the Federal Court.
[24]          
The issues on this motion are whether the
Proffer is presumptively protected from disclosure by litigation privilege and,
if it is, whether the privilege was waived.
[25]          
The Proffer was created for Dr. Aljabri to
comply with s. 38 of the CEA. I first set out the statutory scheme of s.
38 of the CEA.
[26]          
An overview of the statutory scheme of section
38 of the CEA is provided in R. v. Ahmad, 2011 SCC 6, at paras.
17-21:
[27]          
To make the determination pursuant to s. 38.06,
the Federal Court applies a three-part test and must consider whether (i)
information is relevant to the proceeding in which disclosure is sought; (ii)
if so, whether disclosure of the information would be injurious to
international relations, national defence or national security; and (iii) if
so, whether the public interest in disclosure outweighs the public interest in
non-disclosure. See Canada (Attorney General) v. Ribic, 2003 FCA 246, at
paras. 17-21.
[28]          
Litigation privilege gives rise to an immunity
from disclosure for documents and communications whose dominant purpose is
preparation for litigation. Examples of items to which the privilege applies
are the lawyer’s file and oral or written communications between a lawyer and
third parties, such as witnesses or experts. See Blank v. Canada (Minister
of Justice), 2006 SCC 39, at para. 59; Lizotte v. Aviva Insurance
Company of Canada, 2016 SCC 52, at para. 19.
[29]          
In Blank v. Canada (Minister of Justice),
2006 SCC 39, the Supreme Court of Canada explained how litigation privilege
differs from solicitor and client privilege, quoting from R.J. Sharpe (Sharpe
J.A. of the Court of Appeal for Ontario) in “Claiming Privilege in the
Discovery Process”, in Special Lectures of the Law Society of Upper Canada
(1984), 163, at pp. 164-165:
[30]          
In Blank, at para. 32, the Supreme Court
of Canada confirmed that “[c]onfidentiality, the sine qua non of the
solicitor-client privilege, is not an essential component of the litigation
privilege”. See also Lizotte, at para. 22.
[31]          
In Blank, the Supreme Court of Canada, at
para. 27, held that the object of litigation privilege is to ensure the
efficacy of the adversarial process, and to achieve this purpose, parties to
litigation must be left to prepare their contending positions in private,
without adversarial interference and without fear of premature disclosure. The
Court, at para. 60, held that the dominant purpose standard should apply to
determinations of whether litigation privilege applies to documents, observing
that the dominant purpose standard appears consistent with the notion that
litigation privilege should be viewed as a limited exception to the principle
of full disclosure and not as an equal partner of the broadly interpreted
solicitor-client privilege. The Court held that the dominant purpose test is
more compatible with the contemporary trend favouring increased disclosure.
[32]          
The onus is on the party asserting the privilege
to establish, with respect to each document in issue, that the dominant purpose
for its creation was existing or contemplated litigation. The time at which the
dominant purpose for a document’s creation is to be assessed is the time when
it was created. See the Catalyst Capital Group Inc. v. West Face Capital
Inc., 2021 ONSC 125, at paras. 262-264.
[33]          
Both the plaintiffs and Dr. Aljabri rely on the
evidence given by Dr. Aljabri in his affidavit filed in response to this motion
concerning the purpose for which the Proffer was created.
[34]          
In his affidavit, Dr. Aljabri deposes:
[35]          
Dr. Aljabri submits that where s. 38 of the CEA
applies, participation in the process provided for by s. 38 is an essential
part of counsel’s preparation for the underlying litigation because the s. 38
process allows counsel to know what evidence is or is not available for use in
this litigation. Dr. Aljabri submits that the Proffer was created only for the
purpose of preparation for this action through the s. 38 process so that
counsel would know what information is or is not available to be put into
evidence in the action.
[36]          
The plaintiffs submit that the Proffer is not
protected from disclosure by litigation privilege because it was not created
for the dominant purpose of preparing for actual or contemplated litigation
within a zone of privacy. The plaintiffs submit that Dr. Aljabri’s evidence
establishes that the Proffer was prepared solely for the purpose of complying
with s. 38 of the CEA and, for this purpose, it was to be provided to
the AGC in circumstances where Dr. Aljabri knew that it would be shared broadly
with various third-party security partners, filed with the Federal Court, and
be the subject of submissions and adjudication under the s. 38 regime. The plaintiffs
submit that the Proffer was created for a purpose which is opposite to the
purpose of creation of a document with an expectation of privacy. They submit
that no privilege could exist in such a document.
[37]          
There is no question that the Proffer was created
solely for the purpose of allowing Dr. Aljabri to comply with his
statutory obligations under s. 38 of the CEA. In order to determine
whether, given this purpose, the condition to the application of litigation
privilege (that the Proffer was created for the dominant purpose of preparation
for litigation) has been satisfied, it is necessary to consider how s. 38 of
the CEA relates to the civil action in which litigation privilege has
been asserted.
[38]          
Section 38 of the CEA does not apply
simply because a person is in possession of “sensitive information” or
“potentially injurious information”, as those terms are defined in s. 38
of the CEA. In the absence of a proceeding in connection with which a
person is required to disclose, or expects to disclose or cause the disclosure
of, such information, the person has no statutory obligation under s. 38 to
give notice in writing to the AGC or to take any other action.
[39]          
The statutory obligation under s. 38 of the CEA
arises only where a person, “in connection with a proceeding”, is required to
disclose, or expects to disclose or cause the disclosure of such information.
This is clear from the definition of “participant” in s. 38 (“a person who, in
connection with a proceeding, is required to disclose, or expects to disclose
or cause the disclosure of, information”) and the language of s. 38.01(1) that
applies to only to a “participant”.
[40]          
Where, in connection with a proceeding, s.
38.01(1) applies, the statutory process in s. 38 is engaged.
[41]          
The statutory process in s. 38 of the CEA
determines what information that is “sensitive information” or “potentially
injurious information” may be disclosed “in connection with a proceeding”.
Section 38 does not otherwise limit the use that a person may make of such
information.
[42]          
When s. 38 of the CEA is engaged, the
process provided for thereunder becomes integral to the proceeding in respect
of which the notice was given. This is so because a litigant who is required to
give the s. 38 notice will not know whether relevant information that is
subject to the notice can be disclosed in the proceeding until the process
under s. 38 has run its course. Until counsel for a litigant who has given the
statutorily required notice knows what information may or may not be disclosed
in the proceeding, counsel is unable to assess and decide what evidence may be
tendered in the proceeding to prove facts that will advance the litigant’s
interests.
[43]          
When s. 38 of the CEA applies to
information that may be disclosed in connection with a proceeding, the
statutory process provided for thereunder, including the notification in
writing required to be given under s. 38.01(1), must be viewed as a procedural
regime applicable to a proceeding, in addition to other procedures under, for
example, the Rules of Civil Procedure, that leads to a necessary
determination of what information that is “sensitive information” or
“potentially injurious information” may or may not be disclosed in the
proceeding, which determination will affect the evidence that may or may not be
tendered to prove relevant facts.
[44]          
Dr. Aljabri’s defence to this action resulted in
the engagement of the process under s. 38 of the CEA. Dr. Aljabri’s
evidence that the Proffer was created “for the sole purpose of reducing to
writing the information I have that may be disclosed in this action so that
such information could be reviewed by the AGC” must be viewed in the context of
this process.
[45]          
When Dr. Aljabri’s evidence is so viewed, I am
satisfied that the Proffer was created as a part of a statutory process that is
integral to this action. Through this process, Dr. Aljabri and his counsel will
know what information may and may not be disclosed in the action. I am
satisfied that Dr. Aljabri has discharged his onus of establishing that the
Proffer was created for the dominant purpose of preparation for this action.
This condition for the application of litigation privilege to the Proffer is
met and, where the action is pending, there is a prima facie presumption
that the Proffer is protected from disclosure.
[46]          
The fact that Dr. Aljabri notified the AGC in
writing in compliance with s. 38.01(1) through the Proffer, a memorandum prepared
by his counsel, instead of through some other means, does not remove the
litigation privilege that presumptively attaches to the Proffer, where it was
created for the dominant purpose of preparation for litigation. The Proffer is
presumptively protected from disclosure regardless of the extent, if any, to
which its contents include statements which go further than clinical statements
of facts. Even if Dr. Aljabri had been self-represented and provided a document
to the AGC in compliance with the CEA for the dominant purpose of
preparation for litigation, the document would be presumptively protected from
disclosure by litigation privilege because litigation privilege applies to
unrepresented parties. See Lizotte, at para. 22.
[47]          
I am also satisfied that when creation of the
Proffer is viewed as an action taken to comply with a
statutory process that is an integral to the civil action, the rationale for litigation privilege, that is, protecting the integrity of the
adversarial process and maintaining a protected area to facilitate
investigation and preparation of a case by the adversarial advocate, applies to
the Proffer. See Lizotte, at para. 24.
[48]          
The plaintiffs submit that any privilege that
could have existed in the Proffer has been waived as a consequence of Dr.
Aljabri’s litigation conduct.