[1]              
Within the context of a Motion to Change, this court
heard a motion brought by the applicant dated July 30, 2024, and a cross motion
by the respondent dated August 1, 2024, each asking for temporary relief.
[2]              
The parties are parents of WW, born July 30,
2013, and AW born August 2, 2017.
[3]              
The parties married in Ontario in August 2011.
They moved to Texas in January 2015 to facilitate the employment of the
respondent as a physical therapist licensed to practice in the United States
but not in Canada. A separation occurred in or about July 2018. A final decree
of divorce was granted in the 300th Judicial District of Texas dated
March 7, 2019.
[4]              
The applicant returned with the children to
Ontario in July 2019. The respondent deposes that he returned permanently to
Ontario at the end of the summer in 2021 and, while the applicant considers
that the respondent’s return to have occurred earlier, that disagreement is of
no consequence to these motions. The respondent works as a physical therapist
in Buffalo, New York, commuting daily from his home in Ontario.
[5]              
The divorce judgment contained detailed terms as
to parenting made on consent and was signed July 23, 2019. The parties were to
be “joint managing conservators” which appears to be the functional equivalent
of an Ontario order of shared decision-making responsibility. The terms
included alternative provisions depending on whether the parties lived more or
less than 100 miles apart, presumably to account for the fact that at the time,
the applicant intended to return or had returned with the children to Ontario
and whether and when the respondent would choose to do so was not clear.
[6]              
By order dated April 14, 2021, Scott J. recognized
the Texas divorce decree, deeming it to be an order of the Superior Court of
Justice including jurisdiction over decision-making and parenting time for the
children.
[7]              
This court has made previous temporary orders
amending the parenting terms contained in the divorce decree:
[8]              
At the assignment court of October 10, 2024, the
matter was set for a 10-day trial to be heard during the May 12, 2025 sittings.
[9]              
In the lengthy and detailed notice of motion of
the applicant, she seeks an order changing parenting time from the status quo
established by the divorce decree, and which has been in place (other than the location
of the exchanges and supervision) since the divorce order was made.
[10]          
She also requests a “no harassment” clause, including
an order that the parties mutually respect the parenting time of the other, and
that they not attend any events, activities, or appointments that occur during
the other parent’s parenting time, including school meetings, extracurricular
activities and medical appointments.
[11]          
As well, she seeks disclosure of the identity of
the respondent’s employer.
[12]          
The respondent requests that the parenting time
provisions of the divorce decree not be changed (including the provision for electronic
communication) and that the temporary order imposing supervision be vacated. Further,
the respondent requests an order permitting him to register the children in certain
extracurricular activities; requiring the parties to ensure the children’s
attendance at those activities and allowing both parties to be present regardless
of the parenting schedule. The respondent also seeks an order requiring the parties
to ensure the children’s attendance at school.
[13]          
It is well-established that courts should not
disrupt status quo parenting arrangements on an interim basis in the absence of
evidence that the status quo is harmful to the children or that a change is necessary
to meet their best interests. This reluctance to order an interim change comes
from the commonsense proposition that it would be disruptive to the children to
have changes made on a temporary basis and then potentially have them reversed
following a trial on the merits.
[14]          
In this case, the trial is scheduled to take
place in approximately five months and is expected to take 10 days including the
issues of parenting time as well as child support.
[15]          
The applicant has provided a detailed proposal
as to parenting time both on a regular ongoing basis and as to special days,
holidays, and vacation time. Many of the proposals relate to events that will
postdate the anticipated trial, for example Father’s Day, summer vacation, and Thanksgiving.
For others, such as the administration of Holy Sacraments, no dates were
identified.
[16]          
The applicant has been frustrated by what she
considers to be the inflexibility of the respondent in refusing to fine-tune
the parenting terms in the divorce order. She submits that although the Texas
divorce order contained terms that were very detailed and contemplated the
relocation of the parties, there are still provisions that do not fit the
parties’ current situation, living relatively close to one another in Ontario.
[17]          
Many of the changes appear to be requested to
make adjustments that will lessen conflict between the parties from the
applicant’s point of view.
[18]          
For example, the applicant alleges that the
provisions of the divorce order that provide for weekend parenting time beginning
on the first, third and fifth Friday of each month and ending at the time the
child’s school resumes after the weekend are unclear in that the parties cannot
agree on which months have five weekends. Therefore, she proposes an easier
schedule with alternating weekends which, by the way, would increase her
parenting time and reduce that of the respondent. Although I consider counting
Fridays should not be a difficult calculation, I see that conflict as a sign of
how fractious the relationship between the parties has been.
[19]          
Another example relates to summer parenting
time. The divorce order provides that the respondent must give written notice
by April 1 each year setting out his 30 days of summer parenting time which are
to be taken in no more than two separate periods of at least seven consecutive
days. The applicant considers that provision to be unfair in that she cannot
schedule her own summer activities and those of the children until after the
respondent makes his selection. She proposes alternating 15-day periods
throughout the summer with her having the first two-week period in alternating
years.
[20]          
The divorce order specifically gives each party
the right to consult with schools and health care providers regarding the
children, and the right to attend school activities. There is no constraint
based on whose parenting time is in effect at the time of the activities.  The
applicant is asking for a change in that provision, as noted above.
[21]          
The “non-harassment” request would be a
significant restriction in parenting involvement.  Asking that the parties not
attend any events, activities, or appointments including extracurricular
activities and medical appointments that occur during the other’s parenting
time (in addition to removing the court-ordered right to attend school
activities to which I have referred), is a departure from the scheme set out in
the divorce order.
[22]          
The applicant deposes that the respondent and
his parents have been seen videoing the children at extracurricular events, and
that doing so makes the applicant and the children uneasy.  That position is an
indication of how the applicant views matters through the lens of her personal
history with the respondent.  It makes more sense to assume that for involved parents
and grandparents, making videos of the children’s participation in
extracurricular activities is a normal and natural activity.  If the children
are upset by the making of videos, it would be because of input from the
applicant.  A healthier response from the applicant would be to reassure the
children that videoing is a sign of engagement and support.
[23]          
In effect, the applicant is attempting to
renegotiate the details of the parenting time regime in a way that she believes
may reduce conflict and be more equitable as between the parties (meaning more
beneficial to her). There is little apparent benefit to the children in the
proposed changes.  While it can be said that if conflict between the parties is
reduced, there will be a consequent benefit to the children, it is not
reasonable to make an order in the name of conflict reduction granting changes requested
by one party when the other party is opposed, in the absence of clear harm or a
serious negative effect on the children’s best interest.
[24]          
Based on the untested affidavit evidence filed,
I conclude that the proposed temporary changes in the divorce order including a
non-harassment provision are not necessary in the children’s best interest.
[25]          
Presumably one of the issues for the court at
trial will be whether a material change in circumstance has occurred following
the relocation of both parties to Ontario from Texas following the divorce
decree. It is not necessary or appropriate for this court to opine on that
matter at this interim stage.
[26]          
Based on the foregoing, there will be no change
to the status quo as to the parenting time provisions in the divorce order as
requested by the applicant. The children appear to be thriving. The parties are
five months away from trial on the merits and there is insufficient evidence to
satisfy me that their best interests are being harmed by a continuation of the
status quo.
[27]          
Quite apart from the litigation, it is incumbent
on the parties, and part of their responsibility as parents, to reduce their
level of interpersonal conflict in the interest of the children. Although I was
advised that mediation was tried and failed, a revisiting of some form of
alternative dispute resolution is worth considering given the passage of time.
[28]          
The applicant requests that the name of the
respondent’s employer be disclosed.  The respondent has resisted providing that
information based on a concern that the applicant will abuse the information to
his detriment.  The applicant denies that she has made or will make improper
use of the information when provided.
[29]          
The Family Law Rules are clear that full financial
disclosure must be made in cases such as this, where support is one of the
issues. Misuse of that information, especially in such a way as could
jeopardize employment, would not only be counterproductive to the applicant but
would be met with serious consequences in a case where the propriety of the
parties’ behaviour is a significant issue.
[30]          
As a result, the applicant’s motion is dismissed
except for the request for the employer identity, which is to be provided by
the respondent within 10 days.
[31]          
I turn now to the respondent’s request for
relief as contained in his notice of motion.
[32]          
As is obvious from my decision on the
applicant’s motion, I deem it inappropriate to make minor changes to the
divorce order in advance of trial in the absence of evidence that the status
quo is harmful to the children or that a change is necessary to meet their best
interests.
[33]          
It is unnecessary for me to make an order reinstating
electronic communication as required by the divorce order.  That order requires
both parties to make the children available daily between 6:30 and 7:30 p.m.
and if a call is missed, to facilitate a return call within an hour.  That was
not a suggestion, but a requirement.  To the extent that the applicant is not
permitting such communication to happen, she is in breach of the order, and is subject
to enforcement proceedings with the potential for an adverse costs award.  I
note that the parties are required to use the “Talking Parent” app to convey
information concerning the children and if there are events, such as
extracurricular activities, that interfere with the electronic communication
schedule, the other party should be advised.  A suggestion by the applicant
that the calls constitute an invasion of privacy for her other children present
in her home is an example of how the applicant is making excuses to avoid
compliance with the order and shows how the best interest of WW and AW is apparently
not the applicant’s main focus.
[34]          
I have already dealt with the request by the
applicant for an order preventing attendance at children’s events.  It is
unnecessary for me to make the order requested by the respondent giving
specific permission to attend. Likewise, as to enrollment in extracurricular
activities, there is no need to specifically order what otherwise is not
prohibited. The requirement for the children to attend at school is a shared
responsibility and should not require an order.  The overarching consideration
must continue to be the best interest of the children.
[35]          
The most contentious claim for relief by the
respondent is the request that the supervision of parenting time pursuant to
the temporary orders of Justices Walters and Henderson in April and May 2023 be
rescinded.
[36]          
The affidavit material filed by the applicant
seeking a supervision order in March 2023 contained allegations of domestic
violence and other criminal activity involving the respondent in his
relationship with his second spouse, Crystal Butler, and allegations of his drinking
alcohol, sometimes while driving and sometimes in the presence of the children. 
A FACS investigation was underway at the time.
[37]          
In May 2023, the FACS investigation was
completed with no further steps taken.  The break and enter charge against the
respondent involving the premises of Ms. Butler was withdrawn.  As of June 2024,
he was placed on probation for two years following a guilty plea to failing to
comply with a court order, a term of which probation is that he keep away from
Ms. Butler.  He is now divorced from her.  He has admitted to being an
alcoholic but deposes that he has taken several programmes to manage that
condition and has attended Alcoholics Anonymous.  In short, the respondent
submits that the conditions which created concern for the court at the time the
supervision orders were made no longer exist, such that the provision should be
rescinded.
[38]          
The respondent also relies on the fact that his
mother normally lives in Parry Sound with her spouse and has obligations to him
and to other members of her family.  She has been forced to reside with the
respondent at personal inconvenience to her to facilitate his parenting time
with the children.
[39]          
The applicant bases her opposition to the
respondent’s request on her concern about his admitted alcoholism. She is
willing to have the supervision order vacated if the respondent agrees to
random drug and alcohol testing.  The apparent abatement of her concerns
relating to family violence are consistent with the conclusion of the FACS
investigation where no ongoing concerns were identified.
[40]          
The matter of supervision and the identity of
the supervisor are two different matters.  The respondent proposed his mother
as supervisor, and that proposal was adopted by the court in making the supervision
orders.  It is within the purview of the respondent to seek an amendment of the
court order changing the identity of the supervisor.  He did not do so as part
of the relief sought in this motion.
[41]          
Based on the facts to which he deposes, the
respondent has made strides to cope with his alcoholism.  There have been no
reported incidents or alcohol- or drug-related concerns in over 18 months. 
However, based on the untested material contained in her affidavits, the applicant
continues to express concerns about the reliability of the respondent to avoid consuming
alcohol while parenting the children without the assurance that supervision
provides. It is well-understood that alcoholism is a continuing condition which
ideally can be controlled by abstinence, which in turn relies on the commitment
of the respondent.
[42]          
I endorse the general principle that supervision
orders should be of a temporary nature.   The orders of Justices Walters and
Henderson have been in effect for a significant period.  On the other hand, as
I have noted in my reasons for dismissing the applicant’s request for changes
to the status quo, there is merit to maintaining a situation that has been in
effect, given the short period until the scheduled trial.  The children have
been thriving under the present regime.  A change to the supervision order
will, at the very least, increase the tension between the parties which will
inevitably affect the children.  The trial presents the forum where the
competing allegations, including those that relate to the need for continued
supervision, can be fully explored based on evidence tested by
cross-examination.
[43]          
As a result, while the respondent is to be
highly commended for what appears to have been significant efforts on his part
to keep his alcoholism under control, I am not prepared to vacate the
supervision order pending trial.
[44]          
In summary, the applicant’s motion is dismissed,
except for the requirement that the respondent provide the name of his employer
within 10 days.
[45]          
The respondent’s motion is also dismissed.
[46]          
The parties both made submissions as to costs. 
Applying the factors set out in rule 24 of the Family Law Rules, and
especially considering the lack of success of both parties in the substance of
their motions, there will be no order as to costs.