[1]              
The Fuller Landau Group Inc., in its capacity as court-appointed
liquidator and receiver (in these capacities, the "Liquidator") of
the undertaking, property and assets of Calldron Gas Bars Ltd. and 1195705
Ontario Inc. o/a Old Pro Driving Range (the "Companies") brings this
motion for this Court's advice and direction with respect to (i) "the Res
Judicata Issue" as defined in its Notice of Motion; and (ii) the
payment of $250,000 to George Vastis pursuant to the Judgment of Justice
Dietrich dated October 11, 2022.
[2]              
This motion involves Chris Kommatas and George Vastis who are equal shareholders
of the Companies. They were engaged in contentious litigation in relation to
their shareholdings in the Companies which went to trial before Dietrich J. who
granted judgment on October 11, 2022 (the “Judgment”) for reasons released that
day. The issue on this motion is the Judgment gives rise to the application of
the doctrine of issue estoppel to preclude claims that Mr. Kommatas wishes to make.
[3]              
For the reasons that follow, I make the following order:
[4]              
Mr. Kommatas and Mr. Vastis are 50% shareholders of the Companies. They
are also the officers and directors of the Companies.
[5]              
Mr. Kommatas and Mr. Vastis were engaged in contentious litigation in
relation to their shareholdings of the Companies. Mr. Vastis commenced an
application on July 20, 2020 seeking relief under s. 248 of the Business
Corporations Act. Mr. Kommatas commenced an application on September 11,
2011 also seeking such relief. By Order dated October 19, 2021, Gilmore J.
ordered that the applications be converted into a single proceeding with a
trial commencing February 28, 2022. The trial was heard before Dietrich J. over
14 days in February, March, April, and May, 2022.
[6]              
In the Order of Gilmore J. dated October 19, 2021 converting the
applications into a single proceeding to proceed as an action, Mr. Vastis and
his wife Helen Vastis were plaintiffs and Mr. Vastis was a defendant by
counterclaim. Mr. Kommatas was a defendant and plaintiff by counterclaim. The
Companies were defendants and defendants by counterclaim. Gilmore J. ordered
that the Notices of Application shall constitute the pleadings in the action
with each party being deemed to have defended the allegations raised against
them by the other party.
[7]              
In his Notice of Application, Mr. Kommatas claimed various relief
including (i) an order for the winding-up of the Companies, (ii) an order
requiring Mr. Vastis to repay to the Corporations all expenses paid by them for
or on behalf of Mr. Vastis and related parties, (iii) if necessary, an Order
appointing a Receiver to manage and operate the Corporations and to oversee the
sale of the Corporations' assets, (iv) an order that Mr. Vastis personally fund
the costs of a forensic audit of the Corporations to ascertain the amounts of
money Mr. Vastis and related parties have received from the Corporations in
excess of what has been paid to Mr. Kommatas, (v) a tracing of all monies
received from the Corporations by Mr. Vastis and related parties and judgment in
accordance therewith, and (vi) an order for the trial of an issue to determine
the damages that Mr. Vastis ought to pay to Mr. Kommatas or the Corporations.
[8]              
By the Judgment dated October 11, 2022 and for reasons released that
day, Justice Dietrich ordered and adjudged the winding-up and liquidation of
the Companies pursuant to section 207(1)(b)(iv) of the Ontario Business
Corporations Act. In the Judgment, Justice Dietrich also ordered and
adjudged that a further order shall issue for the appointment of a receiver to
facilitate the winding-up and liquidation of the Companies' assets, to conduct
the sale process, and the distribution of the proceeds under the supervision of
the court.
[9]              
By Order dated December 20, 2022 (the "Winding-Up Order"),
Dietrich J. appointed The Fuller Landau Group Inc. as Receiver, without
security, of all assets, undertakings, and properties of the Companies for the
purposes of conducting a wind-up, sales process, and the distribution of the
proceeds under the supervision of this Court.
[10]          
The parties were unable to resolve costs. Dietrich J. invited written
submissions and her endorsement was released on March 10, 2023.
[11]          
By letter dated April 25, 2024, counsel for Mr. Kommatas wrote to the
Liquidator regarding the claims process that, the letter states, will need to
take place prior to the final wind-up of the Corporations. Counsel for Mr.
Kommatas appended to their letter what is stated to be a summary of some of the
unequal payments made by the Corporations on behalf of Mr. Vastis and his
family.
[12]          
The Liquidator reports that it raised the April 25, 2024 letter with
counsel for Mr. Vastis who advised the Receiver that their client's position is
that Mr. Kommatas is precluded from making the claims in the April 25, 2024
letter because they are res judicata as a result of the shareholder
litigation that preceded the appointment of the Liquidator.
[13]          
The Liquidator reports that on May 10, 2024, it wrote to counsel for the
shareholders advising of each party's position on the claims asserted by Mr.
Kommatas in his counsel's April 25, 2024 letter and suggesting that the "Res
Judicata Issue" is likely a threshold issue.
[14]          
The Receiver reports that it is holding $34,623,322.40 of proceeds of
sale and, after estimated future disbursements, including $250,000 in payment
of the judgment amount to Mr. Vastis and $1,000,000 held as a "hold back
for future equalizations", and other disbursements including corporate
taxes and professional fees, the estimated amount available for future
shareholder distributions is $14,060.322.40.
[15]          
In the Liquidator's Notice of Motion dated July 15, 2024, the Liquidator
seeks advice and direction from this Court with respect to the matters
identified in paragraph 1 of this Endorsement.
[16]          
I first address the "Res Judicata Issue" that is the
subject of the Liquidator's motion for advice and direction.
[17]          
Issue estoppel is a branch of res judicata which precludes the
re-litigation of issues previously decided in court.
[18]          
In Danyluk v. Ainsworth Technologies Inc., 2001 SCC 44, Binnie
J., writing for the Court, cited the following passage from McIntosh v.
Parent, 1924 CanLII 401 (ON CA), at p. 422, as a more particular definition
of issue estoppel:
[19]          
There are three preconditions which must be met for issue estoppel to be
successfully invoked:
[20]          
Mr. Kommatas submits that the first precondition is not satisfied. He
accepts that the second and third preconditions are satisfied.
[21]          
In its Notice of Motion, the Liquidator seeks this Court's advice and
directions with respect to "(a) the Res Judicata issue (as defined
below); and (b) the payment of $250,000 to George Vastis pursuant to Justice
Dietrich's Judgment ('Judgment') dated October 11, 2022". The Liquidator
states in the grounds for the motion in its Notice of Motion, under the heading
"The Res Judicata Issue":
[22]          
Mr. Kommatas submits that the "Res Judicata Issue" is
"whether there has been an unequal distribution of Companies' proceeds as
a result of George having received more proceeds from the Companies prior to
the Liquidator's [appointment] and, accordingly, whether Chris ought to receive
a larger portion of the remaining proceeds held by the Liquidator". He
describes this issue as the "Unequal Distribution" issue.
[23]          
Mr. Kommatas relies on paragraph 18 of the trial reasons of Justice
Dietrich in which she writes that "[a] receiver is required not only to
facilitate the sales process, but also to manage the distribution of the net
proceeds of sale, which will include addressing historical accounting
irregularities, income tax reporting, unpaid dividends, and shareholder loan
accounts." He relies on paragraph 2 of the Winding Up Order which provides
for the appointment of the Liquidator as receiver of the assets of the
Companies "for the purposes of conducting a wind-up, sales process, and
the distribution of the proceeds under the supervision of this Court." Mr.
Kommatas submits that the Liquidator was expressly empowered to collect monies
owing to the Companies including those owed by Mr. Vastis as a result of
improperly receiving excess funds.
[24]          
Mr. Kommatas submits that the issue before the court on this motion is
similar to the issue that was before the court in Basegmez et al. v. Akman
et al., 2022 ONSC 4127. In Akman, there was a dispute between
shareholders of a company that led to litigation resulting in a finding of oppression
against one of the shareholders and an order for the liquidation of the land
re-development project the company was undertaking. A trial was held as the
process by which to resolve disputes over the distribution of proceeds of
liquidation. The applicants submitted that a number of issues raised at the
trial were already determined in their favour by the decision of the judge who
decided the oppression application, which was upheld by the Divisional Court.
The trial judge, at para. 25, found that the issues which the applicants argued
were already decided were not distinctly put in issue before the application
judge or the Divisional Court and were not directly determined in those
proceedings. The trial judge, at para. 26, found that the proceeding before the
judge who decided the issue of oppression did not address the arguments raised
by the respondent at the trial, and that he should not be deprived of the
ability to raise those arguments.
[25]          
Mr. Kommatas submits that, like in Akman, Dietrich J. made no
findings about any of the unequal claims asserted in the April 25, 2024 letter
from his counsel, although she made findings of oppression based on, among
other things, evidence which also relates to his claims based on unequal
payments from the Companies.
[26]          
Mr. Kommatas submits that the issue, as he identifies it, was not
decided by Dietrich J. because she did not decide whether Mr. Vastis received
more proceeds from the Companies than Mr. Kommatas or whether, as a result, Mr.
Kommatas should receive a larger portion of the remaining proceeds held by the
Liquidator. Mr. Kommatas submits that, therefore, the first precondition to the
application of the doctrine of issue estoppel is not satisfied.
[27]          
In the Seventh Report of the Liquidator dated July 15, 2024, which was
filed to assist the Court with respect to determining the issues on this
motion, the Liquidator refers to the April 25, 2024 letter from Mr. Kommatas'
counsel as memorializing his position on the argument that resulted in this
motion.
[28]          
In the April 25, 2024 letter, counsel for Mr. Kommatas writes
"regarding the claims process which will need to take place prior to the
final wind-up of the Corporation". The letter refers to claims which Mr.
Kommatas seeks to assert "through a formal claims process as a part of the
liquidation". The letter appends as a schedule "a summary of some of
the unequal payments made by the Corporations on behalf of Mr. Vastis and his
family". The letter asks that the Liquidator conduct a full investigation
so that there can be proper equalization. The letter asks the Liquidator to
advise as to the claims process that the Liquidator recommends.
[29]          
I disagree with Mr. Kommatas that, with respect to the doctrine of issue
estoppel, the issue is the one he identifies.
[30]          
The April 25, 2024 letter is clear that Mr. Kommatas seeks a claims
process as part of the liquidation and, through this claims process, he seeks
an unequal distribution of the proceeds of sale of the Companies' assets. The
question on this motion is whether Mr. Kommatas is precluded by the doctrine of
issue estoppel from making a claim to an order directing a claims process as
part of the liquidation. This claims process would be required before Mr.
Kommatas could seek an unequal distribution of the proceeds of sale of the
Companies' assets.
[31]          
At trial, Mr. Kommatas made written closing submissions concerning the
appropriate remedy. In his written submissions, at paragraphs 70, 91, and 144,
Mr. Kommatas submitted:
[32]          
This shows that, at trial, Mr. Kommatas claimed an order for the
appointment of a receiver who would report to the Court on a claims process.
[33]          
Although Dietrich J. granted Mr. Kommatas' claim for a
receivership/liquidation order, she did not grant his claim to an order
directing a claims process as part of the liquidation. This is clear from the
Judgment where no claims process is ordered, despite a clear request for such
an order in Mr. Kommatas' closing submissions.
[34]          
In her costs endorsement, at para. 6, Dietrich J. described the claims
made in the litigation and she wrote that "Mr. Kommatas sought an order
that the receiver appointed conduct a claims process as part of the
receivership." In her costs endorsement, at para. 29, Dietrich J.
addressed Mr. Kommatas' offer to settle which included an order that the
receiver conduct a claims process. Justice Dietrich addressed the submissions
by Mr. Vastis that a claims process was not included in the judgment and the
offer to settle does not correspond with the judgment. Justice Dietrich held:
[35]          
In her costs endorsement, Dietrich J. concluded, at para. 38:
[36]          
I am satisfied that the question of whether an order should be made that
the receiver or liquidator conduct a claims process was distinctly put in issue
before Dietrich J. at the trial and that she decided this issue by declining to
make an order for the receiver or liquidator to conduct a claims process.
Although the costs endorsement does not, itself, give rise to application of
the doctrine of issue estoppel, in her costs endorsement Dietrich J. confirmed that
she decided this issue in her trial decision. This is the same issue that Mr.
Kommatas seeks to relitigate in the liquidation. The Akman decision is
distinguishable because in Akman, the trial judge held that the issues
which the applicant argued gave rise to the application of the doctrine of
issue estoppel were not distinctly put into issue and decided in the prior
proceeding.
[37]          
The preconditions for the application of the doctrine of issue estoppel
are satisfied.
[38]          
In Danyluk, at para. 62, Binnie J. held that the court retains
discretion to refuse to apply the doctrine of issue estoppel, although he
accepted that such discretion must be very limited in application. Binnie J.
held, at para. 67, that the objective is to ensure that the operation of issue
estoppel promotes the orderly administration of justice but not at the cost of
real injustice in the particular case.
[39]          
In Fresco v. Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, 2022 ONCA 115,
the Court of Appeal cited Schweneke v. Ontario, 2000 CanLII 5655 (ON
CA), where the court commented on the judicial discretion to refuse to apply
issue estoppel and stated: "In exercising the discretion the court must
ask - is there something in the circumstances of this case such that the usual
operation of the doctrine of issue estoppel would work an injustice?"
[40]          
In Fresco, the Court of Appeal also cited Dosen v. Meloche
Monnex Financial Services Inc. (Security National Insurance Company), 2021
ONCA 141. In Dosen, the Court of Appeal, at paras. 36-37, addressed the
exercise of discretion to decline to apply res judicata where its
application would work an injustice:
[41]          
Mr. Kommatas submits that even if I were to find that Dietrich J.
decided the "Res Judicata Issue", it would be in the interests
of justice to invoke the Court's inherent jurisdiction to exercise its
discretion not to apply the doctrine of issue estoppel. He submits that the
trial judge did not analyze the claims set out in the April 25, 2024 letter
from his counsel and that any overlap between evidence relating to such claims
and the evidence at trial related to the issue of oppression. Mr. Kommatas
submits that for the Liquidator to analyze and review the claims through a
claims process would not create any overlap or result in any waste of judicial
resources. Mr. Kommatas submits that because the trial judge did not make
specific findings which were determinative of the claims made in the April 25,
2024 letter, there is no risk of inconsistent findings.
[42]          
At the trial, Mr. Kommatas sought a claims process order as part of the
order he sought for the appointment of a receiver. The evidence upon which he
relied for this claim was tendered at the trial. The trial judge heard this
evidence over a 14-day trial, and was well positioned to decide whether further
proceedings were justified and should be ordered through a claims process
supervised by the receiver. The trial judge was alert to this claim which she
characterized in her costs endorsement as raising an important issue for Mr.
Kommatas. The trial judge decided this question and declined to order the
requested claims process. There is nothing in the circumstances of this case
that persuades me that the usual operation of the doctrine of issue estoppel
would work an injustice.
[43]          
I conclude that Mr. Kommatas is precluded by the doctrine of issue
estoppel from making a claim for an order that the Liquidator conduct a claims
process as part of the liquidation.
[44]          
With respect to the Liquidator's motion for advice and direction in
respect of the payment of $250,000 to Mr. Vastis, Mr. Kommatas does not dispute
that this amount must be paid to Mr. Vastis and he agrees that it may be paid
now.
[45]          
For these reasons, I give the following directions on the Liquidator's
motion for advice and direction:
[46]          
The Liquidator also moves for an order (i) approving the Seventh Report
of the Liquidator dated July 15, 2024, and (ii) approving the Liquidator's
interim statement of receipts and disbursements. There is no opposition. I am
satisfied that this relief should be granted. I so order.
[47]          
If the parties are unable to resolve costs, they may make written
submissions in accordance with a timetable to be agreed upon by counsel and
approved by me (with reasonable page limits).