[1]                                      
This matter was referred to me as an in-writing unopposed motion for
default judgment on November 12, 2024.  Its referral appears to have been the
result of submitting a Requisition to Schedule a Short Motion or Application
reviewed by me on July 11, 2024.  My endorsement (at pages 6 and 7) sets out
the usual process to be followed in Toronto.  This included that the requisite
Motion Record and Factum along with my endorsement were to be served on the
defendants on or before August 15, 2024 in accordance with Casa Manila Inc.
v. Iannuccilli 2018 ONSC 7083, that is personal service, and if the
defendants failed to notify plaintiff’s counsel that they would be responding,
it would proceed in writing during the week of September 9, 2024.
[2]                                      
On November 5, 2024, my assistant passed on to me an email from
plaintiff’s counsel inquiring with regard to the status of this matter and if I
had read the motion material during the week of September 9, 2024.  After
making inquiries with the civil motions staff, I learned that the plaintiff’s
counsel had failed to confirm having complied with my order to the Motion’s Coordinator. 
As a result, it was not sent to a Justice for review the week of September 9,
2024 (and that I was NOT seized of the matter).  Counsel was advised of this
and directed to contact JUS-G-MAG-CSD-Long Motions at LongMotionsStatus.Judge@ontario.ca
for further assistance.
[3]                                      
The material uploaded and available on Case Center (apparently up to November
7, 2024) includes Affidavits of Attempted Service sworn September 4, 2024
describing attendances at 28 Norton Street, Uxbridge on August 3 and August 8,
2024, a residential address (and apparently the last known address of the
defendants).  There was no answer each time.  Two vehicles were identified by
their license plate numbers and referenced in the Affidavits (without further
information).
[4]                                      
I am not satisfied the plaintiff has complied with my July 11, 2024
Order and provided “particulars of a basis for a judge to find that the
Defendants received the Statement of Claim and Motion Record or otherwise knows
about the law suit”.
[5]                                      
I appreciate the personal service ordered may not be achievable but
greater efforts, subsequent to my endorsement of July 11, 2024 to locate and
serve the defendants, are required to be put before the Court then what has
occurred here.  There was no evidence, such as a title search of the property,
license plates searches of the vehicles, corporate records or retaining what is
known as a “skip tracer” that would substantiate a request to proceed without
the level of service ordered.
[6]                                      
The level of service ordered is done to minimize any chance of success
the judgment being requested/granted subsequently be set aside on the basis the
Statement of Claim never came to the attention of the defendants.  This process
assists plaintiffs proceeding with collection efforts after obtaining judgment and
reduces the potential need for valuable court time being used hearing motions
to aside default judgments.  Any additional disbursements incurred in obtaining
current addresses and completion of personal service can and should be added to
the costs being sought.
[7]                                      
As a result, this motion is dismissed.  It is dismissed without
prejudice to it being renewed on compliance with my Order which is varied to
now include service of this endorsement and the following dates contained in my
endorsement of July 11, 2024 revised as contained in the following
subparagraphs: