[1]              
The defendant, Sun Life Assurance Company of Canada (“Sun Life”) brings
a motion for summary judgment pursuant to rule 20.04(2)(a) of the Rules of
Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg 194 (the “Rules”).  The defendant
seeks an order dismissing the claim by the plaintiff, Saloomeh Nazary Nasab,
for short-term disability (“STD”) and long-term disability (“LTD”) benefits,
against it.
[2]              
In the underlying action, Ms. Nasab alleges she suffers from
totally debilitating chronic back pain and should be entitled to an additional
15 weeks of STD payments as well as LTD payments from Sun Life.
[3]              
At the time of Ms. Nasab’s initial claim for STD benefits in 2017,
she was 45 years old and had been employed as a sales manager at Nordstrom. 
She began that position in September of 2016 and her coverage with Sun Life
commenced three months later in January of 2017.
[4]              
Her last day of work was on March 11, 2017.  In her initial claim
documentation, she noted that she was experiencing pain, numbness and weakness
in her lower back and leg. She also indicated that she had ‘the same or similar
illness or injury’ and noted that she experienced weakness and pain in lower
back and also numbness about 2 years ago.
[5]              
Her attending physician statement from that time indicates the
issues had been ongoing since 2014.
[6]              
Sun Life had a contract
of group insurance with Nordstrom Canada
Retail, Inc., being Policy
No. 101245 (the “Policy”), providing, among other things, certain STD and LTD
benefits to eligible employees.  To qualify for, and be entitled to receive,
STD and LTD benefits pursuant to the Policy an eligible
employee must provide
satisfactory proof that she is “totally disabled” within the meaning of the Policy.
[7]              
Sun Life first
received notice of a claim
for STD benefits
on behalf of the plaintiff on or about March 20, 2017.  On about April 7, 2017, Sun Life
notified the plaintiff that STD benefits were approved and would be payable
effective March 20, 2017, through to April 30, 2017.  The STD benefits were
eventually extended until June 11, 2017.
[8]              
On June 11, 2017, Sun Life advised Ms. Nasab that Sun Life had
decided, based on further medical evidence, that a further absence from work
was not supported.  The Plaintiff was advised that she could appeal the
decision to deny further STD benefits if she disagreed with it. She did not do
so at that time.
[9]              
On about October 12, 2017, Sun Life received a note from Dr.
Naghdi dated September 27, 2017, indicating that the plaintiff had undergone a
nerve block procedure a few weeks prior.
She needed to be off work
until November 2017 and had been advised
to start modified hours (4
hours per day) from November 1st until further notice.
[10]          
Following that, Sun Life asked Ms. Nasab for further medical
information relating to the June 11, 2017 – September 27, 2017, period.  The
evidence provided by Sun Life’s case manager was that Ms. Nasab advised her
that during that time period she had been out of the country, in Iran, for a
family emergency.
[11]          
At the hearing, counsel for Ms. Nasab indicated that potentially Ms.
Nasab was out of the country during a different period, however, Ms. Nasab did
not swear an affidavit for use on this summary judgement motion and no evidence
was before me to contradict that she was out of the country during June –
September of 2017.
[12]          
STD benefits were not reinstated by Sun Life.  No application was
made by Ms. Nasab for LTD benefits.
[13]          
The plaintiff issued the underlying statement of claim on March
20, 2019 seeking both the remaining 15 weeks of STD benefits and LTD benefits.
[14]          
Rule 20.04(2)(a) provides: “The court shall grant summary
judgment if the court is satisfied that there is no genuine issue requiring a
trial with respect to a claim or defence”.
[15]          
The issues on this motion are whether the claims by Ms. Nasab for
the additional 15 weeks of STD benefits and for LTD benefits raise a genuine
issue requiring a trial.
[16]          
In the original factum the defendant sought an order dismissing
the action because:
[17]          
At the hearing, counsel for Sun Life advised it was not
proceeding with the argument set out in 16(b)(i) – that the statement of claim
does not disclose a cause of action for any claim for LTD benefits.  This was
based on the Ontario Court of Appeal’s decision in Shawluk v HSBC Bank of
Canada et al, 2023 ONCA 538.  In that case, the Court of Appeal held that
the proper path forward, in the circumstances, was for the plaintiff to seek to
amend her claim to add a request for relief from forfeiture relating to her
failure to apply for LTD benefits.  Counsel to Ms. Nasab agreed that should the
claim for LTD benefits otherwise survive this motion for summary judgment, the
plaintiff intended to seek to amend their statement of claim accordingly.
[18]          
There is no genuine issue requiring a trial when the court is
able to reach a fair and just determination on the merits of the motion. This
will be the case where the process (1) allows the court to make necessary
findings of fact, (2) allows the court to apply the law to the facts, and (3)
is a proportionate, more expeditious, and less expensive means to achieve a
just result: Hyrniak v Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7 [2014], 1 S.C.R. 87 at para.
49; Moffitt v. TD Canada Trust, 2023 ONCA 349, 483 D.L.R. (4th) 432, at
para. 39.
[19]          
While Sun Life bears the onus on this motion of establishing that
there is no genuine issue requiring a trial, the plaintiff has an evidentiary
burden and must put her best foot forward
with respect to the existence of material issues
to be tried – she must lead trump or risk losing:  see 1061590
Ontario Ltd v. Ontario Jockey Club, 1995 CanLII 1686.
[20]          
The Policy provides that STD benefits end on the earlier of
certain dates.  The relevant date for purposes of this proceeding is “the end
of a maximum benefit period of 26 weeks of payment”.  However, the Policy goes
on to say that Sun Life will not pay benefits for any period:
[21]          
Sun Life takes that position that Ms. Nasab was out of the
country from June to September of 2017 and therefore is captured by the
exclusion underlined above for the remaining 15 weeks of STD benefits.
[22]          
Ms. Nasab takes the position that her benefits are only suspended
during the time she was out of the country and the remaining 15 weeks should
recommence once she returned to Canada at the end of September of 2017.
[23]          
Counsel for Ms. Nasab could not point me to any language in the
policy which ‘suspends’ payments.  Rather he argues that Ms. Nasab is entitled
to 26 weeks of payment and nothing in the Policy says that those 26 weeks must
be consecutive.
[24]          
Counsel for Sun Life takes that position that the interpretation
suggested by Ms. Nasab is absurd.  The concept of ‘short-term’ disability
benefits is that they cover the initial ‘short-term’ and if they were simply
‘suspended’ during the periods referred to in paragraph 20 above, the result
may be absurd.  For example, if a claimant refuses treatment for two years, it
would be absurd to say that her short-term disability benefits would commence
two years after she was first disabled.  Similarly, if a claimant received a
week of STD benefits and was then confined to prison for 10 years, they would
not be entitled to short-term disability benefits following their release from
prison 10 years later – those situations he says show the absurdity of Ms.
Nasab’s interpretation.
[25]          
To determine the meaning of the out of country exclusion, the
court is required to read the contract as a whole,
giving the words used their ordinary and grammatical meaning, consistent with
the surrounding circumstances see Sattva Capital Corp. v. Creston Moly Corp.,
2014 SCC 53, [2014] 2 S.C.R. 633, at para. 47
[26]          
In this regard, I agree with Sun Life that the Policy provides
that the period for which Sun Life will not pay benefits under the out of
country exclusion does not ‘suspend’ the 26-week maximum period for which STD
benefits may be paid.  Rather the STD period is a maximum period of 26 weeks of
payment, and for any period the claimant is out of country without pre-approval
from Sun Life during that 26 weeks the benefits will not be paid.
[27]          
Accordingly, as the evidence before me is that Ms. Nasab was out
of the country from at least June 11, 2017 until September 27, 2017 (which is
16 weeks), she is not eligible for STD benefits past the 11 weeks already paid
to her by Sun Life.
[28]          
The Policy also provides that LTD benefits (which are intended to
commence following the initial 26 weeks of STD benefits) will not be available
in certain situations.  The relevant exclusion is referred to as the
pre-existing condition exclusion and reads: “We do not pay benefits if your
disability results directly or indirectly from a condition which existed on or
before the date your coverage began”.  There are certain exceptions, which
are not relevant for the current proceeding.
[29]          
The pre-existing condition exclusion only applies to LTD benefits
and not STD benefits.
[30]          
The evidence before me contains numerous references to Ms. Nasab
experiencing low back pain for a number of years prior to her coverage
beginning on January 1, 2017.  This evidence was summarized in paragraph 43 of
Sun Life’s factum and includes references to medical notes from June 30, 2014,
September 18, 2015, September 25, 2015, October 30, 2015, November 2, 2015, November
19, 2015, December 2, 2015, May 30, 2016, June 3, 2016 and June 24, 2016.
[31]          
The evidence referenced above includes multiple notes of low back
pain, treatment and time off work from 2014 – 2016.  The initial note related
to low back in 2014 indicated the duration as 6-7 years with a diagnoses of
early degenerative disc disease of lumber spine and cervical spine resulting in
chronic neck pain and chronic low back pain.
[32]          
Sun Life obtained two experts to review this evidence, Dr.
Woolsey (who is consultant to Sun Life) and Dr. Skeyi-Otu (who is independent
of Sun Life).   Both experts concluded that Ms. Nasab had prior pre-existing
difficulties with chronic low back pain.
[33]          
Ms. Nasab does not dispute that she had previously experienced
low back pain for many years.  Rather she takes the position that the low back
pain was not as serious previously as it became after March of 2017.
[34]          
Ms. Nasab retained an expert, Dr. Wong who provided an opinion as
follows:
[35]          
Mr. Wong’s interpretation of Ms. Nasab’s benefits under the Policy
is not determinative.  That is a legal issue that it is to be determined based
on the wording of the Policy.
[36]          
Mr. Wong does agree however, that Ms. Nasab had pre-existing back
pain problems.  He clarifies to say that the pre-existing problems were not as
severe as compared to those Ms. Nasab experienced following March of 2017.  As
counsel to Ms. Nasab submitted, the pain is now a completely different level,
previously she had only been off work for seven days and did not require
injections to treat the pain, but now requires regular injections.
[37]          
The question then, is based on the wording of the Policy, is the
severity of Ms. Nasab’s pre-existing back problems relevant.
[38]          
In Hartmann v. Sun Life Assurance Company of Canada [1994]
O.J. No 1089 (Ont Gen Div) [Hartmann] the court addressed a similar
situation.  In that case, the relevant pre-existing condition exclusion
provided: “Payment will not be made…(b) in respect to total disability
resulting directly or indirectly from any illness which existed on the date of
commencement of the employee’s insurance”.
[39]          
The primary difference between the policy at issue in Hartmann
and the current Policy is the use of the word ‘condition’ in the current
policy vs ‘illness’ in the Hartmann policy.  The court, in Hartmann found
that the evidence disclosed the plaintiff had a significant psychiatric history
prior to the relevant date, which continued and became more acute subsequent to
the relevant date.  The court in Hartmann found that Hartmann “was
suffering from a minor illness on June 10, 1981, which became a major illness
on June 21, 1981” see para 11 of that decision.  As a result, the court found
that her total disability was the direct or indirect result of the previous
illness (although it was minor previously) and the pre-existing condition
exclusion applied such that Hartmann was not entitled to receive benefits.
[40]          
I agree with the court in Hartmann that the language of
the pre-existing condition exclusion does not depend on how serious the illness
which existed on the date of commencement of the coverage was.  To interpret
the Policy otherwise (i.e. to say that the exclusion covered only pre-existing
illnesses which are equally as severe as the eventual condition at issue) would
render the wording in large part meaningless.  If the pre-existing condition
was required to be totally debilitating, the individual would not have been
working.  Many chronic conditions wax and wane.  Simply because an individual
is capable of working for a period of time, and later becomes unable to
tolerate the pain or the condition becomes exacerbated does not negate the fact
that the disability resulted indirectly or directly from a pre-existing
condition.
[41]          
Accordingly, I find on the evidence before me that Ms. Nasab’s
chronic low back pain disability results directly or indirectly from a
condition which existed on or before the date her coverage began and she is
therefore not entitled to LTD benefits based on the terms of the Policy.
[42]          
For the reasons set out above, I grant the defendant’s motion for
summary judgment.
[43]          
At the hearing, the parties both provided cost outlines to the
Court.  The amounts claimed by both parties on a partial indemnity basis were
similar.
[44]          
Fixing costs is a discretionary decision under s. 131 of the Courts
of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c C.43.  In exercising my discretion, I may
consider the result in the proceeding, any offer to settle or to contribute
made in writing, and the factors listed in Rule 57.01.  These factors include
but are not limited to: (i) the result in the proceeding; (ii) the experience
of the lawyer for the party entitled to the costs as well as the rates charged
and the hours spent by that lawyer; (iii) the amount of costs that an
unsuccessful party could reasonably expect to pay in relation to the step in
the proceeding for which costs are being fixed; (iv) the amount claimed and the
amount recovered in the proceeding; (v) the complexity of the proceeding; (vi)
the importance of the issues; and (vii) the conduct of any party that tended to
shorten or lengthen unnecessarily the duration of the proceeding. Rule
57.01(1)(f) provides that the court may also consider “any other matter
relevant to the question of costs.”
[45]          
In exercising my discretion to fix costs, I must consider what is
fair and reasonable for the unsuccessful party to pay in this proceeding and
balance the compensation of the successful party with the goal of fostering
access to justice: Boucher v Public Accountants Council (Ontario) (2004),
2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R. (3d) 291 (C.A.) at paras. 26 and 37.
[46]          
For these reasons, I fix the costs of the motion at $7,500
inclusive of disbursements and Harmonized Sales Tax and order the plaintiff to
pay that amount to the defendant within 30 days of the date of this order.