[1]              
The Applicants bring a motion challenging
the validity and enforceability of a second and third mortgage registered
against a multi-unit apartment building at 2818 Bayview Avenue, Toronto (the
“Property”). The Property was owned at the material time by the Respondent,
Golden Ocean Investment Corporation (“Golden Ocean”). The loan documents and
mortgages were executed on Golden Ocean’s behalf by its sole registered
director and officer, the Respondent, Jason Huang.
[2]              
The Applicants, who are Mr. Huang’s co-shareholders in Golden
Ocean, contend that they knew nothing about these mortgages and that Mr. Huang
had no authority to enter into them. The motion before me has been brought in
the context of a shareholder oppression application in which the Applicants allege
that that they have been defrauded and that Golden Ocean has been manipulated and
that they as shareholders have been deprived of substantial funds by Mr. Huang.
[3]              
The lenders under the second and third mortgages are comprised of
individual investors. For the second mortgage, the Respondents, 710561 Ontario
Limited, Linda Hung-I Chao, Chia Mao Hsiang, Yadong Zhao, Ting Ting Lam, Xiaoli
Yu and Yutong Ge (the “Second Mortgagee”), lent Golden Ocean $6,000,000 for a
one-year term at an interest rate of 13.5% per annum. For the third mortgage, the
Respondent, Jian Jiang (the “Third Mortgagee”), lent Golden Ocean $1,700,000
for a six-month term at an interest rate of 15% per annum.
[4]              
The Property has now been sold under Power of Sale by the Second
Mortgagee. That sale was authorized by Order of Justice Koehnen dated July 26,
2024. I am advised that the sale price was in the range of $16 million; of that,
a first mortgage has been paid off, fees paid, and a holdback of $6,000,000 of the
sale proceeds (the “Holdback”) is being held in trust by the Second Mortgagee’s
mortgage enforcement counsel, FIJ Law LLP. Justice Koehnen authorized the sale
of the Property on the understanding that there would be a Holdback and that the
question of the validity of the second and third mortgages is to be determined
at a later time.
[5]              
The Applicants challenge the two mortgages
pursuant to section 2 of the Fraudulent Conveyances Act. They allege
that the Second and Third Mortgagees were reckless or willfully blind as to the
fraud being perpetrated by Mr. Huang, and that, had the Property not been sold
and the mortgages discharged, both the second and third mortgages would be
subject to being set aside. Since the Property has been sold, Justice Koehnen’s
Order provides that any claim for repayment of the mortgages is, in effect a
claim for distribution of the proceeds out of the Holdback funds.
[6]              
Accordingly, if the mortgages are valid, the Second and
Third Mortgagees will get paid from the Holdback funds; and if they are
not valid, then the Holdback will be transferred to Golden Ocean as previous
owner of the Property. Although the record does not contain an exact accounting
of monies owing under the two mortgages, counsel advise that the funds
remaining in trust after various fees may only be enough to repay the Second
Mortgagee. It is likely that the Third Mortgagee will lose much of its
investment.
[7]              
The record establishes that the Second and Third
Mortgagees are both unrelated to Golden Ocean and Mr. Huang. While one of the
principals of the Second Mortgagee group of investors knew Mr. Huang from
previous dealings, there is no evidence that they share any financial interest or
that Mr. Huang was in a conflict of interest in dealing with them. In fact, it
is the Applicants’ position that the two mortgagees were wilfully blind in
entering the mortgage transactions the way they did with a company represented
by a person – Mr. Huang – who they did not know at all and had no reason to
trust.
[8]              
Applicants’ counsel submit that the Second
Mortgagee was reckless to the point of being wilfully blind to the risks of
lending $6 million to Golden Ocean. They submit the same of the Third
Mortgagee, who lent $1.75 million to Golden Ocean behind the Second Mortgagee’s
$6 million. Given the level of rental income produced by the Property, Golden
Ocean would effectively be insolvent in assuming this level of debt.
[9]              
Applicants’ counsel points out that a review of the
rent roll produced by Mr. Huang would have rather quickly revealed that it was
likely falsified. It showed that rents had ostensibly increased to a level
three times higher than they had been four years previously when Golden Ocean
acquired the Property. At a realistic level of rents, the Property’s income
could not come close to covering the interest payments that Golden Ocean would
be obliged to make under the second and third mortgages.
[10]          
On the other hand, counsel for the Second
Mortgagee point out that the Second Mortgagee received 3 months interest
pre-paid upon entering the mortgage agreement, and continued to receive monthly
payments from November 2022 until Golden Ocean’s default in July 2023. Given
that the second mortgage was only for a 12-month term, the Second Mortgagee
received monthly payments for over half the mortgage term.
[11]          
In any case, counsel for the Third Mortgagee
points out that the Second and Third Mortgagees are value investors, and that
those types of non-institutional lenders typically focus on the equity in the
property offered as security for the loan over the income that property
produces. To this end, it is noteworthy that Mr. Huang provided the Second and
Third Mortgagees with an appraisal of the Property showing its value at $18.8
million. That left ample equity to secure the Second Mortgagee’s position and,
potentially, the Third Mortgagee’s position as well. It is the submission of
both Mortgagees that in evaluating a mortgage loan in this way they were not
wilfully blind to the risks of such loans; to the contrary, the elevated rates
of interest are designed to cover precisely those risks.
[12]          
Mr. Huang has deposed that the purpose of both loans
was to pay off previous second and third mortgages on the Property. The
evidence is that Mr. Huang told them that was the reason for the loans, and the
record confirms that this is indeed where the funds went. The previous
mortgages were indeed discharged and replaced by the second and third mortgages
in issue here. The evidence does not suggest that the Second and Third
Mortgagees should have been alerted to some plan by Mr. Huang to take and use
the Mortgagees’ funds for unknown or suspicious purposes; to the contrary, by
all appearances, the funds appear to have needed, and to have been used, to
discharge the previous mortgages.
[13]          
The Second and Third Mortgagees both state that,
contrary to the Applicants’ view of them, they did proper due diligence by
relying on their lawyer to investigate the transaction for them. This
indicates, of course, that they made sure that their investment was properly
secured from a legal point of view, but not necessarily from a financial point
of view.
[14]          
Counsel for both Mortgagees submit that their clients
were entitled to rely on Mr. Huang’s ostensible authority to enter into the
transactions on Golden Ocean’s behalf. They further submit that the Second and
Third Mortgagees are protected in that respect by the indoor management rule,
and that they were bona fide purchasers for value who had no knowledge
of any dispute between Mr. Huang and the Applicants or, for that matter, of the
Applicants’ existence.
[15]          
It is the Second and Third Mortgagees’ overall
position that they did the due diligence necessary to satisfy themselves that
their mortgages were legally valid and enforceable; beyond that, they are free
to take all the financial risks they want and cannot be faulted for doing so.
[16]          
By contrast, it is the Applicants’ position that
by taking serious financial risk the two Mortgagees turned a blind eye to
badges of fraud. Applicants’ counsel argues that had they done more thorough
financial investigation of what Mr. Huang was offering, they would have detected,
or at least seen warning signs, of the fraud he was perpetrating on the other
shareholders of Golden Ocean.
[17]          
In Vestacon Limited v. Huszti Investments (Canada) Ltd. o/a
Eyewatch, 2022 ONSC 2104, at para 334, the court set out a list of red
flags that a transferee or mortgagee of property might detect:
[18]          
It is obvious on the face of these indicators
that the issues addressed in a buyer’s or lender’s due diligence and for the
most part legal issues. This accords with the overall view of the courts that the
law…
[19]          
In other words, an underwriting risk such as that taken by the
Second Mortgagee and Third Mortgagee is not a badge of fraud. It is a business
risk that investors are permitted to take and that non-institutional investors
in mortgages frequently do take. The higher rate of interest compensates for
this risk, and the appraised value of the mortgaged property provides the
security that this type of investor seeks.
[20]          
The Second and Third Mortgagees did all the due diligence
required of them. They are bona fide purchasers for value with no notice of any
fraud by Mr. Huang. Further, Mr. Huang had both ostensible authority and, as
sole director and officer, actual authority to enter into the mortgages.
[21]          
I find that the second
and third mortgages on the Property were valid and enforceable. The Second and
Third Mortgagees are to be paid from whatever funds remain in the Holdback.
[22]          
The Applicants’ motion is dismissed.
[23]          
The parties may make written submissions on
costs. I would ask counsel for the Second and Third Mortgagees to send brief submissions
by email to my assistant by the end of the second week in January 2025. I would
ask counsel for the Applicants to send equally brief submissions by email to my
assistant by the end of the first week in February 2025.