[1]              
Sandra Bernier started this action on behalf of herself and her two
children to seek compensation for injuries she suffered while participating in
a cycling event in 2018.
[2]              
The defendants/fourth parties GranFondo Ottawa and Greg Capello and the
third party Nylene Canada Inc. (collectively, “the moving parties”) have
brought summary judgment motions to dismiss the plaintiffs’ action.
[3]              
The defendant Ville d’Ottawa named Nylene Canada Inc. as a third party.
Nylene Canada Inc. defended the main action and is seeking dismissal of the
action against Ville d’Ottawa.
[4]              
The moving parties argue that the plaintiffs’ action is barred by a
waiver signed by Ms. Bernier and that a plain reading of the waiver exonerates
them from liability for the plaintiffs’ losses. GranFondo and Mr. Capello also
argue that Ms. Bernier voluntarily assumed the risk of injury.
[5]              
Ms. Bernier and Mr. Capello were examined for discovery. Transcripts of
their examinations were included in the record on the motions. The record also
included affidavits sworn by Ms. Bernier, Mr. Capello, Ms. Bernier’s partner
Dean Holmes and Ms. Bernier’s friend Isabelle Vezina, and transcripts of
cross-examinations on these affidavits.
[6]              
The plaintiffs are Ms. Bernier and her two children, Merik and Lydia
Couture. Ms. Bernier’s children are plaintiffs under s. 61(1) of the Family
Law Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. F.3.
[7]              
On July 21, 2018, Ms. Bernier participated in a road cycling event
organized by GranFondo, a corporation owned and operated by Mr. Capello.
[8]              
Ms. Bernier was injured when she fell off her bicycle during the event.
Ms. Bernier fell at the intersection of a road known as Loggers Way and some
railroad tracks.
[9]              
Ms. Bernier said that she slowed down before crossing the tracks and
attempted to cross them at a 90-degree angle. She said the next thing she knew,
she was on the ground, trying to get up.
[10]          
Ms. Bernier learned later that her friend Ms. Vezina fell at the same
location.
[11]          
Ms. Bernier had volunteered to be what was known as a “ride ambassador”
for the event. Ride ambassadors were experienced cyclists enlisted to assist
the other participants. Ms. Bernier had been a ride ambassador for the event on
at least one and possibly two previous occasions. (As I indicate below, I make no
finding about whether Ms. Bernier participated in the event on more than one
previous occasion, and whether she participated more than once previously has
no bearing on my decision.)
[12]          
Ms. Bernier’s partner, Mr. Holmes, was also a ride ambassador. Mr. Holmes
had been a ride ambassador on three previous occasions.
[13]          
In an email dated July 7, 2018, Mr. Capello had provided Ms. Bernier and
the other ride ambassadors with a link to a registration form for the event and
a liability waiver. In his email, Mr. Capello said, “[w]e need everyone to
complete the pdf and send back the info page [with jersey size] and the
signature page.”
[14]          
Ms. Bernier sent Mr. Capello an email on July 15, 2018, attaching the
completed registration form and waiver.
[15]          
Whether Ms. Bernier signed the waiver is not in dispute.
[16]          
The waiver was titled “Release and Waiver of Liability and Assumption of
Risk and Indemnity Agreement.” The first line was in the nature of a subtitle.
It read: “GranFondoOttawa, Inc. registration, release and waiver of liability.”
[17]          
The first paragraph of the waiver included a warning that the form had
legal implications:
[18]          
The waiver included an acknowledgement that it was
being signed on behalf of the person who was signing it as well as their
spouse, children and others, including “anyone else who might claim or sue on
my behalf.”
[19]          
Under the title “Risks”, the waiver provided as
follows, in capital letters: “I HEREBY ACKNOWLEDGE AND
ASSUME ALL OF THE RISKS OF PARTICIPATING IN THE EVENT.”
[20]          
The waiver included the following specific
acknowledgements:
[21]          
Under the title “Liability”, the waiver read as
follows:
[22]          
The waiver required the person signing it to
acknowledge that they understood and agreed to obey all applicable traffic
laws.
[23]          
The waiver concluded with an acknowledgement, in
capital letters, that the person signing the waiver read it, understood its
content, understood the nature of the event and was signing the waiver
intentionally and voluntarily.
[24]          
The plaintiffs argue that the waiver Ms. Bernier signed is not
enforceable against them.
[25]          
The plaintiffs argue that the waiver did not apply to Ms. Bernier
because she was a volunteer who was assisting with the cycling event, and not a
paying participant.
[26]          
The plaintiffs also argue that the waiver was sent to Ms. Bernier by
email without any explanation.
[27]          
The plaintiffs submit that GranFondo and Mr. Capello were negligent when
they planned the event in that they failed to identify and alert participants
to hazards on the route, specifically, the location of Ms. Bernier’s fall,
where Loggers Way was intersected by railroad tracks. The plaintiffs argue that
what GranFondo called a “hot spot” sign should have been erected before the
intersection to warn the cyclists that there was danger ahead.
[28]          
Although the focus of the plaintiffs’ factum and oral submissions was on
their claim against GranFondo and Mr. Capello, they pleaded in their statement
of claim that Ville d’Ottawa was negligent in that it had failed to maintain
the roadways where the cycling event took place.
[29]          
The plaintiffs submit that the waiver does not protect the defendants
from their negligence.
[30]          
The plaintiffs maintain that the issue of whether the waiver protects
the defendants from the consequences of their negligence is an issue requiring
a trial.
[31]          
Rule 20.04(2) of the Rules of Civil Procedure,
R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194 allows a plaintiff to move for summary judgment with
supporting affidavit material or other evidence once the defendant has
delivered a statement of defence. Subrule 20.04(2)(b) provides that a court
hearing a summary judgment motion shall grant judgment if it is satisfied that
there is no genuine issue requiring a trial with respect to the claim or
defence.
[32]          
A trial is not required if a summary judgment motion
can achieve a fair and just adjudication, if it provides a process that allows
the judge to make the necessary findings of facts and apply the law to those
facts and is a proportionate, more expeditious and less expensive means to
achieve a just result than going to trial: Hryniak v. Mauldin, 2014
SCC 7, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 87, at para. 4.
[33]          
On a motion for summary judgment, the judge should
first determine if there is a genuine issue requiring a trial based on the
evidence before them, without using the fact-finding powers set out in ss. 20.04(2.1)
and (2.2) (“the new powers”): Hryniak, at para. 66.
[34]          
Rule 20.04(2.1) permits the motion judge to: (1) weigh
the evidence, (2) evaluate the credibility of a deponent and (3) draw any
reasonable inference from the evidence. Rule 20.04(2.2) permits the motion
judge to order that oral evidence be presented by one or more of the parties,
for purposes of exercising any of the powers under r. 20.04(2.1).
[35]          
If there appears to be a genuine issue requiring a
trial, the judge should then determine if the need for a trial can be avoided
by using the new powers. The judge may use these powers provided that their use
is not against the interest of justice. Their use will not be against the
interest of justice if they will lead to a fair and just result and will serve
the goals of timeliness, affordability and proportionality in light of the
litigation as a whole: Hryniak, at para. 66.
[36]          
In determining whether summary judgment is
appropriate, the court must consider the entire evidentiary record and
the Hryniak analytical framework: Royal Bank of Canada v.
1643937 Ontario Inc., 2021 ONCA 98, 154 O.R. (3d) 561, at
para. 23.
[37]          
A party moving for summary judgment has the evidentiary
burden of showing there is no genuine issue requiring a trial. Once and only
after this burden has been discharged, the responding party must prove that its
claim has a “real chance of success”: Sanzone v. Schechter, 2016
ONCA 566, 402 D.L.R. (4th) 135, at para. 30, citing Connerty v. Coles,
2012 ONSC 5218, at para. 9.
[38]          
The responding party cannot rely on the prospect that
additional evidence may be tendered at trial; the responding party must put its
best foot forward in response to a motion for summary judgment: Sweda Farms
Ltd. v. Egg Farmers of Ontario, 2014 ONSC 1200, at para. 26,
aff’d 2014 ONCA 878.
[39]          
The issues are whether the plaintiffs’ action is barred either by the
waiver Ms. Bernier signed or because Ms. Bernier voluntarily assumed the risk
of injury.
[40]          
To decide this issue, I will need to decide whether the waiver is
enforceable, given that Ms. Bernier was a volunteer and not a paying
participant in the cycling event, and that she received the waiver by email,
without any explanation.
[41]          
If the waiver applies to Ms. Bernier, a further issue is whether the
waiver bars the plaintiffs’ claims for negligence.
[42]          
As the motions before me are for summary judgment, I must decide whether
I can fairly decide these issues on a motion or whether there is an issue
requiring a trial.
[43]          
The plaintiffs argue the waiver does not apply to Ms. Bernier because
she was a volunteer known as a “ride ambassador” and not a regular, paying
participant.
[44]          
The plaintiffs also submit the waiver was brought to Ms. Bernier’s
attention only through an email from Mr. Capello, which requested the jersey
sizes of the volunteers. The plaintiffs argue that the first page of the
emailed document set out route options and registration fees for the event and
that this information was clearly intended for participants and not for
volunteers. The plaintiffs say that no explanation or instructions were
provided in conjunction with the waiver.
[45]          
The plaintiffs did not suggest that the enforceability
of the waiver should be negated by fraud or unconscionability or for policy
reasons.
[46]          
The plaintiffs also did not suggest that Issue #1 was
an issue requiring a trial.
[47]          
The waiver included several clear and unequivocal references to
volunteers.
[48]          
The waiver included an acknowledgement that the event
“carries with it the potential for death, serious injury and property loss”
and, significantly, that the risks “are not only inherent to athletics, but are
also present for volunteers and support staff” (emphasis added).
[49]          
The waiver also stated: “I hereby assume all of the
risks of participating and/or volunteering in this Event” (emphasis
added).
[50]          
The waiver also included the following acknowledgement:
“as a result of these risks, I, as a participant and/or volunteer, may suffer
serious injury, including permanent disability, paralysis and even death, as
well as theft and property loss” (emphasis added).
[51]          
I am satisfied that Issue #1(a) is not an issue
requiring a trial. It is an issue that turns on an interpretation of the
waiver.
[52]          
It is evident from the plain wording of the waiver that
the waiver was intended to apply to volunteers as well as to paying
participants in the cycling event. This intention would have been evident to
any reasonable person reading the waiver.
[53]          
I do not accept the plaintiffs’ argument that the
waiver did not apply to Ms. Bernier because she was a volunteer “ride
ambassador”. I find that the waiver applied to volunteers, such as Ms. Bernier,
as well as to paying participants in the event.
[54]          
The plaintiffs submit the waiver does not apply to Ms. Bernier because
she received it via email and GranFondo and Mr. Capello made no effort to
ensure that she understood what she was signing. Ms. Bernier says that
GranFondo and Mr. Capello did not explain the waiver to her. Ms. Bernier
admitted that she did not read the waiver word-for-word before signing it.
[55]          
As with Issue #1(a), I find that Issue #1(b) is not an
issue requiring a trial. It is a narrow issue. It does not require that I
resolve any factual disputes or make any findings with respect to credibility.
I am satisfied that, based on the record before me which I described earlier in
these reasons, I am able to make any necessary findings of fact, apply the
applicable law to the facts and reach a fair and just conclusion in respect of
this issue.
[56]          
In Arksey v. Sky Zone Toronto, 2021 ONSC 4594, at paras. 21-24, Myers J. summarized the
law relating to waivers:
[57]          
As I noted previously, whether Ms. Bernier signed the waiver is not in
dispute.
[58]          
Although French is Ms. Bernier’s first language, Ms.
Bernier is fluently bilingual and does not suggest that she did not understand
the waiver because it was in English.
[59]          
Ms. Bernier received the waiver by email two weeks
before the event and signed and returned it to Mr. Capello six days before the
event. Ms. Bernier does not argue that she had insufficient time to read and
consider the waiver. Ms. Bernier’s partner, Mr. Holmes, said that he had
sufficient time to read the waiver and ask questions.
[60]          
Ms. Bernier had signed the same waiver the previous
year, prior to the same event held in 2017.
[61]          
Ms. Bernier’s evidence was that she did not read the
waiver carefully. She said she started to read it but stopped because she did
not believe that it applied to volunteers such as herself. She said she read
the entire waiver before signing it, but that she had read it “diagonally”. She
said this meant that she read the titles and the portions that were in bold
type.
[62]          
The waiver stated that the person signing it
acknowledged and assumed all of the risks of participating in the event. The
waiver also stated that the person signing it agreed not to sue any of the
parties released by the waiver for any of the claims waived.
[63]          
As McLachlin C.J.S.B.C. (as she then was) noted in Karroll
v. Silver Star Mountain Resorts (1988), 1988 CanLII 3094 (BC SC), 33 B.C.L.R. (2d) 160, at p.
166, there is no general requirement that a party tendering a document for
signature take steps to ensure that the party signing it reads and understands
any onerous terms. Such an obligation arises only when a reasonable person
would know the party signing the documents was not consenting to the terms.
[64]          
There was no evidence to suggest that the defendants in
the case before me would have had any way of knowing that Ms. Bernier had not
read the waiver or that she did not believe it applied to her. Ms. Bernier
signed the waiver and returned it to Mr. Capello. The waiver stated that the
person signing it read the waiver and understood its contents.
[65]          
At its outset, the waiver clearly stated that it should
be read carefully and that it had legal consequences that would affect the
legal rights of the signor. I find that Ms. Bernier had sufficient time to read
the waiver carefully had she chosen to do so. Further, she was already familiar
with the waiver, having signed the same document the previous year. There was
no language barrier.
[66]          
I am satisfied that the fact that Ms. Bernier received
the waiver by email, without any explanation, has no bearing on its
enforceability and that she is bound by its terms.
[67]          
I am satisfied that the waiver applied to volunteers
such as Ms. Bernier. I am also satisfied that the fact that the waiver was
provided to Ms. Bernier by email and without any explanation has no bearing on
its enforceability.
[68]          
As I noted previously, the plaintiffs do not argue that
the enforceability of the waiver should be negated by fraud or
unconscionability or for policy reasons.
[69]          
For these reasons, I find that the waiver is
enforceable against Ms. Bernier.
[70]          
The plaintiffs argue that Ms. Bernier may have agreed to release the
defendants from injury caused by the inherent risks of road cycling but she did
not agree to participate in a poorly organized event or to release the
defendants if they failed to identify and flag dangers on the route.
[71]          
The essence of the plaintiffs’ claim against GranFondo and Mr. Capello
is that they were negligent in their organization of the event, in that they
selected a route which was in poor condition and they failed to warn
participants, including Ms. Bernier, about the poor condition of the road at
the location where she fell.
[72]          
In their statement of claim, the plaintiffs identify the defendant Ville
d’Ottawa as being the municipality responsible for maintaining public roadways
and sidewalks. They plead that Ville d’Ottawa was grossly negligent in its
maintenance of the intersection between Loggers Way and the railroad track
where Ms. Bernier fell, that it created a situation of danger and that it
failed to warn participants, including Ms. Bernier, about the poor condition of
the road at the location where she fell.
[73]          
The plaintiffs argue that whether the danger created by the defendants’
negligence was of the nature contemplated by the terms of the waiver is an
issue requiring a trial. The plaintiffs submit that there are factual disputes
relating to the organization of the event and the steps GranFondo and Mr. Capello
took to ensure the safety of participants. The plaintiffs argue that some of
these factual disputes will involve findings of credibility that require a
trial to be resolved.
[74]          
The plaintiffs rely on three summary judgment cases: Downs v.
Georgian College, 2008 CanLII 63205 (Ont. S.C.), Pascoe v. Ball Hockey
Ontario Inc., 2005 CanLII 3375 (Ont. S.C.) and Brown v. Blue Mountain
Resort Ltd., 2002 CanLII 7591 (Ont. S.C.). In each of these cases, all of
which pre-date Hryniak, the motion judge concluded that whether a waiver
signed by the plaintiff applied to the defendant’s alleged negligence was an
issue requiring a trial.
[75]          
On its face, the waiver Ms. Bernier signed releases the defendants from
negligence.
[76]          
The waiver states that it applies to
[77]          
The defendants, like the plaintiffs, rely on three summary judgment
cases: Arksey, French v. Augusta Motorsports Park, 2021 ONSC 8385
and Arif v. Li, 2016 ONSC 4579. In each of these cases, the motion judge
found a waiver signed by the plaintiff applied to the alleged negligence of the
defendant and granted summary judgment, dismissing the plaintiff’s action.
[78]          
In Arksey, the plaintiff signed a waiver before participating in
a game of trampoline dodgeball. The issue was whether the plaintiff had waived
her claim for damages caused by the defendant’s alleged negligent failure to (a)
instruct and supervise another player and (b) follow its injury policies.
[79]          
At para. 4, Myers J. concluded that the waiver signed by the plaintiff
“brought home to a reasonable reader that liabilities of the type claimed by
the plaintiff were waived and were not actionable.”
[80]          
At para. 42, Myers J. noted that a waiver must be interpreted to
determine whether it waives the risks and claims asserted and that waivers are
narrowly construed against the drafters.
[81]          
At para. 45, Myers J. said that the court adopts a narrow interpretation
of exclusion clauses generally so as to avoid inconsistency with the purpose of
the agreement overall. Exclusions should not be read expansively and should not
overwhelm the rights bargained for by the parties.
[82]          
At para. 46, Myers J. noted that the use of the word “negligence” on its
own is often insufficient to find that the plaintiff waived all possible forms
of negligently caused injury. The words in the waiver must be construed to
determine if the parties can reasonably be said to have agreed on the exclusion
of liability in the context of the case at hand.
[83]          
At para. 47, Myers J. quoted from Ochoa v. Canadian Mountain
Holidays Inc., [1996] B.C.J. No. 2026, at para. 136, which concluded that,
to bar a claim for negligent conduct, a waiver must include enough context for
the word “negligence” to satisfy the court that the person signing the waiver
could reasonably have been expected to understand its meaning:
[84]          
I take from Arksey and Ochoa that I must determine,
through a consideration of both the wording of the waiver and Ms. Bernier’s
familiarity with the cycling event, whether Ms. Bernier reasonably could have
understood the waiver to exclude claims for damages caused by negligent
organization of the event, negligent failure to identify and alert participants
(including volunteers) to dangerous areas on the designated route or, in
respect of the claim against Ville d’Ottawa, negligent maintenance of roadways.
[85]          
Turning first to the wording of the waiver, I consider the following
excerpts from the waiver to be of particular relevance:
[86]          
Turning now to Ms. Bernier’s familiarity with the cycling event, I note
that Ms. Bernier was 45 years old in July 2018, when the event took place. She
was a federal public servant and a university graduate. Before she participated
in the event, she was an experienced road cyclist. She had participated in
numerous cycling events previously, including the same GranFondo event on at
least one previous occasion.[2]
Ms. Bernier rode her bicycle to and from work on a regular basis. When Ms.
Bernier was examined for discovery, she said that she was aware of the risk of
falling while cycling on roadways, because of potholes and road conditions. She
also said that, before her accident in July 2018, she had experience crossing
railroad tracks on a bicycle. She also said that she probably previously cycled
on Loggers Way, the road where her fall took place.
[87]          
The main thrust of the plaintiffs’ claim of negligence against GranFondo
and Mr. Capello is that the defendants should have identified the railway
tracks where Ms. Bernier fell as a hazard and should have erected what
GranFondo described as a “hot spot” sign along the route before the tracks to
warn participants of the danger ahead.
[88]          
The plaintiffs argue that Mr. Capello gave inconsistent evidence about
the inspection of the route prior to the event and evidence that was
contradicted by other witnesses about whether a “hot spot” sign was in place.
The plaintiffs argue that because credibility findings must be made, a trial is
required to determine whether the nature and scope of the defendants’
negligence is covered by the waiver.
[89]          
I disagree. The application of the waiver to these claims is a narrow issue turning on the interpretation of the waiver in the
factual context and the application of the relevant case law. I am
satisfied that, based on the record before me, I can make the necessary
findings of fact and apply the law to those facts, which will result in a fair
and just adjudication of the issue.
[90]          
Even if credibility findings were made against Mr. Capello and even if
the defendants were found to have been negligent in the manner alleged by the
plaintiffs, it would have no bearing on the outcome of the action, as Ms.
Bernier had signed away the plaintiffs’ right to bring it.
[91]          
I am satisfied that, as in Arksey, the waiver in this case
covered the context in which the risks occurred and, more specifically, Ms.
Bernier’s claim of negligence against GranFondo and Mr. Capello. The waiver
provided that the person signing it was releasing the “Released Parties”, which
included the defendants, from “any and all” liability for personal injury
caused by negligence or gross negligence. The waiver expressly stated that the
risks associated with the event, which the person signing the waiver was
agreeing to assume, included the terrain and the actions of other people
including event officials and the producers of the event. The waiver provided
that it was the sole responsibility of the person signing the waiver to be
familiar with the event course and route. In my view, by signing the waiver,
Ms. Bernier, an experienced road cyclist, expressly gave up her right to
complain that the defendants were negligent in failing to identify and warn of
hazards on the route: She agreed that it was her sole responsibility to be
familiar with the event course and route. The waiver also included an
acknowledgement that none of the “Released Parties” were assuming any
responsibility for the safety of the person signing the release. I am satisfied
that a reasonable person asked to sign the waiver would have understood that
claims of the nature of those the plaintiffs have advanced against GranFondo
and Mr. Capello would be barred by the waiver.
[92]          
I am also satisfied a reasonable person asked to sign the waiver would
have understood that claims of the nature of those the plaintiffs have advanced
against Ville d’Ottawa would be barred by the waiver. In my view, this would
have been evident from the following references in the waiver: (a) to “terrain”
being one of the risks of the event being assumed by the signor of the release;
(b) to sole responsibility for being familiar with the event course resting
with the person signing the waiver; and (c) to the release of “all provincial, city, town, and other governmental bodies, and/or
municipal agencies whose property and/or personnel are used and/or in any way
assist in locations in which the Event or segments of the Event take place”
even if injury arose as a result of their negligence or gross negligence.
[93]          
The cases relied upon by the plaintiffs are
distinguishable and do not assist them. Downs involved an obstacle
course that was set up specifically for purposes of an event, and not an
existing public roadway that was used for an event. The waiver in Downs
also focused on the signor’s physical ability to participate in the event and
not the organization of the event. The plaintiff in Pascoe claimed that
he was injured because there was ice on a ball hockey rink. The motion judge
found that the plaintiff was injured because of the condition of the surface of
the rink, and not because of any activity normally associated with the playing
of the game. He found that it was not contemplated that the waiver would apply
to hazards that were “created and perpetuated by [the defendant]”: Pascoe,
at para. 27. Brown did not involve a waiver that signed by the
plaintiff; the waiver in Brown was on a ski lift ticket.
[94]          
In conclusion, I find the waiver signed by Ms. Bernier applies to and
bars the claims for negligence asserted by the plaintiffs against the
defendants GranFondo Ottawa, Mr. Capello and Ville d’Ottawa in relation to the injuries
suffered by Ms. Bernier as a result of her fall during the 2018 GranFondo
event.
[95]          
The waiver signed by Ms. Bernier has the effect of barring Ms. Bernier’s
claims as well as the claims of her two children. Under the Family Law Act,
dependents do not have a right to sue unless the injured party has a right to
sue. Section 61(1) of the Family Law Act provides that “[i]f a person is
injured or killed by the fault or neglect of another under circumstances
where the person is entitled to recover damages … the spouse, as defined in
Part III (Support Obligations), children, grandchildren, parents, grandparents,
brothers and sister of the person are entitled to recover….” (emphasis added).
As Ms. Bernier is not entitled to recover damages, neither are her children.
[96]          
As I have already found that the plaintiffs’ action is barred by the
waiver, I will address this issue only briefly. Ms. Bernier was an experienced
cyclist who was aware of the risks of road cycling, including falls caused by
potholes and road conditions. By signing the waiver, Ms. Bernier expressly
acknowledged that the cycling event was “an extreme test of a
person's physical and mental limits and carries with it the potential for death,
serious injury and property loss. The risks include, but are not limited to,
those caused by terrain, facilities, temperature, weather, condition of
athletes, lack of hydration, equipment, vehicular traffic, actions of other
people including, but not limited to, participants, volunteers, spectators,
journalists….” By signing the waiver, Ms. Bernier also expressly
acknowledged that there were risks inherent in cycling on roads travelled by
motor vehicles and that none of the released parties was assuming any
responsibility for her safety.
[97]          
I am satisfied that there was an understanding between Ms. Bernier on
the one hand and GranFondo and Mr. Capello on the other that GranFondo and Mr.
Capello assumed no responsibility for her safety and that she did not expect
them to.
[98]          
I find that by signing the waiver and participating in the event, Ms.
Bernier voluntarily assumed the associated physical and the legal risks and
that the plaintiffs’ action is barred on this basis.
[99]          
I am satisfied that there is no genuine issue requiring a trial with
respect to the plaintiffs’ claims.
[100]       The
waiver signed by Ms. Bernier applies to and bars the plaintiffs’ claims against
the defendants Ville d’Ottawa, GranFondo Ottawa and Greg Capello. Further, Ms.
Bernier voluntarily assumed the physical and legal risks associated with the
cycling event.
[101]       The
moving parties’ summary judgment motions are granted.
[102]       The
plaintiffs’ action is dismissed.
[103]       If
any issues should arise between Ville d’Ottawa and Nylene Canada Inc. in
respect of the disposition of the third party claim, either of these parties
may request a case conference with me.
[104]       The
parties are urged to settle the issue of costs. If they are unable to do so,
the moving parties may deliver written costs submissions of no more than five
pages in length, not including bills of costs, on or before January 10, 2025. The
plaintiffs may deliver responding costs submissions, subject to the same page
limit, within 21 days of receipt of the moving parties’ submissions.