[1]              
This trial deals with two issues following an
unmarried couple’s separation: (a) whether the Applicant is entitled to
equitable relief of rectification to address what he says is an error in a
contract the parties signed regarding his equity interest in a jointly-owned
home; (b) whether the Applicant is entitled to spousal support, and if so, what
quantum and duration.
[2]              
In 2008, the parties met while they both worked at
HSBC in Vancouver.  They started a relationship thereafter.  Both held senior
positions.  The Applicant was asked to resign in or around 2011, which he says
is because his employer discovered his relationship with the Respondent.  The
Respondent maintained her job.  She says the Applicant was asked to leave HSBC
because he was not candid when asked by his employer whether the parties were
in a relationship.
[3]              
When the parties met, they were married and had
children from those relationships.  Those relationships ended in or around 2010
or 2011.
[4]              
The Applicant’s divorce was finalized in July
2011, at which point the Applicant’s former wife had primary care of their
three children and they moved to New Jersey.  The Applicant would visit with
them on weekends.  He rented various apartments in Vancouver after separation
until 2012.
[5]              
The Respondent’s divorce from her ex-husband
resulted in a shared parenting schedule with her former husband in Vancouver.
[6]              
After their respective marriages ended, the
Applicant stated the parties began a committed, long-term relationship in
Vancouver.  He said this commenced in 2012.  In contrast, the Respondent said
that their relationship was romantic and passionate, volatile, and not
serious.  She stated that they were merely dating from 2009 onwards until
November of 2019, when they were both living in Toronto in their jointly owned
home and when the Applicant proposed marriage, which she accepted.  At that
point, she said things became serious.
[7]              
The Applicant moved to Toronto in 2012.  He said
he did so after discussing this with the Respondent and for several reasons. 
First, a move to Toronto would allow the Applicant to be closer to his children
who now lived in New Jersey.  He said he has honoured all of his parenting time
with his children.  Second, the Applicant had difficulty finding work in
Vancouver and the Toronto market offered more potential positions.  Finally, he
stated the parties agreed to this move because they viewed Toronto as a better
place to live together and because this is where the Respondent and her family
were from.  The Respondent purchased a cottage in Ontario in 2012.
[8]              
After his move to Toronto, the Applicant had
difficulty securing full-time work.  He was renting an apartment in Toronto but
travelling regularly to Vancouver, and to New Jersey.  Part of his travel to
Vancouver was because of a contract he had which had him working two weeks a
month in Vancouver with the Rick Hansen Foundation.  It was not disputed that when
he was in Vancouver, he would stay at the Respondent’s home with her children.
[9]              
In 2013, the Respondent’s job at HSBC in
Vancouver ended.  She denied joint discussions occurred with the Applicant to
move back to Toronto.  Rather, she said her intention was to remain in
Vancouver.  After the Applicant testified, the Respondent also testified that
she also had limited job options in Vancouver.  As a result, she said she began
to consider job options in Toronto.  She started speaking with a company in
Toronto in February 2014, and received a job offer in March 2014.  She then negotiated
with her ex-husband and obtained a B.C. court order in June 2014 permitting her
relocation with the children to Toronto.
[10]          
The Respondent agreed that returning to Toronto
would allow her to be closer to her family in Ontario, but she stated that this
was a decision she made for herself and for her two children, unrelated to any
discussions with the Applicant.
[11]          
The parties disagreed on the events that led up
to their ultimate purchase of a home in Toronto in August 2014.  However, the
following facts are not disputed:
[12]          
On July 27, 2014, the Applicant sent an email to
Mr. Picov, copying the Respondent, instructing that he prepare an agreement
regarding the “tenant in common” arrangement with the Respondent.  His email
contained the terms he asked to be included within the agreement.
[13]          
The Respondent took no issue with the content of
the instruction provided to Mr. Picov.  In her testimony, she characterized
this email as being jointly from the parties and that it accurately reflected
the parties’ agreement.
[14]          
On August 1, 2014, the parties signed the
Agreement drafted by Mr. Picov.  The relevant parts state:
[15]          
The terms in the Applicant’s email of July 27,
2014 significantly mirror what ended up in the final Agreement that was
executed.  There was no evidence of Mr. Picov circulating a draft Agreement,
requesting clarification on terms, or of comments being provided by the parties
on any drafts circulated.  The parties signed the first draft of this
Agreement, once received.   Neither party obtained independent legal advice
before signing it.
[16]          
Perhaps not surprisingly, the parties disagreed
on what would happen now that the parties have separated.  The Respondent states
the Applicant is only entitled to a return of the mortgage payments he has
made, consistent with para (c) above.
[17]          
The Applicant states that the intention at the
time of contract formation was that he would get an equity interest in the
property, proportionate with the mortgage payments he has made up to the point
of separation.  He acknowledged an error, in his part, when sending
instructions to Mr. Picov that this term was not correctly spelled out.  He
relies on the equitable remedy of rectification to obtain an equity interest in
the property.
[18]          
In May of 2014, a few months before the purchase
of the home, the Applicant was offered a senior executive role with a global
financial company, S&P Global.  He had also been pursuing a position with
Manulife in Toronto but was not successful in obtaining it.  Had it been
offered to him, the Applicant said he would have taken that job over another
international posting because he wished to remain in Toronto.  His evidence,
which was not disputed, is that the parties were still going to purchase the
home, regardless of whether he got the Manulife or S&P Global job.
[19]          
The Respondent said that because the Applicant
had just landed a new job and would be earning an income, he was looking for a
savings and investment vehicle.  She said she had been looking for a home for
just her and her children, but the Applicant encouraged her to purchase a home
larger than what she needed, and that they agreed he would pay 60% of the
mortgage.
[20]          
The Applicant said the parties agreed he would
take this job, which was principally located in Singapore.  It started in July
2014.  He said he returned to Toronto frequently.  He testified that he flew to
Toronto every three weeks to spend time with the Respondent and to spend time
with his children in New Jersey.  The Respondent, in her testimony, did not
dispute he would return from Singapore regularly, but she said it was more like
every four to six weeks, rather than every three weeks.  She also discounted
the suggestion that his trips from Singapore was to principally spend time with
her.  She explained that she often travelled for work, or would have plans with
her children, and that the Applicant would principally return to spend time
with his girls in New Jersey.
[21]          
In June 2016, the Applicant was re-assigned to
New York.  He rented an apartment in New Jersey.  He was terminated from his
position in 2017, but received termination pay and he remained in New Jersey
looking for work.  He testified that this was because of the greater job
opportunities in New York, his prior failed attempts to secure work in
Toronto’s smaller market, and because of he did not have a work permit in
Canada.  He is a USA citizen.  During his time residing in New Jersey, there
was evidence of him travelling to Toronto, of the Respondent coming to New
Jersey and New York, and of the parties travelling to other destinations.
[22]          
In or around October or November 2018, the
Applicant moved back to Toronto and was residing with the Respondent and her
children.
[23]          
The parties separated in February 2022.
[24]          
The Applicant states it was a common
understanding between the parties that, in the event the parties separated, and
if the Respondent wished to buy out the Applicant’s interest in the home, then:
[25]          
The Respondent’s position is that the common
intention of the parties is exactly as set out in the Agreement – namely, the
Applicant would only be entitled to receive an amount equal to the mortgage
payments he has made.  He would not have an interest in the equity of the home.
[26]          
The relief of rectification has been described
by the Supreme Court of Canada in Performance Industries Ltd. v. Sylvan Lake
Golf & Tennis Club Ltd., 2002 SCC 19, [2002] 1 SCR 678 at para. 31 as
follows:
[27]          
In McLean v. McLean, 2013 ONCA 788, the
Ontario Court of Appeal spoke of how “common intention” is to be established in
rectification cases.   After considering authorities and submissions as to what
evidence a Court should consider, Weiler J.A. for the Court stated at para. 61:
[28]          
I am not persuaded, on a balance of
probabilities, and from the totality of evidence that there was a common
intention for the Applicant to receive an equity interest in the home.  Even if
there was a common intention, to find the parties’ equity interest was to be
determined based on the formula understood by the Applicant would go well
beyond rectifying the contract; it would involve re-writing it.  I reach this
conclusion for the following reasons.
[29]          
First, on March 22, 2016, the Applicant wrote to
Mr. Picov and later forwarded the email to the Respondent following a brief
separation.  In his email, the Applicant advised that his belief was that the
Respondent had to pay him the difference of their mortgage payments or put the
asset on the market.  This does not demonstrate the Applicant had a belief he
had entitlement to an equity interest.
[30]          
Second, the Respondent had no recollection of
the parties ever agreeing to the Applicant being entitled to an equity interest
in the home in the event of separation.  Her recollection was that he would be
entitled to recover only the mortgage payments he made.
[31]          
There was evidence of the Respondent in her
communication with the Applicant post-separation appearing to (mis)understand
that the Applicant had an equity interest and that an appraisal would be
required to determine that interest.  However, the Respondent explained that
she had not refreshed herself with the terms of the Agreement, and therefore,
she testified that she erred in her communications with the Applicant.  I
accept her evidence on this point as being credible.
[32]          
Third, it is the Applicant’s burden to establish
that the written Agreement was not what was agreed upon orally.  But the
evidence was that it was him who wanted this agreement.  It was the Applicant
who first set out the contractual terms in an email to Mr. Picov.  Those terms
specifically stated that the Respondent had the right to buy the Applicant out
at an amount equal to the payments he made to date – monthly mortgage plus any
lump sum.  As this email sent by the Applicant days before the agreement was
reached was specific, I find it is the best evidence of the parties’ common
intention at the time.
[33]          
Fourth, I have considered other language in the
Agreement itself that suggests the Applicant would have an equity interest in
the home.  However, an equity interest would only arise in two situations which
did not occur: (1) “If and when…” the Applicant’s 60% payments on the mortgage
plus any lump sum payments resulted in the gap between the parties’ respective
equity interest in the property becoming nil, only then would the property be
owned on a 50/50 basis; or (2) if the parties separated and the Respondent
decided not to buy out the Applicant’s interest.
[34]          
Finally, even if there was a common intention
that the Applicant would have an equity interest based on his mortgage
payments, it would amount to a re-writing of the contract to impose the formula
proposed by the Applicant to quantify his interest.  This formula is only from
the Applicant’s oral testimony of what he understood their agreement to be; it
was neither ascertainable nor definite from other evidence in this case: Performance
Industries, at para. 61.  For example, how the Applicant came to understand
that the Respondent would not be entitled to a rate of return on her
initial downpayment of $1.2M, and that their proportionate equity interest
would be based solely on mortgage payments (or lump sum payments) each party
made, was not in any other evidence.  It would be sensible to assume the
Respondent would be equally entitled to a rate of return on her initial
downpayment.
[35]          
This case is unlike Performance Industries where
the Court merely substituted one word for another based on the evidence.  Here,
the Applicant is seeking to introduce a whole new valuation formula that is
inconsistent with his contemporaneous email to Mr. Picov who drafted the Agreement. 
The court will not rewrite a contract to rectify a belatedly recognized error
of judgment by one or both parties.  When rectification is sought, the Court’s
task is merely to restore the parties to their original bargain.  To read in
new terms not supported by the evidence would represent “a relaxed approach to
rectification as a substitute for due diligence at the time a document is signed.”
Performance Industries, para. 61.
[36]          
For these reasons, I dismiss the Applicant’s
claim to rectify the Agreement.  Pursuant to the parties’ Agreement, I order
the Respondent to pay the Applicant the total of mortgage payments he made on
the jointly owned property at 62 Mason Blvd., Toronto, understood to be
$494,279, less the $230,000 the Respondent has already paid to the Applicant. 
Upon payment of this amount, the Applicant shall cooperate in the legal
transfer of his tenant in common interest in the property to the Respondent. 
Parties advised they agreed on the amount of mortgage payments made by the
Applicant, and if the amount I have indicated is not accurate, it shall be
replaced by the parties’ agreed amount.
[37]          
The Applicant said he is a “spouse” entitled to
spousal support on a needs basis retroactive to the date of separation
(February 2022).  He argued the parties cohabitated from at least August 2014,
although he argued cohabitation could have commenced as early as December 2012. 
His principal position is that parties cohabited for 7.5 years from August 2014
to February 2022.
[38]          
The Respondent submitted the parties never
cohabited within the meaning of s. 29 of the FLA because they did not
cohabit for three years, and therefore, the Applicant is not a “spouse”.  For
the most part of the relationship, they lived under different roofs.  She
argued it was not until November 2019 when the Applicant proposed marriage that
they began to cohabit.  The parties agree that they separated in February
2022.  Therefore, she states they have not cohabited for 3 years as required
under s. 29 of the FLA.
[39]          
Section 29 of the FLA defines spouse to
mean:
[40]          
Section 1(1) of the FLA defines “cohabit”
as living together in a conjugal relationship, whether within or outside of
marriage.
[41]          
In M v. H., 1999 CanLII 686 (SCC) at
pars. 59-60, the Supreme Court of Canada adopted and affirmed the criteria set
out in Molodowich v. Penttinen, 1980 CanLII 1537 (ONSC) for assessing
whether parties are in a “conjugal relationship” under s. 29 of the FLA. 
Those factors include shared shelter, sexual and personal behaviour, services,
social activities, economic support and children, as well as the societal
perception of a couple.  These elements may be in varying degrees and not all
are necessary for the relationship to be found to be conjugal.
[42]          
In assessing whether parties “lived together”,
Karakatsanis J. (as she then was) stated in Campbell v. Szoke, 2003
CanLII 2291 ONSC stated at para. 52:
[43]          
Shore J., in Climans v. Latner, 2019 ONSC
1311, provides a helpful review of relevant caselaw.  At para 128, she stated:
[44]          
For the reasons that follow, I find that the
parties cohabited from August 2014 through to February 2022.
[45]          
I provide brief comments on the credibility of
the parties because it is relevant to the parties’ intention to cohabit.
[46]          
Only the parties testified at trial.  Each
party’s evidence in chief and in cross-examination was less than a day.  They
agreed in large part on many of the pivotal facts around their relationship. 
Where they differed is how they characterized those facts.
[47]          
I had more difficulty accepting the Respondent’s
evidence than the Applicant’s evidence with respect to the nature of the
parties’ relationship.
[48]          
The Respondent regularly described the parties’
relationship as being “intermittent”, “on-again, off-again”, “pretty casual”
and “lacking permanence”.  She spoke of her decisions on where to live as being
for herself and for her children, without any reference to the Applicant or her
relationship with him.  This was despite significant photographic evidence of
their relationship.  At times, she was evasive in answering some questions
rather than simply making basic admissions that were obvious.
[49]         
In these areas, as I explain, her answers
were inconsistent with the facts on how the parties interacted, documentary
evidence, and other admissions she made.
[50]          
I find the Applicant’s moves to Toronto,
Singapore and then New Jersey were for work reasons and the fact that the
parties did not share the same roof each night, is not conclusive.  Rather,
what is relevant is whether there was a subjective intent to maintain a
relationship, that the parties objectively portrayed that they were a couple,
and that they lived together at certain points under the same roof.  There is
such evidence in this case. I consider various factors listed in M. v. H.
as well as others in this case.
[51]          
The parties had a conjugal relationship.  The
parties met in 2008 and by the Respondent’s admission, they had a romantic
relationship.  After the parties’ marriages ended in or around 2011, and the
Applicant moved to Toronto in 2012, it is not disputed that the parties’
relationship continued.
[52]          
It was not disputed that the Applicant left
Vancouver in 2012 for work and to be closer with his children who were in New
Jersey.  The Respondent agreed there were limited job options for her in
Vancouver when her job was terminated in 2013. Therefore, it is more probable
that the Applicant’s move to Toronto was driven by his efforts to find work and
to parent his children.
[53]          
The Applicant’s move to Toronto was not because
he was terminating or ending his relationship with the Respondent.  There was
no evidence of their relationship having ended between 2012 and 2014.  In fact,
there was photographic evidence of their relationship continuing from 2012
onwards.
[54]          
While he was in Toronto, the parties continued
to regularly cohabit in Vancouver at the Respondent’s home.  From December 2012
until the Respondent moved to Toronto in 2014, the Applicant would travel to
Vancouver for two weeks per month on a work contract with the Rick Hansen
Foundation.  The Respondent admitted he would stay with her and her children in
Vancouver on these regular trips to Vancouver.
[55]          
The Applicant said his decision to move to
Toronto was discussed and made jointly with the Respondent and they had a
mutual plan to move to Toronto.  The Respondent disputed this fact.  She was
tied to Vancouver because of her job and the joint parenting arrangement with
her ex-husband.  It is not necessary for me to make this finding of fact.  It
is enough that their relationship did not terminate and that it continued while
living in different cities.
[56]          
There was evidence of them objectively
portraying themselves as a couple and a blended family.
[57]          
There was significant photographic evidence that
the parties regularly spent time as a blended family, with both parties’ five
children and often with the parties’ extended family.  The locations where the
parties travelled as a couple or with their children or extended family members
included Muskoka; Whistler; Vancouver; New York City; Ellicottville; Florida;
Singapore; Bali; Indonesia; Toronto; Minnesota; Aruba; Mt. Tremblant;
Amsterdam; Colorado; Ohio; Niagara Falls; Switzerland; Hong Kong; Vermont;
Dubai; Washington DC; Greece; and Dublin.  The Respondent was taken to these
photos and while she could not recount the precise dates, for the most part,
she did not dispute that the photos represented the various trips the parties
had taken either alone, with their children, or with extended family members.
[58]          
It would have been preferable if these photos
were introduced by the Applicant in his evidence in chief.  The photos were
part of an email the Applicant purportedly sent to his counsel, with text
underneath each describing where the photo was taken and the date it was taken. 
While the Respondent could not confirm the dates of the various photos, on a
balance of probabilities and having considered how the children grew in
subsequent photos, I am persuaded the photos represent events that occurred
from 2012 to 2017.  The location of the photos corresponded with other evidence
received.  Even if the dates are not entirely accurate, they demonstrate the
parties’ spent time together, with their respective children, and with the
parties’ extended families at multiple locations.
[59]          
The Respondent sought to discount these photos
as representing “holiday time” and not “day-to-day life”.  Therefore, she
argued it is not evidence of regular “cohabitation” as between normal
spouses.   But the reality for most couples and families is that these photos
are most often taken when families are vacationing together, and the
reason why they are vacationing together is because they are a family.  Many of
the photos were not just trips, but also milestones in the lives of family
members, such as family birthdays and graduations.  Furthermore, it is not
disputed that the Applicant did spend some “day-to-day” living with the
Respondent when he returned to Toronto and stayed at their jointly owned home.
[60]          
The photographic evidence contained two years of
family Christmas cards (2015, 2017) which the Respondent did not dispute as
being authentic.  The Christmas cards had photos of the parties with their
combined five children, and they included the names of the parties and all five
children.  These cards strongly suggest that not only privately, but also
publicly, the parties were holding themselves out as a couple, and they were
doing so with their children as a blended family.
[61]          
The Respondent’s testimony also sought to
discount the existence of a relationship among the parties’ five children, but
some of her evidence suggested otherwise.  For example, the Respondent bought a
cottage in 2012 where she had a boat.  The Respondent’s evidence was that her
daughter named it, MAJIC, reflecting the initials of all five children.  The
Respondent also admitted that post-separation, she took her daughter to Paris
to meet with the Applicant’s daughter.  On cross-examination, the Respondent
also read into evidence cards her children had written to the Applicant on Father’s
Day.  These are all indicia of a blended family relationship arising from a
spousal relationship.
[62]          
There was evidence of the Respondent having a
subjective intent of being in a conjugal relationship with the Applicant.  There
were several of birthday cards in evidence, signed by the Respondent and her
children to the Applicant.  The dates on which these cards were sent was not in
evidence, but at least one references the Applicant’s 48th birthday,
which would have been on March 16, 2015.  In one of them, the Respondent
referred to the Applicant as “Husband”.  These cards do not suggest a
temporary, intermittent relationship, as suggested by the Respondent in her
evidence.
[63]          
The Respondent tried to discount the fact that
she introduced the Applicant to her family in Toronto, suggesting she would
have done the same for anyone new to Toronto.  I find this answer self-serving
and inconsistent with the evidence.  The Respondent admitted that the Applicant
went on a trip with her father to Scotland, that he spent time with her family
in Toronto, and that he attended her nephew’s hockey games.  Her son’s Father’s
Day card to the Applicant thanked the Applicant for taking him to early morning
hockey games.  This sort of engagement in the lives of extended family members
is more representative of behaviour one would expect of a spouse.
[64]          
The cards the Respondent sent to the Applicant,
the years during which she travelled with her children with the Applicant and
his children, the Christmas cards, the joint family events in which they
participated strongly suggest a subjective intent on the part of the Respondent
to be in a committed relationship with the Applicant.
[65]          
I reject the argument that because the parties
were not living under the same roof, they were not cohabiting in a conjugal
relationship.
[66]          
The Applicant’s career involved international
work in the financial industry for decades.   The Respondent was aware of this,
and it was simply a unique fact of their relationship that they worked around. The
Respondent agreed that employment prospects in Vancouver in the financial
industry were limited, and therefore, it is not surprising the Applicant had to
leave in 2012 to find work.  He returned to Vancouver, every two weeks.
[67]          
After the Applicant moved to Toronto, he had
difficulty finding full-time work.  By 2014, his only job prospect was with
S&P Global, which required him to live in Singapore from 2014 to 2016, and
then in New Jersey from 2016 to 2017.
[68]          
The Respondent was unwilling to admit that she
agreed or was in any way supportive of the Applicant’s decision to accept the
job with S&P Global.  While I agree with her statement that this job was
his only option, I found her resistance to answer whether she agreed with the
decision, participated in the decision, or supported him in making this
decision is at odds with the evidence which demonstrated they were a couple.
[69]          
There was evidence of the parties having
discussed marriage several times.  The Respondent acknowledged this, saying it
was the Applicant who wanted marriage more than her; she had been married twice
before.  However, this does not discount the fact that there had been talk of
marriage.  In November 2019, the Applicant did propose marriage, and the
Respondent accepted.  Their wedding planned for May 2020 did not occur due to
the Covid pandemic.
[70]          
There was no evidence that the parties were in
intimate relationships with others.
[71]          
I reject a finding that the Applicant was merely
a “boyfriend” or “travel companion.”  If this were the case, then (a) the
Applicant would not have spent significant time with the Respondent’s children
and her extended family on trips; (b) the Respondent’s children would not have
written him Father’s Day cards or signed his birthday cards; (c) the Applicant
would not have regularly stayed with the Respondent and her children when he
travelled to Vancouver, or when he returned to Toronto from Singapore or New
Jersey; and (d) the parties would not have purchased a property with both being
on title and would not have jointly signed a mortgage valued at $2 million.
[72]          
The evidence, taken as a whole, demonstrates
that the parties were in a committed relationship.  I find they cohabited
commencing August 2014.
[73]          
While there was a period prior to August 2014,
and possibly as early as December 2012, when the parties appear to have
cohabited regularly, I would not find it was the commencement of their
cohabitation.  This is because their relationship was still relatively new, the
parties had just completed their respective divorces, and the Respondent’s
ability to leave Vancouver was dependent on her settling with her ex-husband a
relocation with her children.
[74]          
What provides evidence of subjective intent is the
Respondent’s move to Toronto with her children, the parties’ joint investment
in the home in August 2014, and their contractual commitment to both be
responsible for this joint investment.  The Respondent did not provide a
satisfactory explanation as to why she would agree to have the Applicant on
title for this property, even though he made no down payment to the property. 
She seemed to suggest that he induced her into this arrangement, and she was
merely helping him because he wanted somewhere to place his savings (by paying
the mortgage).  This answer lacks credulity, and again, suggests a self-serving
attempt to minimize the extent of the parties’ relationship.
[75]          
They maintained most other aspects of their
finances separate, although there was evidence of the Applicant regularly
paying for certain Bell and hydro expenses at the Respondent’s cottage, which
she solely owned.
[76]          
The parties acted as most couples would, when
one spouse must live in another city for work reasons.  From 2014 to 2018, the
Applicant returned from Singapore approximately once a month to spend time with
the Respondent and with his own children in New Jersey, and that he would stay
with the Applicant in their jointly owned home when he returned to Toronto. 
Subject to some brief instances where the parties argued and separated briefly,
their relationship continued.
[77]          
In 2017, the Applicant landed in Hong Kong en
route to Singapore.  He learned from the Respondent that she required emergency
medical care.  He immediately flew back to Toronto on the next available flight
and drove the Respondent to a private medical clinic in Cleveland, Ohio where
she was treated.  He had placed the Respondent on his private medical insurance
coverage in the USA.  None of these facts were disputed.  This is not typical
of what a “boyfriend” in an uncommitted relationship would do.
[78]          
Between 2014 and 2018, the parties regularly
vacationed together, took care of each other, and celebrated key milestones in
their lives together with their extended families and their children.
[79]          
In 2018, the Respondent moved back to Toronto
and gave up a lease on his New Jersey apartment.  This was because his position
with S&P Global ended in 2017, and he was searching for work in New York
and elsewhere in the USA.  I do not view this as indicative of his lack of
commitment to the parties’ relationship.  From 2017 to 2018, he continued to
return to Toronto and the Respondent also came to New Jersey, sometimes with
her children.  The Applicant had attempted and exhausted his efforts to find
work in Toronto for two years between 2012 and 2014.  He had worked in New
York, and internationally throughout his career.  Therefore, it is not
surprising that he maintained the New Jersey apartment from 2017 to 2018 to
support his efforts to find work in the USA.
[80]          
The Applicant returned to Toronto in the fall of
2018 and resumed living full-time with the Respondent.  In November 2019, he
proposed to her and she accepted.
[81]          
Having considered all of the above factors, I
find that the parties were living together in a conjugal relationship from
August 2014 to February 2022.
[82]          
The parties agree that the Applicant does not
have entitlement to support on a compensatory basis.   If he has entitlement,
it is strictly on a non-compensatory or needs basis.
[83]          
Non-compensatory support is based on the financial need of a spouse,
post separation.  It recognizes that when spouses separate, it is artificial to
assume that “all separating couples can move cleanly from the mutual support
status of marriage to the absolute independence of single life”: Bracklow v.
Bracklow, 1999 CanLII 715 (SCC), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 420, at para. 31.  Non-compensatory support
“places the burden of support for a needy partner who cannot attain
post-marital self-sufficiency on the partners to the relationship, rather than
on the state”: Bracklow, at para. 31.
[84]          
This is consistent with the statutory purpose
for spousal support n s. 33(8)(d) of the FLA, namely, to relieve
financial hardship.
[85]          
I find that the Applicant is entitled to
non-compensatory support, based on the difference between the needs and means
of the parties.  The circumstances of the breakdown of their relationship
resulted in economic dependency.  According to the Respondent, the Applicant
lived “rent free” in their jointly owned home because, under the Agreement, he
was entitled to recoup all he had paid in mortgages as a form of “savings”. 
Without that “rent-free” home to live in, and without a job, his only means of
putting roof over his head is to spend his capital.
[86]          
In contrast, the Respondent has solely enjoyed
the growth in value of the home that the parties jointly owned.  It had a value
of $3.1M at the time of purchase.  The Applicant contributed approximately
$500,000 towards mortgage payments, and the Respondent contributed slightly
more, valued at approximately $550,000.  There was an appraisal report done on
the property, which was part of the Applicant’s Documentary Evidence brief. 
While the expert who prepared the report was not called as a witness, there was
no opposing appraisal report.  It concludes the value of the property as of
March 2022 to be $5.8M.  Even if I were not to consider the appraisal report,
the Respondent’s Financial Statement places a value on the home at $5.5M which
confirms that the property’s value grew significantly during the relationship. 
The Respondent solely enjoyed the significant growth in value of this property
during the parties’ relationship, despite the roughly equal contributions
during the relationship towards its growth in value.
[87]          
A purpose of a spousal support order is to
recognize a spouse’s contribution to the relationship and the economic
consequences of the relationship for the spouses: s. 33(8)(a) FLA.
[88]          
During the parties’ relationship, the Applicant’s
had periods when he was earning an income but he was not generating an income
throughout.  Notwithstanding the absence of a steady income, from 2014 through
to May 2021, he lived up to his contractual agreement to pay his 60% share of
the mortgage.   He had received a pension from HSBC, and upon his termination,
half was paid to his ex-wife, and he used the remaining amounts to pay his
child and spousal support obligations and to pay for the mortgage when he had
no income.
[89]          
After considering the parties needs and means, I
find the Applicant is entitled to support on a non-compensatory basis.
[90]          
The Applicant was dependent on the Respondent
for a home.  The Applicant has need for support.  His Financial Statement,
sworn October 31, 2024, on which he was not cross-examined, showed he has
current debts of $789,000 (after deducting mortgage on the jointly owned
property), $172,000 in savings which primarily comprised a retirement savings
account, and no real assets other than a car valued at $12,000.  He has no
income.  There is a prospect of him earning an income from his involvement in
various start-up businesses in which he has been involved, but it is purely
speculative of what his income might be.
[91]          
I am satisfied, based on the evidence, that he
has exerted significant efforts to find work.  The Respondent did not seriously
dispute his job search efforts.  Even she attempted to assist him.  While it is
possible that he has unduly restricted his employment searches to senior executive
positions of CEO or COO, it is unrealistic to assume that he could earn an
income that would approach the standard of living that the parties enjoyed
during their relationship if he were to search for a less senior position.  The
parties lived well during their relationship, which included multiple trips
each year to various locations around the world.
[92]          
In contrast, the Respondent’s Financial
Statement, sworn November 22, 2024, shows that in 2023, she had an annual
income of $1.93M.  It was accepted by the Applicant that a significant portion
of this income represented one-time earnings in 2023 which are unlikely to be
repeated.  Her income in 2022 was $923,000 and her 2021 income was $601,000. 
It is expected her 2024 income will be $964,000.
[93]          
In terms of her assets and liabilities, the
Respondent owns her cottage and will solely own the jointly owned home at 62
Mason Blvd.  Together, the properties are valued at $6.2M.  She holds $2.48M in
accounts and savings, of which approximately $1M is held in registered savings
plans. She identifies a debt of $1M on 62 Mason Blvd.  These figures
demonstrate that she has capacity to pay a spousal support order.
[94]          
I am satisfied that the Applicant is unable to
secure employment as a senior executive in the financial services industry. 
The Applicant adduced some evidence, which was hearsay, that those in the
financial sector are aware that he was terminated from HSBC and that his age
(57) are factors that prevent him from securing the type of senior executive
position he hopes to obtain.  I do not accept this hearsay evidence.  However,
I accept the Respondent’s evidence that the Applicant had difficulty obtaining these
senior positions.  I also accept her argument that the Applicant could likely
obtain employment as a bank manager, where his likely income would be greater
than minimum wage.
[95]          
The Respondent seeks to impute an income to the
Applicant of $70,000.  For this Court to impute an income to the Applicant,
there must be an evidentiary basis to do so: Drygala v. Pauli (2002), 2002 CanLII 41868 (ON CA), 61
O.R. (3d) 711 (Ont. C.A.).  There was none adduced at trial.  Therefore, I
accept the position advanced by the Applicant that he could earn an income of
$50,000 and find so.
[96]          
In terms of the Respondent’s income, the
Applicant has accepted that she earned one-time income in 2023 and that her
2023 income should not be used to determine her support obligation.   I find
that the Respondent’s 2022 income of $923,000 is appropriate income to use when
determining her support obligation.  Her estimated 2024 income was not markedly
dissimilar.
[97]          
The Respondent argued that under the Spousal
Support Advisory Guidelines, when a payor’s income is $350,000 or more, the
guideline amount of support may not be apply.  She further argued that because
there is no compensatory component, it would not be appropriate to base her
support on an income higher than $350,000.
[98]          
The Respondent’s counsel prepared DivorceMate
calculations using the presumptive ceiling of $350,000 and the Respondent’s
2022 income of $923,000, imputed an income to the Applicant of $70,000 (I have
found it should be $50,000), and used 7.5 years of cohabitation (as I have
found).  This results in the following range of support for a duration of 3.75
years to 7.5 years:
[99]          
I have considered the Applicant’s budget as set
out in his Financial Statement.  It shows he has annual expenses of $202,280. 
I have reviewed his budget.  There are some items that are extraordinary,
including $7,250 in monthly costs for education, presumably to support his
children.  The Respondent does not have an obligation to support the
Applicant’s children.  Therefore, I have reduced his budget by $87,000
resulting in annual expenses of $115,280.
[100]      
I note however that this budget does not include
expenses for travel and vacations which this couple enjoyed regularly.  It also
includes modest housing costs of $3,480, which would be a marked departure from
the home in which the parties lived.
[101]      
The attached DivorceMate calculations using the
Applicant’s income of $50,000 and the Respondent’s Income of $923,000 results
in the following range of support and net disposable income under the SSAGs:
[102]      
These amounts, even at the high end, result in
net disposable income for the Applicant that would not meet his current budget. 
It would also not meet his budget were I to reduce it to account for education
costs, and then increase it such that it was not a significant decline
departure from the standard that they enjoyed while a couple.
[103]      
The Respondent’s Financial Statement shows
annual expenses of $407,580.  Therefore, even under the high range of support,
the Respondent will be able to meet her budget.  She will certainly be able to
do so if she receives increases in wage or further one-time income payments.
[104]      
The Respondent alleged there was abuse during
the relationship.  This included the Applicant throwing items at the Respondent
in fits of anger, including an electric toothbrush and a medicine ball.  The
Applicant disputed these allegations.  In fact, the evidence was that the
Applicant called the police after an alleged incident.  The Respondent also
alleged that the Applicant suffered from alcohol addiction, for which he was
treated but then relapsed.  Again, the Applicant disputed these allegations. 
Given my credibility findings with respect to the Respondent, I am not inclined
to accept these allegations on a balance of probabilities.
[105]      
Even if I were to find these allegations true, I
would not find they rise to a course of conduct as to constitute an obvious and
gross repudiation of the parties’ relationship: s. 33(11) FLA.  The
evidence was unclear when these events occurred.  The parties were engaged in November
2019 which suggests they did not represent a repudiation of their relationship
by then.  I do not have evidence to suggest the alleged abuse occurred after
their wedding was planned.  Accordingly, I would not deny or alter the spousal
support order based on these allegations.
[106]      
Because there is no compensatory component to
the Applicant’s entitlement to spousal support, I order spousal support for a
period of 5 years and 6 months, commencing March 1, 2022, rather than the full
7.5 years.
[107]      
For these reasons, I order the Respondent to pay
the Applicant monthly spousal support in the amount of $10,912 commencing March
1, 2022 which will be taxable income to the Applicant and tax deductible to the
Respondent for a period of 66 months.
[108]      
A support deduction order shall issue.
[109]      
Monthly spousal support shall be enforced by the
Director of the Family Responsibility Office, unless it is withdrawn.
[110]      
Parties shall deliver written cost submissions
not exceeding 3 pages, double-spaced.  Parties shall attach any Offers to
Settle, along with any relevant documents.  The Applicant shall deliver his
cost submissions by December 20, 2024, and the Respondent shall deliver hers by
January 17, 2025.  Reply submissions, if any, shall be delivered by January 31,
2025.