[1]              
The accused (“Patrick King” or “Mr. King”) stands charged on a
nine-count indictment arising out of his involvement in what has been called
the “Freedom Convoy”. The Freedom Convoy was a form of protest involving
hundreds of vehicles and thousands of individuals which occupied much of
downtown Ottawa for a period of approximately three weeks, from January 28,
2022 to February 20, 2022.
[2]              
 The accused is charged with mischief (counts 1 and 5), obstructing
police (counts 3 and 4), intimidation (counts 2, 6, and 7), and disobeying a
court order (counts 8 and 9). The Crown alleges the accused committed these
offences as a principal or as a party under s. 21(1)(b) and (c) of the Criminal
Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, or by way of counselling pursuant to ss. 22 and
464 of the Criminal Code.
[3]              
The court heard extensive evidence about the effect of the Freedom
Convoy on downtown Ottawa. The convoy consisted of several thousand individuals
from across Canada, arriving in private vehicles, including many large
commercial tractor-trailers and other trucks, to protest COVID-19 health
mandates and other perceived government overreach. Mr. King personally led a
large convoy of vehicles to Ottawa from Western Canada, and he and some of his
followers were active participants during the course of the convoy activities.
Downtown areas were jammed with trucks and vehicles blocking many streets,
blowing truck horns, disrupting public transportation, and generally bringing
the central core of the city to a standstill. Many downtown residents as well
as owners and employees of small businesses and other institutions suffered
significant interferences in the use and enjoyment of their property and in
their daily activities.
[4]              
As Freedom Convoy participants continued to occupy Ottawa’s downtown
area, they and their spokespersons told both police and the public that they
would not leave until the government agreed to terminate COVID-19 mandates.
Police sought to manage the situation and ensure public safety by controlling
the movement of traffic and public transportation and by attempting to keep one
traffic lane open on most streets to permit emergency vehicle access. As the
situation escalated and grew out of control, the City of Ottawa declared a
municipal state of emergency on February 6, 2022. Downtown residents, through
private legal counsel, sought and obtained injunctive relief against honking of
air horns and train horns (order of the Superior Court of Justice, per McLean
J., dated February 7, 2022). Further injunctive relief was sought and obtained
by the City of Ottawa on February 9, 2022. The Government of Ontario declared a
provincial state of emergency on February 11, 2022. The situation contributed
to the federal government’s invocation of the Emergencies Act, R.S.C.
1985, c. 22, and the ensuing declaration of a national state of emergency.
[5]              
On February 18, 2022, a three-day multi-jurisdictional police operation
began to clear Freedom Convoy participants still within the downtown core of
Ottawa. The accused was arrested mid-day on February 18, 2022, and thus had no
further involvement in convoy activity from that point forward.
[6]              
The bulk of the evidence regarding Mr. King’s specific involvement in
the Freedom Convoy arises from his own social media, where he recorded and often
live streamed his activities in Ottawa. He had a large online following,
sometimes numbering over 300,000 persons, including some Freedom Convoy
participants. A series of videos were entered into evidence on consent through
a police intelligence analyst who had downloaded the material from open-source
postings on the internet. Video evidence shows Mr. King’s participation from
the planning stages of the Freedom Convoy in mid-January 2022 to his arrival in
Ottawa on January 29, and then records his ongoing participation and
involvement ending with his arrest on February 18.
[7]              
The Crown’s position is that the activities of the Freedom Convoy
constituted or rapidly developed into an ongoing mischief in which Mr. King was
a willing participant, a leader, and one of the principal organizers. His
participation and indeed his organizational and leadership activities are
extensively documented in Mr. King’s own social media in the form of videos,
made exhibits in this trial. While the central charges against the accused are
mischief and counselling mischief, it is alleged other offences were committed
as well, as discussed below.
[8]              
Mr. King’s position is that the Freedom Convoy protestors were engaged,
in good faith, in a lawful and constitutionally protected protest against
government overreach, and to the extent some residents and business persons in
downtown Ottawa were inconvenienced, it was said to be the fault of the police
and city officials who mismanaged the situation and provided bad advice to
convoy leaders and participants. Moreover, the accused argues the charges have
not been proven on the evidence, to the criminal standard of proof.
[9]              
This was a lengthy and complex trial. The Crown’s case, in addition to
the extensive video evidence of Mr. King’s activities and his accompanying
dialogue in these videos, consisted of testimony from a resident living with a
disability in the downtown area in the “Red Zone” where many of the convoy
demonstrators’ large commercial trucks were parked, and a shop owner and a
church administrator, who both worked in the downtown area. As well, the Crown
called evidence from a scheduling administrator from the municipal bus company,
OC Transpo, and three persons employed by the Ottawa Police Service (“OPS”),
being an intelligence analyst who downloaded the videos, the constable who
carried out the arrest of Mr. King on February 18, and Officer Blonde from the
Police Liaison Team (“PLT”).
[10]          
Notably, the Crown did not call evidence from any senior police officer
or any senior municipal official. Apart from the arresting officer (Mr. King’s
arrest was unremarkable), no Crown witness interacted in any substantial way
with Mr. King during these events. The member of the police PLT team who was
assigned to monitor and communicate with Mr. King was not called to testify.
[11]          
The defence called 13 witnesses. Mr. King did not testify. The defence
called six OPS officers, all from the PLT team, three convoy participants from
out of town, three Ottawa residents who observed or experienced some aspects of
the convoy, and Mr. Kim Ayotte, a senior city official who was General Manager
of Emergency and Protective Services at the relevant time.
[12]          
As discussed in more detail below, the general thrust of Mr. Ayotte and
the six police officer’s evidence supported the fact that the Freedom Convoy
had rapidly become quite out of control with the result that the central
downtown Ottawa area was in a form of lockdown and extensive activities were
required and continuously under way to preserve public safety and safe access
to this area for residents and business people. None of the defence witnesses
except Mr. Zuccatto interacted with Mr. King in any substantial way, but they generally
knew of him and believed him to be one of the organizers of the Freedom Convoy.
[13]          
The essence of the offence of mischief is the deliberate interference
with a person’s lawful use, operation, or enjoyment of property. One can commit
this offence by personal conduct, by being part of a common purpose with others
who are engaging in such conduct, or by aiding and abetting others to do so.
Aiding and abetting is an act or omission of assistance or encouragement which
must take place with knowledge that a crime will be or is being committed and
must be done for the purpose of assisting or encouraging the perpetrators.
[14]          
In addition, it is an offence to counsel others to commit mischief and
this is so even if the counselled offence is not committed. Sections 22 and 464
of the Criminal Code provide the following:
[15]          
While mere presence will not suffice to establish party liability on the
basis of aiding and abetting, in the context of group mischief, presence may
be sufficient to establish liability. It was held in the leading case of R.
v. Mammolita (1983), 1983 CanLII 3563 (ON CA), 9 C.C.C. (3d) 85 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 17 that “…
the act of assistance or encouragement may be the presence of the accused at
the scene of the crime during its commission, if the aider or abettor is there
for that purpose.” In Mammolita, a large group of picketers interfered
with police who were attempting to escort personnel into a workplace and the
obstruction or interference was found in the human barricade that was created.
It was “more than mere presence and passive acquiescence” (at para. 9).
[16]          
In Mammolita, the Court of Appeal made the following observation
respecting liability as a principal (at paras. 13-14):
[17]          
It should be noted that counselling pursuant to s. 464 of the Criminal
Code is meant to capture situations where the offence counselled is not, in
fact committed. Accordingly, s. 464 is an offence unto itself and in the
present case is charged against Mr. King pursuant to counts 1, 2, 3 and 8 of
the indictment. Furthermore, to establish the mens rea for counselling,
it must be shown that the accused intended the offence counselled to be
committed or was aware of the unjustified risk that the offence counselled was
in fact likely to be committed as a result of the accused’s conduct: see R.
v. Hamilton, 2005 SCC 47, 255 D.L.R. (4th) 283.
[18]          
In the very recent Freedom Convoy appellate decision of R. v. Pawlowski,
2024 ABCA 342, the Alberta Court of Appeal observed at para. 18 that for
political speech or communication to constitute the actus reus of counselling,
“the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that it will be reasonably
understood as in substance deliberately encouraging or actively inducing those
with a political cause to engage in criminal activities in support of that cause,
rather than as in substance expressing support for the political concerns or
goals of the criminal actors.” In Pawlowski, the court upheld the trial
judge’s finding that a speech inciting protestors to continue an ongoing
blockade of a highway constituted an incitement to commit mischief.
[19]          
It will be of assistance to refer to several recent decisions of this
court and from the Ontario Court of Justice arising from the Freedom Convoy in
the context of charges of mischief. I will refer to R. v. Romlewski,
2023 ONSC 5571, 93 C.R. (7th) 146 (Doyle J.), R. v. Remley, 2024 ONSC
543, 169 O.R. (3d) 665 (Somji J.), R. v. Decaire 2024 ONSC 4713 (Somji
J.), and R. v. Gandzalas, (26 June, 2023), (Prov.Ct.), (Dorval J.,
unreported).
[20]          
In Romlewski, the accused was found in the downtown Red Zone area
on February 19, 2022, despite the multiple warnings in the days prior that
Freedom Convoy participants had to leave or would face arrest. As police
officers conducted enforcement to secure the area previously occupied by
protestors, Romlewski verbally challenged them. Police made multiple attempts
to persuade Romlewski to leave. He refused and sat on the ground in defiance.
He was subsequently arrested and charged with one count of obstructing police
and two counts of mischief.
[21]          
At trial, the Crown led considerable contextual evidence pertaining to
the Freedom Convoy and its impact on the City of Ottawa. As in the present
case, the Crown argued that Romlewski was part of the Freedom Convoy and liable
as a party to the mischief that characterized the Freedom Convoy’s occupation
of Ottawa. This theory was based on party liability as an alleged co-principal,
an aider and abettor, and through common intention, and was said to be
supported by Romlewski’s words and actions on February 19, 2022, as well as a
Facebook post from January 30, 2022 wherein he expressed support for the
Freedom Convoy.
[22]          
The trial judge convicted the appellant of the obstruction charge but
acquitted him of the two mischief charges. The trial judge accepted that a
larger mischief was occurring owing to the occupation of Ottawa by Freedom
Convoy protesters, but found the accused could not be held liable as a party
because he was on a “lark of his own” and was “acting on his own agenda” not
connected to the protest leadership or its organization.
[23]          
The Crown appealed the acquittal on the mischief charges, and Romlewski
cross-appealed his conviction on the obstruction charge. The summary conviction
appeal court allowed the appeal and dismissed the cross-appeal, substituting a
conviction on the mischief charges. Justice Doyle, after reviewing the case law
concerning party liability in the protest and blockade context, concluded (at
para. 150) that “[t]he bottom line is that while “mere presence” at a protest
is not enough to ground party liability for mischief, presence coupled with
purpose may suffice depending on the facts.”
[24]          
Doyle J. found the trial judge had erred in his analysis of party
liability by taking an overly narrow view of the circumstances. The court held
that a broad approach is mandated and that all circumstances ought to be
considered to determine party liability in group protests (at para. 163).
Reviewing all circumstances (at paras. 176-199), including a social media post
where Romlewski said “… way to stand up Canada!! Keep those horns honking and
those Spirits high!!”, the court found that Romlewski’s presence, actions, and
encouragement amounted to participation in the mischief occasioned by the
Freedom Convoy (at para. 203).
[25]          
In Remley, the accused was found standing in the back of his
pickup truck in Ottawa’s downtown core on February 12, 2022. Remley’s vehicle
was parked on the road in a southeast position blocking passage on Kent Street,
a northbound one-way street. At the time, Kent Street was littered with
vehicles of all kinds parked bumper-to-bumper and was entirely impassable. A
large container was on the back of Remley’s truck. The officer on scene advised
Remley that he was committing the criminal offence of mischief. Remley
disagreed. A crowd started surrounding the officer, who chose to retreat for
his safety. Before departing, the officer was able to confirm Remley’s identity
and his ownership of the pickup truck. Remley was arrested some time later and
charged with mischief.
[26]          
At trial, the Crown argued that Remley was part of the Freedom Convoy,
the activities of which constituted a broader mischief. The Crown’s theory was
that the container on Remley’s truck was full of fuel and that Remley was using
it to refill jerry cans to be used by other participants in the Freedom Convoy
occupation, thereby aiding and abetting mischief.
[27]          
The trial judge acquitted Remley, holding that the Crown had failed to
prove Remley was a party to mischief, either as an aider or abettor, by
providing gasoline to the Freedom Convoy, or as co-principal by obstructing
Kent Street with his vehicle. The trial judge found that Remley’s vehicle,
facing the wrong way on Kent Street and parked with numerous other vehicles,
was not part of a mischief because emergency vehicles could travel along Nepean
Street, running perpendicular to Kent Street.
[28]          
The Crown appealed the acquittal. On the issue of party liability, the
summary conviction appeal judge, Somji J., found the trial judge erred in her
analysis of party liability. Reviewing the jurisprudence discussed above
regarding the offence of mischief in the context of protests and blockades, the
court found that the trial judge’s reasons had erroneously focused on what the
Respondent had not done, rather than analyzing the evidence about what he had
done and the context in which it was done (at para. 108). In so doing, the
trial judge had failed to consider the inferences that could reasonably have
been drawn from the accused’s conduct.
[29]          
In examining some of the circumstances in the evidence at trial, the
summary conviction appeal court noted the following:
[30]          
The summary conviction appeal court ultimately found there was evidence
before the court from which it could be reasonably inferred that the accused
was not “merely present” but had acted in such a manner for the purpose of
supporting the Freedom Convoy.
[31]          
In Decaire, the appellant was acquitted at trial of mischief. She
had been present on Nicholas Street on the morning of February 18, 2022, in
proximity to vehicles parked there in support of the Freedom Convoy at a time
when police were clearing vehicles and protesters. The Crown argued this
amounted to sufficient evidence to find the appellant guilty of mischief as a principal
or party to the offence. The trial judge’s view was that based on his finding
of facts, while the appellant was present at the scene, there was no evidence
that she engaged in any overt acts of mischief or formed a common intention
with others to engage in an unlawful purpose to block the streets thereby
causing mischief.
[32]          
The trial judge observed that it was indisputable that the Freedom
Convoy obstructed, interrupted, and interfered with the lawful enjoyment of or
use of the property of thousands of residents, but he held that his task was
not to decide if the Freedom Convoy resulted in a mischief at large, but
whether the Crown had proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused committed
mischief as a principal or party or obstructed police in the execution of their
duties. He found that the evidence established neither. He found there was no
evidence of any other civilians or protesters near the accused, nor evidence
connecting the accused with any of the parked vehicles. The trial judge
distinguished Mammolita on this basis. In fact, there was no evidence
presented that the accused was standing near any civilians who were protesting.
The trial judge also rejected the Crown’s submission that a video showing the
accused emptying a coffee pot some days earlier at Coventry Road where convoy
protesters had previously gathered, established that she was a convoy member.
The summary conviction appeal judge accepted the trial judge’s factual findings
and analysis and dismissed the appeal.
[33]          
In Gandzalas, an unreported decision of the Ontario Court of
Justice, Dorval J. (June 26, 2023) the accused was found in a line of
protestors during the police enforcement action of February 18, 2022 (the same
day as Mr. King was arrested). The accused was arrested on the scene and
charged with two counts of mischief and one count of obstructing police. He was
found guilty on all counts.
[34]          
The trial judge took judicial notice of a number of facts surrounding
the Freedom Convoy, including that the Freedom Convoy had set up road blockades
composed of thousands of vehicles in the downtown core of Ottawa to protest
public health measures, affecting public transit routes and making passage on
downtown streets difficult. The trial judge further took judicial notice that
air horns and train horns were blared in a sustained manner, until they abated
following an interlocutory injunction issued by the Superior Court on February
7, 2022. The trial judge accepted that vehicles were left running, affecting
air quality, and that the Freedom Convoy participants had set up a supply chain
at 302 Coventry Road. She concluded the Freedom Convoy adversely affected
downtown businesses and downtown residents’ lives, and concluded it constituted
a mischief.
[35]          
The trial judge dismissed Gandzalas’ application under s. 2(b) of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms, Part I of the Constitution Act,
1982, being Schedule B to the Canada Act 1982 (UK), 1982, c. 11,
finding that by the time of Gandzalas’ arrest, the actions of the Freedom
Convoy consisted of an occupation of the downtown core of Ottawa. Accordingly,
the actions of the defendant in pursuing his protest in this context were not
protected by s. 2(b) as they constituted criminal activity. Put differently, since
the protests had become unlawful and he remained, his arrest for mischief was
not unlawful. The trial judge analyzed the legality of the Freedom Convoy’s
activities in the following terms: the Freedom Convoy Protest was unlawful as
soon as it interfered with the lawful use or operation of property, namely the
streets and public areas of Ottawa. There is no doubt that the chaotic scene,
as outlined in both the evidence and the judicially considered facts,
established that the citizens of Ottawa were no longer able to attend their
employment, businesses, appointments, or public parks in the downtown core.
Those spaces were either occupied by vehicles, structures, or people. The noise
level created by the blaring horns impeded the basic needs of sleep or the ability
to focus. This clearly amounted to mischief.
[36]          
The trial judge found that Gandzalas had participated in that mischief
through his actions, namely by driving participants in and out of the core, by
acting as security on Coventry Road, and by urging others to protest when
facing the line of officers, including by yelling “hold the line.”
[37]          
In R. v. Pawlowski, 2024 ABCA 342, the accused was charged with
committing mischief contrary to s. 430(1)(c) of the Criminal Code. A
truckers’ blockade of a highway occurred near Coutts, Alberta between January
28 and February 14, 2022. The accused travelled from Calgary on February 3,
2022, in order to deliver a speech at Smugglers Saloon in Coutts. He observed
the blockade en route to Coutts but did not personally participate. However, he
gave a speech at the Saloon which the trial judge found to be an incitement to
the protesters in attendance to continue the blockade and was therefore an
incitement to commit mischief. The trial judge found the statements made by the
accused were delivered at a time that the accused knew the protesters were
obstructing and interfering with the lawful use of the highway. The accused’s
statements to the truckers were very similar to the words spoken by Mr. King to
his followers in Ottawa, in the present case. The trial judge stated at paras.
48-49, and 53:
[38]    
On appeal, the Court rejected the appellant’s submission that he was merely
expressing his political thoughts and beliefs and not specifically inciting the
continuation of the blockade, stating the following at para. 32:
[39]          
As stated previously, the Crown’s case against Mr. King is largely based
on his own social media posts, multiple excerpts from which were downloaded
from open online sources by an OPS intelligence analyst and admitted into
evidence on consent in the form of videos. These videos span dates beginning
before Mr. King and the convoy’s arrival in Ottawa and continue from his
arrival on January 29th and throughout the three-week period ending February 18
when Mr. King was arrested and detained in custody. February 18-20 were the
dates the Freedom Convoy was forcibly removed from the city in a large joint
police operation.
[40]          
I agree with the Crown position that these videos (and transcripts
prepared from the videos) provide considerable insight into Mr. King’s
intentions as well as his role and personal conduct preceding and during the
Freedom Convoy’s presence in Ottawa. The Statement of Admissions (exhibit 1)
provides “the open-source videos from Pat King’s social media in disclosure are
authentic and admissible evidence”.
[41]          
So far as the offence of mischief is concerned, the Crown’s position is that
the Freedom Convoy, once it arrived in Ottawa, quickly grew or evolved from a
lawful protest movement into an occupation or blockade of the downtown areas,
having the effect of interfering with people’s use and enjoyment of public and
private properties.  The Crown alleges these videos depict Mr. King counselling
the offence of mischief, or committing mischief himself, as well as personally
engaging in or counselling the offences of intimidation, obstructing police,
and disobeying a court order. He is alleged to have committed these offences as
a principal or as a party (aiding and abetting) or as part of a common purpose.
[42]          
I will review a number of the more significant videos, in chronological
order:
[43]          
Before Mr. King led a convoy of vehicles to Ottawa, he was describing to
his on-line followers his goals and plans for the convoy:
[44]          
Mr. King tells his online followers “Let’s give history the moment that
Canadians peacefully “bear hug” its capital and took it back for the people.
And in taking it back, that’s by saying the mandates are being done and
abolished”. He continues:
[45]          
Two days following Mr. King’s portion of the convoy arriving in Ottawa,
and with a background of loud honking and visible fireworks as he walks around,
he tells his online followers:
[46]          
In this video Mr. King is coordinating the honking of horns (“don’t
forget, horns every half hour for 10 minutes”) and telling his followers about
his involvement in secretly moving 80 trucks overnight to help jam up Kent
Street. He says:
[47]          
Mr. King says, “If we have to, we will do a convoy every friggin’ year
so these guys know that we mean business”. His comments show his understanding
that people are looking to him for leadership and direction, and he welcomes
this.
[48]          
Mr. King tells his followers that an injunction has been granted by a
judge and “for 10 days, we need all horns silenced”. He comments that it is
“pretty hilarious…that people haven’t been able to sleep for 10 days”:
[49]          
Mr. King encourages protestors to “stand with us and honk the horns”,
“let the heavens hear you”. He appears to be escalating his message, saying:
[50]          
Mr. King speaks of his leadership activities and continues to exert his
followers to come to Ottawa to support the Freedom Convoy and to “hold the
line”, saying:
[51]          
Mr. King personally leads a “slow roll” to obstruct and delay traffic to
and from the Ottawa airport. The video shows the congestion he is creating.
Some of his online comments:
[52]          
Becoming aware of increasing police pressure on convoy participants to
leave residential areas and the city itself, Mr. King increases his ongoing
admonitions to ‘hold the line’.
[53]          
Mr. King urges convoy participants to maintain the truck blockade and counsels
them to link arms and resist police if they attempt to intervene.
[54]          
In the morning hours, just prior to his arrest, Mr. King counsels his
followers in the convoy to block roads to avoid being towed. Later that morning,
he broadcasts a different message to his online listeners, stating that convoy
leadership has a “contingency plan” by which OPS will let them leave the city
and they can drive to a truck stop west of the City, regroup, and possibly
return. This extraordinary online message appears to have been sent out just
before his arrest.
[55]          
Significantly, the Crown called only two police officers to testify.
Officer Carmo, who carried out the arrest of Mr. King just after noon on
February 18, 2022, and Officer Blonde, who testified about his observations of
the Freedom Convoy from his perspective as a member of the PTL unit. Their
testimony is discussed below.
[56]          
Officer Carmo was dispatched with another officer to arrest Mr. King. He
pulled over a vehicle in the vicinity of the War Museum. Mr. King, whom he
recognized, was sitting in the front passenger seat with two other men in the
vehicle. Mr. King rolled down his window and the officer advised him he was under
arrest and instructed him to get out of the vehicle which he did, but only
after lighting a cigarette. It was the officer’s impression that Mr. King was
live streaming when the vehicle was intercepted. Mr. King got out of the car, was
polite and fully co-operative, and was cautioned and placed in the police
vehicle. He was told he was being arrested for mischief, counselling mischief,
and counselling the disobeying of a court order. Officer Carmo testified he did
not believe Mr. King was obstructing him or resisting arrest.
[57]          
I find Mr. King’s arrest to have been unremarkable. Mr. King may not
have exited his vehicle quite as quickly as the officer expected, but this was
a polite interaction and was accomplished in a very timely, respectful, and
appropriate fashion by officer Carmo, with the accused’s co-operation. Mr. King
stepped out of the vehicle within a minute and a half of the officer’s
instruction to do so. He did not obstruct the officer.
[58]          
The Crown abandoned their initial position after explaining in their opening
remarks that evidence of Mr. King’s arrest and his actions surrounding his
arrest constituted evidence of a personal obstruction of justice contemplated
by count 4 of the indictment.
[59]          
The Crown also called acting Sergeant Blonde as a witness, a member of
the PLT during the Freedom Convoy. Officer Blonde testified that the Freedom
Convoy was by far the largest demonstration he had ever been involved with in
terms of its scope and duration.
[60]          
Officer Blonde viewed his role as a PLT officer as that of a conduit of
information between his chain of command and stakeholders, including persons
who were demonstrating. He sought to obtain information from these stakeholders
and determine their intentions. He explained that the PLT unit’s objectives
were to do everything they could to ensure things remained peaceful, lawful,
and safe. He further explained that PLT officers assume a role of neutrality
and function in a non-enforcement capacity.
[61]          
Officer Blonde described heavy concentrations of trucks and other
vehicles in the downtown core. His testimony painted a picture of a downtown
area gridlocked by trucks and other vehicles. This was corroborated by a
“compilation video” (exhibit 2), filed on consent, which was a disturbing
collage of images of loud and disorderly behavior in the downtown area over the
course of the Freedom Convoy’s occupation of the area.
[62]          
Officer Blonde explained the PLT’s actions in the latter days of the
Freedom Convoy, including the use of what he described as a “measured
approach.” As early as February 9, 2022, police were telling persons at the
Coventry Road staging area to leave. He explained that from February 15, 2022,
the PLT began disseminating more formal messaging to encourage demonstrators to
leave of their own accord. A notice was distributed downtown, which advised
demonstrators of the potential consequences of their remaining in Ottawa,
namely the possibility of arrest. This notice was outlined in blue. The next
day, the PLT distributed another notice, with firmer language, indicating that
those who do not leave the area will be arrested. The outline of that notice
was in the colour red. A further notice was distributed on February 17, 2022.
[63]          
Officer Blonde indicated that no protester expressed to him any willingness
to leave, even after the distribution of these notices. The notices were met
with expressions of hostility by protesters. Prior to the enforcement action
beginning on February 18, 2022, PLT officers delivered final warnings to
persons remaining at the scene of their potential arrest.
[64]          
This Court first heard from Ms. De La Ronde, a legally blind lawyer and
retired public servant residing near the intersection of Kent Street and
Laurier Avenue. Her building has 225 units. Ms. De La Ronde had no direct
dealings with Mr. King. She explained that, to maintain her independence and
safety, she typically walks with a stick, relies on auditory street crossing
signals, and uses tactile walking surface indicators to orient herself. She was
also assisted by a Vision Loss Ontario representative, who attended at her home
on a regular basis to assist her with technology.
[65]          
Ms. De La Ronde testified that never in her thirty years residing in her
home had she experienced something as severe as the Freedom Convoy. She told
the Court that during the presence of the Freedom Convoy, she no longer had
access to taxis, OC Transpo, or Uber. Groceries, hot food, and personal items
could no longer be delivered to her residence. Her mobility was also affected,
as she testified that she could not go out alone on the street because of
trucks that were blocking or encroaching on intersections or overhanging on
sidewalks. She also indicated that she was not able to hear signals for
crossing, as the idling vehicles and the horns made it unsafe for her to
confidently cross intersections. She explained that the tactile walking surface
indicators she relied on were covered by snow or improperly cleared.
[66]          
She testified she could hear loud, persistent noises associated with the
convoy including continuously idling trucks, horns blowing, loud music,
megaphones, and sometimes fireworks. She described the noise level as that of a
lawnmower or motorcycle in her living room. She could not find a place in her
apartment that was not noisy. This prevented her from sleeping leading to
exhaustion and headaches. In cross-examination, she acknowledged that the horns
were abated after the injunction on February 7 between 11p.m. and 7a.m. She
testified that her exposure to the Freedom Convoy caused her to lose confidence
in her ability to live independently, that she still has ringing in her ears,
and that she has a visceral reaction to loud horns and the smell of gas. She
had no dealings with Mr. King.
[67]          
The Court next heard from Ms. Leir, office administrator for St.
Andrew’s Church at the intersection of Kent Street and Wellington Street. Ms.
Leir testified that she typically attends work in person, five days per week.
Ms. Leir had no direct dealings with King. Ms. Leir generally testified as to
the impact of the convoy on the Church. The Church lost considerable rental
revenue during the Freedom Convoy, and several regularly scheduled activities
such as choir practice and committee meetings could not take place or had to be
moved online. Ms. Leir also indicated a decline in Church service attendance
during the Freedom Convoy. She testified that noise during the Freedom Convoy
was very significant with the sounds of rumbling of trucks, honking, and loud
music, which could be heard in the Church sanctuary.
[68]          
The Court also heard from Ms. Biro, who owns a women’s clothing boutique
in the ByWard Market. Ms. Biro has been a small business owner for 27 years.
She had no direct dealings with Mr. King. At the time the Freedom Convoy
arrived in Ottawa, Ms. Biro had recently reopened her store following the
lifting of COVID-19 restrictions. She maintained regular hours and had to lay
off one of her employees during the Freedom Convoy protest.
[69]          
Ms. Biro indicated that trucks were parked on Sussex Drive in front of
her business for much of the Freedom Convoy’s duration. While Ms. Biro, who was
coming in from the Beechwood area, did not report difficulties accessing her
parking in the ByWard Market, she testified that the disruptions associated
with the Freedom Convoy resulted in delayed deliveries. This had a direct
impact on her online business. Ms. Biro also testified that, on the short walk
from her parking spot to her boutique (for which she wore a mask), she had
“uncomfortable” interactions with Freedom Convoy participants who greeted her
with “foul language.” She said her business was affected adversely by the
honking and noise associated with the convoy. She was subjected to a variety of
loud sounds, audible from inside her boutique, including horns, megaphones,
people shouting “freedom”, and loud music.
[70]          
The Court heard from Ms. Huneault, business projects and special events
coordinator for OC Transpo at the time of the Freedom Convoy. Ms. Huneault
testified as to the impact of the Freedom Convoy on the City of Ottawa’s public
transportation provider, OC Transpo. Bus transportation in downtown areas was
significantly restricted for the 3-week period the Freedom Convoy was present,
notwithstanding the best efforts of transportation planners. The public’s
ridership was significantly impacted. As with other Crown witnesses, Ms.
Huneault had no personal dealings with Mr. King.
[71]          
As noted, Mr. King did not testify. However, the defence called six
police officers, all from the PLT. Their communications with other PLT members
and their supervisors were recorded in a chat log which was the subject of
lengthy questioning. The chat log was used to “maintain situational awareness”
by facilitating and recording communications between PLT officers and their
superiors. It is unclear what the defence hoped to establish through the
testimony of these PLT officers. These officers supported the Crown’s case that
the Freedom convoy was a large-scale occupation of downtown Ottawa and convoy
leaders made it clear to these officers that they had no intention of leaving
and would resist leaving. None of the officers had any substantial contact with
Mr. King but they all said they believed him to be one of the principal
organizers of the Freedom Convoy.
[72]          
The PLT officers explained that their function was to identify convoy
leadership, to open lines of communication, and to keep things peaceful lawful
and safe. They were not involved in enforcement activities. Significantly, each
of these officers denied they were ever asked for advice in their interactions
with convoy leadership and never offered advice.
[73]          
The PLT officers were all aware that one of their colleagues was
assigned to monitor and communicate with Mr. King. This officer was not called
to testify by the Crown and no explanation was furnished. The defence also
chose not to call this officer. The defence did not ask that any negative inference
be drawn from the Crown’s decision not to call this officer and indeed
suggested the defence would call the officer if they chose to. In the result,
the court was deprived of some potentially important evidence from the only
police witness who had any personal interaction with Mr. King.
[74]          
Each of the PLT officers testified that they would have willingly
contacted their superiors to assist convoy participants who wanted to leave and
drive their trucks out of the city, although this would have required some
coordination because many of the vehicles were blocked in by barricades or
other vehicles. However, they never received any such requests.
[75]          
One PLT officer called by the defence related that she was subjected to
personal abuse from convoy participants and endured noise so loud that she
could not hear herself think. When delivering notices on February 16 that
advised “leave or you will be charged” she and other officers were surrounded,
she was subjected to having a truck driven at her, and she was “very, very
uncomfortable on many occasions”.
[76]          
Another PLT officer described being surrounded and subjected to
threatening conduct as he handed out notices to the protesters that they were
required to leave. He also had horns honked directly at him as he stood in
front of vehicles.
[77]          
The PLT officers who testified acknowledged that until the latter stages
of the Freedom Convoy’s presence in the city, there was a reasonable amount of
co-operation between police and protestors. One officer said, “I focused on
issues I thought we could resolve”. The evidence suggests tensions escalated in
the third week of the Freedom Convoy’s presence in the city as the police
escalated their pressure on the demonstrators to leave. The situation was
described by these police officers as becoming more tense as time went on.  Mr.
King had no contact with any of the PLT officers who testified. The court
recognizes that Mr. King’s frequent admonitions to convoy participants to “hold
the line” were usually accompanied by warnings to avoid violence.
[78]          
Mr. Bulford was an ex-R.C.M.P. officer who was part of a group called
“Mounties for Freedom”. He resigned from the R.C.M.P in December 2021 after
publicly opposing federal government vaccine mandates. In January 2022, he
learned from social media that a large convoy of trucks were headed to Ottawa
to protest vaccine mandates and he agreed to help the “Adopt a Trucker” group
which was a part of the protest. He became a liaison with the OPS and the PLT
team on behalf of Ms. Lich and Mr. Barber’s leadership group. His goal was to
assure police that the protestors were not going to create a “criminal problem”
and to ensure the protest proceeded without major problems or violence.
[79]          
Mr. Bulford had virtually no contact with Mr. King but conceded King was
viewed as a prominent figure and organizer of the convoy. He felt Ms. Lich and
Ms. Barber were “the face of the convoy”. He acknowledged that streets were
blocked, particularly in the area of Kent Street, and honking of truck horns
was a feature of the demonstration at least until the court injunction was
granted. When the police began to mobilize to remove protestors, he joined
convoy leaders in a press conference urging police to disobey orders and
support the protestors. He actively opposed the police clearance operation and
was arrested and charged with mischief. He supported convoy leadership in their
plan to continue the Freedom Convoy protest until the government agreed to the
protestor’s demands. His evidence supported the view that the Freedom Convoy
amounted to an occupation of downtown areas.
[80]          
The defence also called two Ottawa residents who testified about their
experience with the Freedom Convoy. Neither resided in the downtown areas. In
addition, the defence called a Freedom convoy participant from western Canada
who followed Mr. King in his portion of the convoy as well as a real estate
agent from Toronto who attended the convoy on four weekends. Their testimony is
briefly described below.
[81]          
Ms. Generoux testified that she and her husband walked to downtown
Ottawa from their home some two kilometers away and spent five or six hours
with the protesters on three occasions. She described this as a “euphoric
experience”, full of goodwill and friendly Canadian activities. She commented
that she had never seen the downtown areas so clean, as people were clearing
snow and collecting garbage. She saw no violence and felt “100% safe”. People
were protesting government overreach, a concern which she also shared. She
acknowledged there was a lot of loud noise and honking, which she said did not
bother her as she does not mind loud noises. Also, she explained, the honking
seemed to be reduced after the injunction. In any event, convoy people were
giving out earplugs and she saw many children wearing them. In
cross-examination she acknowledged being a convoy supporter and financial
contributor and said she was there to support her “brothers and sisters”. She
acknowledged participating in a podcast during which she expressed her support
for the right to bear arms and her opinion that gun control could lead to a
form of cultural genocide.
[82]          
Mr. Dumsday, age 45, resided on the outskirts of the city with his
mother who had asked him not to be involved with the protest. He testified that
he travelled downtown on at least two occasions during the convoy, to the “truck
stage” area on Wellington Street in front of the Parliament buildings. He
personally addressed protesters from the truck stage on one occasion. He was
opposed to COVID-19 mandates. He was enthusiastic about his participation in
the Freedom Convoy. He said, “it was the greatest thing I have ever been part
of to be honest”. He was not arrested, but was pepper sprayed by police on one
occasion. He heard Mr. King speak a couple of times but was not in the habit of
following him on social media. He knew Mr. King to be a “right-wing sort of
guy” and believed him to be a prominent figure in the Freedom Convoy whom he
respected. In cross-examination he acknowledged that things got very noisy at
times, but he personally liked the sound of truck horns. He acknowledged that
trucks were blocking the roads in the downtown area, but he was able to see a
lane that was left open, apparently for emergency vehicles.  He explained “we
were exercising our right of peaceful protest” and quoted Mr. King’s advice
that “extreme circumstances call for extreme measures”. He felt proud of everyone
who participated in the convoy and was of the view that he would not leave
until he “got pushed”. However, he was not among those subsequently arrested in
what he referred to as a “massive police operation”.
[83]          
Ms. McPherson worked 4 days a week in an office south of the Red Zone.
She was sceptical about vaccines and believes in the right to protest. During
the course of the Freedom Convoy her travels to and from her home to work were
considerably longer but she put up with this, as well as some honking at night.
She supported the protest.
[84]          
Another defence witness was Mr. Grewal, a Toronto based real estate
agent who sympathized with the protestors and came to Ottawa to join the
protest on four weekends, returning home each time. He found the convoy to be
one of “the best and most loving experiences of my life”. He stayed overnight
in hotels and B&B’s well outside the city centre. He helped with cooking
and food distribution in the Wellington Street area, and he cleaned up garbage
and “loved” the whole experience. He explained that after the Emergency
Declaration, things were turning “very ugly”, but insisted everyone was
peaceful. Nevertheless, he asserted he was “assaulted” by police, who pushed
him with their batons and sticks. In cross examination, Mr. Grewal acknowledged
personally posting bail for Mr. King, including a $25,000 cash deposit. He
resisted the suggestion that he was a follower of Mr. King or that Mr. King was
advising or counselling him, explaining, “I feel love for King…with love you do
not need a leader”. He knew Mr. King was saying “hold the line” but says all
the convoy leaders were saying that. He also acknowledged that while there were
a lot of large trucks on the streets, many with engines running, the streets
were not fully blocked, and the honking fell off considerably after dark.
[85]          
The defence also called Mr. Zuccatto, a 63-year-old, retired oil patch
worker from Alberta who, along with his wife, were part of Mr. King’s convoy of
500-700 trucks coming to Ottawa from Alberta. He explained that on the convoy
to Ottawa, Mr. King provided instructions regarding road etiquette and
appropriate routes to follow, among other things. He clearly acknowledged Mr.
King’s leadership of his portion of the convoy.  He explained he was concerned
with “government overreach”, such as requiring the wearing of masks. He and his
wife slept in their truck or used hotel points. They parked away from the
downtown area. They drove to parking lots on the outskirts and walked to
downtown areas. They monitored convoy leaders online, particularly Ms. Tamara Lich,
Mr. Chris Barber, and Mr. King. He spoke to Mr. King personally two or three
times while in Ottawa.
[86]          
Mr. Zuccatto acknowledged participating in the slow roll to the Ottawa
Airport which was personally organized and led by Mr. King on February 10,
2022. He observed that Mr. King was video recording what was going on at the
airport. This slow roll lasted for about two hours and circled the loop between
the arrivals and departures levels at the airport terminal. He said there were
30 to 40 vehicles in the convoy in total. He said there were a few large trucks
but were mostly light vehicles like his. The convoy vehicles were honking and
were decorated with Canadian flags and stickers.  He said the airport traffic
was fairly light at the time.
[87]          
Mr. Ayotte was called by the defence and was the only senior City of
Ottawa employee to testify. During the Freedom Convoy, he was General Manager
of Emergency and Protective Services, in charge of the fire department, paramedic
services, by-law officers, corporate security, and other functions consisting
of some 2800 people. Mr. Ayotte reported to the City Manager. However, he
explained it was the Ottawa Police Service who were responsible for keeping the
peace, maintaining public order, and dealing with the Freedom Convoy, with
Emergency and Protective Services providing an important backup role. Mr.
Ayotte outlined in considerable detail the various protocols in place and the
inter-departmental groups who did their best to manage the presence of the
convoy. He had been told by the OPS that the convoy was expected to leave the
city after two or three days, which did not occur and instead turned into an
occupation of downtown areas.
[88]          
Mr. Ayotte agreed the convoy had quickly gridlocked the downtown core of
the city, and said he agreed with Mr. King’s online remarks on January 31 that
“We have all of Ottawa gridlocked now”. He explained the placement and use of
barriers to prevent the blocking of emergency lanes and the ability to move
them if truckers wished to leave the area. He explained the use and operation
of the “Red Zone” in the downtown area to try and control the movement of the
convoy and the protestors. He explained the role of the Traffic Incident
Management Group in maintaining the flow of traffic. He explained his by-law
officers, on the advice of police did not give out tickets or tow vehicles in
the Red Zone for safety reasons, such as being surrounded by protesters.
[89]          
Mr. Ayotte did not meet Mr. King and had no interactions with him. He
said his staff believed Mr. King to be one of the principal convoy organizers
and sometimes monitored Mr. King’s online activities.
[90]          
He discussed the circumstances surrounding the civic state of emergency
declared by the Mayor on February 6: “the convoy did not leave in the two days
we were hoping that they would leave. The weekends were getting very large with
regards to numbers of people, it was becoming very difficult to manage with
regards to controlling things. The police were asking for resources that they
weren’t getting. From outside agencies as well. So, I think, collectively, when
we looked at everything we were faced with, we believed that this was a greater
emergency than we’ve seen of this nature in the recent past, from a protest
perspective […] we didn’t believe we were in control”. He also voiced some
concerns about decisions made by the police that stood in the way of effectively
controlling this protest, such as initially telling city officials they could
plan for what would likely be a weekend protest, allowing the parking of trucks
on Wellington Street and the downtown area and a lack of consultation and
communications with his group.
[91]          
Mr. Ayotte, whose office was in City Hall and not far from the Red Zone
where convoy vehicles were concentrated, took several walks around the Red Zone
observing, as he put it, ”it was loud and it was stinky, there was diesel fumes
and there was a lot of things that were concerning…but with regard to people’s
activities, none of them were threatening at all”. As to the honking, he
observed “the honking while I was in my office in the early days of the convoy
was constant. It was non-stop constant. Following, I believe, the citizen’s
injunction…I found it more sporadic…it was a lot less”.
[92]          
He testified that the primary operational objective of his department
was to avoid serious injury, rioting, as well as property damage. He added that
getting the convoy in and out of the city as soon as possible was “a primary
objective”. He explained that ultimately the cost of the Freedom Convoy to the
City of Ottawa was just under $8 million dollars, and including police costs was
over $30 million.
[93]          
Section 430(1) of the Criminal Code provides:
[94]          
Mischief is a general intent offence such that where the Crown has
proven the accused voluntarily committed the actus reus of mischief, the
mens rea will be satisfied by proof of an intentional, deliberate, or
reckless obstruction, interruption or interference with the lawful use,
enjoyment, or operation of property.
[95]          
The term “enjoyment” of property has been interpreted expansively as “an
action of obtaining from property the satisfaction that the property can
provide.” Accordingly, enjoyment of property within the meaning of ss.
430(1)(d) is to be read plainly and includes mere enjoyment – there is no need
for interference with property rights. The offence also captures interference
with commercial properties: see R. v. Maddeaux (1997), 1997 CanLII 1934 (ON CA), 33 O.R. (3d) 378
(C.A.) and R. v. Tysick, 2011 ONSC 2192.
[96]          
To state the obvious perhaps, the ongoing honking of air horns and train
horns, an activity enthusiastically counselled by Mr. King during his presence
with the Freedom Convoy, would have the inevitable effect of interfering with a
person’s enjoyment of their property, thereby constituting mischief. Indeed, it
would make living in proximity to the honking very unpleasant. It would prevent
residents from sleeping: adults, children, the elderly, and the unwell. The
frequent honking of air horns was malicious conduct intended to disturb people
in their homes and workplaces.
[97]          
The Crown and defence filed on consent, an informative study of noise
levels from the persistent honking of horns during the first two weeks of the
Freedom Convoy’s presence in the downtown area of the city. According to this
study decibel levels of approximately 150 can be emitted from large commercial
truck air horns (compared to a 100-decibel level that is typically emitted from
a lawn mower). The purpose of the horns on these types of trucks is to forewarn
other vehicles and people on the road that the truck is approaching and to shoo
wildlife from the highway. In the loudest and most concentrated area of the
protest, the noise reached 120 decibels. As the noise moved outwards, the lower
range of the noise reached 80 decibels. The study found the highest level of
noise normally encountered was in a category of sound similar to the noise of a
lawn mower.
[98]          
 I draw from this study the conclusion that in parts of the downtown
areas the noise level from the honking of air horns was very significant and
disturbing, particularly when experienced on a continuing basis.
[99]          
In the court’s view, there is overwhelming evidence that Mr. King
planned, from before the arrival of the Freedom Convoy in Ottawa and following
its arrival, to effect an occupation of downtown Ottawa by hundreds of large
trucks and other vehicles; to gridlock the area; and to cause acute distress to
residents, merchants, and workers by continuous honking of truck horns and
other disruptive activities and to extend this occupation and this conduct for
a lengthy and indefinite period. This conduct was designed to, and had the
effect of, interfering with and obstructing the use and enjoyment of property
of downtown residents and workers. The ultimate purpose of the Freedom Convoy
was to pressure the Prime Minister and the government to change COVID-19
mandate policies to which the convoy protesters objected. The evidence is
overwhelming that Mr. King incited and encouraged these activities, both
initially and on an ongoing basis, for a period of three weeks.
[100]      
The details of Mr. King’s activities and the activities he counselled
his followers to engage in are set out above, but I will provide a summary
here, much of which is drawn from Mr. King’s own social media:
[101]      
In the court’s view, Mr. King’s continuing online presence throughout
the Freedom Convoy and his comments prior to arriving in Ottawa, justify a
finding that he was an organizer and a leader of at least a major component of
the Freedom Convoy. It is also obvious that he personally encouraged and
counselled conduct by convoy participants that was calculated to interfere with,
and did interfere with, the use and enjoyment of property of downtown residents
and workers by the parking of large trucks and other vehicles and obstructing of
streets, aggravated by continual blowing of truck horns, both before and on
frequent occasions after an injunction was granted by the Superior Court on
February 7, 2022.
[102]      
Mr. King sought to encourage his followers to use their vehicles to
blockade the downtown area. He took delight in creating as much distress as
possible to downtown Ottawa residents, both in terms of honking of truck horns
and maintaining a blockade on at least several major streets, (such as Kent and
Wellington streets) and counselling his followers to “hold the line” in the
face of efforts by the police to encourage protesters to withdraw from the
city. In doing so, he incited the continuation of mischief. As in Pawlowski,
Mr. King was not merely engaging in political speech, rather he was inciting
Freedom Convoy protestors to continue their ongoing blockade of downtown
Ottawa. That is to say, he was inciting a criminal mischief.
[103]      
I am satisfied the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr.
King personally committed mischief and was a leader, organizer, and online
influencer of the Freedom Convoy, and in that capacity aided and abetted and
was part of a joint purpose of the Freedom Convoy to commit mischief in the
downtown area of Ottawa. Moreover, he incited his followers to continue that
activity on an ongoing basis until the government agreed to their demands.
There will be a finding of guilty on counts 1 and 5 of the indictment.
[104]      
The court is of the view that the intimidation charges are not made out
in the circumstances of this case, for reasons I will explain.
[105]      
Count 2 charges Mr. King with counselling intimidation: that he “did
counsel to commit the indictable offence of intimidation” Count 7 charges that
he “did wrongfully and without lawful authority, for the purpose of
compelling one or more persons to abstain from doing anything that the
person(s) had a lawful right to do, or to do anything that the person(s) had a
lawful right to abstain from doing, intimidate or attempt to intimidate by
threat that other injury will be done, contrary to section 423 subsection
(1) clause (b) of the Criminal Code (underlining added). Count 6 charges
that he blocked one or more highways for the purpose of intimidation.
[106]      
The offence of intimidation is defined in section 423 of the Criminal
Code, as follows:
[107]       Count
7, in relevant part, requires the Crown to prove that Mr. King wrongfully
intimidated or attempted to intimidate persons by engaging in conduct
proscribed in s. 423(1). Other than subsection (1)(g) which deals with blocking
or obstructing a highway, none of the other types of conduct listed in
s.423(1)(a)-(f) are implicated in the present case. Mr. King did not make
threats of violence or threats of property damage to anyone, nor did he engage
in following or watching and besetting anyone.  Moreover, he did not counsel
any such activity. Neither did other participants in the Freedom Convoy engage
in such conduct, so far as disclosed in evidence before the court.
[108]      
In R. v. Boast, 2017 ONCA 602,
the appellant appealed his conviction for intimidation under s. 423(1)(b) of
the Criminal Code. The Court of Appeal held “the accused’s purpose in
attempting to intimidate the complainant is one of the essential ingredients of
the offence created by s. 423(1)(b) of the Criminal Code and the
onus rests upon the Crown to prove the accused’s purpose beyond a reasonable
doubt:  see Regina v. Branscombe (1956), 1956 CanLII 830 (ON CA), 25 C.R. 88, (Ont. C.A.). In Boast there was evidence the
appellant had sent aggressive text messages to the complainant but there was a
lack of evidence with respect to the appellant’s purpose in sending the texts,
and the complainant was not put in fear of her safety. The court found a possible
purpose of the messages was to “vex, disquiet or annoy” the complainant, rather
than to cause her to abstain from doing something she was entitled to do out of
fear, and accordingly the offence of attempting to intimidate was not made out.
[109]      
Applying Boast
to the present case, I have a reasonable doubt the Freedom Convoy protesters
were attempting to intimidate downtown residents and business people to have
them abstain from doing anything they had a lawful right to do. Rather, the
protesters were attempting, as Mr. King explained in several of his online
statements, to pressure, inconvenience, and annoy these downtown residents and
workers, as a way of pressuring the
government to alter its COVID-19 policies.
[110]       However,
as noted, count 6 alleges Mr. King “did wrongfully and without lawful
authority” block or obstruct one or more highways”. Again, the Crown argued the
Freedom Convoy attempted to pressure and intimidate the government to withdraw
its COVID-19 mandates. The method of achieving this, it was argued, was to
disrupt and occupy downtown Ottawa, in part by blocking highways and thereby
pressuring residents and business people in that area.
[111]      
Respectfully, this conduct would not
fall within section 423 of the Criminal Code. The conduct directed at downtown
Ottawa residents and workers was not intended to intimidate them by violence or
otherwise, it was intended to persuade the government to change its policies.
The Government of Canada is not a person within section 423 of the Criminal
Code. While downtown residents are persons within section 423, neither Mr.
King nor the Freedom Convoy intended to intimidate these residents. The object
or focus of Mr. King’s and the Freedom Convoy’s pressure tactics was the
Government of Canada. I would find that counts 2 and 7 are not made out in the
circumstances of the present case.
[112]       Further,
with reference to count 6, the offence of intimidation under section 423.1(g)
requires proof beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. King personally or by aiding
and abetting the Freedom Convoy or as part of a common purpose, blocked or
obstructed a highway. Intimidation under s.423(1)(g) of the Criminal Code requires
the Crown to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. King:
[113]      
I find that Mr. King did not act
wrongly by participating in the Freedom Convoy’s protest against the Government
of Canada’s COVID-19 mandates. A lawful protest is a Charter protected
activity. When Mr. King committed acts of mischief, as occurred in the present
case, he will be convicted of mischief, which is a crime of general intent.
When he obstructs a highway in the course of an otherwise lawful demonstration
intended to protest government policy and not to intimidate individuals, in the
absence of threats and acts of violence listed in s.423(1) of the Criminal
Code, he should not be convicted of the offence of intimidation.
[114]      
Obstructing a highway in the context
of an otherwise lawful protest against government policy should not be
interpreted as intimidation, even if, as in the present case, it constitutes or
involves mischief. To do so would be an unduly broad interpretation of section
423 as it would capture a broad range of lawful protests against government
actions in which there is no proven intent to intimidate individuals. Stated
otherwise, the specific intent offence of intimidation is not made out in the
circumstances of this case, notwithstanding mischief may have occurred, when a
highway is obstructed in the course of a protest against government action.
[115]      
There will be a finding of not guilty
on the intimidation charges, counts 2, 6, and 7.
[116]      
The evidence in this trial does not
support a finding that Mr. King ever personally obstructed police, being Count
4 of the indictment. The police witnesses had no interactions with him. As
noted previously, the Crown’s case is largely based on a series of Mr. King’s
own videos and with one exception, none of the videos show him interacting with
police. The exception is his interaction with the police officer who arrested
him on February 18, during which, as explained previously, he was
co-operative.  Importantly, Mr. King was arrested as he was being driven into
Ottawa. This was before he had any opportunity to personally participate in, or
discuss online, the confrontations between police and Freedom Convoy protesters
that occurred over the February 18-20 period as police forcibly removed
protesters and ended the occupation of downtown Ottawa. I am satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that police were obstructed by demonstrators during this
clearance operation, but I find that Mr. King did not participate as he was in
custody.
[117]      
The issue is therefore whether Mr.
King counselled obstruction of police, as charged in count 3. This would have
to relate to online statements he made to his followers during the period of
the Freedom Convoy’s presence in the city and before his arrest. To amount to
obstruction, the statements would have had to have the effect of “making it
more difficult for the police to carry out their duties”: see Regina v.
Tortolano, Kelly and Cadwell (1975) 1975 CanLII 1248 (ON CA), 28 C.C.C. (2d) 562 (Ont. C.A.).
[118]       Count 3 of the Indictment alleges Mr. King “did counsel
to commit the indictable offence of Obstruct Police, which offence was not
committed by one or more persons, contrary to section 464, clause (a) of the
Criminal Code.” In R. v. Hamilton, at para. 29, the Supreme Court of
Canada held that the actus reus for counselling is the deliberate
encouragement or active inducement of the commission of a criminal offence.
[119]       The
accused submits, following Hamilton, the mens rea for counselling
consists of either an accompanying intent or conscious disregard of the
substantial and unjustified risk inherent in the counselling: that is, it must
be shown that the accused either intended that the offence counselled be
committed, or knowingly counselled the commission of the offence while aware of
the unjustified risk that the offence counselled was in fact likely to be
committed as a result of the accused’s conduct. As noted previously, I agree
with this interpretation of Hamilton and would apply it to the present
case.
[120]       The
videos reveal Mr. King had many opinions and a great deal of advice to impart
to his online followers, not all of it particularly coherent or consistent.
However, two themes or messages were consistent in his remarks. One, to his
credit, was that there must be no violence. Another was to “hold the line”.
What did “hold the line” mean? At the least it was an admonition to continue
the protest, to keep their vehicles in place, and to resist efforts by the city
and police to encourage Freedom Convoy participants to leave the city. More
broadly, it seems to have become an identifying slogan or greeting used by
Freedom Convoy supporters. Depending on the context in which it was used, it
did create an unjustified risk that police efforts to encourage protestors to
leave the city would be resisted, and indeed I find this was Mr. King’s
specific intention.
[121]       Viewing
the evidence as a whole, the court is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that
Mr. King intended his online followers, at least some of whom were among the
Freedom Convoy protestors present in downtown Ottawa, to obstruct police in
several instances, including in the several days leading to his arrest. This is
particularly evident in his rhetoric employed in many of his videos quoted
above, and in particular, his video of February 16: “we link arms…we sit on the
ground, we turn our backs on the men and women in our law enforcement because
they have already turned their backs on us.” Mr. King’s status as a recognized
Freedom Convoy organizer and leader increased the risk that he would be
listened to and some of his followers would obstruct police actions.
[122]       Mr.
King will be found guilty of counselling the obstruction of police, being count
3 of the indictment. He is found not guilty of personally obstructing police,
count 4, because I have found he was fully cooperative at the time of his
arrest.
[123]       Mr.
King is charged pursuant to section 464(a) of the Criminal Code with
counselling to disobey a court order (count 8) and disobeying a court order
contrary to s. 127 of the Criminal Code (count 9).
[124]       The
court order in question is the interlocutory injunction granted by MacLean J.
on February 7, 2022, and subsequently continued on February 16, 2022. The order
was granted in a civil proceeding commenced by residents of downtown Ottawa.
Patrick King is one of the named defendants. The order prohibits any person
having notice of the order “from using air horns or train horns” in the
vicinity of downtown Ottawa. It also requires Mr. King and three other named
Freedom Convoy leaders to communicate this order through their social media
channels. The order further provides that, “provided the terms of this order
are complied with, the defendants and other persons remain at liberty to engage
in a peaceful, lawful, and safe protest.”
[125]       Mr.
King had initially urged his online followers to honk their horns at regular
intervals for 10 minutes every half hour to upset downtown residents and
interfere with their use and enjoyment of their property. He took considerable
delight in the havoc this was causing. This constituted a mischief, as
previously discussed.
[126]       When
the court issued an injunction on February 7, 2022, Mr. King at first insisted
his followers desist in their honking, in accordance with the court order.
Unfortunately, he subsequently began again to counsel his followers to begin
honking. In videos dated February 8, 2022 he broadcasts the following;
[127]       Again,
in a video recorded on February 16, 2022, Mr. King can be heard directing his
followers to “go get those horns honkin’ up there.” On February 17 when Freedom
Convoy leaders Ms. Lich and Mr. Barber were arrested, Mr. King addresses his
online followers to use their horns:
[128]       I
find that Mr. King deliberately counselled his followers to violate the
injunction granted by the Superior Court on February 7 and renewed on February
16. He personally joined in this activity as he counselled his followers to
honk their horns. He is accordingly found guilty on counts 8 and 9 of the
indictment.
[129]       In
defence counsel’s opening statement, it was suggested the accused may rely on a
defence of officially induced error. The accused states in his written submissions
(at paras. 13-14, and 16):
[130]       There
could have been some merit to this submission if the mischief charges were
based on Freedom Convoy trucks blocking Wellington Street and several other
areas where the police initially directed the protesters to park. However,
after the first weekend when the Freedom Convoy arrived, they steadfastly
refused to leave until forced to do so by a large police operation which took
place on February 18-20, some three weeks after the Freedom Convoy arrived. The
Convoy vehicles parked throughout the downtown areas, far beyond the locations
the police directed them to park. The concentration of large trucks and the
barriers put in place by the city to prevent obstruction of emergency lanes
required police co-operation to allow certain trucks to leave their original
parking locations, but the evidence is that the police were never asked to
provide this assistance and the protestors intended to stay in place until the
government agreed to their demands.  Further, the PLT officers all testified
they were not asked for advice by Freedom Convoy members or their leaders and
did not provide advice. The evidence is clear that the protesters and their
leadership had no intention of voluntarily leaving the city and, while in
Ottawa, conducted their activities to deliberately interfere with the lawful
use and enjoyment of property by downtown residents and workers.
[131]       The
court finds there is no air of reality to the defence of officially induced
error in the circumstances of this case.
[132]       For
the reasons set out above, the court finds the accused Patrick King guilty on
counts 1, 3, 5, 8 and 9.  Mr. King is not guilty on counts 2, 4, 6 and 7.