[1]              
OTO.Coach Inc. (“OTO”), the defendant, originally brought a motion to
dismiss or stay the underlying claim by the plaintiffs on the basis that the
court has no jurisdiction to adjudicate the action or, in the alternative that
Ontario is forum non conveniens.  In its factum and during submissions,
OTO conceded this court has jurisdiction to adjudicate the action, but rather
claims Delaware is the more appropriate forum.
[2]              
In the underlying claim, the plaintiffs, OW Technologies, LLC and OW
International, LLC (collectively, the “Holders”) seek payment in the Canadian
equivalent of the amount of $1,878,626.37 USD plus pre- and post-judgment
interest and costs from OTO, as a result of OTO having failed to make payments
to the Holders under a promissory note dated September 15, 2022 (the
“Promissory Note”).
[3]              
The essence of OTO’s argument is that the Promissory Note relates to an
agreement of purchase and sale (the “APS”) between OTO as purchaser and Omegawave
OY (“Omegawave”) as vendor.  There is litigation ongoing between OTO and
Omegawave in Delaware in respect of the APS.  OTO asks this court to find that
Delaware is the forum conveniens for the Holders’ claim under the
Promissory Note against OTO as well, as OTO claims the two matters should be
heard in some coordinated fashion.
[4]              
For the reasons that follow, I do not agree.  OTO’s motion to stay the Holder’s
claim is dismissed.
[5]              
The underlying action is a claim for breach of a Promissory Note.  The Promissory
Note provides it is to be interpreted in accordance with the laws of Ontario. 
OTO as obligor under the Promissory Note has its head office located in
Toronto, Ontario.
[6]              
There is no dispute that the Promissory Note was executed by OTO and
that OTO failed to make any of the required payments under the Promissory Note,
including a payment of $100,000 which was due on signing of the Promissory Note
on March 15, 2022.
[7]              
There is further, no dispute that an event of default under the Promissory
Note has occurred and the entire amount owing under the Promissory Note has
been accelerated and is due.
[8]              
OTO states that it intends to defend the action by claiming unspecified
misrepresentations were made to OTO in connection with the APS.
[9]              
The Holders are not party to the APS.  However, the assignment of the
debt to OTO (which was owed to the Holders by Omegawave prior to the APS
closing) was contemplated under the APS. The Holders are not a party to that
assignment agreement, however, they have consented to the assignment and
restructuring of the debt as part of the Promissory Note.
[10]          
During the negotiations of the Promissory Note (which was occurring in
tandem with negotiations of the APS), OTO specifically requested a term in the Promissory
Note that would have reduced the amount owing under the Promissory Note if
representations made in connection with the APS were not true.  The Holders
rejected this term. A representative of the Holders, Mr. Huffstutter sent an
email to Mr. Evans (of OTO) specifically rejecting the proposed term and
stating that the Holders had no idea what representations were being made in
the APS or if those representations were true.
[11]          
The evidence of Mr. Huffstutter is that he had not received (or
reviewed) a copy of the APS.
[12]          
In its factum, OTO took the position that the terms of the APS were
incorporated into the Promissory Note, including a forum selection clause which
provided that if litigation was commenced in Delaware in respect of the APS or the
transactions completed thereby, the parties irrevocably submitted and agreed to
attorn to the exclusive jurisdiction of the State of Delaware.
[13]          
There is no language in the Promissory Note incorporating all of the
terms of the APA into the Promissory Note.  Rather, Schedule A to the Promissory
Note includes a statement saying that capitalized terms used but not defined in
the schedule to the Promissory Note have the meaning given to them in the APS. 
The schedule to the Promissory Note addresses the calculation of Gross Profit
(upon which certain payments under the Promissory Note were to be made).  Those
terms are not at issue in the proceeding as OTO failed to make any of the
payments under the Promissory Note, including the first payment due on signing.
[14]          
OTO’s primary argument appears to be that Mr. Huffstutter was involved
in devising a plan to sell Omegwave’s assets in order to have the Holders’ debt
repaid.  The Holders had previously sold the underlying business to Omegawave
in 2012.  The Holders had no involvement in the Omegawave business after 2012
but remained a creditor.  Mr. Huffstutter was an employee of Omegawave, Inc.
from 2012 to 2015, but had no personal involvement in the business after that
time.
[15]          
Mr. Huffstutter did advise Mr. Evans that he had suggested in 2020 that
Omegawave look at a sale of its assets so that the Holders would be repaid
their debt on closing of the transaction.  However, that is not what actually
occurred.
[16]          
Rather, starting in or around May of 2021 through to 2022, OTO conducted
due diligence on the Omegawave business.  The Holders and Mr. Huffstutter were
not involved in that process; however, Mr. Evans did advise Mr. Huffstutter
that ‘red flags’ emerged during the due diligence process, but OTO was still
going to proceed to purchase the assets.  Given the results of due diligence,
OTO proposed that rather than pay the Holders on closing as originally
contemplated, OTO would assume responsibility for the debt to the Holders and
pay it over time.
[17]          
The Holders agreed to restructure the debt as part of the Promissory
Note.  As noted above, OTO made no payments at all under the Promissory Note.
[18]          
With respect to the APS, Omegawave commenced litigation against OTO in
Delaware by issuing a complaint on November 8, 2023.  It appears Omegawave
filed an entry of judgment by default in that action on July 1, 2024, as OTO
had not filed the necessary responding material.  However, one a day prior to
this motion being heard, on December 3, 2024, OTO sent a letter to the Delaware
Court indicating OTO intended to defend that action.
[19]          
The Holders are not party to the Delaware action.  Rather, in
submissions counsel for OTO argued that if the Holders action in Ontario, which
is the subject of their motion, was stayed, the Holders could then begin an
action in Delaware that should in some fashion be heard together with the
existing action by Omegawave against OTO relating to the APS as OTO’s defence
to both proceedings will overlap and involve the same witnesses and issues.
[20]          
The issue to be determined on this motion is whether OTO has established
that the underlying action by the Holders is forum non conveniens.
[21]          
In Club Resorts Ltd. V. Van Breda, 2012 SCC 17 [Van Breda]
at paras 103, Justice LeBel stated that the first step in invoking the doctrine
of forum non conveniens is that the party seeking to invoke the doctrine
must identify another forum that has jurisdiction simpliciter:
[22]          
With respect to first portion of the test – does another forum have an
appropriate connection - Van Breda set out four presumptive connecting
factors, which, if found, entitle a court to assume jurisdiction over a tort
dispute (and accordingly should be used to determine if an appropriate
connection has been established): the domicile of the defendant, where the
defendant carries on business, if the tort was committed in the jurisdiction, and
if a contract connected with dispute was made in the jurisdiction.  Here, none
of those presumptive connecting factors point to Delaware.  OTO is not
domiciled, nor does it carry on business in Delaware.  The dispute is not
related to Delaware nor was the Promissory Note made in Delaware.
[23]          
Van Breda notes at para 91 that the list of presumptive
connecting factors is not closed. The Ontario Court of Appeal in Vale Canada
Limited v Royal & Sun Alliance Insurance Company of Canada 2022 ONCA
862 [Vale Canada] held that the Van Breda presumptive connecting
factors are also applicable in a contract dispute.  Vale Canada also
provides that in contract claims reference to Rule 17.02(f) which addresses service
outside of Ontario may be relevant.  However, in this case, those factors also
do not point to Delaware.
[24]          
In this respect, OTO argues that the Holders have agreed to Delaware as
a jurisdiction because the Holders implicitly consented to the choice of law
and attornment clause within the APS.  As noted above, the Holders are not
parties to the APS.  The terms of the APS are not incorporated into the
Promissory Note save and except for a limited number of defined terms being
incorporated into one schedule.  I do not agree that by referencing a limited
number of defined terms from the APS in a schedule to the Promissory Note the
Noteholders have implicitly consented to a forum selection clause within the
APS.
[25]          
As such, on the evidence before me, I do not find that Delaware has an
appropriate connection to the claim by the Holders under the Promissory Note
against OTO and accordingly OTO has not satisfied the first part of the test
laid out in Van Breda.
[26]          
Even if I am wrong, and Delaware does have an appropriate connection to
the claim at issue, for the reasons that follow, OTO has also failed to
demonstrate that Delaware should be preferred and considered more appropriate.
[27]          
In turning the second part of the analysis, Justice LeBel in Van
Breda described the relevant considerations at para 105 as follows:
[28]          
In considering these factors, Ontario appears to be the more appropriate
forum: the evidence shows that OTO’s headquarters is in Ontario and its
principal Caleb Evans resides in Ontario; the Promissory Note is to be governed
by Ontario law; and if an order is issued, it would need to be enforced in
Ontario.
[29]          
To the contrary, Delaware does not appear to be the more appropriate
forum: if an action was commenced in Delaware, new counsel would need to be
retained by the Holders; to the extent a party wished to argue that Ontario law
was different than Delaware law, expert evidence would need to be tendered; and,
if the Holders obtained judgement in Delaware, they would then need to return
to Ontario to seek to have that judgment recognized before they could enforce
it.
[30]          
OTO relies on a decision of Lederman J. in Molson Coors Brewing et al
v. Miller Brewing Co et al. (2006) 2006 CanLII 35628 (ON SC), 83 O.R. (3d) 331 (Ont Sup Ct) at para 39
where emphasis is placed on the policy reasons behind the desire to avoid a
multiplicity of proceedings in considering the forum non conveniens
factors.  OTO argues that this factor should be determinative such that parallel
proceedings in Ontario and Delaware should be avoided along with the
possibility of inconsistent results.  That argument fails to recognize,
however, that there are no parallel proceedings involving the Holders in
Delaware.  The Holders were not party to the APS nor did they agree to be
liable for any misrepresentations contained in the APS.
[31]          
Accordingly, I also find that OTO has failed to satisfy the second part
of the test for forum non conveniens as set out in Van Breda.
[32]          
For the reasons set out above, I
dismiss the defendant’s motion and decline to stay the action by the Holders.
[33]          
At the hearing, the parties both
provided cost outlines to the Court.  The amounts claimed by both parties on a
partial indemnity basis were very similar.
[34]          
Fixing costs is a discretionary
decision under s. 131 of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c
C.43.  In exercising my discretion, I may consider the result in the
proceeding, any offer to settle or to contribute made in writing, and the
factors listed in Rule 57.01.  These factors include but are not limited to:
(i) the result in the proceeding; (ii) the experience of the lawyer for the
party entitled to the costs as well as the rates charged and the hours spent by
that lawyer; (iii) the amount of costs that an unsuccessful party could
reasonably expect to pay in relation to the step in the proceeding for which
costs are being fixed; (iv) the amount claimed and the amount recovered in the
proceeding; (v) the complexity of the proceeding; (vi) the importance of the
issues; and (vii) the conduct of any party that tended to shorten or lengthen
unnecessarily the duration of the proceeding. Rule 57.01(1)(f) provides that
the court may also consider “any other matter relevant to the question of
costs.”
[35]          
In exercising my discretion to fix
costs, I must consider what is fair and reasonable for the unsuccessful party
to pay in this proceeding and balance the compensation of the successful party
with the goal of fostering access to justice: Boucher v Public Accountants
Council (Ontario) (2004), 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R. (3d) 291 (C.A.) at paras. 26 and 37.
[36]          
For these reasons, I fix the costs of
the motion at $20,000, inclusive of disbursements and Harmonized Sales Tax, and
order the defendant to pay that amount to the plaintiffs within 30 days of the
date of this order.