[1]              
This is the determination of the respondent
father’s Form 15 Motion to Change dated September 27, 2021.
[2]              
The respondent seeks to change the child and
spousal support terms of the final order of Olah J. dated August 21, 2019 (the
“Final Order”). The order was made on consent, on the basis of final minutes of
settlement (the “Final Minutes”).
[3]              
The parties were married on September 23, 2000
and separated on April 15, 2018.
[4]              
They have three children: Layten, born February 1, 2002, Jade, born July 1,
2003; and Carly born June 29, 2006. The children are presently 22, 21, and
18 years old.
[5]              
The respondent is a police officer with the
Ontario Provincial Police. He is also licenced to sell real estate and works as
a realtor.
[6]              
The applicant mother has been unemployed since
March 2020.
[7]              
The relevant terms of the Final Order are
paraphrased as follows:
[8]              
The order contains other provisions with respect
to equalization of net family property, the matrimonial home, the parties’
investments, and the respondent’s pension.
[9]              
The Final Order is silent with respect to
relocation.
[10]          
The Final Order is also silent as to when the
child support is to terminate.
[11]          
It is the respondent’s uncontroverted evidence
that he has paid all of the support required under the Final Order and no
arrears are owed.
[12]          
By this motion to change, the respondent seeks
an order:
[13]          
There have been several changes in the parties’
circumstances since the Final Order was made:
[14]          
It is the respondent’s evidence that he
commenced this motion to change because the applicant was resistant to
adjusting child support amounts to the correct Table amount despite providing
his annual tax information. Further, he had no idea that the applicant planned
to relocate to Sudbury to live with her partner, and so this was not taken into
account when negotiating the Final Minutes.
[15]          
The respondent explains why he seeks the relief
that he does, as noted below.
[16]          
The respondent seeks to change the child support
payments to correspond with the parties’ incomes and the changes in the
children’s residence, as well as changes in their status as children of the
marriage.
[17]          
Based on their Notices of Assessment, the
respondent asks that this court find that their incomes are as follows:
[18]          
The respondent disagrees with the applicant’s
child support calculations set out in her affidavit dated May 2, 2024. It is
his position that she has included his real estate commission income in
addition to his T4 earnings from the Ontario Provincial Police, but in doing
so, she has failed to take into account his proper and allowable expense
deductions.
[19]          
The respondent estimates that he spends
approximately $800 per month on fuel for transportation to and from Sudbury and
related travel costs (not accommodation), based on a review of his chequing
account and credit cards. These costs were closer to $300 per month from 2020
to 2022 when Covid 19 restricted travel. Each return trip is just over 600 km.
[20]          
He has calculated the approximate cost of travel
expenses from 2019 onward as follows:
[21]          
It is the respondent’s evidence that the
applicant relocated to Sudbury with little or no conversation about the move or
advance notice to him. This was contrary to the spirit of the Final Order,
which contemplated the parties reside close enough for the siblings to
regularly spend time together on weekends and during all holidays, as well as
have the option of a mid-week family dinner.
[22]          
It is also his evidence that the applicant did
not disclose her intention to move at the time that the Final Minutes were
being negotiated.
[23]          
The applicant has not offered to bear any of the
costs of travel or even to share in the driving.
[24]          
It is the respondent’s evidence that he did not
know that the applicant was planning to move in with her common-law partner and
believes that she intended to do so well before the Final Minutes were signed.
She began to move her items to Sudbury shortly after the Minutes were signed
and before the Final Order was issued on November 18, 2019. She did not
disclose this at the time that the Final Minutes were being negotiated. It is
his position that this represents bad faith on the part of the applicant, who knew
that she would be sharing household expenses and reducing her costs of living,
while the respondent was paying support.
[25]          
The respondent also asserts that the applicant
has remained deliberately unemployed for four years, while being supported by
him and her common-law spouse.
[26]          
The respondent advances an undue hardship claim.
It is his evidence that the spousal and child support payments required under
the Final Order, in addition to the increased costs associated with exercising
his parenting time, have caused him to be in a monthly deficit position. He has
taken out a second mortgage on his property to pay these monthly expenses.
[27]          
The respondent relies on subsection 10(2)(a) of
the Federal Child Support Guidelines: “The spouse has responsibility for
an unusually high level of debts reasonably incurred to support the spouse or
their children prior to the separation or to earn a living.”
[28]          
The respondent also relies on subsection 10(2)(c) of the Guidelines: “The
spouse has unusually high expenses in relation to exercising parenting time
with the child”.
[29]          
Additionally, when the children find themselves
struggling with their finances, or fall short in their ability to pay their
personal expenses, they reach out to him for assistance rather than the
applicant. He has paid money directly to them of approximately $1,500 in 2023
and 2024.
[30]          
The applicant relies on an affidavit dated May
2, 2024. She has not responded to the respondent’s affidavit served on November
8, 2024. The parties and their counsel attended the assignment court held on
November 18, 2024 to address the scheduling of this motion. The endorsement
does not indicate that a request was made by the applicant to extend the time
for serving and filing a responding affidavit. In the result, much of the
respondent’s evidence is uncontested.
[31]          
The applicant resists the request that spousal
support be terminated earlier than set out in the Final Order. The quantum and
duration of spousal support was calculated after taking into consideration the
length of the relationship, the division of property, and the fact that by
including a termination date the respondent was able to avoid the prospect of
paying spousal support for an indefinite period. He also has the benefit of the
spousal support not fluctuating with his income.
[32]          
Mr. Brawn submits that if the spousal support
provisions of the Final Minutes are set aside, his client will be entitled to
renegotiate the support payments based on the increases in the respondent’s
income.
[33]          
The applicant states that the respondent’s
income has risen from the amount imputed to him at the time of the Final Order
to more than $190,000. She has not responded to his allegation that she has
failed to deduct his business expenses. However, in submissions Mr. Brawn
conceded that the respondent’s income numbers should be used by the court.
[34]          
Further, it is her position that Layten did not
graduate with a degree in electrical engineering and begin working full time
until May, 2023, and accordingly child support should not end for him until May
1, 2023. Also, Jade continues to reside with her. She has not responded to the
assertion that Jade is no longer a child of the marriage.
[35]          
It is her position that according to the
financial disclosure made between the parties, as of June 2024 the respondent
owes arrears of child support in the amount of $41,506.
[36]          
The applicant seeks orders stipulating that:
[37]          
The applicant has not addressed her planned move
to Sudbury, or the financial burden that this has imposed on the respondent, in
her affidavit.
[38]          
This is a proceeding to change the Final Order
by ordering that spousal support terminate earlier than set out in the Final
Order. The Motion to Change does not ask for an order setting aside the Final
Minutes on the basis of the bad faith manner in which the agreement was
negotiated, or that its result is unconscionable, pursuant to s. 56(4) of the Family
Law Act. While the respondent was self represented when he began his motion
to change, he has had experienced legal counsel for some time and therefore it
must be assumed that his options to amend the Motion to Change have been
reviewed and evaluated.
[39]          
The Final Order makes it clear that there is
only one circumstance in which spousal support can be varied, which has not
occurred.
[40]          
Accordingly, the terms of the Final Order
govern. The terms related to spousal support are final and cannot be changed.
[41]          
The Motion to Change seeks a retroactive change
back to September 2019 to reflect the parties’ actual incomes. It is noted that
the Final Order was made part way through the year, and accordingly the
respondent’s 2019 income, which fluctuates with overtime and commissions, was
uncertain when the Final Minutes were signed.
[42]          
This court finds that the incomes used to
recalculate the child support are, as conceded, as set out in the chart
attached as Exhibit “D” to the respondent’s affidavit.
[43]          
A proper calculation requires making findings as
to whether Layten and Jade have ceased being children of the marriage, and if
so, when.
[44]          
Under the Divorce Act, a child remains a
child of the marriage provided that,
[45]          
Pursuant to s. 3(2) of the Guidelines, where a
child to whom a child support order relates is the age of majority or over, the
amount of the child support order is,
[46]          
Under the Family Law Act, a dependent,
unmarried child is eligible for support provided that the child,
[47]          
I find that the parties’ eldest child, Layten,
was eligible for child support until he graduated from his educational program.
Accordingly, child support for him would terminate on or prior to May 1, 2023.
[48]          
I find that Jade graduated from her full-time
program of education in May 2024, and accordingly support for her would terminate
on or prior to June 1, 2024.
[49]          
Carly remains a child of the marriage. I also
find on the uncontested facts that she moved to Sudbury effective May 2022,
triggering a new support calculation with no offset.
[50]          
With those findings, the only alteration that I
would make to the chart submitted by the respondent as Exhibit E to his
affidavit is as follows:
[51]          
The respondent’s evidence is that he has paid a
total in combined spousal and child support to November 1, 2024 of $145,923.
This is a total of 63 months. Over that time, he has paid $740 monthly in
spousal support, totalling $46,620. Deducting that amount from the total paid,
he has paid $99,303 in child support.
[52]          
For the 62 months in question, there has been an
underpayment of $29,912 in child support payments made to the applicant.
[53]          
I accept the uncontested evidence of the
respondent that he has travelled twice per month to Sudbury to exercise his
parenting time, other than for periods when Covid restricted more frequent
travel. I also accept that each round-trip is just over 600 km, and the wear
and tear on his vehicle is over 1,200 km per month now that the trips have
become regularized.
[54]          
I also accept the respondent’s uncontested
evidence that the applicant has refused to recognize this additional burden or
share in the transportation costs. This has been increasingly unaffordable for
the respondent with rising gas costs. There is no reason to reject the figure
of $31,900 for travel costs that has been provided by the respondent. Not all
of this is a gas expense; there are additional costs associated with vehicle
use and mileage, expenses related to meals out and miscellaneous expenses that
accompany travel.
[55]          
There is ample evidence that the respondent has
become increasingly in debt, and that the additional costs associated with his
parenting time have contributed to his financial burden.
[56]          
The respondent asks that the applicant be made
to bear all of these costs, both past and going forward.
[57]          
While normally the costs of parenting time are
expected to be borne in some shared manner, the facts of this case compel a
contrary decision. I find the applicant’s move to Sudbury, without consulting
the respondent or obtaining his consent, with next to no notice, was egregious.
It unilaterally interrupted a court ordered parenting regime. It was contrary
to the terms and spirit of the Final Order, which obviously contemplated that
the parties would be close enough that the children could spend time with both
parents in the middle of the week. It created a geographical gulf between the
siblings and reduced the amount of time that they could spend together.
[58]          
The applicant’s relocation occurred before the
2020 reforms to the Divorce Act came into effect. Nonetheless, in a joint custody scenario it is
obvious that such a significant decision should entail much discussion, should
not be made unilaterally and, failing agreement, requires an order from the
court.  The terms of the Final Order that gave the applicant final decision
making authority for the older children did not give her the authority to make
a decision that equally affected Carly’s life in such a significant way.
[59]          
Not surprisingly, Carly eventually decided to
move. The way in which Carly’s move occurred is also disturbing to the court.
Without prior notice or consultation, Carly was removed from her home in Barrie
while the respondent was at work.
[60]          
In contrast, and in the best interests of the
children, the respondent has never missed a support payment and is working at
two careers in order to try to make ends meet. And his financial statement
shows that he is not winning that battle. He is deeply in debt and has had to
obtain a second mortgage. The time spent commuting to Sudbury also affects the
amount of time that the respondent can devote to his real estate career.
[61]          
The applicant has not offered to share these
costs even though she has resided with her common-law partner since July 2020,
sharing living expenses and having the benefit of his earned income of over
$90,000 annually.
[62]          
However, in order to reduce child support
retroactively due to the increased expenses connected with the exercise of
parenting time requires that the court find that there is undue hardship: s.
10(2)(a) of the Guidelines.
[63]          
In ordering child support that is less than the
table amount based on undue hardship, the court must consider the standard of
living of each household. If the respondent has a higher standard of living
than the applicant’s household, his request must be denied: s. 10(3) of the Guidelines. In comparing standards of
living the court may, but is not required to, use the household standard of
living test set out in Schedule II of the Guidelines.
[64]          
The Schedule II calculations were not provided
to the court.
[65]          
An examination of the respondent’s financial
statement indicates that he is overdrawn in every bank account. It indicates
that his total outstanding debt including both mortgages, lines of credit,
outstanding credit card balances and loans total $528,452.65. His assets are
valued at $832,922.93. His monthly expenses are $14,129.
[66]          
The applicant’s monthly expenses are $4,745. She
has investments, savings plans and bank accounts totalling $475,200. She has
borrowed $77,000 for house renovations, even though she does not own a home,
and $5,000 for legal fees. Her partner earns $91,297 annually and contributes
$5,000 per month towards the household expenses.
[67]          
Still, most of these facts are irrelevant, as
the hardship calculation focuses on income, not assets – and in this situation,
the amount of the cost of travel.
[68]          
The respondent has included Divorcemate calculations in his material
for the relevant years. The figures are not likely to represent the respective
households’ standard of living because the net disposable income figures do not
take into account the contribution of $5,000 from the applicant’s partner, and the
calculations use spousal support figures other than the amount in the Final
Order.
[69]          
The onus is on the party asserting undue
hardship to prove his case. This court is not satisfied that he has done so.
[70]          
But that does not end the matter. It is still a
more than fair result to require the applicant to bear the respondent’s
additional travel costs in these circumstances, which are well above what the
respondent could have been contemplating at the time that he signed the Final
Minutes. Her decision alone was the cause of these costs and so she should bear
the consequences of them.
[71]          
I find that the applicant owes a debt to the
respondent of $31,900 as of today. The full amount of retroactive child support
owed to the applicant shall be credited in satisfaction of part of this debt.
The retroactive child support owing to the applicant shall be reduced to nil.
After this credit, there remains $1,988 owing by the applicant to the
respondent, which shall be repaid to him at a rate of $250 per month commencing
December 1, 2024, the last payment being due August 1, 2025 in the amount of
$238.
[72]          
These additional travel costs are anticipated to
continue until Carly is no longer a child of the marriage. However, I have no
information on how long her educational program is expected to take so cannot
project into the future.
[73]          
Going forward, the applicant shall share in the
additional costs required by the this move by driving Carly (and any other of
their children who choose to attend) to Barrie one weekend per month so that
the respondent can have parenting time, until Carly has graduated from a post-secondary
program of education, provided that she remains enrolled on a full-time basis.
[74]          
This court orders:
[75]          
Counsel are to upload their cost outlines and
any offers to settle to Case Centre upon receipt of these Reasons. If any
additional submissions are required by the court, further direction will be
provided to counsel.