[1]              
Police executed a search warrant at the home of
Mohamed Hassan and found a loaded handgun, counterfeit money, and the tools to
make counterfeit money.   Mr. Hassan was charged with three firearms offences, one
breach of a weapons prohibition offence, and three counterfeiting offences.   At
trial, he admitted guilt on the counterfeiting offences, but argued that the
Crown had failed to establish his guilt on the firearms related offences.
[2]              
For reasons set out  in R. v. Hassan, 2023 ONSC 6771, I concluded that the Crown had
established beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Hassan possessed the firearm and
found him guilty of the following offences: Count 1, possession
of a loaded, restricted handgun, Count 2, possession of a restricted firearm, Count
3, possession of a firearm knowing the serial number had been removed, and Count
4, breach of a weapons prohibition order.
[3]              
Given Mr. Hassan’s admissions and the evidence,
I also found him guilty of Count 5, make counterfeit money, Count 6, possession
of counterfeit money, and Count 7, possession of a tool or instrument knowing
that it was used and was intended to be used in making counterfeit money.
[4]              
Mr. Hassan is a Black man.   To assist in
determining an appropriate sentence in his matter, his sentencing hearing was
delayed for some time to allow for the preparation of an Impact of Race and
Culture Assessment (“IRCA”) report.  A detailed report was authored by Dr.
Patrina Duhaney, an approved IRCA assessor in Ontario. The report helpfully documented
socio-cultural information, factors that influenced Mr. Hassan’s involvement
with the law, and made several recommendations to inform sentencing outcomes.
[5]              
The Crown now argues that a global sentence of
four years, minus credit for six months, is fit and proportionate in the
circumstances.[1]  
She submits that this sentence gives proper weight to the primary sentencing
objectives of denunciation and deterrence, while still accounting for the challenges
Mr. Hassan has faced in life as detailed in the IRCA.
[6]              
Defence counsel counters that a conditional
sentence of two years less a day, followed by two years probation is the
appropriate global sentence.  While acknowledging that denunciation and
deterrence are the paramount sentencing objectives, she argues that a
conditional sentence can properly reflect these goals.  Given the many
mitigating factors in this case, including the information set out in the IRCA
and the nearly seven years that Mr. Hassan has been on bail, she argues that a
conditional sentence would be consistent with the fundamental purpose and
principles of sentencing.
[7]              
The circumstances of the offence are set out in
my reasons for judgment.     I do not
intend to repeat the facts in detail.
[8]              
In brief, on January 8, 2018, police executed a search warrant at
Mr. Hassan’s home.  In his bedroom, they found 21 counterfeit $100 bank notes,
a holographic strip simulation of a $100 bill, and a paper cutter.
[9]              
In Mr. Hassan’s bedroom, police also found a locked safe.   
Inside the safe, police found a loaded Ruger P345 .45 auto caliber,
semi-automatic handgun.  There were eight .45 auto cartridges located in the
magazine.  The serial number had been obliterated.   The police also found a
bag of bullets.
[10]          
My understanding of Mr. Hassan’s personal
circumstances was significantly enhanced by the IRCA, as well as numerous support
letters and letters attesting to his involvement in his mosque, counselling,
and the community.   At the sentencing hearing, the Crown took issue with the
information provided, pointing out that there were some discrepancies in the
materials.  With respect to these disputed factors, however, I keep in mind
that pursuant to s. 724(d) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 the
defence does not have to establish them beyond a reasonable doubt; rather, I
must be satisfied on a balance of probabilities of their existence.   In my
view, the issues raised by the Crown were satisfactorily explained by the
defence.   At the end of the day, I am prepared to accept the information
tendered on Mr. Hassan’s behalf.
[11]          
Mr. Hassan was only 22 years old at the time of
the offence.    He is now 29.
[12]          
Mr. Hassan identifies as Somali.  His parents
are both from Ethiopia and came to Canada to seek a better life.  Mr. Hassan
had three older sisters: Deeqa, Hamdi, and Sadia.  Tragically, Sadia died of a
drug overdose in July 2022.
[13]          
Mr. Hassan’s parents separated shortly after he
was born.  His mother raised her four children on her own.    Mr. Hassan’s
father was largely absent from his life.  While he saw his father on “random”
occasions, he never developed a relationship with him.  The author of the IRCA highlighted
the lack of positive Black male role models in Mr. Hassan’s life as a factor
that could have contributed to some of his poor decision making.
[14]          
Mr. Hassan’s mother worked at factories, often
holding down two or three jobs at a time to support her family.  She was frequently
away from home because of her need to make money.   His oldest sister Deeqa
acted as a “substitute mom” to Mr. Hassan.  Despite the best efforts of his
mother, their family struggled financially.
[15]          
Mr. Hassan’s family moved around a lot when he
was younger, and they spent time living in a shelter in Scarborough.   Eventually
they moved to a rented condo in a lower-income neighbourhood marred by crime
and violence.  He told the author of the IRCA that he experienced constant
anxiety as a Black man living in an impoverished neighbourhood with a lot of
community violence.
[16]          
Mr. Hassan reported feeling unsafe in his area
as there were “neighbourhood politics” that at times erupted into violence.    People
from other areas would come to his neighbourhood and fire warning shots.  Mr.
Hassan lived on the ground floor, which he feared put him at higher risk of
being shot.  Once he was almost shot through a window when he was mistaken for
another individual.   On another occasion, someone he knew and grew up with
tried to rob him at gunpoint.   Mr. Hassan told the author of the IRCA that his
experience in his neighbourhood was traumatic, but he did not realize it at the
time as he was “just trying to survive.”   She noted that to survive in their
communities, many Black youth, including Mr. Hassan, must restrict or hide
their emotions and adhere to street culture beliefs such as not showing vulnerability.
[17]          
Mr. Hassan’s neighbourhood also had a strong
police presence.  Mr. Hassan told the author of the IRCA that he witnessed police
violence being used against friends.   He also reported that from an early age,
he was “constantly and consistently” harassed by the police.  The author of the
IRCA explained how exposure to police violence can “elicit a sense of fear,
vulnerability, and helplessness.”  This is often more pronounced in Black individuals
who are “fearful of being racially profiled and discriminated against on a
daily basis.”
[18]          
Mr. Hassan reported experiencing discrimination
and racism during his school years.   He was bullied.  He did not do well
academically, although he excelled at playing soccer and basketball.  Mr.
Hassan left high school when he was 17 because he realized he would not
graduate due to his poor grades.  However, when he was 18, he enrolled in the
Yorkdale Adult Learning Center, and completed his grade 12 education.
[19]          
Mr. Hassan got his first job at the age of 15 or
16, working during the summer at a private basketball gym.  He also did seasonal
work as a general labourer at a construction company when he was about 20.    During
his time on bail, Mr. Hassan did not work regularly, but did occasional
construction work under the table for cash.   Mr. Hassan’s future goal is to
work in construction and join a union.  He has also expressed an interest in
working in the oil fields in Alberta, where some members of his extended family
are employed.
[20]          
Mr. Hassan is a practising Muslim.   When he was
in grade five his mother took him to live in Yemen to learn about his religion.
 He stayed with family members and spent three months in a boarding school
focused on intensive religious instruction.  He remained in Yemen, without his
mother, until grade seven, when he returned to Canada. He told the author of
the IRCA that he gains strength through his connection to his faith, which
allows him to better deal with life’s challenges. Mr. Hassan explained that as
a practicing Muslim he should pray five times a day, but he does not do so
regularly.  Instead, he prays about two times a day, something that he feels
allows him to be closer to Allah.
[21]          
Mr. Abukar Mohamed, a director of the Khalid Bin
Al-Walid Mosque, wrote a letter on Mr. Hassan’s behalf.  Mr. Mohamed reported
that Mr. Hassan is a member of their congregation and that he has known him for
a decade.  In the past Mr. Hassan has volunteered at the mosque.  He noted that
Mr. Hassan has participated in lectures, classes, and programs at the mosque.
[22]          
Mr. Hassan has an extremely close relationship
with his mother and sisters.  They wrote letters of support and spoke to the
author of the IRCA.  It is clear that they deeply love Mr. Hassan and that they
are there to assist him as he tries to move forward from this incident and
become a contributing member of society.
[23]          
Mr. Hassan had a particularly strong bond with his
sister Sadia, as they were close in age.  He experienced extreme grief due to
her unexpected death.    After she died, Mr. Hassan fell into a depression.  He
struggled with feelings of guilt, wondering if he could have done more to help
his sister with her drug issues.   After she died, Mr. Hassan found it
difficult to work and often stayed in his room.   As the author of the IRCA
explained, experiencing the sudden loss of a family member can be one of the
most traumatic occurrences in someone’s life, which is further complicated by
experiences of racial disparities and witnessing police and community violence.
[24]          
Mr. Hassan also has a good relationship with his
extended family.  His aunt Ifrah Abdi wrote a letter in support of Mr. Hassan
and said that she has seen many positive changes in her “beloved nephew” since
his arrest in 2018.  She noted that he has shown a commitment to “becoming a
responsible and upstanding member of the Somali community.”     His older
cousin Shukri Abdi wrote a letter explaining that Mr. Hassan has faced many
challenges in his life, including language barriers, cultural differences, and
financial constraints because he grew up in a household with an immigrant
single mother.  She noted that since 2018, he has tried to distance himself
from his old friend group and instead spend more time with his sisters and at
the mosque.
[25]          
Mr. Hassan also acts as a mentor to his younger
male cousins.  His cousin Hamze Abdi wrote that Mr. Hassan has been a “vital
male figure in my life, providing me with guidance, emotional support and a
sense of stability.”   He explained that Mr. Hassan has been an “influential figure
in my spiritual growth” and has taken him and his younger brother to the
mosque.   Another cousin, Bilal Abdi, wrote that Mr. Hassan has been the only
male figure in his life, and that he has been a “pillar of strength and
guidance.”  When Bilal was bullied in high school, Mr. Hassan helped him
navigate through tough times, and offered unwavering support.  Mr. Hassan has
spent “countless hours” teaching him about Islam and taking him to the mosque.
[26]          
Mr. Hassan has taken some steps to address the
root causes of his criminality by working with Reachout Community, a non-profit
community-based organization.   A letter from the organization advised that Mr.
Hassan underwent counselling and that he enrolled in the Lifeskills and Better You
Program.  The program is an educational and prevention course designed to
assist adults and teens in taking control of changing their behaviour and avoid
reoffending.   Mr. Hassan did two 45-minute phone sessions.  He completed two
other sessions that involved Mr. Hassan completing work sheets.
[27]          
Reachout is also involved in providing yearly
food hampers and toys for children during Christmas, and backpacks filled with
school supplies for their “Back 2 School” events in August.  They also have a
food bank and provide grocery and meals to elderly and physically challenged
clients and families struggling financially.  Mr. Hassan completed 46 hours of
community service with Reachout.   The author of the letter noted that Mr.
Hassan has been “a valuable part of our volunteer driven programs during this
time of food insecurities.”  He assisted in sorting and distribution of meals,
food, and PPE to needy members of the community.
[28]          
Mr. Hassan has a criminal record. In March 2012,
as a youth, he was found guilty of robbery and fail to comply with bail.  He
was sentenced to 45 days of time served, and probation for 12 months, on both
counts, concurrent.   In July 2012, as a youth, he was found guilty of assault,
and received a sentence of nine days time served, and probation for 12
months.   In November 2015, he was convicted of assault and after considering
six months of pre-sentence custody, received a suspended sentence and six
months probation.    In April 2018, he was convicted of possession of
counterfeit money and uttering counterfeit money.  He received a suspended
sentence and 12 months probation.    Mr. Hassan was on bail for these
counterfeiting offences when he was charged with the current offences.
[29]          
With respect to the current offences, Mr. Hassan
spent 15 days in pre-sentence custody.   He has been on bail for almost seven
years.  Of that time, he spent 316 days (10.3 months) on house arrest.   He
spent one year, eight months and 11 days (20.4 months) on a curfew that required
he be home between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.   In July 2020, his bail was varied
to delete the curfew condition.   On August 9, 2024, Mr. Hassan was charged
with dangerous driving, flight from police, possession of property obtained by
crime, and fail to comply and was released on a global bail that once again
included a house arrest condition.
[30]          
   The allegations of the new offences were not
fleshed out in detail before me.  In general, the Crown alleges that Mr. Hassan
was driving a rented Lamborghini (with a passenger) in a dangerous manner, did
not stop for police as required, and when pulled over, the police found $10,000
in the car.   The breach relates to an allegation that he had a debit card
without a name on it, in contravention of a condition prohibiting him from
possessing any identification cards not in his name.   As defence counsel
noted, he is presumed innocent of these charges and Mr. Hassan intends to have
a trial.     Apart from this incident, there is no suggestion that Mr. Hassan
breached the terms of his release order in any way during the almost seven
years he was out on bail.
[31]          
At the conclusion of the sentencing hearing, Mr.
Hassan addressed the court.  He said that his biggest regret in life was having
a gun and bringing it into his family home and community.   He said he was
“deeply sorry and remorseful.”  He noted how his offending had negatively
impacted and disappointed his family.   He acknowledged the seriousness of his
conduct.   He explained how he is trying to move forward on a “new journey in
life” - one that is more meaningful and revolves around his family and
community.    Mr. Hassan highlighted that he is now 29 years old and that he is
not the same 22-year-old man who committed the offences.  Having had the
opportunity to see and hear from Mr. Hassan, I accept that his expression of
remorse is genuine.
[32]          
As noted in R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64,
at para. 58, the “determination of a just and appropriate sentence is a highly
individualized exercise that goes beyond a purely mathematical calculation.  It
involves a variety of factors that are difficult to define with precision.”
[33]          
Section 718 of the Criminal Code provides
that the “fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to
contribute ... to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful
and safe society...”.   This is to be accomplished through the imposition of
just sanctions that have one or more of several objectives enumerated in ss.
718(a) to (f), including denunciation, general and specific deterrence, and
rehabilitation.
[34]          
Section 718.1 sets out the fundamental principle
of sentencing, which is that any sentence imposed “must be proportionate to the
gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.”
[35]          
The Criminal Code lists several other
principles to guide sentencing judges.  The parity principle is set out in s.
718.2(b) and provides that “a sentence should be similar to sentences imposed
on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances.” 
Given the highly individualized sentencing process, however, the sentencing
principle of parity remains secondary to proportionality:  R. v.  Parranto,
2021 SCC 46, at para. 38.   Sentences imposed for offences of the same type
will not always be identical: R. v. Mann, 2010 ONCA 342, at para. 17; Lacasse,
at paras. 53-58.
[36]          
The totality principle is addressed in s. 718.2(c)
of the Criminal Code, which provides that where consecutive sentences
are imposed, the combined sentence should not be unduly long or harsh.    The
totality principle is important in this case, as Mr. Hassan is to be sentenced
for several offences.
[37]          
The restraint principle is reflected in s. 718.2(d)
and provides that an offender should not be deprived of liberty if less
restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances.   Subsection
718.2(e) highlights the particular importance of restraint and requires that “all
available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the
circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community
should be considered for all offenders…”
[38]          
The various sentencing objectives and principles
often compete with one another, in that maximizing the denunciatory or
deterrent effect of the sentence may be contrary to the rehabilitation of the
offender and the principle of restraint, and vice versa.    That said, the
competing objectives and principles must be balanced in a way that respects the
principle of proportionality. Even when denunciation and deterrence are the
paramount sentencing objectives, the sentencing judge retains discretion to
assign significant weight to other factors, such as rehabilitation, in giving
effect to the fundamental principle of proportionality: R. v. Friesen,
2020 SCC 9, at para. 104; R. v. Rayo, 2018 QCCA 824, at paras. 103,
107-8.
[39]          
Pursuant to s. 742.1 of the Criminal Code,
with some exceptions, if a person is convicted of an offence and the court
imposes a sentence of imprisonment of less than two years, the court may impose
a conditional sentence if satisfied that allowing the offender to serve their
sentence in the community does not endanger the safety of the community and is
consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing.
[40]          
Since sentencing is highly individualized, the
determination of a just and appropriate sentence requires the court to assess
the aggravating and mitigating factors related to both the offence and the
offender.  Such an assessment is also mandated by s. 718.2(a) of the Criminal
Code, which states that a sentence should be increased or reduced to
account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to
the offence or the offender.  I turn now to the aggravating and mitigating
factors in the present case.
[41]          
Mr. Hassan has a criminal record.  At the time
of this offence, he had findings of guilt on offences of robbery, fail to
comply with bail, and two counts of assault.   I note that Mr. Hassan received
the suspended sentence for counterfeiting offences in April 2018, after
he had been charged with the current offences.   That is, the counterfeiting
offences I am to sentence him for do not represent “a repetition of an offence
after an offender has been, so to speak, ‘warned’ and ‘put on notice’ by the
imposition of a prior sentence”, which may be viewed more seriously than a
first offence: see Sentencing, eighth edition, Clayton Ruby, Gerald
Chan, Nader Hasan, s. 8.69.
[42]          
That said, at the time Mr. Hassan committed the
offences before the court, he was facing three separate counterfeiting cases,
and was on a global bail for these three offences.  He was clearly breaching
his release order and engaging in the same conduct he was on bail for.   I take
that into consideration as aggravating.
[43]          
With respect to the counterfeit money, he was
not simply in possession, but he was actively involved in making false currency.  
The police discovered counterfeit bills in various stages of production.    He
had a holographic strip, a paper cutter, and a money counter.
[44]          
Mr. Hassan was involved in a relatively
sophisticated counterfeit operation.  He was producing high quality counterfeit
$100 bills.  Police found $2,100 worth of counterfeit bills in Mr. Hassan’s
bedroom.   The quality and quantity of the counterfeit bills Mr. Hassan made
and possessed are aggravating.
[45]          
Mr. Hassan was producing counterfeit bills while
he also had a loaded gun in his safe.
[46]          
Moreover, Mr. Hassan not only had a loaded gun
in his safe, but he also had a bag of bullets.  The serial number of the gun
was also defaced.
[47]          
Mr. Hassan also possessed the gun in
contravention of a weapons prohibition order.  However, I will not consider
this as an aggravating factor.  As explained in R. v. McCue, 2012 ONCA
773, at para. 22, when sentencing an offender for such an offence, the sentencing
judge has two options. First, the judge can take the convictions for breaching
a prohibition order into account as a significant aggravating factor when
fixing the appropriate sentence on the firearms offence, and then impose a concurrent
sentence on the breach of a prohibition order offense.  Second, the judge can
ignore the breach of a prohibition order offence when fixing the appropriate
sentence on the weapons offence and then impose a consecutive sentence on the
breach offence.  I have determined that the proper approach in this case is to
impose a consecutive sentence for the breach of the prohibition order.
[48]          
Mr. Hassan had a trial on the gun charges.  That
is not aggravating but it does mean he is not entitled to the mitigation in sentence
that he would have received if he had pled guilty.
[49]          
In contrast, Mr. Hassan admitted responsibility
for the counterfeiting offences.   He thus saved the court time and resources,
and he is entitled to some mitigation in sentence as a result.
[50]          
Mr. Hassan was only 22 years old at the time of
the offence.  While he is not a first offender, he is youthful.   He has been
on release for almost seven years and apart from the recent allegations there
is no suggestion that he otherwise breached his bail.    This supports that he
has rehabilitative potential.
[51]          
Mr. Hassan has faced many challenges in his
life.  He was raised by a single mother of four, who could not be there for her
children because she had to hold down several jobs at a time to survive.  His
father was absent from his life and Mr. Hassan did not have a positive male role
model.  He grew up in an impoverished neighbourhood, where violence was a
common occurrence.   He encountered racism throughout his life.  The IRCA
eloquently set out how Mr. Hassan’s experiences as a Black youth and man have
impacted him.
[52]          
Mr. Hassan has some employment history.   He got
his first job as a teenager and has been involved in the construction industry. 
The Crown argued that Mr. Hassan’s sparse employment record during his time on
bail belies any suggestion that he has good rehabilitative potential.  But in
my view the context is important in assessing that submission.  Mr. Hassan’s
time on bail was marked by two significant events that affected his ability to
work.  First, the Covid-19 pandemic started in March 2020, and his ability to
work was hampered because of lockdowns.   Second, his sister Sadia died in the
summer of 2022.   Mr. Hassan was profoundly affected by her death and struggled
with depression and processing his grief.    While I agree that he could have
done more with respect to employment, that observation cannot be divorced from
the circumstances Mr. Hassan found himself in.
[53]          
Mr. Hassan has extremely strong family
support.   This is reflected in the numerous support letters authored by his
family members and their comments to the author of the IRCA.   He also had
family members attend every day of his trial and sentencing hearing.  His close
family connections will assist him as he tries to move forward from this
incident.
[54]          
Mr. Hassan’s faith is important to him.  He has
been a part of his mosque for over a decade.  He has attended for classes and
workshops.  While he may not always pray five times a day, or attend the mosque
regularly, I have no doubt that he is a devout Muslim.   Mr. Hassan’s
connection to his religion will also be a positive factor that will help to
ensure that he remains on a pro-social path.
[55]          
Mr. Hassan has also acted as a mentor to his
younger cousins.  He takes them to the mosque and has taught them about their
faith.    He has taken it upon himself to act as a male role model for his
cousins, something that he himself missed growing up.   The care and attention
he has shown to his younger relatives speaks well to his character.
[56]          
Mr. Hassan has done some counselling with
Reachout.   While he has not done a significant amount, and has only undertaken
this work recently, I am unable to dismiss it as simply performative as urged
by the Crown.   That is, I do not find it to be too little, too late.   Instead,
I view it as better late than never.  Given the issues he has faced as a Black
man as set out in the IRCA, his modest steps to grapple with issues is something
to be encouraged and I consider his efforts to be mitigating.
[57]          
Similarly, he has taken steps to give back to
the community. He has put in 46 volunteer hours.  Again, his volunteer work was
only undertaken recently.   But in my view, despite the late start of his
volunteer activity, it does show that Mr. Hassan has the potential to be a
contributing member of society and highlights that he has rehabilitative
potential.
[58]          
Mr. Hassan has shown some insight into his
offending.  He displayed sincere remorse for his crimes.  While the mitigating
impact of his expression of remorse is lessened in that it only came after his
trial on the gun offences, I accept that he is sorry for his actions.
[59]          
I turn now to my analysis as to what a fit and
proportionate sentence would be in this case.
[60]          
Gun-related crime poses a grave danger to all
Canadians and calls for significant sentences: R. v. Nur, 2015 SCC 15,
at para. 1.    More locally, the “possession and use of illegal handguns in the
Greater Toronto Area is a cause for major concern in the community and must be
addressed” in the “strongest possible terms”: R. v. Danvers, 2005 CanLII 30044 (ON CA), [2005] O.J.
No 3532 (C.A.), at para. 78.   Guns are designed to maim and kill.  The
possession of firearms must be condemned. The message must be sent through the
imposition of exemplary sentences.
[61]          
 As explained in Nur, at para. 82, the
offence of possession of a loaded restricted handgun casts a net over a wide
range of potential conduct.   At the least serious end of the spectrum is the
otherwise law-abiding gun owner who mistakenly stores their gun, with
ammunition close by, in the wrong place.   At the other end of the spectrum is the
“outlaw who carries a loaded prohibited or restricted firearm in public places
as a tool of his or her criminal trade.”   A three-year sentence may well be
appropriate for such an offender.
[62]          
There are also cases that fall in the middle of
the spectrum, where the conduct at issue is less serious and poses less danger.
  In such cases, a three-year sentence may be disproportionate, though not
grossly so
[63]          
In R. v. Stewart, 2022 ONSC 6997, at
para. 80, Copeland J. (as she then was) concluded that the sentence for a young
first offender for a handgun possession offence, where there is no evidence of
other criminality such as drug trafficking, ranges from an upper reformatory sentence
(including conditional sentences) to three years.    As highlighted by defence
counsel, there have been several cases where a conditional sentence was deemed
to be a fit sentence for a particular offender who illegally possessed a loaded
handgun: see for example, R. v. Morris, 2021 ONCA 680, at paras. 124-28;
180-81; R. v. Desmond-Robinson, 2022 ONCA 369, at para. 18; R. v.
Mohamed, 2020 ONCA 163; R. v. Hassan, 2017 ONSC 4570; R. v. Lewis,
2022 ONSC 1260; R. v. Goodridge, 2022 ONCJ 139; R. v. Stewart, 2024
ONSC 281; R. v. Edwards, 2023 ONCJ 53; R. v. Roberts, 2023 ONCJ
226; R. v. Jeffery, 2022 ONSC 3828; R. v. Moses, 2022 ONSC 332; and
R. v. Beharry, 2022 ONSC 4370.
[64]          
However, there are significant differentiating
features between Mr. Hassan’s matter and many of the cases relied upon by the
defence.   He was not suffering from mental health issues: in contrast see R.
v. Fabbro, 2021 ONCA 494.  His Charter rights were not violated by
the police: in contrast see R. v. Collins, 2023 ONSC 5768.    He did not
plead guilty to the firearms offences:  in contrast see R. v. Warsame,
2022 ONSC 424; R. v. Yogo, 2023 ONSC 4144; R. v. Burke-Whittaker,
2024 ONSC 2906; and Collins.  Moreover, most of the cases relied upon by
the defence involved youthful first offenders.  While Mr. Hassan was youthful
at the time of the offence, he was not a first offender.   He had previous
findings of guilt for robbery, breach of probation and two counts of assault.
[65]          
Mr. Hassan did not have his gun out in public.  
This helped to reduce any immediate danger to the public.   I also have no
evidence that he used the gun as an “outlaw” to further his “criminal trade”.  
  On the other hand, Mr. Hassan offered no evidence or explanation as to why he
had a loaded handgun in his possession: R. v. Ellis, 2013 ONSC 3092, at
para. 23, aff’d 2016 ONCA 598, at para. 80.    While I cannot find beyond a
reasonable doubt that Mr. Hassan used his gun to facilitate his counterfeiting
offences, the fact remains that Mr. Hassan possessed the loaded handgun at the
same time he was committing his counterfeiting offences.  That is, his
offending was not isolated.   And he illegally possessed a loaded handgun while
on bail.
[66]          
 Considering the aggravating factors, I have determined
that the conditional sentence sought by the defence would fail to give
sufficient weight to the paramount sentencing objectives of denunciation and
deterrence.
[67]          
Yet, I also keep in mind the challenges Mr.
Hassan faced as set out in the IRCA.   As a Black youth growing up in an
impoverished neighbourhood, he was exposed to violence and dysfunction. He
lacked a male role model, experienced racial discrimination, and had reduced
opportunities.   Despite his challenges, Mr. Hassan has shown that he has
rehabilitative potential.  While he could have done more to turn his life
around since he was charged, he was also grappling with the death of his
sister.  He has taken some nascent steps to address his offending behaviours. 
He has shown insight and remorse.
[68]          
Looking at the totality of the circumstances, I
find that the three-year sentence proposed by the Crown does not give sufficient
weight to the sentencing objective of rehabilitation and the principle of
restraint.
[69]          
Balancing the aggravating and mitigating factors
and the relevant sentencing objectives and principles, I find that a fit and
proportionate sentence on the possession of a loaded firearm offence, before
taking into consideration any pre-sentence credit, is two years and eight
months. (32 months).
[70]          
There is no dispute that Mr. Hassan should
receive credit for his time on bail.   As the Court of
Appeal stated in R. v. Downes, 2006 CanLII 3957 (ON CA), [2006] O.J. No. 555 (C.A.), at para. 37,
stringent bail conditions, especially house arrest, represent an infringement
on liberty and are a relevant mitigating factor in sentencing.    The Crown and
defence are not far apart in the credit they submit Mr. Hassan should received
for his time on bail.  The Crown argues that six months is warranted, whereas
the defence asks me to credit Mr. Hassan with eight months.   In my view,
something in between the two positions is appropriate.   I am prepared to
credit Mr. Hassan with just over seven months for his time on bail.    Mr. Hassan should also receive credit for 15 days pre-sentence
custody, calculated on a 1.5:1 basis, for the equivalent of 23 days.
[71]          
Thus, the total credit for time spent on bail
and actual pre-sentence custody will be eight months.  That will be applied to Count
1, the possession of the loaded restricted handgun, leaving a remaining
sentence on that count of two years (24 months).
[72]          
Mr. Hassan will receive a one-year concurrent
sentence on Count 2, the possession of a restricted firearm.  He will also
receive a one-year concurrent sentence on Count 3, the possession of a firearm
with the serial number obliterated.
[73]          
I turn now to what I view as a fit and
proportionate sentence for the offence of breach of a weapons prohibition
order.
[74]          
Breaching a firearms prohibition order is a
serious offence.    Along with denunciation and general deterrence, specific
deterrence is an important sentencing objective in this case.  Mr. Hassan must
get the message that he must abide by court orders and that breaching a
firearms prohibition order will attract a significant sentence.    In all of
the circumstances, I find that six months is a fit and proportionate sentence.
[75]          
The six-month sentence will be consecutive to
Count 1, the possession of a loaded firearm offence.   As noted in R. v.
Claros, 2019 ONCA 626, at para. 51, this type of breach should be served
consecutively to ensure that disregard of firearm prohibition orders, imposed
in the interest of public safety, does not go unpunished.   Making the sentence
consecutive also recognizes the fact that the breach of a prohibition order is
different behaviour than the associate offences, engaging different social
interests.
[76]          
Counterfeiting is not a victimless crime.   As
McMahon J. stressed in R. v. Ijam (2 October 2006) unreported; aff’d
2007 ONCA 597, at para. 20:
[77]          
Here, there are several aggravating factors. 
Mr. Hassan was not just in possession of the finished product, rather he manufactured
the fake currency.  The police found bills in various stages of production.  He
had the tools of the trade, including a holographic strip and a paper cutter.  
He produced high quality counterfeit $100 bills.   He possessed $2,100 in
counterfeit money.  At the time of this offence, he was on a global bail for
three counterfeiting offences.    Given these aggravating features, I have
concluded that the conditional sentence sought by the defence would fail to
give sufficient weight to the principles of denunciation and deterrence.
[78]          
On the other hand, Mr. Hassan was only 22 at the
time of this offence.  While not a first offender, he was clearly youthful.   I
take into consideration his experiences as a young Black man, who grew up in a
poor neighbourhood marred by crime and violence.  The challenges Mr. Hassan has
encountered as set out in the IRCA attenuate his moral blameworthiness.  He
also has strong family support, insight into his offending, and good
rehabilitative potential.
[79]          
Moreover, and of import, Mr. Hassan admitted
responsibility for the counterfeiting offences at the outset of the trial.   By
relieving the Crown of its obligation of prove these counts, Mr. Hassan saved
the court time and resources.  His sentence should be mitigated as a result.   In
my view, the six months sought by the Crown on this count does not properly
reflect the mitigating factors in this case.
[80]          
Looking at all of the factors, I conclude that four
months is a fit and proportionate sentence for the make counterfeiting offence.
[81]          
Defence counsel argues that the sentence on this
offence should be concurrent to the firearms offences.  I am unable to accept
this argument.  A concurrent sentence would denigrate the significance of the counterfeiting
charge and suggest that it is not in and of itself worthy of punishment: McCue,
at para. 20.    I have also considered the principle of totality and find that
imposing a consecutive sentence would not lead to an unduly harsh sentence.  As
a result, the four-month sentence will be consecutive to Count 1.
[82]          
For the remaining two counterfeiting offences,
Mr. Hassan will receive two months on each count, concurrent to the make counterfeiting
count.
[83]          
In conclusion, the global sentence before
granting any credit, is three and a half years (42 months).   After granting
eight months credit for the time in pre-sentence custody and time on bail, Mr.
Hassan will receive a remaining global sentence of two years and 10 months (34
months).
[84]          
The sentence should be structured as follows:
[85]          
Possession of a loaded prohibited firearm is a
primary designated offence.  As a result, pursuant to s. 487.051(1) of the Criminal
Code, I make an order authorizing the taking of
samples from Mr. Hassan for the purpose of DNA testing.
[86]          
A mandatory weapons prohibition order is also
required.   Pursuant to ss. 109(2)(b) and 109(3) of the Criminal Code,
Mr. Hassan is prohibited from possessing any firearm, crossbow, restricted
weapon, ammunition, explosive substance, any prohibited firearm, restricted
firearm, prohibited weapon, prohibited device, and prohibited ammunition for
life.
[87]          
Pursuant to s. 490.1 of the Criminal Code, and
on consent, I order that the following be forfeited as offence-related
property:
[88]          
Further, pursuant to s. 491 of the Criminal
Code, and on consent, I am ordering that the following be forfeited:
[89]          
Given that Mr. Hassan will be serving a
penitentiary sentence defence counsel asks me to waive the victim surcharge.  
In considering the request, I take into consideration that because Mr. Hassan
will be incarcerated, his opportunity to work will be limited.  Moreover, when
he is done serving his sentence, he will need time to reintegrate himself back
into society.  His family also has financial difficulties.   As a result, I am
prepared to waive the victim surcharge as posing an undue hardship.