[1]              
On May 6, 2024, following a four-day judge-alone trial, I convicted
Wasitt Izaz of three firearm-related offences:
[2]              
My reasons for judgment are reported at R. v. Izaz, 2024 ONSC 2651.
[3]              
The circumstances of the offences are that in the late evening hours of
April 24, 2021, Mr. Izaz was the driver of a vehicle with six occupants. At
about 12:48 a.m. on April 25, 2021, the vehicle stopped outside the Oakdale
Community Centre on Grandravine Drive in Toronto. Mr. Izaz remained at the
wheel. Two other occupants got out. Each had a loaded handgun. They shot 18
bullets at two men walking in front of the community centre. Miraculously, no
one was killed. One victim, Darron Mitchell, suffered three bullet wounds to
his leg. The other, Emron Wilson, escaped injury by jumping into bushes. The
shooters got back in the car which sped off. About five minutes later, the
police stopped the vehicle at gunpoint and arrested the six occupants. Police
found one handgun in the front glove compartment of the vehicle, and the other
near the right rear passenger door. Mr. Izaz was charged with several
firearm-related offences.
[4]              
In my reasons, I found objective evidence that the get-away car was
limited in speed and noisy. I accepted that it was reasonably possible that Mr.
Izaz, who had an interest in cars, was duped into being the driver by the
occupants who planned and executed the shooting. I could not say whether the
planning for the shooting was days, hours, minutes or seconds in advance of it
occurring, but I found it reasonable to infer that, if the shooting was planned
in advance of the evening it happened, the perpetrators would not have chosen a
get-away car that was limited in speed and noisy, or one with distinctive yellow
fog lights that would make the car easily identifiable. For reasons that were
not clear, Mr. Izaz ended up being the driver when the shooting occurred.
[5]              
Mr. Izaz testified at trial. I found it a reasonable possibility that,
even though Mr. Izaz was driving the vehicle up and down Grandravine Drive for
more than half an hour before the shooting, he did not know that the occupants
had guns that they intended to discharge. Mr. Izaz testified that when he first
approached the subject vehicle in an empty parking lot sometime after 9 p.m.,
there were already five people in the car, three of whom he had never met. I
accepted that it was dark, the occupants wore baggy clothing,  and that the two
shooters were not displaying their firearms.
[6]              
I was skeptical of Mr. Izaz’s limited description of the conversation in
the car prior to the shooting, but I found it a reasonable possibility that the
shooters communicated in code and that, even if Mr. Izaz physically heard what
they said, he did not understand that the shooters had guns that they intended
to discharge that night. There was no evidence of Mr. Izaz’s prior association
or communication with the shooters, or evidence he was associated with gang
activity, or that he heard of or knew the victims in any way. Ultimately, I was
left with a reasonable doubt that Mr. Izaz knew, before the shooting, that the
shooters had guns that they intended to discharge.
[7]              
I also had a reasonable doubt that he knew, both before and after the
shooting, about the gun that was found near the rear right passenger door.
However, I was convinced beyond a reasonable doubt that, after the shooting,
Mr. Izaz knew about the gun (Glock Model 21) that was found in the front glove
compartment of the vehicle. Since police intercepted the car within five
minutes of the shooting, the sentencing for firearm possession raises the
following question: what is the appropriate sentence for a young, first-time
offender who had constructive possession of a firearm in the vehicle that he
drove for about five minutes?
[8]              
For the reasons that follow, I find that a conditional sentence of two
years less a day to be served in the community, with two years of probation, is
appropriate. Certain ancillary orders should also be imposed.
[9]              
There was a debate over the admissibility of the Victim Impact Statements
provided by Mr. Mitchell, the victim who was shot in the leg, and Mr.
Mitchell’s mother.
[10]          
Defence counsel argued that the letters should not be admitted since Mr.
Izaz was convicted of gun possession and not being one of the shooters.
Moreover, since Mr. Izaz was found to have no foreknowledge of the shooting,
the Defence argued that Mr. Mitchell is not a direct victim of Mr. Izaz’s
offences. Rather, society at large is the victim when the offence is firearm
possession.
[11]          
Crown counsel disagreed and submitted that the Victim Impact Statements focus
on the impact from Mr. Izaz driving away from the crime scene after Mr.
Mitchell was shot. Moreover, the definition of “victim” in section 2 of the Criminal
Code is broadly defined:
[12]          
Further, s. 722(8) of the Criminal
Code makes it clear that a sentencing judge shall
take into account the portions of the statement that the judge considers
relevant and disregard any other portion.
[13]          
I agree with the Crown’s position and find that the two Victim Impact Statements
are admissible. Having said that, I note that the Victim Impact Statements hold
Mr. Izaz responsible for all the consequences that have befallen Mr. Mitchell
and his family since the shooting. These consequences include the difficult
financial circumstances that Mr. Mitchell and his family have faced. It is
understandable why Mr. Mitchell and his mother feel this way, but it does not
follow that Mr. Izaz’s criminal conduct is responsible for all of the impact on
Mr. Mitchell and his family. Without diminishing the voice of a victim in the
sentencing process, it is important to remember that sentencing hearings are
not tripartite proceedings, rather they are a proceeding between society, as
represented by the Crown, and a convicted person: R. v. Bremner, 2000
BCCA 345, at para. 26, citing R. v. Gabriel, 1999 CanLII 15050.
[14]          
A Pre-Sentence Report (PSR) was prepared by Radika Koneswaran, a
Probation and Parole (P&P) Officer.
[15]          
Mr. Izaz has no prior criminal record.
[16]          
The PSR indicates that Mr. Izaz, now 21, was born in Dhaka, Bangladesh
in February 2003. He arrived in Canada in August 2004 with his parents. His
parents were married but separated when he was 12 years old. He has two younger
sisters who are enrolled in middle and high school. His father works for the
TTC but is currently on medical leave because of back pain. His mother is
presently enrolled in nursing school. Mr. Izaz noted that no one else in his
family has a criminal record. He stated that his grandfather on his father’s
side is a retired Supreme Court judge in Bangladesh.
[17]          
Mr. Izaz reported that he was raised in a good stable home without any
major trauma or neglect. He was never exposed to any substance abuse.
[18]          
Mr. Izaz’s parents pointed to the traumatic effect that their separation
had on Mr. Izaz. His father reported that the mother took the children to a
shelter in 2009 and 2015.
[19]          
Mr. Izaz was initially raised in an apartment and then, in 2012, moved
to a house that his father purchased. He then moved around quite a bit—to “three
separate addresses”—with his mother before settling down in a three-bedroom
apartment. After a year, in the summer of grade 7, he moved back in with his
father, sharing a condo with his siblings. Several moves followed, and his
father and the three children now reside in a five-bedroom home in Scarborough
as of April 2024. Mr. Izaz does not think he was influenced so much by the
various communities where he lived, as much as the instability caused by his
frequent moves.
[20]          
Mr. Izaz reported having a close relationship with his mother. In
describing his relationship with his father, he stated that his father would be
working all day; he barely saw him, but did see him every Sunday. His time
together with his father meant a lot. His father did what he could with the
time that he had and made sacrifices for the children. Mr. Izaz has mostly
lived with his father since his parents’ separation, but nowadays his
interactions with his mother are more frequent.
[21]          
Mr. Izaz has had two serious relationships: one in high school between
the ages of 14 and 17, and a later one, during the time of the criminal
proceedings, when he was between 18 and 20. At the time of the PSR, he was
single, without children.
[22]          
The PSR noted that Mr. Izaz is no longer friends with his co-accused.
Nowadays, he has three close friends: a business partner, and two friends from
high school.
[23]          
In high school, Mr. Izaz reported taking part in every team sport
offered. In August 2023, he suffered an ACL tear, a sporting ailment that
limits his ability to play sports.
[24]          
Mr. Izaz graduated from high school in 2024. He graduated with an 82%
average. He was recently admitted into a four-year Bachelor of Arts program in
criminal justice and public policy at the University of Guelph. I understand
that he commenced this program in September 2024.
[25]          
In terms of employment, Mr. Izaz’s first paid position was at the age of
18 at a warehouse for one month. After various short-term positions, he started
his own business, a luxury mobile car cleaning company, in April 2023. He has a
business partner. He has no assets. At the time of the PSR, no confirmation of
Mr. Izaz actually operating this business had been provided.
[26]          
As regards his future ambitions, Mr. Izaz stated that he wants to be a
criminal trial lawyer and a businessman.
[27]          
Mr. Izaz denied any dependency on alcohol or drugs.
[28]          
The PSR noted that Mr. Izaz presented as cooperative, respectful, and
engaged, answering most questions in a forthcoming manner. His attitude towards
the offences was described as “the worst day I’ve experienced of my life.” He
stated that, “it ruined my life, every single day I have to live with it.” He
is thankful that the shooting victim is healthy. He is extremely remorseful. He
did not think there was any reason for people to have firearms, unless you have
a gun license, and he drew a distinction with the situation in the United
States.
[29]          
Mr. Izaz denied any gang affiliation and said that he was not concerned
for his personal safety.
[30]          
While Mr. Izaz stated that he felt discriminated against and felt
various stereotypes, but only until grade 3; then it became normalized, and he
felt it was nothing out of the ordinary. He indicated that he did not have any
negative experiences with the police. Mr. Izaz’s father could not recall any
racism to which Mr. Izaz had been subjected.
[31]          
Mr. Izaz does not report any mental health issues. His father recalled
taking him to a psychiatrist when he was 13 to address any childhood trauma and
there was no diagnosis.
[32]          
The PSR concluded that Mr. Izaz has some insight into his behaviour and
does appear to express regret for what occurred. He needs to address several
concerns, including those who he associates with as well as reflecting on the
potential danger of firearms.
[33]          
The Crown seeks a three-year (36-month) sentence for Mr. Izaz.
[34]          
Additionally, the Crown seeks:
[35]          
The Crown presented several authorities that suggest a custodial
sentence of between 36 and 42 months is appropriate in the circumstances of
this case.
[36]          
The Crown submits that, after the shooting at the Community Centre, Mr.
Izaz continued to drive through a Toronto neighbourhood for another 2.1 to 2.4 kilometres
knowing that he was doing so with a loaded, prohibited weapon and the shooters
in the car. His decision to continue driving posed a significant risk to the
public. Mr. Izaz would have continued driving but for the police take down, though
for how much longer can never be known.
[37]          
The Crown acknowledges that, in terms of mitigating factors, Mr. Izaz is
a young, first-time offender. However, appellate courts have repeatedly
emphasized that denunciation and deterrence are the key sentencing principles
to deter offenders from possessing illegal firearms.
[38]          
The Defence submits that the appropriate sentence for Mr. Izaz is a
conditional sentence of 18 months to be served in the community.
[39]          
The Defence does not take issue with the ancillary orders requested by
the Crown.
[40]          
The Defence submits that Mr. Izaz has strong rehabilitative potential. He
is a young, first-time offender. He has been admitted to the University of
Guelph. He has expressed remorse for his actions. While his criminal conduct
cannot be likened to a regulatory breach, it is not as if Mr. Izaz possessed
the firearm found in the glove compartment as a tool of his criminal trade.
That the firearm was brought into the vehicle by someone else, presumably one
of the shooters, diminishes Mr. Izaz’s moral culpability. His possession of the
firearm lasted for only about 5 minutes.
[41]          
The Defence presented its own set of cases in support of its request for
an 18-month conditional sentence.
[42]          
I agree with the comments of Stribopoulos J. in R. v. Barreira,
2024 ONSC 4682 concerning the appropriate range of sentences for firearms
offences:
[43]          
In R. v. George, 2024 ONSC 6016, Penman J. also commented on the
appropriate sentence for loaded firearm possession offences for well-situated
first-time offenders:
[44]          
Some of the above caselaw was well summarized by Himel J. in R. v. Papilota, 2024
ONSC 4065:
[45]          
On the facts in Papilota, the accused pleaded guilty to charges
of possession of a non-restricted firearm while knowingly not being the holder
of a licence permitting such possession. He was sentenced to two years less a
day served as a conditional sentence, and two years of probation. The accused,
a first-time offender with strong rehabilitative potential, had possession of
an unloaded shotgun and a loaded Glock 17 in his home.
[46]          
In R. v. Desmond-Robinson, 2022 ONCA 369, the Ontario Court of
Appeal held that a sentence of two years less a day served in the community as
a conditional sentence followed by two years of probation for a firearm offence
was appropriate for an offender with no criminal record who had made a terrible
error in judgment.
[47]          
I also find the case of R. v. Bajraktari, 2024 ONSC 4536, which
has several factual similarities with Mr. Izaz’s case, to be instructive. Mr.
Bajraktari was a back-seated passenger in a Nissan parked in front of an
Ultramar gas station store. The police detained Mr. Bajraktari for an
investigation into potential Liquor Licence Act violations
after finding an open bottle of wine in the front passenger footwell. After
removing Mr. Bajraktari from the vehicle, police located a Glock 45 handgun
loaded with 27 rounds of 9 mm bullets in a satchel located at Mr. Bajraktari’s
feet. Mr. Bajraktari was 21 years old at the time of
sentencing. At the time of the offence, he had just turned 19. He had no
criminal record but had some outstanding new charges. He was born in Italy to
Albanian parents. He had two older brothers and, at age seven, his parents
divorced.
[48]          
Unlike Mr. Izaz, Mr. Bajraktari recalled an
unhappy childhood due to conflict between his parents. His father was
eventually diagnosed with schizophrenia and his mother became the sole
breadwinner as a chef. Sugunasiri J. sentenced Mr. Bajraktari to a sentence of two years less a day to be served in the
community.
[49]          
The aggravating factors are that Mr. Izaz possessed the loaded,
prohibited firearm in a moving vehicle with five other individuals as it fled
from the scene of a brazen shooting. The shooters and the firearm that he was
aware of were in the car for at least five minutes before police intercepted
the vehicle at gunpoint. The risk level to the public and occupants of the car
was high.
[50]          
The mitigating factors are that Mr. Izaz had just turned 18 at the time
of his criminal conduct. He has no prior criminal record and he constructively
possessed the firearm for five minutes. He has expressed remorse and appears to
have recognized the gravity and danger of his offences. Notwithstanding the
separation of his parents, he has a close relationship with each of them.
[51]          
He has strong rehabilitative potential. He did well academically in high
school and has been admitted to the University of Guelph. At least on paper, he
has started a car detailing business and has a group of supportive friends.
There are no alcohol or drug dependency issues and his mental health appears sound.
[52]          
I am guided by the principles of sentencing that are
set out in ss. 718, 718.1, and 718.2 of the Criminal Code. The sentence
must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and degree of
responsibility of the offender. An appropriate sentence is one that reflects a
realistic appraisal of the offender’s prospects for rehabilitation, his
individual and family circumstances, and the principle of restraint.
[53]          
I find that a conditional sentence of two years less a day to be served
in the community is just for the following reasons.
[54]          
Mr. Izaz falls into that category of well-situated first-time offenders
where the very low end of the sentencing range of two years less a day is
appropriate. Such sentences are available even in the absence of the offender
pleading guilty: see, for example, Bajraktari; R. v. Beharry, 2022
ONSC 4370; R. v. Stewart, 2022 ONSC 6997.
[55]          
Mr. Izaz was barely an adult when he committed his offences and the
duration of his firearm possession lasted five minutes. It is tempting to
suggest that he may have continued to drive around for hours longer, but that
is speculation.
[56]          
On the unique facts of this case, notwithstanding the fact that the
firearm that Mr. Izaz constructively possessed was associated with a serious
crime – the shooting of two victims – I cannot say that Mr. Izaz used the firearm
as a tool to commit some other crime. Further, Mr. Izaz was not responsible for
bringing the firearm into the vehicle. These facts reduce the degree of moral culpability
within the spectrum of firearm possession charges.
[57]          
Mr. Izaz is of South Asian origin. He experienced some discrimination
growing up, but I do not place him in the same category as Black Canadian
offenders (R. v. Morris, 2021 ONCA 680, 159 O.R. (3d) 641).
[58]          
It bears repeating that Mr. Izaz is a youthful first offender with family
support and strong rehabilitative potential: R. v. E.N., 2024 ONCA 472,
at para. 18. The principle of restraint serves to minimize a youthful first
offender’s sentence in that it requires a sentencing judge to consider all
sanctions apart from incarceration and where incarceration is required, make
the sentence as short as possible and tailor it to the individual circumstances
of the offender: R. v Desir, 2021 ONCA 486, at para. 41, citing R. v.
Batisse, 2009 ONCA 114, R. v. Priest, 1996 CanLII 1382.
[59]          
Having decided that a sentence in the reformatory range is a fit one, I
turn to whether Mr. Izaz should serve this sentence in the community.
[60]          
First, under s. 742.1 of the Criminal Code the
court may impose a jail sentence of less than two years to be served in the
community if the offence is not one on the excluded list of offences and does
not have an attached minimum sentence.
[61]          
Mr. Izaz’s offences fit those criteria, and so a conditional sentence is
available.
[62]          
 Second, a conditional
sentence must not endanger the safety of the community and it must be
consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing as set out
in ss. 718 to 718.2.
[63]          
Regarding conditional sentences and the fundamental purpose of
sentencing, the Supreme Court in R. v. Proulx, 2000 SCC 5, [2000]
1 S.C.R. 61, at para. 22, stated:
[64]          
I do not find that Mr. Izaz serving his sentence in the community will
endanger its safety and I find that such a sentence remains consistent with the
fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing.
[65]          
Mr. Izaz served 17 days of pre-sentence custody from April 25 to May 11,
2021. He is entitled to 26 days of Summers credit.
[66]          
He was then on house arrest with ankle monitoring from May 11, 2021 to
March 8, 2023. The Defence submits that since Mr. Izaz spent 22 months under
full house arrest and his bail conditions were very restrictive, he should
receive a Downes credit based on a ratio of 1 day credit for every 4
days under house arrest.
[67]          
I adopt the comments of Schreck J. in Beharry:
[68]          
In this case, I have considered the time Mr. Izaz spent subject to
restrictive bail conditions, but I do not intend to assign a specific amount to
it. I exercise my discretion and have considered this factor in fashioning the
overall sentence.
[69]          
In conclusion, Mr. Izaz is sentenced to:
[70]          
Accordingly, I impose an effective sentence of imprisonment of two years
less one day to be served in the community as a conditional sentence. I
recognize that Mr. Izaz served 17 days in custody and he is credited with 26
days in accordance with s. 719(3.1) of the Criminal Code and R.
v. Summers, 2014 SCC 26, [2014] S.C.R. 575.
[71]          
The sentence of two years less 27 days served as a conditional sentence
shall have the following terms: in addition to the statutory conditions in s.
742.3 which I impose, Mr. Izaz shall reside at [redacted] Kennedy Road in
Scarborough, Toronto with his father or at such address as approved by his
supervisor. He shall be under house arrest for the first twelve months of the
conditional sentence and shall only leave the house for the purpose of work, to
attend school, or attend at appointments with his supervisor, to attend
counselling, to attend medical appointments for himself or members of his
immediate household, to obtain necessities once each week for four hours and
for any other reason that his supervisor approves. In any event, during
the period of house arrest, he shall be in the house between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. each day for seven days each week.
[72]          
 For the remaining months of
the conditional sentence, he shall be permitted to leave his residence, but he
shall be subject to a curfew between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. each
day for seven days each week. The only exceptions are for medical
emergencies for himself or a member of his household or with the prior approval
of his supervisor. During the entire period of the conditional sentence,
he shall attend counselling, educational training or work as directed by his
supervisor and sign any necessary releases; he shall abstain from owning,
possessing, or carrying a weapon and he shall not apply for or possess a
firearm acquisition certificate or gun licence.
[73]          
I have signed an Adult Conditional Sentence Order (CSO) that specifies
the terms of Mr. Izaz’s conditional sentence. In the event of any inconsistency
between these Reasons for Sentence and the CSO, the CSO prevails.
[74]          
Following this period of confinement, Mr. Izaz will be on probation for
two years. In addition to the statutory conditions, he shall report to his
probation officer forthwith following the conclusion of the conditional
sentence and as often as the probation officer deems necessary; he shall reside
at an address approved by his probation officer, he shall maintain employment
or attend school and provide proof thereof to his probation officer, he shall
abstain from owning or possessing any weapon and he shall attend and
participate in any counselling and/or treatment as directed by his probation
officer and sign any necessary releases.
[75]          
I also order that Mr. Izaz be subject to: