[1]         
During the trial of
this matter, the accused made separate mid-trial applications concerning the
admission of certain evidence as part of the Crown’s case.  These were argued
over several days. I gave oral rulings which excluded certain text
message evidence between Ms. Rose-Podnar and Mr. Lozoomi from the trial.  In
addition, I made an oral ruling that a Crown witness should not expressly refer
to the fact of timing and number of cell phone calls made between Dennis Crupi
and Mr. Parr, and by Dennis Crupi to Ms. Rose-Podnar, for the period of January
13, 2019, at 15:32 until January 14, 2019, at 00:18. I advised that written
reasons would follow for those decisions.  The trial has now concluded.  I see
it as most efficient to combine my reasons for both decisions in one judgment.  Here
are my written reasons for those decisions.
[2]         
Very close to midnight
on January 12, 2019, the body of Samatar Warsame was discovered on the shoulder
of Highway 527 in the Municipality of Shuniah, near Thunder Bay.  Mr. Warsame
had been shot three times in the head.  His body was found with one of his wrists
tied up with a green ethernet cable and another CAT 5-like white cable wrapped
loosely around his legs. It appears he was bound at the time he was shot. The
police were alerted to the presence of Mr. Warsame’s body in the first few
minutes of January 13, 2019. A murder investigation was immediately commenced
by the Ontario Provincial Police.
[3]         
The coroner who did the
autopsy on Mr. Warsame opined that he was alive immediately before he was
killed by the three gunshots.  Several individuals were subsequently arrested
and charged with first degree murder, including Stephan Parr, Amy Rose Podnar,
and Kaveh Lozoomi-Gamroodi (“Mr. Lozoomi”).  The indictment was severed in
respect of Mr. Lozoomi, and his trial is expected to take place late in 2025.
[4]         
There has been evidence
led at this trial suggesting that Mr. Lozoomi and Mr. Warsame were partners in
the Thunder Bay drug trade during 2018. The relationship soured in the
fall of 2018 and the two had a falling out. The murder of Mr. Warsame occurred
shortly after Mr. Lozoomi was seen attempting to enter safe house locations
where it was suspected that Mr. Warsame kept money and drugs.
[5]         
Evidence at this trial
related to Ms. Rose-Podnar includes DNA found on the left ankle of Mr. Warsame
and on the plug area of the green ethernet cable that was used to bind him. The
trial evidence also includes numerous records taken from cell phone towers in
and around Thunder Bay, which indicate that telephone calls and text
messages were going back and forth between a cell phone associated to Ms. Rose-Podnar
and a cell phone associated to Mr. Lozoomi throughout January 12, 2019, and
into the morning of January 13, 2019.
[6]         
Evidence in this trial
related to Mr. Parr included DNA found on the green ethernet cable used to bind
Mr. Warsame’s wrist and on a white cable found loosely wrapped around Mr. Warsame’s
leg.  In addition, DNA associated to Mr. Parr was found on Mr. Warsame’s right
ankle.  Video evidence from CCTV was entered into evidence showing Mr. Parr
driving a blue Dodge Ram truck around different places in Thunder
Bay on January 12, 2019.  This was relevant, as there was also evidence that
the blue Dodge Ram was present at the scene of the murder later, on the
evening of January 12, 2019.  Mr. Parr did not own the vehicle.  It was owned by
Dennis Crupi.  Mr. Crupi’s family had surreptitiously placed a tracking device
on the truck.  This allowed the police to collect evidence during their murder
investigation showing the location of the truck around Thunder Bay, and
ultimately elsewhere, on January 12 and 13, 2019.
[7]         
Furthermore, there was
voluminous evidence purporting to show where a cell phone associated to Mr.
Parr was physically present at various times in Thunder Bay on January 12,
2019.  This evidence came from cell phone tower pick-ups.  Lastly, there was
video evidence of Mr. Parr and Mr. Lozoomi entering and walking around a multi-residential
building located at 625 Fulton Avenue, where Mr. Warsame may have been staying
or had access to a unit.  This video was recorded at around 10:30 pm, about an
hour and a half before Mr. Warsame was apparently shot on the
highway on the outskirts of Thunder Bay.
[8]         
The defence applications
came mid-trial and relatively near to the end of the Crown’s case.  The
focus of the applications were two distinct types of communications exchanged
between the accused and other persons in the day after Mr. Warsame was murdered. 
The relief sought was also different with respect to the two different types of
communication.
[9]         
The first application, made
exclusively by Ms. Rose-Podnar, dealt with seven text messages. These messages
are attached as Schedule 1 to this endorsement. In this trial, these seven
messages are the only electronic communications for which the Crown sought to
tender the actual content of relevant electronic messages. The texts
were all sent by a cell phone admittedly associated to Ms. Rose-Podnar and
received by a cell phone associated to Mr. Lozoomi.
[10]      Ms. Podnar applied to have these seven text
messages excluded from the trial.
[11]      The second application was made jointly by
the accused and dealt with phone records that had been entered into
evidence in voluminous spread sheets contained in power point evidence tendered
by the Crown.  Initially, the Crown had identified eight calls either to or
from Mr. Parr and Mr. Crupi and five calls either to or from Ms. Rose-Podnar
and Mr. Crupi.  These calls occurred between about 3:30 in the afternoon of
January 13, 2019, and 18 minutes after midnight on January 14, 2019.  The
application ultimately focused on two calls involving Mr. Crupi and Mr. Parr,
and one call involving Mr.  Crupi and Ms. Rose-Podnar.  The circumstances and particulars
of the calls had not been discussed in any vive voce testimony of any
witness at  the point when the defence brought their application.
[12]      In respect of this second application, the defence
sought only a ruling that any subsequent Crown witnesses not specifically refer
to these three calls in their testimony.
[13]      I will first address the submissions of
counsel for Ms. Rose-Podnar and the Crown concerning the application to exclude
the seven text messages.
[14]      The Crown set out in its written materials the
proposition for which this evidence was not sought to be tendered: “The
Crown does not intend to suggest to the jury that the seeking of instruction
after the fact provides a foundation for the finding that Podnar took
instruction from Lozoomi to commit the kidnapping that led to Warsame’s murder”.
[15]      Rather the Crown submitted the following: “[T]he
Crown does, however, intend to suggest that the frequency of contact
demonstrates a level of communication and coordination with Lozoomi that
surpasses that of an individual looking to buy drugs”.
[16]      The Crown submitted that the evidence was
admissible, and that Ms. Rose-Podnar’s concerns with the evidence
went to its weight, not its admissibility. The Crown conceded that it was not
evident from the texts what purpose Ms. Rose-Podnar had for allegedly
seeking instructions from Mr. Lozoomi.
[17]      Ms. Rose-Podnar argued that the texts were
not probative of any proposition that was dispositive of any issue at trial.  Alternatively,
even if the evidence was relevant and otherwise admissible, Ms. Rose- Podnar
argued the prejudicial effect of the text messages overbore any probative
value.
[18]      I agreed with the submissions of counsel
for Ms. Rose-Podnar that the seven text message evidence should be excluded.  I
said so for the following reasons.
[19]      Ms. Rose-Podnar characterized this evidence
as “extrinsic misconduct evidence”. The texts were also sent after the murder, which
could allow this evidence to be described as “post offence conduct”. This
distinction may matter in the context of which party would have borne the onus
on this application.  As constituted, the application was framed as a “post
offence conduct” application.  Ms. Rose-Podnar was late in bringing this
application.  In argument, this delay was not raised.  In context, I thought it
best to focus on the merits of the relevance and admissibility questions, rather
than dismissing the application out of hand on a technicality.
[20]      I did not see the text message evidence - standing
alone - as being evidence of obvious extrinsic misconduct. On its face,
this evidence was simply a series of text messages, which are not
illegal to send, asking questions about things that are not illegal to do, all
of which were unanswered by Mr. Lozoomi.  However, in my view the fact that the
texts went unanswered impacted their admissibility, as this created a “context
vacuum” for the messages.  Furthermore, the defence submitted that it was the
possible inferences that could be drawn from Ms. Rose-Podnar texting
“a bad guy” – i.e., Mr. Lozoomi – that pushed these messages into the category
of “extrinsic misconduct”, which is presumptively inadmissible.  I agreed with
this submission.
[21]      I was mindful of Watt J.A.’s observations
in R v. Luciano, 2011 ONCA, 267 C.C.C. (3d) 16, at paras. 223–225:
[22]      Considering this direction from the Court
of Appeal, I considered the merits of the application on the basis that, while the
evidence was that of post offence conduct, when contrasted with the Crown’s position
that these texts were part of a continuum of pre- and post-murder conduct, the
only reasonable inferences that could be drawn by a jury were that the texts were
evidence of extrinsic misconduct, which is presumptively inadmissible.
[23]       There was no suggestion in the evidence
that this murder was part of any preconceived plan that would see Mr. Warsame
shot and then the shooters quickly escaping Thunder Bay for the GTA.  There was
no suggestion in the evidence that Ms. Rose-Podnar had been present where and
when Mr. Warsame was apparently moved in a vehicle from somewhere in Thunder
Bay to the place on Hwy 527 where he was shot.  I found that these
aspects of the evidence made the texts look more in the nature of post offence
conduct; they occurred after a murder where Ms. Rose-Podnar had not been
present, and where there was no suggestion that she took part in any particular
plan regarding the killing.  To me, this militated in favour of treating the
conduct as “post offence conduct”, but only insofar as it contrasted the
evidence from the Crown’s continuity of events theory.  To my mind, post
offence conduct is clearly separate from the events of an offence, and, in this
case, it was a more understandable description that did not require any
speculation.  I saw the Crown’s theory – that the sending of the texts was part
of a continuum – as requiring a great deal of speculation on the part of the
jury, based on the evidence. This is because no other electronic evidence tendered
at the trial contained any content.  Without content, context is impossible to
determine.  Without context I saw it as impossible to draw an inference that the
evidence represented a “continuum” of anything without speculation.  In any
event, I saw resolution of this first portion application as requiring an
analysis weighing probative value versus prejudicial effect of the text
evidence.
[24]      I appreciated counsel providing the Court
with several authorities setting out useful governing principles
concerning the laws of evidence. They were of great assistance in
resolving this matter.
[25]      The relatively recent decision of the
Ontario Court of Appeal in R v. Atienza, 2023 ONCA 537, at para. 91,
contains the following helpful direction:
[26]      In R v. Ansari, 2015 ONCA 575,
330 C.C.C. (3d) 105, at paras. 110–113, Watt J.A. lays out useful governing
principles for assessing this evidence:
[27]      The threshold for the admission of this
evidence was not high.  The evidence was probative of the proposition that Ms.
Rose-Podnar was in relatively regular contact with Mr. Lozoomi. However it was
the lack of content for the entirety of what the jury had to consider is what
drove me to consider as persuasive the defence arguments that this evidence
would be used impermissibly by the jury and should be excluded.
[28]      Mr. Lozoomi was a drug dealer.  Counsel for
Ms. Rose-Podnar made no secret of referring to her client as a drug user. Therefore,
this level of communication had a very strong possibility of being considered by
the jury as evidence of extrinsic misconduct because that is all the jury
possibly could know about any possible relationship between these two people.  According
to the evidence of Mr. Joiles, it could be inferred the murder in context of a
turf war between Mr. Lozoomi and Mr. Warsame.  The mere fact that Ms.
Rose-Podnar was regularly communicating with Mr. Lozoomi at at time when the
turf culminated in a murder could be viewed as inviting an inference by the
jury of guilt based solely on Ms. Rose-Podnar’s bad character as a drug user. 
The logic would be because Mr. Lozoomi was her dealer of course she was
involved in assisting him in eliminating his rival.  It was one thing for the
Crown to put in the fact of the electronic communications between these two. 
However, when it came to these seven text messages, they had content, and in my
view, without any other content had a prejudicial quality that overbore their probative
value.
[29]      These possibilities lessened the probative value
of this evidence to the relevant questions concerning Ms. Rose-Podnar’s liability
for/contribution to the murder of Mr. Warsame.  It also increased the
prejudicial nature of the evidence.  The jury could see the words in the texts,
but because there was no reply to them the jury had no context to assess what was
really going. The jury would also have nothing to compare the unanswered
texts to, as the actual content of any other communications that
passed between these two people were not part of the Crown’s case.  This missing
context was important if the jury was not to be called upon to start
speculating.  I agreed with the defence submission that a lack of context was an
aspect that would confuse the jury.
[30]      Further, I was persuaded by the arguments
of the defence that admission of the texts could lead the jury to a circular
reasoning exercise. An inference could be suggested that, because Ms. Rose-Podnar
was looking for some direction about “what to do” at the various times the
messages were sent to Mr. Lozoomi, she must have always been communicating with
Mr. Lozoomi prior to that time about “what to do” about the murder. The lack of
context and reply by Mr. Lozoomi, combined with an absence of information
whatsoever about the content of prior communications, in my view created an
undue risk of circular reasoning by inviting the jury to speculatively
construct possible prior evidence solely on the strength of the less than clear
evidence contained in the words of the texts.
[31]      I did not agree with the Crown submission
that this problem could be addressed by a limiting instruction in the final
charge to the jury. I say this as I was of the view, at the time of my ruling,
that the ultimate Crown theory of liability concerning Ms. Rose-Podnar and her
connections to Mr. Lozoomi would involve a complicated trip through DNA
evidence as well as a non-intuitive snowstorm of technical information relating
to cell phone calls, cell tower pick-ups, charts, and power point slides.  I
anticipated the charge to the jury would be complex. However, this was not a
reason why I decided to exclude the evidence. The Crown had done its best to
efficiently stream-line the presentation of complicated evidence in this case.
It is commended for doing so.
[32]      It seemed to me that, based on the evidence
I had heard to that point, it would have been too easy for the jury to be
confused by the possible inferences urged by the Crown with respect to these
seven texts, in the face of all the other “wordless” communications that were
already in evidence. I appreciate that the Crown submitted that they were not
going to urge those inferences.  However, I was persuaded that the admission of
these texts would nonetheless tempt the jury to fall back on a simpler, yet
impermissible, path of circular reasoning to a guilty verdict by utilizing
these texts to conclude that, because Ms. Rose-Podnar was asking for
instructions from Mr. Lozoomi after that fact, she was previously involved in a
common unlawful purpose to kidnap Mr. Warsame, as evidenced by the fact, but
not the content, of all other calls and texts that occurred in January up to
and including January 13, 2019.
[33]      I appreciate the Crown’s express
indication it would not be making this submission.  However, I could see no
other reason why the texts would be logically relevant to any issue in this
trial other than for that proposition.
[34]      I appreciate that I could have instructed
the jury to simply not to follow that line of impermissible reasoning
with regard to this evidence.  I expect that they would follow my instructions.
Nevertheless, I thought it would be an area of unnecessary difficulty, with no
corresponding benefit to the jury’s appreciation of the essential issues to be
decided in the case. Given the chance of dealing with the problem as it arose,
rather than later in a final charge, for these pieces of evidence at least, I
saw it as appropriate to exclude the evidence rather than admit it with a
correcting instruction that I viewed as insufficient to overbear the prejudice
the texts would create.
[35]      I saw it as important that the “request for
instructions” inference arose from seven texts that were never answered by Mr. Lozoomi. 
I agreed with Ms. Rose-Podnar that the jury would be left to extreme
speculation as to the purpose of these texts and the reasonable inferences that
could be drawn from them. This speculation would be a more dangerous
exercise than simply being asked to draw inferences from what were rather bald,
context-less texts.  I did not see it as a reasonable inference that these texts
were representative of a continued pattern of intensified communication between
Ms. Rose-Podnar and Mr. Lozoomi about the murder, particularly because these
were the only texts the Crown sought to introduce the content of, in addition
to the records of the fact of countless other phone calls and text messages
sent in January 2019.
[36]       Also, in time and in text, only the first
message at 4:20 am takes place in what I would consider a circumstance that
might be remotely connected to the events of the murder. The others
start at 10:18 am later that morning and seem to have something to do with an
airport, presumably the one in Thunder Bay.  Ms. Rose-Podnar asking Mr. Lozoomi
what to do about an airport pick up, with no response from Mr. Lozoomi, made it
impossible, in my view, to draw any reasonable conclusions without significant
speculation.  Even the text request at 4:20 am about “stay here or??” is a
message that in no way is remotely connected to anything to do with the murder
of Mr. Warsame, absent extreme speculation.  Common sense tells me that
attempting to communicate with a person, Mr. Lozoomi, who for argument’s sake
was a party to a murder, even in the context of a continued series of phone
calls and text messages, without any other way to assess what is being
discussed, only creates a possibility for an impermissible inference of guilt
by association. This invites an ultimate reasoning flaw by finding liability,
not because of the actions or mental state of Ms. Rose-Podnar, but only because
of her association by electronic messages with Mr. Lozoomi.
[37]      In my view, the text message evidence was
not strong.  It only supported an inference that Ms. Rose-Podnar was trying to
reach out to Mr. Lozoomi on a topic or topics that appear to be unrelated to Mr.
Warsame or the events of the previous day. Despite their brevity, the seven
texts were the only texts that would be offered in relation to Ms. Rose-Podnar in
the Crown’s case.  I agreed with Ms. Rose-Podnar’s submission that, as a
result, the seven texts would have a very good chance of being given
undue importance, which would confuse the issues in this trial for the jury and
unduly prejudice Ms. Rose-Podnar.
[38]      I appreciate that the Crown’s argument
relies on the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Suchan and
Jackson (1952), 1952 CanLII 393 (SCC), 104 C.C.C. 193, at para. 16, which states the following:
[39]      The Crown argues that it is permissible to
leave with the jury the ability to draw inferences from these messages, on the
theory that Ms. Rose-Podnar would not be expected to be direct (i.e., asking
“did you kill him??”) in her texts with Mr. Lozoomi regarding the murder.  In
my view, that argument did not rely on any evidence lead up to that point in
the trial and instead rested on what I saw as undue speculation.  It proposed
that Ms. Rose-Podnar knew or ought to have known that, by 4 a.m. on January 13,
2019, Mr. Warsame had been dead for some four hours and that Mr. Lozoomi was
involved.  There was no direct or circumstantial evidence in the trial on Ms.
Rose-Podnar’s state of mind that could have supported that conclusion. All the
jury had to that point about Ms. Rose-Podnar was evidence of electronic
communications, and the DNA on Mr. Warsame.   There was nothing that placed her
at the scene of the murder or even reliably close to where Mr. Warsame might
have been confined.  Further, Ms. Rose-Podnar’s knowledge about the murder could
not be ascertained from a plain, or even nuanced, reading of the texts without
undue speculation.
[40]      The law from Suchan and Jackson
requires a trier of fact to focus on conduct, rather than words in writing, to
ascertain whether there is “common intention” in a criminal context.  The Crown
seeks only to introduce the texts as evidence of a continuum of conduct
stretching back to the beginning of January 2019 and ending on January 13, 2019.
[41]      Ms. Rose-Podnar put something into writing
in those seven texts.  The question was could they be permissibly used by a
jury to draw inferences about the elements of the offence with which Ms.
Rose-Podnar was facing.  I saw the fact of no other context for all the other
electronic communications as creating an insurmountable burden of prejudice arising
from the admission of this relatively small bit of communications, that could
not be fairly dealt with by a mid trial or final instruction, that required me
to exclude these messages.
[42]      I expected the jury to view the content of
texts as important in this case.  Unduly and significantly prejudicial in
my view, because these were the only texts containing words from Ms. Rose-Podnar
sought to be introduced by the Crown.  Further because of their patently
innocuous and contextless nature, their introduction into evidence had a
serious potential to create confusion and would be an invitation for circular
reasoning on the part of the jury.  Speculation by juries is to be expressly discouraged. 
In this case, I saw the introduction of these messages as being a circumstance
where the prejudicial effect overcame the limited probative value of the
evidence.
[43]      I was also persuaded by Ms. Rose-Podnar’s
submission that the introduction of the texts would prejudice Ms. Rose-Podnar’s
decision to testify at the trial.
[44]      I have outlined above how the mere fact of
the sending of these messages could be viewed as extrinsic misconduct on the
part of Ms. Rose-Podnar, despite it occurring in a circumstance of post
offence conduct. Introduction of the proposed evidence had the potential
to support an inference of guilt solely on the basis of bad character.  In my
view, context was required to avoid unnecessary focus on these prejudicial
aspects and to eliminate an occasion of undue speculation.  Context could only
come from testimony by Ms. Rose-Podnar once these texts were introduced.  She
would be required to give up a significant constitutional right to remain
silent in order to address what I saw as evidence that was problematic by
itself.  This was a further aspect of prejudice that I saw as militating
against admitting the evidence.
[45]      Accordingly, for all these reasons I found
that the prejudicial value of these messages outweighed their probative value
and an instruction to the jury could not remedy this difficulty.  The
application was allowed in respect of this aspect and the Crown was directed not
to lead the seven text messages as evidence in this trial.
[46]      On October 10, 2019, I gave an oral
judgment with respect to the joint application by the accused as follows:
[47]      Here are the reasons for that decision.
[48]      I was persuaded by the defence’s arguments
that any evidence of D/C Robillard – which would seek to connect or comment on
the timing of the communications between Mr. Crupi, Mr. Parr, and Ms. Podnar –
were not relevant to the issues at this trial.  I also agreed that the evidence
would be construed by the jury as extrinsic misconduct as opposed to post
offence conduct.  This evidence is presumptively inadmissible.  Further, I
agreed with the defence that the prejudicial nature of the calls overbore any
probative value that the fact and length of the calls would have on the
essential issues at trial.
[49]      It was intended for the last Crown witness,
D/C Robillard, to testify about his investigation of Mr. Crupi the day after
the murder.  Mr. Crupi’s blue Dodge Ram had been tracked to the scene where Mr.
Warsame was found. He was an obvious person of interest for the police.  Long
after D/C Robillard had interviewed Mr. Crupi, in the context of analysing Mr.
Crupi’s phone records, D/C Robillard realized that both Mr. Parr and Ms. Rose-Podnar
had calls with Mr. Crupi around the time D/C Robillard was calling Mr. Crupi
trying to get him in to the police station to conduct an interview on the
afternoon of January 13, 2019.
[50]      Ultimately, Mr. Crupi showed up to meet
with D/C Robillard.  It appears that, at that time, Mr. Crupi had dialed Ms.
Rose-Podnar on his phone and then just left the call open, with the phone out
of sight of D/C Robillard, while he was being interviewed at about 10:30 the
night of January 13, 2019.  This call went on for one hour and twenty-two
minutes.  The Crown indicated that D/C Robillard intended only to testify about
the fact, length, and time of these specific calls.
[51]      In my view this proposed commentary on the
evidence lacked relevance because there was no way for the jury to know what
was said during the calls or why they were made, and the calls could only be
connected to the charge at issue by speculation and not reasonable inferences
based on the proposed evidence for the Crown’s case.  I say this because Mr.
Crupi was not going to testify.  All the jury would know about him was what was
contained in an agreed statement of fact before the Court.  Mr. Crupi owned the
blue Dodge Ram, it was at the scene of the murder on January 12, 2019, and it
was located about 800 kilometers east of Thunder Bay on January 13, 2019, with
Mr. Lozoomi, Mr. Joiles, and another person, now deceased in the truck.  In the
case for the Crown, Mr. Crupi is not otherwise implicated in the kidnapping and
murder of Mr. Warsame.  In my view, this made any commentary about the existence
of these calls an invitation to speculation rather than an opportunity to
make a reasonable or permissible inference.  Absent evidence – other than they
called each other on the phone – linking Mr. Crupi to the acts or intentions of
the parties on trial or linking him to a party that will be on trial
later – Mr. Lozoomi – I saw the introduction of this evidence as a big “so
what?”.  It is not illegal to phone people, per se.  The Crown argued that the existence
of the calls demonstrates continuity of communication with a person who was
being questioned by police about the murder, but who was never charged with any
involvement.  I could not see how the evidence was relevant, except through a
lens of impermissible speculation with respect to both Mr. Parr and Ms.
Rose-Podnar.
[52]      For both accused, I also saw this proposed evidence
as being that of extrinsic misconduct.  My reasoning in treating the evidence as
being extrinsic misconduct evidence, rather than post offence conduct evidence,
follows my reasoning with respect to the text message evidence.  The phone
calls happened in time, post offence. Mr. Crupi’s roll in the narrative of the
murder had been minimal to that point in the trial, but the Crown wanted the
evidence admitted as part of its case concerning of the alleged continuum of
both Mr. Parr’s and Ms. Rose-Podnar’s common unlawful intention to kidnap and murder
Mr. Warsame.  However, Mr. Crupi would not be called as a witness at the trial.
[53]      I will first discuss why I view the call
between Mr. Crupi and Ms. Rose-Podnar during Mr. Crupi’s interview as evidence
of extrinsic misconduct on the part of Ms. Rose-Podnar.
[54]      In my view, listening in to the
conversations of others on an electronic device when one of two people involved
in the main conversation don’t know you are there listening, is a reprehensible
action.  It is sneaky and not encouraged as socially appropriate behaviour.  It
is more offensive when the person who doesn’t know you are listening is a
police officer.  Even worse when the police officer is conducting a murder
investigation.  What Ms. Rose-Podnar did by not hanging up, even if the call
was, in fact, a “butt dial”, was an act of misconduct.  It stands on its own as
evidence of bad character and is presumptively inadmissible.
[55]      However, the Crown argued that it could be
inferred to be the act of a person who is already connected to the
offence of murder at issue.  I disagreed because I saw it as independently bad
behaviour.  Ms. Rose-Podnar was not charged with intercepting private
communications.  The focus of my analysis then turned to a consideration of the
probative value versus the prejudicial effect for this evidence
with respect to Ms. Rose-Podnar.
[56]      The Crown argued that any concern regarding
improper use of bad character evidence for this particular evidence could
have been dealt with by way of a jury instruction.  I have set out above the
law concerning jury instructions and how juries are presumed to follow what they
are told by a trial judge.  However, like with the text messages, I viewed the
introduction of this evidence as an occasion where a specific
instruction would not be sufficient to insulate the jury from a propensity for
circular reasoning or a finding of guilt only by association.
[57]      The fact that Mr. Crupi was not going to
testify was important to my decision in this regard.
[58]       Choosing who to call as a witness is a tactical
decision of counsel.  I did not draw an adverse inference from this decision. 
However, I observe that, absent his testimony, there would be no context for
the jury to consider why Mr. Crupi made the calls at issue, or what was said. 
The jury would therefore be called to engage in an exercise of
speculation regarding this evidence.  I knew the standard charge would give the
jury a general instruction about the prohibition on speculation.  However, when
it came to this particular evidence, had it been admitted, I was of the view
that the jury would be left in an untenable position of determining what
inferences could be drawn without any proper context to consider all reasonable
inferences.  In outlining what kind of interferences would be impermissible, I
would be required to describe, on a speculative basis, a litany of conduct that
is bad and which would therefore be extremely prejudicial to Ms.
Rose-Podnar without any corresponding probative benefit to the evidence in the
first place.
[59]      One such impermissible inference was that
Ms. Rose-Podnar was intending to obstruct the investigation of the murder or intending
to assist others in that endeavour.  This is not an offence with which
she was charged.
[60]      During the Crown’s case, the jury would not
hear from anyone about why the call was made or what was said.  In my view this
would mean that the jury would be required to speculate about why Ms.
Rose-Podnar stayed on the call for almost an hour and half.  The Crown argued that
she listened in because she was involved with the murder.  It seemed to me that
the only foundation for that argument came from the call being made in the
context of a murder investigation. However, there was or would be no evidence led
in this trial showing that Mr. Crupi was directly or indirectly involved
in the murder.   Simply noting the fact that a call was made by Ms.
Rose-Podnar to Mr. Crupi was not probative of any of the elements the Crown
would need to prove against her.  In my view, the only way that this evidence
could rise to a level of being probative would be through a process of impermissible
speculation, rather than the drawing of a reasonable inference from the facts.
[61]      No doubt, Ms. Rose-Podnar was a drug user. 
The evidence in this trial would lead the jury to a reasonable inference that Mr.
Lozoomi was a drug dealer.  He was driving the truck on January 13, 2019, which
had been at the murder scene less than 24 hours before he was intercepted by
police.   An inference from other evidence in the trial could be made that Mr.
Lozoomi was directly involved with the murder.  Yet there would be no way of
knowing why Mr. Crupi’s truck was involved, nor how Mr. Lozoomi ended up
driving it so far away from Thunder Bay.  Again, the defence relied on the
circular logic argument to suggest that impermissible reasoning would be the
only manner of inferring Ms. Rose-Podnar’s guilt, based on her
association with Mr. Lozoomi and her apparent interest in taking a call from Mr.
Crupi, who owned the truck found to be driven by Mr. Lozoomi on January 13,
2019.   This would lead to a bad character-based inference as a way to find
guilt, which could not be overborne by a special instruction to
the jury. For this reason, as well, I was determined to exclude comments
about the evidence with respect to Ms. Rose-Podnar.
[62]      I was also persuaded by Ms. Rose-Podnar’s
argument that introducing this evidence would force her into a choice about
testifying.  She would be required to give up a significant constitutional
right to silence in order to answer this evidence, which at best called
for extreme speculation by the jury to make any sense out of it.  Ms.
Rose-Podnar would be called upon to answer evidence that was presumptively
inadmissible.  I viewed this as a prejudice that outweighed any probative value
to the evidence.  The bad character nature of Ms. Podnar’s conduct created a
prejudice that outweighed any possible probative value or permissible inferences
that could arise from the fact of her listening in on the conversation of a
person who was never charged with anything while they were being interviewed by
police.
[63]      In considering the fact that Mr. Parr had
discussions with Mr. Crupi around the time the police were trying to interview
him, I conducted the same analysis as I did with regard to Ms. Rose-Podnar.  Absent
testimony from Mr. Crupi, I did not see the existence of the telephone calls as
probative of anything relating to the charge at issue.  The lack of context as
to why and what was said would lead to an occasion of impermissible
speculation by the jury.  Also, I was persuaded by the arguments of Mr. Parr’s
counsel that, because the mere fact of the phone calls could be
construed as either an attempt to obstruct justice or to threaten Mr. Crupi
about anything he said to police, this evidence was that of extrinsic
misconduct.  Mr. Parr was not charged with obstructing justice.  Yet it could
be inferred that is what he was doing when he was talking to Mr. Crupi around
the time the police were looking to interview him.  An instruction to the jury
on that impermissible reasoning would be more akin to filling in gaps in the
evidence rather than outlining possible alternative innocent explanations for
actions that must be considered when dealing with circumstantial evidence.
[64]      In respect of Mr. Parr, the prejudicial
effect of evidence that could be inferred as that of bad character,
coupled with a lack of probative value to the charges at issue, led me to
conclude that the prejudice outweighed any probative value, and that any commentary
evidence about phone calls between Mr. Parr and Mr. Crupi should be excluded
from the trial.