[1]    
       On
October 4th, 2024 I heard the Defendants’ motion for further
particulars in this matter.  I dismissed that motion with oral reasons given
from the bench at the conclusion of the Defendants’ arguments.  I finalized
written reasons, which are reported at 2024 ONSC 5673.  I am now required to
fix the costs of the matter.
[2]    
      The
Plaintiffs, as the successful party, seek costs on a full indemnity basis in
the sum of $6,463.02.  I believe that this amount is inclusive of HST and
disbursements, but counsel’s Costs Outline does not make that clear.  The basis
for full indemnity costs is that the Defendants should not have brought this
motion, filed extra cases the morning of this motion and made no effort to
settle the motion.
[3]    
      The
Plaintiffs also seek additional costs of $1,000.00 for the preparation of the
costs submissions.  Those costs are sought on the basis that the Defendants did
not accept the Plaintiff’s offer that the Defendants should pay $6,000.00 to
settle the costs of the motion.  The Defendants object to the Plaintiffs
disclosing these discussions to me as they are privileged.
[4]    
      The
Defendants are also opposed to the Plaintiffs’ request for substantial
indemnity costs.  The Defendants argue that the costs should be in the cause on
the basis that the delays in this case can be laid at the feet of both parties,
that the Plaintiffs’ costs are disproportionate and that the motion was
dismissed on the basis of “evolving Rules reforms”.  In the alternative, the
Defendants argue that the costs should be limited to $1,500.00 plus HST.
[5]    
      These
positions raise three issues that I need to address, as follows:
[6]    
      I will
deal with each issue in turn.
[7]    
      In his
costs argument, counsel for the Defendants argues as follows:
[8]    
      In my
oral reasons, I referenced the Phase One Report of the Civil Rules Review Task
Force that had been established by Chief Justice Morawetz.  The point I made in
reference to this report was the long-established concern that the Courts have
had about the culture of delay in civil litigation.
[9]    
      These
concerns have been discussed in other decisions going back years.  For example,
in Innocon Inc. v. Daro Flooring Constructions Inc., 2021 ONSC 7558,
Myers J. stated (at para 48):
[10]    
   Over
the past number of years, there have been innumerable calls for a “culture
shift” in civil litigation and to focus on the merits of decisions.  This
motion did not do that.
[11]    
   Regardless
of whether the motion was brought in good faith or not, it was still a motion
that was unnecessary.  It also asked for unnecessary relief.  For example, it
sought further particulars about the type of work that a mechanic was doing. 
Regardless of whether one concludes that the intention of this motion was
delay, the effect of the motion was certainly to delay the adjudication of the
merits of this matter.
[12]    
   Further,
Rule 57.01 makes it clear that costs should generally be awarded to the
successful party. There is nothing in the Defendants’ submissions that would support
any result other than that the Plaintiffs should be awarded costs for this
motion.  The question is the quantum of costs, and I now turn to that issue.
[13]    
   The
Plaintiffs seek substantial indemnity costs.  There is no basis for that
request.  Substantial indemnity costs are rarely awarded unless a party
achieves a result that is better than their Rule 49 offer.  In this case, the
Plaintiff’s offer to settle the costs for $6,000.00 does not amount to a Rule
49 offer, much less a Rule 49 offer that the Plaintiff has beaten.
[14]    
   Beyond
the ambit of Rule 49, the decision in S & A Strasser v. Richmond Hill
(Town) 1990 CanLII 6856, (1990) 1 O.R. (3d) 243 (C.A.) sets out that the
circumstances in which elevated costs awards should be given are very limited. 
Those circumstances were expanded on by the Court of Appeal in Davies v. Clarington
(Municipality) et. al. 2009 ONCA 722, (2009) 100 O.R. (3d) 66.  At
paragraphs 28-31, the Court stated:
[15]        In
this case, there is no conduct that would justify an order of enhanced costs. 
The Defendants brought a procedural motion.  They were unsuccessful in that
procedural motion.  While the Defendants pursued this motion vigorously, there
was no egregious conduct in bringing the motion and nothing that would fall
within the grounds set out in Davies.
[16]    
   I note
that Counsel for the Defendants has argued that he brought the motion in good
faith.  I am not prepared to go as far as that in my assessment of the case. 
It is quite possible that the Defendants brought the motion to delay the
matter, but even if I made that finding it would not be sufficient to justify
an order for substantial indemnity costs.  As a result, the costs in this case
will be awarded on a partial indemnity basis.
[17]    
   The
third issue concerns the quantum of costs, and whether the amount sought by the
Plaintiff is proportional to the issues that were in dispute.  In considering
this issue, I am mindful of the factors that are set out in Rule 57.01(1).  In
this case, the issues are the complexity of the matter, the steps taken by a
party that tended to shorten or lengthen the matter and the reasonable
expectations of the parties.  I will deal with each of those issues.
[18]    
   I
should begin, however, with an observation about the Plaintiffs’ counsel
disclosing the offer to settle.  I appreciate the Defendants’ counsel’s concern
in this regard, in that the costs issues were not resolved.  Therefore, it was
not appropriate for the Plaintiffs’ counsel to disclose his proposed settlement
of the costs issue.
[19]    
   That
being said, the disclosure does not have an effect on the outcome of this case
for two reasons.  First, as I have set out above, the Plaintiffs are not
entitled to substantial indemnity costs.  As a result, the offer that the
Plaintiffs have made is not going to influence the disposition of this matter. 
Second, in any event, I am not going to provide the parties with a further
opportunity to make costs submissions on the costs submissions.  That would be
unjustifiable even after a complex trial.  In these circumstances, it is
completely unrealistic.
[20]    
   This
brings me back to the three key points.  I start with the complexity of the
matter.  This was a short motion.  However, Defendants’ counsel used a full
half-hour to argue this matter as well as providing a full factum and detailed
case-law.  In the circumstances, the motion was moderately complex, and it
justifies a heightened award of costs.
[21]    
   Second,
the Defendants pursued the particulars issue well beyond what was justifiable
on the facts.  In addition, I am not persuaded that the Plaintiffs made a
significant contribution to the delay in having this matter heard.  As a
result, this is also a factor that favours a heightened award of costs for the
Plaintiff.
[22]    
   Finally,
there are the reasonable expectations of the parties.  In this case, the costs
outlines submitted by both parties show costs in the range of $6,000.00 on a
full indemnity basis.  In my view, that indicates that a reasonable amount of
costs on a partial indemnity basis would be about $4,000.00, inclusive of HST
and disbursements.
[23]    
   Counsel
for the Defendants argues that the time spent by Plaintiffs’ counsel was
disproportionate to the dispute and that the time spent was unreasonable.  The
Defendants point to the issue of a cross-motion that the Plaintiffs’ counsel
threatened to bring as well as the claim that the Plaintiffs spent time
preparing a motion record.
[24]    
   In my
view, neither of these issues justifies any reduction in the costs that would
otherwise be payable for this motion.
[25]    
   For
the foregoing reasons, the Defendants are to pay the Plaintiffs the sum of
$4,000.00, inclusive of HST and disbursements as the costs of this motion
within thirty (30) days of today’s date.  The Defendants are jointly and
severally liable for those costs.