[1]              
Lorne MacRae died on March 22, 2017 at the age
of 87. He had been suffering from bladder cancer and had been showing signs of
dementia, although the extent of his memory loss is one of the key issues in
dispute between the parties.
[2]              
In the approximately 20 months before his
father’s death, the respondent, Bruce MacRae, received funds from his father
totalling $776,000. Specifically:
[3]              
The applicant, Patricia Playfair, is Lorne’s
daughter and Bruce’s sister. She claims that the above inter vivos
transfers are void because they are subject to a resulting trust. She also
submits that, in the circumstances, Bruce must be presumed to have exercised
undue influence over his father.
[4]              
Bruce states that Lorne expressed a clear and
corroborated intention to give this money to him. Bruce submits Lorne had the
capacity to make these gifts, despite any memory loss issues. According to
Bruce, the presumption of undue influence does not apply in the circumstances,
and, in any event, any applicable presumption is rebutted by the evidence.
[5]              
The matter proceeded by way of application,
based on affidavit evidence and the cross-examination of Patricia, her son
Christopher Playfair, Bruce, and Shauna MacDonald, Lorne’s home support
companion from June 2016 to March 2017. In addition, CIBC Wood Gundy responded
to a series of questions by email and John Murphy, Lorne’s long-time investment
advisor, was cross-examined.
[6]              
For the reasons that follow, the application is
allowed in part. Two of the three transactions are not valid inter vivos transfers.
The evidence about those transactions was insufficient to rebut the presumption
of a resulting trust. The transaction of $500,000 is a valid inter vivos transfer.
There was credible corroborative evidence to show that Lorne intended this as a
gift to Bruce.
[7]              
The background facts are not in dispute. Lorne
and his wife Anne had three children: Bruce, Patricia, and Ian. Until she
passed away in February 2015, Anne and Lorne resided together in their home in
Metcalfe, Ontario. Lorne was a retired military officer.
[8]              
Lorne’s daughter Patricia described her
relationship with him as “loving and caring.” However, from 2015 to his death
in 2017, she saw him only a handful of times each year. They did not often
speak on the phone.
[9]              
Lorne and his son Bruce had a closer
relationship. Bruce lived nearby, they spent time together, and he provided
support and companionship to his father. Bruce was Lorne’s power of attorney
for property and personal care.
[10]          
Following his wife’s death, Lorne lived with
Bruce and his family for about a month between February and March 2015. Lorne
then returned to his own home and lived there alone until December 2015. During
this time, he lived largely independently and managed the household and his own
daily living requirements.
[11]          
In the spring and summer of 2015, Lorne and
Bruce toured a number of retirement residences. At Bruce’s invitation, however,
Lorne moved in with Bruce’s family in December 2015 and he continued to reside
with Bruce until his death in April 2017.
[12]          
Three main factual issues are in dispute:
[13]          
The parties agree that these factual issues must
be considered in relation to each of the transactions in question. Rather than
drawing broad conclusions about Lorne’s intentions, the state of his memory
loss, or his vulnerability, I have considered those issues at the times and in
the context in which he allegedly made gifts to Bruce.
[14]          
Before conducting a detailed review of the facts, I
begin by setting out the legal principles that apply and through which the
facts must be assessed.
[15]          
The legal principles are not in dispute. Both parties relied on many of
the same caselaw.
[16]          
A valid inter vivos gift is one that is intended to take effect
during the lifetime of the donor. It consists of a voluntary transfer of
property to another with the full intention that the property will not be
returned. Establishing a gift requires an intention to donate, sufficient
delivery of the gift and acceptance of the gift: Foley v. McIntyre, 2015
ONCA 382 at para. 25 (“Foley”). The case at hand is primarily about
whether Lorne had the intention to donate.
[17]          
As the Court of Appeal discussed in Foley, two presumptions can
apply to inter vivos gifts.
[18]          
First, there is a presumption of a resulting trust. The principles of
equity assume a bargain rather than a gift. Thus, when a parent gratuitously
transfers property to an adult child, the law presumes that the child holds the
property on a resulting trust for the parent. The onus is on the child to rebut
the presumption by proving the contrary intention on a balance of
probabilities.  There is no dispute that the presumption of a resulting
trust applies to all the transactions in this case.
[19]          
Second, the presumption of undue influence applies to inter vivos
transfers if there is potential for domination in the relationship between the
donor and the recipient. In such circumstances, the person who receives the
funds must establish on a balance of probabilities that the gift was the result
of full, free, and informed thought. There is no need to establish actual undue
influence, it is the potential for dominance within the relationship
that will trigger the presumption. There is a dispute between the parties as to
whether this presumption applies.
[20]          
In determining whether the presumption of undue influence applies,
courts begin by considering whether there is a potential for dominance, given
the nature of the relationship: Geffen v. Goodman Estate [1991] 2 S.C.R.
at p. 355. The presumption does not automatically apply to a parent-child
relationship, unless the relationship between an elderly parent and a child is
characterized by dependency or dominance: Pandke Estate v. Lauzon 2021
ONSC 123 (CanLII) at para. 13 and Modonese v. Delac Estate, 2011 BCSC 82
at paras. 103 – 106. This is a question of fact. It requires
the courts to consider whether the parent can assert their will and act
independently of the child.
[21]          
If either presumption applies, the common law requires corroborating
evidence to rebut that presumption. Corroborating evidence can be direct or
circumstantial. It can consist of a single piece of evidence or several pieces
considered cumulatively: Foley at para. 29. Where, as here, the donor is
deceased, corroborating evidence is also required by section 13 of the Evidence
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.E.23.
[22]          
The caselaw identifies examples of corroborative evidence that can rebut
presumptions regarding inter vivos transfers. For example, corroborative
evidence can include the post-transfer conduct of the parent, where that is
relevant to the parent’s intention to make a gift: Pecore v. Pecore, 2007
SCC 17 795 at 819. It can also include written confirmation from the donor that
the money is a gift: Pecore, at para 104. While not required in every
case, evidence that the parent received qualified, independent advice can serve
to rebut the presumption of undue influence: Foley, at para. 28
[23]          
This case does not require the court to make findings about Lorne’s
capacity and, in any event, there would not have been sufficient medical
evidence for me to do so. That said, Lorne’s dementia and related vulnerability
are relevant to whether the presumption of undue influence applies. They are
also relevant to assessing whether the transfers were the result of full, free,
and informed thought. I deal with these issues, below, in the analysis of the
facts.
[24]          
The materials facts in this matter were highly
contested and witnesses provided different versions of events. Much turns on
the assessment of the credibility and reliability of the evidence, particularly
as it relates to Lorne’s dementia and memory loss at the time of the
transactions.
[25]          
Patricia and her son Christopher testified about
Lorne’s memory loss. Patricia described a few incidents where Lorne appeared forgetful,
beginning in 2014. Christopher testified that he saw his grandfather more
frequently after Anne died in February 2015. According to Christopher, Lorne
did not recognize him and he repeated himself during their conversations. In
considering this evidence, it is significant that these witnesses’ contact with
Lorne was infrequent, irregular, and did not specifically correspond to times
when the transactions took place.
[26]          
For his part, Bruce submits that he spent more
time with Lorne and was in a better position to testify about his cognitive
acuity. According to Bruce, while
Lorne may have had some memory issues, they did not impact his ability to make financial
decisions. Bruce was insistent that Lorne managed his finances independently
until the day he died, in March 2017.
[27]          
In my view, there were significant difficulties
with Bruce’s evidence.  A number of considerations (when taken together
and considered on a balance of probabilities) lead me to conclude that Bruce’s
evidence is not credible or reliable. Specifically:
[28]          
For example, Bruce’s assertion that Lorne
managed his own finances until he died is contradicted by a text message Bruce
sent to his nephew Christopher, on February 29, 2016, almost a year before
Lorne’s death. Bruce wrote:
[29]          
Bruce’s evidence about Lorne’s dementia found
some support in the evidence of Ms. MacDonald, who saw Lorne five days per week
from June 2016 to March 2017. However, Ms. MacDonald’s own evidence was
somewhat contradictory. She testified that Lorne was capable and fully aware of
his surroundings and that his “dementia was not obvious at all.” Later in her
affidavit, however, she stated that Lorne had “issues with his short-term
memory.” He had to be coaxed to bathe and “had difficulty grasping the concept
that once the [protective] underwear were wet that they had to be thrown in the
garbage.” Ms. MacDonald testified broadly about Lorne’s abilities between June
2016 and March 2017. The medical reports show that Lorne’s dementia and
physical health deteriorated during that time. Improbably, Ms. MacDonald’s
evidence does not identify any changes to Lorne’s circumstances during this
time.
[30]          
Bruce’s evidence was markedly different from the
information contained in the medical notes, particularly beginning in 2016.
Lorne’s physicians did not provide affidavit evidence, although both Patricia
affidavit attached medical records. At the hearing, counsel for both parties
agreed that these medical records could be relied on for the truth of their
contents.
[31]          
Bruce testified that, in consultation with his treating physicians, Lorne
made all decisions relating to his cancer treatment and end of life care. In
cross-examination, however, Bruce confirmed that he provided informed consent
for Lorne’s medical treatment in May of 2016.
[32]          
By 2016, Bruce was attending many of Lorne’s
medical appointments. Notes from those appointments consistently refer to
Lorne’s dementia as significant and impactful. Physicians described objectively
poor memory loss that was progressing rapidly. During a geriatric assessment in
August 2016, Lorne was unable to provide his medical history, recall how many
grandchildren he had, or even remember that he used to live in Metcalfe. The
August 2016 report noted that Bruce had to cue Lorne to take showers and baths.
[33]          
Bruce did not generally dispute the accuracy of
other medical notes, including other notes that described significant cognitive
impairment. In cross-examination, however, he stated that the doctor conducting
the geriatric assessment had “made stuff up.” It is significant that many
aspects of the geriatric report are consistent with what was noted by other
physicians. Other than Bruce’s speculation, there is no basis to conclude that
this report, or parts of it, were made up.
[34]          
Finally, Bruce’s evidence about e-transfers made
between September 2015 and March 2016 is not reasonably probable in the
circumstances. In the fall of 2016, Bruce knew that Lorne was not using his
computer very much, could not find anything, and had to be cued to bathe. It
defies belief that, in these circumstances, Lorne would have set up 89
individual e-transfers, at what appear to be random days and times in the months
and days immediately before his death.
[35]          
 In sum, I did not find Bruce to be a credible
witness. As it relates to the extent and impact of Lorne’s dementia and where
it differs from Bruce’s version of events, I prefer the information contained
in the medical notes and the evidence of John Murphy, Lorne’s investment
advisor. Mr. Murphy’s evidence is discussed in more detail below.
[36]          
As noted, Bruce’s testimony is often the only
direct evidence of Lorne’s intentions. Except for the $500,000 transfer in September
of 2015, Bruce was the only other person present for any conversation regarding
Lorne’s intentions. Given the serious difficulties with other aspects of
Bruce’s evidence, I find that he cannot be relied upon to tell the truth about
private conversations he allegedly had with his father.
[37]          
The parties agree that, rather than drawing broad conclusions about
Loren’s intentions, the state of his memory loss, or his vulnerability, those
issues must be considered at the times and in the context in which he allegedly
made gifts to Bruce.
[38]          
Bruce testified that the $98,000 was initially to assist Bruce with
painting and other home renovation expenses as he prepared his home for sale. When
Bruce offered to pay Lorne back after the sale of the house, Lorne said wanted
the money to be given to Bruce’s son, Branson, who was looking to purchase his
first home.
[39]          
The evidence shows that Bruce did not transfer the
entire sum to Branson and kept part of that money for himself. When pressed on
cross-examination, Bruce acknowledged that a portion of the alleged gift to
Branson “has been distributed among all the things that were necessary in [Bruce’s]
life for years.”
[40]          
There is no dispute that this transfer is subject to a resulting trust
and that the onus is on Bruce to show that this money was a valid inter
vivos gift. Under section 13 of the Evidence Act, Bruce’s evidence,
alone, is not sufficient and corroborating evidence is required.
[41]          
One of the difficulties with Bruce’s position is that (on his own
evidence) Lorne intended that the $98,000 be loaned to Bruce and given to
Branson. The evidence before the court is that the full amount was not
transferred to Branson. It is not clear that the conditions of a valid inter
vivos gift were met.
[42]          
In any event, for this transaction, there is insufficient credible
evidence to rebut the presumption of a resulting trust. The evidence is Lorne
had a history of giving financial gifts to his children, in different amounts
and at different times. However, $98,000 is larger than any gift he had given
in the past. The only direct evidence of the alleged gift is from Bruce. For
corroboration, he relies on Lorne’s post-transaction conduct, namely the fact
that Lorne did not seek repayment of the $98,000. Importantly, however, this
assertion also relies heavily on Bruce’s own evidence: it is Bruce who says
that Lorne did not seek repayment.
[43]          
The fact that Lorne did not discuss repayment issues with Patricia or
Christopher is not, in my view, sufficient to corroborate Lorne’s intentions.
Their contact was irregular and infrequent. Christopher helped his grandfather
prepare his tax returns, but there was no evidence to suggest that Lorne
typically discussed his finances or any gifts or loans to his other children
with Patricia or Christopher.
[44]          
In these circumstances, the evidence is not sufficient to rebut the
presumption of a resulting trust. Accordingly, I find that the transfer of
$98,000 was not a valid inter vivos gift.
[45]          
The $500,000 transfer was executed following written instructions, which
Lorne signed. Bruce and the investment advisor, John Murphy, both testified
about the circumstances that led to that transfer. There is some divergence in
their evidence and, for the reasons provided, I prefer Mr. Murphy’s version of
events.
[46]          
On September 9, 2015, Bruce and Lorne met with John Murphy and provided
him with RBC Gift Letter, which they had already filled out. There is no
dispute that Bruce filled out the Gift Letter, except the date and the signature,
which were added by Lorne.
[47]          
The Gift Letter states:
[48]          
Mr. Murphy testified that he did not specifically discuss Lorne’s
intention to give the money to Bruce. However, Mr. Murphy understood from the
Gift Letter that this was his intention.
[49]          
On September 9th, Lorne and John Murphy discussed the tax
implications of drawing from a non-registered account. Mr. Murphy suggested
that Lorne cash in a TFSA, but Lorne disagreed and directed a withdrawal from
his non-registered account. They also discussed that $500,000 was “pretty well
everything” in Lorne’s investment account. Mr. Murphy described Lorne as lucid
and testified that he provided clear instructions. Nothing in Lorne’s behaviour
on September 9, 2015 caused Mr. Murphy to question Lorne’s instructions.
[50]          
Bruce was present for the entire September 9th meeting,
although Mr. Murphy said he spoke very little. Mr. Murphy did not specifically
recall meeting or speaking to Lorne without Bruce present, either before,
during, or after the September 9th meeting.
[51]          
The $500,000 was ultimately transferred from Lorne’s account to Bruce on
approximately September 30, 2015. This liquidated of approximately 82% of the
value of Lorne’s entire investment portfolio.
[52]          
There is a presumption that this money was subject to a resulting trust.
The issues in dispute are whether the presumption of undue influence applies
and whether Bruce has met the onus of rebutting the applicable presumption(s)
on a balance of probabilities.
[53]          
I find that in September 2015, Lorne and Bruce’s relationship was not
characterized by dependency or a potential for dominance. The evidence
establishes that Lorne was exercising his will and acting independently in
September 2015.
[54]          
In this respect, Mr. Murphy’s evidence is significant. He testified that
on September 9th, Lorne was “quite intent” on making the transaction and he
provided “direct and clear instructions,” including about which accounts should
be liquidated and when this should occur. As noted, Lorne exerted his will and declined
to follow a suggestion by Mr. Murphy.
[55]          
Both Patricia and Christopher testified about occasional incidents of
memory loss in 2014 and 2015, but those incidents do not correspond in time to
the September transaction. In any event, occasional incidents of memory loss do
not lead to a blanket assumption that Lorne was incapable of managing his
finances or understanding the consequences of making a gift, particularly when
the evidence points to the contrary.
[56]          
In September 2015, Lorne was living on his own. Although he received
some assistance with his filing his tax return, he was otherwise managing most
of his own affairs. While the medical reports in 2015 refer to treatment for
memory loss, Lorne’s cognitive impairment at that time was reported to be both
minimal and stable.
[57]          
 I am mindful that Bruce completed most of the Gift Letter and attended
the September 9th meeting. However, in the circumstances, this is
not sufficient to establish a potential for dominance. As noted, Lorne took the
lead at the meeting and asserted his will. While Bruce completed most of the
form for him, Lorne verbally indicated to Mr. Murphy that he wished to withdraw
$500,000.
[58]          
There is a dispute between the parties as to whether Mr. Murphy provided
independent financial advice. I do not need to resolve this issue. Independent
advice is not required in every circumstance and, even if I assume (without
finding) that Lorne did not receive independent advice, the remainder of the
circumstances establish that he was able to assert his will and act
independently in September 2015.
[59]          
For these reasons, I find that the presumption of undue influence did
not apply to Bruce and Lorne’s relationship in September 2015.
[60]          
The Gift Letter is unambiguous and must be given considerable weight as
corroborative evidence. It clearly states that the $500,000 was intended as a
gift to Bruce. The presumption of a resulting trust is rebutted by the signed
Gift Letter.
[61]          
The applicant suggested that Lorne did not understand the purpose of the
Gift Letter. The evidence does not support this assertion. Lorne provided clear
instructions to Mr. Murphy about how and when he wanted the withdrawal to take
place. He also commended on the tax implications. In these circumstances, I
cannot conclude that Lorne was unable to understand the purpose of a one-page
document entitled “Gift Letter.”
[62]          
Accordingly, the $500,000 transfer in September 2015 was a valid inter
vivos gift.  Given this conclusion, it is not necessary for me to address
the limitation period issue and the Respondent’s argument that the Applicant’s
claim to the $500,000 is statue-barred.
[63]          
Bruce submits that a portion of these monies were reimbursement for
expenses he incurred on Lorne’s behalf. The parties agree that Bruce is
entitled to repayment for reasonable expenses incurred to meet Lorne’s needs, but
they disagree as to which expenses should be reimbursed. Counsel have undertaken
to discuss this further, with a view to narrowing or resolving the issues. I
remain seized of this issue, if the parties are unable to resolve their
differences. If necessary, counsel may provide brief written submissions in
accordance with the scheduled agreed to at the hearing.
[64]          
Setting aside the issue of expense reimbursement, I have no hesitation
in concluding that the balance of the money transferred to Bruce from September
2016 to March 2017 is not a valid inter vivos gift. There was no
evidence to corroborate Bruce’s assertion that this money was intended as a gift.
[65]          
The respondent sought to rely on Lorne’s post-transfer conduct and the
fact that he did not seek repayment of any portion of the $178,000. By October
2016, Lorne’s dementia and memory loss were significant. Even assuming he was
aware of them in the first place, it would be unreasonable to expect Lorne to
recall any of the 89 e-transfers or to take steps to seek their repayment.
Lorne’s post-transfer conduct does not corroborate Bruce’s assertions and is
not sufficient to rebut the presumption of a resulting trust.
[66]          
Some money may be owed to Bruce as reimbursement for expenses incurred
on Lorne’s behalf. The balance of the $178,000 is not a valid inter vivos transfer.
There is no credible evidence to rebut the applicable presumption of a
resulting trust.
[67]          
The Application is allowed in part.
[68]          
The April 2015 cheque in the amount of $98,000 was not
a valid inter vivos gift. There is insufficient evidence to corroborate
Bruce’s assertion that this money was intended as a gift. Moreover, even on
Bruce’s evidence, the alleged intended recipient of the gift did not receive of
accept the full funds. The respondent must return the full sum of $98,000 to
the Estate of Lorne MacRae.
[69]          
The September 2015 transfer from the CIBC Wood Gundy
account is a valid inter vivos gift. Lorne’s intention to give this
money to Bruce is corroborated by a Gift Letter, which Lorne signed. The
presumption of a resulting trust is rebutted by the evidence. In the
circumstances, the presumption of undue influence does not apply.
[70]          
The balance of the $178,000 (after deduction of
eligible expenses) is not a valid inter vivos transfer. There was no
credible evidence to rebut the applicable presumption of a resulting trust I remained seized of this issue, if the parties are unable to reach
an agreement regarding eligible expenses.
[71]          
Success on this application was divided. If the parties are not able to
resolve the issue of costs, they may make submissions within 30 days. The
submissions must be no longer than three pages, exclusive of the Bill of Costs.