[1]              
Mr. Swaby pleaded guilty to various offences
involving human trafficking, drugs, and a firearm.  On October 31, 2024 I read
a summary of my reasons for sentence in court.  What follows are my full
reasons for sentence.
[2]              
Mr. Swaby met J.J. in February 2020.  J.J. was
working as an independent escort at the time.  J.J. agreed to go into business
with Mr. Swaby.  He would take care of administrative details – arranging
customers, booking hotel rooms, creating, and posting advertisements, providing
protection – in exchange for a percentage of her earnings.  Mr. Swaby used the
term “party favours” in J.J.’s advertisements, meaning that customers could
also purchase drugs.  Mr. Swaby did sell drugs.  He decided J.J.’s
restrictions, and the prices to be charged by J.J.  Mr. Swaby set a quota of
$1500 per day for J.J.  She worked long hours.  Mr. Swaby decided when she
could eat.  He also provided her with alcohol and cocaine so that she could keep
working.  Mr. Swaby kept control over J.J.  He would get mad if she left the
room without his permission, and one time he grabbed her by the hair and threw
her on the bed.  Mr. Swaby took all the money she earned.  She estimated that
it amounted to about $15,000.00.  J.J. eventually decided to leave Mr. Swaby. 
She suffered no repercussions.
[3]              
Mr. Swaby also worked with A.A.P.  A.A.P. did
escorting for Mr. Swaby in Toronto, Mississauga, and St. Catherines.  He drove
her to her appointments.  Mr. Swaby prepared advertisements for A.A.P. using
both fake pictures and sexualized real pictures.  Mr. Swaby required A.A.P. to
be responsive to messages from customers.  If she did not respond quickly
enough, or fell asleep instead of working, Mr. Swaby would become angry and
threaten to come to her hotel room.  He decided her hours and her
restrictions.  She had a quota of $1000 per day. Mr. Swaby became angry with
her if she did not reach it.  A.A.P. knew that Mr. Swaby had a drinking
problem.  He provided her with cocaine so that she could work.  A.A.P. was also
aware that Mr. Swaby had a gun.  She was afraid of him.  Mr. Swaby advertised
through A.A.P’s escorting ads that “party favours” – drugs – were available. 
She was required to complete the drug transactions on his behalf.  She was not
permitted to leave the room except with his permission.  He provided food,
drinks, and other products.  During the time that she worked for him she earned
about $15,000.  Mr. Swaby took all her earnings.  A.A.P. eventually decided to
leave Mr. Swaby.  She suffered no repercussions.
[4]              
A.P. also worked with Mr. Swaby.  Tragically,
A.P. has since died.  The Toronto Police learned of the relationship between
Mr. Swaby and A.P. from a review of Mr. Swaby’s cell phone.  The police found
36 escort advertisement photos of A.P. on Mr. Swaby’s phone.  Mr. Swaby posted
advertisements for A.P. and scheduled customers.  He also listed “party
favours” in her advertisements.  He sold powder cocaine through A.P. to her customers. 
He provided her with cocaine as well.
[5]              
On November 18, 2021, the police executed a
search warrant at 311-30 Livonia Place in Toronto.  That was the apartment of
his girlfriend, Coretea Anthony, and her 12-year-old son.  The police found Mr.
Swaby in the apartment and arrested him.  They located several items in Mr.
Swaby’s pants, including $810 in cash and a package containing crack cocaine. 
The total amount of the cocaine seized was 6.56 grams.  The police also
arrested Ms. Anthony, and she has faced charges.
[6]              
The police also found other baggies of powder
and crack cocaine in Ms. Anthony’s apartment.  The drugs belonged to Mr.
Swaby.  The police found a 9mm Luger firearm with a 10-round magazine on the
couch.   Mr. Swaby admitted to ownership of the firearm and has maintained from
his arrest that Ms. Anthony had nothing to do with it.  The police also seized
28 rounds of 9mm ammunition – including some hollow-point rounds.  Mr. Swaby
acknowledged that he possessed the cocaine for the purpose of trafficking.  Mr.
Swaby was on a weapons prohibition at the time.
[7]              
The Crown filed an indictment containing 38
counts.  On July 22, 2024, Mr. Swaby pleaded guilty to the following 12
offences:
[8]              
Counts 1, 2, and 3 related to human trafficking
of and sexual services provided by A.A.P.  Counts 9 and 11 related to sexual
services provided by A.P.  Counts 14, 15, and 17 related to human trafficking
and sexual services provided by J.J.  Counts 21, 26, and 31 related to the
firearm and the cocaine seized by the police during the execution of the search
warrant on November 18, 2021.  Count 28 related to the sale of cocaine by Mr.
Swaby.
[9]              
Victim impact statements were provided by the
following people:
[10]          
A.A.P. indicated in her victim impact statement
that prior to becoming involved with the sex trade she lived a normal life. 
She had a job and had plans to further her education.  Mr. Swaby, she says,
introduced her to cocaine.  She has struggled with depression, trust issues,
and substance addiction issues.  A.A.P. also indicated that Mr. Swaby took all
her money, leaving her financially unstable and unable to pursue post-secondary
education.  These issues, as well as the fear that Mr. Swaby might seek
retribution have all contributed to the significant toll on her mental health. 
A.A.P.’s involvement with Mr. Swaby has deeply impacted her.
[11]          
J.J., in her victim impact statement, also spoke
of how her involvement with Mr. Swaby has had a deep and long-lasting impact on
her.  She believed that she and Mr. Swaby were in a genuine relationship. 
Instead, she indicated, he manipulated her and used her.  Prior to her
involvement in the sex industry J.J. had been sober, was working, and had finished
college.  Mr. Swaby, she says, introduced her to sex work and provided her with
alcohol and drugs.  (I note that the defence objects to the statement that Mr.
Swaby “showed her the ropes”. The agreed statement of facts indicates that she
had been an independent sex worker prior to meeting him.  To be clear, where an
assertion in a victim impact statement is contradicted the agreed statement of
facts, I do not take it into account in sentencing Mr. Swaby.)  J.J. indicated
that he used her, broke her heart, helped to destroy her relationships, and
contributed towards her living in a homeless shelter for three years.  J.J. has
had her sense of trust destroyed, has been unable to hold a job, and is still
dealing with her mental health issues although she has been going to
counselling and has managed to stay sober.
[12]          
A.P.’s mother, T.P., described A.P. as a happy,
witty young lady who was full of life and a good mother to her three children. 
Her behaviour changed.  A.P. became depressed and feared for her safety. 
A.P.’s struggles had a significant effect on T.P.  A.P.’s three children also
filed victim impact statements.  They are heartbreaking.  The children all wish
she was still present in their lives.  They long for her attention, her
kindness, her presence.  F.H., A.P.’s grandmother, filed a victim impact
statement in which she described the impact on her – including lost sleep, and
watching her great-grandchildren not have their mother.  Other family members
filed similar victim impact statements.
[13]          
I certainly understand the pain and the anguish
that A.P.’s family members feel.  I also understand that they want to see Mr.
Swaby punished for, as they put it, taking A.P. from them.  It is
understandable that they should feel that way.  There is no doubt that Mr.
Swaby exploited A.P.  He provided her with drugs.  He manipulated her through
her drug addiction.  There is no evidence, however, that Mr. Swaby was
responsible for her tragic death.  I do not consider A.P.’s death to be an
aggravating factor on sentencing.
[14]          
A pre-sentence report was prepared for the
court.
[15]          
Mr. Swaby is now 38 years old.  He was born in
Jamaica and came to Canada in 1992 at the age of 6.  He has siblings in the
Greater Toronto Area and in Jamaica – one of whom was unfortunately killed by
gun violence.  Mr. Swaby’s parents were young – his mother was 17 when he was
born.  She immigrated to Canada when he was 1.  He lived with his maternal
grandparents until his mother brought him to Canada five years later.  He said
that life with his grandparents was rough.  He said that he endured frequent
beatings.  He found his father to be distant and difficult to communicate with. 
His relationship with both of his parents has strengthened over the years.  His
father is supportive but has tried, and unfortunately failed, to get Mr. Swaby
to avoid mistakes.  None of the members of Mr. Swaby’s family or extended
family are involved with the criminal justice system.  He comes from a
pro-social family background.  His parents own and operate a barber shop.
[16]          
After he came to Canada, Mr. Swaby resided with
his parents and siblings – first in an apartment and later in a townhouse
purchased by his parents.  At age 18 he moved in with his uncle and
girlfriend.  He agreed that he was very rebellious at that time.  He says that
he experienced a gunpoint robbery and moved out of his area.  He began to
accumulate criminal convictions.  He began to hang out with people involved in
a criminal lifestyle.  One of his friends was killed.
[17]          
Mr. Swaby has completed high school.  He said
that he was suspended once in elementary school, but never in high school.  He
generally did well in school, aside from failing math in Grade 11.  He reported
that his interactions with teachers were generally positive.  In terms of
employment, Mr. Swaby has had occasional summer and part-time jobs.  In 2013 he
worked at his parent’s barber shop as a barber but went on social assistance in
2017 and began to receive ODSP at age 18 due to mental health issues.
[18]          
Mr. Swaby has significant substance abuse
issues.  More particularly, Mr. Swaby has a problem with alcohol.  Some of the
victims in this case have described him as an alcoholic.  He was using alcohol
and Xanax.  He also began to traffic in controlled substances.  As he put it,
if he had not been selling, he would not have met the victims in this case. 
Mr. Swaby did acknowledge to the PSR writer that he has a problem with
alcohol.  He also stated to the PSR writer:
[19]          
Mr. Swaby also admitted to the PSR writer that
he had no need to have a firearm.  He did describe being around many violent
situations, including robberies and shootings.
[20]          
Mr. Swaby has a significant criminal record. 
All of the entries on his record are adult convictions. In 2008 Mr. Swaby was
convicted of theft under $5000.00.  In 2009 he was convicted of aggravated
assault and possession of a prohibited or restricted firearm.  He was sentenced
to 8 years for the aggravated assault and 1 year consecutive for possession of
the firearm.  In that offence, Mr. Swaby shot the victim in the stomach after a
confrontation.  In 2012 Mr. Swaby was sentenced to a further 4 months
consecutive for possession of a schedule II drug for the purpose of
trafficking.  In 2019 he started accumulating impaired driving offences.  In
2019 he was convicted of “over 80” for which he received a fine and a driving
prohibition.  Later in 2019 he was convicted of impaired driving, fail to
comply with a recognizance, and operating a conveyance while prohibited from
doing so.  He received suspended sentences on each (in light of pre-sentence
custody) and a further three-year driving prohibition.
[21]          
Mr. Swaby hand-wrote a lengthy letter to the
Court.  In it he apologized to A.A.P. and J.J.  In his letter he expressed the
hope that God will watch over A.P.’s children and that He grants her a peaceful
repose.  He also apologized to Ms. Anthony, his co-accused, and her son.  He
apologized to them for, as he put it, putting them through the mud and causing
them so much trouble.  Finally, he apologized to his family for all the hurt,
pain, and stress he has caused them.  He thanked them for continuing to support
him.
[22]          
Mr. Swaby’s letter then delved into what he
called his journey of the last three years at the Toronto South Detention
Centre.  He said that the letter was not meant to be a grievance, but rather an
insight into how his time in jail has affected him.  That time included
lockdowns due to the COVID pandemic.  He described being locked down and under
droplet protection for 2-3 weeks.  He had felt isolated and had mental
breakdowns due to the isolation. Visits were cancelled for about four months. He
described some inhumane conditions at the detention centre.  These conditions
have been mentioned by other judges in other judgements, and are,
unfortunately, well known.  Mr. Swaby also described a high level of gang
activity and violence in the jail.  The violence caused him to become
hyper-aware, anxious, and depressed.  His remedy was to attend frequent chapel
services and programming.  In his letter Mr. Swaby also acknowledged his
problem with drugs and alcohol. He understands that he must acknowledge the
problem to deal with it.  It caused him to live a life of partying that led to
women, sex, and more drugs.  He expressed the hope that he can be a better man.
[23]          
Mr. Swaby also attached a hand-written
“declaration of change” to his letter.  In it he said that going to jail was a
catalyst for change for him.  He states in the declaration that he is grateful
in some ways for jail.  He uses the metaphor of shackles.  He states,
essentially, that he exchanged the shackles of drug and alcohol addiction for the
physical shackles of jail.  This has given him insight into his problems and,
he hopes, the strength to change.
[24]          
The Crown’s position is that I should sentence
Mr. Swaby to a global term of imprisonment of 14 years imprisonment less
pre-sentence custody.  As well, I should impose a DNA order, a s. 109 order for
life, and a restitution order of $15,000.00 per complainant for a total of
$30,000.00.  The Crown also seeks forfeiture of the seized firearm, $810.00
found on Mr. Swaby on arrest, and his phone.
[25]          
Ms. Gharabaway relies on R. v. A.E., 2018
ONSC 471 as authority for the assertion that the sentencing range in human
trafficking cases is 4-8 years.  A.E. is also the case that is closest to the
facts to this one.  A.E. trafficked and abused two women between 2011 and
2015.  He sold drugs.  He possessed a loaded, prohibited firearm.  He was
convicted after a trial of human trafficking in relation to each complainant;
the criminal harassment of one and the assault of the other; possession of
cocaine for the purpose of trafficking; and offences in relation to the
firearm.  He did not procure the complainants as each had worked as an
independent escort and then approached him.  He had a criminal record that
included a conviction for second degree murder as a young offender, but he had
made rehabilitative strides.  Boswell J. sentenced the offender to a global
sentence of ten years, after which he deducted four years of credit for
pre-sentence custody.
[26]          
In R. v. Dak, an unreported decision of
Justice Kennedy of the Superior Court in Kitchener dated December 12, 2023, the
offender pleaded guilty to possession for a loaded restricted firearm and
possession of cocaine for the purpose of trafficking.  He went to trial on
other charges and was convicted of human trafficking and threatening in
relation to one complainant, his partner.  Mr. Dak was a youthful first
offender.  His personal circumstances were challenging.  His mother died when
he was young and his father abandoned the family.  He lived with his
grandmother.  He did attend college.  He introduced his partner to sex work. 
He used emotional manipulation and physical violence at least once to enforce
compliance.  He kept all her earnings and controlled her work in the sex trade
for about 9 months.  Justice Kennedy, after reviewing the cases, found that 4-8
years is the range for human trafficking offences.  Justice Kennedy would have
sentenced Mr. Dak to 5 ½ years on the human trafficking offence alone prior to
accounting for totality.  Justice Kennedy would have sentenced Mr. Dak to a
global sentence of 12 years but after accounting for totality imposed a global
sentence of 9 years before reductions for pre-sentence custody. He imposed a
restitution order of about $48,000 and gave Mr. Dak 10 years to pay after
release from custody.
[27]          
The Crown also points to R. v. Downey,
2023 ONSC 3776 where the offender was convicted on multiple human trafficking
related counts in relation to four complainants.  He manipulated and was
violent towards them, controlled their movements, and required them to be
available to work 24/7.  The offender took all of their earnings.  He had a
lengthy criminal record.  He was unrepentant and refused to participate in a
pre-sentence report.  Somji J. sentenced him to a global sentence of 15 years.
[28]          
The defence position is that I should sentence
Mr. Swaby to a global sentence of nine years in the penitentiary.  Mr. DeCock
has no opposition to any of the ancillary orders, other than the restitution
order.  He argues that Mr. Swaby is unable to pay restitution, given that he is
currently incarcerated and on ODSP.
[29]          
Mr. DeCock filed several cases.  I have reviewed
them all but need only mention a few:
[30]          
In R. v. Deiaco, 2019 ONCA 12, the
offender pleaded guilty to human trafficking.  The complainant was addicted to
drugs.  She escaped after five days of sex work.  He then abducted her and
placed her in the trunk of a car before the police found her.  The sentencing
judge sentenced him to eight years.  It appears he had no criminal record.  The
Court of Appeal upheld an 8-year sentence.
[31]          
In R. v. Senouri Abedini, 2020 ONCA 520,
the offender was convicted of various human trafficking offences related to two
complainants.  One of the complainants was under 18 years old.  The trial judge
found that the offender orchestrated a sex trade business and enticed
vulnerable young women.  She exercised strict and abusive control over the
victims.  The Court of Appeal upheld an 8.5 year sentence.
[32]          
In R. v. H-O., 2022 ONSC 4900, the offender
pleaded guilty to six human-trafficking and sexual services offences in
relation to three complainants.  One of those complainants was under 18 years
old.  The Crown sought a sentence of ten years.  The defence sought a sentence
of between five and six years.  The offender exerted a great deal of control
over the young complainants.  He provided them with drugs.  The exploitive
conduct was of a relatively lengthy duration, lasting months.  He used violence
and intimidation to control the victims.  He did, however, plead guilty and was
remorseful.  He had struggled with mental health and trauma issues.  The
sentencing judge would have imposed a sentence of 8 ½ years but after taking
into account harsh conditions of custody imposed a sentence of 7 years, less Summers
credit.
[33]          
In R. v. Musara, 2022 ONSC 2835 the
offender trafficked a vulnerable 18-year old over a 10-month period.  He was
found guilty of human trafficking and associated sexual-services offences, and
possession of an illegal handgun.  He introduced the victim into sex work and
got her addicted to cocaine, using that addiction to manipulate her.  The
victim received very little of her earnings due to her drug addiction.  The
offender threatened to kill her if she left him.  Nakatsuru J. sentenced the
offender to 6 years and 8 months.
[34]          
After reviewing the cases, I adopt the following
observation of Justice Boswell at para. 46 of A.E. about the range of
sentence for human trafficking offences:
[35]          
I agree with Justice Boswell that the range of
sentence for human trafficking offences is four to eight years.  All human
trafficking is predatory, controlling, and exploitive.  The greater the amount
of exploitation, the higher the sentence should be.
[36]          
I agree that A.E. and Dak are the
cases most on point.  No case is identical but these two cases have important
similarities.  The offender in A.E. was convicted of murder as a youth; Mr.
Swaby was convicted of aggravated assault after shooting someone.  Dak and A.E.
both had more troubled upbringings than Mr. Swaby.  They all involved human
trafficking, guns, and drugs.
[37]          
I would distinguish Deiaco on the basis
that it involved only one complainant for a short time, although of course
there were other aggravating factors not present here, including abducting the
complainant and locking her in a trunk.
[38]          
Both counsel also filed cases dealing with
firearms and drug trafficking, but the range of sentence for those offences is
more settled.
[39]          
The most important mitigating factor in this
case is the guilty plea.  Mr. Swaby pleaded guilty, took responsibility for his
actions, and has apologized to the victims and his family.  It is also
important that by pleading guilty, Mr. Swaby spared the victims from
cross-examination.  Victims usually find cross-examination to be an ordeal, and
many have commented that cross-examination can even be worse than the actual
offence.  Re-traumatization through cross-examination is a something very real
– anyone who has spent time in the criminal courts has seen it.  Sparing the
victims that experience obviously carries weight.
[40]          
I also find it mitigating that Mr. Swaby has
shown insight into his behaviour.  He understands that he has grievously harmed
others.  He has also shown insight into his substance abuse problems – problems
which have been described by the victims.  He has attended Alcoholics Anonymous
while incarcerated.
[41]          
Mr. Swaby has worked hard while in custody to
take advantage of opportunities for growth and learning.
[42]          
Mr. Swaby also filed an affidavit where he
described the conditions of custody at the Toronto South.  He described the
conditions under which he dealt with the Covid 19 pandemic.  For example, he
did not report symptoms of Covid one time so that his entire range would not be
locked down.  The conditions were very difficult in the institution.  There
were no visits from December 2021 to April 2022.  Mr. Swaby described the
conditions under lockdown, and the generally unhealthy and unhygienic
conditions in the jail.  Many of his experiences – such as not receiving fresh
laundry or cleaning supplies – have been echoed in other cases in this court. 
Mr. Swaby also described witnessing the traumatic death of a friend in custody
from an overdose.
[43]          
It is mitigating that Mr. Swaby has the support
of his family and friends.  I have reviewed letters from the following people:
[44]          
Mr. Swaby also provided several certificates of
completion of courses that he has taken in custody, including those dealing with
substance abuse, life skills, and being an effective father.
[45]          
Mr. DeCock asked that I consider the Morris
factors as well: R. v. Morris, 2021 ONCA 680.  Mr. Swaby is a Black
man.  No doubt he has endured institutional and even blatant racism.  Morris
teaches, however, that there must be some connection between the commission of
the offence and the factors.  Respectfully, it is difficult for me to see the
connection in this case.  Mr. Swaby did not suggest that his criminal behaviour
was connected in any way.  Indeed, I think it is to his credit that he takes
responsibility and does not blame anyone but himself for his mistakes.  He has
seen violence and had some instability in his younger years, but he was raised
in an intact family where his parents ran a small business.  Judging by the
fact that his siblings have led pro-social lives, his parents provided him with
love, structure, and discipline.  I suspect his parents are of relatively
modest means, but they also provided him with financial security.  I do not
doubt that they did their best for him.
[46]          
There are some significant aggravating factors
in this case, which I now turn to.  The nature of the offences is very
aggravating.  There are obviously a range of behaviours encompassed by human
trafficking and prostitution related offences.  Some behaviours are more
malignant than others.   These offences are particularly bad.  It is highly
aggravating that Mr. Swaby used drugs and alcohol to manipulate each of A.P.,
A.A.P., and J.J.  He knew that each victim had a substance abuse issue, and he
took advantage of it.  A.P. and J.J. each worked for him for significant periods
of time.  Mr. Swaby took virtually all their earnings.  He controlled their
movements, when they could eat, when they could work, and the sexual services
that they were required to perform.
[47]          
I find it particularly aggravating that that Mr.
Swaby used all three victims to sell drugs, or “party favours” as they were
described in the advertisements.  As sex workers, J.J., A.P., and A.A.P. were
immune from prosecution for advertising or providing their own sexual services:
Criminal Code, s. 286.5.  They were not, of course, immune from drug
trafficking charges.  By selling drugs through each of the victims, Mr. Swaby
exposed them to the danger of robberies by customers or people pretending to be
customers, who would have known that relatively defenceless women were in
possession of drugs.  Mr. Swaby also exposed the victims to the danger of
arrest and prosecution for drug trafficking.
[48]          
It is aggravating that Mr. Swaby used violence,
or the threat of violence, to keep the victims in line.  J.J. described a
violent incident that included hair pulling.  A.A.P. knew that Mr. Swaby had a
gun, which frightened her.  Of course, Mr. Swaby did have a gun – one was found
when a search warrant was executed.
[49]          
These offences had a significant impact on J.J.
and A.A.P.  I infer that they also had a significant impact on A.P.  The impact
on the victim is a statutory aggravating factor: Criminal Code, s. 718.2(iii.1).
[50]          
Mr. Swaby’s possession of the firearm in
proximity drugs is aggravating.  I find that Mr. Swaby used the firearm as a
tool of the trade – whether that trade was human trafficking or drug
trafficking.
[51]          
I also note that Mr. Swaby was subject to a
weapons prohibition at the time.  Since I will be sentencing him separately on
the breach of the weapons prohibition, I will not consider as an aggravating
factor when I sentence Mr. Swaby for possession of the firearm.  What is extremely
aggravating, however, is that he kept the firearm and ammunition in an
apartment with a child.  He made no real effort to keep it in a place where his
girlfriend’s son could not easily find it.  Rather, it was on a couch with a
loaded magazine.  Imagine the consequences if Ms. Anthony’s son had found the
gun and started to play with it.  The consequences could have been
catastrophic.
[52]          
I recently considered this issue in R. v.
Nygard, 2024 ONSC 4837.  In that case I declined to make a
freestanding restitution order as the amounts were not readily ascertainable.
[53]          
Subsection 738(1)(b) of the Criminal Code
states that where an offender is convicted of an offence a court may order
restitution:
[54]          
Based on my interpretation of s. 738(1)(b) of
the Criminal Code there are three elements that must be met before I can
order restitution:
[55]          
The offender’s ability to pay is irrelevant.  A
victim may complete Form 34.1 setting out the particulars of a victim’s
pecuniary loss: Criminal Code, s. 737.1(4).
[56]          
There is no doubt that each victim suffered
psychological harm.  There is also no doubt that the amount sought by the Crown
would not exceed all pecuniary damages.
[57]          
The Crown suggests that a restitution order in
the amount of $30,000 would be appropriate.  She suggests $15,000 per living
victim.  But are the amounts readily ascertainable?  Unlike in Nygard, I
find that the amounts in this case are.
[58]          
It is an admitted fact in this case that the
victims earned money and Mr. Swaby kept all of it.  According to the Agreed
Statement of Facts J.J. was required to earn $1500 per day.  She worked five
days per week.  That amounts to $7500 per week.  She escorted for Mr. Swaby for
about two months in 2020.  The total amounts to $30,000.00.  I find that the
$15,000 requested by the Crown is a conservative estimate.
[59]          
A.A.P. was required to earn $1000 per day. 
According to the Agreed Statement of Facts A.A.P. earned about $15,000 while
she escorted for Mr. Swaby.  The amounts are sufficiently grounded in the
evidence for them to be readily ascertainable.  I therefore find that a
freestanding restitution order is appropriate.
[60]          
After hearing further submissions from counsel,
I granted 10 years from his release from custody to make payment, with yearly
installments.
[61]          
The terms of the restitution order will be as
follows:
[62]          
If Mr. Swaby is unable to make the final
lump-sum payment, he can apply for an extension of time from the court.
[63]          
The fundamental principle of sentencing is that
a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree
of responsibility of the offender: Criminal Code, s. 718.1.  Other
sentencing principles include that sentences should be raised or lowered to
account for aggravating and mitigating factors; and that sentences should be
similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences
committed in similar circumstances.  While sentences for unrelated offences
should generally be consecutive, the totality principle requires that a global
sentence not be so crushing that it destroys any hope of rehabilitation.
[64]          
The primary sentencing principles in cases of
human trafficking are denunciation and deterrence.  Human trafficking and pimping
are abhorrent crimes.  They involve exploiting and profiting from the intimate
sexual activities of other people – other people who are usually vulnerable, as
these victims were.
[65]          
Sentencing is often described as the most
difficult part of a judge’s job.  I agree with that.  This case is an example
of the difficulty of sentencing people.  On the one hand, Mr. Swaby committed a
very serious set of crimes over a lengthy period.  He damaged many people.  He
sold drugs.  He possessed a firearm while he was subject to a prohibition
order.  On the other hand, over the course of 3 years he appears to have gained
insight and made strides towards rehabilitation.  He has apologized to the
victims and to his family.  Balancing an appropriately denunciatory sentence
with the goal of rehabilitation is my challenging task.
[66]          
Several cases have considered the factors that a
sentencing court should consider in human trafficking and prostitution cases. 
See, for example, R. v. Lopez, 2018 ONSC 4749 at para. 64.  Justice Boswell
set out a list of factors in R. v. A.E., supra, at para. 56 taken
from the Alberta Court of Appeal’s decision in R. v. Tang, 1997 ABCA 174 (CanLII), [1997] A.J.
No. 460 (also cited in R. v. Lopez):
[67]          
Justice Boswell, quoting Justice Hill’s decision
in R. v. Miller, [1997] O.J. No. 3911, included other factors:
[68]          
When I apply these factors, I make the following
findings:
[69]          
Prior to applying the principle of totality, the
offences in relation to A.A.P. and J.J. each merit a collective sentence of 5
to 6 years in the penitentiary; the offences in relation to A.P. merit a
sentence of 3 to 4 years in the penitentiary; the gun possession offence merits
a sentence in the range of 3 to 4 years; the drug possession and trafficking
offences merit a sentence in the range of 1 year; and the weapons prohibition
offence merits a sentence of six months to 1 year.  Thus, before applying the
principle of totality, these offences would merit a sentence in the range of 17
½ to 22 years.  Such a sentence would grossly violate the principle of
totality, as Crown counsel recognized by recommending a global sentence of 14
years.
[70]          
I would have sentenced Mr. Swaby to a global
sentence in the range of 12 to 14 years in the penitentiary but for the
conditions of custody over three years, the principle of totality and, of
course, the guilty plea.  When I consider all the sentencing principles,
including denunciation, deterrence, rehabilitation, totality, and the
mitigating and aggravating circumstances, I sentence Mr. Swaby to a global
sentence of 11 years.
[71]          
Mr. Swaby has been in custody since November 8,
2021.  As of the date of sentencing, he has spent 1089 days in custody, or 35
months and 24 days – almost three years.  At 1.5:1 that works out 1633.5 days
or about 54 ½ months, or just under 4 ½ years: Criminal Code, s.
719(3.1); R. v. Summers, 2014 SCC 26.  I will credit him with 4 ½ years
in order to simplify the math and also to give him a slight break.  Mr. Swaby
therefore still has 6 ½ years to serve.
[72]          
Thus, the warrant of committal will read as
follows:
[73]          
Global sentence of 11 years less presentence
custody, with a recommendation that Mr. Swaby remain in a penitentiary in
Southern Ontario, if possible.  There will also be a note on the warrant of
committal that Mr. Swaby would benefit from continued counselling,
rehabilitation, and therapy.
[74]          
There will be a DNA order.  Human trafficking is
a secondary designated offence.  In my view it is appropriate in this case. 
There will be a s. 109 order for life.  There will also be a freestanding
restitution order in the amount of $30,000 in favour of A.A.P. and J.J. for
$15,000 each.  The seized firearm, the $810.00 found on Mr. Swaby on arrest,
and his phone are all ordered forfeited.