[1]              
On October 03, 2024, I granted Lucien Cammaert’s
motion and transferred these proceedings from Toronto to Sudbury.  The parties
were unable to agree on costs.  I have considered their written submissions,
including the moving party’s costs outline.    This is my decision on costs. 
In what follows, I refer to the parties by their first names, which is how they
presented themselves at the motion and in their costs submissions.
[2]              
Modern costs awards address several important
principles. They partially indemnify successful litigants for the cost of
litigation, they encourage settlement, and they discourage and sanction
inappropriate behaviour. Awards should reflect what the court views is a fair
and reasonable amount that should be paid by the unsuccessful party, rather
than an exact measure of the actual costs of the successful party.  Part of
this assessment includes considering what the unsuccessful party could expect
to pay in the circumstances: Boucher v. Public Accountants Council for the
Province of Ontario, 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA) at para 26.
[3]              
Costs awards are entirely within the discretion
of the court. Rule 57.01 provides some guidelines that may be considered when
exercising that discretion, in addition to the result in the proceeding and any
offers to settle.
[4]              
This case involves Rosemarie’s request to set
aside powers of attorney in favour of Lucien granted by their father.  She
challenges their father’s capacity to grant the powers of attorney and asks
that she be appointed as his guardian.  She further challenges Lucien’s
management of their father’s property.
[5]              
Lucien seeks substantial indemnity costs of
$7,574.96 inclusive of disbursements.  He submits Rosemarie’s behaviour warrants
an elevated award because she insisted on proceeding in Toronto despite her
counsel being the only connection to that jurisdiction.  Further, he argues she
requested an oral hearing despite the fact the presumptive mode of appearance
for transfer motions is in writing: Ontario Superior Court of Justice, Consolidated
Civil Provincial Practice Direction (Toronto: Ontario Superior Court of
Justice, amended February 01, 2024) para 51.  Finally, he submits Rosemarie improperly
accused him of abusing the court’s process by bringing this motion while he had
attorned to the Toronto jurisdiction.
[6]              
Rosemarie submits costs should not be awarded
because she is simply seeking an accounting of the assets of their father.  She
further argues she had a prima facie right to choose the venue at the
commencement of the proceedings.  She submits in the alternative that costs
should be payable in the cause, suggesting this is the normal practice for
transfer motions.
[7]              
A successful party is presumptively entitled to its
costs.  On a contested motion, costs shall be fixed and payable within thirty
days unless the court “is satisfied that a different order would be more just”:
Yelda v. Vu, 2013 ONSC 5903, at para 11 (leave to appeal refused, 2014
ONCA 353); Rules of Civil Procedure, RRO 1990, Reg. 194, r 57.03(1).
[8]              
Rosemarie has not persuaded me to deviate from
this well-established principle.  Lucien brought the transfer motion in writing
in accordance with the Practice Direction.  Rosemarie requested an oral
hearing that required half a day.  This necessarily took time to schedule
before me.  Lucien cannot be faulted for engaging in the proceedings in Toronto
while the parties waited for the oral hearing in Sudbury.
[9]              
Nor do I agree there is principle that costs of
transfer motions are always ordered in the cause.  Rosemarie filed several transfer
decisions in which the court ordered costs in the cause.  All but one of the
cases provided were decided by Firestone, RSJ.  However, in none of these cases
does Firestone RSJ enunciate a statement of law supportive of Rosemarie’s
position.  Notably, in his transfer decision Bruce Power L.P. v. BNT Canada,
L.P., 2018 ONSC 5968 (not provided by counsel) Firestone RSJ encouraged the
parties to agree on costs for the motion, and he ordered written submissions in
the event of disagreement.
[10]          
The other transfer case relied upon by Rosemarie
is distinguishable.  In that case, Howard J. (as he then was) fixed partial
indemnity costs for the successful party but ordered them payable in the cause:
Williams v. Provost, 2022 ONSC 3255, at paras 46-47.  In that case, the
party that successfully moved for a transfer of the proceedings was one of
three respondents in an estates dispute.  The motion was heard in writing,
which reduced costs and time.  As well, the successful party was the only
respondent that was opposed to the relief sought in the application.  One of the
other respondents opposed the motion to transfer, as did the applicant.  In those
circumstances, Howard J. declined to order the successful party her costs in
the event.
[11]          
In my view, Lucien is entitled to partial
indemnity costs of this motion.  Substantial indemnity costs may be engaged
when there are offers to settle (which is not the case here) or conduct by the
unsuccessful party that warrants elevated costs.  I cannot find that the
positions advanced by Rosemarie were unreasonable so as to require substantial
indemnity, although I disagreed with them in my decision.
[12]          
For the above reasons, I find that $5,564.97 in
costs, all-inclusive, on a partial indemnity basis, represent a fair,
reasonable, and proportionate award in the circumstances of this motion.  These
costs shall be paid by Rosemarie to Lucien within thirty days of this order.
[13]          
No costs were sought by or against s. 3 counsel
and none will be given.