[1]              
The accused, Adrian Blair Schmid, is charged
with five counts of sexual abuse against two young complainants, N.M. and T.C.,
over the period from January 2020 to June 2022, and three counts of child
pornography.
[2]              
The allegations are that the accused befriended
the complainants and their parents and gained their trust for the children to attend
overnight stays at his residence. It is alleged that he groomed the children to
normalize various sexual behaviours and his sexual assaults on the children.
[3]              
The allegations are many and serious. They include
instances of touching a child’s penis, masturbation, fellatio, and anal penetration.
The allegations also involve pornographic images of two known children, N.M.
and J., and countless other pictures of unknown children, some engaged in
various sexual acts including masturbation, fellatio, and anal penetration.
[4]              
The accused testified and denied all allegations.
He denies the allegations of the two young complainants, and he maintains that
the pornographic images found on his electronic devices are not his.
[5]              
The evidence may be considered count to count as
the Crown successfully brought a similar fact application. Also, identification,
authentication, and continuity of the seized evidence were admitted, as were
the facts relating to the execution of the search warrant.
[6]              
The indictment relates to three young
complainants, N.M., T.C., and J. The complainants were between 13 and 15, and 9
and 10 at the time. The indictment also relates to unknown children, those visible
on the many child pornography images.
[7]              
N.M. was born in 2006. He met the accused
through his involvement in the Air Cadets program that he joined when he was
about 12. It is not disputed that N.M. frequently stayed overnight at the
accused’s residence.
[8]              
T.C. was born in 2012. He met the accused while
visiting his sister at his sister’s adoptive family, which is related to N.M.’s
family. T.C. also occasionally stayed overnight at the accused’s residence. The
accused testified he considered adopting T.C.
[9]              
J. is N.M.’s younger brother. J. was born in
2012. The accused was his godfather. It is not disputed that J. also
occasionally stayed overnight at the accused’s home, sometimes with and
sometimes without N.M.
[10]          
The accused was born in 1975. He worked for an
insurance company and was an officer, a captain, in the Air Cadets program. Through
his involvement in that program, the accused met N.M.’s and J.’s parents (“the
parents”) and became friends with them. The parents described the accused as a “good
friend”. The father of N.M and J. (“the father”) considered the accused as a “best
friend” at the time of the alleged incidents. The accused agreed that they were
“close friends”.
[11]          
The accused lived alone, and the parents included
the accused in their family. The accused was part of their COVID-19 bubble.
They had him over to their house and to their trailer for dinners, and
sometimes, overnight as their friendship progressed. Eventually, the accused
was considered an uncle to their children, and became the godfather of one of
their children, J. Both parents testified that the accused was a nice person
and they trusted him. The father did free renovations at the accused’s home,
and N.M. regularly came over to help, after staying overnight, as did J, on occasion.
[12]          
It is not disputed that N.M. often stayed
overnight at the accused’s home during the period covered in the indictment—from
January 2020 to about June 2022. N.M.’s and J.’s mother (“the mother”) testified
that N.M. slept over at the accused’s home almost every weekend starting in
about October 2020. She said that J. also liked to stay overnight at the
accused’s home, that he liked the attention he received from the accused.
[13]          
N.M. testified the accused touched his penis and
his buttocks, asked him to undress and be naked around the house. He said the
accused asked him to masturbate in his presence and engage in mutual
masturbation, fellatio, and anal intercourse. He testified he was also
encouraged to use a blue dildo in his anus and a black vibrating sex toy as
directed by the accused, to watch men and boy porn with the accused, and was repeatedly
told that the accused was “teaching him”. N.M. also testified the accused
counselled or invited him to have sexual contact with him and with T.C.
[14]          
The father helped the accused with his home
renovations, starting in the spring of 2020. The accused agreed that N.M. came
over with his father and helped as well, as did J. on occasion. N.M. stayed
overnight at the accused’s home to watch movies and be more easily ready the
next morning to continue assisting his father with the ongoing renovations. On
such occasions, the accused testified that he and N.M. had dinner, watched a
movie, and eventually that each separately went to bed.
[15]          
The accused testified that nothing inappropriate
occurred on the many occasions that N.M. stayed overnight. The accused agreed
that on one occasion, N.M. undressed in the presence of T.C., but the accused said
that he immediately asked N.M. to get dressed, which he said N.M. did. The
accused also testified that on one occasion, N.M. sent him a picture of himself
naked while seated on a toilet. The accused said that he told N.M. not to do
this again and to delete that message. Three images of a boy’s penis while
seated on a toilet were found to have been deleted from the accused’s phone. No
child pornography images were found on N.M.’s phone.
[16]          
With regards to N.M.’s allegations that the accused
threatened him not to tell what was occurring at his home, the accused
testified that early on, he did tell N.M. to be careful while N.M. was replacing
the blades of a box cutter. He said that he might have told N.M., in that
context, to be careful or he might regret it. He said that he never threatened N.M.
not to tell anyone as N.M. alleges.
[17]          
The accused agreed that he told N.M. that he was
teaching him but said that it was in the context of his Air Cadets aviation
test. He also testified that he never instructed N.M. to delete their text
messages as N.M. alleges.
[18]          
With regards to T.C., the accused agreed that he
considered adopting a child. He discussed this with the mother, who mentioned
that they were aware of a young boy for whom adoption might be an option. This
is how he met T.C. T.C.’s father testified that T.C. was then a difficult boy
to manage, they considered giving T.C. up for adoption. He said that some
respite time while T.C. was with the accused was welcomed as the accused was
helping, including with the boy’s schoolwork. As a result, T.C. started going
to the accused’s residence, and occasionally stayed overnight.
[19]          
T.C. testified the accused touched his penis
with his hand, that the accused and N.M. asked T.C. to pull down his pants,
that they measured his penis, that the accused pulled down T.C.’s pants,
touched his penis and “did something that was probably sex related” “asking him
if he was ready to have sex”, that N.M. touched his penis, and that the accused
touched his penis “trying to see if I was ready to have kids or not”. T.C.’s allegations
also include that the accused counselled or invited T.C. to have sexual contact
with the accused and with N.M., and N.M. described instances of sexual contact
that N.M. had with T.C.
[20]          
The accused admitted that T.C. stayed overnight
at the accused’s starting in February 2022, and subsequently on about 20 to 25
occasions. The accused testified that nothing inappropriate occurred with T.C.
except for N.M. once undressing in T.C.’s presence, as described above.
[21]          
The allegations involving J. relate to naked images
of J. found on the accused’s phone. The police recovered from the accused’s
cellular telephone, text messages with N.M. and, among many legal images on his
phone, they recovered 237 thumbnail images of J. naked in the accused’s shower.
These were from 38 original images of J. naked in the accused’s shower. The
focus of most of these original images is on J.’s genital area. In most of
these images, J.’s penis is visible, and in some, his face is not visible.
These images were deleted at some unknown date and were found in the glide
cache, a storage site where images can be found even after they have been
deleted and are no longer available to the user. The detective who testified
about this explained that if these 237 images were from a video taken of J. in
the shower, as the accused testified, he would have expected to find only one
unique image, not the 38 unique images that were found.
[22]          
The Crown did not call J. to testify. The accused
testified that J. asked him to take a video of himself in the shower blowing
bubbles. The accused agreed and explained in-chief that when he was filming, he
was focused on the bubbles and not always on what his phone was filming. He
also said during his examination-in-chief that at some points, he had to adjust
the water temperature of the shower and that his cat knocked his arm, both of
which moved the focus of his phone. He said that he told the mother about this
and, as she recommended, deleted this video. The mother remembered a
conversation with the accused when he told her that at J.’s request, the
accused had taken a video of J. in the shower while J. was singing. J. does not
appear to be singing in the images, but in some, he is blowing a bubble. The
mother remembered telling the accused to delete this video as it could be considered
as child pornography. She did not mention J. being behind a towel while this
was being filmed by the accused, as the accused said was the case during part
of his cross-examination.
[23]          
The police also recovered, on the accused’s
cellular telephone, three images of a young teenage boy seated on a toilet with
his penis visible. This photo appears to have been taken from an above angle, as
if by the young boy taking a photo of his penis while seated on the toilet. As
well, the police also found ten images of N.M. on the accused’s phone that were
taken at N.M.’s home. In these images, N.M. is seated on a chair with only his
face and bare chest visible. The Crown did not question N.M. about these photos.
During his examination-in-chief, N.M. said that he was not aware of the accused
having any nude picture of him, and during his cross-examination, he denied
sending a nude picture of himself while on the toilet. This is similar to what he
had said in the police video statement, that he was not aware that the accused took
any nude picture of him and did not remember being uncomfortable about any
photo that the accused took of him.
[24]          
The police searched another cellular telephone
of the accused. They recovered from that telephone text messages with N.M. and
22 images which at some unknown time had been saved on his phone. Although also
deleted at some unknown time, these images were still present and recoverable
as cache file images. They were images of unknown naked boys, between the age
of about 5 to 14 years old, in sexualized poses, including some depicting anal
or oral penile penetration by a boy of about the same age, with the focus of
the images being on the genital and anal region of the boys.
[25]          
The accused testified that the above was his
older phone, which he was no longer using. He said that it was downstairs on
the coffee table and was not password protected. He testified that he does not
know how these images happen to be on this phone, that he did not put them
there. He said that J. occasionally used this phone to play games, implying
that it might have been J who put these images on this phone.
[26]          
The hard drive of the accused’s computer was
also searched. Of the thousands of legal images on this device, three were of
naked boys. One is a close-up of a child’s penis, the other is of a child’s
penis held by a hand and stretched out against a white measuring tape, and the
third is of a shirtless teenage boy, about 14 years old, leaning against a
young woman with her bare breasts visible.
[27]          
The accused agreed that the above was his
computer and testified that he cannot say how these images got onto his hard
drive. He said that his computer was not password protected and that the boys,
N.M., J., and T.C., had access to his computer and were not always supervised.
[28]          
The police also recovered 11,144 images and 148
videos of mostly young naked boys on a distinctive looking yellow and white USB
key which was found inserted in the USB port of the accused’s computer. These
were mostly of naked young boys, some between 6 to 8 years old, and others
about 14 to 16 years old. They include images of masturbation, showing a boy
masturbating or boys masturbating each other, as well as images of anal and
oral penile penetration of young boys by other young boys, and of digital
penetration of a young boy’s anus. These images had been deleted at some
unknown date. One of the recovered deleted videos involved ejaculation on a
child’s face, another was of young boys masturbating, another of young boys
performing fellatio on other young boys, and another of young boys performing
anal sex on other young boys. One of the sample videos involved a 6- to 8-year-old
girl performing fellatio.
[29]          
The accused testified that he found this USB key
outside his previous apartment in 2009 or 2010. To find its owner, he looked at
four images and saw that they were child pornography. He said that he then
deleted all the images and started using this USB key to save work and Air
Cadets documents.
[30]          
The police also searched N.M.’s cellular
telephone and recovered some text messages with the accused. They did not
recover any child pornography on N.M.’s cellular telephone.
[31]          
The police also found computer searches about
young naked boys on some of the accused’s electronic devices. During his
examination-in-chief, the accused admitted that he conducted these searches and
used such words to find sites that guaranteed that their models were 19- to
25-years-old males, yet “who looked younger”, implicitly admitting a sexual
attraction to young looking boys.
[32]          
In May 2022, T.C. disclosed instances of sexual
abuse by the accused to a school counsellor and to his parents, after which the
police became involved and started their investigation.
[33]          
The mother testified that on May 26, 2022, she
heard that T.C. was accusing the accused of touching him. At the time, she was
not aware of N.M.’s allegations and did not believe T.C. She texted the accused
to warn him. The accused agreed that towards the end of May 2022 or very early
June 2022, the mother or her sister-in-law told him that T.C. had made
allegations against him.
[34]          
On June 2, 2022, the parents were contacted by the investigating
detective and informed that the accused was under investigation for allegations
involving N.M., J., and T.C. The parents were also then informed that some of T.C.’s
complaints involved N.M. inappropriately touching T.C.  Later that evening, N.M.
told his parents, for the first time, that the accused had touched him. As T.C.’s
allegations also involved N.M. touching T.C., the parents contacted a lawyer on
June 3, 2022. They consulted this lawyer with N.M. on June 6, 2022. With the
assistance of his grandmother, N.M. wrote a statement on the evening of June 6,
2022, and the family attended the police station on June 7, 2022, when N.M. was
interviewed.
[35]          
The accused was arrested, and his home was searched on June 14,
2022. His electronic devices were searched, and two sex toys found in his home were
sent for DNA analysis. A blue and a dark dildo were found to have (or stated
more precisely, it could not be scientifically excluded that they contained) the
DNA of the accused and of N.M. on them.
[36]          
The ultimate issues in this case are whether the
Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused committed the
offences charged.
[37]          
Accused persons are presumed innocent and the
burden of proving their guilt beyond a reasonable doubt is always on the Crown.
[38]          
   Proof beyond a
reasonable doubt is a doubt based on reason and common sense that logically
arises from the evidence or from the absence of evidence. A reasonable doubt is
not far-fetched or frivolous; it does not involve proof to an absolute
certainty or proof beyond any doubt.
[39]          
To be convinced beyond a
reasonable doubt means to be certain that an offence has been made out. A
finding of not guilty is required where the evidence only manages to prove that
an offence probably or likely occurred.
[40]          
A finding of guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt may arise from circumstantial evidence where the accused’s
guilt is the only reasonable conclusion available on the totality of the
evidence: R. v. Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 1000, at
para. 55. However, the circumstantial evidence does not have to totally exclude
other conceivable inferences and a verdict is not unreasonable simply because
“the alternatives do not raise a doubt”; it is “for the trier of fact to decide if any proposed alternative
way of looking at the case is reasonable enough to raise a doubt”: Villaroman, at para. 56.
[41]          
The assessment of the credibility and
reliability of the witnesses’ evidence is important. Credibility relates to a
witness’s veracity, whereas reliability concerns the accuracy of the witness’s
testimony.
[42]          
A judge can believe or
disbelieve a witness, but still be left with a reasonable doubt considering all
the evidence. When considering the testimony of a witness, a judge can accept
all, some, or none of a witness’s testimony. If the evidence does not convince
the judge beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused committed the offence, the
accused must be acquitted.
[43]          
A judge must be sensitive that “children may
experience the world differently from adults, [and] it is hardly surprising
that details important to adults, like time and place, may be missing from
their recollection”: R. v. W. (R.), 1992 CanLII 56 (SCC), [1992] 2 S.C.R. 122, at p. 133. A
common-sense approach should be adopted when dealing with the testimony of
children as “children may not be able to recount precise details and
communicate the when and where of an event with exactitude, this does not mean
that they have misconceived what happened to them and who did it”: W. (R.),
at p. 133.
[44]          
The credibility and reliability of every witness
must be carefully assessed. In assessing the evidence of a child, it is
important for the judge to consider the witness’s mental stage and intellectual
level, comprehension, and ability to articulate his or her recollection, while
at the same time maintaining the same standard of proof.
[45]          
The Supreme Court of Canada
provides seminal instructions with respect to the analysis of reasonable doubt
when an accused testifies in R. v. W. (D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), [1991] 1 S.C.R. 742, at p. 758.
Those instructions can be paraphrased as follows:
[46]          
For a conviction of sexual interference contrary to s. 151 of the
Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 (“the Code”), the Crown must
prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused intentionally touched (i.e.,
intentionally physically contacted) any part of the body of a complainant who
was under the age of 16 years, directly or indirectly, with a part of the body
or with an object for a sexual purpose: R. v. Clement, 2023 ONCA 271, at
para. 20; R. v. R.V., 2019 ONCA 664, 147 O.R. (3d) 657, at para. 19. The
accused must intend to touch the complainant for a sexual purpose, and the
Crown must prove that the accused knew or was reckless about the fact that the
complainant was under 16.
[47]          
For a conviction of invitation to sexual touching contrary to s.
152 of the Code, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the
accused invited, counselled, or incited a complainant who was under the age of
16 years to touch the body of any person, directly or indirectly, for a sexual
purpose: R. v. Carbone, 2020 ONCA 394, 150 O.R. (3d) 758, at paras.
59-61; R.V., at para. 20. The accused must intend that the touching be
for a sexual purpose and be aware that the person counselled or invited to
touch is under 16, or, stated differently, the accused must knowingly
communicate with a person under the age of 16 in a prohibited way. However, it
is not necessary for the Crown to prove that the young complainant actually
touched someone. It is enough if the accused said something to a young
complainant that amounts to an invitation to touch the body of any person for a
sexual purpose: Carbone, at paras. 61-62.
[48]          
For a conviction of making sexually explicit material available
to a child contrary to s. 171.1 of the Code, the Crown must prove beyond
a reasonable doubt that the accused made available sexually explicit material
to a complainant who was, or who the accused believed was, under the age of 16
years, for the purpose of facilitating the commission of sexual interference or
invitation to sexual touching.
[49]          
For a conviction of making child pornography contrary to s.
163.1(2) of the Code, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that the accused created an instance of child pornography, as defined in the Code,
that is new or different from already existing instances of child pornography: R.
v. Bowers, 2022 ONCA 852, at para. 24; and R. v. A.H., 2023 ONSC 2005,
at para. 73. The created instance of child pornography must be in a tangible
format: R. v. McSween, 2020 ONCA 343, at para. 43. The accused must
intend to create the material knowing it depicts child pornography.
[50]          
For a conviction of possessing child pornography contrary to s.
163.1(4) of the Code, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that the accused had both control over the child pornographic images and
videos, and knowledge of the images and videos, including knowledge of the
criminal character of the images and videos: R. v. M.N., 2017 ONCA 434,
at para. 12; R. v. Morelli, 2010 SCC 8, [2010] 1 S.C.R. 253, at para.
15; and R. v. Winter, 2015 ONCA 150, at paras. 12-14. As indicated in Morelli,
possession of an image in a computer means possession of the underlying data
file in some way that constitutes control, not its mere visual depiction. The
viewer must have control of the data to possess it. Simply viewing child
pornography images online, over which the viewer has no control, is not possession
but rather the separate crime of accessing child pornography. To establish
possession of child pornography images found in the cache file of a computer,
telephone, or other electronic devide,  it must be showed that the file was
knowingly stored and retained though the cache as “the automatic caching of a
file to the hard drive does not, without more, constitute possession”: at para.
36. This is because the automatic caching does not establish the mental or
fault element essential to finding possession: that the accused knowingly used
the cache as a location “to store copies of image files with the intent
to retain possession of them through the cache”: at para. 37. The accused must
have both custody of the materials and knowledge of its nature.
[51]          
 For a conviction of accessing child pornography contrary to s.
163.1(4.1) of the Code, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that the accused knowingly caused child pornography to be viewed by, or
transmitted to, himself or herself: Criminal Code, s. 164.1(4.2); Morelli,
at paras. 25-26. The accused must intend to view the child pornography or
transmit the child pornography to himself or herself.
[52]          
The defence argued, during closing submissions, that
the accused answered questions fairly and to the best of his abilities. That
although the circumstances are suspicious, the accused’s evidence should leave
the court with a reasonable doubt. I disagree.
[53]          
I find that the accused’s evidence did not make
sense and that the accused was occasionally evasive. In the context of all the
evidence, I do not believe the accused’s exculpatory evidence. Further, his
evidence does not leave me with a reasonable doubt about the charged offences. I
explain why I make these findings below.
[54]          
The accused was not believable, and his evidence
did not leave me with a reasonable doubt about the charged offences because the
accused’s versions of events and explanations do not make sense. Many of his
explanations defy logic and common sense, and some gave the impression that
they were concocted by the accused as he testified, in an unconvincing attempt
to explain the evidence. Moreover, the accused remembered details that he would
have had no reason to remember, and remembered precise facts which would be impossible
to remember. All of this undermined his credibility, such that I found the
accused not to be a credible witness.
[55]          
Significant aspects of the evidence corroborate many
of the complainants’ allegations. For example, there are inappropriate text
messages between the accused and N.M. that are highly suggestive of an inappropriate
relationship between them. There are text messages between the accused and the
parents of the boys, or evidence, which support N.M.’s and T.C.’s version of
occasionally not wanting to go to the accused’s home, and of the accused
applying subtle pressure on the boys’ parents. There are computer searches conducted
by the accused and the title of some electronic documents found on some of his electronic
devices, including “12yo erect boy”, “young nude boy”, “young teen gay nude”, and
“naturalist young boys” which could corroborate the child pornography images. Also,
in his police statement, N.M. described sex toys that he said were used on him,
and similar sex toys were found at the accused’s residence with DNA evidence of
N.M. found on each of the accused’s two sex toys. As well, N.M. told the police
that he was made to watch pornography, and pornography was found at the accused’s
home and child pornographic images were found on four of the accused’s electronic
devices, some not dissimilar to some of the young complainants’ allegations. The
accused addressed this evidence during his testimony and his explanations defy
logic and common sense. Here are some examples.
[56]          
On October 16, 2021, the accused texted N.M. “Ate
u [sic] home alone?” N.M. immediately replied, “Yes I am”, to which the accused
responded, “Have you tried anything that we discussed at the trailer?” N.M.
replied, “Yes but I think I not doing it right. Because I don’t feel anything”,
to which the accused responded, “How far are you going in?” N.M. replied, “Half
a marker”, to which the accused responded, “Try going almost all the way in. Go
slow and you should feel a second set of muscles. Push past those and angled
towards your stomach. You could also use your middle finger.” N.M. replied,
“Ok”, and later during the same exchange added, “and there is sometimes some
poo in it”, to which the accused replied, “Ah, I’ll have to get you a kit to
wash your insides. If you’d like that is.”, and moments later, the accused asked,
“Did you want to come over next Saturday after I get home?”
[57]          
During his examination-in-chief, the accused
said that he did not remember sending the above first two texts, implying that
the first text “Ate u [sic] home alone?” contained uncharacteristic typos and might
have been sent by someone using his phone. The latter would have been highly unlikely
considering that not more than about three minutes separated his first and
admitted third texts. In any event, during his cross-examination, the accused contradicted
himself and admitted also sending the first two texts.
[58]          
In-chief, the accused explained that at the
parent’s trailer, N.M., the father, and himself had a frank discussion about why
people enjoy having “a penis inserted up their anus”. He explained that his
texts were about prostate stimulation, which they discussed in the father’s presence
at the trailer. He said that he sent these texts to share information for N.M. to
make better informed decisions.
[59]          
During his cross-examination, the accused was
asked why he initially inquired whether N.M. was home alone. It was put to him
that he wanted to make sure that N.M. was alone before discussing such a topic.
He denied this and said that it was not his intention to inquire about this
topic when he initially asked N.M. whether he was home alone. This explanation does
not make sense considering the accused’s subsequent text messages and the tight
timing of these messages. Indeed, one minute after his first text asking N.M if
he was alone and 30 seconds after N.M. answered that he was alone, the accused asked,
“Have you tried anything that we discussed at the trailer?” From this question,
I fail to see how it was not his intention to inquire about this topic. The
accused also said that although they had discussed this in the presence of the father,
he did not think that N.M. was “going to do that”. Again, this explanation does
not make sense because it is contradicted by the accused’s text asking N.M. whether
he tried what they discussed at the trailer.
[60]          
Further, the accused explained that he was not
shocked that N.M. had inserted a marker up his anus “because I just wasn’t,
it’s not my nature to be excited about that, I thought he was using his hand”.
He denied that he was coaching N.M., explaining that he was simply curious
whether N.M. had tried what they had discussed. He said that he simply wanted
to ensure that N.M. was doing it right by providing N.M. more information about
it. The accused found nothing inappropriate about having such a conversation
with 15-year-old N.M. because N.M. was “more comfortable discussing this with
me than with his parents”, and because of the special “nephew”-like
relationship the accused enjoyed with N.M. and with the family.
[61]          
The above explanations were not put to the father
by the defence during the father’s cross-examination, despite them implicitly
contradicting the father’s evidence who did not mention participating in such a
conversation with N.M. and the accused, nor giving permission to the accused to
discuss such a topic with N.M. Moreover, despite his stated concerns about N.M.,
the accused never communicated this text message exchange, or any of the other inappropriate
text message exchanges that he had with N.M., to the parents—the accused’s admitted
close friends. In this context, failing to advise the parents does not make
sense, even more so if the accused’s explanation is accepted that he was
concerned about N.M. Another example is the following.
[62]          
Shortly after, on November 5, 2021, the accused
texted N.M. asking, “Why dors [sic] J. [N.M.’s younger brother] know about the
toy for your butt?” and “He also said you showed him a G string”.
[63]          
During his examination-in-chief, the accused said
that he sent this text to N.M. to warn him that his brother had seen him because
he was concerned that N.M. should not be intentionally doing this in front of
his younger brother. However, the accused contradicted himself during his
cross-examination when he said that J. had told him that he had seen this
through a hole in the bathroom wall.
[64]          
Further, during his cross-examination, the
accused denied that this text was directed at finding out whether N.M. had
talked about what was occurring at the accused’s home. He said that he was
simply asking a question to find out if J. was telling the truth. However, it
is telling that in these text messages the accused does not ask N.M. whether he
did this, but rather he asks, “Why dors [sic] J. know about the toy for
your butt?” (Emphasis added). It is also telling that if the accused was
concerned about N.M. intentionally doing this in front of his younger brother, whether
or not J. was lying about this, the accused did not communicate any of his
concerns arising from this information to the parents.
[65]          
Furthermore, as indicated above, during his
cross-examination, the accused said, for the first time, that J. had said that
he had seen N.M. using a sex toy through a hole in the bathroom wall. However, this
contradicts his evidence in-chief about writing these texts out of concern that
N.M. was intentionally showing his younger brother. Moreover, in the text
exchange the accused replied, “I don’t know” to N.M.’s asking how J. had seen
this, which also contradicts the accused’s testimony that J. had told him that he
had seen this through a hole in the wall.
[66]          
Another example of an explanation that defies
logic is the following. On May 12, 2022, the accused sent a late evening text
to N.M. enquiring, “We need to come up with a password or phrase so that if you
text me like last night, I will know it’s you and not someone using your
phone.”
[67]          
The accused testified that earlier that evening
he received a text from N.M.’s phone asking, “can you make me hard or how to
make me hard”. The accused said that he sent the text message asking for a
password because, initially, he was not certain whether the “make me hard” text
was from N.M. He said that this was out of character for N.M., who would not
have sent such a text.
[68]          
The accused said that he later concluded that
the “make me hard” text was from N.M., that he felt confused, and that he told N.M.
that this was inappropriate. He explained that this is why he sent the password
text, so that if N.M. sent him another similar text about getting him hard, he
would know that it was from N.M. instead of initially thinking that it might
have been from either J. or a friend of N.M.’s “goofing off”.
[69]          
This explanation does not make sense for several
reasons. These include that asking to create a password suggests an intention
to secretly pursue such inappropriate conversations which contradicts the
accused’s testimony that he told N.M. “No, … this is inappropriate”, or that he
wanted to know if the text was from N.M. to “shut it down sooner” if it
reoccurred. As well, it defies logic that an “uncle” in the accused’s position,
where N.M. frequently stayed overnight at his home, receiving such a text from his
10-year-old godson, J., or from a friend of his 15-year-old nephew would
consider such a text as “goofing off”. Further, considering the accused’s longstanding
leadership role in the Air Cadets, with its focus on child safety and measures
to avoid inappropriate relationships, it defies logic that upon receiving such
a text from a 15-year-old boy with whom the accused spent and was still spending
significant time alone, the accused’s response would be to suggest that they
“come up with a password or phrase so that if you text me like last night I
will know it’s you and not someone using your phone”, rather than, considering
how concerning this should have been, bringing this to the attention of his
friends, N.M.’s parents.
[70]          
Contrary to what was argued by the defence
during the accused’s closing submissions, these text messages are not
irrelevant distractions, but cogent corroborating evidence of the complainants’
allegations.
[71]          
As well, the accused’s explanations about the child
pornography images found on his yellow and white USB key are also unbelievable.
As indicated earlier, the accused said that in 2009 or 2010, he found the
yellow and white USB key, which contained a significant amount of child
pornography material, in the hallway of his previous apartment building.
[72]          
It seems an unlikely coincidence that similar illegal
child pornography material was also found on three of the accused’s other electronic
devices. Further, accepting his version of events, knowing that the yellow and
white USB key contained deleted illegal child pornography material, it defies
logic and common sense that the accused, who testified that he did not trust
the police, despite his long-standing military connections, assumed that the
images were gone and decided that it was safe to keep this USB key to store
documents. It also seems an unlikely coincidence that this same USB key was
still in the accused’s possession about 12 years later when the search warrant
of his premises was executed on June 14, 2022, and, even more so, that it was found
connected to a USB port on the accused’s computer (as shown by a photo taken by
the police during the execution of the search warrant).
[73]          
As indicated above, a forensic search of this
USB key revealed that it contained 11,144 deleted child pornography images and
148 deleted child pornography videos. These images are of nude young boys, some
as young as 6 to 8 years old, and other teenagers, performing manual
stimulation of each other, oral penetration, anal digital penetration, and anal
penile penetration, and single subject nudity with a focus on the boys’ genital
or anal region, bearing some similarity to some of the complainants’ allegations.
[74]          
As well, the accused was a civilian officer with
the Air Cadets and a board member of the co-op where he resided when he said he
found the yellow and white USB key, back in 2009 or 2010. Yet, knowing that
someone who frequented their building had child pornography material on a USB
key, involving what he admitted were vulnerable children, the accused did not
report this to the board of his building, to his military leadership, or to the
police. Instead, if his explanation is accepted, he deleted its known criminal child
pornography content and assumed that it was gone, possibly destroying evidence
of countless serious crimes, and took no steps to attempt to protect these
vulnerable children. This explanation defies logic and common sense considering
the accused’s longstanding military connection and leadership role in the Air Cadets,
a youth program for young people 12- to 18-years-old, where safety is paramount.
[75]          
Further, when explaining why he had naked images
of J. on his cellular telephone, the accused contradicted himself and some of his
explanations were contrived. During his testimony in-chief the accused’s explanations
about why the focus of many of the naked images of J. were on J.’s penis were
contrived, bordering on fanciful. Moreover, during parts of his
cross-examination, the accused contradicted his evidence in-chief about this when
he said that J. was behind a towel, and when he said that he did not know how
these images came to be on his phone, that he did not take them, implying that
maybe one of the children did. His evidence about this does not make sense.
[76]          
In-chief, and seemingly for a moment at the
start of his cross-examination on this topic, the accused testified that as he
filmed J. making bubbles in the shower, he did not pay attention to his phone, had
to adjust the water, and said that his cat bumped his arm—all of which he said impacted
where his phone focused. This is not believable and is fanciful when you
consider that the focus of many of these images is on the area of J.’s penis. Further,
the accused said that he deleted this video before he had the opportunity to
view it. This is contradicted by the detective’s evidence who testified that
these images had been accessed on the accused’s device.
[77]          
Finally, examples of the accused unconvincingly purporting
to remember unimportant details include his explanation of the first alleged
incident of sexual assault on N.M. Although there is no known precise date of
when this incident occurred and although the accused described a normal evening
during which nothing out of the ordinary occurred, the accused remembered that
during this evening, over four years ago, he innocently slapped N.M.’s knee
using his left hand to “get him to go get some supper”. He also remembered what
they had for dinner and what movie they watched. Similarly, for the third
alleged incident on N.M., for which there is also no known precise date, I find
the accused’s detailed recollection of that evening disingenuous and unbelievable.
[78]          
Another example of the accused’s incredible
memory is when, during his cross-examination, the accused remembered and
described, in viewing order, the four child pornography images that he said he
looked at, back in 2009 or 2010, when he alleges that after finding the yellow
and white USB key in the hallway of his apartment building, and noticing its
illegal child pornography content while looking for its owner, he decided to
delete its illegal content and keep the USB key to save documents. His stated sequential
recall of these images I also find not believable.
[79]          
The accused’s evidence defies logic and common
sense. I do not believe it. It does not leave me with a reasonable doubt.
[80]          
Next, I consider whether the Crown has proven
its case. That is, whether, on all the evidence, the Crown has proven each
element of the offences charged beyond a reasonable doubt.
[81]          
The Crown presented a strong case. This includes
the complainants, N.M. and T.C., who were credible and reliable witnesses. As
well, this includes the parents, N.M.’s grandmother, and T.C.’s father, who were
also credible and reliable. In fact, all witnesses, except for the accused, presented
his or her evidence fairly, attempting to answer to the best of their
recollection, irrespective of whether the questions were asked by the Crown or
by the defence.
[82]          
The strong Crown case also includes that some of
the complainants’ evidence is corroborated by text messages, computer searches,
sex toys, DNA evidence, and pornographic images. As well, some of the allegations
of the two complainants corroborate some of the allegations of the other, and
one of the two complainants, N.M., witnessed, participated, and described some
of what happened to T.C. (in a context where collusion is not alleged by the
accused, and, in any event, where there is no evidence of collusion impacting
the reliability of the evidence).
[83]          
The strong Crown case also includes child
pornography images found on four of the accused’s electronic devices, which also
corroborates N.M.’s narrative that he was made to watch pornography, and strong
forensic evidence by three witnesses who testified candidly.
[84]          
Consequently, when I consider the evidence, I
find that the Crown has proven each element of the offences charged beyond a
reasonable doubt.
[85]          
The defence argued that N.M. is not a reliable
witness because he only remembered a handful of events (despite telling the
police that he was assaulted on more than 40 occasions), because he did not
remember much context or remembered little about the facts surrounding the alleged
assaults, and because of inconsistencies in his evidence. The defence also
argued that N.M. made up his allegations, including what N.M. said he did to
T.C. at the urging of the accused, to shield himself from the allegations made
against him by T.C.
[86]          
For the reasons that follow, I do not agree.
[87]          
N.M. was 13 to 15 years old when the alleged
events occurred, over two years ago. He was almost 16 during the police video
statement and was 18 when he testified in this trial in September 2024. His
parents and grandmother testified that N.M. has learning difficulties, and N.M.
appeared younger than his age during his testimony. N.M. was nervous and
testifying appeared difficult for him. Nonetheless, N.M. testified calmly, candidly,
and fairly, irrespective of which lawyer was asking him questions. He was
cross-examined extensively yet did not contradict the core of his evidence.
[88]          
Further, N.M. described a routine of being
frequently and regularly sexually assaulted by the accused. He described the
accused and himself often being naked at the accused’s home, and testified that
there were multiple instances of masturbation, fellatio, and anal sex. It is
not surprising that N.M. could not describe sequentially and precisely what
happened to him.
[89]          
N.M. described how it started. He said that he
felt unsure, nervous, and that he was “scarred and not scarred”. He described
the lubricant that he said was occasionally used during masturbation and anal
sex, and described the sex toys that he alleges he used at the accused’s
direction. He described with varying detail some of the alleged instances of
sexual abuse. Further, during his examination-in-chief, N.M. described how the
accused occasionally made him watch porn involving men and boys having sex.
[90]          
N.M. said that the sexual assaults started after
his third overnight stay at the accused’s, at the start of COVID-19, when N.M. and
his father were doing renovations at the accused’s home. This timeframe
coincides with the mother’s evidence, and all witnesses agreed that N.M. regularly
stayed overnight at the accused’s home starting about that time until May 2022.
The parents were fine with this and saw the accused as a mentor to the boys. The
mother understood that the accused, who lived alone, always wanted to have
children, and was thinking of adopting or fostering a child. The parents
testified that they trusted the accused.
[91]          
N.M. remembered the first time that he was
sexually assaulted. He testified that it was after dinner. He was seated on the
couch with the accused seated beside him. He said that the accused put his hand
on N.M.’s lap and started rubbing. That the accused moved his hand to rub
N.M.’s groin area. He testified that the accused slowly went inside N.M.’s pants
and rubbed his penis over and under his clothing. He did not remember how long
this lasted until the accused stopped. They went to bed and nothing else
happened on that occasion.
[92]          
N.M. did not remember at what time the first
assault occurred, nor how long he and his father worked on the ongoing renovations
at the accused’s earlier that day. He did not remember if his father stayed for
dinner, what they had for dinner, or how long dinner lasted. He did not
remember on what side of the couch the accused was seated, what hand the
accused used to touch him, whether the accused said anything as he touched him,
or how long the sexual assault lasted. But these are details that most would
not remember, and N.M. testified that he was in shock and has since made
efforts to try and forget what happened to him.
[93]          
Nonetheless, N.M. remembered the first occasion when
the accused touched his penis and provided the above description. As well, N.M.
provided further details. He testified that the next day, his father returned
after breakfast, and that they continued working on the accused’s renovations. That
evening, N.M. stayed overnight at the accused’s home again. He could not
explain why he stayed nor later why he kept returning. After his father left, N.M.
testified that the accused told him not to tell or “something bad will happen”.
[94]          
N.M. remembered that he was sexually assaulted
again that evening. He did not remember when, or if it happened after dinner. However,
he remembered that they were seated on the couch when the accused asked him to undress.
N.M. testified that he felt he had no choice. He explained that the accused was
an adult and that he does not disobey adults. He was asked “to get naked”, and
he “got naked” because “I had no choice”. He testified that the accused asked
him to masturbate, and he masturbated. He said that the accused undressed while
N.M. masturbated. He testified that the accused touched N.M.’s penis and
masturbated him. N.M. did not remember how long this lasted until it stopped. Then
he said the accused asked him to masturbate the accused, and he testified that
he did.
[95]          
N.M. had difficulty remembering and describing
the third occasion of sexual abuse. He said that he could not fully remember. He
thought that it happened the following weekend but was not certain. He did not
remember and could not explain why he returned to the accused’s home. He did
not remember what happened before but remembered the accused asking him to “get
naked”. He undressed and testified that the accused undressed. The accused
asked him to masturbate, and N.M. testified that “the same stuff happened”. The
accused also asked him to masturbate the accused, and N.M. did so. He testified
that on this occasion, the accused showed him the blue dildo, and told him how
to use it. N.M. said that he used the blue dildo on himself, inserting it in
his anus, and said that he masturbated the accused. He was not certain but
believed that the accused ejaculated on his chest. He ejaculated but did not
remember where. Later, during his cross-examination, when answering questions
about his statement, N.M. mentioned that the accused used his sex toys on him
on more than one occasion.
[96]          
N.M. could not remember what happened on the
fourth occasion of sexual abuse. He said that he could not remember but that it
happened on 20 to 30 occasions.
[97]          
However, N.M. remembered that T.C. started to
come over. He remembered the accused asking him to “get naked” in front of T.C.
This is corroborated in part by T.C. who described N.M. being naked on the
couch for about 30 minutes, although T.C. did not observe the accused asking
N.M. to undress, only that this happened after the accused mentioned that they
would have to take a shower before bed. However, T.C. corroborated that the
accused tried to normalize this behaviour, that he said that this was normal. T.C.
contradicts the accused who testified that he immediately asked N.M. to dress.
[98]          
Moreover, N.M. remembered that he was sexually
assaulted by the accused after T.C. went to bed that evening. N.M. said that
the accused touched him that evening, that he could not fully remember, but said
that he remembered the accused “putting his penis in my butt”. N.M. did not
remember the context or what else happened that evening.
[99]          
N.M. testified that the following weekend, the
accused asked both N.M. and T.C. to undress. He said that T.C. was hesitant but
testified they both undressed. N.M. did not remember what happened after on
this occasion, and T.C. did not describe a similar instance.
[100]      
N.M. remembered that they both went back the
following weekend. He said that they undressed after the accused asked them to do
so. He testified that the accused asked him for help to measure T.C.’s penis. This
is corroborated in part by T.C. who testified that his penis was measured with a
soft yellow measuring tape, but T.C. did not remember N.M. being naked. N.M.
said that they measured T.C.’s penis with a tailor’s measuring tape that the
accused kept in the living room. In his police statement, N.M. said “I think it
was red. I’m not sure”. During his cross-examination, he said that it was red. Two
tailor’s measuring tapes were found at the accused. None was red but a white tape
with a red string was found, and a yellow tape was also found. In his police statement,
N.M. said that the accused thereafter also measured N.M.’s penis but during his
cross-examination he said that afterwards, the accused asked him to show T.C.
how to masturbate. N.M. did not remember how long he showed T.C. how to
masturbate. He said that T.C. eventually went to bed and afterwards, he masturbated
the accused and performed fellatio on the accused. He said that the accused
ejaculated but he did not remember where.
[101]      
The defence argues that N.M. is not reliable
because he described a red measuring tape and because of the above
contradictions. Regarding the above contradictions, I find that these are
explained by the fact that it would be impossible for N.M. and T.C. to remember
what happened where similar sexual assaults frequently happened, particularly
when each testified that he is trying to forget what happened. This also
explains why, during his testimony, N.M. described less instances of sexual
assault, and why he might be overstating how often he was assaulted. Regarding the
colour of the tape, I find that this is a detail. Moreover, in-chief, N.M.
indicated that he was not certain, and a red string was found with a white
tape. Moreover, T.C. testified that the tape was yellow, and contrary to the
defendant’s closing submissions, a yellow tape was found at the accused’s home
(see Exhibit 3 at p. 90138). In any event, and more importantly, two
complainants testified that T.C.’s penis was measured, in an evidentiary
context where collusion is not alleged or supported by evidence. Consequently, I
find that the differences between the complainants’ evidence about when and how
T.C.’s penis was measured, the colour of the tailor’s measuring tape that was
used, and what happened after, does not detract from the strength of their evidence
that this sexual assault happened.
[102]      
In his statement and during his police video statement,
N.M. said that the accused once asked him to remove his pyjamas and insert his
penis in T.C.’s anus. He said that he did this on that one occasion upstairs while
the accused read a book to T.C. He said that the accused told T.C. “it’s okay”,
told N.M. “to keep on going”, and told T.C. to “masturbate”. During his
cross-examination, N.M. did not recall what happened before or what happened after
this incident, did not remember what T.C. said, but remembered that T.C. looked
at him and that the accused told T.C. “it’s okay”. T.C. did not remember a
penis being inserted in his anus and I will address this later in my reasons.
[103]      
N.M. also testified that on more than one
occasion the accused asked him to take a shower with T.C. while the accused
watched, seated on the toilet. As well, that the accused asked him to kiss T.C.,
which N.M. said he did on about three occasions. N.M. testified that the
accused used his sex toys with T.C. Also, during his cross-examination, N.M.
said that although he does not remember specifically what happened, or how
often, he remembered that there were other instances of inappropriate things
occurring with T.C., including T.C. touching N.M. at the accused’s request (which
T.C. remembered). I will also address this later in my reasons.
[104]      
N.M. testified that he felt bad about what he
did to T.C., he felt that it was “disgusting”, and it bothered him. He said
that he was scarred and hoped that it would soon end. He could not explain why
he kept returning, other than he did not want the accused to think that he had
told anyone.
[105]      
N.M. testified that at some point his younger
brother J. also attended at the accused’s. He explained that he did not
discourage J. from attending or tell their parents because the accused had
warned him not to tell. He described J. taking a shower before going to bed. In
his police video statement, N.M. testified that the accused was never with him when
J. was taking a shower. This is corroborated in part by the naked images of J.
in the accused’s shower found on the accused’s phone. N.M. also described being
sexually assaulted by the accused after J. had been put to bed. During his
cross-examination, N.M. remembered one occasion, after J. had taken a shower
and gone to bed, when the accused came down and asked N.M. to undress and to
masturbate.
[106]      
In his police video statement, N.M. said that
the accused asked him to masturbate in his presence and to masturbate the
accused. He also said that the accused would send him a text asking him to
masturbate. As well, in his police statement, N.M. says that he performed
fellatio on the accused, and the accused performed fellatio on him, until each
ejaculated in the mouth of the other, on about 20 to 30 occasions. He also said
in his police statement that he and the accused had anal intercourse on about
20 to 30 occasions, sometimes with or without a condom or lubricant. He said
that the accused frequently walked around naked, and that he was asked to walk
around naked on about five occasions. Again, I am not surprised that N.M. could
not describe each of these instances of sexual assault, and find, considering the
evidence, that it would have been impossible for N.M. to remember and describe
each instance of sexual assault. Conversely, considering N.M. and his evidence,
I am also not surprised by the possibility that N.M. overstates how often he
was assaulted.
[107]      
I found N.M. to be a credible and reliable
witness despite the contradictions and lack of additional detail or added context
in his evidence in part because N.M. did not exaggerate his evidence and
answered questions fairly during his cross-examination. N.M. said that he was
trying to forget what happened and I would have found it unconvincing if N.M. had
remembered the level of detail seemingly expected from some of the questions asked
during his cross-examination. Considering the evidence, I would have found it implausible
if N.M. had been able to describe sequentially more than a few instances of
sexual assault, and untenable if he had been able to describe everything that
happened to him.
[108]      
Further, my assessment of the complainants’
reliability and credibility is also assisted by the evidence which corroborates
their respective narratives, and by the Crown’s evidentiary pieces fitting well
together. All of this informed my assessment of the complainants’ reliability
and credibility and distinguish this case from others where the court arrived
at a different conclusion.
[109]      
For example, N.M. first mentioned that the
accused had sex toys in the written statement of June 6, 2022. In his police
statement, on June 7, 2022, N.M. described the accused’s two sex toys as a blue
dildo and a black vibrator. He said that they were kept in a drawer in the
accused’s bathroom, with the lubricant that they used. Two sex toys matching N.M.’s
description and a tube of lubricant were found in a drawer in the accused’s
bathroom. Moreover, the presence of N.M.’s DNA could not be excluded from
either of these sex toys. N.M. did not remember when lubricant was first used,
but he said that it was occasionally used on his penis and anus.
[110]      
The defence argues that N.M. could have found
these sex toys and touched them, which would explain that N.M. knew where they
were, how N.M. could describe them, and the DNA results. Indeed, N.M. was
familiar with the accused’s home and obviously knew where these sex toys were.
However, contradicting the defence’s submission, N.M. was believable when he
described how he, N.M., used the blue dildo on himself as instructed by the
accused. Moreover, I find it convincing that N.M.’s narrative about this is
corroborated by a text message exchange with the accused during which the
accused asked N.M. why his younger brother J. knew about “the toys for your
butt?”.
[111]      
Importantly, the other two text message exchanges
that were found between N.M. and the accused, described above in the analysis
of the accused’s evidence, also corroborate N.M.’s and T.C.’s evidence. N.M.
testified that the accused asked him to delete their text messages. He said the
accused regularly inspected N.M.’s phone for compliance, but N.M. forgot to
delete some messages. As indicated above, in one text exchange, the accused asked
N.M. whether he tried what they discussed, involving anal penetration, and in
the other, he informed N.M. that they need to come up with a password after
N.M. texted him “can you make me hard or how to make me hard”. Considering the
context of the evidence, the text messages are strong evidence of grooming and of
an inappropriate relationship between the accused and N.M. They corroborate the
complainants’ allegations.
[112]      
Moreover, N.M.’s evidence that he was made to
walk around the accused’s home naked is corroborated in part by T.C., and T.C.
contradicts the accused’s narrative that the accused immediately asked N.M. to
cover himself. I find that such conduct is also evidence of grooming and of the
accused’s efforts to normalize abnormal sexual behaviour with the children, as
were the viewing of pornographic material with N.M. and the accused’s inappropriate
text messages to N.M.
[113]      
Additionally, the mother corroborated N.M.’s
evidence in-chief that on occasion N.M. did not want to go to the accused’s
residence. She testified that when that happened, she would receive a text from
the accused that the father might need help and she would ask N.M. to go and
help his father, which she said made sense because N.M. was “handy”. The
accused sent a similar text aimed at encouraging T.C. attending at his home to
T.C.’s mother when T.C. indicated that the did not wish to attend at the
accused’s.
[114]      
N.M. testified in-chief that he was sexually
abused and saw the accused naked on at least 20 or 30 occasions, and that he never
observed any tattoo or mark on the accused’s body. The accused denied ever
being naked in N.M.’s view and testified he had four scars and a dark mole that
were visible on his body. As explained above, I do not believe the accused and
his evidence about this does not leave me with a reasonable doubt. Further, if I
accept that the accused had some scar or mark on his body, without a photo or
something describing how visible any of these might have been in 2020-2022, I
find that this statement has no impact on my assessment of N.M.’s reliability because
without such evidence, I cannot assess what N.M. allegedly did not notice or
remember.
[115]      
I now address what I twice indicated would be
addressed later in my reasons. N.M. described events involving T.C. that T.C.
did not remember or describe, and T.C. described less incidents and described some
incidents differently from N.M. For example, N.M. said that at the accused’s request,
N.M. inserted his penis into T.C.’s anus once, T.C. was made to walk around the
house naked with N.M. on about two occasions, the accused measured N.M.’s penis
in T.C.’s presence, the accused asked N.M. to show T.C. how to masturbate, the
accused asked N.M. to take a shower with T.C. while the accused watched on
about three occasions, the accused asked N.M. to kiss T.C. on about three
occasions, and N.M. believes the accused used his sex toys with T.C. T.C. did
not remember or describe such events, and T.C. remembered some events
differently from N.M.
[116]      
I start by pointing out what I mentioned
earlier, that when assessing the evidence of a child, it is important for the
judge to consider the witness’s mental stage and intellectual level,
comprehension, and ability to articulate his or her recollection, while at the
same time maintaining the same standard of proof.
[117]      
T.C. was 9 years old when the alleged events
happened, 10 when he gave his police video statement on June 2, 2022, and 12 when
he testified in this trial. N.M. is almost six years older. It was readily apparent
that T.C. is a smart young boy. He testified impressively, with a vocabulary exceeding
his years. He testified fairly and candidly, irrespective of who was asking him
questions. He made efforts to answer questions and demonstrated an above
average memory (for example his impressive recall of the accused’s address). T.C.
was an excellent witness. Moreover, parts of his evidence are corroborated by
other evidence, as indicated above. As a result, subject to what follows, I
believe and accept T.C.’s evidence.
[118]      
However, although T.C. did his best to answer all
questions as best he could, it is clear from his testimony that T.C. did not
remember all that happened to him. He testified in-chief that he does not want
to remember being touched, and that thinking about this frustrated him, and caused
him to misbehave and not be able to focus or think straight. He said that he is
doing everything not to remember what happened.
[119]      
It was apparent from T.C.’s evidence that he did
not remember all that happened to him. For example, T.C. remembered that
something sexual happened with the accused in the accused’s bedroom but did not
remember what it was. He only remembered that the accused pulled down T.C.’s
pants “and basically, did something … sex-related … asking me if I was ready to
have that … which would be sex and that made me really uncomfortable”. But T.C.
did not remember what the sexual thing the accused did was and did not describe
this instance of sexual assault during his cross-examination.
[120]      
Other examples where T.C. did not remember all that
happened include the following. T.C. said that he wondered if those things were
normal, including the inappropriate touching by the accused and N.M., and said that
he did not consider the accused a friend “after all the inappropriate
things he did to me”. He testified that he “was wondering if those things
were normal”, in reference to the accused and N.M. touching him or N.M. asking to
be touched. Similarly, he testified that he got angry at N.M. “for stuff
and I did not want him to do that stuff to me”. However, during his testimony, T.C.
did not mention in what circumstances he got angry at N.M. or what stuff
T.C. did not want N.M. to do to him. He also mentioned that the accused did
things that he could not remember. He could only remember one or two things and
said that both the accused and N.M. would normally just touch his penis unless
it was for “sex”, however when questioned about this he answered that “sex”
never happened with either of them.
[121]      
Contrasting the above and N.M.’s evidence with the
fact that T.C. described few instances of sexual abuse during his
cross-examination, supports a finding that there were more instances of sexual
abuse than those described by T.C. during his testimony because, as per his
candid admission, T.C. is doing everything not to remember what happened. This
explains why T.C. agreed during his cross-examination that the accused touched
his penis once and could not then recall more than about three incidents
involving the accused.
[122]      
Further, N.M. was older and better understood some
of what was occurring at the accused’s home. At the time, T.C. was 9 years old and
although very intelligent, it was apparent from his testimony that he was still
very much a child, with a more limited understanding of what was occurring.
[123]      
As well, N.M.’s evidence describing what he did
to T.C., including his evidence and admissions of sexual touching which T.C. did
not remember, could be contrary to N.M.’s legal interests. In concert with the
corroborating evidence, the fact that parts of N.M.’s testimony could be
contrary to his legal interests contradicts the accused’s arguments that N.M.,
after consulting with a lawyer, made up his allegations as a shield against the
T.C.’s allegations. Granted, N.M. testified that he acted at the urging of the
accused, but this is evident from the evidentiary context, including from the
accused’s grooming and efforts to normalize abnormal sexual behaviour. As well,
the defence argument that N.M. made up his allegations as a defence to the T.C.’s
allegations is contradicted by the corroborating evidence, including the text
messages, and by T.C.’s evidence that he was sexually abused by the accused, by
T.C.’s evidence that the accused attempted to normalize such behaviour, and by
T.C.’s evidence that the accused repeatedly asked T.C. if he was ready for sex.
[124]      
All this gives weight to the conflicting
evidence of N.M. and explains T.C.’s evidence.
[125]      
Accordingly, I find that the above explains the conflicting
evidence between N.M. and T.C., and, consequently, their conflicting evidence does
not negatively impact my assessment of their respective credibility and
reliability.
[126]      
As a result, I believe that what N.M. observed,
did, and described regarding T.C. and the accused happened. However, because some
of what N.M. observed, did, and described regarding T.C. would have directly involved
and impacted T.C. but somehow this was not remembered by T.C., for those
instances, I am nonetheless left with a reasonable doubt (for those instances described
by N.M. that directly involved and impacted T.C. which T.C. did not remember). These
instances include that at the accused’s direction: N.M. inserted his penis into
T.C.’s anus once; T.C. was made to walk around the house naked; after measuring
T.C.’s penis, N.M. showed T.C. how to masturbate; N.M. and T.C. took showers together;
N.M. and T.C. kissed; and the accused used sex toys with T.C.
[127]      
On the other hand, for conflicts between N.M.
and T.C.’s evidence that relate to N.M. being counselled or invited by the
accused to sexually touch and be sexually touched by T.C., I believe N.M.’s
evidence about this. I am convinced beyond a reasonable doubt that what N.M.
did to T.C. for a sexual purpose, he did because the accused counselled or
invited N.M. to do so. I arrive at this finding because N.M. had better and
direct knowledge of the accused’s influence and encouragements and because this
is supported by the bulk of the evidence, including by the accused’s grooming
and normalizing efforts, which are corroborated by the text messages and by T.C.’s
evidence.
[128]      
During closing submissions, the defence agreed
that T.C. was an “impressive young man”. However, the defence argued that T.C. was
not reliable, including because T.C. mentioned that the accused “tried
touching my private parts”, gave conflicting evidence, provided little by way
of context and details, and only described approximately four incidents.
[129]      
With one exception, being whether the accused only
tried to touch his private parts, these arguments are answered by the above.
[130]      
With regards to whether the accused touched him,
T.C. explained during his cross-examination that he used the “wrong grammar” in
the police video statement when he first mentioned that the accused tried
touching his private parts. This is confirmed when later, on several occasions during
the police video statement, T.C. mentioned that the accused touched “his
private part”, touched his “penis”, “at least, more than five times from
what I can remember”. He said that the accused touched his penis while
asking him questions such as whether T.C. was okay with what the accused was doing,
“asking a whole bunch of questions”, including telling T.C. that if he wanted
to do something he would first have to let the accused touch his penis,
and asking T.C. if he was ready for sex. T.C. said that the accused touching
his penis was always on his skin, under his clothes.
[131]      
During the police video statement, T.C. also
said that there was one time when he was not sure what the accused was doing
exactly, but believes that “around the beginning”, the accused tried “to see if
I was ready to have kids or not”. In the context of the evidence, I am
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that this refers to an occasion of the
accused masturbating T.C.
[132]      
From the police video statement, considered in
the context of the evidence, I am also satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that
T.C.’s penis was frequently touched by the accused and N.M. for a sexual
purpose, and that T.C. was frequently asked to touch N.M.’s penis for a sexual
purpose. T.C. said that the “stuff” is what “normally happened at the beginning”,
that the days were “always the same after that”, and that “they would do the
same thing”. He also said that “after he did all of those things of touching my
private parts, he would just act as though those were just a regular day”.
[133]      
T.C. remembered touching N.M.’s penis, normally
in the living room. T.C. said that the same thing as with the accused touching
his penis would happen after, “pretending it was a normal day”. T.C. believed
that he told the accused that N.M. was asking him to be touched. However, in
another demonstration of how fairly and candidly T.C. testified, he said that because
he was not certain that he told the accused, he preferred not to say that he
did.
[134]      
T.C. said during his examination-in-chief that
the accused touched his penis with his hand on five to six occasions, and that
N.M. touched T.C.’s penis at least 10 to 20 times. He said in-chief that the
accused might also have touched his penis with something other than his hand,
but he was not certain and did not remember.
[135]      
T.C. also said in-chief that N.M. sometimes
touched T.C.’s penis over his clothes, sometimes with “my clothes off”.  N.M. corroborates
some of this as he agreed and testified that he frequently touched T.C.’s penis,
and, as explained above, also described more serious incidents.
[136]      
T.C. also corroborates that the accused and N.M.
measured his penis and testified that the accused reassured him that measuring
his penis was normal.
[137]      
As well, T.C. denied ever importing sexual
images on any of the accused’s electronic devices.
[138]      
During his cross-examination, T.C. only
remembered one to three incidents involving the accused and remembered fewer than
10 to 20 incidents involving N.M. as explained above.
[139]      
Furthermore, T.C. corroborates that N.M. was once
naked at the accused’s home, and that the accused normalized such behaviour. T.C.
saw N.M. naked at the accused’s once for about 30 minutes. He said that N.M.
was acting normal, on the couch, with the accused saying nothing and acting
normal, just looking at him, and not asking N.M. to dress despite T.C. asking the
accused to do so. Contradicting the accused, T.C. testified in the police video
statement that the accused asked him why he was confused by N.M. being naked.
[140]      
The above also corroborates that by January 2022,
the accused had groomed and normalized abnormal sexual behaviour with N.M. and that
he was proceeding to attempt to groom and normalize such behaviour with T.C. The
above, considered in the context of the evidence, establishes beyond a
reasonable doubt that through his ongoing efforts at grooming and normalization,
the accused encouraged and created an environment that encouraged N.M. to have
sexual contact with T.C.
[141]      
Consequently, considering the evidence, I am satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused touched T.C.’s penis for a sexual
purpose using his hand on T.C.’s skin on at least five to six occasions, which
include one instance of attempted masturbation of T.C. and another of measuring
T.C.’s penis, contrary to s. 151 of the Code. As well, I am satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused, through the environment that he
created and through his encouragements, counselled or invited N.M. to touch
T.C. and N.M. being touched by T.C. for a sexual purpose on at least 10 to 20
occasions, contrary to s. 152 of the Code. Furthermore, I am convinced beyond
a reasonable doubt that while touching T.C.’s penis, the accused frequently asked
T.C. if he was ready to have sex, thereby counselling or inviting T.C. to have more
serious sexual contact with the accused or with N.M., contrary to s. 152 of the
Code.
[142]      
As well, considering the evidence, I am satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused sexually assaulted N.M. on at least
15 occasions, contrary to ss. 151 and 152 of the Code. This includes the
accused:
[143]      
Furthermore, considering the evidence, I am satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused occasionally showed pornography to
N.M., including images or videos of men and boys having sex or engaged in explicit
sexual activity, for the purpose of facilitating the accused touching N.M. or the
accused being touched by N.M. for a sexual purpose, contrary to s. 171.1 of the
Code. N.M. was believable when he described this. Further, his evidence
about this is corroborated by the evidence, including by the child pornography
evidence.
[144]      
With regards to the child pornography counts, the
defence argues that the accused did not make, possess, or access child
pornography.
[145]      
The defence argues that the accused did not
intend to make child pornography. The defence argues that the images of J. are
thumbnail images and the images showing that J. was behind a towel when the
accused took a video of J. blowing bubbles are missing. The defence also argues
that he did not intend to make pornography, but a video of J. blowing bubbles,
and that this is corroborated by the fact that he mentioned this video to the
mother, proving his lack of intent. The defence argues that the accused found the
yellow and white USB key and deleted its content. The defence argues as well that
there is no evidence that the accused accessed any of the illegal images found
on his devices, that these were not downloaded or accessed by him but by an
unknown user, possibly one of the children who he testified had easy access to
his devices. The defence also argues that the accused did not have care and
control of the deleted images found in the cache file of his devices.
[146]      
I find, with one exception, that the alleged
illegal images are all instances of child pornography, as defined in s. 163.1
of the Code. All depict at least one child, and in some instances, several
children, under the age of 18, either engaged in explicit sexual activity, or the
dominant characteristic of which is the depiction, for a sexual purpose, is of
a sexual organ or the anal region of a child under the age of 18 years. The
exception are the images of N.M. shirtless and seated on a chair in his home, these
do not meet the definition of child pornography.
[147]      
As indicated and explained earlier in my reasons,
I do not believe the accused’s exculpatory evidence and his evidence does not
leave me with a reasonable doubt. As a result, I do not believe that J. was
behind a towel when the accused took those images of J. naked in the accused’s
shower, that a cat or the accused adjusting the water temperature of J.’s
shower impacted the focus of the accused’s phone (which incidentally was primarily
on J.’s penis and anal area), that N.M. sent the accused a picture of his penis
while seated on a toilet (this was denied by N.M. during his cross-examination and
no pornographic images were found on N.M.’s phone), that the accused found the
yellow and white USB key and deleted its content as he described in 2009 or
2010, and that the illegal images found on the accused’s devices were imported
onto his devices and accessed by people other than the accused. As well, as
explained, the accused’s exculpatory evidence did not leave me with a
reasonable doubt. However, as explained in the general principles section, this
is not the end of the analysis as the onus of proof is always on the Crown to prove,
beyond a reasonable doubt, the elements of the offences charged.
[148]      
Detective Desjardins testified and was qualified
as an expert to provide his opinion about the acquisition, seizure, examination,
storage, and analysis of the data and images on the accused’s electronic devices.
[149]      
The detective provided evidence that confirmed
that the seized electronic devices were the accused’s devices. This included similar
passwords used on the devices, the accused’s email addresses, credit card
information, documents authored by the accused, and other personal information of
the accused found on the devices.
[150]      
As indicated in the background section of my
reasons, the detective found in the glide cache of the accused’s cellular telephone,
thumbnail images, including 237 images of J. naked in the accused’s shower,
three images of a young teenage boy seated on a toilet with his penis visible,
and ten images of N.M. seated on a chair with his face and bare chest visible.
[151]      
The detective explained that of the 237 images
of J. naked in the shower, 38 were original images. All the illegal images were
found in the phone’s glide cache. I agree with the defence submissions that
once in the glide cache or cache of the accused’s devices, the accused had no
control over the material. The detective explained that a cache is a storage
site where images can remain even after being deleted, and that while in the
cache, the images are not accessible by the device user. As well, the detective
explained that thumbnail images are a smaller representative image of a larger
image, that thumbnail images are the reduced-sized version of original images. He
said that if these images originated from one video of J. in the shower,
only one unique image would be expected to be found on the thumbnail, not the 38
unique images that were found. The detective said the data obtained shows when
the images were last accessed, in May and early June 2022, but not when the
images were created or deleted. However, of note, and as discussed above, the
mother testified that on May 26, 2022, she warned the accused that T.C. was
making allegations against him. The accused also agreed that he was warned about
allegations towards the end of May or early in June 2022.
[152]      
Further, the accused implicitly acknowledged he
knew what child pornography was when he testified about viewing four
pornographic images on the yellow and white USB key.
[153]      
Considering the evidence, I am satisfied beyond
a reasonable doubt that the only rational inference that can be drawn from the
evidence is that the accused took images of J. naked in his shower, intending
to focus on the child’s penis and anal region, knowing that it depicted child
pornography, thereby making child pornography contrary to s. 163.1(2) of the Code.
Similarly, I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the only rational
inference that can be drawn from the evidence is that the accused accessed
these images and possessed these images up until he deleted them after being warned
of allegations against him by early June 2022 and prior to his arrest on June 14,
2022, knowing that they were child pornography. Indeed, Detective Desjardins
testified that some of these images were accessed or modified on May 14, 2022. This
was the accused’s cellular telephone and he testified about taking these images.
He told the mother about these images at the outset to establish trust with the
parents, but did not delete the images as instructed because, based on the
data, some of these images were accessed or modified in May 2022. Further, there
is no evidence that any of the children or that someone else other than the
accused accessed the accused’s telephone. This argument is pure speculation. As
a result, the accused will also be found guilty of accessing and possession of
child pornography contrary to ss. 163.1(4.1) and 163.1(4) of the Code.
[154]      
Regarding the three images of a young teenage
boy seated on a toilet with his penis visible, the evidence does not establish that
these were created by the accused. However, the evidence establishes, beyond a
reasonable doubt, that the only reasonable inference that can be drawn from the
evidence is that the accused accessed these images, knowing that they were
images of child pornography and that he knowingly possessed these images until
he deleted them just prior to his arrest, also in breach of ss. 163.1(4.1) and
163.1(4) of the Code. Again, his argument that these were accessed by
someone else is pure speculation.
[155]      
Detective Desjardins also testified about 22
images found in the cache file of the accused’s older cellular telephone. These
are images of unknown naked boys, between the age of about 5 to 14 years old,
in sexualized poses, including some depicting anal or oral penile penetration,
with the focus of the images being on the boys’ genital and anal regions. As
explained above, I did not believe the accused’s evidence about why the images
were found on his device, including his suggestion that J., who was then 9 or
10 years old, might have downloaded them or somehow put them on the accused’s phone,
nor did his evidence about this leave me with a reasonable doubt.
[156]      
This device was the accused’s older or prior cellular
telephone. It was not password protected. It was seized in the accused’s home
on the day of his arrest. Detective Desjardins testified that the 22 illegal images
would have been saved on the accused’s phone at some unknown date prior to
being deleted, which, considered in the context of the evidence, establishes
care or control. Once deleted, these images remained in the phone’s cache file where
they were no longer available to the user.
[157]      
Considering the evidence, I am convinced beyond
a reasonable doubt that the only rational inference that can be drawn from the
evidence is that the accused saved these 22 child pornography images on this
phone prior to deleting them after being warned of allegations against him. It
would be pure speculation to accept the accused’s arguments that J. or someone
else did this. As a result, the accused had possession of this child
pornography, knowing that they were child pornography, contrary to s. 163.1(4)
of the Code, from the time that he saved these images up until the time
that he deleted them prior to his arrest. For the same reasons, I arrive at the
same conclusion for the three child pornography images found on the hard drive
of the accused’s computer, as they too had been saved prior to being deleted.
[158]      
Detective Desjardins also recovered 11,144
images and 148 videos of young naked boys on a yellow and white USB key found
inserted in the USB port of the accused’s computer. These were mostly of naked
young boys, some between 6 to 8 years old, and others about 14 to 16 years old.
Samples of these images include images of masturbation, young boys masturbating
each other, as well as images of anal and oral penile penetration of young boys
by other young boys, and of digital penetration of a young boy’s anus. Samples of
the recovered deleted videos involved ejaculation on a child’s face, young boys
masturbating, young boys performing fellatio on other young boys, young boys
performing anal sex on other young boys, and one of the sample videos involved
a 6- to 8-year-old girl performing fellatio.
[159]      
These images and videos had all been deleted at
some unknown date and were found on the USB key’s unallocated space. Detective
Desjardins prepared a voluminous report and his testimony about images and
videos on the USB key establishes that some of these images were accessed and
manipulated prior to being deleted.
[160]      
Considering the evidence, I am satisfied beyond
a reasonable doubt that the only rational inference that can be drawn from the
evidence is that the accused saved these images on the yellow and white USB key,
knowing that they were child pornography, and that he accessed and manipulated
these images prior to deleting them before his arrest. As a result, the accused
accessed and possessed child pornography, contrary to ss. 163.1(4.1) and
163.1(4) of the Code.
[161]      
Indeed, similar images were found on four of the
accused’s devices. Web searches conducted by the accused searched for words
including “young nude boys”. Young nude boys are what most of the images found
on the accused’s devices depict. The accused admitted, during his examination-in-chief,
that he conducted web searches using such words. The accused also then admitted
that when conducting web searches, he was looking for males who, although 19-
to 25-years-old, looked younger than 19, implicitly admitting that he was
sexually attracted to young boys and that he knew that the images were child
pornography images. Most of the images found on his devices depict males who
are younger than 18. Furthermore, the evidence indicates that the accused
accessed some of the illegal images, some as late as about one month prior to
his arrest.
[162]      
As well, some of the illegal images found on the
accused’s devices mirror some of the complainants’ allegations. For example, the
accused’s web searches focused on nudity and young boys, and the complainants
testified that the accused encouraged their nudity while at his house. N.M.
testified that he was often naked at the accused’s home and the accused asked
him to undress. T.C. corroborated that the accused acted as if N.M. being naked
was normal. As well, some of the sexual acts depicted on the illegal images mirror
some of the complainants’ allegations. For example, the boy-on-boy pornographic
images are quite similar to some of the allegations of sexual acts between N.M.
and T.C. Further, some of the text messages between N.M. and the accused also
corroborate a focus by the accused on the sexuality of young boys, which is
what most of the illegal images focus on.
[163]      
These facts, considered in the context of the
evidence, establish beyond a reasonable doubt that the only reasonable
inference is the accused’s guilt on the child pornography counts. The defence
arguments that part of the images are missing because the images are thumbnail
images, including that a towel was present on the images of J. but was not
depicted because the images are thumbnails, are simply not supported by the
evidence. Further, as indicated above, it would be pure speculation to accept
the accused’s arguments that someone else, including that one of the children, accessed
any of the illegal images found on his devices when there is no evidence
supporting such an inference.
[164]      
I did not believe the evidence of the accused,
and his evidence did not leave me with a reasonable doubt. When I considered
the evidence, I found that the Crown proved each element of the offences
charged beyond a reasonable doubt.
[165]      
Consequently, the accused is found guilty of all
eight counts on the indictment.