[1]         
This is an urgent application for certiorari and mandamus brought by the
Crown arising from a decision of a Justice of the Peace to strike a bail
hearing while the Crown was in the process of cross-examining the defendant’s
proposed surety.  For the reasons that follow, this application is granted.
[2]         
When seized of an application for bail governed by s. 515(6) of the Criminal
Code, the Justice “shall order that the accused be detained in custody”
unless the accused, having been given “a reasonable opportunity to do so” is
able to show cause why detention is not justified.  A hearing may be adjourned
in the circumstances contemplated by s. 516 of the Criminal Code.  While
there is an unquestionable jurisdiction vested in the Learned Justice to strike
proceedings - the equivalent of a mistrial in pre-trial motions and
applications – that jurisdiction is not an all-purpose discretionary remedy to
allow a “do-over” where a witness proves unsatisfactory or some other element
of the evidence failed to materialize as hoped.
[3]         
The Learned Justice suggested the defence bring a motion to strike a s.
515(6) bail hearing after the surety proposed by the defence unexpected damaged
her own credibility “through no fault of the defence”.  In those circumstances,
the Learned Justice had no basis to assume a jurisdiction granted neither by
Parliament nor the common law to strike the proceeding.  There was no
cognizable prejudice objectively present that could render the continuation of
the proceeding contrary to the principles of fundamental justice.  There was no
impairment to the right of the accused to a fair hearing simply because the
hearing did not unfold as hoped due to unforeseen actions of a witness called
by the accused.
[4]         
The harm to the functioning of an already Jordan-stressed
criminal justice system by such a practice, were it to be accepted, can readily
be appreciated.  Court staff, a Justice, a courtroom and Crown Attorney were
all assembled to conduct this hearing – a diversion of resources that could otherwise
have been used for other participants seeking to vindicate their constitutional
rights to reasonable bail and trial within a reasonable time.
[5]         
The circumstances giving rise to this application may be summarized as
follows.  Mr. Murray was arrested and released on bail in July 2024 on domestic
violence related charges.  His release terms included standard non-contact
provisions (not to be present in the residence of the complainant nor have any contact
with the complainant).  On October 6 he was arrested in the complainant’s
residence and charged with failure to comply (x 2) and fresh assault and other
charges arising from this incident.  On October 8 a special bail hearing was
scheduled for October 11 at the request of the defence to consider the
defendant’s proposed release plan.  That hearing was a reverse onus hearing
governed by s. 515(6) of the Criminal Code.
[6]         
The special hearing was convened (via Zoom) as scheduled and the defence
called as a witness the proposed surety.  While the Crown was cross-examining this
witness, the defendant - whose microphone was muted - signaled to the court with
his hands.  Noticing this, the Justice halted the questioning and requested the
accused be sent to a breakout room to confer with his counsel.  As it turned
out, he merely wanted a short break to use the washroom.
[7]         
While the Registrar was setting up the break-out room, the surety
uttered a profanity directed at Crown counsel, likely unaware her microphone
was still live.  Defence counsel heard the witness while waiting to be
transferred to the break-out room and immediately notified the witness that her
microphone was live and directed her to say nothing further until she (i.e. defence
counsel) returned.  At or shortly after this point, defence counsel was electronically
whisked away to the break-out room.
[8]         
It is not always immediately clear to participants when persons have
left a zoom hearing or rejoined it.  In the few seconds that followed, the
Crown objected to the witness’ slur against her that was made on the record by
the witness and the witness denied making the remark.  Her denial was contradicted
by the fact that her outburst had been both recorded and heard.   The Justice
admonished her about her language but nothing further was said until defence
counsel and the defendant rejoined from the break-out room moments later.
[9]         
There followed a discussion about what the witness had said and her
(recorded) denial of what she had said.  The recording was played back in
full.  The Learned Justice remarked “I understand that …. she didn’t think she
was saying that on the record.  But, but it was clearly heard.  And I heard
it.  I heard her say, then deny she had said it.”  After making these remarks
he suggested that the defence might wish to bring an application to strike the
proceeding.  The lunch break ensued followed by the anticipated defence motion
to strike the bail hearing.
[10]       Following
oral argument from both sides, the Learned Justice noted that “people make
comments like that when they get out of court, and it’s not intended for anyone
to be heard” and that “it’s probably blowing off steam”.  However, he noted
that “the problem was that she made that comment, coupled with an immediate
denial”.
[11]       I
set forth below the operative reasons given by the Justice for striking the
hearing in full:
[12]       It
may not seem “fair” that a witness performed badly on the witness stand through
no “fault” of the accused.  However, that is not the sort of hearing “fairness”
that is the subject of principles of fundamental justice.  No accused can control
whether or when a witness may lie on the witness stand and doubtless does not
plan for the witness to do so.  A witness may display dishonesty on the stand
or may do so in actions or statements intended to be off the record or even out
of court.  Evidence of such dishonesty is not inadmissible simply because
unanticipated or unplanned.  None of this brings into play the principles of
fundamental justice (in which case the jurisdiction to strike the proceeding is
of course undoubted).
[13]       The
Justice’s reasons amount to a blanket assertion of discretion to grant the
defence a “do-over” where, even if through no “fault” of the accused, a release
plan falls apart.   The onus on the accused under s. 515(6) is not conditioned
on a hearing unfolding as anticipated.
[14]       The
requested order quashing the decision of the Learned Justice to strike the
proceeding is granted and the mandamus in aid requiring the Learned Justice to
complete the hearing in accordance with the statutory requirements of s. 515
shall also be granted.