[1]         
The defendants bring
this motion pursuant to ss. 29.1(1) of the Class Proceedings Act, 1992,
SO 1992, c.6 (the ‘CPA’) and Rule 24.01 of the Rules of Civil
Procedure R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, (“the Rules”) to dismiss this
proposed class action for delay.
[2]         
The proposed class
action, commenced on August 15, 2016, involves the interests of the Mohawk,
Oneida, Onondaga, Cayuga, Seneca, and Tuscarora peoples otherwise known as the
“Six Nations” or “Haudenosaunee Confederacy”. The plaintiffs, Wilfred Davey and
Bill Monture, are members of the Haudenosaunee Confederacy.
[3]         
The defendant,
Haudenosaunee Development Institute (‘HDI’), was created in 2007 by the
Haudenosaunee Confederacy Chiefs Council (‘HCCC’), the traditional government
of the Haudenosaunee Confederacy, to provide proponents of development a means
by which to engage with the Haudenosaunee Confederacy in respect of proposed
and pending developments affecting the lands of the Haudenosaunee Confederacy.
Upon being satisfied that Haudenosaunee interests are adequately addressed in
the proposed development, the HCCC may grant its consent to proceed with the
development. The HCCC consent may include such conditions as compensation for
the infringement of rights or the requirement of employing members of the
Haudenosaunee Confederacy.
[4]         
At a high level, the
plaintiffs in their fresh as amended statement of claim allege that HDI and its
members had a duty to protect the rights of the members of the Haudenosaunee Confederacy
in carrying out HDI’s functions and to ensure that all stakeholders, including
the putative class members, were aware and supportive of HDI’s activities. Instead,
the plaintiffs allege HDI and its co-defendants leveraged HDI’s position as a
representative of the HCCC to enrich themselves at the expense of the
Haudenosaunee Confederacy, contrary to their duties and obligations. The
plaintiffs claim damages of $50,000,000 for breach of fiduciary duty, breach of
contract, breach of trust, fraudulent misrepresentation, negligent
misrepresentation, unjust enrichment, and civil conspiracy, as well as
exemplary, aggravated and punitive damages together with a mareva injunction.
[5]         
I now review the
evidence on this motion as it relates to the steps taken in this action.
[6]         
The plaintiffs
commenced this proceeding on August 15, 2016. The defendants delivered their
statement of defence on October 11, 2016. On November 2, 2016, the plaintiffs
brought a motion seeking both a mareva injunction over the defendants’ assets
and a norwich order to compel production of certain of the defendants’ account
information (collectively, the ‘Mareva/Norwich Motion’). The Mareva/Norwich
Motion was adjourned on consent on three separate occasions to February 23,
2017, and in the meantime, cross-examinations were completed.
[7]         
On February 23, 2017,
the plaintiffs sought a fourth adjournment of the Mareva/Norwich Motion. The
defendants opposed the adjournment request. Parayeski J. granted the
plaintiffs’ adjournment request to the long motions list for the week of April
10, 2017, peremptory to the plaintiffs, at which time the court would hear both
the Mareva/Norwich Motion and the plaintiffs’ motion for certification. Parayeski
J. also ordered the plaintiffs to deliver their certification motion materials
on or before March 8, 2017.
[8]         
On March 9, 2017, the
plaintiffs delivered their motion record in support of the certification of the
class proceeding to which the defendants responded with their delivered record
on April 4, 2017.
[9]         
On April 11, 2017, the
plaintiffs sought a further adjournment of the Mareva/Norwich Motion and an
adjournment of the certification motion, both of which were opposed by the
defendants and denied by the court. The plaintiffs’ motions remained on the
long motions running list.
[10]      
On April 13, 2017,
after receiving the defendants’ factum on the certification motion, the
plaintiffs delivered a supplementary motion record, including both an amended
notice of motion and an amended amended notice of motion which withdrew some of
its plead causes of action and sought to add new causes of action despite not
having amended its statement of claim.
[11]      
On April 26, 2017, the
matter came before Goodman J. Upon consideration of the defendants’ opposition to
the plaintiffs’ further adjournment request, the court determined that the
matter “must be dealt with by a designated class proceedings judge” and that
cross-examinations were required with respect to the certification motion. The
court adjourned the matter sine die and directed the lawyers to contact
the Regional Senior Judge’s (RSJ) office to arrange for the assignment of a
class proceedings judge and hearing dates.
[12]      
In the meantime, the plaintiffs
were in the process of retaining new counsel.
[13]      
On May 24, 2017, Lococo
J. advised the parties that he had been appointed as the designated class
action judge and asked the parties to contact his office to arrange a
conference call to discuss scheduling once the plaintiffs’ new legal counsel
had been confirmed. On August 17, 2017, the plaintiffs delivered a notice of
change of lawyer appointing the plaintiffs’ current counsel.
[14]      
On September 8, 2017, new
plaintiffs’ counsel requested that defence counsel provide copies of all orders
and endorsements issued in the proceedings to which request defence counsel
complied within seven days.
[15]      
On October 6 and 20,
2017, respectively, the plaintiffs delivered a fresh as amended notice of
motion to certify the class proceeding and a fresh as amended statement of
claim. On November 10, 2017 the defendants advised that they were not prepared
to consent to either amendment.
[16]      
On December 18, 2017,
the plaintiffs contacted the court to arrange a scheduling case conference with
respect to the plaintiffs’ motion to seek leave to amend the statement of
claim. The conference was scheduled for January 25, 2018 but rescheduled to
January 30, 2018 at the court’s request.
[17]      
On January 30th,
2018, Lococo J. set out the procedure for the plaintiffs to follow for the
hearing of their motion for leave to amend the statement of claim. The
plaintiffs delivered their motion materials on February 27, 2018 pursuant to
the court’s direction. The motion for leave to amend was scheduled to be heard,
and was heard, on May 25, 2018.
[18]      
On September 12, 2018, Lococo
J. issued his reasons for granting the plaintiffs leave to issue their fresh as
amended statement of claim. The plaintiffs served their fresh as amended claim
on October 12, 2018, to which the defendants responded with their amended
statement of defence on April 4, 2019.
[19]      
On November 26, 2019,
defence counsel advised counsel for the plaintiffs that he had instructions to
bring a motion to dismiss the action for delay. On January 10, 2020, the court
scheduled the dismissal motion for hearing before Lococo J. on May 29, 2020,
and advised the parties to file their materials “well advance of the date”.
[20]      
No motion materials were
delivered by either party. In early May 2020, the defendants vacated the May
29, 2020 motion date sine die with the consent of the plaintiffs in
light of the COVID pandemic.
[21]      
On October 8, 2021,
defence counsel wrote to plaintiffs’ counsel seeking to reschedule the dismissal
motion. Having not received a response from plaintiffs’ counsel, on November 4,
2021, defence counsel again wrote to opposing counsel to seek agreement on a
schedule and a date for the argument of the dismissal motion. At that time, plaintiffs’
counsel requested a copy of the defence motion materials that had yet to be
delivered.
[22]      
On June 28, 2022,
defence counsel communicated with the court seeking to reschedule the motion
for dismissed for delay. Plaintiffs’ counsel responded by advising that the
plaintiffs also wished to schedule a date for the certification motion, having
been ready to proceed, and requested a scheduling case conference for that
motion. The parties were subsequently advised that Lococo J. was no longer
sitting and on August 2, 2022 defence counsel was requested by the court to
provide its dismissal motion materials to the RSJ.
[23]      
On August 26, 2022,
defence counsel delivered to the RSJ a draft notice of motion together with the
pleadings and advised that the motion materials themselves were nearing
completion.
[24]      
On August 31, 2022, the
court advised that Broad J. was appointed as the designated class proceedings
judge and his office would be in contact with the parties to arrange a
conference call to discuss the matter.
[25]      
After defence counsel
followed up with the court on January 11, 2023, the court offered January and
March dates for the requested case conference. Because plaintiffs’ counsel was
unavailable on the proposed dates, the case conference was set for March 10,
2023 but ultimately rescheduled to April 14, 2023 to accommodate a last-minute
change in defence counsel’s availability.
[26]      
On April 14, 2023, Broad
J. set a timetable for both the defendant’s dismissal motion and the
plaintiffs’ motion to impose a timetable for the certification motion. The
court’s April 14, 2023, timetable is not in the record but based on the
affidavit of plaintiffs’ counsel, Jeffrey Kaufman, sworn June 14, 2023 (‘the
Kaufman Affidavit’) and the transcript of the cross examination of defendant,
Aaron Detlor, dated April 16, 2024, I am able to determine that the defendants
were directed to deliver their motion materials on or before April 30, 2023 and
that no hearing dates were prescribed in the timetable for either the dismissal
motion or the plaintiffs’ motion for a timetable for their certification motion.
[27]      
On April 25, 2023, the
defendants delivered their motion record in support of the dismissal motion
which was followed by the cross-examinations of Messer Kaufman and Detlor on
February 26, 2024 and April 16, 2024 respectively.
[28]      
On October 25, 2024,
the defendant’s dismissal motion came before me for hearing.
[29]      
The plaintiffs never
brought back on the Mareva/Norwich Motion or their motion for certification of
the class proceeding.
[30]      
The defendants submit
that the plaintiffs cannot establish that on or before October 1, 2021 (the
‘Anniversary Date’) any one of the steps required to save the putative class
action from a mandatory dismissal pursuant to s. 29.1 of the CPA was
satisfied. Specifically, the defendants submit that the plaintiffs failed to
file by the Anniversary Date a final and complete certification motion record.
The motion records filed by the plaintiffs prior to the Anniversary Date do not
include the fresh as amended statement of claim seeking to certify the new
causes of caution plead in the amended claim. Additionally, the parties never
filed with the court a timetable for service of the plaintiffs’ certification
motion record or for completion of one or more other steps required to advance
the proceeding.
[31]      
The defendants also
assert that at no time did the court establish a timetable for service of the
plaintiffs’ certification motion or for completion of one or more other steps
required to advance the proceeding. None of the court’s orders or endorsements
issued prior to October 1, 2021 satisfy this third saving provision of s. 29.1.
The Order of Parayeski J., dated February 23, 2017, resulted only in the filing
of a certification record in respect of the claims originally advanced in the
unamended statement of claim. The amendments sanctioned by the court in the
fresh as amended statement of claim radically changed the claims, and for that
reason, the February 23, 2017, order is of no assistance to the plaintiffs.
[32]       The plaintiffs’ position is that it delivered a final and
complete certification motion record well before the Anniversary Date.  The
plaintiffs also submit that whether the certification record is otherwise
“sufficient” should be ultimately determined on the certification motion and
not on this motion before the court. While the plaintiffs concede that the
parties did not file with the court the timetable stipulated by s. 29.1 of the CPA,
nevertheless the February 23, 2017 order of Parayeski J. established a
timetable for service of the plaintiffs’ motion for certification and scheduled
the certification motion date. Furthermore, the April 26, 2017, endorsement of
Goodman J. identified and directed steps that had to be taken to advance the
proceeding, including the assignment of a designated class proceedings judge,
and thereby, is a form of timetable sufficient to satisfy the requirements of
s. 29.1(1)(c) of the CPA.
[33]       In addition, and in the alternative, the defendants rely on Rule 24
in support of their motion to dismiss this proceeding. The defendants submit
that not only is the plaintiffs’ delay in advancing their claim intentional
conduct that demonstrates a distain or disrespect for the court process, but
the delay is inordinate, inexcusable and gives rise to a substantial risk that
a fair trial will not be possible because of the delay.
[34]      
The defendants submit
that inordinance of the delay is measured by reference to the length of the
time from the commencement of the proceeding to the motion to dismiss and rely
on precedent decisions where a delay of 5 years or more have been found to be
unreasonable. The moving parties also assert that the plaintiffs’ explanations
for the delay are neither reasonable nor persuasive. Finally, the defendants’
submission is that because the plaintiffs’ delay is both inordinate and
excusable, there is a presumption of prejudice that the plaintiffs have failed
to rebut.
[35]      
Apart from there being
no evidence on the part of the plaintiffs or their counsel of a demonstrated
disdain or disrespect for the court process, the plaintiffs submit that the
relevant period of delay is to be measured from the commencement of the action
to when the defendants signaled their intention to bring the dismissal motion,
or at the latest, when the court first scheduled the dismissal motion. They
submit there is no inordinate delay on their part within this timeframe. In any
event, the plaintiffs submit that they always had an intention to move for
certification but were frustrated in their efforts because the defendants did
not agree to move forward with the certification motion pending adjudication of
the dismissal motion. The plaintiffs further submit that they have provided additional
reasonable and cogent explanations for any periods of delay up to the
defendants’ initiation of their dismissal motion and thereafter. Finally, the
plaintiffs’ position is that because there is no inordinate or inexcusable
delay, no presumption of prejudice exists, and in any event, the defendants
have failed to proffer any evidence of prejudice to their ability to have a
fair trial of the issues by reason of the plaintiffs’ alleged delay.
[36]      
The statutory language
of s. 29.1 of the CPA is clear. If none of the requirements enumerated
in s. 29.1 are satisfied by the one-year anniversary date, the proposed class
action shall be dismissed for delay. The requirements are disjunctive.
[37]      
The current provisions
of the CPA, including s. 29.1, came into force on October 1, 2020.
Pursuant to the transition provisions, actions commenced before October 1, 2020
are deemed to have been commenced on that date for purposes of the one-year
dismissal date. For these actions, unless there was compliance with one of ss.
29.1 (1)(a), (b), (c) or (d) by October 1, 2021, the dismissal provision in s. 29.1
would apply.
[38]      
If none of the
requirements enumerated in s. 29.1 of the CPA are met by the one-year
anniversary date, the court has no residual discretion to order anything other
than dismissal of the proceeding (see: St. Louis v. Canadian National
Railway Company, 2022 ONSC 2556, (“St. Louis”), at para 17, leave to
appeal dismissed 2022 ONSC 5016.
[39]      
In Bourque v.
Insight Productions, 2022, ONSC 174 (“Bourque”), the court was urged
by the plaintiff to exercise discretion under s. 29.1. In response to that
submission, Belobaba J. stated that:
[40]      
Belobaba J. also observed:
[41]      
In rejecting the
application of s. 12, Belobaba J. explained that although the court may have
“wide-ranging case management powers respecting the conduct of class proceedings”,
there is no basis on which the court can override s. 29.1’s mandatory
provisions (see: Bourque, at para 17). The approach taken by Belobaba J.
is settled law.
[42]                   
Subsections 29.1(b) and
29.1(c) refer respectively to the parties having agreed in writing and the
court having established a timetable for service of the representative plaintiffs’
motion record for certification or for completion of one or more other steps
required to advance the proceeding.
[43]      
Rule 1.03 (1) of the Rules,
which applies to class proceedings, defines “timetable” as “a schedule for the
completion of one or more steps required to advance the proceeding (including
delivery of affidavits of documents, examinations under oath, where available,
or motions), established by order of the court or by written agreement of the
parties that is not contrary to an order”.
[44]      
In considering the Rule
1.03(1) definition of “timetable”, Belobaba J. stated in Bourque
that a “timetable” is “a plan of times at which events are scheduled to take place,
especially towards a particular end” (see: Bourque, at para 13). A
timetable also requires an undertaking to do something within a specified
deadline (see: Lamasche v. Pacific Telescope Corp., 2022 ONSC 2553, at
para 15).
[45]      
What may constitute a “timetable”
was specifically addressed in Bourque. There, the plaintiff submitted
that a timetable had been established at a case conference by virtue of an
agreement between both counsel and the court that she could serve her
certification record “when she can” (see: Bourque, at para 10). Based on
these facts, Belobaba J. rejected the notion that a timetable had been
established. At para 14, the court found:
[46]      
In St. Louis,
R.D. Gordon J, considered whether a case conference endorsement of October 17,
2017 established a timetable where the court ordered a second case conference
to be held before June 30, 2018 to permit the plaintiffs time to undertake an
environmental assessment and report to the court on its status. R.D. Gordon, J.
found that the 2017 case conference endorsement established a timetable because
“[i]t provided for a further event by a specified date” and that the two
completed steps (the commencement of an environmental assessment and the second
case conference) were required to advance the proceeding in the circumstances
of the case (see: St. Louis, at para 20). Although no timetable for the
advancement of the plaintiffs’ certification motion “was set or even
considered”, the fact that a further “case management conference was necessary
to determine whether or how the action would be proceeding” was deemed
sufficient to satisfy the requirements of ss. 29.1 (c) (see: St. Louis,
at para 23).
[47]      
Additionally, the court
found in St. Louis at para 24 that:
[48]      
In Lubus v. Wayland
Group Corp., 2022 ONSC 4999 (“Lubus”), leave to appeal granted, 2023
ONSC 239, but appeal settled prior to hearing, Morgan J. agreed that while the
goal of s. 29.1 is to ensure that otherwise stagnating class actions move along
and that the wording of s. 29.1 is strict, the importance of context in
implementing the provisions of s. 29.1 is to be appreciated because “[s]ection
29.1 is not there to catch plaintiffs out” (at para 44).
[49]      
In Lubus, Morgan
J. found that a case conference endorsement directing steps to be taken without
the implementation of specific deadlines satisfied the requirements of ss.
29.1(1)(c). The circumstance before Morgan J. were such that the plaintiffs had
sought at a case conference a timetable leading to a certification motion but
instead were ordered by the court to take certain steps to clarify
representation and service issues that had arisen. In those circumstances where
the case management judge has identified steps to be taken prior to the
certification motion, and those steps can be done in writing “and therefore
without a specific hearing date being scheduled”, Morgan J. found that “the
court had, in effect, established a form of timetable by directing the next
steps to be taken despite not specifying an outside date” (Lubus, at
paras 45 and 46).
[50]      
I agree with and adapt
the approaches taken by R.D. Gordon J. and Morgan J. in St. Louis and Lubus
respectively with respect to the meaning of “timetable” as situated ss. 29.1(1)(c)
of the CPA.
[51]      
There is no dispute
that this proceeding was commenced on August 15, 2016, and therefore, the
one-year anniversary date for compliance with the provisions of s. 29.1 is
October 1, 2021.
[52]      
Likewise, the parties
agree that should I find that the plaintiffs have failed to comply with one of
the four requirements of s. 291, I must dismiss the proposed class action. I
have no discretion.
[53]      
Where the positions of
the parties diverge is with respect to the plaintiffs’ compliance with s. 29.1.
As I have previously referenced, the defendants submit that the plaintiffs have
failed to satisfy any of the requirements of the section whereas the plaintiffs
maintain that they have met the requirements of ss. 29.1(1)(a) having filed a
final and complete certification motion record as well as the requirements of ss.
29.1(1)(c) with this court having established both a timetable for service of
the certification motion and for the completion of one or more other steps
required to advance the proceedings.
[54]      
While the defendants
concede that the order of Parayeski J., dated February 23, 2017, provides for
the delivery of the plaintiffs’ certification motion record by a specified
date, and certification motion records were filed in March and April, 2017, the
defendants submit the order resulted in the filing of a certification motion
record only in respect of the plaintiffs’ original claims and not with respect
to the claims advanced in the plaintiffs’ fresh as amended claim which they now
seek to certify. For this reason, the plaintiffs’ filed records fail to satisfy
ss. 29.1(1)(a)’s requirement that the motion record for certification be “final
and complete”. For the same reason the timetable established by the February
23, 2017, order for service of the motion record falls short of meeting the
first condition of ss. 29.1(1)(c): the subsection does not contemplate a
timetable for service of any certification motion record but rather a final and
complete record.
[55]      
I agree with the
defendants’ submission that ss. 29(1)(c) contemplates a timetable for the
service of a final and complete certification motion record. This is the only
rational interpretation of the subsection given the clear requirement that the
record be “final and complete” in the preceding subsection of s. 29.1. I
disagree, however, that the plaintiffs’ motion record filed on March 9, 2017
and the supplementary record filed on April 13, 2017 (collectively, the ‘certification
records’) are anything other than “final and complete”.
[56]      
I have reached this
conclusion because the evidence of plaintiffs’ counsel is unequivocal that the
certification records are final and complete. Plaintiffs’ counsel’s evidence is
that the fresh as amended statement of claim does not include any changes to
the material facts and does not necessitate revisions to the certification
motion records. From the plaintiffs’ standpoint, no additional evidence or
amendments are intended or required.
[57]      
Although the defendants
submit that the certification records should be amended, at least to the extent
of including the final revision of the statement of claim, in order that the
plaintiffs might succeed in certifying all of their proposed causes of action,
that decision is not for the defendants to make. Whether the certification
records are sufficient to certify each of the putative class’s causes of action
will be adjudicated by me as the assigned class proceedings judge on the
certification motion. On that occasion, the defendants will be free to
challenge the certification of the proposed causes of action based on the
certification records as filed.
[58]      
Otherwise, I agree with
the plaintiffs that practically speaking, the defendants’ purported gap in the certification
records does not exist. Rules 37.10(1) and 4.08 of the Rules
permit the plaintiffs to requisition the fresh as amended statement of claim to
be placed before the court at the time of the certification motion for the
court’s consideration.
[59]      
I also find that
whereas the certification motion did not proceed in April 2017 as ordered by Parayeski
J., this fact does not make it incapable of satisfying the requirements of ss.
29.1(1)(c). As this court held in St. Louis, ss. 29.1(1)(c) “does not
require the actual advancement of the action or that the parties proceed with
scheduled steps. It only requires the court to have established a timetable for
a single step required to advance the proceeding” (see: St. Louis, at
para 24).
[60]      
In the event that I am mistaken
that the filed certification records are final and complete as mandated by ss
29.1(1)(a) and that the February 23, 2017 order of this court established a
timetable for service of the certification motion record, the order of Goodman
J., dated April 26, 2017, identified and directed steps that were required to
advance the proceeding, including cross-examination on the certification motion
and the designation by the RSJ of a class proceeding judge.
[61]       Like the environmental assessment in St. Louis,
this step was required on a practical basis for the plaintiffs to advance the
proceeding. In making his order, Goodman J. established “a form of timetable by
directing the next steps to be taken” as recognized by Morgan J. in Lubus
(at para 46). Even though Goodman J. did not set an explicit deadline date for
the designation of a class proceedings judge, the court in Lubus
recognizes a “form of order” that need not do so to satisfy the requirements of
the ss. 29.1(1)(c). As R.D. Gordon J. explained in St. Louis, where
steps are identified that need to be taken prior to the scheduling of the
certification motion and those steps can be taken without a specific date being
imposed, “one can nevertheless say that a schedule has in effect been set for
those necessary steps” (see: St. Louis, at para 45).
[62]       Based on the facts as I find them, these circumstances
did arise and were satisfied by the April 2017 endorsement of Goodman J.,
thereby complying with the requirements of the alternative condition of ss.
29.1(1)(c) of the CPA.
[63]       Rule 24.01(1) provides that a defendant who is not in
default under the Rules or an order of the court may move to have an
action dismissed for delay where the plaintiff has failed to serve the
statement of claim on all of the defendants within the prescribe time, to have
noted in default any defendant who has failed to deliver a statement of
defence, to set the action down for trial within six months after the close of
pleadings or to move for leave to restore to a trial list an action that has
been struck off the trial list, within 30 days after the action was struck off.
Although not specifically addressed by either party, there was apparent
agreement on the motion that the plaintiff had failed in at least one of the
four stipulated criteria.
[64]       Dismissing an action for delay is a severe remedy
because it denies a plaintiff the adjudication of their claim on its merits. In
D’Alimentation Denis Theriault Ltee v. Giant Tiger Stores Ltd, 2007 ONCA
695, at para 34, the Court of Appeal stated the preference that matters be
decided on their merits:
[65]       The Court of Appeal has also pointed out, however, sometimes
dismissal for delay on the part of the plaintiff is the only order that can
adequately protect the integrity of the civil justice process and prevent an
adjudication on the merits that is unfair to the defendant (see: Langenecker
v. Sauve, 2011 ONCA 803, (‘Langenecker’) at para 3; Avdeeva v.
Khankaldiyan, 2021 ONSC 2681 (‘Avdeeva’, at para 20).
[66]       Having said that, the Court of Appeal also cautions
that the adjudication of a motion to dismiss pursuant to Rule 24.01(1)
requires a careful balancing between efficiency and deciding disputes on their
merits:
[67]       In the event that there was any question as to whether
the Rule 24.01 dismissal for delay provisions apply to class actions, the
decision of this court in Barbiero v. Pollack, 2024 ONSC 1548 (“Barbiero”)
settles the issue in the affirmative. At para 158 of Barbiero, Glustien
J. found:
[68]       In Langenecker, the Court of Appeal summarized
the well-established test under Rule 24.01 for the dismissal of an
action for delay. Speaking for the Court, Doherty J.A. stated that an action
should not be dismissed for delay unless:
[69]       The test for dismissal for delay pursuant to Rule
24.01 is disjunctive. The defendant, as the moving party, has the onus of
establishing either branch of the test (see: Cardillo v. Willowdale
Contracting et al, 2020 ONSC 2193 (‘Cardillo’), at para 33.
[70]       The first type of case that attracts dismissal of an
action for delay, where the delay is both intentional and contumelious, “speaks
to a delay that is at least reckless, or perhaps wilful. It is the sort of
default where there is no reasonable explanation for it, and where there is an
element of disrespect to the court” (see: Cardillo, at para 34). In Langenecker,
the Court of Appeal described these types of cases as rare, usually involving
the breach of one or more court orders (at para 6).
[71]       The second type of case that will justify an order
dismissing a proceeding for delay has been more recently expressed by the Court
of Appeal as an action in which the delay is “inordinate, inexcusable and
prejudicial to the defendants in that it gives rise to a substantial risk that
a fair trial of the issues will not be possible (see: Ticchiarelli v.
Ticchiarelli, 2017 ONCA 1( (at para 12), (‘Ticchiarelli’).
[72]       This second type of case has three characteristics:
the delay must be (1) inordinate, (2) inexcusable, and (3) such that it gives
rise to a substantial risk that a fair trial of the issues will not be possible
because of the delay. In Smith v. Armstrong et al, 2018 ONSC 2435 (‘Smith’),
at para 22, R.D. Gordon R.S.J. provided an instructive summary of the
jurisprudence for evaluating the three requirements of the second branch of the
test under Rule 24.01:
[73]       While the plaintiffs do not dispute the point of
commencement of measuring the delay, they submit the Court of Appeal in Langenecker
was equivocal with respect to its end date. They argue that because the court did
not specifically define the end date (i.e. “ a motion to dismiss”), it is open
to this court to interpret the end date of the delay period as any one of the
date on which the defendants gave notice of their intention to bring the
dismissal motion, the date on which the court scheduled the defendants’ motion,
or the date on which the notice to dismiss is filed.
[74]       I disagree. The plain meaning of the Court of Appeal’s
direction in Langenecker is that the delay period is to be measured from
the commencement of the proceeding to the date on which the motion to dismiss
is heard. This interpretation of Doherty J.A.’s direction was confirmed by the
Court of Appeal in Ali v. Fruci, 2014 ONCA 596 (‘Ali’) and
adopted by this court without exception based on the decisions provided by the
parties for my consideration (see for example: Guillermo v. Akpata, 2024
ONSC 3839 at para 18; Ardeera v. Khankaldiyan, 2021 ONSC 2681, at para
23; Kelly v. Weins Canada One. Operating as Don Valley North Toyota,
2024 ONSC 445, at para 26.
[75]       There is no set amount of time that will make a delay
qualify as “inordinate”. In Langenecker, the Court of Appeal found a 15-year
delay to be inordinate. Courts have found that delays of between 8 and 11 years
to be inordinate. See for example: Berg v. Robbins, 2009 CanLII 37710
(ONSC), [2009] O.J. No. 6160 (Div Ct.) and Bourque where this court
found a 7-year delay in proceeding with the action to be inordinate. Finally,
in Ali, the Court of Appeal upheld the motion judge’s finding that a 5-year
delay from the commencement of the action was inordinate, although the court
described it as a “close case” (at para 11).
[76]       More generally, however, and as made clear in both Langenecker
and Bourque, the determination of whether the delay is inordinate is
contextual in light of the reality that litigation moves at different speeds
depending on the nature of the case (see: Cardillo, at para 40).
[77]       In the event that the plaintiffs’ delay is found to be
inordinate, whether the delay is inexcusable requires an examination of the
reasons for it and whether a “reasonable and cogent” or “sensible and
persuasive” explanation has been provided (see: Langenecker at paras
9-10, Ticchiarelli; at para 16). The court is also to consider not only
the adequacy of the explanations offered for the individual parts of the delay
but also the overall delay and the effect of the explanations considered as a
whole to determine if the delay could be excused, at least to the extent that
an order dismissing the action would be inappropriate (see: Langenecker
at para 9-10., Ticchiarelli, at para 16.
[78]       Finally,
in assessing delay, R.D. Gordon R.S.J. stated in Smith that:
[79]       Neither situation existed based on the facts in Smith
and the plaintiff’s claim was dismissed where some 17 years had passed since
the class action was commenced and had yet advanced to certification.
[80]       While the defendants concede that cases of intentional
conduct demonstrating an intentional disrespect or distain for the court are
rare, the moving parties rely on the Divisional Court’s decision in Berg v.
Robbins, 2009 CanLII 85303, for the proposition that absent an explanation
from the plaintiff for the delay, it is to be presumed that the delay was
intentional (at para 13). In the circumstances of this case, where neither
plaintiff delivered an affidavit in explanation of their delayed prosecution of
the class proceeding, the defendants urge this court to infer that the delay is
indeed intentional.
[81]       I decline to do so. I find that this is not the first
type of case described by Doherty J.A. in Langenecker that attracts an
order of dismissal for delay. Plaintiffs’ counsel provided an explanation for
the delay both in his affidavit and on cross examination. While I may not
accept the entirety of his explanation, the justification of counsel, as
described later in these Reasons, is sufficient for this court to conclude that
the delay was neither intentional nor contumelious.
[82]       Otherwise the defendants have the onus of establishing
the first branch of the Langenecker test and they have failed to offer
any evidence for me to conclude that the plaintiffs’ delay is intentional and
contumelious.
[83]       Given that the Langenecker test is disjunctive,
the question then becomes is the delay inordinate? The plaintiff is responsible
for moving an action forward; this responsibility is not for the defendant
(see: Prescott v. Barbon, 2018 ONCA 504). On the other hand, the reality
of our civil justice system in this province is that most matters do not
proceed at a speedy pace. Some litigation, because of the number and complexity
of issues as well as the number and nature of the parties involved, will move more
slowly compared to the average case (see: Langenecker, at para 8). In my
view, many class action proceedings are among those cases that progress slowly.
[84]        Even accepting that litigation generally advances at
a slow pace and that class action proceedings, like this litigation, can move
more slowly than most cases, I have concluded that more than 8 years from the
commencement of these class proceedings to the motion to dismiss constitutes
inordinate delay. The plaintiffs delivered their certification motion record on
March 9, 2017, some 7 months after the commencement of these proceedings but
the certification motion is no closer to being heard today than when it was
first delivered. In these circumstances, a delay of this length is
unreasonable.
[85]       Having found the delay to be inordinate, I must address
whether the plaintiffs have discharged their evidentiary burden to provide a
reasonable explanation for the delay? With one exception relating to a delay
period of some 7 months, I am satisfied after considering the plaintiffs’
explanations for individual parts of the delay, the overall delay, the effect
of the explanations considered as a whole and the credibility of those
explanations, the plaintiffs’ explanations are both cogent and persuasive. I
have come to this conclusion for the following reasons:
[86]      
I accept the plaintiffs’
position that the dismissal motion prevented them from seeking adjudication of
the certification motion. The uncontroverted affidavit evidence of plaintiffs’
counsel, Jeffrey Kaufman, is that the defendants would not, and did not, agree
to move forward with the certification motion while they sought to have the
proceeding dismissed in its entirety for delay. On cross examination Mr.
Kaufman unequivocally confirmed the defence position with respect to the order
in which the motions were to be heard.
[87]      
While the defendants’
position is logical, it is only reasonable if they proceeded with due diligence
to have the dismissal motion heard. I find that they did not. Certainly, the
defendants cannot be faulted for not pushing forward with their motion while
the courts were shuttered because of the COVID-19 pandemic from mid March, 2020
to the end of May, 2020 (see: Bourque, at para 18(i)). However,
following the adjournment of the dismissal motion from its originally scheduled
May 20, 2020, due in part to the defendants’ failure to file any motion
materials, there are unexplainable periods of defence delay. For example:
[88]       Perhaps the only explanation for the defendants’ delay in
prosecuting the dismissal motion is found in the testimony of defendant, Aaron
Detler. On his cross examination, Mr. Detler, a lawyer himself, described the
decision of when and how to bring the motion for dismissal as strategic and
conceded that much of the prejudice the defendants claim for delay could have
been mitigated if the dismissal motion was heard at the earliest opportunity
after November 26, 2020.
[89]       Based on these circumstances, I find that it would be
inappropriate to dismiss this class proceeding for delay that has been caused
in large part by the defendants’ actions particularly when the plaintiffs
advised the court in June, 2022, that they were ready to proceed with the
certification motion having served their record.
[90]       Because I have found the inordinate delay to be
excusable, there is no presumption of prejudice. Additionally, and in any
event, I find that the defendants have not established that they are actually
prejudiced by the delayed prosecution of this proposed class proceeding within
the meaning stipulated by the Court of Appeal in Langenecker.
[91]       The defendants’ evidence of prejudice centers on the
alleged prejudice that they have suffered as a result of the plaintiffs’
allegations in these proceedings. The evidence proffered by the defendants is
that the plaintiffs’ action furthers the narrative that HDI is not a legitimate
representative of Haudenosaunee interests and thereby prejudices HDI’s ability
to carry out its mandate.
[92]       While the alleged prejudice caused by the plaintiffs’
challenge of the legitimacy of HDI’s role in representing and safeguarding the
interests of the Haudenosaunee Confederacy may be a relevant issue in these
proceedings, the prejudice described by the defendants is irrelevant to the
second branch of the Langenecker test for dismissal pursuant to Rule
24.01. In Langenecker, the Court of Appeal could not be clearer that the
question of prejudice is directed at prejudice “caused by the delay to the
defence’s ability to put its case forward for adjudication on the merits” (at
para 11).
[93]       In its 2015 decision, in H.B. Fuller Company v.
Rogers (Rogers Law Office), 2015 ONCA 173, the Court of Appeal held it as a
reversible error for the motions judge not to link the issue of prejudice to
whether a fair trial is still possible (at para 44).
[94]       There is no evidence that the delay jeopardizes in any
way the defence’s ability to have a fair trial or to put forward its case for
adjudication on the merits. Therefore, I conclude that notwithstanding the
delay, which I have found to be excusable, a fair trial is still possible.
[95]       For the above reasons, the defendant’s motion is
dismissed.
[96]       There is the issue of costs of this motion as well as
the issue of the costs of the abandoned Mareva/Norwich Motion which by
agreement of the parties I am to determine in the event that they are unable to
do so. Also outstanding is the plaintiffs’ motion for the imposition of a
timetable for the hearing of the certification motion.
[97]       In the unfortunate event that the parties are unable to resolve any
of these outstanding matters, I would direct them to contact the Hamilton Civil
trial coordinator’s office to arrange a 9:30 a.m. case conference before me to
discuss the procedure and manner in which any one or more of these outstanding
issues is or are to be resolved.