[1]              
On November 29, 2024 I issued an ex parte
interim injunction restraining the respondents and others from picketing on the
plaintiff's property at 90 Silver Star Boulevard in Scarborough, Ontario in a
manner that blocked the ability of the plaintiff's vehicles to leave the
property in a timely manner.[1] 
  On December 5, 2024 I issued further reasons arising out of a hearing that
occurred with notice to the Canadian Union of Postal Workers (“CUPW”) in which
I maintained the interim injunction.[2] 
These current reasons arise out of a hearing on December 9, 2024 to extend the
injunction for a further 30 days.
[2]              
I grant that extension for the reasons set out
in my reasons of December 5, 2024.
[3]              
The argument today was not materially different
than the argument on December 1.  Today was focussed more on some added nuances
and updates than on anything new.
[4]              
The respondent CUPW asks that I amend my order
to remove paragraph 2 (b) which precluded the respondents from inducing breach
of contract.  CUPW argues that this provision leaves strikers uncertain about
what they can or cannot do.  By way of example, CUPW submits it would prevent
union members from posting messages on social media encouraging people to
boycott Purolator. I disagree and am not inclined to change the order.
[5]              
Courts have long recognized that torts,
including inducing breach of contract, are the appropriate mechanisms through
which to regulate picketing.[3] 
CUPW’s concern about posting on social media is misplaced.  Advocating a
boycott of someone does not amount to inducing breach of contract. As the
Supreme Court of Canada described it in, A.I. Enterprises Ltd. v. Bram
Enterprises Ltd.,[4]
the tort of inducing breach of contract or intentional interference with
economic relations creates a type of “parasitic” liability in  three-party
situations.  It allows a plaintiff to sue a defendant for economic loss
resulting from the defendant’s unlawful act against a third party.  Liability
to the plaintiff is based on (or parasitic upon) the defendant’s unlawful act
against the third party.  As the Court described it in para. 24 of Bram
Enterprises:
[6]              
In this example, the defendant fired on the
canoe in order to prevent the occupants of the canoe from carrying on business
with the plaintiff.  That is the sort of conduct the tort is aimed at.  It is
not aimed at legitimate competition or free speech which includes trying to
persuade people not to do business with one party.
[7]              
Second, CUPW asked me to narrow the scope of the
order to the specific premises at issue and not to all Purolator premises in
Ontario.  CUPW submits that the degree of picketing that occurs and the degree
of obstruction that is permissible turns on the individual facts of each case. 
For example, the Scarborough facility has a single entry and exit.  Thus, if
one blocked that single exit for 5 minutes per vehicle, with 78 vehicles
leaving per day, one would create a delay of 390 minutes or 6.5 hours.  Other
Purolator facilities in Ontario may, however, have more than one exit.  In
those circumstances the delays would be decreased to 3.25 hours per day with 2
exits, and 1.62 hours with 4 exits.  If the number of vehicles at the other
facilities were smaller, the delays would be smaller still.
[8]              
Although that may well be the case, the
principle underlying the order was not a specific period of time as such as on
the concept of obstructing an exit of a third party which is impermissible as
opposed to informational picketing which is permissible.  Informational
picketing as described in my earlier reasons remains permissible even in the
face of the order. While perhaps not perfect, a province wide order of this
nature makes for a preferable use of judicial and party resources than arguing
a separate injunctions in umpteen different venues for each facility. Should
the particularities of a particular facility make the order unjust, the parties
can attend before me seek to vary the order.
[9]              
Finally the parties advised me of two other
orders that had been issued in Montreal and Winnipeg with the former enjoining
picketing much like my orders did and the latter dismissing Purolator’s request
for an injunction.  Neither of those courts has had an opportunity to release
reasons yet.
[10]          
In light of the foregoing I extend my earlier
order for a further 30 days from today’s date.