[1]              
This matter
returns to Court today. The Plaintiff, Trustar, seeks the continuation of
previous Norwich relief granted, and also today moves for Mareva
relief as set out in the Notice of Motion.
[2]              
Much of the
background for this motion is set out in my earlier Endorsements made in this
proceeding, and particularly my Endorsement of November 14, 2024. Since that
time, the investigation of the Plaintiff has continued to progress and evolve.
[3]              
Today, the
Plaintiff continues to rely on the earlier material filed and in addition, the
affidavits of Ryan Seager sworn December 9 and 10, 2024, together with exhibits
thereto. In particular, I note the undertaking of Trustar by its Chief
Operating Officer with respect to damages, previously filed.
[4]              
The Seager
affidavits, and particularly the affidavit of December 9, incorporate the
information in the Affidavit of Sandy Boucher sworn November 22, 2024 (summarizing
the investigation undertaken on behalf of the Plaintiff by Grant Thornton
(“GT”) and the earlier affidavit of Seager November 12, 2024 that resulted in
the order I granted on November 14, 2024.
[5]              
Since that
time, the Plaintiff has uncovered evidence that the Defendant, Daniel Moses
(Moses) has also apparently misappropriated insurance premiums, delivered
Trustar invoices for unknown or nonexistent insurance policies, and redirected
payments from Trustar to his personal bank account. That, in part, resulted in
the motion for disclosure of banking information from RBC, granted on November
25, 2024.
[6]              
The evidence
now discloses that Moses appears to have engaged in two separate but concurrent
schemes to defraud Trustar.
[7]              
The first scheme
involves his apparent selling of insurance policies to proposed policyholders,
but in fact, failing to place those policies with any insurance company. Moses
accepted the premiums, however, and notwithstanding the lack of any issued
policy, accepted and then deposited the premiums into his personal bank
account.
[8]              
A variation of
this scheme is illustrated by additional circumstances in which Moses would
sell a genuine insurance policy to a policyholder, and then misrepresent that
the policy had been renewed, when it in fact had not, and appropriate the premiums
for himself. The particulars of this first scheme are fully set out in the
Boucher affidavit of November 22, 2024.
[9]              
The second
scheme appears to involve Moses simply paying or causing to be paid funds from
the trust account of Trustar into his own personal account or accounts, with
transactions being masked or misrepresented so as to appear that they were
being done for legitimate purposes and the funds directed to legitimate
recipients.
[10]          
A number of
transactions by Moses, and particularly those involving the RBC account 5047642,
involve insurance premiums for an entity called Q2Hire. These are fully
explained in the Grant Thornton report appended to the Boucher affidavit. In
short, e-transfers were sent to an email address provided by Moses with the
stated intention of paying for an insurance premium for Q2Hire. In the normal
course, such premiums would not be paid by e-transfer and, moreover, would have
been paid into the trust account of Trustar, to be later remitted to the
appropriate insurer. As set out in the motion record, however, it appears that
funds were deposited into the RBC account, and thereafter transferred into
other accounts in Moses’ name, as fully described in the materials. There is no
evidence that the funds were ever deposited into the trust account of Trustar
(see affidavit of Seager of December 9, 2024 at paragraphs 11 – 20).
[11]          
In addition,
there are numerous payments made by “Merlin Underwriting” to the same RBC
account. Merlin is the former name of Trustar, and given that the current
banking processes of Trustar predate its corporate name change, payments of
premiums to insurers often reflect the old name. There are numerous
transactions and transfers of funds from Merlin Underwriting to Moses’ RBC account
(see Seager affidavit, paragraphs 21 - 28), none of which appear to have been
properly authorized by Trustar or for its benefit.
[12]          
In addition to
other specific transactions set out at paragraphs 22 – 66 of the affidavit,
additional, newly identified suspicious transactions are set out at paragraph
67 and onward, together with corresponding exhibits. That reveals that Moses
maintains bank accounts with, among other institutions, RBC, as discussed
above, TD and BMO.
[13]          
Finally, the
investigation revealed suspicious activity involving Trustar’s previous
accounting firm, Stonehenge Accounting, and one of the accountants at that
firm, Matthew Cassar. That firm ceased providing accounting work to Trustar in
or around January, 2020 when Trustar transitioned its accounting work to MNP.
It was the belief of Trustar’s Board, and Seager, that all work with Stonehenge
ceased at that time.
[14]          
However, the
investigation has revealed that Stonehenge was apparently doing work
purportedly for Trustar, as directed by Moses, up to at least the end of 2023.
According to information provided by Cassar, this included transaction entry
work, reconciliations, bill payment processing and payroll management. The
extent of the work, and the purpose for it, is not yet clear to the Plaintiff.
[15]          
However, while Cassar
has agreed to Trustar’s request to provide it with all correspondence between
Stonehenge and Moses from 2021 to 2023, Stonehenge has refused to provide its
working papers in respect of accounting work purportedly done for Trustar.
[16]          
The test for a Mareva
injunction is well established. This Court has jurisdiction to grant an
interlocutory injunction, including a Mareva injunction, pursuant to section
101 of the Courts of Justice Act, where it appears just or convenient to
do so. The order may include such terms as are just, and may be sought on
motion made without notice for a period not exceeding 10 days.
[17]          
That said, the
relief is extraordinary. As observed by Perell, J. in Wang v. Feng, 2023
ONSC 2315 at para. 129:
[18]          
As numerous
courts have observed, the harshness of such relief, usually issued ex parte,
is mitigated or justified in part by the requirement that the defendant have an
opportunity to move against the injunction immediately.
[19]          
The factors to
be considered in determining whether to grant Mareva relief include whether the
moving party has established the following:
[20]          
A strong case
that a defendant has committed fraud against the plaintiff can be important
evidence in support of the relief sought. The “reluctance” of the common law
toward allowing execution before judgment has recognized exceptions, including
circumstances where the relief is necessary for the preservation of assets, the
very subject matter in dispute, or where to allow the adversarial process to
proceed unguided would see their destruction before the resolution of the
dispute. (See Aetna, at para. 9).
[21]          
The test as to
whether a strong prima facie case exists has been expressed by the
courts as the question of whether the Plaintiff would succeed “if the court had
to decide the matter on the merits on the basis of the material before it”: Petro-Diamond
Inc. v. Verdeo Inc., 2014 ONSC 2917 at para. 25.
[22]          
I am satisfied
for the purposes of the relief sought today that the Plaintiff has a strong prima
facie case.
[23]          
The particulars
of the claim, setting out the basis for the relief sought, are set out in
detail in the materials and described above. They continue to evolve as the
investigation being undertaken by the Plaintiff continues. For the purposes of
the relief sought today, however, it appears to show unauthorized transfers of
the funds, to the accounts in respect of which the relief is sought. The
unauthorized transfers and payments need to be explained.
[24]          
A party moving
without notice must be fair, both to the absent opposing party and to the court
hearing the request for extraordinary relief: Moses v. Metro Hardware and
Maintenance Inc.,
2020 ONSC 6684, at para. 26, leave to appeal denied, 2021 ONSC 877 (Div. Ct.). In
United States v. Friedland, [1996] O.J. No. 4399
(Gen. Div.) at paras. 27-28, this Court described the duty on a party moving
without notice as follows:
[25]          
The evidence
clearly meets the requirement of showing some grounds for the belief of the
Plaintiff that the Defendant has assets in Ontario. In this case, those assets
are the accounts and property described above and in the materials.
[26]          
I am satisfied
there is a risk of dissipation of assets. I observe that the still-evolving
investigation of the Plaintiff has already revealed multiple transfers of funds
from one account to another which will make tracing and recovery (if ultimately
ordered) more difficult almost by the day. Different jurisdictions are, on the
face of the evidence, involved.
[27]          
Proof of the
risk of removal/dissipation may be inferred from the surrounding circumstances
of the responding parties’ misconduct. (See Ontario Professional Fire
Fighters Association v. Atkinson, et al, 2019 ONSC 3877 at paras. 6-8,
quoting with approval from Sibley v. Ross 2011 ONSC 2951 at paras. 63,
64 and Amphenol Canada Corp. V. Sunadrum, 2019 ONSC 849). Again, the
evidence uncovered to date by the Plaintiff here shows multiple transfers, and seemingly
fraudulent and false documents and representations about insurance policies.
[28]          
I am satisfied
that the requirement of irreparable harm is also met here. If the assets of the
Defendant cannot be restrained, there will be no way for the Plaintiff to
collect on a money judgment if obtained in the future. Irreparable harm,
measured as against the risk that the Defendant will remove property or
dissipate assets prior to judgment, is established.
[29]          
If the accounts
are not frozen, the assets could very well be transferred or hidden again with
the result that the probability of recovering on any damages award will be
decreased significantly.
[30]          
The balance of
convenience, or, in other words, the measurement of the relative harm to be
suffered by the Plaintiff if the order is not granted as against the harm that
will be suffered by the Defendant if it is granted, favours the Plaintiff,
particularly given the short temporal duration of the order sought today. I
observe that the draft order sought contemplates that the Defendants would be
able to obtain a variation of terms or a discharge of the order, and/or to
address requirements for ordinary living and legal expenses if necessary.
[31]          
Finally, the
Plaintiff has provided an undertaking in damages.
[32]          
The scope of
the draft order originally submitted by the Plaintiff was overly broad. In my
view, certain of the accounts originally sought frozen were not sufficiently
linked to the Defendants by the evidence disclosed to date. The scope has,
accordingly been amended. I also observe that the order is, however, without
prejudice to the right of the Plaintiff to seek further and other relief at a
later time if and as necessary.
[33]          
The Plaintiff
also seeks a continuation and modest expansion of the Norwich relief
granted earlier. That relief is granted for the reasons set out in my earlier
Endorsement, the additional evidence now discovered as summarized above and as
more fully described in the Boucher report of GT and in the Seager affidavit.
[34]          
Finally,
Matthew Cassar and Stonehenge Accounting are directed to produce their entire
client files with respect to work done or purportedly done by or for the
Plaintiff (and for greater certainty under its current name or its former name
of Merlin Underwriters). All parties are in agreement that the work was done or
purportedly done by and for the Plaintiff. In the circumstances where that work
or some of it appears to have been directed by Moses, the Plaintiff is
reasonably entitled to see that work and understand what was done, on whose
instruction, why and to what effect.
[35]          
The order I
have signed today has effect until December 20, 2024. This matter shall return
before me (within 10 days) for a hearing to consider whether the order should
be continued, amended or varied, or vacated, on December 20, 2024 at 10
AM.
[36]          
This
endorsement shall be served on the Defendants, together with the order.
[37]          
Order to go in
the form signed by me today which is effective immediately and without the
necessity of issuing and entering.