[1]              
Jason Perrault has pleaded guilty to the
following offences:
[2]              
Of the offences that he was convicted of, the
most serious would appear to be his conviction for assault with a weapon, which
carries a maximum term of imprisonment of not more than 10 years.
[3]              
In addition, the defendant has a long history of
criminal convictions which include other convictions for assault, theft, break
and enter, uttering threats, possession of property obtained by crime and
failure to comply with probation orders.
[4]              
The basis under which the Crown is seeking a
dangerous offender designation is that the charge of assault with a weapon was
committed on Mr. Perrault’s girlfriend at the time and constituted intimate
partner violence. Mr. Perrault has a history of intimate partner violence
convictions.
[5]              
Mr. Perrault is currently 38 years old and
claims Indigenous status.
[6]              
The charges against Mr. Perrault arise out of an
incident which occurred on September 7, 2020. The parties submitted an Agreed
Statement of Facts to the Court as to what occurred during the course of this
incident.
[7]              
C.M. (“Ms. M.”) and Mr. Perrault had been in an
intimate relationship for approximately six months at the time of the
occurrence. Their relationship was difficult as both parties had jealousy and
insecurity issues. Many of their arguments were as a result of Ms. M.
communicating with her ex-partner, despite telling Mr. Perrault she was not.
Ms. M. was aware that Mr. Perrault had mental health issues.
[8]              
On September 6, 2020, they were talking on the
phone. Mr. Perrault learned again that Ms. M. had been speaking with her
ex-partner as he had received Facebook messages from her ex-partner. This led
to another argument on this date and, as a result, Ms. M. hung up on Mr.
Perrault and blocked his number. This is how Ms. M. would react to these
arguments. Despite questioning their relationship, Ms. M. would quickly unblock
Mr. Perrault’s phone number and resume speaking with him.
[9]              
After the call ended on September 6, 2020, Ms.
M. went to bed around 11:00 p.m. She was living at the time with her adult
daughter, C.L.
[10]          
In the early morning hours of September 7, 2020,
shortly after Ms. M. fell asleep, Mr. Perrault broke into her home. He entered
through Ms. M.’s unlocked bedroom window with a folding style pocket knife. Mr.
Perrault had cut his hand while opening the window screen with the knife. The
knife was covered in Mr. Perrault’s blood. Once inside, Mr. Perrault
immediately took Ms. M.’s phone.
[11]          
C.L. heard a bang from her mother’s bedroom and
immediately went to investigate. Ms. M. told C.L. to call 911. Mr. Perrault
followed C.L. to her bedroom preventing her from accessing her phone. Mr.
Perrault kept both phones so Ms. M. and C.L. were unable to immediately phone
police. He advised them not to call the police as it would only make the situation
worse.
[12]          
The chronology of the events after Mr. Perrault
entered the home are unclear due to the high emotional state of Ms. M. and C.L.
Mr. Perrault, while upset, was monotone and calm throughout. Mr. Perrault had
consumed drugs and alcohol prior to these events. At some point, C.L. armed
herself with a baseball bat as well as a knife.
[13]          
Also, at some point during this altercation the
parties moved into the living room of the home. Mr. Perrault, while armed with
a knife, physically restrained Ms. M. He utilized one arm to restrain her and
had the knife in his other hand. The knife was pointed towards Ms. M. This was
observed by C.L. and caused her to fear for her mother’s safety.
[14]          
During this altercation, Ms. M. convinced Mr.
Perrault to exit the home with her and go out onto the covered porch area. C.L.
stayed inside the home during this period of time. Mr. Perrault dropped the
folding knife on the porch where it was later seized by police.
[15]          
Mr. Perrault was eventually convinced to give
C.L. her phone back. At 12:43 a.m. on September 7, 2020, C.L. placed a call to
911. Dispatch was unable to hear anyone on the line other than some background
noise. Dispatch then placed a call back to C.L.’s phone. She answered and
advised that she required police at their address as her mother’s ex-boyfriend
broke through the window with a knife and took her phone. C.L. advised that she
was in her room taking the call and that her mother was in the living room. She
hung up as she was concerned that Mr. Perrault would hear her speaking with
police.
[16]          
At 12:49 a.m. two police constables attended at
the home. C.L. and Ms. M. were outside the home waving officers into their
driveway. One officer was able to see Mr. Perrault standing in the living room
through the window of the home. He did not observe any visible weapons on Mr.
Perrault’s person and made the decision to unholster his conducted energy
weapon. The police attended inside the home where they ordered Mr. Perrault to
the ground. Mr. Perrault refused and moved into the kitchen area of the home.
Mr. Perrault asked the officer to take out his gun and shoot him.
[17]          
One of the police officers then noticed a knife
block near the feet of Mr. Perrault. He requested that Mr. Perrault kick the
knife block over to him. Mr. Perrault refused to comply with that demand and
asked, “if I pick up these knives will you have to take out your gun and shoot
me?” The officer noted that Mr. Perrault was calm throughout these
interactions.
[18]          
Several other officers arrived on scene while
the two officers were attempting to effect Mr. Perrault’s arrest. They heard
similar utterances made by Mr. Perrault including refusals to get on the ground
when directed by police. Concerned that Mr. Perrault would cause serious injury
or bodily harm to his colleagues, one of the police officers deployed his
conducted energy weapon successfully striking Mr. Perrault. It took several
officers using physical force and a reactivation of the energy device to get
Mr. Perrault to release his arms so that he could be placed in handcuffs. Mr.
Perrault continued the uncooperative behaviour when getting into the police
cruiser and later when being removed from the police cruiser at the police
station.
[19]          
There were no physical injuries sustained by Ms.
M. or C.L. on September 7, 2020.
[20]          
In the pre-sentence report, the author
interviewed Mr. Perrault about the events leading up to the incident. Following
is the summary contained in the pre-sentence report:
[21]          
A victim impact statement was tendered by C.M. on
April 25, 2023. While brief, it demonstrates the lasting psychological impact
of this incident. The statement reports:
[22]          
As noted previously, Mr. Perrault has a very
lengthy history of criminal convictions. His criminal record spans 20 years
from 1998 to 2020 with a total of 18 youth convictions and a total of 69 adult
convictions. He has been convicted of violent offences on 8 occasions,
including 3 convictions for assault, 4 convictions for assault with a weapon
and 1 conviction for robbery. He also has 19 convictions for breach of court
orders.
[23]          
Mr. Perrault has 21 convictions for adult
domestic related offences. The intimate partner violence offences start with a
conviction on March 15, 2007 with a victim, K.C. He pleaded guilty to several
counts of offences committed against K.C. as follows:
[24]          
While a transcript no longer exists for this
guilty plea, the police synopsis indicates that K.C. told police on September
16, 2006 that she was contacted by Mr. Perrault over the phone. When they
spoke, Mr. Perrault questioned Ms. K.C. about who she had been with earlier in
the day. When Ms. K.C. explained that she had been out with classmates working
on a school project, Mr. Perrault told Ms. K.C. “you are not going to make a
fucking fool out of me” and “you are never going to be with anyone else”. Mr.
Perrault threatened to put a knife to the male classmate’s throat. Mr. Perrault
told K.C. that if the classmate’s story was not the same as hers, he would stab
her in the neck.
[25]          
K.C. further disclosed historical assaults that
occurred between December 1, 2004 and March 31, 2005. She advised that in the
winter of 2004 she was residing with Mr. Perrault when he became upset with her
because of a “guy from her past”. Mr. Perrault believed K.C. was lying and
became angry with her, trying to slam her head into the wall. K.C. protected
her head with her hands so she was not injured. On another occasion, K.C. stated
that Mr. Perrault was again upset about her past, and when K.C. was trying to
explain, Mr. Perrault hit her with a belt.
[26]          
In speaking with Dr. Klassen, who was retained
to conduct an assessment pursuant to the dangerous offender application, Mr.
Perrault is reported to have told him about this incident, “I was pretty
jealous for sure…”. He stated that he “found it easier to be angry, and not
vulnerable, about his need to be with others, when he was younger”.
[27]          
On March 4, 2010, Mr. Perrault pleaded guilty to
four counts across several informations involving a girlfriend, S.H. Two of the
informations were domestic in nature, specifically one count of uttering
threats and one count of failing to comply with probation from 2009. He had
originally been charged with robbery of Ms. S.H. in relation to this
occurrence.
[28]          
Although a transcript does not exist for this
guilty plea, the police synopsis outlines that Mr. Perrault and Ms. S.H. had
been in an intimate relationship for two years. Mr. Perrault had been released
from the Central North Correctional Centre on October 31, 2009. Mr. Perrault
and S.H. were reunited upon his release and spent the next few days together.
The day following his release, Mr. Perrault and S.H. were together in a vehicle
when a verbal altercation began regarding money. Mr. Perrault held a knife to
Ms. S.H.’s chest and demanded that she provide him with $1,300 that she had in
her wallet. While holding the knife up to Ms. S.H., Mr. Perrault threatened her
by stating, “if you tell anybody I took your money I am going to kill you and
your kids” and “I will gut you like a pig”. Mr. Perrault was on probation at
the time of this offence. In relation to this occurrence, Mr. Perrault advised
Dr. Klassen as follows:
[29]          
On May 2, 2012 Mr. Perrault was convicted after
trial to the lesser included offences of theft under $5,000 and mischief under
$5,000. The case involved a relationship he had with D.R.
[30]          
Facts of this matter are recounted in the
judge’s Reasons for Judgment dated May 2, 2012. Mr. Perrault and Ms. D.R. had
been in on and off again relationship for approximately two years. On August
16, 2011 Ms. D.R. was visiting her sister. Mr. Perrault called her from her
apartment demanding she come home. She refused. The next day she came home and
discovered Mr. Perrault asleep in her bed and extensive damage to the
furniture. The couch and chair were sliced up, the TV screen was smashed and
the computer monitor was broken. An I-Pad and her recently deceased’s mother’s
ashes were also missing. In his Reasons, the presiding justice commented as
follows:
[31]          
In speaking with Dr. Klassen, Mr. Perrault outlined
the events with D.R. as follows:
[32]          
Dr. Klassen also reports that Mr. Perrault in
recounting the offences in his criminal profile, reported that his “jealousy
caused disruption in their relationship and that Ms. D.R. and her family were
subjected to threats and controlling behaviour”.
[33]          
On October 16, 2017, Mr. Perrault pleaded guilty
to uttering threats, two counts of assault with a weapon, and two counts of
assault. These charges related to a relationship he had with V.C. A number of
facts were read into the record on October 16, 2017. This includes that on July
29, 2017 police received a call just before 2:00 a.m. from V.C. stating she
believed she was in danger from her boyfriend, Mr. Perrault, who had threatened
her. Both parties were intoxicated at the time. Police learned that within
weeks of beginning their relationship in 2016, Mr. Perrault was threatening Ms.
V.C. and her children’s lives. Police also learned that:
[34]          
In a victim impact statement, Ms. V.C. stated as
follows:
[35]          
In a criminal profile report, Mr. Perrault sets
out his view of the relationship as follows:
[36]          
At the Dangerous Offender hearing, the Crown
called the following witnesses:
[37]          
In addition to the above witnesses, the Court
received a pre-sentence report dated June 7, 2023 prepared by Patrick Whiffen.
The Court also received a “No-Gladue Report” dated February 16, 2023 prepared
by Amanda General. The written report of Dr. Klassen dated October 23, 2023 was
marked as an exhibit on consent.
[38]          
In addition, on an application by the defence to
clarify the evidence of Dr. Klassen, an Agreed Statement of Fact by the parties
with respect to the further evidence of Dr. Klassen was marked as an exhibit.
[39]          
Apart from the defence reopening the evidence of
Dr. Klassen as noted above, the defendant did not introduce any evidence at the
hearing.
[40]          
Mr. Perrault is currently 38 years old. As noted
previously, he has a lengthy criminal record as well as numerous convictions
for intimate partner violence. In the pre-sentence report, it is noted that the
defendant’s father, Steve Perrault, reported that he was physically abusive
towards the defendant, his brother, and his mother throughout Mr. Perrault’s
upbringing and he deeply regrets his actions. There is also evidence that the
father was charged and sentenced to a term in custody for an assault on his
wife and the defendant. The father disclosed that he abused opiates and alcohol
consistently throughout the defendant’s upbringing, which often escalated
issues within the family household.
[41]          
The defendant disclosed for the pre-sentence
report that when he was 15 years old, while serving a secure custody sentence,
he was involved over the span of 15 months in a sexual and emotional
relationship with a much older female person in authority. Mr. Perrault noted
that she was later convicted for sexual assault and sexual exploitation against
himself and other male youth in the facility. Mr. Perrault expressed that he
felt used and betrayed and that his experience led to insecurities and trust
issues in his intimate relationships which followed.
[42]          
Mr. Perrault left the family residence when he
was 16 years old. He advised that at a young age he began associating with
older very criminally oriented individuals.
[43]          
Mr. Perrault reported that his highest level of
education is grade 12. He was suspended from school and eventually completed
his education while in federal custody.
[44]          
In terms of employment, Mr. Perrault advised
that he was employed at an international fast food franchise in Ottawa for
about 10 months and then discontinued this work in order to attend college. In
January, 2020, he advised he was hired at a restaurant in Toronto and worked
there for three months and was let go as a result of a COVID-19 closure. Mr.
Perrault reported that he has been receiving Ontario Disability Support
payments since 2016 as a result of post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety,
depression, substance abuse and his history of incarceration.
[45]          
Mr. Perrault reported that he began consuming
alcohol when he was about 12 years old. His prior intimate partners and family
members have expressed concern regarding his alcohol and drug use.
[46]          
In terms of drug use, Mr. Perrault stated that
he began smoking cannabis when he was approximately 12 years old and cocaine at
the age of 19. He began using oxycontin, percocet and heroin in his early
twenties. He reported that most recently in 2020 he overdosed in custody on
fentanyl, but recovered from this incident. He understands that his substance
abuse has affected all areas of his life and that when he is under the
influence of alcohol or drugs, he often becomes agitated and angry.
[47]          
Mr. Perrault told the pre-sentence report author
that he takes responsibility for the current offences and understands that the
court may designate him as a “long-term offender”. He does not disagree with
this status designation. Mr. Perrault presents with a pattern of either
accusing or finding out that his prior intimate partners have been unfaithful
which then escalates to domestic violence. Mr. Perrault noted insecurities and
trust issues stemming from sexual abuse he experienced when he was 15 years old
by a female person of authority and his father confirmed a noticeable change in
the subject’s behaviour following this event.
[48]          
Mr. Perrault reported that he is Metis,
Indigenous, and noted that neither himself or his parents have resided on a
reserve. He stated that his father attended at a school that is being
classified as a residential school. Mr. Perrault has embraced Indigenous
practices and stated that should he be released from custody, he plans to
return to Sagatay Indigenous transitional housing in Toronto and access
available programming and resources.
[49]          
As a result of Mr. Perrault’s assertion that he
was Indigenous, a Gladue Report was requested and a report dated February 16,
2023 was received. In preparing the Report, the author interviewed Mr. Perrault
and obtained information with respect to his Indigenous background.
[50]          
In the Report, the author states as follows:
[51]          
The Report states that it should not be
concluded that Mr. Perrault is not an Indigenous person as they were not in a
position to draw such a conclusion. Nor should the Report be read as stating
that there may not be relevant Gladue issues at play in this case. However, in
the absence of any direct evidence that Mr. Perrault is Indigenous and in the
absence of any issues being raised by the defendant regarding his Indigenous
status, it would not appear that there are any relevant Indigenous issues to
take into account on this application.
[52]          
The Crown takes the position that it has proved
beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Perrault should be designated as a dangerous
offender and seeks an indeterminate sentence.
[53]          
The defence takes the position that the Crown
has not proven that Mr. Perrault is a dangerous offender beyond a reasonable
doubt. Instead, the defence asserts that Mr. Perrault fits the long-term
offender designation and should be classified as such. In the alternative, the
defence argues that the Crown has not proven beyond a reasonable doubt that
there is no alternative sentence that would protect the public short of an
indeterminate sentence, and that a 10 year long-term supervision order in
addition to custody will address the public interest and safety of the
community.
[54]          
Section 753 of the Criminal Code sets out
the statutory requirements which must be met in order to designate a person as
a dangerous offender.
[55]          
Section 753 sets out a two-stage process before
a person can be categorized as a dangerous offender. In the first stage, s.
753(1) requires the Crown to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the offence
for which the offender has been convicted is a serious personal injury offence,
and that the offender constitutes a threat to the life, liberty or physical or
mental wellbeing of other persons on the basis of evidence establishing:
[56]          
A “serious personal injury offence” is defined
in the Criminal Code under s. 752 to mean:
[57]          
In the present case, the defence acknowledges
that the predicate offence for which Mr. Perrault has been convicted is a
serious personal injury offence. I agree with this conclusion. It is clear that
Ms. C.M. suffered severe psychological damage as a result of the assault and
under s. 267 of the Criminal Code, Mr. Perrault is liable to
imprisonment for a term of up to 10 years.
[58]          
Under s. 753 of the Criminal Code, a
court “shall find” the offender to be a dangerous offender if the criteria
under s. 753(1) are satisfied.
[59]          
The defence argues that Mr. Perrault could
equally be categorized as a long-term offender under s. 753.1 of the Criminal
Code. This section provides that in order to be designated a long-term
offender, the court must be satisfied that:
[60]          
Under s. 753.1(3), if a court finds an offender
to be a long-term offender, it shall:
[61]          
However, this analysis is contrary to the
Supreme Court of Canada’s Ruling in R. v. Boutilier, 2017 SCC 64
(CanLII). In the Ontario Court of Appeal’s decision in R. v. Snowden,
2023 ONCA 768 (CanLII), the Court quoted from the Supreme Court of Canada
decision in R. v. Boutilier as follows:
[62]          
Thus, it is apparent that if the defendant meets
the criteria as a dangerous offender, the designation as a dangerous offender
must be made as opposed to the designation of a long-term offender under s.
753.1 of the Criminal Code. This conclusion is further reinforced by the
reasoning of the Court of Appeal for Saskatchewan in R. v. Jensen, 2016
SKCA 109. In that decision, the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal found that the
trial judge made an error that if the dangerous offender criteria are
satisfied, the law further required him to assess under s. 753.1 whether Mr.
Jensen could be categorized appropriately as a long-term offender. Given that
the criteria for a finding of the defendant as a dangerous offender, that
designation was mandatory and precluded a finding that he was subject to the
long-term offender provisions.
[63]          
The second stage of a dangerous offender
application follows once a person has been identified as a dangerous offender.
Once this designation is made, the sentencing judge retains discretion to
impose the appropriate sentence.
[64]          
Under s. 753(4), if the court finds an offender
to be a dangerous offender, it shall:
[65]          
Under s. 753(4.1), a court shall impose a
sentence of detention in a penitentiary for an indeterminate period unless it
is satisfied by the evidence adduced during the hearing of the application that
there is a reasonable expectation that a lesser measure under para. (4) (b) or
(c) will adequately protect the public against the commission by the offender
of a murder or a serious personal injury offence.
[66]          
In R. v. Boutilier, 2017 SCC 64 (CanLII), [2017] SCJ No. 64,
the Supreme Court noted that at the designation stage of a dangerous offender
application what the Crown is required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt is a
“likelihood” of future dangerousness. At para. 36, the Supreme Court stated,
[67]          
Intractability is an important consideration for
the Court to consider at both the designation and the sentencing stages. As
noted by the Supreme Court in Boutilier at para. 45,
[68]          
Thus, before designating a person as a dangerous
offender, a sentencing judge must not only consider the past offences of the
person, but must also consider whether he or she is a future threat after a
prospective assessment of the risk. A future risk assessment requires
consideration of the future treatment prospects for the offender. The
designation provision does not capture offenders who, though currently a threat
to others, may cease to be in the future, notably after successful treatment.
[69]          
In summary, I adopt the reasoning of the Ontario
Court of Appeal in R. v. A.M., 2024 ONCA 587, where the court sets out
the criteria which the Crown must satisfy beyond a reasonable doubt in order to
make a finding for a dangerous offender. In this case, the court states,
[70]          
As previously noted, the defence concedes that
the predicate offence is a serious personal injury offence.
[71]          
The next issue to be addressed is whether the
predicate offence forms part of a pattern of repetitive behaviour by the
offender, of which the offence for which he has been convicted forms a part,
showing a failure to restrain his or her behaviour and a likelihood of causing
death or injury to other persons, or inflicting severe psychological damage on
other persons, through failure in the future to restrain his or her behaviour.
I have concluded that the Crown has satisfied this condition beyond a
reasonable doubt as well for the following reasons.
[72]          
Mr. Perrault has been convicted of violent
offences against 5 of his prior domestic partners.
[73]          
With respect to the victim, V.C., Mr. Perrault
was convicted of uttering threats, assault with a weapon x2 and assault x2.
These offences were committed while on statutory release for his first federal
offence. Mr. Perrault waved a knife at Ms. V.C. by threatening to cut her. On
another occasion, Mr. Perrault stabbed Ms. V.C. with tweezer scissors.
[74]          
With respect to the victim, D.R., Mr. Perrault
was convicted of theft and mischief. These offences involved Mr. Perrault’s
damage to Ms. D.R.’s belongings and the destruction of an urn containing Ms.
D.R.’s mother’s ashes.
[75]          
With respect to the victim, S.H., Mr. Perrault
was convicted of uttering threats. He was initially charged with robbery and
admitted to holding a knife to Ms. S.H.’s chest and demanding money. He further
threatened her children and Ms. S.H. herself suggesting that he’d “gut her like
a pig”.
[76]          
With respect to the victim, K.C., Mr. Perrault
threatened Ms. K.C.’s life if she was to leave him. He threatened a male
classmate of Ms. K.C.’s with a knife due to beliefs of infidelity.
[77]          
In the report of Dr. Klassen, he comments that
Mr. Perrault would appear to meet criteria for antisocial personality disorder,
borderline personality disorder and multiple substance abuse disorders, though
his antisocial traits appear to be declining and latterly behavioural dyscontrol
has been predicated largely on borderline personality features.
[78]          
Dr. Klassen administered a number of tests to
Mr. Perrault during the course of his assessment.
[79]          
Mr. Perrault scored 19 out of a possible 40
points on the PCL-R test. This score placed him on approximately the 35th
percentile with respect to a reference sample of North American offenders.
Scores in this range suggested some difficulties for Mr. Perrault with
treatment response and/or supervision, the persons with scores in this range
are often manageable in structured settings.
[80]          
Mr. Perrault scored 35 on the violence risk
assessment tool (VRAG-R). This is a high score and places Mr. Perrault on the
97th percentile with respect to the standardization sample. Similar
scoring individuals recidivated at a rate of 80% over 5 years and 91% over 15
years.
[81]          
The DVRAG is an intimate partner violence risk
assessment tool which includes the PCL-R. Mr. Perrault scored 32 which is
greater than the 97th percentile in reference to the standardization
sample. Similar scoring individuals recidivated violently at a rate of 100%
over multi year follow up in the community.
[82]          
Mr. Perrault scored between 18 – 25 points on
the HCR-20 V3  test which is a violence risk assessment instrument. At a score of
18, Mr. Perrault would be considered to be at moderate risk of future violence.
At a score of 25, Mr. Perrault’s risk might be considered moderately high.
[83]          
In conclusion, based on the above testing, Dr.
Klassen concluded:
[84]          
Later, Dr. Klassen states that information from
structured and actuarial risk assessment tools suggest a likelihood of violence
from Mr. Perrault in unstructured release, but a lower risk of violence in
structured scenarios.
[85]          
In his evidence at the hearing, Dr. Klassen
expanded on the results of his assessment. He commented that Mr. Perrault is in
a high risk category for future intimate partner violence in an unstructured
setting. He stated as follows:
[86]          
Later Dr. Klassen commented as follows,
[87]          
I accept Dr. Klassen’s opinion that in the
absence of close supervision, Mr. Perrault is at high risk of future intimate
partner violence unless he is closely supervised.  That situation will likely persist
until he is in his fifties. The evidence of Dr. Klassen is that by the time
people like Mr. Perrault get into their fifties, “at that point typically risk
for violence has become fairly attenuated for age related reasons alone”. At
trial Dr. Klassen’s evidence on this issue was as follows:
[88]          
The conclusion I take from Dr. Klassen’s
evidence overall and which I accept is that Mr. Perrault represents a very
substantial risk of intimate partner violence to the public until he is in his
fifties, unless he is in a tightly controlled environment.
[89]          
In summary, I accept that the defendant has been
convicted of a serious personal injury offence. I further accept that the
defendant has been guilty of a pattern of repetitive behaviour, including the
predicate offence which he has been convicted of, which shows a failure to
restrain his behaviour and a likelihood of causing severe psychological damage
on other persons by failing in the future to restrain his behaviour. Based on
these findings, I conclude that the defendant must be designated as a dangerous
offender.
[90]          
Proceeding to the next stage of the dangerous
offender application, I must now consider what the appropriate sentence should
be. As noted previously, there are three options. The first is to impose a
sentence of detention in a penitentiary for an indeterminate period. The second
possibility is to impose a sentence for the offence for which the defendant has
been convicted and further order that the offender be subject to a long-term
supervision order for a period that does not exceed 10 years. The third option
is to impose a sentence for the offence for which the defendant has been
convicted.
[91]          
Dr. Klassen has made a number of recommendations
and expresses the view that Mr. Perrault is committed to treatment. He states
in his Report as follows:
[92]          
Dr. Klassen recommends the following external
controls on Mr. Perrault:
[93]          
In conclusion, in his Report, Dr. Klassen stated
that with effective structure and support, on parole, and with a residency
condition, Mr. Perrault faired much better and per the HCR-20, likely presents
with moderate risk of violence, a risk which, “while still substantial, is
consistent with “reasonable possibility of eventual control of the risk in the
community”.”
[94]          
In their submissions, the Crown took the
position that Mr. Perrault still poses a significant risk of reoffence,
especially in relation to domestic violence. The Crown noted that in Dr. Klassen’s
report, he spoke about the “reasonable possibility” of Mr. Perrault’s eventual
control in the community. It was pointed out that in the Ontario Court of
Appeal decision in R. v. Straub, 2022 ONCA 47, the Court delineates
between “a reasonable possibility” and “a reasonable expectation” as required
under s. 753(4.1) of the Code. This argument then led to the defence
seeking to reopen the evidence on this hearing. As this issue was a very
important one, I allowed the defence’s application. In response, the parties
agreed to an Agreed Statement of Fact with respect to the further evidence of
Dr. Klassen. It was agreed that Dr. Klassen would testify, from a psychiatric
point of view, that there is a reasonable “expectation” that a lesser measure
than an indeterminate sentence would adequately protect the public. He would
also testify, from a psychiatric point of view, that it is likely that Mr.
Perrault could be controlled on an LTSO with strict conditions. It was noted in
the Agreed Statement of Fact that the Crown disagrees with Dr. Klassen’s
position. My own view, however is that Dr. Klassen was a credible and reliable
expert. He was very cautious in making statements about Mr. Perrault’s
potential for recidivism. For example, in his oral evidence he stated as
follows:
[95]          
Earlier in his evidence, Dr. Klassen was careful
to comment on the limitation one can put on statistics for recidivism. He
stated,
[96]          
Overall, I was impressed by Dr. Klassen’s
fairness in giving his evidence and that as the only expert in psychiatry
called as a witness at the hearing, his evidence was essentially unchallenged.
[97]          
In addition to the list of controls set out
above proposed by Dr. Klassen for Mr. Perrault, he did make two major additions
or modifications in his oral evidence. The first is with respect to any
intimate partner relationships. In his Report, Dr. Klassen states that he
should be required to report any actual or potential intimate relationships to
those supervising him and that he should not for the foreseeable future reside
with an intimate partner. In his oral evidence, Dr. Klassen went further. He
stated:
[98]          
Upon further questioning about this issue from
the Court, Dr. Klassen stated as follows:
[99]          
From the comments of Dr. Klassen, I infer that
his recommendation is that Mr. Perrault refrain from any intimate partner
relationship at all for a fairly lengthy period.
[100]      
Another issue raised by Dr. Klassen in his
evidence is the need for Mr. Perrault to take in-custody training which
duplicates some of the earlier training he has taken while in custody. This is
referenced by Dr. Klassen in his evidence as follows:
[101]      
Later, Dr. Klassen comments that Mr. Perrault
should at the present time be treated as someone who is “untreated”.
[102]      
On the specific issue of in custody treatment,
Dr. Klassen testified as follows:
[103]      
I think it is fair to say that while in custody
treatment may not have been successful in the past, it has to be considered as
part of a plan if Mr. Perrault is to be released from custody.
[104]      
Kathy Beddows is the Indigenous Program Officer
for the Correctional Services of Canada. In her evidence, she described some of
the timing of the programs that may be appropriate for Mr. Perrault. In her
evidence she described an Indigenous high intensity multi-target program. She
testified that a three year period of incarceration would allow for an offender
to enter into the program and a four year period of incarceration would allow
the offender to complete the program. She advised that this time frame allows
for the intake and placement process, which is required of any offender
entering a federal institution.
[105]      
The Crown takes the position that a long-term
supervision order will not be adequate to protect the public. It notes that Mr.
Perrault has effectively been supervised by way of probation orders since he
was 13 years old, and his criminal record is evidence enough that even prior to
his federal sentences, he was unmanageable in the community, with 19 breaches
of court orders, mostly being breaches of probation orders.
[106]      
The Crown also notes that on reviewing Mr.
Perrault’s first federal sentence, managing Mr. Perrault is difficult even
despite a condition that he reside at a CRF and that he return nightly to that
CRF. The Crown notes that it was during this period that Mr. Perrault
re-offended violently against Ms. K.C. The Crown also points out that it is now
known that less than four months after his warrant expiry date, he committed
the predicate offences against Ms. C.M. and that he and Ms. C.M. likely began
this relationship while Mr. Perrault was on statutory release.
[107]      
As noted previously, I am satisfied that Mr.
Perrault satisfies the requirements of a dangerous offender. He has been
convicted of a serious personal injury offence and has exhibited a pattern of
repetitive behaviour showing a failure to restrain his behaviour and a
likelihood of causing injury to other persons or inflicting severe
psychological damage on other persons. There is a very substantial risk that
this behaviour will continue as intractable unless appropriate steps are taken
to restrain his behaviour. Having said that, I am satisfied that a determinate
sentence with a long-term supervision order for 10 years is appropriate to
provide safety to the public on the terms and conditions set out herein. It is
important that all of the long-term supervision orders be monitored frequently
and with diligence. I also feel that in custody education as described herein
is an important part of this disposition. Specifically, a sentence of 10 years
which is the maximum for this offence is to be imposed. When taking into
account credit for time already served, this would allow the necessary three to
four year period for Mr. Perrault to complete his in custody training. I view
this training as an integral part of the sentence. While it has not been
successful in the past, when combined with the terms of the long-term
supervision order, it does provide in my view, a reasonable expectation for
protection of the public.
[108]      
Like Dr. Klassen, I was impressed by the
defendant’s recognition of the issues he faces and his commitment to deal with
them.
[109]      
The defendant made oral submissions to me at the end of final argument.
In his submissions he stated,
[110]      
With respect to his commitment to change in the future, the defendant
stated,
[111]      
The defendant’s commitment to change has also been reinforced by the
death of his mother. He stated,
[112]      
As is apparent, the defendant’s commitment to change is not only
reflected in Dr. Klassen’s comments, but Mr. Perrault’s submissions impressed
me considerably as well. I believe that the defendant will in fact do his very
best to comply with the terms and conditions of his long-term supervision order
and will take this opportunity to turn his life around.
[113]      
While I have concluded that Mr. Perrault should be
designated as a dangerous offender, I have also concluded that a determinate
sentence with a long-term supervision order for 10 years is the appropriate
sentence. The long-term supervision order should contain the external controls
as recommended by Dr. Klassen and summarized in para. 86. In addition, I believe
that the offender should not enter an intimate partner relationship for a
minimum period of five years and potentially longer depending on his progress
in dealing with intimate partner violence. Finally, I believe that the offender
should participate in educational sessions while in custody directed at
controlling his aggressive conduct towards women and other involved third
parties.
[114]      
In summary, I find that Mr. Perrault should be
sentenced to 10 years in a penitentiary. He should receive credit for the time
he has spent in pre-sentence custody. I understand that Mr. Perrault has been
in custody since September 7, 2020. He should receive credit for one and half
days for each day spent in custody. By my calculation, his pre-trial credit would
total 6 years and 98 days. Mr. Perrault, once he is released from custody,
should then be made subject to a long-term supervision order for a period of 10
years.
[115]      
In addition, the following ancillary orders form part
of Mr. Perrault’s sentence: