[1]
    Nancy White has been found guilty of two counts of sexual assault; and two
counts of sexual interference. My decision was delivered orally on January 12,
2024. I applied the Kienapple principle and conditionally stayed the two
convictions of sexual assault.
[2]     The case was tried before me without a jury.
[3]
    The offender is before me today to receive my sentence.
[4]
    S.B. was a friend of the accused’s son, E.M. The families lived in the same
survey and the parents socialized during the summer and fall of 2020.
[5]
    S.B. was 14 years of age during the relevant time.
[6]
    The accused was married to James McDonald (“Mr. McDonald”). They have three
children together, who are currently aged 13, 16, and 18 – the eldest of which is
E.M. The accused and her husband separated after the sexual assaults took
place, and are now divorced. The offender has a new partner, to whom she is
engaged. The pair share a four-month-old baby.
[7]   
On January 12, 2024, I found, as a fact, that on two occasions – the first
being sometime in late September/early October of 2020 and the second being October
30, 2020 – the offender had vaginal intercourse with, and performed oral sex on,
S.B. in the offender’s bed
[8]   
The evidence on trial indicated that over the summer of 2020 the offender and
S.B. were often together and, as one witness remarked, appeared as though they
were dating. When together, the two were inseparable.
[9]  
  S.B., after first denying to police that anything happened, ultimately
confirmed the sexual activity. He indicated that he had initially denied the
allegations in order to protect the offender. S.B. also communicated to police
that the sexual activity had been agreed upon by both parties, and that it was
his first time engaging in sexual intercourse.
[10]
A DNA sample was found on the inside crotch area of S.B.’s underwear, revealing
a profile from S.B. and one female. There was a greater than one trillion times
likelihood that the female DNA profile was that of the offender, over any other
unknown unrelated person.
[11]
The offender was 37 years of age in the fall of 2020. When she testified before
me on trial, she adamantly denied that the sexual assaults ever happened.
Suggestive text messages to S.B. were found on the offender’s phone, and put to
her. She denied sending any such messages to S.B. She had no plausible
explanation for how her DNA got on S.B.’s underwear.
[12] 
The offender confirmed, at trial, that she was aware that S.B. was 14 years of
age at the time of the sexual assaults.
[13] 
In my January 12, 2024 reasons, I concluded that the credibility of the
offender was lacking and I rejected her denials as not believable. I accepted
the evidence of S.B. as more accurate, especially when considered alongside the
other evidence put forward by the Crown, such as the DNA analysis and the text
messages.
[14]  
The pre-sentence report indicates that the offender is the youngest of four
children. She reported a happy upbringing with no abuse in the family. Her
father passed away in 2021. The offender maintains a close relationship with her
mother, and a less close relationship with her siblings. She claims her
relationship with Mr. McDonald from 2001, until they split as a result of these
charges, was difficult. She reported physical, verbal, and emotional abuse. Mr.
McDonald denies this adamantly. Her children, from her union with Mr. McDonald,
now reside with Mr. McDonald and she has not seen them since the charges were
laid.
[15]  
The report indicates that the offender has lived with a new partner since
November 2023. She now has one child from that union, born in July 2024. The
offender has been on ODSP for the past four years due to chronic back pain.
Prior to this, she completed high school and worked at Walmart for 12 years.
She is currently on medication for depression, migraines, and chronic pain. She
is currently in counselling, through her doctors in house mental health worker.
[16] 
The offender noted, briefly, two sexual assaults against her, having  occurred
when she was 15 and as a young adult. She made no comments in her pre-sentence
report on the sexual assaults currently before the Court.
[17] 
The offender has no criminal record.
[18] 
The Court has received two victim impact statements. The first is from Mr.
McDonald. He speaks of the significant difficulty he has had, physically, emotionally,
and financially, raising the three children himself, especially during COVID.
The children have also lost time with their maternal grandparents, while the
offender lived with them. Time spent with the offender’s extended family has diminished.
Mr. McDonald speaks at length as to the emotional harm and trauma caused to his
three children, much of which is ongoing despite many attempts to get the
children help. He states that the children want no contact with their mother
now or in the future.
[19] 
The parents of S.B. also provided a victim impact statement. They speak of the
offender being a family friend who took advantage of her position to abuse
their son. They describe the assaults as traumatic and life altering to their
family, with their son S.B. being the most affected. S.B. is traumatized and no
longer the care-free, fun-loving teen he was before the abuse. He has lost his
ambitions. He is withdrawn from family and friends and is doing poorly in school.
Further, the family has suffered in the neighbourhood, as they have become the
victims of vandalism, graffiti, and written/spoken obscenities. S.B. himself
did not provide a victim impact statement.
[20] 
Counsel for the offender seeks a conditional sentence. He argues that a
sentence of two years less a day, served in the community, with three years of probation
to follow, is appropriate. While a conditional sentence in a child sexual
assault case is rare and only justified if there are exceptional circumstances,
counsel for the offender states that such exceptional circumstances, pertaining
to the offender, exist. They include the offender’s new four-month-old baby and
her precarious health. A brief letter from the offender’s doctor attests to the
latter of these circumstances.
[21] 
The Crown feels that a penalty of 7-8 years of incarceration is warranted. The
Crown is of the view that the offender was in a position of trust, as a
neighbour and family friend, and that she took advantage of such a position to
abuse a 14-year-old, the best friend of her son. As such, the offender carries
a great deal of moral blameworthiness for her actions. The trauma of sexual
assault to children is significant and long lasting. The actions of the
offender attract a great deal of denunciation and deterrence, both to the
offender and to others. A message must clearly be conveyed, through sentencing,
that such abuse of children will be dealt with strictly, argues the Crown.
[22]
  The following are the aggravating factors in this case, some of which are statutorily
set out in s. 718.2(a) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46:
[23]   There are some mitigating factors:
[24]   Parliament has stated in s. 718 of the Criminal
Code that:
[25]   The fundamental principle for judges to follow in
sentencing is stated in s. 718.1 of the Criminal Code as follows:
[26] Stated another way,
proportionality is the cardinal principle which must guide the fitness of the
sentence imposed. The more serious the crime and its consequences, or the
greater the offender’s degree of responsibility or moral blameworthiness, the
heavier the sentence: see R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64, [2015] 3 S.C.R.
1089, at para. 12.
[27]   In R. v. M. (C.A.), 1996 CanLII 230 (SCC), [1996] 1 S.C.R. 500, at
para. 91, Lamer C.J. stated that sentencing is,
[28]   Finally, as per the Ontario Court of Appeal in R.
v. A.J.K., 2022 ONCA 487, 162 O.R. (3d) 721, citing to R. v. Parranto,
2021 SCC 46, [2021] 3 S.C.R. 366; R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9, [2020] 1
S.C.R. 424; and Lacasse, the following is useful in understanding the
proper application of proportionality:
[29]   Section 718.01 of the Criminal Code provides
that denunciation and deterrence are the primary considerations when imposing a
sentence for offences against children. Such has been made clear by Parliament
and by the courts: see R. v. Inksetter, 2018 ONCA 474, 141 O.R. (3d)
161, at paras. 16-17; Friesen, at para. 105. In considering denunciation
and deterrence as the primary objectives for sentencing sexual offences against
children, the Ontario Court of Appeal in R. v. M.M., 2022
ONCA 441, at para. 15, wrote “[t]hose who commit sexual offences
against children must understand that carceral sentences will ordinarily
follow.”
[30]   In Friesen, the Supreme Court of Canada made it
abundantly clear that trial judges must treat sexual offences against children
with the utmost severity by saying as follows, at para. 5:
[31]
The
Supreme Court strongly cautioned against characterizing children who are
victims of sexual offences as willing participants: see Friesen, at
para. 152. Further, the Supreme Court reminds trial judges, in Friesen, at
para. 153, that,
[32]
  Thus, victim participation is not a mitigating factor in sentencing sexual
offences against children: see Friesen, at paras. 148-150, 154. The
participation of a victim should not distract the court from the wrongfulness
of sexual violence against children, the harm that the child suffers as a
result of sexual violence, or the fact that adults - and not children - are
responsible for preventing sexual activity between an adult and a child: see Friesen,
at paras. 148-154. Any sexual contact between an adult and a child is an act of
physical and psychological violence, even if it does not result in a lasting
injury: see Friesen, at para. 77.
[33]
  Affirming that participation of the victim is not a mitigating factor, in the
circumstances of sexual offences against children, the court in R. v. Riossi,
2023 ONSC 3812, at para. 135, goes on to say that the gender of the victim and
accused/offender, as a male and female respectively, is also not a mitigating
factor.
[34] There is no evidence of threats, coercion, rewards or
gratuitous violence, above that inherent to the crime of sexual assault against
a child (as per Friesen), in the present case. However, as
far as the Court is concerned such is not a mitigating factor. At best it
represents the absence of an aggravating factor: see R. v.  Luckhart, 2016 ONSC 1509, at
para. 44; Friesen, at para. 77.
[35]   Further, where an offender,
of sexual assault against a child, is found to be occupying a position of trust
such is an aggravating factor and calls for an increased sentence: see Friesen, at para. 130.
[36]   Finally, I accept that there has been no remorse
shown, although it is difficult to express remorse after a plea of not guilty,
as pointed out in R. v. Valentini, 1999 CanLII 1885 (ON CA), [1999] 43 O.R. (3d) 178 (C.A.) at p.
22. I acknowledge that a lack of remorse is not an aggravating factor.
[37]
  The foundational case on conditional sentences which sets out the general
principles and legal test, is R. v. Proulx,
2000 SCC 5, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 61. The legal test can be summarized into a
two-stage analysis: see Proulx, at paras. 46-47; R.
v. Kirkpatrick, 2022 ONCJ 387, at paras. 14-15.
First,
a judge should consider whether a conditional sentence is available, having
regard to the statutory prerequisites. At this stage of the analysis, the
factors to consider include that,
[38]
 Rarely is a conditional sentence appropriate in cases involving sexual
offences against children post-Friesen: see M.M., at paras.
15-16. Only exceptional circumstances, such as medical hardship that cannot be
adequately addressed at a correctional facility, could render a conditional
sentence appropriate: see M.M., at para. 16; R. v. P.S., 2021
ONSC 5091, at para. 81.
[39]
  Friesen suggests, at para. 114, that “mid-single digit penitentiary terms
for sexual offences against children are normal.” Crown, in their sentencing
materials cite to Friesen; R. v. Menard, 2023 ONCA 210, affirming
R. v. M.M., 2022 SCJ (unreported); R.
v. B.M., 2023 ONCA 224, 166 O.R. (3d) 721; and Riossi
– all of which involved sentencing following a conviction of sexual
assault/interference against a child. The sentences imposed in these cases
were, respectively, six years, five years, seven years, and four years. The
four-year sentence in Riossi, was the result of conviction on two
charges of sexual assault, each receiving two years and running consecutively.
I understand these cases to be illustrative of the Friesen “mid-single
digit penitentiary term”.
[40]   The
defence seeks a conditional sentence, given certain unique factors in this case,
being the poor health of the offender, the care of her new baby, her lack of a
criminal record, and the overall factual matrix. The Crown is opposed, given
the aforementioned aggravating factors, the significant moral blameworthiness
of the offender, and the seriousness of a conviction of sexual interference against
a child.