[1]              
Trial judges are required to give reasons for their decision whether
they are convicting or acquitting an accused.  Sometimes, the trial judge due
to various exigencies may give a bottom-line decision “with reasons to
follow”.  With the best of intentions this is precisely what happened on
September 22, 2023 when the trial judge convicted Mr. Osaigbovo with written
reasons to follow.  The matter came back on September 22, 2023, again on
January 6, 2024 and March 18, 2024.  Counsel understood that on these
re-attendances written reasons would be provided prior to sentencing. 
Unfortunately, the trial judge is now retired and it falls upon me to determine
whether under s. 669.2 of the Criminal Code of Canada (the “Code”) the
reasons provided by the trial judge are sufficient to allow me to impose
sentence. I also deal with the motion brought by Mr Osaigbovo seeking a
mistrial.
[2]              
Mr. Osaigbovo stands charged on an indictment which has 5 counts as
follows:
[3]              
The trial in this matter began on July 4, 2023.  The evidence was
complete on July 5, 2023.  Submissions were completed on July 10, 2023 and the
matter was adjourned by the trial judge to September 14, 2023 for reasons.  On
September 14, 2023, the matter was before the trial judge for judgment and was
adjourned to September 15, 2023.  When the matter came back the following day
on September 15, 2023, the trial judge was ill and the matter was adjourned to
September 22, 2023 for reasons.  On September 22, 2023, the trial judge prior
to giving judgment stated the following:
[4]              
It would appear that counsel consulted and indicated they were content
with written reasons to follow.
[5]              
At the commencement of the trial the trial judge put on the record he
had met with counsel in chambers to find out what was happening with this
matter.  In chambers he was advised that Mr Osaigbovo would be reelecting his
mode of trial to judge alone.  The formal reelection was done in open court.
[6]              
The electronic indictment for September 22, 2023 reflects the following
endorsement:
[7]              
The judgment dated September 22, 2023 reflected in the electronic
endorsement provides as follows:
[8]              
The judgment in the electronic endorsement bears the digital electronic
signature of the trial judge.
[9]              
Factually it is important to note that the judgment reflects there were
7 counts for which Mr. Osaigbovo has been found guilty.  The indictment itself
contains 5 counts, not 7 counts. Mr Osaigbovo has therefore been found guilty
of 2 counts for which he was not arraigned.
[10]          
The transcript of September 22, 2023 is five and a quarter pages in
length. The oral reasons for conviction as it relates to the firearms charge
and the possession for the purposes charge are brief. There are no reasons for
the remaining counts. The transcript does not reflect the comment of the trial
judge that he “promised” to have his written reasons prior to the next return
date.   The next return date was scheduled for December 22, 2023 to deal with
sentencing submissions.
[11]          
After September 22, 2023 there were five times this matter came back
before the trial judge. The last date the matter was before the trial judge was
on March 14, 2024.  No written reasons were provided by the trial judge on any
of the five dates the case was back before him.  On April 11, 2024 this matter
first came before me in my capacity as the Regional Senior Justice for the
Central East Region.  I advised counsel that the trial judge was unwell. 
Eventually counsel were advised that the trial judge had retired.
[12]          
The process by which the trial judge reached his conclusion as it
relates to the possession for the purposes of trafficking charge and the
firearms charge could provide this court with sufficient information to impose
sentence.   What makes this case more complicated is the fact his oral reasons
give no basis upon which to impose sentence on the remaining three counts. 
When I raised this concern, Crown counsel immediately agreed to enter a stay as
it relates to those remaining three counts.  But what makes this case even more
complicated is that the trial judge found Mr Osaigbovo guilty on two additional
counts for which Mr Osaigbovo was never arraigned.
[13]          
It is beyond dispute that a trial judge has a responsibility to provide
his or her reasons that explain to the parties the basis upon which the trial
judge has reached his decision.
[14]          
Section 123(5) of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990,
c. C.43 (the “CJA”) provides for timelines for the delivery of reasons:
for judgment it is six months and for any other matter it is three months.  It
is important to note that the “chief judge may extend the time in which the
decision may be given and if necessary, relieve the judge of his or her duties
until the decision is given.”
[15]          
In addition to the timelines set forth in s. 123(5)  of the CJA, judges
are expected to adhere to the Ethical Principles for Judges (the “Ethical
Priniples”) published by the Canadian Judicial Counsel (the “CJC”) and
available on the CJC website. As it relates to the delivery of reasons the Ethical
Principles provide as follows:
[16]          
The Ethical Principles suggest a maximum of six months for the delivery
of reasons, subject to exceptional circumstances. The governing legislation in
Ontario as set forth in s. 123(5) of the CJA also provides for a six-month
deadline. The difference between the Ethical Principles and s. 123(5) is
that the CJA provides the Chief Justice, and by definition the Regional Senior
Justice, the discretion to grant extensions where appropriate.
[17]          
In the case of Mr Osaigbovo the trial judge took his decision under
reserve on July 10, 2023. While he gave brief oral reasons on September 22, 2023
it is clear from the Indictment and from listening to the audiotape of the
proceedings of September 22 that the trial judge had promised to give written
reasons. Those written reasons would have been due six months from July 10, 2023
i.e., January 10, 2024.
[18]          
As previously noted, a trial judge may request one-month extensions to
allow for the delivery of written reasons. Up to three extensions may be given
in the discretion of the Regional Senior Justice. No extensions were sought by
the trial judge.
[19]          
It is a fundamental principle of our law that not only must justice be
done but it must be seen to be done. In this case the parties have only the
very brief oral reasons of the trial judge that explain the reasons for the
conviction as it relates to the possession for the purposes of trafficking and
the firearm possession.  The parties have no idea why the trial judge then
registered convictions for the remaining three counts and the two additional
counts.
[20]          
There is not a large body of case law that has interpreted s. 669.2 of
the Code. In R. v. Gionet, 2016 ONSC 6894, Templeton J. dealt
with a somewhat similar situation as occurred in this case.  The trial judge
had retired and Templeton J, was faced with a motion for a mistrial. What differentiates
Gionet from Mr Osaigbovo’s case is that the trial judge in that case had
released a complete set of reasons.  In denying the mistrial motion Templeton J.
dealt at some length with the appearance of justice being an essential element
in any trial. At paragraphs 31-34 Templeton J. stated:
[21]          
In Mr Osaigbovo’s case the public would be justifiably upset if his case
was dismissed on what some might describe as a technicality.  Members of the
public on the other hand may very well be concerned if they were told about the
history of this case and the statutory requirement for all trial judges to
provide reasons for their decision in a timely manner and certainly within the six-month
guideline.  Members of the public would also be concerned about procedural and
trial fairness to learn that the trial judge convicted Mr Osaigbovo of 2 counts
that he was never arraigned on.
[22]          
A mistrial is a remedy of last resort.  It has sometimes been referred
to as the nuclear weapon in the hands of the trial judge.  A mistrial should
only be declared if there is no other remedy available to prevent a miscarriage
of justice.
[23]          
The leading decision from the Supreme Court of Canada as it relates to
the jurisdiction of a trial judge to declare a mistrial is R. v. Burke, 2002
SCC 55.  At paragraph 75 the Court stated:
[24]          
Prior to declaring a mistrial, I enquired of counsel about the “Jordan”
date.  Defence counsel was entirely candid that he would not be using the delay
in the giving of reasons and the ensuing delay caused by the retirement of the
trial judge in support of an 11B motion.
[25]          
In this case a miscarriage of justice has occurred.  The parties were
not provided with the written reasons the trial judge promised.  The oral
reasons only gave a minimal insight as to why he convicted Mr Osaigbovo of the
possession for the purposes of trafficking and one firearms charge.  There are
no other reasons for the remaining 3 counts nor any reasons for the additional
2 counts.
[26]          
There is no disputing that the charges Mr Osaigbovo faced before the
trial judge are serious charges.  A firearm was allegedly involved. The public
should be protected from those intent on the sale of drugs aided with use of a
firearm. Those who participate in that kind of activity deserve a fair trial
but if found guilty they should be punished.
[27]          
What happened in this case was not the fault of any of the parties and
was certainly not the fault of any of the lawyers.  While the charges were
serious the evidence in this case was completed in two days with a further day
set aside for submissions.  The trial judge regrettably did not provide the
written reasons he had promised the parties.  It is regrettable the trial judge
retired but more than adequate time was afforded for the release of the
promised written reasons.  None were forthcoming and in this case, it is not
appropriate to rely on s. 669.2 of the Code to impose sentence on Mr
Osaigbovo.  A mistrial is declared.