[1]              
The accused/applicant, Toshjaih Williams, is
charged with various firearms-related offences. He applies to exclude evidence,
including a firearm, seized from his home pursuant to a search warrant. The
applicant contends that there were insufficient grounds for the warrant’s
issuance. The applicant alleges three problems with the information to obtain
(ITO) the search warrant. First, the applicant argues that the ITO has
insufficient grounds to establish that an offence was being committed. He says
that the video footage the police relied on to allege that he was holding a gun
does not support that assertion. Second, the applicant alleges that there were
insufficient grounds to establish that a firearm would be found in his home.
The applicant contends that the affiant relied on stereotypical generalizations
about how someone who has a gun would behave and that there were insufficient
grounds to support finding a firearm in his home six weeks after he was
allegedly seen carrying one. Finally, the applicant argues that there was
insufficient evidence in the ITO to establish that he was the person seen with
the firearm. He argues that the breach of his Charter rights warrants
exclusion of the evidence seized pursuant to the warrant.
[2]              
The Crown, respondent, opposes the application.
The respondent argues that there were sufficient grounds to issue the warrant.
The respondent argues that when the ITO is read as a whole, it contains
sufficient grounds to believe an offence had been committed and that a firearm
would be found in the applicant’s home. The respondent says that the police
were entitled to rely on their experience in identifying the item that they saw
as a gun. They were also allowed to rely on their experience and provide their
opinion about the likelihood of the applicant’s possession of the gun.  The
respondent further argues that there was sufficient information in the ITO
identifying the applicant as the driver of the Volvo. Finally, the respondent
argues that, even if the warrant should not have issued, the court should not
exclude the evidence because its admission would not bring the administration
of justice into disrepute.
[3]              
For the reasons that follow, the application is
granted. There were insufficient grounds to establish that an offence had been
committed. The basis for believing that the applicant had a gun was not
objectively reasonable. It follows that there was also insufficient evidence to
establish that a credibly-based probability that there was a gun in the
applicant’s home. The warrant should not have issued as there was no basis to
establish the two most important pre-conditions. The Charter breach
justifies exclusion of the evidence. Although the police had a warrant, the
issuing justice was misled somewhat about the police’s ability to see a firearm.
The impact on the applicant’s Charter-protected interests was
significant because it involved a search of his home. The importance of the
evidence to the Crown’s case, and its reliability, cannot save the evidence
from exclusion.
[4]              
The search warrant at issue in this case arose
out of an investigation that police conducted in response to a 911 call about
two males chasing another on Kingknoll Drive in Brampton. The 911 caller said
that at least one of the males was in possession of a black handgun. The caller
said that the four people involved were associated to two black vehicles, an
Audi and a Volvo. The vehicles left the area before police arrived. The police
believed that the applicant was driving the Volvo.
[5]              
The affiant who swore the ITO in support of the
warrant relied on his review of reports completed by other officers. He also
relied on his own firsthand investigation, including his own review of security
video footage, described below.
[6]              
The affiant explained that he reviewed an
occurrence report authored by another officer, Cst. Said. Cst. Said spoke to
the 911 complainant who told him that the “parties were associated to 3 Danum
Road in Brampton.” Cst. Said canvassed the area for video footage of the
incident and located some video that showed the two black cars arriving at
separate times. The officer saw a black Audi park between 1 and 3 Danum Road.
The Audi’s driver was a male with light skin, six feet tall. The Audi had a
passenger as well.
[7]              
A black Volvo station wagon arrived a short time
later and parked beside the Audi. The driver was a Black male with a blue
hoodie. The passenger was a Black male, six feet tall with a skinny build and
black t-shirt and white jogging pants. The Volvo’s driver and passenger “exited
the vehicle and chased a passenger of the Audi westbound on Kingknoll Drive.”
Cst. Said testified that the Volvo’s driver had a black item in his hand that
was “believed to be a firearm.” It is this observation of the firearm that
formed the sole basis for believing the Volvo’s driver had possession of a
firearm.
[8]              
Both of the Volvo’s occupants ultimately
returned to that car and left the area. The driver of the Audi also returned to
his car and left in the same direction as the Volvo.
[9]              
The affiant also reviewed video of the incident
and added some details to the foregoing. He added that the Audi’s driver
returned to the Audi shortly after getting out of it. The Audi’s driver
accessed the car’s trunk and retrieved an item “believed to be a handgun” which
he then concealed in his waistband. After the chase described above, the two
occupants of the Volvo searched the Audi before leaving the area. When they
Audi driver returned, the affiant said that “he pulls [an] object from his
waistband believed to be a handgun.”
[10]          
As mentioned above, the applicant’s attack on
the warrant focuses on the following:
[11]          
I will deal with each of these areas in turn.
[12]          
The affiant set out his basis to believe an
offence had been committed under the heading “Reasonable Ground to Believe that
an Offence Has Been Committed.” The affiant detailed his review of a report
authored by Cst. Said. The report details the officer’s observations of the video
of the incident. The affiant sets out what is presumably in his colleague’s
occurrence report. As already mentioned, he says that a black Audi and a black
Volvo are seen parked next to each other. The applicant is alleged to be the
driver of the Volvo. After giving a description of the Volvo’s driver, the
affiant states “Video captures the driver of the black Volvo had a black item
in his right hand, believed to be a firearm.” The affiant then explains that he
reviewed video of the incident himself. The affiant also says that “On video,
the driver of the Volvo was observed carrying a small black object believed to
be a handgun.” There is no further description of the item. The police included
screenshots of the black Volvo. They did not include any screenshots of the
male carrying the black item that was believed to be a handgun.
[13]          
At the hearing of this application, the
applicant filed still images from the video depicting the two occupants of the
black Volvo, including the person alleged to be the applicant. Crown counsel
agreed that these stills accurately represent the portions of the video footage
that the affiant would have been referring to when he said he saw the Volvo’s
driver with a handgun. It is fair to say that the video is not sufficiently
clear to make out exactly what is in the Volvo’s driver’s hand.
[14]          
The respondent argues that when the ITO is read
in its totality, the issuing justice was entitled to find reasonable grounds to
believe an offence had been committed. While acknowledging that the video
footage did not clearly depict the object in the Volvo driver’s hand, the
respondent argues that the issuing justice was entitled to consider the
officer’s experience and the information from the 911 caller.
[15]          
I cannot agree with the respondent that the ITO
contained reasonable grounds to believe that an offence had been committed. To
be clear, the offence alleged here is that the applicant, not somebody else,
possessed a firearm. The video footage in this case cannot support the officers’
conclusion that the Volvo’s driver (whom the police alleged was the applicant) had
a handgun. The still image from the video, which the respondent acknowledged
was a fair representation of what the officer would have looked at, does not
show an object clearly enough that one can say it is a handgun. This may have
been why the affiant used the phrase “believed to be a handgun” rather than
saying that he saw a handgun. Even accounting for a poor choice of language by
the officer,[2]
the video does not depict the object in the driver’s hand clearly. This may
also explain why the officers could give no better description than to say that
the item was black. Respectfully, no amount of expertise can permit an officer
to conclude that an indiscernible black item is a handgun. The 911 caller’s
information is similarly unhelpful in adding to the grounds respecting the
Volvo’s driver. The caller said that at least one of the males had a handgun.
The police also alleged that the Audi’s driver possessed a handgun. The affiant
said the video depicted the Audi’s driver placing a gun in his waistband. Therefore,
the 911 caller’s observation of a handgun does not add to the affiant’s grounds
about the Volvo’s driver having a handgun, because the 911 caller could have
been referring to the Audi’s driver possessing a handgun.
[16]          
The ITO did not contain sufficient grounds to
establish that an offence had been committed. That is a sufficient basis to set
the warrant aside and find that the applicant’s s. 8 right against unreasonable
search and seizure was breached. However, for the sake of completeness, and
because the number of deficiencies is relevant to the court’s exclusionary
decision, I will consider the other two grounds that the applicant advances.
[17]          
The applicant alleges that the ITO did not
support a reasonable belief that the firearm would be in the place to be
searched. Strictly speaking, since I have found that there were insufficient
grounds to believe that the applicant (as the Volvo’s driver) possessed a handgun,
it stands to reason that there could not have been sufficient grounds to
support finding a handgun at the applicant’s home. However, I will address the
applicant’s alternative argument that, even if the police had seen him with a
gun, that there were insufficient grounds to support that there was a gun in
his home.
[18]          
The police obtained a search warrant for the
applicant’s home six weeks after the incident on Kingknoll Drive. The affiant
addresses his grounds to believe that the items the police wanted to search for
would be in the applicant’s home under the heading “GROUNDS TO BELIEVE ITEMS
SOUGHT ARE AT PLACE TO BE SEARCHED.” Respecting the firearm, the affiant
included the following paragraph:
[19]          
The applicant argues that there were
insufficient grounds to support a reasonable probability that a firearm would
be found in the place to be searched. The applicant says that, apart from the
affiant’s improper generalizations and behavioural assumptions in the underlined
passage above, there was no basis to believe that there would be a firearm at
the applicant’s home six weeks after the police allegedly saw him with a gun. In
support of his argument that the police relied on the applicant relies on the
Supreme Court’s decision in R. v. Morelli 2010 SCC 8. In Morelli,
Fish J. cautioned (at para. 79) that, “[t]o permit reliance on broad
generalizations about loosely defined classes of people is to invite dependence
on stereotypes and prejudices in lieu of evidence.”
[20]          
There are really two aspects to this alleged
deficiency. One relates to the affiant’s alleged reliance on expertise and
where someone will keep a firearm, and the other relates to the remoteness of
the event. Regarding the first issue, I do not consider the affiant’s assertion
about the fact that someone would keep a gun with them to be an improper
generalization. That someone would keep a firearm close to themselves, or carry
it with them, is a commonsense proposition. However, I do agree with the
applicant that the information here was stale-dated and there was an
insufficient information in the ITO to support reasonable grounds to believe
that the firearm would still be in the applicant’s possession.
[21]          
The affiant’s assertion about people keeping
firearms near themselves was simply stating a commonsense proposition. Illegal
firearms are a valuable commodity. As illegal items, they are hard to come by.
They are generally not purchased as mere curiosities or collector’s items.
Someone who acquires an illegal handgun usually does so to carry it for
protection or aggression or both. It stands to reason that, unless it is
borrowed or rented, a person who owns a firearm will keep it with them or
somewhere close to themselves. If someone is at home, they would probably have
their illegal gun with them. Although the affiant said he was relying on his
experience on this topic, he did not have to. Issuing justices are allowed to
rely on reasonable inferences from evidence in the ITO: R. v. Vu, 2013
SCC 60, at para. 16. It stands to reason that an affiant is permitted to spell
out such inferences in the ITO, especially if those inferences form the basis
for their grounds. In drawing such inferences, there will always be some degree
of generalization. In Vu, the Supreme Court held that an issuing justice
could properly infer that documents showing ownership of a home would be found
inside the home. And as I raised during submissions, it is a fair
generalization that people carry their smartphones with them or keep them close
by. No degree of expertise is required to draw such an inference. The fact that
the affiant mentioned his experience is of no moment.
[22]          
Alternatively, the officer was entitled to
provide his opinion about where someone would likely keep a firearm. An
affiant’s opinion does not have to meet the standard of admissibility required
at a trial: R. v. Prosser, 2016 ONCA 467, at para. 18. A police affiant
is entitled to inform an issuing justice of their experience regarding the
typical behaviour of someone who possesses firearms: R. v. Lacroix, 2018 ONCA 842, at para. 9. This approach is no different
than that used by courts when assessing a police officer’s grounds for a
warrantless arrest, detention, or search. In such cases, a court considers
whether someone standing in the shoes of an officer would have the belief or
suspicion that the officer did. The police officer’s experience is a necessary
lens through which those grounds are assessed: R. v. MacKenzie, 2013 SCC
50, at para. 62. It would be ironic if an officer’s experience was relevant in
assessing their grounds for a warrantless search or arrest, but not relevant
when the same officer applies for a judicially authorized search.
[23]          
The second issue – the remoteness of the
information – is not resolved by either commonsense or expertise. Six weeks had
passed between the July incident and the issuance of the warrant. The affiant
did not address why he believed that the firearm would still be in the
applicant’s possession six weeks after he had allegedly been seen running with
it. Unlike his assertion that people keep firearms with them, he made no such
assertion about his experience about how long people typically keep firearms.
How long someone holds onto an illegal item like a firearm is not something
that an issuing justice can infer as a matter of common sense. The affiant
offered no opinion on this issue. Even if the ITO had established that the
applicant possessed a gun, it did not establish a reasonable probability that
the applicant would still have possessed the gun. Had the search warrant been
sought closer to July 15, 2023 – perhaps within a week or two – it may have
been more reasonable to infer that the possessor of the gun would still have
it. There is no magic number of days that will constitute sufficient temporal
proximity to infer continued possession. But where six weeks have passed, the
timing of the first-observed possession and continued possession is too remote.
[24]          
Given my conclusion on the first two of the
applicant’s grounds, I will deal briefly with the last alleged deficiency. The
applicant argues that there were insufficient grounds to establish that he was
the Volvo’s driver. I cannot agree with the applicant that there was an
insufficient link in the ITO to establish that he was the driver. The ITO sets
out a fairly compelling basis to show that the applicant was driving the Volvo.
The police are not required to establish a target’s identity to the same
standard of proof required at a criminal trial. Indeed, the standard of
credibly-based probability does not even require the police to establish the
preconditions for issuance of the warrant on a balance of probabilities: R.
v. Sadikov, 2014 ONCA 72, at para. 81. In this case, the police established
a strong link between the Volvo and the applicant. The distinctive features of
the Volvo and the ultimate link of the applicant to that Volvo was enough to
furnish grounds to establish a reasonable probability that the applicant was
the Volvo’s driver.
[25]          
The applicant has established that the warrant
to search his home ought not to have been issued and has therefore established
a breach of his s. 8 Charter right. It is therefore necessary to conduct
the three-step Grant inquiry to determine whether the Charter
breach here warrants exclusion of the evidence: R. v. Grant, 2009 SCC
32.
[26]          
The application of the Grant inquiry to
the applicant’s case demonstrates that the admission of the evidence would
bring the administration of justice into disrepute.
[27]          
The first step of the Grant inquiry requires
a court to examine how serious the police conduct is that led to the breach of
an applicant’s Charter rights. This conduct can be placed on a continuum
with good faith, technical breaches on one end, and bad faith, flagrant
breaches on the other. Normally, the police’s reliance on a what they believed
to be a valid warrant would be evidence of good faith. A search where the ITO
lacks the required grounds is unwarranted but not warrantless: Morelli
at para. 99. The rationale for finding good faith is that the police are
entitled to rely on a judicial officer’s apparent conclusion that their grounds
are sufficient, even if a judge at trial later finds that they have fallen
short. However, where, as here, the police inaccurately describe key evidence,
they will not be able to rely on their good faith reliance on a warrant. The
rationale for finding good faith reliance on a warrant disappears because the
police did not put all of the relevant facts before the issuing justice.
[28]          
In this case, I appreciate that the ambiguity in
the description of the black item would have been apparent to the issuing
justice. But that was only part of the problem here. The issuing justice was
not provided with the image shown to this court purportedly displaying the
observation of the gun. While there is no rule that an affiant must include
photos of observations that they rely on, there is a rule that an affiant must
make full, fair, and frank disclosure. That did not happen in this case. Even
though I am not finding that the police deliberately misled the justice, the
drafting of the warrant application, and failure to be full, fair, and frank,
demonstrates a level of carelessness that moves this breach away from the good
faith end of the spectrum. Negligence, carelessness, or inattention to
constitutional standards in obtaining the warrant can “tip the scales in favour
of exclusion” even where there is no impropriety or bad faith: R. v. Rocha,
2012 ONCA 707, at para. 43. Consequently, I find that the breach was serious
enough that this first step of the Grant inquiry favours exclusion.
[29]          
The second step in the Grant inquiry
requires a court to consider the impact of the breach on the applicant’s Charter-protected
interests. Where s. 8 is concerned, the greater the invasion of privacy, the
more serious the breach will be. The respondent acknowledges that the search of
a dwelling will always involve a significant impact on a Charter
claimant’s Charter-protected interests. The impact on the applicant’s Charter-protected
interests here was significant. This step of the Grant inquiry strongly
favours exclusion.
[30]          
Finally, the third step of the Grant
inquiry considers society’s interest in an adjudication of the case on its
merits. This step of the inquiry is concerned with “whether the vindication of
the specific Charter violation through the exclusion of evidence exacts
too great a toll on the truth-seeking goal of the criminal trial”: Grant,
at para. 82. On this step of the inquiry, a court may consider the reliability
of the evidence, the importance of the evidence to the prosecution’s case, and
the seriousness of the offence at issue: R. v. Beaver, 2022 SCC 54, at
para. 129. As it does in almost every case, the third step of the inquiry
favours admission of the evidence. The evidence that the police recovered from
the applicant’s home – particularly the gun – is reliable evidence. The Crown
has no case once the evidence is excluded. Society’s interest in an
adjudication on the merits is high in this case.
[31]          
The final balancing of the three lines of
inquiry favours exclusion of the evidence. As the Court of Appeal observed in R.
v. McGuffie, 2016 ONCA 365, at para. 63, where the first two lines of
inquiry strongly favour exclusion, the third line of inquiry will rarely tip
the balance in favour of admission. This is not one of those exceptional cases
where the third line of inquiry can save the evidence from exclusion. Although McGuffie
makes the balancing exercise somewhat automatic, it is important for the court
to emphasize here, in plain language, why this balancing results in excluding
evidence.
[32]          
The police here wanted to enter someone’s home to
look for evidence. They told the judicial officer who could authorize that
entry that they may have seen the person who lives in the home with a gun. But
they did not explain why exactly they thought he had a gun and they overstated
what they could see. In short, they wanted to go into the applicant’s house
without being as certain as the law required them that the applicant had broken
the law. Getting a search warrant for someone’s home is a serious and invasive
investigative step. A search warrant gives police the right to forcibly enter
someone’s home and root through their belongings. The police often go into the
most private areas of a home looking for evidence. A reasonable and fully
informed member of the public would not approve of the police being able to
show up at their door armed with this authority unless the police had
been up front with the issuing justice about the crime they believed they saw
and why they thought they saw the crime. While the police turned out to be
right, a court cannot rely on an after-the-fact justification to admit the
evidence. Had the police been wrong, this matter would never have gotten to
court. Exclusion of the evidence is required to maintain the repute of the
administration of justice.
[33]          
The application is granted. The evidence seized
from the applicant’s house is excluded from his trial.