[1]              
There were two motions before me in this matter today.
[2]              
First, the applicant, The Foundation Assisting Canadian Talent On
Recordings (FACTOR), a non-profit funder of Canada’s musicians and industry
members, brings a motion for additional productions from the respondent, The
Bank of Nova Scotia (BNS).
[3]              
The application arises from and relates to a cybertheft of approximately
$9.7 million from a bank account of FACTOR at BNS.
[4]              
I have previously dealt with this matter on two occasions.
[5]              
On July 10, 2024, I made an order in the nature of a Norwich order,
which was unopposed.
[6]              
I next heard a case conference on August 19, 2024. At that time FACTOR
was seeking to issue and deliver a Fresh as Amended Notice of Application (the
“Amended Application”) to include Mr. Campagna and 10426377 Canada Inc. (104)
as respondents, and was expressing concerns about what it alleged was an unduly
narrow interpretation taken by BNS to its production obligations following from
my July 10 order. BNS, for its part, was suggesting that rather than FACTOR
issuing an Amended Application, the matter should instead be converted to an
action. I note that, given that the hearing on August 19 was a case conference,
there was no motion before me that day, either by FACTOR for additional
productions, or by BNS to convert the proceeding to an action.
[7]              
In the circumstances at the time, apart from granting leave for FACTOR
to issue its Fresh as Amended Notice of Application, I encouraged BNS to
revisit its approach to productions, noting that my July 10 order had been
broad in scope, and that the intention had been to allow for relevant
information concerning the (fraudulent) transfer to be unearthed expeditiously
to maximize the chances of recovery. I observed that in my view BNS’s narrow
interpretation of its production obligations to that point was in fact too
narrow, and found that at that stage, particularly given the need for
expedition at the outset, there was no imperative to convert the proceeding to
an action.
[8]              
By the time the parties were before me today, while FACTOR had in fact
issued and served its Amended Application, and had made some strides in its
investigation to determine the means by which the unauthorized transfer
occurred, the issues that were raised before me in a somewhat preliminary way
on August 19 had persisted and taken hold.
[9]              
That is, FACTOR continues in its motion to complain about BNS’s parsimonious
and incremental approach to productions, and BNS has now served the other (second)
motion before me today, seeking to convert the application into an action and
to put in place a timetable for that proposed action. BNS is supported in its
request by Mr. Campagna and 104 (who as noted were added as parties in the
Amended Application).
[10]          
 Dealing first with FACTOR’s motion for productions, I would first
observe that since BNS engaged new counsel, its approach to productions has
been somewhat more expansive and forthcoming. That is not to criticize BNS’s
former counsel; often a new set of eyes on the file will lead to changes in the
way the case is being approached, and I expect that new counsel reinforced to
BNS the need to be cooperative in delivering relevant documents.
[11]          
That said, FACTOR complains that BNS’s productions have still only
arrived in “dribs and drabs,” and have yet to meet the expectations
of comprehensive relevant productions, nor the spirit of the direction in my
earlier endorsements in this matter.
[12]          
BNS maintains that it has produced virtually all of the documents that
FACTOR has requested, that the only material it has knowingly held back is
material that BNS says is not relevant or only marginally relevant, and is
commercially sensitive, such that BNS requires protection and assurance that
the material cannot and will not find its way into the public domain. In some instances,
BNS’s position is that the material sought is so sensitive that BNS is not
prepared to produce it at all, even with a structure to ensure that the
material remains confidential.
[13]          
BNS also argues that the dispute over what is to be produced also
underscores the benefits of an action as compared to an application. It asserts
that in an action, where affidavits of documents are required, there is a
structure and clear expectations guiding a party’s obligations. In an
application, as here, BNS maintains that productions are less prescriptive and
emerge as parties assert and respond to one another’s positions, including
during the course of examinations.
[14]          
The latter observation is generally fair, but also conveniently tethered
to BNS’s position that the application should be converted to an action. It
also does not excuse non-compliance with a court order, like the one I made on
July 10, mandating broad and inclusive disclosure. While BNS’s adherence to the
expectations set by that order has been better of late, particularly since the
arrival of new counsel, it is fair to observe, as FACTOR does, that BNS’s
overall approach to productions has been characterized by some degree of
obfuscation and heel-dragging.
[15]          
In its materials relative to the productions motion, FACTOR has included
a chart labelled “Chronology of Scotiabank Productions.”
[16]          
That Chronology confirms the dynamics described above.
[17]          
In the first couple of months of this matter, BNS appears to have taken
a constrained and halting approach to productions, such that even when other
entities – VirgoCX Direct Inc. (“VirgoCX”) and ATB Financial (“ATB”) – provided
much more fulsome materials, BNS refused even to produce materials that had
already been produced by those other entities (for example ATB produced
correspondence between it and BNS concerning the fraudulent transfer, whereas
BNS did not produce that same set of correspondence).
[18]          
There was a very modest flurry of additional production immediately
after my August 19 endorsement, in which I was critical of BNS’s
“interpretation of its production obligations.”
[19]          
The tap was then turned off again until BNS engaged new counsel, and,
since then, there has been a steady trickle of additional BNS productions.
[20]          
As noted, part of FACTOR’s complaint is about the allegedly glacial pace
at which BNS has provided relevant materials, particularly but not exclusively
earlier on in the proceeding. As an example underlining FACTOR’s frustration
with the manner of BNS’s disclosure of materials, in its factum FACTOR says:
“Most recently, minutes before FACTOR served its factum for these motions,
Scotiabank delivered key information it had been withholding: internal emails
revealing that, on the day of the theft, the fraudsters deleted Ms. Anianova,
the sole legitimate digital token holder, and Ms. Smysyk, FACTOR’s CEO, as
authorized users of the online Scotiabank account.”
[21]          
What appears to remain outstanding at this stage are three categories of
materials:
[22]          
Dealing with those three categories in turn, I think it is fair to say
that BNS has, albeit somewhat slowly and grudgingly, produced in an indirect
way the fruits of much of its internal investigation.
[23]          
For example, rather than producing copies of notes made by its employees
of interviews with Mr. Campagna in the early days following the discovery of
the fraud, I am advised that BNS has instead provided summaries of the
discussions covered by the notes.
[24]          
The rationale for this indirect approach is apparently that the
interview at issue was conducted at the request and direction of counsel. This
purported justification seems thin to me, particularly now that Mr. Campagna
has since become a party respondent in the litigation, but even apart from that
development. A party cannot generally protect from disclosure information from a
critical independent fact witness, simply because the interview of that witness
was directed by counsel. The notes at issue are not notes made by counsel,
which would merit different considerations.
[25]          
I do not know what other information has been filtered in some way as a
result of being gathered as a consequence of encouragement by counsel, but I
would again encourage BNS to take another look at the products of its internal
investigations and revisit the question of what more might be producible. It
seems to me that all such information is likely to be relevant, and if BNS is
holding back relevant information under the guise of questionable claims for
privilege, there are likely to be consequences down the road.
[26]          
The second category of information sought seems to me to be readily
soluble.
[27]          
BNS maintains that the session logs are of little or no relevance, but
says that so long as appropriate protections are in place to prevent aspects of
the session logs from spilling into the public domain, it is prepared to
produce them.
[28]          
On the question of the relevance of the session logs, it seems to me
that evidence about what the fraudster did, after providing fraudulently
acquired authentication and accessing the account, is likely to qualify as
relevant. FACTOR has already engaged a number of experts, and the basis for
FACTOR’s request for the session logs is in part that one or more of its experts
have requested that information.
[29]          
Moreover, as noted, and notwithstanding its stated position that the
information is of marginal relevance at best, BNS is prepared to produce the
session logs. In its factum, BNS says that its willingness to produce the
session logs is “subject to an appropriate sealing order.”
[30]          
I am open to considering a sealing order relative to the session logs
(or aspects thereof) when and if we are at the point that they are to be filed
in the court file. At the moment, however, the issue is only how BNS can
provide the session logs to FACTOR on a basis that assures BNS there will be no
public disclosure of this information.
[31]          
There appears to be a debate between the parties about how best to have
the information provided in a fashion that protects it from the public eye.
[32]          
It seems that BNS is continuing to insist on a form of sealing order, whereas
FACTOR is suggesting instead a form of agreement that replicates the operative
provisions of BNS’s proposed sealing order. Counsel for BNS has written to
FACTOR’s counsel, in response to the proposed form of agreement, saying: “The
NDA does not provide us with any assurances that the session logs won’t
ultimately be publicly filed.”
[33]          
The parties should be able to sort this out. For example, the proposed
agreement could be amended to include an undertaking on the part of FACTOR to
consent to a sealing order as a precondition of filing the session logs, or any
portion of them, in court (subject to the court’s direction). Whatever the
specific drafting solution, I expect the parties to agree, acting reasonably,
on the best way to surmount this small hurdle.
[34]          
The third issue is, I agree, a trickier one.
[35]          
The request by FACTOR is for “all alerts set up by Scotiabank to detect
or alert Scotiabank personnel to unusual activity.” BNS has refused production
of the details of the internal alerts it has set up to detect unusual activity,
for three reasons:
[36]          
Of the three stated reasons, I am sympathetic to the third one, but not
persuaded by numbers one and two.
[37]          
With respect to the first reason, BNS’s counsel, in an exchange during
argument, suggested that inasmuch as FACTOR’s claim is framed in contract, and
not negligence, issues as to whether or not BNS’s internal systems, including
its account alerts, meet expected standards are not relevant to pleaded claims.
[38]          
I disagree. While it is fair to observe that FACTOR’s claim is not
expressly based in negligence, FACTOR does allege, in its Amended Application,
that:
[39]          
Even if not accompanied with language alleging negligence per se, these
allegations in my view import considerations as to whether or not BNS’s
internal security systems were reasonable and in keeping with expected
standards. They specifically put in issue the adequacy of the means by which
BNS protects its customers’ accounts and funds and, to the extent the internal
alerts are an important feature of that regime – its “secret sauce” – the
sufficiency of the alerts is squarely raised.
[40]          
As to the bank’s assertion that the issue will come down to the question
of whether or not FACTOR, rather than BNS, met its obligations, it is of course
open to BNS to allege and pursue that theory, but its ability to do so does not
preclude other theories being advanced, any and all of which will ultimately be
determined by the court.
[41]          
The second reason offered by the bank, with respect, seems circular and
nonsensical. BNS says that, because the alerts were not triggered, the details
of the alert triggers are not relevant. It seems to me that this begs the
question. FACTOR points out that no alerts were triggered when FACTOR’s two
authorized account users were terminated and replaced, or when an amount was
transferred out of FACTOR’s account that was approximately 10 times larger than
any previous transfer ever made from that account. It argues that this shows,
or may show, that BNS’s internal alerts were inadequate to warn BNS or FACTOR
that potentially nefarious efforts were afoot, and that as such the precise
formulation of BNS’s internal alert system is highly relevant. In my view, this
suspicion is available in the circumstances, and certainly justifies the
requested production.
[42]          
As noted, I am sensitive and sympathetic to BNS’s third reason. I have
no desire to risk compromising the integrity of the BNS’s customer account
security.
[43]          
That said, I find that on balance the inquiry is a relevant one, and the
information producible.
[44]          
Accordingly, I direct BNS, in consultation as necessary with its
internal and/or external account security consultants, to determine and propose
a mechanism to provide, or provide access to the relevant details of its
internal alert system, to FACTOR, in a way that ensures the confidentiality of
the information. I expect BNS to do so, and to propose to FACTOR, through
counsel, a secure means to accomplish the production of the information, within
10 days of the date of the release of this endorsement.
[45]          
Turning now to the additional respondents, still on the issue of productions,
I note that there are no complaints raised or relief sought vis-à-vis VirgoCX,
which by all accounts produced the relevant material in its possession swiftly
and comprehensively.
[46]          
On the other hand, I note that Mr. Campagna and 104 have provided no
productions whatsoever to FACTOR.
[47]          
Mr. Campagna, in his affidavit in this matter, and presumably by way of
purported explanation for not having produced anything to FACTOR, notes first
that he was not a party as at July 10 when FACTOR’s initial motion was brought,
and did not receive the motion record.
[48]          
That said, it is clear that Mr. Campagna has since received a copy of my
July 10 order, and is aware that it compels “any other person having
notice or knowledge of [the order]” to “forthwith deliver” essentially any and
all documents in their possession relevant to the fraudulent transfer.
[49]          
Mr. Campagna goes on to say that he did provide certain materials to
BNS, and that to his knowledge both BNS and VirgoCX have produced 104-related
documents to FACTOR, including documents related to his BNS account (in the
case of BNS) and communications between himself and VirgoCX (in the case of
Virgo).
[50]          
This of course does not obviate the need for Mr. Campagna and 104 to
comply with the July 10 order themselves and yet, somewhat remarkably, even
knowing that others have produced materials that obviously would be within the
possession, power and control of Mr. Campagna and 104 – and clearly subject to
the July 10 order – Mr. Campagna and 104 have made no effort to furnish any
productions at all.
[51]          
Mr. Campagna, in his affidavit, states that he takes “no issue with the
[disclosure of documents by other parties] to date as it relates to the 104
Respondents”. This is not so magnanimous as Mr. Campagna seems to think; he
remains obliged to make production of his relevant materials and those of 104,
and he is in my view very late to do so.
[52]          
Mr. Campagna also echoes what BNS says in its materials concerning the
benefits of converting the proceeding to an action.
[53]          
 He says that “the matter should be converted to an Action so that I can
provide relevant documents in response to the allegations raised in the
statement of claim.” He provides no explanation as to why he has not provided
those relevant documents in response to the July 10 order, not even since he
and 104 were added as parties over three months ago. I find that despite the
evident effort to shelter under the position of BNS, Mr. Campagna and 104’s
response to the imperative to produce relevant materials is woefully and deliberately
inadequate.
[54]          
Accordingly, and by way of summary with respect to my findings
concerning the productions issues:
[55]          
I turn now to the second matter before me, being BNS’s motion, supported
by Mr. Campagna and 104, that FACTOR’s application should be converted to
an action.
[56]          
BNS recites, as its starting point, the provisions of Rule 38.10(1)(b)
and (2), contemplating that applications may in some circumstances be converted
to actions.
[57]          
Relevant caselaw confirms that the factors for consideration by the
court in that context include:
[58]          
BNS asserts, relying in particular on Fort William Indian Band v.
Canada, 2005 CanLII 19819, that “An application is appropriate when there
is no matter in dispute and when the issues to be determined do not go beyond
the interpretation of a document.
[59]          
I note that the decision in Fort William is not quite as cut and
dried as that. For example, after reciting the test set out above, G.P. Smith
J. notes that “when a factual dispute simpliciter is involved, this by itself
is not sufficient to convert an application into an action.”
[60]          
In Seabrook v. Pantrust, 2018 ONSC 5471, Nakatsuru J., in turn
referencing the decision of Firestone J. (as he then was) in Przysuski v.
City Optical Holdings Inc., 2013 ONSC 5709, sets out a list of “General
principles to consider in determining whether to convert an application into an
action.” These include:
[61]          
I would observe that, doubtless owing to imperatives of efficiency and
access to justice, the court is often and I think increasingly amenable to
allowing even somewhat complex matters to proceed by application, subject
always to what I regard as the overriding consideration among the various
factors, being the question of whether or not the judge hearing the matter
feels that she or he can fairly make a proper determination of the issues based
on the application record.
[62]          
It is not unreasonable in this case, in my view, for BNS to assert that
the determination of this matter may ultimately have to be by trial. The matter
involves cyber-fraud, and, as is evident from FACTOR having already engaged
four experts (and BNS one), and from the extensive session logs and internal
controls sought by FACTOR, there is complexity, at least in unravelling the
technological means by which that fraud was perpetrated.
[63]          
It is easy to imagine that, once those experts generate their respective
opinions, and assuming competing theories, the court is likely to need
painstaking viva voce evidence to determine just what was done and who bears
responsibility.
[64]          
I suspect that the likelihood of this kind of competing evidence, and
other potential credibility issues was animating Kimmel J., when she wrote, in
her endorsement establishing the timetable for this motion: “This is a fraud
action. As it has evolved and expanded the question of whether it is
appropriate to proceed as an application can and should be revisited.”
[65]          
In my discussion with FACTOR’s counsel during the course of submissions,
I too raised a concern, in particular about the inevitably complex expert
evidence, and whether that would lend itself to determination on a paper
record.
[66]          
FACTOR posits three main reasons why the application should remain an
application, at least for now.
[67]          
First, it expresses, in this context, the same frustration that it
voices concerning the somewhat protracted pace of the respondents’
productions to date. It characterizes the respondents’ motives in attempting to
convert the application to an action as being “only to delay and frustrate this
litigation.”
[68]          
Second, it maintains that this matter, despite its size, really boils
down to a fairly straightforward interpretation of a contract, and in
particular whether or not BNS is bound by its Guarantee to reimburse FACTOR for
the fraudulently transferred funds.
[69]          
Third, and I think FACTOR’s most compelling position on this issue, it
points out that unless and until the respondents deliver their evidence, it is
and remains speculative as to the extent to which there genuinely are facts and
credibility matters in issue.
[70]          
FACTOR observes, fairly, that the only evidence offered by BNS so far
has been two affidavits from a single deponent, Ms. Leung: one in August to
respond to FACTOR’s early concerns about BNS’s compliance with my July 10
order, and one in the context of this motion.
[71]          
Ms. Leung’s evidence, FACTOR asserts (again fairly) is at a high level,
and speculative. For example, in describing BNS’s position and likely steps in
the litigation, Ms. Leung deposes that “Scotiabank intends to advance
crossclaims for contribution and indemnity against the co‑Respondents.
Those claims for contribution and indemnity will likely involve determinations
of the identity of the fraudster and relationships between the various co‑Respondents,
among other material issues that are likely to be in dispute.”
[72]          
What Ms. Leung does not do is to definitively assert any affirmative evidence,
or even firm positions, on behalf of BNS. While I understand the wish to be
circumspect until further evidence emerges, this somewhat non-committal
approach to the evidence underlines FACTOR’s point that unless and until BNS
articulates a position and proffers specific evidence, the banks’ assertion
that there will be matters in issue requiring viva voce evidence remains
speculative.
[73]          
For his part, in his affidavit submitted for this motion, Mr. Campagna
also makes broad pronouncements without particular evidence to support them. For
example in paragraph 4 of his affidavit Mr. Campagna says “For the reasons that
follow, the 104 Respondents are of the view that the Application should be
converted into an Action. This matter involves highly disputed material facts
and complex issues with respect to an alleged fraudulent transfer of
$9,772,875.33 (the “Funds”) from FACTOR’s Scotiabank account, which have
been converted to cryptocurrency.”
[74]          
What then follows in Mr. Campagna’s affidavit is in fact a straightforward
recitation of known and undisputed facts, peppered by broad denials that Mr.
Campagna is himself the fraudster. Again, as in the case of BNS, there is
little in the way of affirmative evidence.
[75]          
On balance, I am persuaded that it is premature, until BNS and Mr.
Campagna/104 deliver responding records, to order the proceeding converted to
an action.
[76]          
I caution FACTOR that this may prove to be a Pyrrhic victory. It may
prove to be the case, once the responding evidence is laid out, that there will
in fact be significant factual matters in dispute, and, as Kimmel J. cautioned,
the question of potential conversion to an action will have to be revisited.
[77]          
If that proves to be the case, then the time between now and the respondents’
delivery of their respective records may end up being minimally productive, and
at that stage, and indeed at various junctures going forward FACTOR will be
well-advised to continue to consider whether at some stage the conversion to an
action is unavoidable (and perhaps beneficial).
[78]          
That too is necessarily speculative, and so I will reserve further
comment until the extent of contentious evidence is known.
[79]          
In the meantime, so as to minimize the further delay, but understanding
the demands of the season, I order the respondents to deliver their responding
records by January 10, 2025. At that stage, if it wishes to proceed with
cross-examinations, FACTOR (and of course the other parties) may do so, and
such cross-examinations should be completed by January 31, 2025.
[80]          
At that point, I expect that all parties will be in a position to
revisit the form of the proceeding. If FACTOR is persuaded at that stage (or
of course if the court decides) that the matter should proceed from there as an action,
I expect it will be appropriate to treat the records as the pleadings, and the
cross‑examinations as discoveries.
[81]          
In that regard, both BNS and Campagna/104 have predicted the need for
cross‑claims. (and it is conceivable that VirgoCX will also take
that position). There is no specific mechanism under the rules for
cross-applications. As such, I expect that in their respective responding
materials, the respondents will each include such evidence as may form the
basis of claims over against other respondents. The assertion of cross‑claims,
depending on their content, may ultimately be another factor favouring
conversion to an action, but again that remains to be seen.
[82]          
No party has uploaded a costs outline to Case Center as required. I will
proceed on the assumption that is intentional, and that no party is seeking
costs at this stage.
[83]          
If I am mistaken in that assumption, I would be prepared to hear
submissions as to whether or not I should consider awarding costs and if so on
what basis.
[84]          
I am also generally prepared to remain available to the parties to the
extent they require ongoing directions or determinations.