[1]          Qui Thieu
Mac filed an assignment in bankruptcy on July 22, 2020 and Goldhar &
Associates Ltd. was appointed as trustee in bankruptcy. It is a bankruptcy
governed by the summary administration provisions of the Bankruptcy and
Insolvency Act (“BIA”).
[2]          Mr. Mac
previously filed for bankruptcy on November 3, 2005, and received his discharge
on November 19, 2006.
[3]          At the
time he filed for his second bankruptcy, he reported to the Trustee that he had
no income. As a result, he had no requirement to pay surplus income to the
Trustee in accordance with section 68 of the BIA and the applicable OSB
directive.
[4]          Under
subsection 168.1(1)(b)(i) of the BIA, as a second time bankrupt with no surplus
income, Mr. Mac was entitled to an automatic discharge from bankruptcy 24 months
after he filed his assignment, unless an opposition to the discharge was filed
in accordance with the BIA.
[5]          Mr. Mac
received his automatic discharge on July 23, 2022, as no opposition was filed
by the Trustee, the OSB or any creditor.
[6]          The
Trustee brings a motion to annul Mr. Mac’s discharge from bankruptcy. The
evidence filed by the Trustee indicates that it prepared and signed a notice of
intended opposition to discharge dated June 25, 2022 and intended to serve and
file it in accordance with the BIA.
[7]          The
Trustee also prepared and signed its Report on Bankruptcy Application for
Discharge under subsection 170(1) of the BIA dated June 25, 2022, which
indicates the Trustee’s intention to oppose the discharg, due to the prior
bankruptcy, Mr. Mac’s failure to provide income and expense statements, and Mr.
Mac having brought on, or contributed to the bankruptcy, by gambling. These are
all facts under section 173(1) of the BIA that are to be considered by the
court on any discharge application.
[8]          Through inadvertence,
the notice and report were not filed, and this was not discovered by the
Trustee until it was preparing a supplementary report for a discharge hearing
scheduled for October 23, 2024. That hearing was cancelled.
[9]          The
Trustee served its motion materials on Mr. Mac and the OSB. Neither has taken
any steps to oppose the motion.
[10]      The Trustee cites no section of
the BIA that it is relying on for the purposes of this motion. The
Trustee did not file any legal submissions for the motion.
[11]      As I
have previously written, as noted in Bankruptcy and Insolvency Law of
Canada, 4th Edition at §8.164, “a registrar derives
its authority from the Act and the Rules and has no inherent jurisdiction. If
authority for an act cannot be found in the BIA or the [Bankruptcy and Insolvency General Rules],
then the registrar cannot perform it.” The learned authors of the text go on to
state that “if the power to hear a matter is not expressly conferred on the
registrar by s. 192 or some other section of the Act or the Rules, the
registrar has no jurisdiction to hear it.”
[12]      In the
circumstances, I was required to consider which sections of the BIA may
grant authority to the Court to annul an automatic discharge.
[13]      Subsection 180(1) provides that “where a bankrupt after his discharge
fails to perform the duties imposed on him by this Act, the court may, on
application, annul his discharge.” That section is not applicable, as the
Trustee has raised no issues regarding Mr. Mac’s conduct following his
discharge from bankruptcy.
[14]      In Cameron, Re, Justice Blair (as he then was) held
that subsection 187(5) of the BIA was applicable to a motion to annul a
discharge.[1] That section provides that “Every
court may review, rescind or vary any order made by it under its bankruptcy
jurisdiction.”
[15]      In Cameron, Re, Justice Blair set out factors the
court is to review when considering whether to annul a discharge.[2] Blair J. referred
to Tong, Re[3] as a precedent for an annulment
motion under subsection 187(5) of the BIA.
[16]      Justice Blair also referred to the decision of Justice Farley
in Baker, Re, where Farley J. considered a motion for annulment of an
automatic discharge because of inadvertence of the trustee by applying
subsection 187(9) of the BIA.[4]
[17]      That section provides that “no proceeding in bankruptcy shall
be invalidated by any formal defect or by any irregularity, unless the court
before which an objection is made to the proceeding is of opinion that
substantial injustice has been caused by the defect or irregularity and that
the injustice cannot be remedied by any order of that court.”
[18]      In my view, even in circumstances
where a motion is unopposed, a trustee in bankruptcy must provide legal
submissions where it is requesting an annulment of a discharge from bankruptcy.
As no submissions considering the applicable law and cases were filed, I am
adjourning this motion sine die.
[19]      The Trustee shall review these
decisions, note them up, review the applicable sections of Houlden &
Morawetz, and prepare legal submissions that set out the section(s) of the
BIA should be applied by the Court, and how the facts of the case support the
granting of the annulment motion based on the tests set out in the relevant
jurisprudence.