[1]              
In competing applications, the parties sought
the court’s interpretation of the payment provisions of a Purchase and Sale
Agreement in respect of a commercial property at the downtown Toronto
intersection at Queen and Spadina. The parties, who had acquired the property
in the name of a mutually owned holding company, decided to end the joint
venture. Integration International Capital Limited would purchase Helmsbridge
Holdings ULC’s shares in the holding company. The consideration for the
transfer of shares entailed IICL paying $11,000,000 plus half of the principal
owing under the existing mortgage financing of about $4,000,000.
[2]              
The agreement also provided that IICL replace
the existing $293,000 letter of credit posted with the City of Toronto to
secure compliance with certain landscaping requirements. On completion of the
work, the City would release the landscaping LOC. Plazacorp Group, a
Helmsbridge affiliate, had originally posted the LOC as a condition of site
plan approval. The issuing bank, RBC had secured it as part of the mortgage.
[3]              
Prior to closing, IICL discovered that its
bankers required $293,000 in cash collateral, a 1%-3% service fee, and an
annual maintenance fee to replace the existing LOC and maintain it annually. The
collateral entailed purchasing a low-risk security such as a term deposit with
the issuing bank. IICL demanded that the $293,000 be credited toward the cash
portion of the purchase price, relying on a clause in the payment provisions about
the replacement LOC. IICL contended that the clause implied a deduction of the
$293,000 from the price before settling the balance of the purchase price on
closing.
[4]              
Helmsbridge did not agree with IICL’s
interpretation of the payment provision and demanded full payment of the fixed
cash portion in the amount of $11,000,000. (There had been no deposit.) IICL
paid it, so as not to prevent the closing of a $15,000,000 deal, but under
reservation of rights to claim the $293,000 after closing. However, it has not
posted a replacement LOC as required under the agreement. The parties were
therefore deadlocked in competing demands, as reflected in the two applications
before the court:
[5]              
The parties’ competing interpretations of the agreement
focused on the following three issues:
[6]              
For the reasons that follow, I dismiss both
applications. I have concluded the contractual provisions must each be read in
accordance with their ordinary and grammatical reading and do not bear an
interdependent meaning, at least with respect to the balance of the purchase
price on closing. The $293,000 could not fall into the definition of an
adjustment. However, Section 3.1(1)(c) allowed IICL to pay part of the purchase
price by replacing the LOC but failed to do so. Accordingly, IICL was liable to
pay the whole $11,000,000 on closing. Helmsbridge is not entitled to an award
of specific performance, because its damages have not yet accrued and may be
discharged once the landscaping is complete.
[7]              
Article 1 of the agreement defined the purchase
price simply as follows:
[8]              
The issue between the parties concerned the $11,000,000
portion of the purchase price. Neither side raised the collateralization of the
existing LOC through the mortgage as affecting the value of the deduction from
the purchase price sought by IICL. In any event, the contractual wording, and
not the economic permutations, govern. Article 1 also contained standard
clauses excluding the headings and table of contents from interpretation of the
contract and stating that the written document constituted the entire agreement
of the parties.
[9]              
The agreement provided two additional relevant definitions:
[10]          
The dispute arose from Article 3, entitled
“PURCHASE PRICE.” It consisted of the following sections, of which 3.1, 3.3,
and 3.5 figure in the analysis:
[11]          
Section 3.1(1) also bore the title, “Purchase
Price,” and read as follows:
[12]          
The word “Balance” was defined in s. 1.1 as “the
meaning given to it in Section 3.1(1)(d).” Section 6.2 provided that the
purchaser would deliver the “Balance of the Purchase Price” on or before
closing.
[13]          
Hemsbridge did not require a deposit, and
therefore ss. 3.1(1)(a) and 3.2 never applied.
[14]          
Section 3.3 dealt with the adjustments on
closing. I will reproduce s. 3.3(1) in particular, when dealing with Issue 1.
[15]          
Section 3.4 dealt with realty tax appeals, a
subject having no bearing on the dispute.
[16]          
Section 3.5 contained the following provision:
[17]          
Unlike s. 3.1(1)(c), s. 3.5 did not provide the
option of “cash collateralization.” It only required IICL to replace the LOC.
[18]          
The statement of adjustments prepared by
Helmsbridge contained ledger entries for mortgage interest and municipal realty
taxes that reduced the balance on closing to $10,943,649.42. IICL appointed an
auditor who disagreed with the statement and stated IICL ought to have been
credited a deduction of $293,000.
[19]          
“Adjustments” were defined in s. 1.1 with
reference to s. 3.3. Subsection 3.3(6), in particular, provided that the cost
of a purchaser-appointed auditor be shared equally. IICL’s auditor, Song Han,
determined in his June 4, 2024, report that the $293,000 ought to have been an
adjustment to the purchase price. The report did not deal with any other item
in contention, with respect to the adjustments on closing.
[20]          
The adjustments referable to the auditor were
defined in s. 3.3(1), as follows, in which I insert a conceptual break for ease
of reading:
[21]          
The specific items after the general term,
“Adjustments,” do not restrict the generality of the word.  The ejusdem
generis rule, a.k.a. the ‘limited class rule,’ does not apply where general
terms are followed by specific terms and connected by the word “including”: National
Bank of Greece (Canada) v. Katsikonouris, 1990 CanLII 92 (SCC), [1990] 2
SCR 1029, at 1040-41. Rather, the specific adjustments only clarify the
provision by leaving no doubt that they are to be included. Despite this, one
cannot stretch the meaning of “Adjustments” to mean a $293,000 line item of
which the amount is known prior to closing.
[22]          
It is obvious from the list of eligible
adjustments in the first part that they are to be standard adjustments to the
financial terms on closing and to not entail changes to the payment of the
purchase price. They are typical items allocating to the precise day of closing
portions of operating costs and liabilities to third parties and utility
operators that are billed monthly or quarterly. Parties agree to adjust because
of the uncertainty of the exact amounts as of the closing date.  The second
part of the subsection added the interest portion of the 50% assumption of the
mortgage financing and interest in the joint venture’s operating bank accounts.
[23]          
The words, “subject to the Adjustments” in s.
3.1(1)(d), could not have meant a reduction of the purchase price, because the
“Balance” already included the LOC in s. 3.1(1)(c). One cannot adjust a balance
with an item already factored into the balance calculation, without double-counting.
[24]          
Thus, with all due respect to Mr. Han, the
$293,000 could not be deducted from the purchase price as an adjustment,
because it was not an adjustment. Since the sharing of the auditor’s fees only
applied to disputes over adjustments and not over general contract
interpretation, Helmsbridge was not obligated to pay 50% of the fees for
completing a report that did not deal with adjustments.
[25]          
The agreement inserted the replacement LOC into
the components of s. 3.1(1) for the “Payment of the Purchase Price.” But s. 3.5
also deferred the purchaser’s requirement to replace it after the closing. The apparent
ambiguity created by the references to the LOC in these locations lies at the
heart of the dispute.
[26]          
The evidence in the affidavits revealed a consensus
that s. 3.5 was a late amendment to the agreement. Beyond that, the parties
disagreed on the significance of it. According to IICL, it suggested the
insertion “for clarity that the obligation to replace the LOC would take place
AFTER closing, by which time IICL would have received the value of the cash
collateralization that was required of it to fund the replacement LOC.” Helmsbridge’s
evidence was that there were no grounds to foresee that IICL would rely on s.
3.5 “to seek a reduction in the purchase price.” IICL’s late discovery that it
would need another $293,000 in funds could support Helmsbridge’s contention
that the late addition had nothing to do with the purchase price and everything
to do with IICL’s need for more time to replace the LOC than they had, prior to
the negotiated closing date.
[27]          
The practical financial effect of replacing the
LOC is that the LOC obtained by Helmsbridge’s affiliate would be released, and
IICL would be required to reserve $293,000 as collateral for the LOC to the
City. Apart from the opportunity cost of being able to invest the funds in
instruments yielding better return, the real economic value of the swap would
have been neutral. On the completion of the landscaping obligation, the LOC
would be released no matter whose LOC it was. The practicalities of the LOC
could form part of the surrounding circumstances of the contract, in that the
$293,000 LOC is only a contingent liability. The term deposit is only security,
in the sense that the land is security – in the same way the existing LOC was
secured by the mortgage.
[28]          
The only purpose for which the court could
consider the evidence of the parties regarding the insertion of s. 3.5 would be
to deepen the understanding of the mutual and objective intentions of the parties
as written in the contract: the so-called rubric of “surrounding circumstances”
in Sattva Capital Corp. v. Creston Moly Corp., 2014 SCC 53, [2014] 2 SCR
633, at para. 58. If clarity was IICL’s aim, s. 3.5 plainly stated the
replacement of the LOC described in s. 3.1(1)(c) was understood as its
obligation after closing. That is about all the court can glean from its
insertion. There is an elegant logic to IICL’s contention that s. 3.5 deferred
to the post-closing period performance of an obligation for which it intended
to credit in the balance ledger on closing. The question for the court is
whether the written words also bear that meaning.
[29]          
Beyond the surrounding context, the parties’
subjective intentions or representations prior to the execution of the
agreement cannot form part of the contractual interpretation, if the contract
contains a standard ‘entire agreement’ clause. As Epstein J.A. stated in Soboczynski
v. Beauchamp, 2015 ONCA 282, at para. 43: “An entire agreement
clause is generally intended to lift and distill the parties’ bargain from
the muck of the negotiations.”
[30]          
If the court had to give up trying to resolve
the meaning contextually, as a last resort the rules of contract interpretation
require the meaning to be construed against IICL as the proferens, the
one who adduced the provision in the agreement – the contra proferentum
rule: Consolidated-Bathurst v. Mutual Boiler, 1979 CanLII 10
(SCC), [1980] 1 SCR 888, at 893-94. In St. Lawrence Cement
Inc. v. Wakeham & Sons Ltd. (1995), 1995 CanLII 2482 (ON CA), 26 O.R. (3d) 321, citing Canada
Steamship Lines Ltd. v. The King, 1952 CanLII 260 (UK JCPC), [1952] A.C.
192 793-94, Dubin C.J.O., outlined a more nuanced three-part application of the
rule. These parts can be simplified thus:
[31]          
Section 3.5 in itself is not ambiguous. It clearly deferred the
post-closing interval IICL’s requirement to register with the City a
replacement landscaping LOC from before closing to after it. Evidently, the
absence of a definite time limit reflected the lack of urgency to the
replacement. It is the insertion of ss. 3.5 into an agreement already
containing s. 3.1(1)(c) that created the ambiguity, the possible inference
either that s. 3.5 allowed the post-closing performance of a closing obligation
or that Helmsbridge paid for (by reduction of purchase price) a commitment to
replace the LOC.
[32]          
Construing the effect of s. 3.5 contra proferentum against
IICL as the party adducing the section, the absence of a clear reduction of the
purchase price or a credit toward the purchase price in either section could
mean IICL should receive no reduction or credit. I do not consider that to be a
fair result of the application of the rule of construction. Rather, the result
should be that the insertion of s. 3.5 does not help IICL’s interpretation that
s. 3.1(1)(c) was intended to be a reduction of the purchase price or a credit
to be applied to it when calculating the balance on closing. The contra
proferentum construction resulting from IICL’s insertion of s. 3.5 only has
the effect of negating IICL’s preferred combined reading of the two provisions.
It does not necessarily follow that s. 3.1(1)(c) cannot be read as providing a
reduction or credit in favour of IICL.
[33]          
I am therefore unconvinced that the insertion of s. 3.5 affects
the meaning of s. 3.1(1)(c), either by clarification or by alteration. Section
3.5 only deferred the timing of the replacement LOC, and it would be an unreasonable
stretch to read anything further into it. Had they been intended to be read together
in that manner, the parties could have employed additional connective language.
Instead, the two sections are more appropriately read independently in the same
document. The most reasonable and harmonious construction therefore entails a
reading of the two provisions connected by timing.
[34]          
In the plain grammatical reading of s. 3.1(1)(c), it starts with
the phrase, “The Purchase Price shall be paid and satisfied by the Purchaser as
follows,” followed by the list of four items. Each of the four expressed a form
of payment:
[35]          
Had IICL replaced the CIBC LOC with a new LOC, the Helmsbridge
group’s LOC would be rescinded together with its contingent liability. The
reasonable and grammatical reading of s. 3.1(1)(c) would be to recognize the
$293,000 value as payment toward the purchase price under the head clause starting
with “The Purchase Price shall be paid …” The extinguishment of a contingent
liability has value. The insertion of the replacement LOC in s. 3.1 signified
an incentive for IICL to relieve Helmsbridge of the exposure prior to closing,
without requiring that to be done.
[36]          
Instead of replacing the LOC or providing the City with cash
collateral as security for the landscaping undertaking, IICL paid Helmsbridge the
full $11,000,000 plus Helmsbridge’s 50% of the outstanding loan amount. Since
IICL had neither registered a replacement LOC with the City nor provided a cash
collateral, the amount for the calculation of the balance on closing to pay and
satisfy the purchase price – the very purpose of s. 3.1(1) – would have been
$11,000,000. Therefore, IICL’s payment of the whole $11,000,000 discharged what
it owed on closing.
[37]          
Counsel for the parties cited practical and economic arguments
for and against such an interpretation. One argument against it is that Helmsbridge
emerges with a $293,000 windfall, or IICL with an unexpected penalty, by having
paid $11,000,000. Had IICL replaced the LOC prior to closing, it would
eventually have seen the return of the use of the money. Helmsbridge, however,
would have received $293,000 less, in return for the cancellation of a
contingent liability.
[38]          
The court cannot extract a meaning that the wording does not
support, based on ex post arguments such as these. The contract may be
“badly drafted and … difficult to comprehend.” However, the court’s function is
not to rewrite the relevant clauses despite the urge to make them logically
reflect the elements of the transaction: AXA Insurance
(Canada) v. Ani-Wall Concrete Forming Inc. (2008), 91 O.R. (3d)
481, 2008 ONCA 563, at paras. 29-30. This case also does not entail an unlawful
penalty or other form of coercive unfairness arising from power imbalance. As
in the Axa case, the root of the issue is unclear contract wording. The
court cannot impose on the parties its own opinion of what the parties could
have intended to do.
[39]          
Helmsbridge is therefore under no obligation to refund $293,000
from the payment it received on closing. Consistent with the insertion of s.
3.5 sometime after s. 3.1(1)(c),  IICL could have replaced the LOC on or before
closing and availed itself of a deduction from the purchase price. Its failure
to do so meant it had to pay the full price. In principle, the situation was no
different from any other situation in which a party fails to take advantage of
a contractual time-limited discount, whether in a multi-million dollar
transaction or a department store sale.
[40]          
There remains the effect of s. 3.5. Helmsbridge seeks specific
performance on the obligation to replace the LOC and to make all reasonable
“commercial efforts” to have the LOC returned to Helmsbridge for cancellation.
Unlike s. 3.1(1)(c), there was no express option to provide the City a cash
collateral to release the existing LOC.
[41]          
Counsel for Helmsbridge limited the legal submission on this
point to a statement that IICL was required by contract to replace the LOC and
has not done so. I do not intend to criticize this submission, but it is
perhaps a reflection on the weakness of the demand for a mandatory order where
the legal consequence to Helmsbridge remains contingent on the owner’s failure
to complete the landscaping. If I do not make the order it seeks, it would
remain exposed to the liability to the CIBC on the LOC if IICL, its holding
company, or a successor, failed to fulfill the landscaping undertaking. In that
instance, Helmsbridge would have to sue IICL for breach of the covenant to
replace the LOC. What governs the issue here is the availability of the remedy
of specific performance.
[42]          
Specific performance is an equitable remedy in which the court
orders a party to perform a contractual obligation as described in s. 3.5. As
in the case of all equitable remedies, it is a discretionary remedy that is not
available as of right: Wewaykum Indian Band v. Canada, 2002 SCC 79,
[2002] 4 SCR 245, at para. 107; Jiro Enterprises Ltd. v. Spencer, 2008 ABCA
87, at para. 9.
[43]          
In contract law, courts have reserved specific performance ordinarily
to situations where an award of damages would be an inadequate remedy. Historically,
the English courts treated it as applicable to real estate transactions and not
to personalty, because all land was unique, and all other forms of property
were market commodities. That distinction eroded to the point that Supreme
Court ended any principled distinction of the availability of the remedy primarily
to realty and rarely to personalty: Semelhago v. Paramadevan, 1996
CanLII 209 (SCC), [1996] 2 SCR 415, at paras. 11-21. Nevertheless, a party
seeking the performance of a contract in respect of non-land property climbs
uphill against the idea that the default award of damages should be granted
where the purchaser can use the damages to purchase identical or equivalent
goods: Semelhago, at para. 13.
[44]          
Helmsbridge’s demand for an order for specific performance does
not concern the land itself. The conveyancing part of the transaction has
already concluded with the transfer of shares. In theory, a LOC is a unique
instrument, because its value depends on the contingent legal relationship
among the issuing bank, the buyer, and the beneficiary. However, in the
circumstances where the contract contemplates the City’s acceptance of a replacement
LOC issued to another party, IICL, there is an inherent absence of uniqueness.
The value to Helmsbridge of obtaining the return of the LOC under s. 3.5 is
that the contingent liability will be extinguished. For the liability to
accrue, IICL or any successor on title would have to default on the landscaping
undertaking, such that the City would perform the work and trigger the bank’s
funding under the LOC. There can be no compensable value to Helmsbridge’s relatively
advantageous banking terms, because the contract contemplates the cancellation
of the LOC, as opposed to making use of it for another transaction.
[45]          
I therefore conclude that Helmsbridge is not entitled to an order
against IICL requiring the latter to replace the LOC. If IICL does not perform
its obligation under s. 3.5, Helmsbridge will eventually see the return of the
LOC when the landscaping is finished. If IICL defaults on the landscaping and
the City acts on the LOC, IICL will be liable to Helmsbridge for up to $293,000
in damages. Not every contractual breach will result in immediately accrued
damages. When the damages accrue, the wronged party can sue. If damages do not
accrue, there is no cause of action.
[46]          
I am mindful of two considerations that could render any
interpretation of s. 3.5 less than satisfactory in terms of the justice or
fairness of the outcome. They arise from the difficulty of granting a remedy
where the breach of contract appears to bear no real consequence at the time of
the hearing.
[47]          
First, s. 3.5 required IICL as purchaser to do everything
commercially reasonable to replace the LOC and to obtain the return of the CIBC
LOC to Helmsbridge or its affiliate, and that the requirement was forthwith
“From and after Closing.” IICL is therefore in breach of s. 3.5. Its counsel
conceded the breach, but he also argued that the agreement contemplated a
$293,000 reduction in the purchase price to enable IICL to obtain the LOC. I
have already found that the meaning of the words in the contract cannot be
stretched to support that premise, if it failed to replace the LOC on or before
the closing. The rules of equity require the court to award damages in lieu of
an order for specific performance unless damages would not suffice. However,
how is the court to rule when damages have not yet accrued even though the
breach has occurred?
[48]          
Second, the facts of this case are that IICL paid Helmsbridge
$11,000,000 (subject to some adjustments), even though it could have closed the
transaction for $293,000 less, if it had replaced the LOC or provided cash
collateral to the City. The decision not to replace the LOC prior to closing
seems to have been based on an intention on the part of IICL to have its cake
and eat it too, by seeking the benefit if s. 3.1(1)(c) without performing it. Helmsbridge
rightly relies on s. 3.5 as a backstop to a decision by IICL to close without
the benefit of s. 3.1(1)(c). However, the post-breach enforceability of s. 3.5 is
limited by the limitations on the court to award a remedy.
[49]          
Ultimately, these two problems stemmed from the late insertion of
s. 3.5. Without it, the clear meaning of s. 3.1(1)(c) would have been an
obligation to provide the replacement LOC at the time of closing and that the value
of the LOC would be applied toward payment and satisfaction of the purchase
price. IICL was aware of the replacement issue in the preceding draft of the
agreement and should have checked with its bankers first and then bargained for
the desired mechanism for completing the transaction. If Helmsbridge must wait
for the breach to be enforceable in damages, it is not as undesirable as the
consequence to IICL in having paid Helmsbridge $293,000 in cash when it could
have satisfied that amount of purchase price by purchasing a LOC which would
likely be returned to it.
[50]          
To summarize the outcomes of the applications, both are
dismissed. In particular:
[51]          
At the hearing, counsel reserved the opportunity to make
submissions regarding costs. I encourage the parties to settle the costs of the
applications, especially having regard to the outcome. In the event no
settlement is possible, they may each deliver costs submissions within 20 days
hereof, of no longer than three pages. They will then each have 10 days to
deliver responding submissions of no longer than two pages.