[1]              
This is a personal injury action arising from an
accident said to have occurred when the plaintiff tripped on uneven interlock steps
on premises owned by the defendant Fergus.  The defendant, Artistic Landscape
Designs Limited was said to be responsible for the design and installation.
[2]              
The plaintiff has settled with the defendant
landscaper but not with the homeowner.  This is what is commonly referred to as
a “Pierrenger Agreement” or a proportionate share settlement agreement.  In
theory this allows the settling defendant to cap its liability by paying a
fixed sum to the plaintiff which amount will not be disclosed to the
non-settling defendant or to the court until after the trial.  The plaintiff
agrees to pursue the remaining defendant only for its proportionate share of
the damages rather than seeking the joint and several liability provided by s.
1 of the Negligence Act.[1]
[3]              
The motion before the court is a motion permitting
the plaintiff to amend the statement of claim in order to delete the claim
against Artistic Landscaping and to amend the claim against Fergus to limit the
claim only to “her direct and several share of liability”.
[4]              
Originally counsel for Fergus declined to
consent to the amendment and also declined to consent to the proposed order. 
The reason for declining to consent was twofold.  Firstly, the proposed amended
claim did not make reference to the Pierrenger Agreement and did not make it
clear that the court would still be required to apportion fault between the
original co-defendants (and the plaintiff if there is found to be contributory
negligence).  It is inherent in the nature of a Pierrenger Agreement that the
non settling defendant can only be held liable for damages if it is found at
fault and only for the percentage of fault attributed to it.  The court must
still assess the percentage of fault, if any, for which the settling defendant
would have been liable.
[5]              
As I understand it, this has been resolved by
agreement that counsel will make this point clear at the opening of trial.  Counsel
for the defendant and the plaintiff will advise the court that although the
plaintiff is no longer pursuing the other original co-defendant, the court must
nevertheless determine if there was fault on the part of either defendant and
must determine the percentage, if any, that Fergus is at fault.  Fergus will
not be held liable under any circumstances for any fault that may be attributed
to the landscape contractor.
[6]              
The second issue relates to the draft order.  
The draft included dismissal of the cross claim by Fergus against Artistic
Landscape.  The draft did not contain a dismissal of the cross claim by
Artistic against Fergus but I understand that was an oversight.  Counsel for
Artistic Landscape agrees that its crossclaim should be dismissed.
[7]              
In Pierrenger agreements, it is common to seek
the agreement of the non settling defendant to drop the crossclaim.  This is
because the plaintiff will normally have agreed to cap the damages of the
settling defendant at the amount the settling defendant has agreed to pay.  The
plaintiff will also indemnify the settling defendant and will ordinarily agree
not to pursue any party that could make a claim over.
[8]              
While the plaintiff did not include the
Pierrenger Agreement in its motion materials, a redacted copy was provided to
the defendant and appears in the responding record.  Paragraph 4 of the
agreement contains the covenant not to pursue the settling defendant for more
than the (redacted) amount the defendant has paid.  Paragraph 8 contains an
agreement to limit the claim against the non-settling defendant “so as to
exclude any crossclaim or third party claim made against or which could be made
against the settling defendant”.  Paragraph 10 provides that the plaintiff
agrees not to seek “recovery from the non-settling defendant for any amount
which the non-settling defendant would be entitled to recover from the settling
defendant.”
[9]              
The plaintiff faced a problem in this case because
the non-settling defendant was not a party to the Pierrenger Agreement and
could not be compelled to drop its crossclaim.  A similar situation was
described by the Court of Appeal in Maio v. Kapp Contracting Inc.[2]  An
agreement between two parties to litigation cannot curtail the rights of a
party that is not a party to the agreement.  Unless the amendments to the claim
clearly remove the basis for any claim to contribution and indemnity by the
non-settling defendant then that defendant acts entirely reasonably by
maintaining its crossclaim.
[10]          
The defendant has now agreed to dismissal of the
crossclaim.  It does so because the plaintiff is not only amending the claim to
limit its claim against the non-settling defendant but has also agreed with the
non settling defendant how the issues for trial will be defined.
[11]          
Under those circumstances I will grant an order
amending the claim and dismissing both crossclaims.  Counsel for the plaintiff
is to provide a draft order amended to reflect the dismissal of all crossclaims
and attaching the form of the amended claim as “Schedule A”.[3]
[12]          
The motion remained on the motions list this
morning because the moving party plaintiff was seeking costs against the
non-settling defendant.  That request for costs was misguided.  It was entirely
reasonable for Mr. Peloso to withhold his consent until he was satisfied that
his (non-settling and non-party to the Pierrenger) client was protected. 
Moreover, as a non-party to the Pierrenger, Fergus is under no obligation to
assist the plaintiff to implement the agreement.  No defendant or other party
is entitled to be obstructionist or to force another party to run up costs but
that is not what occurred here.
[13]          
The plaintiff is not entitled to costs.