[1]            
The applicant was found guilty by
a jury of five counts related to human trafficking. One of those counts was the
offence of receiving a material benefit from trafficking a person under 18
years of age, contrary of s. 279.02(2) of the Criminal  Code. That
subsection provides a mandatory minimum sentence of two years. The minimum
sentences have already been found unconstitutional for both the trafficking and
procuring offences: R. v. Purcell, 2019 ONSC 4683; R. v. Ahmed et al.,
2019 ONSC 4822; R. v. Safieh, 2021 ONCA 643.
[2]            
The applicant submits that the
mandatory minimum sentence for this section amounts to cruel and unusual punishment
and is therefore contrary to s. 12 of the Charter and cannot be upheld
under s. 1 of the Charter. The applicant further submits that the unavailability
of a conditional sentence in accord with s. 742.1 of the Criminal Code
results in an arbitrary and overly broad deprivation of liberty and is
therefore contrary to s. 7 of the Charter and cannot be upheld under s.
1 of the Charter.
[3]            
The Crown submits that it is not
necessary to deal with these constitutional issues since the appropriate total sentence
for this and the other counts far exceeds the mandatory minimum sentence under
s. 279.02(2) of the Criminal Code.
[4]            
Counsel have not provided any
cases and I am not aware of any decisions in Ontario declaring that this
mandatory minimum sentence violates the Charter. In R. v. Webber,
2019 NSSC 14, the Nova Scotia Supreme Court found that this minimum mandatory
sentence violated s. 12 of the Charter and could not be saved by s. 1 of
the Charter.
[5]            
In R. v. Nur, 2015 SCC at
para. 65 the court concluded that a provision can be “challenged on the ground
that it would impose a grossly disproportionate sentence either on the offender
or on other persons in reasonably foreseeable situations.”
[6]            
Based on Nur, the applicant
submits that the reasonable hypotheticals are defined by the essential elements
of the offence. If the essential elements of the offence are very broad there
will be difficulty in attaching a mandatory minimum sentence because they can
be committed in such different ways in a variety of circumstances. The
applicant submits that the mandatory minimums for sexual services offences and
human trafficking have been struck down because they are grossly
disproportionate since the conduct underlying those offences is broadly
defined.
[7]            
The applicant submits that based
on her personal circumstances and involvement in this offence she is at the
lowest level of culpability and should be at lease eligible for consideration
of a conditional sentence.
[8]            
The Crown submits that a potential
sentence of less than two years cannot address the situation, as here, where
the accused receives a material benefit from the sexual exploitation of a
child. In support the Crown refers to the comments of the SCC in R. v.
Friesen, 2020 SCC 9.
[9]            
There is a broad range of
reasonable hypothetical situations that could be captured as an offence
contrary to s. 279.02(1) of the Criminal Code. This indictable offence
carries a maximum prison term of 10 years. Charges under this section are
routinely accompanied by various other serious offences related to human
trafficking. The cumulative sentences in such cases, bearing in mind factors
including totality and the need to reflect denunciation, will routinely attract
significant penitentiary terms.
[10]        
It is difficult to see how this
mandatory minimum sentence can survive when similar provisions for other
offences related to human trafficking have been struck down under the Charter.
The maximum potential sentence will continue to properly reflect the
seriousness of such offences.
[11]        
I find that the statutory minimum
sentence in this section contravenes ss. 7 and 12 of the Charter and
cannot be saved by s. 1 of the Charter.
[12]        
The application is allowed. The
mandatory minimum sentence in s. 279.02(2) of the Criminal Code is
struck down and of no force and effect.