[1]              
DNA testing has become a tool used routinely in criminal investigations.
Police may seek to compare a DNA sample from a known person (a “reference
sample”) to a DNA profile of unknown origin, that has been developed from items
associated with a crime scene or victim of a crime. The results of the
comparison allow them to determine whether to exclude the donor of the
reference samples as the source of the DNA profile of unknown origin.
[2]              
This certified class proceeding concerns DNA profiles that were prepared
and retained by the Centre of Forensic Sciences (“CFS,” or the defendant). The
profiles originated from the forensic analysis of reference samples that were provided
by class members on consent.
[3]              
The plaintiff alleges that the collection and retention of their DNA
profiles violates s. 8 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
and the class members’ common law right to privacy under the tort of inclusion
upon seclusion. He seeks aggregate and punitive damages for himself and the
class.
[4]              
The trial of the certified common issues took place before me. These are
my reasons.
[5]              
In 2013, the plaintiff, Mr. Granger, was a migrant farm worker living
and working in Vienna, Ontario. Around that time, a violent sexual assault
occurred in southwestern Ontario. From the crime scene, the police recovered a
DNA sample of unknown origin that they believed to be linked to the perpetrator.
While investigating the assault in October 2013, OPP officers came to the farm
where Mr. Granger worked seeking to obtain consent samples from all migrant
workers for comparison against the crime scene sample.[1]
[6]              
The police gave Mr. Granger a form to sign. He now understands it was
likely a consent form. He was not given a copy of the form. The police retained
the original. However, it is common ground that he signed the standard consent
form that was in use at the time, and which has been produced in this action.
[7]              
The police took Mr. Granger into a van, where they took a buccal swab from
him (that is, a DNA sample taken by wiping a piece of cotton inside his mouth).
Samples were also taken from 95 other migrant workers. The samples were
delivered to the CFS for forensic analysis.
[8]              
Subsequently, on November 8, 2013, the CFS reported to the OPP that all
the migrant workers’ samples were excluded as matches for the crime scene
sample. The physical DNA samples taken from the migrant workers were destroyed.
[9]              
At issue in this case is what happened to the results of the DNA testing,
not just of the migrant workers, but of all class members who provided consent
samples for forensic analysis during the class period.
[10]          
The definition of the class on whose behalf the plaintiff seeks redress is:
[11]          
The certified class originally ended on the date of the certification
order, without prejudice to the plaintiff bringing a future motion within the
proceeding to certify an amended class. The class definition was later amended
to end the class period on April 1, 2022. On this date, the CFS changed its lab
practices and ceased retaining DNA profiles, except in cases where a reference
sample is a match to the sample against which it was compared.
[12]          
The parties agree that a reasonable estimate of the class size is 7,267
class members. It is also agreed that this is an underestimate.
[13]          
At this juncture, I set out a summary of the CFS’s processes.
[14]          
The CFS’s Biology Program Area provides forensic DNA analysis for
criminal investigations in Ontario. Part of its mandate includes testing
reference samples for comparison against DNA samples of unknown origin. Reference
samples may be obtained after an individual signs a consent form, they may be
seized under warrant, or they may be discarded samples. As I have noted, this
case focuses on reference samples obtained voluntarily.
[15]          
There is no question that the CFS’s services are important to the
investigation of crimes and the administration of justice. The results of the
CFS’s testing can lead to the successful identification and prosecution of
offenders, and they can exonerate people wrongly suspected or convicted of
crimes.
[16]          
The demand for the CFS’s DNA analysis services has ballooned over the
duration of the class period. Currently, the CFS tests over 25,000 individual
samples annually, 12% of which are reference samples.
[17]          
To enable it to process the volume of testing required, the CFS uses
highly automated procedures. It tests samples in batches of up to 68. Any given
batch will contain different kinds of reference samples and the samples
typically relate to different cases. The CFS describes batch processing as
“necessary for the CFS to meet the continually increasing demand for forensic
DNA testing as batching creates efficiencies of scale”.
[18]          
Reference samples are submitted by police forces to the CFS for testing.
The process by which the samples are submitted has changed over the years. Before
2012, samples were submitted with paper documentation that would often, but not
always, identify the donor who provided the reference sample by name. After
2012, the CFS advised police not to include the name of the reference sample
donor, but rather, to use a “reference sample code.” In addition, the samples
will typically have a Police Item Number and/or a seal number that identifies
the item.
[19]          
To track samples, the CFS uses a Laboratory Information Management
System (“LIMS”) that assigns unique numbers to each case and each item of
evidence. The LIMS is used to record the chain of custody of any given item of
evidence and to maintain an electronic record of the case and its associated
items.
[20]          
At the risk of stating the obvious, without a tracking system, the CFS
would not be able to relate the results of its forensic DNA testing back to a
sample from a particular individual. There would thus be no value in the
testing process, if law enforcement could not eventually learn if the person
from whom a sample was obtained was a match, or not, to the DNA profile in
question.
[21]          
Tracking is also necessary for quality assurance and ensuring that the CFS’s
work is verifiable. Being able to verify its work may be important in cases
where the results of DNA testing is used in the prosecution of an accused.
Because CFS does not know in advance which samples will match a DNA sample from
a crime scene, it must track all samples in the same manner.
[22]          
The CFS’s testing process produces two categories of outputs: one physical,
and one electronic.
[23]          
The physical output is called a DNA extract, which is a purified form of
DNA extracted from the biological sample provided to the CFS for testing. The
DNA extracts of persons who are excluded as a DNA match to the crime scene sample
are destroyed. Any unused biological sample (that is, sample remaining after
the DNA extract has been taken from it) is returned to the police force that
originally submitted the sample; it is the police force’s responsibility to
destroy it. This case does not concern physical biological samples or DNA
extracts. There is no allegation that physical biological samples and DNA
extracts are not destroyed once a reference sample is excluded.
[24]          
The electronic output of the forensic testing is called a DNA profile;
it is the electronic results of the DNA analysis.
[25]          
The DNA profile in question is a 16-locus profile which compares 15
short tandem repeat (“STR”) loci on the human genome, plus the Amelogenin
locus, which is an indicator of biological sex. The 15 STR loci are components
of a commercial test kit designed for identity testing, which uses the 15 STR
loci because: (i) there is substantial variation at each locus that can be used
to discriminate between individuals; (ii) the loci are independent, such that
the results obtained at one locus do not influence the results obtained at any
of the other loci; and (iii) the same loci are used by forensic laboratories
throughout North America, and elsewhere in the world, enabling comparison of
profiles generated in different laboratories. I refer to this type of DNA
profile as an STR profile.
[26]          
An STR profile provides an indication of biological sex, but it does not
provide specific information regarding an individual’s physical traits, like
hair or eye colour. It is highly unlikely that two individuals (apart from
monozygotic twins) would have identical forensic STR profiles. There is debate
between the parties as to what other information can be gleaned from STR
profiles. I return to this question in my analysis of the issues.
[27]          
 An STR profile is not the only kind of DNA profile that can be
generated. A second form of genetic variant that is widespread in the human
genome is a single-nucleotide polymorphism (“SNP”). Each SNP is a locus in the
human genome at which individuals vary. SNPs are a primary form of genetic
variability of interest in biomedical genetics, as SNPs show statistical and
causal connections to various diseases. SNP testing can allow an investigator
to make inferences or predictions with respect to information including
physical traits, like hair or eye colour. SNPs are also used in population
genetics research on relationships among different human populations.
Commercial ancestry testing companies type individuals for SNP sets. I refer to
a DNA profile that types SNP loci as a SNP profile. The CFS has not performed
SNP testing on the reference samples obtained on consent.
[28]          
The STR profile the CFS generates is recorded in various formats:
[29]          
The end result of the CFS’s forensic analysis — is the reference sample
a match or not to the sample against which it was compared — is provided to the
requesting police service, but the police service does not receive a copy of
the DNA profile of the sample donor.
[30]          
The plaintiff alleges that the CFS was required, by both the provisions
of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 and the standard consent form,
to permanently remove the results of its DNA testing of reference samples when
there was no match. The plaintiff alleges that the CFS failed to do so until
April 2022, the end date of the class period.
[31]          
The plaintiff relies on s. 487.09(3) of the Criminal Code, which
provides:
[32]          
Section 487.01(1)(b) refers to DNA which is collected from a crime scene
and may belong to a perpetrator of a crime.
[33]          
There is no dispute that the reference samples provided by class members
were samples covered by s. 487.09(3) of the Criminal Code.
[34]          
The class members signed standard form consents to provide biological
samples. The standard form consent was developed in 2005 by the Ministry of the
Attorney General of Ontario and approved by the Ontario Crown Brief Standards
Committee. It is a province-wide consent form that police services across the
provinces are mandated to use by the provincial government. It is the same form
that Mr. Granger signed. No other standard form consents were produced in this
litigation.
[35]          
The standard form consent to provide biological samples includes a
paragraph that adverts to the requirements under s. 487.09(3):
[36]          
In my analysis of the issues below, I consider the CFS’s procedures in
greater detail, particularly as they relate to its intake and tracking of
reference samples. I also review the actions it takes after testing determines that
a reference sample is not a match, in the context of the Criminal Code
requirements, consent, and the law relevant to the plaintiff’s claims.
[37]          
The certified common issues are set out below. I have re-ordered them to
reflect the order in which I will address them:
[38]          
The plaintiff proffered evidence from two proposed experts, Dr. John S. Waye
and Dr. Noah Rosenberg. The defendant proffered evidence from one proposed
expert, Dr. Frederick Bieber. No party objected to the admission of the other
party’s proposed expert evidence. However, the court retains a gatekeeping role
and as a result, I must rule upon the admissibility of the proposed expert
evidence.
[39]          
Determining whether to admit expert evidence involves a two-stage analysis.
In the first stage, there are four threshold requirements that must be
established: White Burgess Langille Inman v. Abbott and Haliburton Co.,
2015 SCC 23, [2015] 2 S.C.R. 182, at paras. 19 and 23, citing R. v. Mohan,
1994 CanLII 80 (SCC), [1994] 2 S.C.R. 9, at pp. 20-25; see also R. v. Abbey,
2017 ONCA 640, 140 O.R. (3d) 40 (C.A.), at para. 48. These requirements include:
[40]          
If the threshold requirements are met, the court moves on to the second
stage of the analysis. There, the judge, as gatekeeper, determines whether the
benefits of admitting the evidence outweigh the potential risks. Relevant
factors include legal relevance, necessity, reliability, and absence of bias.
[41]          
I consider each proposed expert in turn.
[42]          
Dr. Waye holds a Ph.D. in medical biophysics from the University of
Toronto. He is board-certified as a clinical molecular geneticist by the
American Board of Medical Genetics and Genomics. His work experience includes
holding the position of Molecular Genetics Specialist with the Central Forensic
Laboratory of the RCMP in Ottawa, where he developed and implemented a forensic
DNA typing program.
[43]          
Since 1990, Dr. Waye has been employed at Hamilton Health Sciences,
where he currently is the Director of Laboratory Genetics and Head of Service
for Molecular Diagnostic Genetics. He is a Professor in the Department of
Pathology and Molecular Medicine at McMaster University.
[44]          
Dr. Waye has extensive experience giving evidence as an expert in
forensic DNA typing, and he has authored or co-authored hundreds of
publications relating to medical applications of DNA technology and forensic
DNA profiling.
[45]          
Dr. Waye gave affidavit evidence in this proceeding on forensic DNA
typing including STR profiles and the information that can be gleaned from
them. He was not cross-examined on his evidence.
[46]          
Dr. Rosenberg holds a Ph.D. in Biological Sciences from Stanford University
and a Postdoc from University of Southern California in Molecular and
Computational Biology. He is a Professor of Biology at Stanford University
where he holds the Stanford Professorship in Population Genetics and Society.
He leads a computational research laboratory at Stanford that investigates
mathematical and statistical problems in the field of genetics. Among other
things, the laboratory develops statistics for understanding genetic
variability among people in problems of anthropological, biomedical,
evolutionary, and forensic interest.
[47]          
Dr. Rosenberg has been widely published in leading scientific journals
and is a frequent speaker at academic conferences. He has been awarded numerous
grants and fellowships, has held numerous advisory roles, been involved in many
reviewing activities, and participates as a member on many PhD committees.
[48]          
Dr. Rosenberg’s report and oral evidence focuses on the extent to which
STR profiles can be matched to SNP profiles, and the implications of the
possibility of making such matches. This is an area in which Dr. Rosenberg has
completed research in his laboratory and on which he has published.
[49]          
Dr. Bieber holds a Ph.D. in human genetics with a focus on population
genetics. He completed a post-doctoral research fellowship in Medical Genetics
at Harvard Medical School. Afterwards, he joined the faculty, where he has
worked for the past 40 years. Dr. Bieber is also a Medical Geneticist in the
Center for Advanced Molecular Diagnostics at Brigham and Women’s Hospital. Dr.
Bieber has a major scholarly focus on DNA-based human identification; his
research interests focus on statistical aspects of genetic identification,
interpretation of forensic DNA mixture evidence, and genetic kinship analysis using
data mining methods including familial searching and forensic genetic genealogy.
He has worked in these areas for the past 40 years, and in forensic DNA
analysis for the past 32 years. He is widely published in these areas.
[50]          
Dr. Bieber was a member of the first-ever National Commission on
Forensic Science, having been appointed to the commission by then-U.S. Attorney
General Eric Holder. He led the team that published the major paper to provide
guidance to the forensic community on the interpretation of complex DNA
mixtures. He is in his second term as a member of the U.S. Forensic Science
Standards Board.
[51]          
Dr. Bieber’s report and oral evidence address the basics of DNA
variation, including STRs and SNPs, the use of DNA typing in criminal
investigations, the extent to which STR profiles reveal sensitive information
about a person. He also offers a critique of Dr. Rosenberg’s research on the matching
that can be made between STR and SNP profiles.
[52]          
I am satisfied that the evidence of all three proposed experts is
relevant and necessary in the context of the issues in this case. They are each
eminently qualified to give the evidence they have offered. There are no
exclusionary rules that apply to their evidence. Moreover, the benefits of
admitting their evidence outweigh any risks associated with the admission of
expert evidence.
[53]          
I qualify Dr. Waye to give evidence on forensic DNA typing.  I qualify
Dr. Rosenberg to give evidence on forensic DNA typing, and the potential to
match STR profiles with SNP profiles and the implications of such matching. I
qualify Dr. Bieber to give evidence on forensic DNA typing and the potential to
match STR profiles with SNP profiles and the implications of such matching.
[54]          
The first issue is whether a DNA profile, such as an STR profile, is a
“result” within the meaning of s. 487.09(3) of the Criminal Code. Here,
the issue arises as a component of the plaintiff’s s. 8 Charter argument,
not because the plaintiff advances a claim in breach of statutory duty.
[55]          
Sensibly, the parties agree that a DNA profile is a result within the
meaning of s. 487.09(3) and the CFS generates results for purposes of s.
487.09(3). The parties disagree about whether the CFS complies with the
requirements of s. 487.09(3); this in turn, has implications for the Charter
arguments before the court.
[56]          
The plaintiff alleges that s. 8 was breached at two points in time:
[57]          
Section 8 of the Charter provides that “[e]veryone has the right
to be secure against unreasonable search or seizure.”
[58]          
The Supreme Court of Canada has emphasized the need to adopt a purposive
approach to s. 8 that emphasizes the protection of privacy as a prerequisite to
individual security, self-fulfillment and autonomy, as well as to the
maintenance of a thriving democratic society: see R. v. Spencer, 2014
SCC 43, [2014] 2 S.C.R. 212, at para.15.
[59]          
An alleged breach of s. 8 is analyzed through a two-step process. First,
the court asks if the state has engaged in a search, for constitutional
purposes. A search falls within the meaning of s. 8 only where state
examinations constitute an intrusion upon some reasonable privacy interest of
an individual. It is thus necessary at this stage to ask whether the
government’s actions engage an individual’s reasonable expectation of privacy: R.
v. Tessling, 2004 SCC 67, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 432, at para. 18.
[60]          
If an individual has a reasonable expectation of privacy in the subject
matter of the search, s. 8 is engaged. The court then proceeds to the second
step: determining whether the search is reasonable: R. v. Cole, 2012 SCC
53, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 34, at para. 36.
[61]          
In R. v. Jarvis, the Supreme Court explained that privacy is not
an “all-or-nothing” concept: the fact that a person does not expect complete
privacy in the circumstances does not mean they waive all reasonable
expectations of privacy: 2019 SCC 10, [2019] 1 S.C.R. 488, at para. 61.
[62]          
The reasonable expectation of privacy analysis is both a fact-specific
and normative exercise. It requires conducting a “contextual assessment that
takes into account the totality of the circumstances”: Jarvis, at para.
60; R. v. Edwards, 1996 CanLII 255 (SCC), [1996] 1 S.C.R. 128, at para.
45. “The normative inquiry is broader in nature, with an eye to protecting that
for which we ought to expect protection from a privacy perspective in a free
and democratic society”: R. v. El-Azrak, 2023 ONCA 440, 167 O.R. (3d)
241, at para. 31.
[63]          
To assess whether a claimant has a reasonable expectation of privacy in
the subject matter of the search, the court considers:
[64]          
Section 8 protects three broad categories of privacy interests:
personal, territorial, and informational privacy: Tessling, at para. 20.
[65]          
The plaintiff here asserts a personal and informational privacy interest
in both the physical DNA sample taken from class members’ bodies and the DNA
profile resulting from the forensic analysis of those samples.
[66]          
When characterizing the subject matter of the search, the “Court has
looked at not only the nature of the precise information sought, but also at
the nature of the information that it reveals”: R. v. Spencer, 2014 SCC
43, at para. 26.
[67]          
The plaintiff defines the subject matter of the search as the class
members’ DNA profiles, including the information that can be gleaned from those
profiles. The defendant argues that the subject matter of the search is narrower;
it is the retention of anonymized, unused DNA profiles.
[68]          
In El-Azrak, at para. 40, the Court of Appeal cautioned that
determining the subject matter of the search should not take on hypothetical
dimensions, but it must remain rooted in reality. At para. 38, the court
endorsed a functional and holistic approach that derives from the actual
circumstances of the case. “Undoubtedly, this approach requires that we look
beyond the actual information provided and ask whether, with that information
in hand, something further is revealed about the individual to whom the
information relates”: El-Azrak, at para. 38. This requires the court to
consider the raw data that the state came to possess and “the nature of the
information that could be inferentially derived from that raw data”: El-Azrak,
at para. 38.
[69]          
The subject matter in this case is the claimants’ DNA profiles. The
defendants propose what I find to be an artificial separation between the class
members, their samples, and the resulting DNA profiles. This characterization
is contrary to the functional and holistic approach set out in El-Razak.
The class members and their samples are indivisible from the resulting DNA
profiles. During the initial search and continued seizure, each class member’s DNA
profile was the information that was sought and subsequently derived from the
sample.
[70]          
In R. v. Dosanjh, the Court stated that “whether an individual
has a direct interest in the subject matter of a search is not defined by
whether the subject matter is incriminating or not, but by the degree to which
the individual has a meaningful connection to the subject matter – for example,
through participation, authorship, ownership or control”: 2022 ONCA 689, 163
O.R. (3d) 401, at para. 117.
[71]          
It is plain that class members have a direct interest in the subject
matter of the search; it is their DNA profile. Further, I agree that the nature
of their privacy interest is both personal and informational.
[72]          
Supreme Court of Canada jurisprudence has repeatedly acknowledged the
potentially significant intrusion that the taking of bodily samples may have on
an individual’s personal privacy interests.
[73]          
Privacy of the person has “the strongest claim to constitutional
shelter” because it protects bodily integrity: Tessling, at para. 21.
Case law has recognized that taking bodily samples “can involve significant
intrusions on an individual’s privacy and human dignity”: R. v. S.A.B.,
2003 SCC 60, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 678, at paras. 40, 44.
[74]          
In R. v. Rodgers, 2006 SCC 15, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 554, a case that
dealt with the DNA data bank provisions, the Supreme Court of Canada held, at
para. 25, that “there is no question that the taking of bodily samples for DNA
analysis without the person’s consent constitutes a seizure within the meaning
of s. 8 of the Charter.” This is so notwithstanding the Supreme Court’s
finding that a buccal swab “is quick and not terribly intrusive”: S.A.B.,
at para. 44.
[75]          
The collection and retention of DNA profiles at issue in this case
raises similar personal privacy interests. There is no collection and retention
of DNA profiles without an initial intrusion into bodily integrity.
[76]          
In Rodgers, at para. 39, the Supreme Court of Canada recognized
that DNA sampling engages the privacy interests of an individual in two ways.
First, as I have already noted, it interferes with the bodily integrity of the
person. Second, “it engages the informational component of privacy”: Rodgers,
at para. 39. At para. 40, the Court described the informational privacy aspect
of DNA sampling as “far more significant.” Relying on S.A.B., it held
that there is “undoubtedly the highest level of personal and private
information contained in an individual’s DNA”: Rodgers, at para. 40;
S.A.B., at para. 48. Moreover, “DNA can reveal personal information that
goes far beyond the identity of the person”: Rodgers, at para. 40.
[77]          
In Tessling, at para. 23, the Supreme Court of Canada found that
informational privacy is the claim of individuals, groups, or institutions to
determine for themselves when, how, and to what extent information about them
is communicated to others. The protection of informational privacy is based on
the assumption that all information about a person is in a fundamental way his
or her own, to communicate or retain as he or she sees fit: see also Spencer,
at para. 40.
[78]          
The defendant argues that it only retains anonymized DNA STR profiles
which do not reveal private information that can be linked to anyone, and as
such, retaining them does not intrude upon any reasonable expectation of privacy.
This position equates informational privacy with anonymity. While anonymity can
be an integral part of ensuring privacy, it does not eliminate the claimants’ expectations
of privacy in this case.
[79]          
Here, informational privacy must be understood in the context of control.
The court in Spencer explained that “[e]ven though the information will
be communicated and cannot be thought of as secret or confidential, ‘situations
abound where the reasonable expectations of the individual that the information
shall remain confidential to the persons to whom, and restricted to the
purposes for which it is divulged, must be protected’”: at para. 40, citing R.
v. Duarte, 1990 CanLII 150 (SCC), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 30, at p. 46.
[80]          
I find that, in this case, the class members consented to the taking of
their bodily samples for a specific purpose (that is, to be used in a specific
criminal investigation), and subject to specific terms about the use of the
results (if their sample was not a match for the sample against which it was
tested, the electronic data related to their sample would be permanently
removed). The specific purpose and conditional nature of the class members’
consent demonstrates a level of ongoing control and illustrates that they did
not relinquish their reasonable expectation of privacy.
[81]          
The reasonable expectation of privacy analysis is also shaped by factors
such as the nature and quality of the information at issue: Jarvis, at
para. 66. Here, the parties disagree about the nature of the information and
inferences that can be gleaned from STR DNA profiles. This disagreement is the
focus of the expert evidence called at trial, which I now turn to review.
[82]          
The experts who gave evidence in this trial did not
disagree with one another. Their evidence was largely consistent. I summarize
the key elements of the evidence:
[83]          
From this evidence, I conclude that an STR profile, when compared with
another, has the potential to reveal one's identity and familial relationships,
including incestuous ones. An STR profile, when compared with a SNP profile,
has the potential to reveal matches that would reveal information including
statistical and causal connections to various diseases, and physical traits.
[84]          
In R.v. Jarvis, the court explained that “the privacy
jurisprudence recognizes the potential threat to privacy occasioned by new and
evolving technologies more generally and the need to consider the capabilities
of a technology in assessing whether reasonable expectations of privacy were
breached by its use”: 2019 SCC 10, [2019] 1 S.C.R. 488, at para. 63. The
STR-SNP comparison is currently only used in academic contexts, but the
technique exists. The technique is not merely hypothetical, but it also is not
sufficiently developed to have a practical application.
[85]          
Thus, the STR DNA profile in the hands of the defendant can reveal
private information, including familial relationships and incestuous
relationships. STR DNA profiles are also the subject of ongoing scientific
research that seeks to elicit more information from STR DNA profiles, including
statistical and causal connections to various diseases and physical traits,
through matching with SNP profiles of the donor or biological relatives.
[86]          
Class members have a significant privacy interest in controlling the deeply
personal information that can be ascertained from STR DNA profiles. And there
is a realistic potential that more private information will be discernible from
the STR DNA profiles in the future.
[87]          
I thus conclude that the nature of the class members’ privacy interest
in the subject matter of the search engages significant privacy interests.
[88]          
In R. v. Jones,
2017 SCC 60, [2017] 2 S.C.R. 696, at paras. 20-21, the Supreme Court of Canada
discussed what is required for a claimant to have a subjective expectation of
privacy in the subject matter of the search:
[89]          
In Tessling, at para. 42, the Supreme Court cautioned against
using the absence of a subjective expectation of privacy too quickly to
undermine the protection afforded by s. 8 to the values of a free and
democratic society. It noted that “suggestions that a diminished subjective
expectation of privacy should automatically result in a lowering of
constitutional protection should therefore be opposed. … Expectation of privacy
is a normative rather than a descriptive standard.” [Emphasis in original]
[90]          
The defendant argues that there is no subjective expectation of privacy
in the DNA profiles because they are hard to access and only reveal certain
information that is personal but not private. I disagree.
[91]          
I have already reviewed the nature of the privacy interests engaged by
the class members’ DNA profiles. They can reveal highly private and personal
information, the breadth of which is likely to expand with ongoing scientific
developments.
[92]          
Moreover, in my view, the defendant’s argument is inconsistent with the
normative nature of the s. 8 inquiry.
[93]          
As noted above, the claimants provided a sample for a specific purpose
and subject to restrictions surrounding its use and retention. Their subjective
expectation of privacy can be inferred from the fact that the sharing of the
information was subject to these terms.
[94]          
In my view, the class members’ subjective expectation of privacy in their
STR DNA profile is objectively reasonable in the totality of the circumstances.
Even if I accepted the defendant’s characterization of the subject matter of
the search as anonymized DNA profiles, I would find that this reduces, but does
not negate, the class members’ expectation of privacy. DNA has the potential to
reveal much about its donor based on current science. Even STR profiles, which
provide more limited information than SNP profiles, can reveal highly private
information, like biological familial relationships, including incestuous ones.
[95]          
The fact that ongoing research seeks to expand what we can learn from
DNA, including STR profiles, also demonstrates that subjective privacy concerns
about retention of DNA profiles, and what may be done with them in the future, are
objectively reasonable.
[96]          
The privacy concerns regarding DNA profiles are reflected in s.
487.09(3) of the Criminal Code and in the standard consent form signed
by class members. It is objectively reasonable to assume that the police forces
which take the bodily sample, and the government institutions that develop DNA
profiles, will abide by the Criminal Code provision and the terms of the
consent form: see Spencer, at para. 54, where the court noted that
contractual and statutory frameworks may be relevant to an individual’s
reasonable expectation of privacy.
[97]          
I find that the claimants have a reasonable expectation of privacy in
their DNA profiles.
[98]          
The parties in this case argue about the validity of the consent signed
by the class members. They raise the validity of the consent in the context of
the second branch of the test, that is, whether the search was reasonable.
[99]          
In my view, the validity of the consent is more appropriately considered
at this juncture in the analysis. Valid consent does not
render a search reasonable; instead, consent acts as a waiver of  a claimant’s
reasonable expectation of privacy, such that there would be no seizure if there
is a valid consent: R. v. Borden, 1994 CanLII 63 (SCC), [1994] 3 S.C.R.
145, R. v. Paul, 2004 CanLII 28946 (ON SC); R. v. Angou, 2021
ONSC 7446; R. v. Wills, 1992 CanLII 2780 (ON CA), 7 O.R. (3d) 337.
[100]       Before
assessing the validity of the consent in this case, I first determine whose
burden it is to prove whether or not the consent is valid.
[101]       In
considering the validity of the consent given to take DNA samples and develop
and retain DNA profiles, the first issue that arises is who bears the burden of
proof. The plaintiff argues that the defendant must prove that the DNA
collection and retention of profiles was consensual. The defendant argues that
he who asserts must prove, so the plaintiff bears the onus of proving that the
consent was not informed and is thus ineffective.
[102]       A
warrantless search is presumptively unreasonable under s. 8 of the Charter.
In criminal proceedings, where an applicant establishes standing and a
warrantless search or seizure, the presumption of unreasonableness arises and
the Crown must rebut it: Spencer, at para. 68; R. v. Marakah, 2017
SCC 59, [2017] 2 S.C.R. 608, at para. 55.
[103]       Is
the burden different in civil proceedings? In Young v. Ewatski, 2012
MBCA 64, 351 D.L.R. (4th) 81, the Manitoba Court of Appeal considered a civil
claim for damages in which a plaintiff alleged that the defendant police
service members breached her s. 8 Charter rights by conducting a
warrantless and unreasonable search of her home. The defendants argued that the
search was not unreasonable, because the plaintiff’s adult daughter had
consented to the search.
[104]       The
Manitoba Court of Appeal observed, at para. 50, that the case raised the issue
of which party had the burden of proving consent. It noted that consent in the
context of an alleged Charter breach “almost always arises in the
context of criminal cases.” It then went on to consider how the burden of proof
ought to be applied when the question of a s. 8 breach arises in a civil case.
[105]       The
court noted that the purpose of s. 8 is to protect individuals from unjustified
state intrusions upon their privacy; it seeks to prevent unjustified searches
before they happen by employing a system of prior authorization, not subsequent
validation: Young, at para. 51.
[106]       Therefore,
“it would be unwieldy to require that a plaintiff negative every possible
justification, not to mention the difficulty of proving a negative, that is,
that each justification did not apply”: Young, at para. 55. The court
went on, at para. 56, to find that:
[107]       The
Manitoba Court of Appeal thus concluded that once the plaintiff has proven that
there was a warrantless search, the burden of proof shifts to the defendant as
part of its defence to a civil claim alleging a breach of the plaintiff’s Charter
rights.[2]
[108]       For
its part, the defendant relies on Halton (Regional Municipality) v. Canadian
National Railway Company, 2024 ONCA 174. In this case, the defendant
railway was in the process of constructing an “intermodal hub” in the town of
Milton, Ontario. This project was affecting local residents adversely, and
concerns were raised about the disruptive nature of the project, its demands on
local infrastructure, and its environmental impact. The railway denied that it
required approval of local authorities on the basis that it was a federal
undertaking.
[109]       The
Municipality of Halton brought an application for declarations and injunctions
to the effect that the defendant railway company was obligated to seek and
obtain requisite approvals under provincial laws, regulations and municipal
by-laws. The question as to who bore the burden of proof arose.
[110]       Before
the Court of Appeal, the appellant municipality argued that the onus of proof
belonged with the railway, because ordinarily applications for declarations
relating to interjurisdictional immunity or paramountcy are launched by a
proponent of a federal undertaking, as the party challenging the constitutional
validity of an impugned law. The railway, however, left the municipality no
choice but to initiate the application on issues that, according to the
municipality, the railway bore the burden of proving.
[111]       The
Court of Appeal concluded that the municipality’s reasoning was “misconceived,”
finding that it was “trite law that the party seeking declaratory relief bears
the burden of establishing that prerequisites to such relief are satisfied.”
Because the municipality sought the declaration, it fell to it to discharge the
burden of establishing the factual record supporting its claim that the
declarations it sought should be made: Halton, at paras. 103-104.
[112]       I
see no inconsistency between the decisions in Halton and in Young.
The plaintiff bears the burden of establishing his claim. He must prove a
reasonable expectation of privacy. In the case of a warrantless search, once he
has done so, for the reasons described in Young, the onus shifts to the
defendant to prove the consent was valid. I turn next to consider whether the
defendant has discharged its onus.
[113]       For
a consent to a seizure of bodily materials to be valid, it must have six
characteristics, described by the Ontario Court of Appeal in Wills:
[114]       The
last of these conditions requires that the giver of the consent have a general
understanding of the jeopardy in which he found himself, and an appreciation of
the consequence of deciding for or against giving the consent. “The person
whose consent is sought must understand that if the consent is given the police
may use any material retrieved by them in a subsequent prosecution”: Wills.
[115]       In
R v. Borden, 1994 CanLII 63 (SCC), [1994] 3 S.C.R. 145, the Supreme Court of Canada held, at
p. 162, that the waiver of the right to be secure against an unreasonable
seizure can only be effective when “the person purporting to consent must be
possessed of the requisite informational foundation for a true relinquishment
of the right. A right to choose requires not only the volition to prefer one
option over another, but also sufficient available information to make the
preference meaningful.”
[116]       In
this case, the fourth and sixth elements of valid consent are at issue. The
plaintiff argues that the consent has been vitiated by the fact that it does
not disclose that the defendant retains DNA profiles.
[117]       In
arguing that the consent is valid, the defendant focuses principally on the
sixth element. It argues that there is no evidence to suggest that the class
members did not understand the kind of jeopardy they were in when they gave the
samples to the police. It argues that its retention of anonymized DNA profiles
is not material to the provision of consent. It cites cases like R. v. Karas,
1007 ABCA 362, R. v. Arp, 1998 CanLII 769 (SCC), [1998] 3 S.C.R. 339, R. v. Yu, 2019
ONCA 942 and R. v. Belbin, 2015 ONSC 5346 to argue that consent, once
validly given, does not constrain the use that may be made of the sample or the
results of its analysis, and that consents obtained after police lied or failed
to disclose facts to the donor remain valid as long as the individuals giving
the consents understood the legal jeopardy they were facing.
[118]       The
defendant’s argument is persuasive, as far as it goes. It speaks to the
question of what the giver of consent needs to know about the consequences of
the consent to validly give consent, that is, the sixth element. But it does
not speak to the fourth element of a valid consent, that is, that the giver of
consent was aware of the nature of the police conduct to which he or she was
being asked to consent.
[119]       The
consent describes the conduct to which the class members consented. It explains
that it will allow authorities to take a biological sample from them, to
conduct such analysis as deemed appropriate by the authorities, including DNA
testing. There is no question that the consent is accurate in this respect.
[120]       But
then it states “[t]he Criminal Code says that samples of bodily substances
voluntarily given shall be destroyed and electronic data related to those
samples will be permanently removed once it is determined that the bodily
substance does not match to the crime under investigation.”
[121]       The
clear inference from this paragraph is that once it is determined that the
reference sample is not a match, the defendant and the police will do what the Criminal
Code says that they shall do: (i) destroy the samples of bodily substances
(which they do); and (ii) permanently remove the electronic data related to
those samples.
[122]       In
my view, the consent is limited to the conduct described therein. That conduct
includes that authorities will permanently remove the electronic data related
to the donor’s sample if it is not a match for the sample against which it is
tested.
[123]       If
the electronic data related to the samples is not permanently removed once the
sample is determined not to be a match, the consent has misinformed the class
members about the nature of the conduct of the authorities at issue.
[124]       Given
the current and expanding amount of information DNA profiles offer, what
happens to the DNA profile after it is excluded as a match is a material part
of the conduct that the donor is consenting to.
[125]       It
follows that the consent to take the bodily sample is only valid if the consent
accurately indicates that electronic data related to the donor’s sample will be
permanently removed once the sample is excluded as a match. If, at the time
consent is obtained, the defendant did not actually intend to take action that
would permanently remove the electronic data if the sample is excluded, the
consent to take the bodily sample is invalid from the outset, because the form
misrepresents a material aspect of the conduct of the authorities.
[126]       I
turn next to consider whether the defendant in fact permanently removed the
electronic data related to the class members’ samples after they were excluded
as a match.
[127]       The defendant submits that the consent is not vitiated because it
complied with the terms of the consent by anonymizing the profiles of the class
members. This argument rests upon the premise that by de-linking the identity
of the donor from the DNA profile, it has complied with its obligation to
permanently remove the results of the DNA testing.
[128]       The
consent form does not use the word “anonymized.” It tells potential signatories
that one thing will happen to their electronic DNA profiles: permanent
removal.
[129]       In
my view, anonymization is not equivalent to permanent removal or destruction.
The following review of the defendant’s anonymization processes illustrates
this point. Although doing so would be unethical and difficult, it is possible
to re-link the DNA profiles.
[130]       There is a great deal of evidence in the record about the
defendant’s processes, and how they have changed over time. I describe some of
it earlier in these reasons. I do not describe it all in these reasons; further
detail can be found in the affidavits of Mr. Laird, the defendant’s
representative. The core dispute between the parties is not what the defendant
does, but whether its practice is sufficient.
[131]       In
evaluating the claim that the profiles are anonymized, or
de-linked, from the identity of the donor, the following facts are noteworthy:
[132]       As
of April 1, 2022, the CFS has adopted a new process. It now destroys and
deletes all copies of all DNA profiles, from consent and warrant donors,
whether or not they are excluded as a match to the unknown sample. The only
profiles it retains are hard copies of non-excluded profiles.
[133]      
From this review, I conclude that the CFS made
efforts to anonymize the DNA profiles in its possession and did so based on the
belief that this would suffice to meet its obligation to permanently remove the
results of the DNA analysis. I accept that it is possible to relink the DNA
profiles the CFS retained with the identity of the consent donor; doing so would
require at least one CFS employee and one police services employee to act
improperly and outside the scope of their duties. I acknowledge that there is
no evidence this has ever occurred. The defendant has made it very difficult
and unlikely that a donor’s identity can or will be relinked to the DNA
profile, but it is not impossible to do so, and the necessary information
resides with state entities. Thus, the DNA profile cannot truly be described as
anonymized.
[134]      
I note also that anonymizing the DNA profiles,
to whatever extent they were anonymized, is not the same thing as permanently
removing access to the profiles. Until April 1, 2022, the defendant did not
take all possible steps to permanently remove the DNA results of excluded
donors in its possession, and since then, has only done so prospectively.
[135]       The
consents given up to April 1, 2022 are thus invalid, both at the time the
bodily samples were taken, and during the time period when the DNA profiles
continued to be retained after they were excluded as a match. The class members
were misinformed about a material aspect of the authorities’ conduct: the
results of the class members’ DNA testing were not permanently removed, but
only mostly anonymized. The defendants did not comply with s. 487.09(3) of the Code
or the terms of the consent.
[136]       I
thus find that the class members’ have established a reasonable expectation of
privacy in the subject matter of the search, and that expectation is not
vitiated or waived by reason of the consent. I thus turn to the second branch
of the test: whether the search and continued seizure are reasonable.
[137]       For
a search to be reasonable: (i) it must be authorized by law; (ii) the law itself
must be reasonable; and (iii) the manner in which the search was carried out
must be reasonable: Rodgers, at para. 25.
[138]       In
this case the search and seizures were performed without a warrant, and it was
not argued that they were authorized by law. The parties argued that the reasonableness
of the seizure, search, and continued retention of the DNA profiles depends on
the validity of the consent given by the donors.
[139]       As
the Court of Appeal held in Wills, in the absence of valid consent,
taking and testing the class members’ DNA constitutes a search and seizure.  Where
the defendant relies exclusively on consent to justify a seizure and the
consent is found to be invalid, “the reasonableness of the seizure must be
addressed from the premise that the seizure was not authorized by law”: Wills.
[140]       The
defendant does not seek to rely upon s. 487.09(3) to establish that the search
was authorized by law, nor is there a warrant. Both parties agree that the lawfulness
of the initial seizure and subsequent search for the purpose of excluding the
donor, turns solely upon whether informed consent was given.
[141]       Because
I concluded the requisite consent was not obtained and the class members have
an expectation of privacy, there was an unlawful seizure of the sample and
search of the DNA profile. This conduct was unreasonable because it was not
authorized by a warrant or law. It thus constitutes a breach of s. 8 of the Charter.
[142]       I
have already determined that the defendant did not comply with the terms of the
consent; namely, that it was required to permanently remove the class members’
electronic DNA profiles once they were excluded as a match. The class members
did not provide informed consent to the CFS to retain their electronic DNA
profiles. In the circumstances of this case, they had a reasonable expectation
of privacy in their DNA profiles and thus the retention was a continued seizure.
This seizure was not authorized by law or permitted by a warrant and is
therefore contrary to s. 8.
[143]       Neither
the initial seizure and search nor the continued seizure were reasonable. Both Charter
breaches are therefore established.
[144]       Because
this question is identified as a common issue to be determined at trial, I
address it briefly.
[145]       Because
no one challenged the reasonableness of any statutory provision, there is no
limit “prescribed by law” to evaluate in this case. The s. 1 analysis has no
application.
[146]       In
any event, the analysis of s. 8 already includes a reasonableness component;
therefore, it is only in exceptional cases that a breach of s. 8 can be saved
under s. 1: R. v. Fink, 2002 SCC 61, [2002] 3 S.C.R. 209, at para. 46. I
have already described why the defendant’s conduct was not reasonable.
[147]       The
defendant made no oral submissions on the limitation period argument and relied
solely on its written argument. In its factum, the defendant argues that the
basic limitation period of two years set out in the Limitations Act, 2002,
S.O. 2002, c. 24, Schedule B (the “Limitations Act”) is
applicable to the claims of all class members. The claim was commenced on
September 14, 2018. The defendant submits that all claims prior to September
14, 2016, including that of the representative plaintiff, are prima facie barred.
This position applies to both the Charter claim and the claim of
intrusion upon seclusion.
[148]       I
am asked to determine what limitation period applies to the claims advanced in
this action.
[149]       The
plaintiff argues that there is no limitation period issue because the claim
addresses ongoing wrongs that continued after the date the action was
commenced. In response, the defendant submits that “this case does not involve
the type of conduct that constitutes a continuing cause of action within the
meaning of the [Limitations Act]”.
[150]       The
defendant cites Tyszko v. St. Catharines (City) for the proposition that
a continuing cause of action is one in which the alleged wrongful act or
omission is repeated, not where the alleged wrong occurred once and has
continuing effects or consequences: 2023 ONSC 2892, at paras. 43, 46.
[151]       The
defendant’s argument is initially attractive, but it ignores the fact that this
was not a one-time error. Rather, the defendant adopted and employed a process
for managing records for years that did not result in the permanent deletion of
electronic records related to class members’ DNA profiles. This practice directly
contradicted the one thing class members were told about how their records
would be treated.
[152]       Moreover,
the facts here suggest not so much a single negligent act (or omission), as was
at issue in Tyszko, but the continual repetition of an unconstitutional
process and an ongoing failure to permanently delete the records. I am
satisfied that there was an ongoing wrong.
[153]       If
I am wrong that the wrongdoing was ongoing, I would still conclude that the
limitation period has not expired. I accept the plaintiff’s argument that class
members were unable to discover their claim.
[154]       The
evidence indicates that, at least as of 2005, class members were told in the
consent form they signed that forensic results related to their DNA produced in
electronic format would be permanently removed. There is no evidence that the
class members (including those whose samples were taken before the consent form
came into use) had any way of knowing that the electronic results related to
their DNA profiles had not been permanently removed. Nor is there any reason to
suppose they could have had access to that information.
[155]       The
parties have also raised the ultimate limitation period in s. 15(1), prescribed
at 15 years by s. 15(2). This action was commenced on September 14, 2018, but
the class period commences in 2000. Therefore, some class members may be
affected by the ultimate limitation period.
[156]       Under
s. 15(4), the ultimate limitation period does not run during any time in which
the defendant willfully concealed from the class the fact that the injury, loss
or damage has occurred, or that it was caused or contributed to by the
defendant’s act or omission.
[157]       The
defendant argues that the plaintiff has failed to prove facts amounting to
wilful concealment under s 15(4) of the Limitations Act, 2002, but has
offered no law interpreting that section.
[158]       The
plaintiff argues that the effect of the consent form was to wilfully conceal
that the electronic results would not be permanently removed. The consent form
told the class members who signed it that something different would be done
with the electronic DNA profiles obtained from their samples than what actually
occurred.
[159]       The
problem with this argument is that the evidence indicates that the consent
forms came into use in 2005. Anyone who signed a consent form in 2005 or after is
not affected by the ultimate limitation period anyway.
[160]       There
is no evidence in the record about the information given to class members who
consented to providing reference samples before 2005.
[161]       I
thus have no evidentiary basis to draw conclusions about the application of the
ultimate limitation period to the class members who might be affected by it.
The defendant is the party most likely to be able to offer evidence about what information
its standard operating protocol provided donors before 2005, or if a standard
protocol existed at that time. It has offered no evidence on the subject. Nor
has the plaintiff delivered evidence regarding this information from a class
member who gave a sample on consent prior to 2005, before the consent form was
developed.
[162]       I
note that the Criminal Code provision at issue was enacted in 1995 and
would have applied to police services and the defendant throughout the class
period. It is therefore likely that consent donors who gave reference samples
prior to the creation of the consent form were told that their DNA profiles
would be treated as required by the Criminal Code.
[163]       No
one argued that consent donors who provided reference samples before the introduction
of the consent form should be treated differently from signatories of the form.
As a result, I conclude that the parties agree that my findings are equally applicable
to those who provided consent samples prior to 2005, notwithstanding that no
consent form was signed.
[164]       If
I am incorrect and there is no such agreement, the parties may contact me to
determine next steps to address it.
[165]       The
elements of intrusion upon seclusion were set out by the Ontario Court of
Appeal in Jones v. Tsige, 2012 ONCA 32, 108 O.R. (3d) 241, at paras.
70-71, and described again more recently in Owsianik v. Equifax Canada Co.,
2022 ONCA 813, 164 O.R. (3d) 497, at para. 54, as:
[166]       In
Jones, the Court of Appeal discussed the limits of the tort:
[167]       Subsequent
decisions addressing the tort reveal that courts have been careful not to
expand the reach of the tort: see, for example, Winder v. Marriott
International, Inc., 2022 ONSC 390, at paras. 13-14, where Perell J. noted
the narrow ambit for the tort of intrusion on seclusion; see also Stewart v.
Demme, 2022 ONSC 1790 (Div. Ct.), 81 C.C.L.T. (4th) 64.
[168]       In
my view, the tort of intrusion upon seclusion is not available in this case. I
do not accept the plaintiff’s argument that the defendant has acted
intentionally or recklessly.
[169]       In
Equifax, at para. 59, the Court of Appeal discussed the prohibited state
of mind, and found that it must relate to the doing of the prohibited conduct:
[170]       In
this case, the evidence reveals that the defendant developed a process to
manage the DNA results that was intended to comply with s. 487.09(3) of the Criminal
Code. Before this court, the defendant continued to insist that it had
complied with the requirements of the provision.
[171]       The
process employed by the defendant to determine how to comply with the provision
included consultation with others in the forensic DNA community. The defendant
has made changes to its process over time, as technology changed, and perhaps also
in response to this litigation.
[172]       In
my view, the defendant made good faith efforts to comply with the statutory
requirements, in the context of the changing technological environment. It also
faced pressures such as technological limitations and the growing demand for
forensic DNA analysis. I have found that the process that it adopted was not
satisfactory, but adopting an unsatisfactory process in a good faith effort to
comply with the law does not amount to conduct that intentionally intruded or
invaded upon the class members’ affairs.
[173]       Nor
can I describe the defendant’s actions as reckless. Recklessness “refers to the
realization at the time the prohibited conduct is being done that there is a
risk that the conduct will intrude upon the privacy of the plaintiffs, coupled
with a determination to nonetheless proceed with that conduct”: Equifax,
at para. 60. Here, the defendant’s conduct was undertaken to try not to intrude
upon the privacy of the class members. It fell short and the defendant was
wrong about the adequacy of the process it adopted, but it was not reckless.
[174]       I
dismiss the plaintiff’s claim for intrusion upon seclusion.
[175]       The
plaintiff seeks aggregate Charter damages in the amount of $5,000 per
class member. The defendant argues that if damages are awarded, they should be
no more than $250 per class member.
[176]       Damages
under s. 24(1) of the Charter were considered by the Supreme Court of
Canada in Vancouver (City) v. Ward, 2010 SCC 27, [2010] 2 S.C.R. 28. Ward holds that a
functional approach to Charter damages is necessary and finds that they
are appropriate and just to the extent they serve a useful function or purpose.
The purposes that an award of damages under s. 24(1) may serve are
identified in Ward, at para. 25, as: (i) compensation; (ii) vindication; and (iii) deterrence.
[177]       Compensation is normally the most prominent of
the three functions that Charter damages may
serve; it focuses on the claimant’s personal, physical, psychological, and
pecuniary loss. Vindication focuses on the harm the infringement causes
society. Deterrence seeks to regulate government behaviour, by influencing it
to secure state compliance with the Charter in the
future: Ward, at paras. 27-29.
[178]       However,
in many cases a breach of Charter rights can be sufficiently addressed
through a declaration: Ward, at para. 37:
[179]       The
Supreme Court of Canada articulated a four-part test in Ward for when Charter
damages may be available, at para. 4:
[180]       The
first step in the inquiry has already been established; I have found two breaches
of s. 8 of the Charter.
[181]       The
next question is whether damages are a just and appropriate remedy, having
regard to the function they would fulfil. The plaintiff argues that Charter damages
will compensate, vindicate and deter in this case. The defendant disputes that
damages are necessary to achieve any legitimate function.
[182]       Taking
compensation first, the plaintiff argues that compensation extends to
intangible losses, citing Kent Roach, “A Promising Late Spring for Charter
Damages: Ward v. Vancouver” (2011) 29 Nat’l J. Const. Law 135 at pp. 145-155. The
plaintiff argues that the intrusion into class members’ bodily autonomy and
informational privacy was serious and harmed class members’ intangible
interests. He relies on the evidence of Dr. Waye and Dr. Rosenberg that
significant and sensitive information can be gleaned from STR profiles,
including ethnicity and sensitive familial relationships. He describes the
privacy invasion as significant.
[183]       I
do not accept this argument.[3]
There is no evidence in the record of compensable loss. There is no evidence that
the STR profiles of the class members were accessed after they were excluded as
a match, let alone misused. There is no evidence that any concern the class
members had about the retention of their STR profiles caused any compensable
damage.
[184]       The
plaintiff also argues that vindication and deterrence are required in this case
to reflect the fact that the defendant broke its bargain with the class to
permanently remove the results of the analysis of their DNA, contrary to the Criminal
Code. He submits that this breach undermines the administration of justice
at large and the public’s ability to trust police, and therefore the public’s
inclination to voluntarily assist police.
[185]       In
support of this argument, the plaintiff notes that, in 2016, the Office of the
Independent Police Review Director (“OIPRD”) released a report entitled
“Casting the Net.” This report reviewed the DNA canvas that involved
participants such as Mr. Granger and concluded that the canvas was overbroad
because it targeted all migrant workers of colour in the area, including those
who did not match the physical characteristics of the perpetrator. Relevant
recommendations made in the report included:
[186]       There
is no evidence that any of these recommendations were acted upon.
[187]       The
plaintiff argues that these factors demonstrate the need for deterrence and
vindication.
[188]       In
contrast, the CFS argues that it has acted in good faith to protect privacy
interests and abide by s. 487.09. It characterizes any breach as a technical
one since there is no evidence of improper use of the DNA results. The CFS
argues that the OIPRD report did not raise the same issues as the plaintiff in
this proceeding; instead, it was geared towards the particular DNA canvas that
the plaintiff participated in and did not investigate the defendant’s
practices. In any event, the defendant claims Ontario has implemented recommendations
made by the OIPRD. It relies on a February 2023 document produced by the
Ministry of the Solicitor General that sets out guidance for conducting mass
DNA canvasses and provides a new standard consent form in light of the OIPRD
report.
[189]       The
CFS argues that the criticism about its retention of records related to the
clarity of its retention policies, as opposed to a violation of s. 487.09(3). In
my view, the distance the defendant is trying to create between the
recommendation and the retention of records is not supported by the text of the
actual recommendation:
[190]       There
is no evidence that the defendant did anything in response to this
recommendation.
[191]       In
these circumstances, I find that an award of Charter damages would serve
the purposes of vindicating the class members’ Charter rights and deterring
future breaches.
[192]       The
next step in the assessment of damages is to consider whether there are any
countervailing concerns. The defendant argues that its conduct does not meet an
elevated fault threshold; it acted in good faith to comply with s. 487.09 and
to protect privacy interests. It submits that the imposition of Charter damages
for making a good faith error would deter effective governance at the CFS and similar
institutions.
[193]       In
Ward, the Supreme Court of Canada held that in some cases, an award of Charter
damages may interfere with good governance such that they should not be
awarded unless the state conduct meets a minimum threshold of gravity. “The
rule of law would be undermined if governments were deterred from enforcing the
law by the possibility of future damage awards in the event the law was, at
some future date, to be declared invalid”: Ward, at para. 39.
[194]       The
defendant argues that good governance concerns also apply where government
policies, which precipitated unconstitutional actions, can be sufficiently
connected to statutory provisions: Francis v. Ontario, 2021 ONCA 197,
154 O.R. (3d) 498, at para. 92. It argues that its role of providing forensic
DNA services and retention of DNA profiles is connected to the Executive
Council Act. It operates under a 1979 Order in Council which provides that
its functions include producing legally admissible evidence through scientific
examination to assist with the “just and effective enforcement of the law.”
Thus, it argues that its policies and action further the duty assigned by the Executive
Council Act.
[195]       The
plaintiff argues that good governance concerns do not apply and an award of Charter
damages would have no impact on the CFS’s effective governance. In his
view, the defendant has demonstrated that it is possible to abandon its prior
practices which failed to comply with s. 487.09(3) of the Criminal Code.
[196]       I
am satisfied that there is a sufficient nexus between the CFS and the Executive
Council Act that good governance concerns may be engaged in this case.  I
do not, however, accept that good governance concerns negate the
appropriateness of s. 24(1) damages or necessitate an elevated level of fault.
I note that the Supreme Court of Canada in Ward, at para. 38, discussed
the interplay between the purpose of Charter damages and good governance
concerns:
[197]        In
Ward, citing its earlier decision in Mackin v. New Brunswick
(Minister of Finance), 2002 SCC 13, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 405, the Court
recognized that the state must be afforded some immunity from liability for
damages resulting from the conduct of certain functions that only the state can
perform. It identified legislative and policy-making functions as one such area:
Ward, at para. 40.
[198]       The
actions at issue here are a long way from legislative and policy-making
functions. The defendant’s conduct was, in fact, at odds with the legislative
direction. In my view, good governance concerns in this case require an award
of damages for purposes of vindication, deterrence, and to promote good governance.
They do not raise concerns that a damages award is not appropriate.
[199]       Nor
do I accept that a declaration would suffice in this case. The parties advised
me that they do not seek forms of relief such as requiring the defendant to
permanently remove the remaining STR profiles of the class members. I am
advised this is because it would be virtually impossible to do so; the breach
of the Charter will thus continue. In these circumstances, a declaration
that there is an ongoing breach of Charter rights is performative. In my
view, issuing a declaration about an ongoing breach that cannot be rectified
does not provide sufficient deterrence of future Charter breaches. Nor would
such a declaration meaningfully vindicate the rights of the class members.
[200]       The
last step in the analysis of Charter damages is to ascertain the
appropriate quantum. In Ward, the Supreme Court of Canada found that,
where the objectives of Charter damages are vindication and deterrence,
making the appropriate determination of quantum is “an exercise in rationality
and proportionality,” and will be guided by precedent: Ward, at para.
51.
[201]       Factors
that are relevant to quantum include the seriousness of the breach, having
regard to the objects of s. 24(1) damages, the impact of the breach on the
claimant, and the seriousness of the state misconduct. Damages must be
appropriate and just to both the claimant and the state.
[202]       The
plaintiff has offered examples of Charter damages in other cases. Of
these, I find Stewart v. Toronto (Police Services Board), 2020 ONCA 255,
to be the most useful. In Stewart, the plaintiff was refused entry to
Allan Gardens during the G20 protests in Toronto, and his backpack was searched
in violation of s. 8 of the Charter. The breach lasted several minutes.
The plaintiff was awarded $500 in damages. While the duration of the breaches
in this case is markedly different than in Stewart, the actual harm
suffered by the class members is similar. The facts in Stewart are
closer than in those other cases cited by the plaintiff that involve, for
example, administrative segregation in correctional institutions.
[203]       Taking
into consideration the fact that: (i) the Charter breach will never be
rectified in this case, (ii) no actual harm to the class members has been
established, but (iii) that there is a need for deterrence and vindication of
the class members’ Charter rights, I am of the view that Charter damages
of $1,000 per class member is appropriate and just.
[204]       I
now turn to consider whether those damages can be awarded on an aggregate
basis.
[205]       Under
the Class Proceedings Act, 1992, S.O. 1992, c. 6, s. 24(1) (“CPA”),
the court may determine the aggregate of a defendant’s liability to class
members where (i) monetary relief is claimed; (ii) no questions of fact or law
other than those relating to the assessment of monetary relief remain to be
determined in order to establish the amount of the defendant’s monetary
liability; and (iii) the aggregate or a part of the defendant’s liability to
some or all class members can reasonably be determined without proof by individual
class members.
[206]       In
Ramdath v. George Brown College, 2014 ONSC 3066, 375 D.L.R. (4th) 488, at
para. 42, the court found that, in class proceedings, aggregate damages should
be more routine than exceptional. It noted the requirement in the CPA
that aggregate damages can be reasonably determined, at paras. 43-44:
[207]       I
accept the plaintiff’s argument that the common conduct of the defendant in
retaining DNA profiles provides the foundation for an aggregate award of s. 8 Charter
damages. In addition, there is evidence in the record of the minimum class
size to allow for a determination of the defendant’s liability.
[208]       I
note that the plaintiff seeks a direction that the defendant confirm the true
class size given the current figure in the record is an underestimate. In my
view, that is not required. The evidence does not suggest that the estimate is materially
off. Further, it is rare that a class action sees a 100% take-up rate (if ever).
I am more concerned about the disproportionate expenditure of resources to try
to get a more accurate measurement of class size. As noted, the jurisprudence
recognizes that aggregate damages awards strive for what is reasonable, not
what is accurate. Accordingly, I decline to make the direction the plaintiff
seeks.
[209]       In
conclusion, based on a minimum class size of 7,267, and a damages award of
$1,000 per class member, the aggregate damages for which the defendant is
responsible for totals $7,267,000.
[210]       The
last common issue for determination is whether an award of punitive damages is
required.
[211]       Punitive
damages are awarded where a defendant has engaged in “high-handed, malicious,
arbitrary or highly reprehensible misconduct that departs to a marked degree from
ordinary standards of decent behaviour”: Whiten v. Pilot Insurance Co.,
2002 SCC 18, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 595, at para. 94.
[212]       To
award punitive damages, the plaintiff must satisfy the court that the
defendant’s misconduct would otherwise go unpunished, and that “other penalties
are, or are likely to be, inadequate to achieve the objectives of retribution,
deterrence and denunciation”: Whiten, at para. 94. See also Strudwick
v. Applied Consumer & Clinical Evaluations Inc., 2016 ONCA 520, 349 O.A.C.
360, at para. 113, where the Court of Appeal found that “[w]hat justifies
punitive damages ultimately is the conclusion, in exceptional cases, that
compensatory damages are simply insufficient to respond to the conduct being
addressed.”
[213]       The
plaintiff relies on a class action decision in Bernstein v. People’s Trust
Company, 2019 ONSC 2867, where Perell J. found that the defendant’s
violations of consumer protection legislation were serious and “went to the
very heart of the Legislature’s public purpose in providing protection” to
consumers: at para. 320. In that case, Perell J. found that the defendant’s
conduct was not malicious, but it was an intentional violation of the
legislation, and displayed “ignorance, carelessness, or serious negligence.” An
award of punitive damages was appropriate to serve the purpose of discouraging
the repetition of the undesirable conduct: Bernstein, at paras. 321-323.
[214]       In
my view, there is no evidence of behaviour that warrants an award of punitive
damages in this case. I accept that the CFS acted in good faith. It failed to do
what it should have done, but it did not intentionally or recklessly violate
the provision in the consent that class members signed. It did not display
ignorance, carelessness, or serious negligence. It made a mistake, and it has
corrected that mistake in advance of the trial of this action.
[215]       This
is not an appropriate case for punitive damages.
[216]       The
parties have advised me that they have reached a resolution on costs in advance
of the release of these reasons. There is thus no reason to address costs.