[1]              
The accused Tafari Bezabeh is charged with first
degree murder and attempt murder in relation to two separate shooting incidents
that occurred on June 19, 2022 in Toronto. The two shootings are closely
connected by time, place, and circumstance. Two other co-accused, Jalen
Campbell-Brown and Justin Harker, were charged with the same offences. I
ordered severance of Campbell-Brown’s trial, due to delay issues. The joint
trial of Bezabeh and Harker is scheduled to begin with jury selection on
November 19, 2024.
[2]              
I heard a s. 8 Charter of Rights
pre-trial motion brought by Bezabeh on November 12, 2024. The motion challenged
the facial sufficiency of two affidavits filed in support of two search
warrants that were executed by Toronto homicide officers. The warrants
authorized the search of a residence in London, Ontario and the search of a car
parked in the driveway of that residence. The warrant for the residence was
executed on July 8, 2022, less than three weeks after the two shooting
incidents had taken place in Toronto. The warrant for the car was executed
shortly afterwards. Both warrants resulted in relevant seizures.
[3]              
The s. 8 pre-trial motion seeks a determination
as to whether the two warrants were facially insufficient and, therefore,
violated the rights of Bezabeh, and whether the evidence seized should be
excluded. Bezabeh was the only one of the three co-accused who was found and
arrested in the London residence at the time of the search. The other two
co-accused had been arrested in Montreal on July 2, 2022, six days before the
first London search warrant was executed. At the end of oral argument of the s.
8 motion, I dismissed it with reasons to follow. These are my Reasons for
Judgement.
[4]              
As noted above, the only issue raised on the s.
8 motion is the facial sufficiency of the two search warrant affidavits. There
is no sub-facial attack on the accuracy or completeness of the information set
out in the affidavits. As a result, the only facts relevant to the s. 8 motion
are those set out in the two lengthy affidavits prepared and sworn by Det. Nair
of the Homicide Squad. The first affidavit is just over 80 pages in length. It
sets out the history of the investigation in considerable detail and seeks
authorization to search the London residence. When the warrant for the
residence was executed on July 8, 2022, the officers found a grey Mazda parked
in the driveway of the residence. The second affidavit was then prepared by
Det. Nair. It is identical to the first affidavit except that about six pages
have been added. These additional pages relate to observations of the Mazda
made by surveillance officers. In addition, the seizures made at the residence were
summarized. This second affidavit is 86 pages in length.
[5]              
As noted above, the first affidavit sets out the
approximately three week history of the homicide investigation, between the
June 19, 2022 shooting incidents in Toronto and the July 8, 2022 execution of
the search warrant at the London residence. I will summarize the parts of this
investigative history that are most relevant to the grounds for searching the
London residence.
[6]              
The first shooting on June 19, 2022 took place
at about 4:17 p.m.  Gunshots were fired from the driver’s side of a motor
vehicle on Amaranth Court. The victim of the shooting, David Joseph, suffered
three gunshot wounds but he survived. The police found 15 cartridge casings at
the scene. Most importantly, the police obtained video surveillance of the
suspect vehicle on Amaranth Court, shortly before the shooting. Good quality
stills from this video were included in the search warrant affidavit. They show
a four door Chevrolet with license plate CTSD 309. That license plate belonged
to a white BMW X3. When the police attended at the address associated with this
white BMW X3, they found the car and saw that it had no license plates. It
could be inferred from further investigative steps (set out below) that the
perpetrators of the Amaranth Court shooting had stolen the license plates from
the BMW and placed them on the Chevrolet.
[7]              
The second shooting on June 19, 2022 took place
at about 4:23 p.m., a few minutes after the first shooting. The location of
this second shooting was on Lotherton Pathway, which runs west off Caledonia
Road. Eyewitnesses and dashcam video showed or described a Chevrolet with the
same license plate CTSD 309 driving on Lotherton Pathway at the time of the
shooting. Three black male suspects exited from the vehicle and fired numerous
shots at the victim, Jaron Williams. One of the suspects had a gun with an
extended magazine. The driver of the vehicle was a white male and there appeared
to be a fourth passenger in the back seat who did not exit at the time of the
shooting.
[8]              
The police obtained video surveillance of the
vehicle and of the shooting on Lotherton Pathway. The surveillance images show
a four door Chevrolet Equinox and also show three male suspects exiting from
the two rear doors and from the front passenger side door. Descriptions of the
clothing worn by these three suspects were set out in the search warrant
affidavit and still images of the suspects were included. All three suspects
fired guns at the victim. The driver of the vehicle never exited. After the
suspects returned to the vehicle, it was driven away. The victim of this second
shooting, Jaron Williams, died from multiple gunshot wounds. The police found
numerous cartridge casings and projectiles at the scene. The colour of the
Chevrolet was described as beige or champagne or gold.
[9]              
On June 20, 2022, the day following the two
shootings, the Toronto police issued a news release. It stated that there were
“potential links” between the two shootings and that “the suspect vehicle
fleeing the area” was a “beige/champagne coloured Chevrolet Equinox”. That same
day, officers found a “gold coloured” Chevrolet Equinox parked on Norval Street
in Toronto. It had no license plates. The homicide investigators learned that
this car had been reported stolen on May 23, 2022, that is, about a month prior
to the two shootings. The license plate for the car at the time of its theft
was CDSL 064. It could be inferred from further investigative steps (set out
below) that the perpetrators of the two shootings had removed the license
plates from the stolen Chevrolet Equinox, replaced them with license plates
stolen from the BMW, and then removed the stolen BMW plates from the Chevrolet
after the two shootings (leaving the Chevrolet without any license plates).
[10]          
The finding of the Chevrolet Equinox on Norval
Street led to a particularly important development in the police investigation
of the two shootings. On June 21, 2022, two days after the shootings, the
police investigators conducted a canvass for video surveillance on Norval
Street during the time frame between 4:30 and 5:00 p.m. on June 19, 2022. This
was shortly after the two shootings had taken place at about 4:17 and 4:23
p.m.  The police obtained video surveillance images showing the following:
[11]          
From the totality of the above video evidence,
it was apparent that four occupants of the stolen Chevrolet Equinox (a driver
and three passengers) exited from that vehicle after it parked on Norval Street
shortly after the two shootings. These four suspects all entered a black SUV
and were driven away by a fifth suspect. That fifth suspect had reversed the
black SUV northbound on Norval from Henrietta, stopped it to allow the other
four to enter, and then the black SUV was driven away. The black SUV headed
back to the south towards Henrietta Street. The Chevrolet Equinox was left
parked on Norval Street without any license plates, where the police found it
the following day.
[12]          
The next significant development in the
investigation was a video canvass conducted by the police in order to discover
the identity and movements of the black SUV that had driven away southbound on
Norval Street at 4:44 p.m. on June 19, 2022. The investigators obtained video
surveillance showing a black SUV turning from Henrietta Street onto Runnymede
Road and heading south at approximately 4:52 p.m. on June 19, 2022 (this time
has been corrected to some extent because of inaccuracies in the original
recording). Most importantly, the license plate of this black SUV can be seen
in the surveillance on Runnymede Road. It is CVKV 443.
[13]          
In light of the above evidence identifying a
second vehicle that was apparently used in the shootings as a “getaway” car,
the homicide officers conducted an extensive investigation of that second
vehicle. I need not summarize this part of the investigation in any great
detail. It covers about 20 pages in the search warrant affidavit. In brief
summary, the black vehicle was a Ford Escape SUV. The vehicle and/or its
registered owner (one Shakaya Amos) had been connected to various police
investigations in Sarnia, Tecumseh, Windsor, and Waterloo. More importantly, an
extensive video surveillance canvass of the vehicle’s movements in Toronto on
the date of the shootings revealed apparent coordination between the black Ford
Escape SUV and the gold/beige Chevrolet Equinox. In particular, two occupants
of the Ford entered a Dollarama store at 2:54 p.m. and then one of the
passengers hopped a fence behind the Dollarama before getting back into the Ford.
It then drove to St. Clair Avenue West, meeting up with the Chevrolet. The two
vehicles drove into a Petro Canada gas station on St. Clair Avenue West where
the two vehicles can be seen side by side at the gas pumps at 3:22 p.m.  Some
of the occupants of the two vehicles were interacting at the gas station. The
two vehicles then drove to a plaza on Hagar Street and parked at 3:30 p.m.  The
driver of the Ford got into the Chevrolet at 3:31 p.m.  The Chevrolet then
drove away from the plaza at 3:47 p.m., leaving the Ford parked in the plaza.
By 4:03 p.m., the Chevrolet was in the vicinity of the shootings which were to
take place during the next 20 minutes. After the shootings, the two vehicles
met up at 4:41 p.m. on Norval Street, as previously described. Finally, the
Ford was last seen southbound on Runnymede at 4:55 p.m.
[14]          
All of the above movements of the two vehicles,
before and after the two shootings, not only inferred coordination in relation
to the shootings. The surveillance also provided additional images of some of
the occupants of the vehicles and their clothing.
[15]          
About two weeks after the two shootings, on July
2, 2022, the police found the black Ford Escape SUV with license CVKV 443. It
was observed by police officers in Montreal and its two occupants, Justin
Harker and Jalen Campbell-Brown, were arrested for the present murder. Articles
of clothing relevant to the Toronto investigation were seized from both
individuals. In addition, Harker was in possession of a car key to the
Chevrolet Equinox and Campbell-Brown was in possession of a car key to the Ford
Escape. Finally, Campbell-Brown gave a cautioned recorded statement on arrest
advising the police that he met Harker at an address in London, Ontario where
he and Harker had stayed for “a couple of weeks”. That address in London was
1195 Blackwell Boulevard. Campbell-Brown described it as a “bed and breakfast
type place.”
[16]          
The above developments in the investigation in
Montreal on July 2, 2022, led to the final important body of evidence that is
set out in the search warrant affidavit. On July 7, 2022, the Toronto homicide
officers attended at the 1195 Blackwell address in London. They conducted a
video surveillance canvass and found a camera that provided a street view that
included the townhouse located at the address in question. The officers
reviewed video from June 19, 2022, after 6:30 p.m. That time frame was based on
the last observations of the black Ford SUV in Toronto on June 19th
at 4:55 p.m.  At 8:21 p.m., the Ford can be seen turning onto Blackwell
Boulevard. A zoomed-in image of the vehicle and its license plate were included
in the search warrant affidavit. The investigators believed that the license
plate captured in the video image was CVKV 443. The driver parked the black
Ford SUV on the street. Four occupants exited the vehicle and walked to 1195 Blackwell,
entering at 8:23 p.m.  This was about three and a half hours after the Ford
Escape with the above license plate was last seen in Toronto on June 19, 2022.
Surveillance images of the four individuals walking from the black SUV to the
townhouse were included in the affidavit.
[17]          
The townhouse at 1195 Blackwell Boulevard was
part of a complex. The police learned from management of the complex that the
owner of 1195 had not been seen. Management believed that this unit was “some
sort of rental.”
[18]          
The additional investigative information
included in the second search warrant was as follows:
[19]          
The well-known legal principles relating to s.8 Charter review of
the facial sufficiency of a search warrant were recently summarized by the
Court of Appeal in R. v. Kalonji (2022), 414 C.C.C. (3d) 133 at para. 19
(Ont. C.A.). They are as follows:
[20]          
The Applicant Bezabeh conceded, in counsel’s written and oral
submissions, that the search warrant affidavit set out substantial grounds to
believe that a murder of Jaron Williams and an attempt murder of David Joseph
had taken place in Toronto on June 19, 2022. In addition, the Applicant
conceded that there were substantial grounds to believe that a gold Chevrolet
Equinox and a black Ford Escape were involved in these two shootings. Finally,
the Applicant conceded that there was sufficient evidence to believe that the
black Ford Escape had arrived at the 1195 Blackwell Boulevard address in London
and that four occupants of the vehicle had entered the residence at about 8:23
p.m. on June 19, 2022 (some four hours after the shootings). When pressed during
oral argument, Mr. Derstine also conceded that it would have been reasonable to
search the London townhouse shortly after the shootings if there was evidence
that the four suspects who had entered the premises on June 19, 2022 still
resided there.
[21]          
The main thrust of the Applicant’s argument concerning the facial
sufficiency of the search warrant affidavit was that the London townhouse
appeared to be nothing more than a transitory place where the suspects had
stayed for some unknown period of time. In this regard, Campbell-Brown
described it as a “bed and breakfast type place”. In addition, almost three
weeks had elapsed since the shootings, the black Ford Escape and two of the
suspects had left and had been arrested in Montreal, and there was no direct
evidence that the other suspects were still at the London townhouse. In all these
circumstances, the Applicant submits that there were no reasonable grounds to
believe that evidence relevant to the shootings would still be found at the
London townhouse when the search warrant was executed on July 8, 2022.
[22]          
The above factual premises relied on by the Applicant ignore or omit a
number of other facts. First, the police spoke to management of the Blackwell
Boulevard townhouse complex. They were told that the owner of 1195 had not been
seen and management believed that the house was “some sort of rental”. Second,
Campbell-Brown’s statement to the police after his arrest in Montreal on July
2, 2022 was that he “met” Harker at the London townhouse and they had “stayed
there for a couple of weeks”. Third, the arrest of Campbell-Brown and Harker in
Montreal and the seizure of the black Ford Escape was 13 days after the
shootings, so the “couple of weeks” that these two suspects “stayed” at the
townhouse likely extended from both before and after the June 19th
shootings. Fourth, there were five suspects in the two shootings, four of them
had fled to the London townhouse, and only two had been found and arrested.
Fifth, the five suspects had gone to considerable lengths to hide their flight
to the London townhouse by using a stolen vehicle with stolen license plates
during the shootings, by removing the stolen license plates and abandoning the
stolen vehicle after the shootings, and by using a second vehicle unconnected
to the shootings in order to drive for over three hours to London. Sixth, many
of the items being sought as evidence such as clothing, cell phones, and
identification documents were not illegal to possess (unlike stolen goods or
handguns or drugs) and were more likely to be kept by the suspects.
[23]          
In all the above circumstances, including the Applicant’s significant
concessions set out above at para. 20, I am satisfied that there was a
reasonable inference that one or more of the suspects may still have been
staying at the London townhouse, that the suspects may not have believed that
they had been located at the London townhouse, that they may have been using
the townhouse as a rental residence, and that the passage of 19 days since the
shootings did not mean that any or all of the relevant evidence had been
removed or destroyed.
[24]          
None of the above reasonable inferences excludes other alternative
inferences, nor does the search warrant investigative standard of reasonable
and probable grounds require the exclusion of alternative exculpatory
inferences. As the Court of Appeal recently stated in R. v. Ilia, 2023
ONCA 75 at para. 17:
[25]          
The Court of Appeal reiterated this point in R. v. Kalonji, supra
at para. 29:
[26]          
There is no authority for the proposition that relevant evidence of a
murder, that is believed to be located at rental premises where suspects have fled,
will become “stale” in 19 days and can, therefore, no longer be seized by
search warrant. In my view, it could be inferred that four of the five suspects
fled to the townhouse in London shortly after the two shootings in Toronto and
that relevant evidence would still be at this location less than three weeks
later. It was, therefore, reasonable to grant the search warrant for those
premises in this case. See also: R. v. McNeil, 2020 ONCA 313; R. v.
Fuller, 2021 ONCA 411; R. v. Hamouth, 2023 ONCA 518.
[27]          
The Applicant submits that the grounds for the search warrant,
authorizing a search of the Mazda parked in the driveway of the London
townhouse, were also facially insufficient. In particular, the Applicant relies
on the fact that the Mazda was not connected to the two shootings in Toronto.
In addition, when the surveillance officers first saw the Mazda arrive at the London
residence, it was driven and occupied by two women who do not appear to be
connected to the Toronto shootings.
[28]          
In my view, there were reasonable grounds to search the Mazda. The
search of the townhouse residence on July 8, 2022 had yielded a rich body of
evidence that appeared to be relevant to the shootings in Toronto. There was a
reasonable inference that the Mazda was being used by the occupants of the
townhouse as a place to store, carry, retrieve, or simply examine items located
in the Mazda. It had remained parked in the driveway overnight on July 7/8,
2022. On five separate occasions during the night, various occupants of the
townhouse attended at the Mazda. On these occasions, the occupants of the
townhouse either brought items from the townhouse to the Mazda, brought items
from the Mazda to the townhouse, or went to the Mazda in order to simply do
something in the car. The Mazda was now the only motor vehicle associated with
the occupants of the townhouse. The Ford Escape SUV had been associated with
the townhouse but had apparently been driven to Montreal by two of the
suspects. Four suspects had fled to the townhouse after the shootings on June
19, 2022. Three male occupants of the townhouse had been arrested during the
search on July 8, 2022.
[29]          
In all the above circumstances, there was a reasonable inference that
evidence relevant to the shootings would be found in the Mazda. Once again,
this inference does not exclude other alternate inferences, and it need not do
so. See: R. v. Ilia, supra; R. v. Kalonji, supra.
[30]          
For all the above reasons, the s. 8 pre-trial motion challenging the
facial sufficiency of the two search warrant affidavits, one relating to the
London townhouse and the other relating to the Mazda parked in its driveway,
was dismissed at the end of oral argument on November 12, 2024.