1.           
THIS COURT ORDERS that the Defendant, including her servants, agents and anyone
acting on her behalf, are restrained via interlocutory / interim injunction,
until May 15, 2026, from:
2.           
THIS COURT ORDERS that the Defendant, including her servants, agents and anyone
acting on her behalf, are restrained via permanent injunction from:
3.           
THE COURT ORDERS the
production of documents by December 20, 2024, whereby the Defendant is to
produce to the lawyers for the Plaintiff any and all work related records and
correspondence between herself and clients and employees of the Plaintiff,
including, but not limited to those that are relevant to the claim set forth in
the Notice of Action, including, without limitation, work related e-mails, work
related recordings, work related videos, work calendar appointments,  as of October
1, 2024 up to and including the date of the Order.
4.           
THE COURT ORDERS that
the Defendant will not provide any accounting services to Jake Shen, or any
other Accounting for Law clients as particularized in Schedule “A” effective
immediately for a period of eighteen (18) months from the date of this Order or
May 15, 2026, whichever is earlier, or as the Court may otherwise direct.
5.           
THIS COURT ORDERS that the Defendant shall return all outstanding company property to
the Plaintiff, including work laptop, login information and passwords for any
email address associated with the Plaintiff, by no later than November 15,
2024.
6.           
THIS COURT ORDERS that in exchange for consideration of an additional week of pay, the
Defendant shall promptly respond to all minor requests and information (which
includes but is not limited to providing authentication codes received on her
personal phone when Accounting For Law logs into client systems and banking),
from Accounting For Law in relation to the business of Accounting For Law.
7.           
THIS COURT ORDERS that the Plaintiff shall immediately assign any new staff member to
any log in credentials or signing authority on behalf of Accounting for Law
including but not limited to Banks, Unity, Teraview and Treefort that are
currently in the Defendant’s name.
8.           
THIS COURT ORDERS that the costs of this motion and the action in the amount of $10,000
inclusive of HST and disbursements, shall be paid by the Defendant, Jessica
Chappelle, to the Plaintiff, Accounting For Law Inc., within 30 days, bearing
interest at a rate of 6 per cent per year, commencing on the date of this
Order.
9.           
THIS COURT orders that The Plaintiff shall file a Notice of Discontinuance in this
matter if paragraphs 5 and 8 of this Order are fully complied with.