[1]         
The applicant father seeks  the return of his
son to Mexico pursuant to the Convention on the Civil Aspects of
International Child Abduction, Can. T.S. 1983 No. 35 (the “Hague Convention”).
The respondent mother opposes the child’s return and requests that the
application be dismissed. The child, who I will refer to as R, was born January
3, 2019; he currently resides with the respondent in Ontario.
[2]         
During the hearing, counsel for the respondent
advised that there is no dispute about the following:
[3]         
The issue to determine is whether an exception to
an order requiring R to return to Mexico applies. The respondent argues that the
exception in Article 13(b) of the Hague Convention applies as R faces
grave risk of harm or an intolerable situation if he returns to Mexico as a
result of the applicant’s abusive conduct. The applicant denies all allegations
of abuse.
[4]         
This hearing was conducted on a paper record. In
addition to affidavits filed by the parties, they each filed several supporting
affidavits from family and friends as well as two experts. Both counsel advised
that there was no issue with respect to the qualifications of either expert. The
parties declined to conduct cross-examinations on the affidavits either prior
to or during the hearing.
[5]         
For the reasons that follow, I find that the
exception in Article 13(b) of the Hague Convention does not apply; R is ordered
to return to Mexico by no later than December 31, 2024. I will discuss the
issue of undertakings at the end of these reasons.
[6]         
The parties and R are Mexican citizens. They
were living in Playa del Carmen, Quintana Roo, Mexico at the time the
respondent left for a trip to Europe in August 2023 with R. She then travelled
to Canada, without the applicant’s knowledge, and since October 2023 has
refused to return R to Mexico.
[7]         
R was enrolled in school in Playa del Carmen. 
He has only left Mexico twice.  He only speaks Spanish.
[8]         
The parties commenced a relationship in 2011 and
began to live together in 2012. They did not marry. The relationship ended in February
2021; they have since lived separate and apart. The applicant works in the real
estate industry. The respondent worked as a masseuse before she left Mexico.
[9]         
R is the only child of their relationship. They
both have children from prior relationships. The applicant’s two other children
live in Austria and the respondent’s daughter lives in Canada.
[10]      
The parties initially lived in the applicant’s
home in Playa del Carmen. They moved to a new home in Playa del Carmen after R
was born. When the parties separated in 2021, the applicant moved out of that
home. The uncontested evidence is that the respondent continues to own that
home, and a vehicle, in Playa del Carmen.
[11]      
After they separated, neither party commenced
court proceedings, nor did they sign any sort of separation agreement. The
parties agreed on a parenting schedule. There is no dispute that R spent time
with both parents. There is a dispute about the frequency and duration of the time
that he spent with the applicant. While the respondent disputes that it was a
shared parenting relationship, her evidence is that after the parties
separated, the parenting schedule was flexible, and she never opposed the
applicant spending time with R.  Despite the dispute regarding how much time R
spent with the applicant, there is no dispute that he was exercising parenting
rights in Mexico.
[12]      
On August 13, 2023, the respondent told the
applicant that she intended to travel with R to Europe for three weeks to visit
friends and family, including the applicant’s daughters. The applicant consented
to the trip. It was his understanding that the respondent and R would return in
September in time for R to begin school.  He was enrolled in grade one at a school
in Playa del Carmen.
[13]      
At the end of the three weeks, the applicant
asked the respondent when she was returning; the respondent said she was not
ready to return. On October 7, 2023, the respondent advised the applicant via a
WhatsApp message that she was in Canada, would be staying, and had no intention
to return to Mexico with R.  The applicant then sent several messages to the
respondent trying to persuade her to return with R to Mexico.
[14]      
The applicant learned, after the respondent left
Mexico, that she unilaterally deregistered R from his school in July 2023.  She
did not inform the applicant of her decision to do this.
[15]      
The applicant notified the Prosecutor’s office
in Playa del Carmen when the respondent refused to return with R. After some
delay, an “amber alert” and “yellow alert” were issued by Interpol. The
applicant continued his unsuccessful efforts to persuade the respondent to
return voluntarily until she terminated communication with the applicant.
[16]      
The applicant learned of his rights under the Hague
Convention in or about January 2024. That same month, he filed his Return
Application and administration forms with the Mexican Central Authority seeking
the return of R. Those documents were forwarded to the Canadian Central
Authority in March. In or about September 2024, the applicant retained a lawyer
in Canada to launch this application. This application was commenced on September
26, 2024, less than one year after the respondent told the applicant that she
was not returning to Mexico with R.
[17]      
The applicant did not know where the respondent
and R were living until an initial conference was held on October 3, 2024.
[18]      
The applicant’s position is that R’s habitual
residence is in Mexico and that he has been wrongfully retained in Ontario. He
seeks an order under Article 12 of the Hague Convention that R be
returned forthwith to Mexico.  He also argues that none of the exceptions to an
immediate return found in Article 13 apply.
[19]      
The respondent argues that Article 13(b) of the Hague
Convention applies, and that R faces grave risk of harm or an intolerable
situation if he returns to Mexico. Her position is that the applicant was
physically and psychologically abusive during their relationship and he exerted
coercive control over her after they separated. She also argues that the
applicant consumes alcohol to an excess and has placed R at risk as he has
driven him in a car while impaired.
[20]      
The respondent also argues that there is expert
evidence that the justice system in Mexico will not protect her or R in the
event she returns with R to Mexico.
[21]      
Mexico and Canada are signatories to the Hague
Convention. Article 1 sets out the purpose of the Convention as
follows:
[22]       Pursuant to Article 12, where a child has been wrongfully removed or
retained, and a period of less than one year has elapsed from the date of the
wrongful removal or retention, the child shall be returned forthwith to their
home or originating state. In this case, that is Mexico.
[23]      
The purpose of the Hague Convention is to
protect against the harmful effects of wrongful removal or retention, deter
parents from abducting a child to try to establish links in a new country that
might award them custody, and to ensure a rapid resolution of the merits of
custody or access in the forum of the child’s habitual residence: Ludwig v.
Ludwig, 2019 ONCA 680, 30 R.F.L. (8th) 21, at para. 19.
[24]      
The purpose of this hearing is not to determine
the merits of custody unless the court determines that the child is not to be
returned. The decision whether to return a child is not based on who should
have custody, parenting time or decision-making responsibility; Pollastro v.
Pollastro (1999), 1999 CanLII 3702 (ON CA), 43 O.R. (3d) 485 (Ont. C.A.) at paras. 25-27 and Thomson
v. Thomson, [1994] 3. S.C.R. 551 at pp. 576 – 581.
[25]      
The Hague Convention presumes that the
interests of children who have been wrongfully removed are better served by
immediately returning them to their original jurisdiction where the merits of
their best interest will be determined. If the return order is made, it
restores the status quo which existed before the wrongful removal or retention.
[26]      
Article 13 of the Hague Convention sets
out certain exceptions to the  presumption that a child wrongfully removed or retained
should be returned pursuant to Article 12.  If one of those exceptions applies,
the court may not order the return of the child.
[27]      
The applicant relies on the exception set out in
Article 13(b) which states as follows:
[28]       As Article 13 is an exception to the general rule that a wrongfully
removed or retained child must be returned to their country of habitual
residence, it should not be read so broadly that it erodes the general rule:
Office of the Children’s Lawyer v. Balev, 2018 SCC 16, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 398,
at para. 76.
[29]      
Given the sole issue to determine on this
application, I will review the evidence that is relevant to the issue of
whether Article 13(b) applies.
[30]      
The respondent describes her relationship with
the applicant as abusive and tumultuous. She describes him as loud and aggressive.
She says that the applicant often drank alcohol to an excess during their
relationship. Her evidence is that he denied that he abused alcohol or that he
needed treatment. According to the respondent, the applicant would lose control
when he drank.  He became angry, belligerent, and moody, and would belittle her. 
Her self-esteem suffered as a result of the applicant’s behaviour.
[31]      
The respondent described an incident in 2017,
before R was born, when the applicant came home after drinking and wanted to be
intimate. Her daughter was watching television with her in her bedroom which
upset the applicant. He became enraged and threw the television at them. The
respondent left the house for a few days after this incident.
[32]      
The respondent described another incident when
the respondent came home, impaired, in February 2019, when R was just one month
old. The applicant wanted to wake up R, but she refused. She said they argued
several times about this. During one of these arguments, the applicant pulled a
knife on her and said he would kill her if she took R away. That same month, he
wrapped his hands around her neck in a threatening manner.
[33]      
  In early 2020 and 2021, there was an incident
when the applicant was drinking at home. He punched her daughter’s bedroom door
and broke it. The applicant’s friend told the respondent not to call the police
and left the home with the applicant.
[34]      
The respondent alleges that the applicant forced
her to have sex, without her consent, on several occasions.
[35]      
On one occasion in May 2023, the applicant
brought R home while he was under the influence of alcohol.
[36]      
The respondent never reported the applicant’s
conduct to the police as she was afraid of what he would do if she filed a
report.
[37]      
According to the respondent, she was primarily
responsible for R both prior to and following their separation and made all
decisions for him. After they separated, the respondent alleges that the
applicant participated very little in R’s care. On one occasion in 2022 when
she took a trip, she left R with the applicant, but he brought R to her
mother’s house part way through the week. After that, R stayed overnight with
the applicant very sporadically.
[38]      
The respondent’s evidence is that the applicant
decided when to see R, but he was not consistent and at times did not follow through
with plans he made with R. On one occasion in 2023, the applicant was to look
after R when the respondent worked but he did not, and the nanny had to be
called on an urgent basis.
[39]      
  According to the respondent, due to the
applicant’s lack of responsibility, his intimidation of her, and his conduct
that put R at risk, she decided to move to Canada to be closer to her older daughter
who moved to Canada two years earlier.
[40]      
The respondent believes that the applicant wants
her to return to Mexico to control her. She said that in 2023, he frequently
sent messages belittling her or intimidating her about money.
[41]      
According to the respondent, when she arrived in
Canada, she tried to facilitate calls between R and the applicant, but R
resisted. At the end of June or August 2023, she changed her WhatsApp number
but before that, the applicant knew the phone number to use to contact R.
[42]      
According to the respondent, she commenced a
refugee claim in Canada on October 4, 2023 based on the abuse she suffered at
the hands of the applicant; her son is also a claimant as the respondent says he
was exposed to a toxic environment.
[43]      
The respondent filed a supplementary affidavit
attaching two documents in connection with her refugee application. The first
document titled “Refugee Protection Claimant Document” confirms that the
respondent and R submitted refugee claims and on April 9, 2024 were entitled to
coverage of their health-care costs. The second document is entitled
“Confirmation of Referral and Notice to Appear” from the Immigration and
Refugee Board of Canada. That document indicates that the claims for refugee
protection were referred to the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration
and Refugee Board of Canada. There was no date set for a hearing and the
application is still pending.
[44]      
The respondent filed as evidence a letter from the
lawyer representing her in the refugee claim. That letter dated October 22,
2024, addressed to the Immigration and Refugee Board letter attached claim-specific
evidence including transcribed voice messages from the applicant in May 2023 and
February 2024, a psychotherapist report dated July 18, 2024, and the affidavits
of the respondent’s daughter and mother that were filed for this hearing. Also
attached were two articles written about the Hague Convention.
[45]      
The letter from the psychotherapist is addressed
to the Immigration and Refugee Board.  According to that letter, the therapist
saw the respondent 10 times between March and May 2024 to deal with anxiety due
to a history of psychological abuse in Mexico. The respondent reported to the therapist
that when she left the applicant, he continued to manipulate her, told her he was
going back to Dominican Republic with R, sexually abused her when he was drunk,
threatened her with a knife, put his hands on her neck, and bit and bruised her.
She reported feeling anxious, and on edge, and had difficulty sleeping. She reported
feeling depressed and angry since she was seven. Through treatment, she reported
improvement with her depression and PTSD but she still experienced high
anxiety.
[46]      
The respondent did not file a copy of her
original refugee claim.
[47]      
In her affidavit, the respondent set out details
of R’s life in Canada and why it would not be in his best interest to remove
him from Canada where he has been going to school and making friends. As I will
discuss in these reasons, I do not consider R’s current status in determining
whether he should be returned to Mexico following his wrongful retention in
Canada. If I decide R should be returned to Mexico, it will be for the court in
Mexico to determine if is in R’s best interest to reside in Canada with his mother.
[48]      
Ms. Alma Rosa Casanova Gutierrez, the
respondent’s mother, filed an affidavit. Her regular domicile is in Mexico; she
is presently in Canada as a visitor.
[49]      
While she lived in Mexico, Ms. Gutierrez visited
her daughter and R four to five times per year. She witnessed how the applicant
treated the respondent and R.
[50]      
According to Ms. Gutierrez, the applicant could
be charming, but his personality would change when he drank, which she said he
did daily to an excess.   When he drank, he would become irritable, aggressive,
and prone to anger. He would raise his voice at the respondent, insult and
swear at her, which R witnessed. She said that her granddaughter called her
once in 2017 as she was upset and told her about the incident involving the
television.
[51]      
According to Ms. Gutierrez, the respondent was
R’s primary caregiver. The applicant would be gone all day and come back in the
middle of the night, inebriated. She spoke to the applicant in 2020 about
getting help for his alcohol abuse but he denied that he had a problem.
[52]      
After the parties separated in 2021, Ms.
Gutierrez stayed with her daughter more often.  On several occasions, the
applicant did not show up for his parenting time with R. He would see R, at
most, once per week and rarely overnight. In 2023, she saw the applicant visibly
drunk while driving R. She heard the applicant threaten to take R to the
Dominican Republic, where he is from, or to New Jersey, where his mother
lives.
[53]      
The respondent’s daughter, Chiara Sofia Chacon
Aldana, who is 18 years of age, filed an affidavit in support of her mother. She
has lived in Canada since 2021 with her father; she is now a permanent
resident.
[54]      
Before moving to Canada, she primarily lived
with her mother in Mexico.  She was eight when her mother moved in with the
applicant. She said the applicant was constantly drunk, even during the day.
She said she would lock herself in her room as he would be rowdy and become
aggressive. She described the incident in 2017 when she and her mother were watching
television in her bedroom. The applicant came home drunk, and was upset that
she was in their bedroom with her mother.  She said he aggressively knocked the
television to the floor. She called her grandmother as she was scared.
[55]      
 Her evidence is that the applicant initially tried
to be home after R was born but shortly retuned to his old habits of being gone
all day and coming home drunk. He drove her when he was impaired.
[56]      
She described an incident in late 2020 or early
2021 when the applicant was drinking at home. He started to harass her and she
told him to “fuck off”. He became angry, chased her to her bedroom and broke
her door. His friend took him away.
[57]      
She said after the applicant left the home in
February 2021, he would pick up R about once per week and usually bring him
back the same day; he never kept R for more than one night.
[58]      
According to Ms. Aldana, she saw her mother in
Italy in the summer of 2023.  When her mother told her she was afraid to go
back to Mexico, Ms. Aldana encouraged her to move to Canada.
[59]      
Isadora Cortes Aburto, is the respondent’s
friend; she has known her for over 15 years. She often witnessed the applicant
drunk. In 2017, the respondent told her that the applicant threw a television
on the floor.
[60]      
The applicant denies all claims that he was
abusive towards the respondent or that he has a substance abuse problem. He
denies ever threatening the respondent or forcing her to be intimate with him.
[61]      
According to the applicant, his separation from
the respondent was amicable; no court proceedings were commenced, nor did they
sign a separation agreement. He and the respondent agreed on a flexible and
shared parenting schedule. R spent three to four overnights with him each week.
When R was with him, he brought him to and from school to doctor’s appointments,
and playdates.
[62]      
Prior to August 2023, R had only travelled
outside of Mexico twice; once in April 2023 when he travelled with the parties to
New Jersey to meet the applicant’s mother and sister, and once to Canada to see
the respondent’s daughter.
[63]      
According to the applicant, he and the
respondent rarely argued, but there were issues with her daughter, Ms. Aldana. The
police were never involved with their family or any child protection services.
[64]      
The applicant denies that he consumes alcohol
daily or that he is prone to anger. He does not dispute that he speaks loudly.
[65]      
The applicant denies threatening to take R to
Dominican Republic. in 2022, the applicant asked the respondent if he could
take R on a trip to the Dominican Republic. She did not think it was a good
idea and the trip did not occur. .
[66]      
The applicant recalls the television incident. He
asked Ms. Aldana to leave the bedroom so he could change but she refused.  He
tried to unplug the television but if fell. He denies throwing it in anger.
[67]      
 He denies all allegations made by Ms. Aldana. 
His evidence is that he tried to teach her house rules, but she did not listen to
him. He says that she did not see him as a parental figure who had authority to
tell her what to do. He denies her allegations that he drove while impaired. He
recalls a verbal altercation with her about long showers, but he denies ever
breaking her bedroom door.
[68]      
According to the applicant, R stayed with him
for an entire week when the respondent visited her daughter in Canada. He
recalls only once when he had to cancel plans with R due to work but he called
the respondent and told her in advance.
[69]      
Rather than having a difficult post-separation
relationship, the applicant’s evidence is that he and the respondent spent time
together. For example, at times she shared meals with him at his home when she
picked up R. When she was renovating her home, she and R stayed with him as R
is allergic to dust. They also traveled to New Jersey together in April 2023 to
visit his family.  None of this was denied by the respondent.
[70]      
The applicant acknowledges that he and the
respondent had disagreements about finances and how to pay for R’s expenses
after they separated.
[71]      
The last time the applicant spoke with R was in
mid-July 2023.  He has since been unable to contact him.
[72]      
William Neil Tancre, the applicant’s friend, filed
an affidavit in support of the applicant. The applicant lived with him and wife
for two years when the applicant was in enrolled in a program in the United
States. They grew close; Mr. Tancre considered the applicant to be a son. He
and his wife purchased a home in Playa del Carmen and now live there part-time.
Mr. Tancre knows the respondent and had frequent contact with her even after
she and the applicant separated. He and his wife also have a close bond with R.
Mr. Tancre describes the applicant as a loving father. Mr. Tancre recalls
conversations with the respondent years ago that she wanted to live in Canada.
[73]      
Ms. Marjorie Tancre filed an affidavit agreeing with
Mr. Tancre’s evidence.
[74]      
Nicolas Lauras is the applicant’s friend. They
met in 2010. When R was born, Mr. Lauras lived in the same neighbourhood as the
applicant. He and his child spent time with the applicant and R. He saw the
applicant drive R to and from school. He had more limited interaction with the
respondent and only saw her a few times at social events.
[75]      
The applicant relies on the evidence of Ricardo
Flores Lune, a lawyer who has practiced in Mexico for 15 years. He was asked to
prepare an opinion on the following three issues:
[76]      
His evidence, in summary, is as follows:
[77]      
The respondent relies on the evidence of Alicia
Elena Perez Durartey Norona.  Ms. Norona is a law professor in Mexico. She has
written several books and articles on topics related to human rights and gender
legal studies. She has an extensive CV. Much of her work has been in the area
of human rights and the right of women to live free from violence.
[78]      
Her opinion is as follows:
[79]      
The only issue to determine is whether the
exception in Article 13(b) of the Hague Convention applies. I will review
the jurisprudence that has interpreted what constitutes a “grave risk” and an
“intolerable situation” and whether the respondent’s evidence of the alleged
abuse she suffered at the hands of the applicant meets the test.
[80]      
Before addressing that issue, I will address the
respondent’s evidence about how well R is doing in Canada. While I accept that
evidence, it would be an error for me to consider the evidence arising after
the wrongful retention in determining if R should be ordered to return to
Mexico: Ellis v. Wentzell-Ellis, 2010 ONCA 347, 102 O.R. (3d) 298, at
para. 27. The respondent cannot rely on evidence of R’s current best interest
in Canada, which she created by her own wrongful conduct of unilaterally
refusing to return R to Mexico, to argue that the principles of the Hague
Convention do not apply or can be circumvented.
[81]      
While I do not consider evidence of R’s current
best interest, I do consider his best interests when I determine whether there
would be a grave risk of harm to him or an intolerable situation if I order that
he return to Mexico.
[82]      
There is a high threshold to prove “grave risk”
of physical or psychological harm: Ellis at para. 37.The onus is on the
parent opposing the return to satisfy the court that the threshold has been met:
Gourgy v. Gourgy, 2018 ONCA 166, at para. 10.
[83]      
In Thomson, at p. 597, La Forest J
concluded that an intolerable situation must be a “weighty” risk of
“substantial” psychological harm, “something greater than would normally be expected
on taking a child away from one parent and passing him to another.” Both the
risk and the harm must be substantial.
[84]      
In Rayo Jabbaz v. Rolim Mouammar (2003),
236 D.L.R. (4th) 494 (Ont. C.A.) the court found, at para. 23, that the use of
the term “intolerable” in Article 13 speaks to “an extreme situation, a
situation that is unbearable; a situation too severe to be endured.”
[85]      
In Friedrich v. Friedrich, 78 F.3d 1060
(U.S. C.A. 6th Cir. 1996), the Court of Appeal in the United States agreed
with a restrictive reading of the grave harm exception referred to in Thomson
and found that there are two situations where a grave risk of harm can
exist.  The first is where there is a grave risk of harm when the return of the
child puts the child in imminent danger prior to the resolution of the custody
dispute such as returning the child to a state of war, famine, or disease.  The
second grave risk is in cases of serious abuse or neglect or extraordinary
emotional dependence, when the court in the originating State may be incapable
or unwilling to give the child adequate protection.
[86]      
Friedrich has been
cited with approval in several cases in Ontario including M.J.W. v. P.S.G.,
2007 CanLII 13522 (ON SC), 38 R.F.L. (6th) 60 (Ont. S.C.), Paschel v. Paschel, 2017 ONSC 6952, 1
R.F.L. (8th) 379 and De Martinez v. Rios, 50 R.F.L. 293.
[87]      
In Hassan v. Garib, 2017 ONSC 7227,
Engelking J. found that there are three questions to answer in determining
whether there is a grave risk that returning the child to the originating State
would expose them to physical or psychological harm or otherwise place them in
an intolerable situation, at para. 10.  Those questions are:
[88]      
In Hassan, there were allegations of
domestic violence that included swearing, denigrating name-calling, threats of
harm and death, use of a knife to threaten, and physical violence causing
injury. The allegations were denied by the opposing party who sought the return
of the child to England.
[89]      
In Hassan, the court found that the
allegations of a beating causing injury and the use of a knife in a threatening
manner would be severe if they occurred.  The court found that it was unlikely
the past violence would recur and that the left behind parent was amenable to
control and therefore ordered the child returned to England.
[90]      
The allegations in Hassan were of a more
serious and egregious nature than in this case. There were also several police
records about complaints of domestic violence. Furthermore, the alleged abusing
spouse had a criminal record for assault causing bodily harm. Nonetheless, the
court found that the exception in Article 13(b) did not apply despite the allegations
of serious domestic violence.
[91]      
Hassan was
applied in Diaz Garcia v. Reyna Cruz, 2023 ONSC 3306.  In that case, the
father sought the return of his seven year old child to Mexico.  The responding
mother argued that there was a grave risk of harm to the child if returned to
Mexico as she was abused physically, financially, verbally, and sexually by the
applicant. She also alleged that the applicant was physically, verbally, and
emotionally abusive to the child.
[92]      
The allegations in Diaz Garcia included
sexual assault.  The mother also alleged that the father called her names and threatened
to kill and harm her and the child.  She detailed many incidents of significant
physical abuse over the span of several years including being slapped and
punched causing injury, choking until unconscious, kicking, and pushing. The
mother’s sister gave evidence that she witnessed some assaults. There were
photographs of her injuries. The father denied all allegations.
[93]      
  Despite allegations of domestic violence, the
court found that the there was no grave risk of harm should the child return to
Mexico nor would the child be placed in an intolerable situation.  The court
found that there was no evidence that the child experienced or observed severe,
significant, or prolonged forms of physical harm.
[94]      
Similar to Hassan, the allegations of domestic
violence were far more egregious, serious, and significant in Diaz Garcia
than the allegations made by the respondent in this case.
[95]      
The applicant and respondent describe the nature
of their relationship both pre- and post-separation in starkly different
terms.  It is difficult to make findings about whose evidence to accept based
on the conflicting affidavit evidence.  Unlike in Hassan and Diaz
Garcia, there was no corroborating evidence such as police records, medical
records, or photographs.
[96]      
With respect to the nature of the relationship
pre-separation, the respondent and her daughter testified about two incidents
where the applicant was allegedly violent in the home – when he threw a
television and when he broke a bedroom door. The respondent also described one
incident when the applicant threatened her with a knife and threatened to harm
her. The respondent, her mother, and her daughter all testified about the
applicant’s abuse of alcohol and his aggressive behaviour when he drank. While
these allegations have all been denied by the applicant, for the purposes of
this hearing, I will accept the evidence that during the relationship, there
were incidents of domestic violence in the home and that the applicant abused
alcohol.
[97]      
There is no evidence that applicant was
physically, emotionally, or mentally abusive towards R.
[98]      
I put little weight on the report from the
psychotherapist for two reasons. First, much of that report is based on the
respondent’s self-reports. Secondly, unlike in Diaz Garcia where the
doctor filed an affidavit, there is no such affidavit from the therapist. The
therapist’s evidence is therefore not properly before the court.
[99]      
During submissions, counsel for the respondent
conceded that after the parties separated, there was no physical abuse but
rather argued that the applicant’s conduct was intimidating, and he attempted
to exert control over the respondent.  While the respondent was not at risk for
her physical safety, counsel argued that the applicant exerted coercive control
over the respondent by threatening to not financially support R after he
learned that the respondent was in a new relationship. The respondent attached
two messages from the applicant which appear to support that the applicant was
upset with her.
[100]    During the 3.5 years that the parties lived separate and apart in
Mexico, the respondent’s evidence is that the applicant had “full freedom
regarding his rights with R.” It was also her evidence that, “I never opposed
him spending time with his son.” Her concern was that the applicant disappointed
R by not following through with parenting time and R stopped asking when he
could see the applicant.  Those are concerns that go to R’s best interest and not
on whether Article 13(b) of the Hague Convention applies.
[101]   The evidence of post-separation coercive control exerted by the
applicant over the respondent is quite limited and vague and non-specific. There
were email exchanges which convey that there were disputes, as is not uncommon
between separated spouses. In my view, there was nothing alarming or
threatening in these emails. Being impolite and upset in a text message or
using foul language does not make that controlling behaviour. Furthermore,
there was no evidence of a pattern of behaviour such as repeated text messages
or voice messages.  The evidence presented was of isolated incidents of
disputes between the parties over finances and forming new relationships.
[102]   The respondent’s position that R would be at a grave risk of harm if
ordered to return to Mexico is incongruous with her own evidence that despite the
applicant’s alleged coercive control of her post-separation, she never opposed
him spending time with R. I cannot reconcile the respondent’s position that R
faces a grave risk of harm if he returns to Mexico when she never opposed R
spending with the applicant after they separated.  There is no evidence that
she required the intervention of the police, courts, or any sort of child
protection services for the 3.5 year that she remained living in Mexico after
the separation.
[103]    I also cannot reconcile the respondent’s claims of a grave risk of
harm to R given the evidence, that she did not dispute, that during the 3.5
years that the parties were separated, she spent time with the applicant having
meals with him and travelling with him in April 2023 to New Jersey. There is no
evidence that the applicant’s conduct post separation led the respondent to
fear for her or R’s safety.  At best, she alleges that the applicant engaged in
a pattern of coercive control of her after they separated by, amongst other
things, threatening to not pay for R’s support.
[104]   I am struck by the minimal evidence of coercive control in the 3.5
years after the parties separated, particularly as that conduct is relied upon
by the respondent to justify her unilateral action of removing R from the only
home he ever knew and moving him to another country.
[105]   The respondent relies on Pollastro in support of her position
that the exception set out in Article 13(b) applies. I will review the facts in
Pollastro given her reliance on that decision.
[106]    In Pollastro, the court found that Article 13(b) applied
based on the violence in the home directed at the mother and declined to order
the child returned to California.
[107]   The court found the following in Pollastro:
[108]   The court found that the threatening phone calls demonstrated a
continuing inability of the father to control his temper or hostility and that
the mother, who would accompany the child if ordered to return, would be
returning to a dangerous situation. The court also found that the child was in
danger if ordered to return.  The court found that the potential for violence
was overwhelming should the child be ordered retuned and that there was a grave
risk that the child would be placed in an intolerable situation.
[109]   The allegations of domestic violence in Pollastro are far
more detailed and serious than in this case. There is no evidence of a pattern
of physical abuse or threatening behaviour since February 2021 that is any way
close to the findings made by the court in Pollastro. Even if I accept
the respondent’s evidence that the applicant sexually assaulted her or
threatened her with a knife and was physically violent in the home as described
by the respondent and her witnesses, the evidence does not rise to the level of
egregious conduct as in Pollastro.
[110]   The jurisprudence is clear; the exception set out in Article 13(b)
must be narrowly construed. The threshold is high as one of the purposes of the
Hague Convention is to dissuade parents from wrongfully removing children
from one country and unilaterally moving to another. In my view, a liberal
interpretation of this exception runs the risk of compromising this
international convention thereby encouraging parties to engage in self-help and
take custody matters into their own hands by moving internationally.
[111]   The Hague Convention also presumes that the interest of
children who have been wrongfully removed form the originating State to a haven
State are better served by returning them immediately to the originating State.
It is in the originating State that the parenting issues ought to be determined,
not in the Haven State: Thomson at p. 619.
[112]   There is no evidence or allegations that the applicant has caused
any harm to R, save and except for the allegations that he drove with R when he
was drinking. The applicant proposes several undertakings should R be ordered
to return including an undertaking that he will not to consume alcohol when he
is with R. I am satisfied that will address concerns with his consumption of
alcohol.
[113]   If the applicant abuses alcohol and has driven R while impaired,
that is an issue that goes to R’s best interest and not about whether Article
13(b) applies.
[114]   When I consider the three questions from Hassan, even if I
accept that there was domestic violence prior to February 2021, it has not
recurred during the 3.5 years since the parties separated. There is no evidence
that any of the applicant’s conduct prior to separation was life-threatening. I
also do not accept the respondent’s evidence that the applicant has engaged in
a pattern of coercive control since they separated. Lastly, there is no
evidence that the applicant would not abide by court orders.
[115]   I was not directed to any jurisprudence where the allegations of
domestic abuse are dated as in this case.  In all cases relied on by counsel,
the parent who fled did so shortly after leaving an abusive relationship and
did not wait several years, as in this case. Even if I accept the evidence of
domestic violence during the relationship and the limited evidence of coercive
control post separation, it falls far short of the high threshold required to
establish that Article 13(b) applies.
[116]   The respondent also argues that the court in Mexico will be unable
to protect her or R  and that will create an intolerable situation. She relies
on Ms. Norona’s opinion to support that position.
[117]   I prefer the expert opinion of Mr. Luna over that of Ms. Norona. Ms.
Norona did not dispute that there are laws in Mexico that address domestic
violence.  Rather, her opinion is about how the law is applied. I find that Ms.
Norona is more of an advocate for the respondent rather than an independent expert.
She makes sweeping conclusions and goes so far as to say R’s return runs the
risk of femicide without there being any evidence of domestic violence after
the parties separated. That was an alarming conclusion without any foundation for
it.
[118]   Ms. Norona is clearly concerned with how women are treated in the
justice system in Mexico, and she points to two tragic cases where women were
killed by a spouse who was released from custody.
[119]   While no evidence was led about the number of women killed by
abusive partners in Canada, I am certain that there are experts, like Ms. Norona,
who would share her view and opine that the Canadian legal system does not protect
women who are victims of intimate partner violence. That does not mean that
there are no laws and systems in place in Canada to protect women and children,
as there are in Mexico. Many women who are victims of intimate partner violence
in Canada might say that the laws in Canada provide them with  minimal
protection. That does mean, however, that the legal system would not be able to
protect a spouse who was ordered to return to Canada under the Hague
Convention.
[120]   Furthermore, as a signatory to the Hague Convention, it is
presumed that Mexico can properly determine the merits of the parties’
parenting dispute and consider R’s best interest in doing so. I find that
Mexico can make any necessary orders to protect the respondent and R and determine
R’s best interests.
[121]   The respondent has failed to discharge her onus to prove the high
threshold  that there is a grave risk of harm to R or that he would be placed
in an intolerable situation if he returns to Mexico.  Even accepting her
evidence of domestic abuse during the marriage and the applicant’s abuse of
alcohol, I do not find that R would be an extreme situation that is too severe
to endure if he returns to Mexico. Furthermore, I accept that there are laws in
Mexico that can address the concerns raised by the respondent.
[122]   The exception in Article 13(b) of the Hague Convention does
not apply.
[123]   While the respondent has filed a refugee claim in Canada on behalf
of her and her son that is outstanding, that is not a basis to refuse to order
R to return to Mexico. The respondent did not file any documentation confirming
when she commenced the application. Furthermore, based on the letter from her
lawyer, it appears that she only filed material in support of the application
after the application in this matter was commenced.  This suggests that there
may have been a strategic basis to the refugee claim.
[124]   Even if the refugee application was filed when she came to Canada, an
order can be made for the return of the child under the Hague Convention while
there is a pending claim on the child’s behalf for refugee status in Ontario. A
refugee claim cannot defeat the purpose of the Hague Convention, which
is to deal with international abduction cases expeditiously and for children to
be returned to their home state promptly: Kovacs v. Kovacs, 2002 CanLII 49485 (ON SC), 59 O.R. (3d)
671 (S.C.), at paras. 73, 74 ,75, and 124 and Toiber v. Toiber, 2006 CanLII 9407 (ON CA), 208
O.A.C. 391 (Ont. C.A.), at paras. 11-12.
[125]   In a refugee claim based on domestic abuse, the alleged perpetrator is
not served nor have a right to appear at the hearing before the Immigration and
Refugee Board. This was addressed by the court in Singh v. Kaur, 2022
MBQB 46, 71 R.F.L. (8th) 198.  At paras. 57 and 59, the court found that unlike
an Immigration and Refugee Board proceeding, in a Hague proceeding the
court has evidence from both parties and other individuals making it best
placed to consider the evidence in its totality and determine if there is a
grave risk that an order for the child’s return would, on the basis of the
domestic violence allegations, meet the test set out in article 13(b).
[126]   In A.M.R.I. v. K.E.R., 2011 ONCA 417, 106 O.R. (3d) 1, the
court cautioned against the potential abuse of a refugee application being used
to gain tactical advantage. The court also found that even if a child has been found
to be a refugee, that is not dispositive of whether the grave risk of harm is
established but gives rise to a rebuttable presumption that the exception was
engaged: at paras. 73-74.
[127]   In this case, there has been no such finding and therefore no such
rebuttable presumption.
[128]   I therefore find that the pending refugee claim does not prevent
this court from making a determination under the Hague Convention. The
refugee claim does not automatically stay this proceeding, nor was she a stay
requested by the applicant.
[129]   The applicant’s Hague application is granted. I find that R is
wrongfully retained in Ontario and shall be returned to Mexico by no later than
December 31, 2024.
[130]   The applicant shall comply with the following undertakings:
[131]   The applicant is entitled to his costs.  If the parties cannot agree
on quantum, the applicant is to serve, file and upload to Case Centre his bill
of costs, offers to settle, and two-page cost submissions, double spaced, 12 pt
font, by December 23, 2024.  The respondent shall file her bill of costs,
offers to settle and two-page cost submissions, double spaced, 12 pt. font by January
6, 2025. There shall be no reply.