[1]              
There are two motions before the court:
[2]              
The respondent and the children have been residing in Saskatchewan since
September 2023. There is a history of family violence whereby the applicant was
found guilty of assault by choking and mischief in 2021. He is currently on
probation.
[3]              
The temporary relief sought by the parties will have a significant
impact on the lives of the parties and of the children. There are important
credibility issues, mobility issues, financial issues and issues surrounding
the best interests of the children which require that this matter proceed to
trial as soon as possible.
[4]              
I decline to order most of the temporary relief sought by the parties as
the adjudication of these issues must be done on a more complete evidentiary
record. The importance is that the children must continue to have parenting
time with the father, that child support be paid and that the father has the
opportunity to cover the expenses on the matrimonial home and protect the
interests of the parties. In the meantime, this matter shall be case managed by
me in order for a full adjudication to take place of the parenting and mobility
issues as everything will then flow from that decision.
[5]              
The parties met in Ottawa in 2009. The applicant joined the military in
2011 and the parties relocated to Petawawa in 2013. In June 2013, they bought the
matrimonial home as joint tenants in Deep River.
[6]              
The parties married on August 17, 2013. There are two children of the marriage.
L.A. who was born in 2016 and is 8 years old. E.M. was born in 2019 and is 5
years old.
[7]              
The respondent has provided very little evidence of parenting prior to
the separation and prior to her move to Saskatchewan. Her focus has been on the
parental conflict. The applicant has provided his view on parenting prior to
the move to Saskatchewan. He claims to have been an active parent, involved in schooling
and transportation. He also focusses on the parental conflict.
[8]              
The respondent claims a history of family violence. On June 29, 2021,
there was an incidence of family violence and the applicant was found guilty of
assault by choking and mischief. The respondent argues that a finding was made
that the applicant has conspiratorial and persecutorial thinking, however, I
was not directed to such a finding. That wording forms part of the Probation Order.
The applicant’s probation is from June 10, 2024, to June 9, 2026.
[9]              
On July 2, 2021, the respondent relocated to Ottawa with the children.
There is very little evidence on parenting issues during the following two-year
period and how involved the applicant was in the children’s lives. The
applicant provided evidence of the frequency of visits from 2021 to 2023.
However, there is no clear explanation as to why the applicant had no visits
with the children after September 11, 2022 but I appreciate that after July
2023, the children were residing in Saskatchewan. Prior to that, there may have
been an impact from the criminal charges. However, there is no adequate
explanation as to why there were virtually no phone calls and no visits for
such extended periods in 2022 and 2023.
[10]          
What is apparent from the affidavits is that the applicant had frequent
concerns that the respondent would relocate to Saskatchewan. While the
applicant was residing in Ottawa, the respondent claims that he paid no child
support. After two years, the respondent claims that she could no longer afford
to live in Ottawa but there is no evidence as to the efforts she made to be
employed while living in Ottawa or any explanation as to why legal proceedings
were not commenced to compel the applicant to pay child support. She relocated
to Saskatchewan in July 2023. The applicant claims that he only found out about
the relocation on September 28, 2023, which also raises questions on why it
took so long.
[11]          
The probation order requires the applicant to participate in all directed
assessments, counselling or rehabilitative programs including anger management,
substance abuse, domestic violence which may include the PAR Program,
parenting, psychiatric or psychological issues and conspiratorial and
persecutorial thinking. At the hearing of this motion, the applicant provided a
letter from his Probation and Parole Officer to confirm that the applicant is
moving forward with the programs which are being referred to him.
[12]          
This is the most relevant background for the purposes of this decision.
However, I have considered the full content of the affidavit of the parties
which is summarized as follows:
[13]          
I have considered all the evidence filed. There is a considerable amount
of conflicting evidence and issues which are unresolved. One of the major
issues is the lack of parental contact between the applicant and the children
since September 2022 and the limited contact since July 2021. This puts in
doubt the relationship between the applicant and the children. The court also has
significant concerns surrounding the relocation of the children to Saskatchewan
and I reject the suggestion by the respondent that the unilateral move to
Saskatchewan has established a new status quo. At the same time, there has been
considerable delay in bringing this motion to require the children to relocate
to Ontario although the applicant did attempt to have it dealt with on an urgent
basis.
[14]          
At the motion, there was an issue as to if the applicant has been having
regular virtual parenting time, but his affidavit suggests that he had been
having regular calls from January 2024 until the end of July 2024. There are
also questions surrounding the relationship of each parent with the children
and if sufficient evidence has been provided to the court at this stage.
[15]          
Further, there are urgent issues surrounding the matrimonial home such
as insurance, mortgage defaults, mortgage renewal and the applicant’s ability
to buy out the respondent’s interests which need to be addressed.
[16]          
In the end, this matter needs to get to a trial, and it will require
case management in order to get there. The children have been residing in
Saskatchewan since July 2023. The applicant only found out about the move at
the end of September 2023. This leaves questions around the applicant’s
parenting time before the relocation and why the applicant was not more
involved in the children’s lives and why no court application was brought soon
after July 2021 to assert the applicant’s parenting time. Once again, the
criminal conditions may have impacted this situation.
[17]          
However, the court must look at the parenting issues from the
perspective of the interests of the children as opposed to the interests of the
parents. They have now been residing in Saskatchewan for close to 15 months and
it would not be reasonable to require them to relocate based on the limited
picture given to this court at this temporary motion. This is a trial issue
which must be fully explored. At the same time, the applicant’s role as a
parent has been significantly impacted by the first relocation to Ottawa and
the second relocation to Saskatchewan together with limits imposed by his
criminal conditions. All of this must be assessed on a full record at a trial
to determine the best interests of the children. Hence, the need to get this
case trial ready through case management.
[18]          
 At this point, there is an immediate need to deal with issues of
interim child support and the matrimonial home.
[19]          
In terms of child support, the applicant must begin paying immediately.
There is no argument to suggest that the applicant can delay paying child
support while he disputes the relocation by the respondent. He will commence
paying child support effective December 1, 2024, without prejudice to the
interest of both parties.
[20]          
As for child support arrears, I decline to deal with that issue, and it
will be a trial issue. The picture of what has transpired since July 2021
remains unclear and evidence will be required to determine the issues
surrounding child support arrears although it may be difficult to imagine how
the applicant can justify not having paid anything towards child support in over
three years since the date of separation.
[21]          
The applicant has been consistent in pointing the finger at the
respondent for failing to contribute to the expenses for the matrimonial home,
but he is in sole possession. If she were to continue paying, there would be
issues of occupation rent. It is not up to the respondent to pay the ongoing
expenses for the matrimonial home following her departure, particularly as the
low-income earner of the couple. The bottom line is that the applicant must
decide if he can afford to keep it. Regardless, he must keep it in good
standing failing which the court will have to intervene.
[22]          
At this point, the issues of property insurance, mortgage arrears if any,
and ongoing mortgage payments are of primary importance. If the applicant is
not able to maintain the expenses surrounding the home while the court provides
him with an opportunity to buy out the respondent’s interest, it will have to
be sold and I will manage that process. The applicant must provide adequate
evidence to the respondent about the home insurance and exactly what consent is
required by the insurer to put this in place. This must be done immediately. Next,
the applicant must demonstrate that the mortgage is in good standing and if he
has a pre-approval to buy out the respondent’s interest in the matrimonial
home.
[23]          
In terms of parenting, the applicant has a right to know what is going
on in the children’s lives. The respondent must provide all details surrounding
their schooling, health, dental and extracurricular activities. The applicant has
a right to know the circumstances in which they are residing and where they are
residing subject to a valid reason why such information should be withheld. The
respondent has an obligation to set up a file for the children on a parenting
application such as Our Family Wizard where he can go to get all the
information about the children including a calendar of activities, report
cards, medical information, a detailed summary of all appointments and details
of their daily activities. Both parents will be responsible to pay their share
for such an on-line application but clearly the respondent has the bulk of the
responsibility to provide all the information.  In addition, there should be no
reason why the applicant should not have the names of all professionals
involved in the lives of the children and access to information about the
children. This would include information about the school.
[24]          
On this point about access to information, the respondent has been
reluctant to advise as to where she is residing with the children. I am not
aware of a basis to justify this. The criminal trial is over along with the
sentencing. The terms of probation should not prevent the applicant from
knowing where his children are residing, the type of accommodations, where they
are sleeping, where they go to school and other general issues surrounding
their daily lives. I will reserve my opinion on any restrictions that should be
placed on the applicant’s access to information given the respondent’s apparent
reluctance to do so. This issue shall be discussed during case management
whereby the respondent may need to justify a request to limit the applicant’s
access to information.
[25]          
In the end, I decline to deal with issues or relocation, expanded
parenting time and decision-making as these issues are more properly determined
at a trial.
[26]          
There will be a virtual case management conference set up by trial
coordination as soon as possible. That CMC will deal with the following issues:
[27]          
As for temporary orders, I order the following:
[28]          
My preliminary view is that the success on these motions has been
divided. The parties are encouraged to resolve the issue of costs or simply
agree to leave them in the cause. However, if they are unable to agree, both
parties will have 15 days from the date of this Endorsement to
provide written costs submissions. Both parties will have 15 days thereafter to
respond. All costs submissions will be no longer than 4 pages plus attachments.