[1]              
The defendants, the Attorney General of Canada (“Canada”) and the
District Municipality of Muskoka (the “District”) both brought successful
motions to strike the statement of claim, and now seek their costs of the
action and the motion. Where an interlocutory step results in a final order
that disposes of the entire action, costs of the entire proceeding may be
awarded: Persaud v. Bratanov and Unifund Assurance Co., 2012 ONSC 6870.
[2]              
The claim sought $5 million from Canada for
causes of action stemming from the 1980s through to present day. Canada in turn
claimed contribution and indemnity from the District for the entire amount of
the plaintiffs’ claim because so many of the material facts purported to lay
liability at the feet of the District.
[3]              
This court struck the claim as statute-barred: 744185
Ontario Incorporated v. Attorney General of Canada, 2024 ONSC 5825.
[4]              
I have reviewed the written cost submissions filed
by the parties.
[5]              
Both defendants seek their costs on a partial
indemnity basis - the amount of $90,913 for Canada and $97,377.42 for the
District.
[6]              
The defendants’ submissions outline the factors
that increased the complexity of the proceeding, including the decades spanning
the material facts alleged and the involved process of document and witness
gathering, the fact that the District was not sued by the plaintiffs even
though the claim raised allegations against the District, resulting in Canada
issuing a third party claim, and the plaintiffs raising entirely new arguments
and causes of action in their factum, not found in the pleading. The plaintiffs
did not respond to the substance of these submissions but have argued that the
time and resources expended by the defendants was unreasonable and
disproportionate.
[7]              
Similarly, the defendants’ submissions outlined
the plaintiffs’ conduct that lengthened the duration of the proceeding and
increased costs, conduct that required the defendants to seek triage court
intervention and rulings from the court on more than one occasion to deal with
the matter of timetabling this motion. The plaintiffs’ submissions do not deny
that these steps were required, nor that they are responsible for those
additional steps.
[8]              
Also, the defendants’ submissions outline the
importance of the issues for their clients, given the amount claimed and the
nature of the claims pleaded. They submit that it was necessary for them to
meet the claim by expending significant resources attempting to locate retired
employees or other personnel, and to locate historic documents. For Canada,
this involved a manual undertaking that required the assistance of Library and
Archives Canada, and archival searches for documents either in storage or other
locations as outlined in the supporting affidavit of Soha Ehsan. For the
District, this involved correspondence with former District personnel and a
hunt for documents going back decades. Resources were expended scanning these
documents for document management and review purposes.
[9]              
Canada also makes submissions about the
plaintiffs’ refusal to admit various things, including the limitation problem,
and states that the plaintiffs could have pled different causes of action to
avoid it, as they had attempted to do at the last minute. Canada submits that
the plaintiffs also should have admitted that most of their claim targeted the
District. In its claim and submissions, the plaintiffs took the position,
without legal foundation, that Canada should have exerted authority over the
District to make it comply with the plaintiffs’ requests.
[10]          
The plaintiffs’ submissions focus on the rates
charged and time spent by the defendants’ lawyers. The plaintiffs suggest that
an award of $10,000 combined for both defendants is a fair and reasonable cost
award. In support of that figure, the plaintiffs suggest that the fees should
be adjusted to reflect “Bracebridge standards”, that there has been a
duplication of work as between the two parties, that Canada has duplicated
costs arising from a different claim initiated by the plaintiffs in the Federal
Court, and finally, that the equities favour the plaintiffs because of the
unjust actions of the defendants. The plaintiffs ask the court to consider that
the defendants’ actions have cost the individual plaintiff, Mr. Gronfors, his life
savings.
[11]          
The court has broad discretion in deciding
whether to award costs, to whom, and in what amount: s. 131 of the Courts of
Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43.  However, that discretion is to be
exercised in accordance with the provisions of an act or the Rules of Civil
Procedure, O. Reg. 194:  1465778 Ontario Inc. v.
1122077 Ontario Ltd., 2006 CanLII 35819 (ON CA), [2006] O.J. No. 4248 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 25; Andersen
v. St. Jude Medical Inc., 2006 CanLII 85158 (ON SCDC), [2006] O.J. No. 508 (Div. Ct.), at para.
20; leave to appeal refused, 2006 CarswellOnt 7749 (Ont. C.A.).
[12]          
Rule 57.01 sets out the factors a court may
consider when deciding costs, and the court must adhere to the principle of
proportionality set out in r. 1.04(1.1). Despite those factors, the court’s authority under r. 57.01(1)
remains discretionary: Ontario v. Rothmans Inc., 2013
ONCA 353, [2013] O.J. No. 2367, at para. 134.
[13]          
In determining the appropriate amount of costs
to which the plaintiff is entitled, the principles that guide my decision are
those articulated in Andersen, at para. 22, and Apotex
Inc. v. Eli Lilly Canada Inc. 2022 ONCA 587:
[14]          
The overarching principle when fixing costs is that the amount of costs
awarded be reasonable in the circumstances: Apotex, at para. 61; Davies
v Clarington (Municipality), (2009) 2009 ONCA 722 (CanLII), 100 O.R. (3d) 66 (Ont. C.A.), at para.
52.
[15]          
The question is whether the costs are reasonable, fair, and
proportionate for the losing party to pay in the particular circumstances of
the case or whether the magnitude of the costs generally exceeds any fair and
reasonable expectation of the parties: Apotex, at para. 64.
[16]          
This action was commenced on April 6, 2020. It followed an earlier
action commenced by the plaintiffs against Canada in the Federal Court of
Canada in June 2015. That action was eventually stayed and the appeal by the
plaintiffs to the Federal Court of Appeal was not successful. Although the
plaintiffs have alleged that Canada has included costs related to that Federal
Court proceeding in its bill of costs, my review of the costs documentation from
both defendants does not disclose any basis for that submission.
[17]          
The figure suggested by the plaintiffs bears no relationship to the fees
actually incurred by the defendants. The plaintiffs attempt to simplify the
time and cost incurred by the defendants to defend this action and adequately
prepare for a Rule 21 motion.
[18]          
It is difficult to assess what the plaintiffs’ expectations are as the
losing party to this motion. Mr. Daffern did not submit anything to reveal the
costs that the plaintiffs have incurred since commencing this action. The
reason that the court ordered written submissions (at further cost to all
parties) was that Mr. Daffern did not attend the long motion with a cost
outline nor prepared to make submissions. Doing so is required by the Protocol
for Civil Proceedings Central East Region, updated June 24, 2024, Part
4(I), which provides, in part:
[19]          
As Apotex directs, this lack of disclosure is not dispositive of
the issue of reasonableness, but “the amount of its own cost is nevertheless a
relevant factor that informs the reasonableness of the parties’ expectations as
to the amount the losing party could reasonably be expected to pay”: para. 71.
[20]          
In assessing the plaintiffs’ reasonable
expectations, I note that in addition to the action in the Federal Court, these
plaintiffs have been litigating against the District in the Superior Court of
Justice ever since causing a statement of claim to be issued in Bracebridge on
January 31, 2001. Remarkably, that proceeding appears to still be active. There
is some basis for concluding that they have a good deal of familiarity with rates
charged by their own counsel, who is an experienced litigator with over 30
years’ experience, and by opposing counsel.
[21]          
The pleading stage of this action was more complex than regularly seen
because of the breadth of the plaintiffs’ claims. Canada docketed a total of 60
hours for reviewing the statement of claim, reviewing client documents and
holding client consultations, research, drafting a demand for particulars,
reviewing the response to particulars, drafting a statement of defence and
third-party claim, replying to the District’s defence, and delivering a request
to admit. These steps took place between 2020 and 2023.
[22]          
For the District, there was a docketing of 38.8 hours related to their
counsels’ initial review of pleadings, case assessment and drafting a statement
of defence.
[23]          
Significant hours were spent in preparing and finalizing productions,
and reviewing those of the plaintiffs, for the reasons outlined by the
defendants in their submissions. 125 hours were spent by Canada, and 33.7 hours
by the District.
[24]          
Canada took the additional step of locating, contacting and interviewing
retired Transport Canada officials, which led to a witness meeting and drafting
a witness statement for a more elderly witness to preserve his evidence. That
potential witness was employed by the Department of Transport Canada as the
airport manager of Muskoka airport between 1987 and 1996. He held that position
when Transport Canada transferred the Muskoka airport to the District in 1996,
which was a significant period in the litigation. Canada has provided his
statement for the court’s review, which satisfies me that that individual had
relevant information to provide about the merits of the action. The time
docketed by Canada for these additional steps was 20 hours.
[25]          
As described, attendances were required at two triage conferences in
2024 for which preparation and attendance was required. Canada docketed a total
of 3.5 hours for those conferences. The District has docketed 45.5 hours,
including considerable time in 2023, described as “assisting with motion
scheduling, including responding and contesting various hearings brought and
other attempts by the plaintiffs to prevent the scheduling of the motion or
consolidated with unrelated matters”.
[26]          
These hours are explained by the District in its submissions, which
describe the attempts made by the plaintiffs to oppose the scheduling of the Rule
21 motions. The District submits that the plaintiffs opposed the scheduling of
the motions when they were brought in April 2023, requiring both defendants to
make written submissions to the court to justify their motions. Once Regional
Senior Justice Edwards confirmed that the Rule 21 motions could proceed, the
plaintiffs sought to consolidate the motions with other proceedings involving
the parties (namely the proceeding commenced in Bracebridge), which would have
necessitated cross-examinations and a protracted timetable. This required the
defendants to seek and obtain another endorsement from Regional Senior Justice
Edwards confirming that their motions could proceed in isolation. Despite that
second order, the plaintiffs still brought a cross-motion seeking to
consolidate the defendants’ motions with other matters. This required the
District to obtain yet another endorsement to provide direction to the
plaintiffs. Again, the plaintiffs have not denied that this narrative is
accurate.
[27]          
Then there are the Rule 21 motions themselves. Canada docketed 56 hours,
which included additional research that was mandated by delivery of the
plaintiffs’ factum which, for the first time, raised arguments related to the Real
Property Limitations Act. Canada’s time includes everything from drafting
the motion to preparing written cost submissions, including preparing a cost
outline. The District’s associated time for all of these same steps is 66.8
hours.
[28]          
As noted by the defendants in their submissions, it was apparent to the
court that the lawyers had coordinated with respect to the written and oral
submissions to ensure that they were dealing discreetly with the claims made
only against their own client.
[29]          
Canada seeks only assessable disbursements related to filing fees for
their statement of defence, third-party claim in motion record, totaling $776.
The District’s disbursements likewise only include filing costs for a total of
$805.
[30]          
The District submits that the actual time incurred by its counsel far
exceeds the total time reflected in its cost outline for the purpose of its
partial indemnity calculations. They have excluded over 250 hours of collective
time incurred by articling students, junior lawyers and law clerks, as well as
an additional 45 hours of time incurred by the two lawyers who have had
carriage of the matter. The District advised that it declined to claim for this
additional time in order to ensure that the cost award it is seeking is fair
and proportionate.
[31]          
The partial indemnity rate used by the District for the two lawyers
whose time is captured in the costs outline ranges between $417 per hour and
$521 per hour depending on the year in which the work was done. These lawyers
were admitted to the Ontario Bar in 2009 and 2016 respectively. Counsel have
used 60% of the actual hourly rate charged to the District, consistent with the
approach taken in Inter-Leasing Inc. v. Ontario (Revenue), 2014 ONCA
683, at para 5. For law firms operating in the Toronto area, these rates are typical
for lawyers of this experience.
[32]          
The two lawyers who had carriage of this matter for Canada both have
over 20 years of experience. They have used a counsel fee of $350 per hour on a
partial indemnity rate. Canada provides recent decisions from the Superior
Court of Justice revealing that senior counsel hourly rates are routinely
between $600 to $750 per hour. Taking 60% of those actual rates results in a
partial indemnity rate which is higher than that being requested by Canada.
[33]          
Canada also relies on the recent decision of SageTea Inc. v. Attorney
General of Canada, 2022 ONSC 4078 for the following principles, which I
accept: costs awarded to Canada are not to be reduced on account of Canada’s
counsel being salaried officers of the Crown; evidence of the actual costs of
the legal services provided by salaried Crown counsel is not required; the
amounts “charged” by counsel reflect an internal accounting mechanism and do
not represent the actual cost of legal services provided by Canada’s counsel;
and the rates provided in the 2005 Cost Grid have not been adjusted for
inflation.
[34]          
While asking this court to use partial indemnity rates that reflect
“Bracebridge standards”, the plaintiffs have not provided any guidance to the
court. However, after a decade and half on the bench, during which determining
costs is all in a days’ work, I am aware that the partial indemnity rates used
by the defendants’ counsel are not higher than ordinary, nor unreasonable for
lawyers with their years of experience.
[35]          
The plaintiffs’ cost submissions attempt to address the merits of the
case. None of the merits of the case were tested on this motion other than
whether the action was statute-barred. I agree with the defendants that this
was not a close call, and the outcome of the motions obvious. In determining
costs, I take into account that one aspect of upholding the interests of
justice includes discouraging unmeritorious claims, in this case claims clearly
statute-barred, from ever being initiated.
[36]          
Having reviewed the docketed time of the defendants in some detail, I
cannot reach the conclusion that there has been an inordinate, disproportionate
amount of time spent at any step, duplication or “over lawyering”. Given that
the defendants were facing a complex claim seeking millions of dollars, they
had little choice but to allocate significant resources. And the added
complexity of the documentary discovery adds a unique feature to this case that
may not be found in most Rule 21 motions. Even though no evidence was
admissible on the motion, the defendants had to take these steps to assess their
position in the litigation and for the purposes of advising their clients with
regard to bringing their motions.
[37]          
The plaintiffs did attempt to use an affidavit on the motion, although
it was from a different proceeding and had no relevance to the motions. This
also wasted the time of the defendants.
[38]          
Despite reaching the conclusion that there is nothing
objectionable about the amount of time or rates charged by either defendant,
courts have made clear that a calculation of hourly rates and time is not the
object of the exercise. The object is to fix costs in an amount that is fair
and reasonable for the unsuccessful party to pay in the particular proceeding.
Further, there must be proportionality between what is at stake and what is
spent. As Farley J. stated in BNY Financial Corp.-Canada v. National
Automotive Warehousing Inc., [1999] O.J. No. 1273, (Ont. C.J.), at p. 4:
“Rather essentially the question to be considered is what is the case
reasonably worth in the circumstances.”
[39]          
Having considered the facts and the law and each
of the factors set out in r. 57.01, and “stepping back” to consider the
appropriateness of the costs overall, I find that in the circumstances of this
case an amount of costs that is fair, proportionate and reasonable to have the
plaintiffs pay to Canada is $85,000 and to the District is $85,000, both
inclusive.  Order to issue accordingly.