1.                 
On March 23, 2018, Payam Katebian entered into a
pre-construction agreement to purchase a condominium unit from 1000 Elgin East
C Inc. On March 31, 2018, the agreement was amended to substitute 2627641
Ontario Inc. (“262Ont.”) for Katebian as purchaser.
2.                 
The agreement contained the following provisions
relevant to the issues to be determined in these proceedings:
3.                 
On May 10, 2023, My Linh Trinh and Brandi Trinh
(“Trinh”) entered into an agreement with 262Ont. for the assignment of its
interest in the agreement of purchase and sale. The assignment agreement
provided:
4.                 
The assignment agreement was not completed. Trinh
argues that the agreement became null and void because of 262Ont.’s failure to
obtain the vendor’s consent within the time provided. 262Ont. argues that it
was not required to provide the consent until Trinh paid the final deposit to
Elgin East, and that Trinh’s failure to make the payment was a breach of the
agreement. Trinh claims a return of its deposit of $37,500. 262Ont. claims forfeiture
of the deposit, and damages for breach of contract. The damages claimed are $4,341.75,
being the difference between Trinh’s purchase price and the price paid by a
third party under a subsequent assignment agreement.
5.                 
On June 1, 2023, a legal assistant in the office
of 262Ont.’s lawyer emailed Trinh’s lawyer informing him of the terms upon
which Elgin East would consent to the assignment. One of those terms was that the
assignee would not be entitled to the benefit of the $8,000 cap on the amount
to be paid to Elgin for development charges. Another was “payment of additional
deposit in the amount of $28,945.00 ….” Trinh’s lawyer responded that he would
seek his clients’ instructions.
6.                 
On June 5, 2023, Trinh’s lawyer wrote to the
legal assistant requesting clarification with respect to the proposed removal
of the cap. Not having received clarification, he wrote again on June 8:
“Please ask the builder what the uncapped Levies will be.” The response
received was: “The rest of the closing cost would be as per a normal real
estate transaction.” Understandably dissatisfied with that response, Trinh’s
lawyer wrote again saying, “Please ask the builder what the uncapped Levies
will be.” At 262Ont.’s request, the closing date was then extended to June 12,
2023 to allow time for the information to be provided.
7.                 
On June 9, 2023, Trinh’s lawyer wrote again
saying that he needed to know the amount of the development charges: “your
client had an agreement that those levies [development charges] will be capped.
The builder is now saying that the assignee does not get the benefit of the
cap. What I need to know is exactly how much the levies are so that I know how
far above the cap they will be.”
8.                 
On June 12, 2023, the legal assistant responded:
“I have provided all of the builder’s responses, it is up to you to review the
APS with your client. Have you reviewed Schedule B of the Tarion Addendum? All
of the fees are in there.” In response, Trinh’s lawyer pointed out that the
amount of the development charges was not in the agreement, and again asked that
they be obtained from the vendor. The legal assistant responded by agreeing
that the charges were not set out in the agreement and asked whether Trinh’s
lawyer wished to extend until the following day. Trinh’s lawyer responded that his
client would have her agent speak to 262Ont’s agent about extending the time
for fulfillment of the condition. The assignment agreement was then amended, this
time to provide for a closing date of June 14, 2023, provided that builder
approval was received.
9.                 
Neither the requested information nor Elgin
East’s consent to the assignment were provided by June 14, 2023. On that date, Trinh’s
agent sent the following text to 262Ont.’s agent: “My client has declined, will
only go with 100%. Doesn’t want any unknown on closing. 102 sold for 800 with rooftop
terrace and end unit, she had seen that before. Will do the release tomorrow.”
What the agent meant by “will only go with 100%” is in dispute.
10.             
On the morning of June 18, 2023, Trinh’s agent
emailed 262Ont.’s agent advising that Trinh would be signing a release and that
it would then be automatically sent to him for his client’s signature. However,
rather than sign the release, 262Ont. requested that Trinh sign a further
amendment of the assignment agreement. The proposed amendment provided for an extension
of the closing date to June 23, 2023. In addition, it provided the following in
relation to the issue of the development charges:
11.             
Trinh was unwilling to sign the proposed
amending agreement and maintained their position that they were entitled to a
return of their deposit because of 262Ont.’s failure to obtain Elgin East’s
consent within the time provided in the assignment agreement and subsequent
amendments.
12.             
The issue to be decided is whether,
13.             
For the following reasons, I do not accept
262Ont.’s argument.
14.             
First, the assignment agreement provided that
the assignees would pay the final deposit of $28,945 required by the agreement
of purchase and sale directly to the vendor, “upon the acceptance of this
assignment of agreement of purchase and sale by the builder/vendor.” I see no argument
to support 262Ont.’s position that Trinh was required to pay the deposit in the
absence of Elgin East’s consent. Trinh had no contractual relationship with
Elgin, and the assignment agreement was subject to termination, in the absence
of Elgin’s consent. In addition, there is no evidence that Elgin was even given
a copy of the assignment agreement, let alone accepted it.
15.             
Second, I am not satisfied that Trinh’s
willingness to pay the deposit in accordance with the assignment agreement was
ever in issue. In support of its position, 262Ont. relies on an affidavit sworn
by its real estate agent in which he says that Trinh’s agent “confirmed that
they wanted the Assignor to advance the additional deposit, as they said they
wanted 100% of the conditions covered by the assignor.” He then goes on to say,
without any indication of the source of his information, that the parties “were
unable to obtain the consent of the Vendor as the Assignees failed to advance
the 5% deposit of $28,945.00, thereby breaching the Assignment Agreement.” He
does not comment on the fact that immediately after Trinh’s agent texted “[m]y
client has declined, will only go with 100%”, he continues, “[d]oesn’t want any
unknown on closing.” “[A]ny unknown on closing” could only refer to the
uncapped and unknown development charges, and not to the fixed amount of the
deposit which was known back on May 10, 2023, when the assignment agreement was
initially signed.
16.             
In response to 262Ont.’s agent’s affidavit,
Trinh’s agent produced text messages between the two not included in the
former’s affidavit. In one of those texts he wrote: “this is a conditional sale
based on builder approval as every assignment is. The builder said they are
willing to approve the assignment based on certain conditions they have added.
One being that they will not transfer the cap [on development charges]. My
client declines this therefore there is no approval.”
17.             
On June 21, 2023, 262Ont.’s lawyer wrote to
Trinh’s lawyer saying, “I am writing to formally notify you of your failure to fulfil
your obligations under the Agreement dated May 9, 2023 regarding the assignment
of the Property. Specifically, you have not completed the assignment within the
agreed-upon time frame, which was set to close on June 14th, 2023.” Of
particular note, the current allegation of breaching the agreement by failing to
pay the final deposit to Elgin East is nowhere to be found in the letter.
18.             
Trinh’s evidence is that by this time she had
“had enough” and no longer felt comfortable proceeding with the transaction.
19.             
Third, it is not clear that the “additional
deposit” said to have been a condition imposed by Elgin East in June 2023 was
one and the same as the final deposit referred to in the March 2018 agreement
of purchase and sale, and which was to be paid to Elgin on interim occupancy.
Payment of the final deposit upon interim occupancy was a pre-existing
requirement and not an additional one. I was provided with no evidence from
Elgin of its requirements for acceptance of the proposed assignment, and the
text from 262Ont.’s real estate agent to Trinh’s lawyer advising of those
requirements is hearsay.
20.             
The terms set out in 262Ont.’s email included that
Elgin would “allow the assignment of the unit to be listed on MLS only after all
of the within conditions have been satisfied, not before” (emphasis in original).
The reference to “list[ing] on MLS” suggests that Elgin may not even have been aware
of Trinh as the proposed assignee. There is no evidence that Elgin was aware.
21.             
The remaining issue is whether Trinh ought to
have accepted the amending agreement proposed by 262Ont. on June 18, 2023. On
this issue, 262Ont. relies on the provision of the original assignment
agreement that 262Ont. and Trinh would work diligently toward obtaining the
vendor’s consent to the assignment. For the following reasons, I find that they
were not required to do so.
22.             
First, pursuant to its terms, the assignment
agreement became null and void, before the June 18 amendment was proposed. While
the provision relied on by 262Ont. required Trinh to negotiate in good faith during
the currency of the agreement, that obligation ceased when the time for vendor
approval expired.
23.             
Second, accepting the June 18 amending agreement
would have exposed Trinh to financial risk. If the proposed holdback was insufficient,
Trinh would have to rely upon the personal undertaking of the assignor
(assuming that in the final sentence of the relevant paragraph it was intended
that the assignor would “give” rather than “take” a personal undertaking). They
could not be required to do so.
24.             
In the result, I find that because 2627641
Ontario Inc. failed to obtain Elgin East C Inc.’s approval of the assignment
agreement, the agreement is null and void, and My Linh Trinh and Brandi Trinh
are entitled to a return of the $37,500 deposit paid by them to Tesa Real
Estate Inc.
25.             
As the successful parties, Trinh are entitled to
their costs of the application. Trinh provided a bill of costs; 272Ont. did
not.
26.             
Trinh’s bill of costs shows fees of $9,164.84,
and disbursements of $589.00, for a total of $9,753.84, on a partial indemnity
basis. However, those fees include preparing for and attending at an aborted
hearing which took place on January 17, 2024. The difficulty with this is that
the costs of January 17 were not reserved to this court. In fact, the
endorsement of Verner J. provided that if the parties were unable to agree on
costs, they were to provide her with bills of costs and written submissions.
27.             
I find a fair and reasonable costs award in the
circumstances of this case to be $8,500 for the consolidated applications.