[1]              
This is an Application to appoint a receiver of
the business, affairs, assets, undertakings and properties of the Respondents,
1953199 Ontario Inc. (“195 Ontario”), Ocean Nursery Inc., Ocean Equipment
Limited and SSL123 Holdings Inc. (collectively, the “195 Companies”) and the Respondents,
Songsco.com Ltd. (“Songsco”), Navy Equipment Rental Ltd. and Song Landscaping
Ltd. (collectively, the “Song Companies”).
[2]              
The Application is brought under s. 101 of the Courts
of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C43, s. 243(1) of the Bankruptcy and
Insolvency Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. B-3 (the “BIA”) and s. 248 of the Business
Corporations Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. B.16 (OBCA).
[3]              
The Applicants, Doctor Qian Xi Luo and Doctor
Zhi Gang Sha (respectively “Luo” and “Sha”) are spouses. Through their
respective holding corporations, the Applicants Tao
Enlightenment Corp. and Tiyouyihei Corporation (the “Corporate Applicants”),
they are 50 percent shareholders of the Respondent 195 Ontario. The Corporate
Applicants hold first and second mortgages over property which is the principal
place of business of the 195 Companies. 195 Ontario is the mortgagor. These
mortgages secure a principal debt of $2.625 million which the Applicants allege
has been in default for over a year.
[4]              
The Respondent, Hai Jun Song (“Song”) is Luo and
Sha’s business partner. He is also a 50 percent shareholder of 195 Ontario. He
is the sole shareholder of the Respondents Songsco.com Ltd., Navy Equipment
Rental Inc. and Song Landscaping.
[5]              
The Respondent SSL123Holdings Inc. is a holding
company owned 50 percent by Luo and 50 percent by Song. The Respondents Ocean
Equipment Limited and Ocean Nursery Inc. (“Ocean Equipment” and “Ocean Nursery”,
together the “Ocean Companies”) are owned by SSL123 Holdings Inc., and were the
corporate vehicles through which Luo, Sha and Song operated the joint venture
landscaping and equipment rental businesses.
[6]              
Commencing in 2016, the Applicants Luo and Sha
and the Respondent Song formed and operated a horticulture nursery business
(Ocean Nurseries) and a landscaping equipment sale and rental business (Ocean
Equipment). Song operated the businesses, while Luo and Sha supplied capital for
the venture. 195 Ontario was incorporated on April 11, 2016. Ocean Nursery and
Ocean Equipment were incorporated on July 6, 2016. SSL123 was also incorporated
on July 6, 2016 as a holding company to hold the shares of the Ocean Companies.
[7]              
Luo alleges that between June 8, 2016 and
November 3, 2017, he made a “series of capital loans” to the Ocean Companies
totalling $3.5 million. This amount is disputed by Song.
[8]              
To carry out their intended business operations,
Luo and Song agreed to purchase a 47-acre property at 16110 Woodbine Avenue, in
Stouffville, Ontario (the “Property”). The Property was purchased on April 18,
2016 for $2.85 million.
[9]              
Luo and Song agreed that Song’s share of the
purchase price would be used to construct greenhouses and warehouses on the
Property to house the businesses. Luo and Song obtained the agreement of the
Vendor to finance Song’s share of the purchase price with a vendor take back
mortgage of $1.425 million (the “VTB”). Luo and Song agreed that Song would be
solely responsible for the interest and principal payments required under the
VTB. The businesses were also under the primary operational control of Song,
who ran them on a day-to-day basis.
[10]          
The parties dispute the contributions made by
Luo and Song to the businesses in the following years.
[11]          
On September 14, 2016, the Luo Companies, 195
Ontario and Song executed an “Assumption and Indemnity Agreement”. Pursuant to
this agreement:
[12]          
The Applicants allege that Song breached this
agreement by failing to pay the VTB when it became due.
[13]          
To protect her investment in the Farm Property,
Luo agreed to lend 195 Ontario and Song $1.2 million (the “VTB Takeout Loan”),
to retire the VTB. The VTB Takeout Loan was advanced by Luo’s holding company
pursuant to a promissory note dated April 22, 2021 (the “Promissory Note”) and
secured by a second-ranking mortgage registered against the Farm Property on
April 22, 2021 (the “VTB Takeout Mortgage”).  The Promissory Note and the VTB
Takeout Mortgage each provide that $1.2 million was to be paid in full by
October 22, 2021, with interest payable monthly at the rate of three percent
per annum. Contrary to their terms, Song only repaid $700,000.00 and no
interest payments have been received since December 22, 2022.
[14]          
On March 7, 2023, the Luo Companies made demand
for payment on 195 Ontario of $1,515,103.49 owing under the Farm Mortgage and
$510,426.77 owing under the VTB Takeout Mortgage. Notices of intention to
enforce security were issued under both mortgages pursuant to s. 244(1) of the
BIA. To date, no Statement of Claim regarding the enforcement of these
mortgages has been issued.
[15]          
In the spring of 2021, Song entered into two
agreements with a person named Zhengyi Yu (“Yu”): a lease and a sub-lease.
Under the first agreement, Yu leased the Ocean Companies from 195 Ontario for
$10,000 per month. Under the second “mirror” agreement, Song sub-leased Yu’s
interest back from Yu. The Applicants allege that the purpose and result of
these mirror agreements were to transfer the business operations of Ocean Companies
to companies (the Respondents Navy Equipment Rental Ltd. and Song Landscaping
Ltd.) controlled solely by Song. The Applicants allege that, contrary to the
assertions of Song, no rent was ever paid by Yu under the first agreement.
[16]          
Luo alleges that although Song purported to
close the Ocean Companies in 2021, Song actually appropriated the businesses
into his own companies and that the businesses still operate on the Property.
[17]          
Luo retained an accountant to conduct a forensic
accounting investigation into the records and operations of 195 Ontario and the
related companies. The investigation revealed significant indications of
suspicious transfers and payments to Song and his companies. The preliminary
forensic accounting report, dated March 15, 2024, concludes that Song appears
to have misappropriated approximately $5.4 million from 195 Ontario and the
related companies. Song disputes these conclusions.
[18]          
Song argues that he and Luo agreed that they
would equally share all of the capital and operating expenses of the jointly
owned corporations. Song would be responsible for the day-to-day construction,
renovation, operation and management of developing the Property. Song would
contribute money, but would also be credited for contributing his personal time
and effort towards the construction, renovation, operation and management of
the businesses. Luo and Song would share on an equal basis any proceeds,
revenues and/or profits from the businesses.
[19]          
However, as expenses relating to the development
of the Property grew into the millions, Song alleges that Luo breached the
terms of their agreement by failing to contribute her 50% share. Song takes the
position that he contributed and paid a total of $3 million for significant
improvements to the Property, including structures, offices, warehouses,
greenhouses, driveways, landscaping and connecting utilities and services.
[20]          
Song also takes the position that, by mutual
agreement of the parties, Ocean Equipment ceased operating in May 2020 and
Ocean Nursery ceased operating in April 2021. Once the decision was made by Luo
and Song to cease operations of Ocean Nursery, they decided to lease the
buildings and facilities on the Property. The lease to Yu was pursuant to that
joint decision and was made with the full knowledge and consent of Luo.
[21]          
Since Ocean Nursery and Ocean Equipment are no
longer operating businesses, they have no assets. The only asset is the 47-acre
Property owned by 195 Ontario that Ocean Nursery and Ocean Equipment previously
operated on. That property was purchased in 2016 for $2.85 million, and was
appraised at $7 million in 2018, in part because of the improvements made by
Song. No updated appraisal was provided on this Application, but there is no
evidence that the value of the Property has depreciated.
[22]          
Song alleges that, in November 2022, he
discovered that Luo had made over $1 million in unauthorized transfers from the
jointly owned corporations to corporations owned solely by Luo. Some of this
money was used for renovations to Luo’s children’s homes. It was at this point
that Song and Luo’s relationship broke down.
[23]          
Finally, Song argues that no funds were advanced
by Luo to obtain the $1.425 million mortgage. He alleges that he did not
understand the mortgage document and the loan agreement because they were
presented to him in English and not translated to Mandarin. He takes the
position that the mortgages are fraudulent.
[24]          
Assuming this matter proceeds through trial, the
Court will necessarily make specific findings about fault and responsibility in
evaluating the opposing claims. It is not my task to do so at this stage, and
indeed I must be circumspect about purporting to reach definitive findings on a
paper record: 340268 Ontario Limited v. Georghiades and Georghiades v.
Georghiades, 2024 ONSC 6168, at paras. 48 and 49.
[25]          
On January 17, 2018, Luo, through her holding
company Tao Enlightenment Corp. (“Tao”), loaned Song $1.5 million, secured by a
second mortgage against Song’s personal residence on Ella Drive in Stouffville,
Ontario. The mortgage was registered on January 26, 2018. Demand for payment
was made on November 30, 2022. As payment was not forthcoming, a Notice of Sale
was issued on February 22, 2023.
[26]          
On May 2, 2023, Tao commenced an action against
Song and his spouse for payment and possession under the mortgage.
[27]          
Song defended and counterclaimed in the action,
adding all of the 195 Companies named in this Application as Defendants by
Counterclaim.
[28]          
In his counterclaim, Song alleges that the
business affairs of the 195 Companies have been carried out “in a manner that
is oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to …Song’s interest contrary to s. 248 of
the OBCA” and he seeks, inter alia, an order for “the appointment of a
Monitor to oversee the business affairs” of the 195 Companies, and an Order
under s. 248 of the OBCA requiring “the winding up of the 195 Companies and the
distribution of their property”.
[29]          
The Ella Mortgage Action is referenced in both
parties’ materials, but is not before me on this Application.
[30]          
On May 3, 2024, the Applicants brought a motion
within the Application to have MNP Ltd. appointed as Interim Monitor pending
the return of the Application.
[31]          
On June 21, 2024, the Court granted an Order on
consent appointing MNP as Interim Monitor without security, over all the
Property of the Monitored Respondents pursuant to the terms of the Appointment
Order. The Monitored Respondents are 195 Ontario, Ocean Nursery, Ocean
Equipment, and SSL123 Holdings.
[32]          
The Interim Monitor filed a “First Report” on
October 15, 2024.  That Report indicated the Interim Monitor’s view that,
despite repeated requests, Song and the Monitored Respondents “continue to
obfuscate and frustrate the performance of the Interim Monitor’s mandate, in
breach of sections 3, 4, 5, 6, and 9 of the Appointment Order”. The Report
recommended amendments to its Appointment Order to expand its powers to obtain
information from the Monitored Respondents to effectively monitor the Property.
These expanded powers would include granting the Interim Monitor the power to
search for, locate, and take possession of records of the Monitored Respondents
or relating to the Property, wherever located and in whatever format, and
giving the Interim Monitor the right to access any location owned by the
Monitored Respondents or Song and his spouse, including Song’s personal
residence, for the purpose of carrying out the Interim Monitor’s mandate.
[33]          
The Respondents take the position that they have
complied with the terms of the June 21, 2024 Order, and that the Interim
Monitor exceeded its authority by seeking information that was not within its
mandate.
[34]          
This is not a dispute that I will resolve on
this Application. The Applicants did not bring a motion to expand the powers of
the Interim Monitor.
[35]          
The issue to be determined on this Application
is whether MNP should be appointed as receiver over the Property.
[36]          
To be clear, the Draft Order filed by the
Applicants would grant extensive powers to the receiver, including:
[37]          
The Applicants argue that a receiver should be
appointed for the following reasons:
[38]          
The Applicants also seek an Order appointing a
receiver over the companies owned by Song. This relief was not in their Notice
of Application but was raised for the first time in their Factum, served on the
Respondents just three weeks before the Application was heard. The Respondents
object to the Applicants seeking this relief since it was not raised in their
Notice of Application and the Applicants did not file a motion to amend the
Notice to include this relief. I will return to this issue later.
[39]          
The Applicants ask the Court to appoint MNP as
receiver over the Property of both the 195 Companies and the Song Companies to
perform a full forensic investigation into the affairs of the companies,
resolve the impasse between the shareholders, market and
sell the Property, including the Farm Property and distribute
the proceeds to the stakeholders on an equitable basis.
[40]          
The Respondents take the position that the only
asset owned by the 195 Companies is the 47-acre Property that is owned by 195
Ontario. The Applicants have registered two mortgages against this Property.
The Respondents argue that the Applicants do not meet the test for the
appointment of a receiver, which requires both a strong prima facie case
and evidence of irreparable harm. Since the Property is jointly owned by the
Applicants and Song, there is no concern that the Applicants’ right to recover
is in any jeopardy. The current value of the Property far exceeds what the
Applicants have invested in the joint venture.
[41]          
Moreover, many of the cases relied on by the
Applicants involve mortgage agreements that expressly provide for the
appointment of a receiver if the mortgagor defaults on the mortgage. There is
no such provision in the mortgages at issue in this case.
[42]          
In summary, the Respondents argue that the
balance of convenience does not favour the appointment of a receiver because:
[43]          
The Applicants rely on three statutory
provisions to support their application: s. 101 of the Courts of Justice Act,
s. 243(1) of the BIA and s. 248 of the OBCA. I will address each in turn.
[44]          
Section 101 of the Courts of Justice Act
provides:
[45]          
In my view, s. 101 does not apply to the present
case. Section 101 provides for an interlocutory appointment of a receiver. An
interlocutory appointment means that the receiver will be appointed on a
temporary basis until the underlying action is determined. In this case, there
is no underlying action.
[46]          
The Applicants have not issued a Statement of
Claim against any of the Respondents in relation to the mortgage default or any
alleged misappropriation of funds from 195 Ontario or the Ocean Companies. The
Notice of Application does not seek the appointment of a receiver on an interim
or interlocutory basis pending any action. It seeks the final appointment of a
receiver.
[47]          
This interpretation of s. 101 is supported by
the decision of MacPherson J.A. in Ontario v. Shehrazad Non Profit Housing
Inc., 2007 ONCA 267, at para. 23:
[48]          
In the present case, the application for an
appointment of a receiver is not ancillary to other relief claimed in the
Notice of Application, it is the only relief claimed. Nor is there a “pending
or intended proceeding”. The Fresh as Amended Notice of Application is dated
March 20, 2024, and no proceeding has been commenced since then.
[49]          
This distinction is important. The test for the
appointment of an interim receiver pursuant to s. 101 requires the application
of the three-part test set out by the Supreme Court of Canada in RJR-MacDonald,
at paras. 47-48. The RJR-MacDonald test requires the applicant to
demonstrate (i) that there is a serious issue to be tried; (ii) that the
creditor will suffer irreparable harm if the relief is not granted; and (iii)
that the balance of convenience favours the creditor: Akagi v. Synergy Group
(2000) Inc., 2015 ONCA 368, at para. 92: “The test is often applied where
the receivership order is purely interlocutory and ancillary to the pursuit of
other relief claimed -- where it is, in effect, execution before judgment”.
[50]          
In the present case, the appointment of a
receiver would not just be “execution before judgment”, it would be execution
before claim.
[51]          
See also Mao v. Liu, 2024 ONSC 752, at
para. 96 and cases cited therein:
[52]          
Finally, Strathy J. (as he then was) summarized
the relevant principles in Anderson v. Hunking, 2010 ONSC 4008, at
paras. 15 and 16 (citations omitted):
[53]          
As will be discussed below, a less stringent
test may apply if the appointment of a receiver is sought as a final order
under the BIA or the OBCA.: Hands-On Capital Investments Inc. v. DMCC
Holdings Inc., 2023 ONSC 2417, at para. 50.
[54]          
My point at this juncture is that s. 101 of the Courts
of Justice Act is limited to interlocutory appointments “when ancillary to
relief claimed in a proceeding”. It does not, therefore, apply to this case.
[55]          
Putting aside the procedural issue raised above,
the Applicants in this case have presented a strong prima facie case. The
preliminary forensic accounting report dated March 15, 2024 presents a strong prima
facie case that Song has misappropriated funds from 195 Ontario. In
addition, Song’s lease of the Property to Yu, and the mirror sub-lease back to
Song, are particularly suspicious. In my view, the Respondents have failed to
provide a satisfactory explanation for the sub-lease other than that it was
designed to appropriate the joint business for Song’s sole benefit.
[56]          
That said, the Applicants have failed to satisfy
the irreparable harm component of the three-part test. Given the nature of the Property
– a 47-acre farm with buildings – and the fact that the Property is owned
jointly by the parties, and the fact that the Applicants hold a first and
second mortgage over the Property, the Applicants’ right to recover any
potential judgment (should an action be commenced some time in the future) is
not in any real jeopardy:  2607087 Ontario Limited v.
2654993 Ontario Ltd. et al., 2024 ONSC 4595, at para. 57. Apart from the Farm
Property, there does not appear to be any property that requires preservation
in this case. Even assuming that the Respondents have misappropriated the funds
and business as alleged by the Applicants, the 47-acre Property appears to have
sufficient value to provide the Applicants with security.
[57]          
There is no evidence as to why the Applicants
have not commenced a mortgage enforcement proceeding, which “if successful, the
Applicant would presumably be entitled to force a sale of the Real Property and
seek to be paid out on its mortgages”: 2607087 Ontario Limited, at para.
58.
[58]          
Moreover, the Applicants have failed to persuade
me that the immediate sale of the Property – even before an action has been
commenced – is necessary. Even if the Property is sold tomorrow, the
distribution of the proceeds of sale will have to wait until the parties either
settle their case or there is a judicial resolution of their opposing claims.
The appointment of a receiver cannot bring an end to these proceedings because,
although the receiver can investigate and make recommendations, the receiver
cannot decide the dispute between the parties. No explanation has been provided
as to why the immediate sale of the Property is “just or convenient”.
[59]          
Section 243 of the BIA provides that on an
application by a secured creditor, a court may appoint a receiver to, inter
alia, take possession of the property of an insolvent person and exercise such
control thereon that the court considers advisable if the court considers it
“just or convenient”.  Unlike s. 101 of the Courts of Justice Act, s.
243 of the BIA is not limited to interlocutory orders.
[60]          
An “insolvent person” is defined in s. 2 of the
BIA as:
[61]          
Since s. 243 applies to any “secured creditor”,
one of the factors considered by the courts when deciding whether to appoint a
receiver under s. 243 is whether the creditor has a right to appoint a receiver
under the loan document: 2806401 Ontario Inc. o/a Allied Track Services Inc.,
2022 ONSC 5509, at para. 15:
[62]          
In 340268 Ontario Limited v. Georghiades and
Georghiades v. Georghiades, 2024 ONSC 6168, Black J. stated, at para. 104:
[63]          
See also: Bank of Montreal v Carnival
National Leasing Limited, 2011 ONSC 1007, at para. 25; 2607087 Ontario
Limited v. 2654993 Ontario Ltd. et al., 2024 ONSC 4595, at para. 10.
[64]          
In the present case, the Luo Companies are
secured creditors, they hold a first and second mortgage over the Farm Property
owned by 195 Ontario. They allege that 195 Ontario is an “insolvent person”
because it is unable to meet its obligations: it has defaulted on the two
mortgages.
[65]          
This is not, however, a case in which the
creditor has the right to appoint a receiver under the loan document.
[66]          
Moreover, the Respondents dispute the validity
of the mortgages, and each party has accused the other of misappropriation.
Given these disputes, I am left with the same questions I had when considering
the parties’ positions under s. 101 of the Courts of Justice Act:
Assuming that 195 Ontario qualifies as an “insolvent person” under s. 243 of
the BIA, what is the advantage of appointing a receiver to immediately
liquidate the insolvent corporation’s property?  There is no evidence that the
Applicants’ right to recovery is in jeopardy, and there cannot be any
distribution of the property until the parties’ opposing positions have been
resolved. Apart from liquidating the sole asset of 195 Ontario, what is the
receiver going to do? Neither of the Ocean Companies has operated since 2021,
so there is no business for a receiver to manage.
[67]          
In my view, s. 243 of the BIA leads to the same
result as s. 101 of the Courts of Justice Act: it is not “just and
convenient” to appoint a receiver at this stage of the proceedings.
[68]          
There is evidence that the Song Companies continue
to operate a nursery on the Property, and that this nursery was misappropriated
from the 195 Companies. The Applicants have, belatedly, sought to add an order
that the receiver should manage the Song Companies as well. I agree with the
Respondents that this amendment – added for the first time in the Applicants’
factum - was brought too late to give the Respondents a fair opportunity to
respond. The Applicants contend that it should have been obvious to the
Respondents since Song’s cross-examination on August 27, 2024, that the
Applicants would seek to appoint a receiver over the Song Companies. Assuming
this to be correct, if it should have been obvious to the Respondents on that
date, it should have been even more obvious to the Applicants, who were unable
to explain why they waited until October 31, 2024, to put the Respondents on
notice that they would seek to expand the relief claimed in their Notice of
Application.
[69]          
Finally, to the extent that this Application is
brought under s. 243 of the BIA, I was provided with no authority to support
the proposition that the Song Companies are “insolvent persons”, such that s.
243 of the BIA would apply to them.
[70]          
Section 248 of the OBCA provides a remedy to
shareholders unfairly oppressed or prejudiced by the conduct of any security
holder, creditor, director or officer of the corporation. Section 248(2)
provides:
[71]          
One of the orders available to the court under
s. 248(b) is “an order appointing a receiver or receiver manager”.
[72]          
While the Applicants rely on s. 248 of the OBCA
in their Notice of Application, their factum makes no additional reference to
it.
[73]          
It is, however, clear from the material filed by
both parties that there has been a serious breakdown of trust between the Applicants
and the Respondents, and the parties are at an impasse regarding the operation
of the 195 Companies. It is not, however, clear that the Property must be
immediately liquidated or that the appointment of a receiver will resolve any
of the disputes between the parties.
[74]          
As discussed by Black J. in the Georghiades case, at paras. 109 - 110, one
available option for the Court under s. 248 of the OBCA is the appointment of
what has come to be referred to as an “investigative receiver”:
[75]          
It appears that the threshold for the
appointment of an investigative receiver is lower than for receiver manager:
see Black J.’s detailed review of the case law at paras. 113 – 159 of
Georghiades. Black J. concludes, at para. 113, that the Court needs “to
carefully consider the proposed role of a given court officer in identifying
the correct test for their appointment”.
[76]          
In Akagi v. Synergy Group (2000) Inc., 2015
ONCA 368, the Court of Appeal identifies “consistent themes” that emerge from
the authorities, and states, at para. 90:
[77]          
In addition, the Court must consider “the
appropriateness of the proposed investigation, bearing in mind its usefulness
and reasonableness under the circumstances, with due consideration to its
expected costs and benefits”: Kerbel v. Morris Kerbel Holdings Limited,
2023 ONSC 529, at para. 48.
[78]          
An investigation under the OBCA is not intended
to determine the rights of parties or to assist the parties to prepare for
litigation: Kerbel, at paras. 55 and 59:
[79]          
In the present case, the Applicants have not
sought the appointment of an investigative receiver. The Applicants already
have the preliminary forensic accounting report of March 15, 2024, and the
parties have already consented to an interim monitor who has filed a first
report. It is not clear to me that an investigative receiver could do much more
at this stage. Nor did the Applicants bring a motion to expand the
investigative powers of the interim monitor. The Applicants brought this Application
for the appointment of a receiver with the power to “market and sell the
Property, including the Farm Property and distribute the proceeds to the
stakeholders on an equitable basis”. For the reasons given at paras. 58 and 65
above, I am not satisfied that the Court should appoint a “receiver or
receiver-manager” over 195 Ontario or the 195 Companies at this stage of the
proceedings.
[80]          
Nor am I prepared to consider the Applicants’
request to appoint a receiver over the Song Companies under s. 248 of the OBCA.
As indicated above, this request was raised for the first time in the
Applicants’ factum, filed three weeks before the Application was heard.
Moreover, before I could consider the appointment of a receiver over the Song
Companies, the Applicants would have to persuade the Court that they qualify as
“complainants” under s. 248(1) of the OBCA, as defined by s. 245. The
Applicants made no submissions on this point.
[81]          
For the foregoing reasons, the Application is
dismissed.
[82]          
If the parties are not able to agree on costs,
the Respondents may serve and file costs submissions not to exceed 3 pages plus
costs outline and any offers to settle, within 20 days of the release of this
decision. The Applicants may serve and file responding submissions within a
further 15 days.