[1]         
In contested litigation, there is no procedural
step more mundane than the requirement for parties to produce relevant
documents to each other.
[2]         
Production of one’s documents to an opponent in
litigation is an imposition. It can violate one’s privacy. It reflects an
exercise of governmental power of compulsion against a private person who has
done no wrong but simply finds herself named as a party to litigation.
[3]         
But the obligation to produce relevant documents
is so fundamentally necessary to an organized system of fair justice that it is
commonly accepted as a basic minimum requirement. As Moldaver JA (as he then
was) wrote in Goodman v. Rossi, 1994 CanLII 10551 (ON CA),
[4]         
The issue in that case was whether limits ought
to be imposed on the use of documents produced by a party under the compulsion
of litigation procedures. In this case, the employer seeks to avoid production
of some documents altogether.
[5]         
The respondent union has delivered a grievance
under the applicable collective agreements. The union claims that the employer
is violating the collective agreements by using non-unionized labour and failing
to pay proper agreed-upon wage rates at each of its construction sites.
Although the claim includes all of the employer’s work sites, the grievance
identified just two particular sites.
[6]         
The grievance is being considered in an
arbitration proceeding under the Provincial Collective Agreement between the
Ontario Painting Contractors Associate, the Acoustical Association Ontario, the
Interior Systems Contractors Association of Ontario, and the International
Union of Painters and Allied Trades, and the Ontario Council of the
International Union of Painters and Allied Trades.
[7]         
The agreed upon procedure for all arbitrations
for this branch of the construction industry in Ontario includes the following
term in Appendix “B” of the collective agreement:
[8]         
Under para. 26.04 (h) above, the union wants to
conduct an audit of the employer to obtain financial information for use in the
arbitration. To that end, it delivered a document request to the employer’s
counsel. The union sought production of the following documents that the
auditor whom it retained said she needs to complete an audit of the employer:
[9]         
The employer submitted that the documents sought
were not relevant to the issues in the grievance. The union sought a full audit
of the employer’s business and not just a limited audit of its work sites. The
employer argued that the union ought to be confined to documents concerning the
two work sites that are particularized in the grievance.
[10]      
The employer also expressed concern that the
auditor appointed by the union was not “independent” as required in para. 26.04
(h) because she had performed these types of audits and other non-audit work for
the union in the past. The employer therefore asked for production of documents
by the auditor and union so that the employer could investigate the auditor’s
independence prior to any decision being made about whether any documents ought
to be provided to the auditor.
[11]      
In an award dated July 22, 2024, the arbitrator
held in favour of the union. He ordered the employer to produce the documents
sought to allow the union to obtain an audit of the employer under clause 26.04
(h) of the collective agreement. He also held that there was no basis for the
employer to assert that the auditor was biased or not independent just because
she had worked with the union previously.
[12]      
The employer has commenced this application for
judicial review to seek to quash the order that it produce documents to allow
an audit to be performed for use at the arbitration of the grievance.
[13]      
Before me today, the employer asks to stay the
order of the arbitrator pending the outcome of this judicial review proceeding.
The union has brought its own motion asking the court to dismiss this application
because it is premature.
[14]      
For the reasons that follow, I agree with the
union that the application for judicial review is premature.
[15]      
While the award of the arbitrator is final in
the sense that it cannot be appealed to any other arbitral body or court, it is
plainly an interim award. It does not resolve the union’s grievance. Rather it
deals with procedural steps to take place before the arbitration is heard.
[16]      
The parties agreed in the collective agreement that
all awards by the arbitrator are “final and binding”. They are. They are final
to the extent that they resolve the issues raised and they cannot be reviewed
apart from an application for judicial review. But that does not answer the
question of whether an application for judicial review in this court ought to
be heard in relation to an arbitral award that does not resolve the entire
proceeding on its merits. Ruling that an application is premature does no
violence to the parties’ agreement that all awards by the arbitrator are final
and binding.
[17]      
Judicial review proceedings are not available
for interim awards generally except in very narrow “exceptional circumstances”.
The reasons for this are well understood. Fragmentation of administrative proceedings
causes delay in those proceedings. In this case the arbitration will be delayed
by as much as a year.
[18]      
Allowing fragmentation also encourages a
proliferation of unnecessary court proceedings. It encourages a multiplicity of
court proceedings that may be brought to obtain delay and to run up parties’
costs.
[19]      
The issues are better defined for judicial
review once all proceedings have been completed. Here, for example, once the
matter concludes, a reviewing court will be able to see whether any use was made
of the audit and the underling documents at the arbitration.
[20]      
Perhaps of greatest significance, as I set out
below dealing with the employer’s claim of “irreparable harm”, the production of
documents and audit ordered cause no significant harm to the employer at all.
[21]      
The employer relies on the decision in Canada
(Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness) v. Kahlon, 2005 FC
1000 (CanLII), in which the court reviewed a procedural decision by an
immigration tribunal to enforce a summons to witness against a third-party. The
court held that the decision on the summons was final as it resolved the third-party’s
rights in their entirety. The court was also concerned that should the summons
be upheld, the loss of the witness’s personal privacy rights in her immigration
file could not be undone at the main hearing on the merits.
[22]      
Here, the employer is a business and bound by a
province-wide collective agreement. What is at issue is financial information
concerning the business. There is no personal autobiographical information at
play. Moreover, unlike the third-party witness in Kahlon, the employer’s
rights remain to be decided at the arbitration hearing. The motion before the
arbitrator did not determine the employer’s rights on the merits. Any
inconvenience it suffers producing documents and undergoing an audit is
contemplated by the express terms of the collective agreement and the necessity
of production of documents to do justice between the parties.
[23]      
In the arbitration decision, the arbitrator
dealt with the fact that in this industry, audits are necessary to level the
playing field. Projects can be short-lived. Labour can be transient. The
union’s ability to ferret out particulars of breaches of payment terms is
limited. All financial information is in the hands of employers.
[24]      
Despite the employer submitting that the scope
of an audit under para. 26.04 (h) should be limited to the particulars of a
given grievance, the wording of the paragraph and the relevant case law say otherwise.
 Rather, as the arbitrator noted expressly, information beyond the particulars
provided can be required to prevent employers from hiding information and
playing “catch me if you can”. In addition, information beyond the specific
payroll accounts of particularized projects can be required as checks and
balances by comparison to what was disclosed.
[25]      
The arbitrator found that there was sufficient disclosure
particularized to support an order for a “full audit” on “all” the employer’s
books and records as contemplated by the collective agreement.
[26]      
Exceptional circumstances under which a court
will hear a judicial review proceeding in relation to an interim order are so
narrow that they do not include claims that the arbitrator or tribunal being
reviewed may be biased, lacks jurisdiction, or violated the applicant’s
constitutional rights. Generally, as long as the remaining arbitral or tribunal
process allows the issues to be raised and an effective remedy to be granted,
the court will await the final outcome of the proceeding before embarking on a
judicial review of an interim decision. It is not a sufficiently exceptional circumstance
that a litigant may have to undergo a process that would be avoided if he or
she succeeds on the merits. The court will not weigh-in even where an abuse of
process is claimed. See: David v. Law Society of Ontario, 2021 ONSC 4606
at para. 14. Mekdes Kahissay v. Intact Insurance, 2023 ONSC 3650, at
paras. 9 and 10.
[27]      
Some of the factors that the court assesses
generally in considering the existence of exceptional circumstances are listed
in Toronto Transit Commission v. Amalgamated Transit Union Loc. 113,
2020 ONSC 2642 (CanLII).
[28]      
In this case, the employer has provided evidence
of a project manager in the business who swears that the corporation will
suffer irreparable harm by the disclosure of its private and confidential
information. The witness says so broadly, baldly, and without any reference to
any particular harm that could come from the auditor seeing its records. It is
not at all clear how a project manager is in a position to give evidence about
the nature of the corporation’s privacy interest in its financial records and
the harm it could suffer on disclosure of various records to an auditor under
the collective agreement.
[29]      
I agree with Mr. Gibson that there are many
options as to what might happen at the main hearing on the merits. There are
many outcomes where the union never sees any of the employer’s disputed
information. For example, if the auditor finds no breaches at all, then the grievance
will be dismissed and this issue will be moot.
[30]      
The employer has agreed and has already provided
the auditor with its records about the two listed projects. If the auditor
finds breaches in those projects only, then, once again, there is no issue
about the scope of the audit beyond the particulars already provided and to
which the employer seeks to limit its disclosures.
[31]      
The employer has not sought an order for the
auditor or the union to keep the employer’s records confidential. Mr. Gibson
submits that such orders are routine and are ones to which his client would be
expected to consent. The employer also made no submissions on the scope of the
implied undertaking of confidentiality in arbitration proceedings. That is, if
confidentiality is a concern, there are other ways to minimize possible risks.
[32]      
If the auditor finds issues in projects beyond
the two particularized by the union in its grievance, then the employer’s issue
about the scope of production and the independence of the auditor will be live.
In addition to confidentiality duties already mentioned, the employer will then
have every right to question the auditor and dispute her findings at the
hearing.
[33]      
The employer submits that it has been precluded
from questioning the auditor’s independence by the refusal of disclosure of
documents concerning prior dealings between her and the union.
[34]      
In my view, all the arbitrator said was that once
the employer acknowledged that the auditor was a CPA practising in an
independent accounting firm, it really had no evidence on which to question her
independence or to allege bias. The arbitrator has the power to issue summonses
to witnesses and to order production of documents for use at the hearing.
Nothing precludes a party from asking relevant questions at the hearing and
seeking production if it can lay a sufficient foundation for relevancy and
proportionality for the hearing.
[35]      
I am quite dubious about the alleged independence
issue given that industry experience is critical for any expert or expert
witness. In addition, with the employer voluntarily producing its records for
the two listed projects to the auditor already and not asking for a
confidentiality order or asserting the implied undertaking of confidentiality,
it cannot be all that concerned that she would violate her duties and misuse
the information. That leads me to fear that fragmentation of proceedings and
obtaining a year-long delay in the arbitration on the merits may be more significant
in this application than may be apparent on the face of the materials.
[36]      
Moreover, the arbitrator’s decision follows
well-trodden law on the very paragraph of the very collective agreement in
issue. The arbitrator lays out clearly the basis for his decision. To the
extent that the merits are relevant under the factors listed in TTC,
this is not a strong case for judicial review under Canada (Minister of
Citizenship and Immigration) v. Vavilov, 2019 SCC 65 (CanLII). It is
certainly not a case that is so clearly wrong that would admit interlocutory
review without exceptional circumstances.
[37]      
This is not a close call. An order for
production of documents to allow a full audit on all financial records as
provided in the collective agreement is not exceptional or a real hardship.
[38]      
The application is therefor dismissed.
[39]      
The parties agreed that on this outcome, the
employer would pay the union costs fixed at $5,000. So ordered.
[40]      
As I have dismissed the application, the
employer’s motion for a stay pending the hearing is dismissed as moot. Had I
found exceptional circumstances existed, I likely would have granted the stay
as sought. The issues of irreparable harm and exceptional circumstances are
related if not flip sides of the same facts.