[1]              
The Plaintiffs Victoria Abbott-Fleming (“Victoria”) and Michael
Abbott-Fleming (“Michael”) bring a claim in respect of an injury Ms. Abbott
suffered while on a flight operated by the Defendant Fox Flight Inc. (“Fox
Flight”).
[2]              
Fox Flight is an international air ambulance company that engages in the
transportation of individuals that require medical care. The Defendants
Ashleigh Levesque and Denise Giles
were a registered nurse and registered respirologist, respectively, on the
flight.
[3]              
The Plaintiffs allege that Victoria suffered a sciatic nerve injury
during the flight as a result of the negligence of the Defendants that resulted
in an above-knee amputation of her left leg.
[4]              
The trial in this matter has not yet been scheduled although there have
been two pre-trials. There are still some expert reports that have not been
delivered.
[5]              
The Defendants move to strike the jury notice in this action.
[6]              
For the reasons that follow I dismiss the motion.
[7]              
In my view, it is preferable to follow the “wait and see” approach.
While there is complexity to this matter, there is not yet a trial date. It is
unknown what the actual contested issues will end up being at trial, as issues
sometimes are narrowed. It would not be in the interests of justice to deprive
the Plaintiffs of this substantive right at this stage of the proceeding based
upon the materials and argument before me.
[8]              
Will justice be better served in this case by discharging the jury at
this time?
[9]              
There is no dispute between the parties as to the following legal principles
that apply.
[10]          
The right to a trial by jury in civil actions is set out in s. 108 of
the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43 and is a substantive
right that should not be interfered with lightly: Kempf v. Nguyen, 2015
ONCA 114, 124 O.R. (3d) 241, at para. 43; Penate v. Martoglio, 2024 ONCA
166, at para. 18, where the Court reiterated this.
[11]          
Section 108(3) of the Courts of Justice Act and r. 47.02(2) provides
that the court may, on a motion, order that the issues of fact be tried or the
damages assessed, or both, without a jury.
[12]          
The test for discharging a jury in a civil proceeding was articulated by
the Court of Appeal for Ontario in Graham v. Rourke (1990), 1990 CanLII 7005 (ON CA), 75 O.R. (2d)
622, at p. 625 as follows:
[13]          
Complexity of the facts and the legal principles that apply to a given
case are proper considerations, and indeed the main considerations in
determining whether justice will be better served by the discharge of a jury: Cowles
v. Balac (2006), 2006 CanLII 34916 (ON CA), 83 O.R. (3d) 660 (Ont. C.A.), at paras. 58, 72, and 91.
[14]          
Drawing a line between what is too complex for a jury is “far from an
exact science.” Cases come down to the weighing of the right of a litigant to a
jury trial against a determination that justice to the parties will be better
served by striking the jury notice: at paras 36-91. See also Girao v.
Cunningham, 2020 ONCA 260 at para 162 regarding the test. Determining whether
a case is too complex is an inherently case specific exercise: Kempf v.
Nguyen at para 119.
[15]          
See also Ismail v. Flemming,
2018 ONSC, where the Court indicated that a jury should be discharged only where
a trial by jury would present the “greatest difficulty” by virtue of the
complexity of the issues or evidence.
[16]          
Finally, in in Louis v. Poitras, 2021 ONCA 49, 456 D.L.R. (4th)
164, at para. 17, the Court indicated that the state of the administration of
justice and the civil backlog is an appropriate consideration.
[17]          
The Defendants’ main argument is that a constellation of factors looked
at together mean that justice to the parties will be better served by the
discharge of the jury at this time, because this matter is simply too complex.
[18]          
The Plaintiffs’ position is that this motion is premature and that this
court should adopt the “wait and see” approach.
[19]          
Victoria and Michael were on vacation
in New York from December
13, 2013, to January 17, 2014. While on their vacation Victoria contracted Swine
Flu which developed into pneumonia. Victoria was admitted at Lenox
Hill Hospital in Manhattan,
New York on January 2, 2014. On
January 4, 2014, she was put into a medically induced coma and put on extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation (ECMO). On January 15, Victoria
was removed from ECMO with the insertion of a tracheostomy for respiratory support. There was no record
of any neurological problem with Victoria’s left leg up to
the time of transfer.
[20]          
Victoria was further sedated with Midazolam, Fentanyl and Propofol during
transport to the UK. During the flight, Victoria was restrained with
straps so that she could not move in any way.
She felt that the straps were too tight but was unable to speak due to
the tracheostomy in her throat. The flight was expected to take approximately 12-16 hours. Upon arrival in the UK, Victoria was rejected
by Stepping Hill Hospital
because Fox Flight had not confirmed the flight status.
This resulted in a further confined
transport to Fairfield Hospital some three
hours later. Shortly after arrival, she noticed that her left foot was numb and cold. The hospital
put a woolen sock on her foot. She
told her husband Michael that she could not feel her foot.
[21]          
Before this incident, in or around 2003 Victoria suffered a workplace
accident. This resulted in diagnosis of Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS)
in 2004 and an above-the-knee amputation of her right leg in 2006.
[22]          
Victoria engaged in litigation in the UK related to the first above-knee
amputation which involved expert opinions on her condition, prognosis and
future damages.
[23]          
She settled that action in 2007 for 2.1 million pounds.
[24]          
It is the Plaintiffs’ position that by December 2013 when she took her
trip to New York, her pain had stabilized with intermittent flare ups and that
prior to the 2013 incident, she never had any problems with her left leg with
no signs of CRPS. She takes the position that this leg was strong and allowed
her to be more independent than she is now without any legs.
[25]          
It is the Plaintiffs’ position that as a direct result of the Defendants’
negligence, Victoria suffered a sciatic nerve injury, which resulted in a
flare up of her CRPS and eventually led to the above knee
amputation of her left leg. The Plaintiffs
assert that up until the time of transfer, there was no record of any
neurological problem with Victoria’s right leg. She had been cleared for
transfer by Lenox Hill and accepted by Fox Flight who had done their own
medical evaluation.
[26]          
The following is my consideration of
the main issues argued.
[27]          
The cause of action is negligence and at this stage, issues of standard
of care, causation and damages are in dispute. These concepts are concepts that
juries typically address in medical malpractice and motor vehicle accident
cases.
[28]          
The jury will have to understand what CRPS is. The Defendants’ factum
references Victoria’s expert, Dr. Kevin Smith, who describes CRPS as a
“syndrome of signs and symptoms that can develop following trauma to an
extremity in which there is variable expression of pain, edema, dysregulation
of blood vessel, sweat gland and hair follicle control, movement disorder and
trophic changes in the skin, nails, and bone.” “The associated pain is often
disproportionately severe to the injury itself and is generally non-dermatomal.
Although early and aggressive treatment is recommended, prognosis for recovery
is unpredictable and often patients are left with permanent signs and symptoms.”
In my view, a jury could understand this concept which is central to all issues
in this case.
[29]          
The Defendants also rely on the decision in Athey v. Leonati,
1996 CanLII 183 (SCC), [1996] 3 SCR 458 in support of the complexity in this case. Athey held
that a defendant need not compensate the plaintiff for any debilitating effects
of a pre-existing condition which the plaintiff would have experienced in any
event. In my view, this is not too complex a proposition for a lay person to
understand and it is presumed that a judge knows the law and is able to explain
it to the jury.
[30]          
The Plaintiffs have 8 expert witnesses which include a pain specialist,
an emergency medicine physician, an anesthesiologist, a peripheral nerve injury
surgeon, a life expectancy evaluator, an occupational therapist, a vocational
consultant, an accommodations expert and possibly a biomedical engineer.
[31]          
The Defendants have 12 expert witnesses including a critical care
paramedicine expert, an emergency medicine physician, a neurologist, an expert
in anesthesia and pain care, a critical care expert, a rehabilitation medicine
physician, an occupational therapist, a vocational rehabilitation and
employment consultant, a life expectancy expert, a biomedical engineer and an architect.
[32]          
The Defendants may call the experts from the UK litigation as well which
would add another 12 experts.
[33]          
These experts will present conflicting opinions related to the issue of
the standard of care, whether the standard was breached and whether the damages
were caused by the negligence.
[34]          
The expert reports demonstrate that there is no agreement as to the
standard of care of an aeromedical transport company. The Plaintiffs rely upon
analogies to critical care facilities in hospitals, but the Defendants’
position is that direct transference of such standards to the aeromedical field
is difficult. Therefore, the jury will have to determine the standard of care
based upon competing medical opinions. They would then need to extrapolate that
to the unique circumstances of this flight.
[35]          
To determine causation, the trier-of-fact will also be required to parse
Victoria’s pre-existing condition from injuries allegedly caused by the Fox
Flight Defendants’ negligence.
[36]          
There will also be issues as to the impact of Victoria’s treatment in
New York, the potential implications on her CRPS and whether the flight caused
the sciatic injury which then triggered CRPS.
[37]          
With respect to damages, the Defendants argue that the previous
settlement represents the severity and permanence of Victoria’s CRPS and
impacts her damages. There are reports related to the previous litigation
related to Victoria’s future needs. These include reports that spoke to her
needing an electronically operable wheelchair and adaptations to her home. However,
I take Plaintiff counsel’s point that this is somewhat of a red herring. The
future care reports that led to that settlement are in some cases 15 years old.
They were the basis for the future care that she required at that time, but
what can be known with some precision now is what her future care costs have
actually been since the 2003 accident. The fact that the experts in this
litigation also say that she requires a wheelchair and adaptations to her home
does not make the issue more complicated. If anything, the Defendants will be
able to point out where they feel her estimated future care costs have been
duplicated by damages that she has already obtained in as simple a manner as
they did in their factum on this motion and before me during argument.
[38]          
As noted by the Court in Boyce v. Waterloo Insurance Company, 2024
NSSC 54, conflicting expert opinions is not generally a ground to strike a jury notice, because counsel performs much of
the “heavy lifting” on evidentiary issues in any event, and that “it is the job
of counsel to elicit any necessary opinion evidence from medical experts in a
clear and understandable fashion”.
[39]          
Despite the fact that there are many experts, and they approach the
issues from different perspectives, juries often address pre-existing injuries
and conditions in the context of medical negligence and motor vehicle
negligence and claims address competing causation and expert opinions relevant
to severely injured individuals: Kwok v. Abecassis, 2016 ONSC 2031 at
para 7; In Cowles v. Balac at paras 39 the Court acknowledged that
“experience shows that juries are able to deal with a variety of cases and to
render fair and just results.”
[40]          
The trial duration calculations on the Trial Management Form indicate
that the trial will take 13,320 hours which is approximately 8 weeks, but in
argument the parties indicated that it could take an additional 2 weeks because
Victoria can only testify for 2 to 3 hours per day because of her medical condition.
With this adjustment, her evidence is expected to take 2 weeks. Counsel for the
Plaintiffs indicates that the time will not be wasted because there will be
other issues to address when the Plaintiff is not testifying.
[41]          
I note here that Victoria’s inability to testify for more than 3 hours
per day will be the case whether this is a jury trial or not.
[42]          
While there may be concerns about inconvenience to juror members by
having to sit during a long trial, there is a process for empaneling the jury
who will be able to raise any issues about the duration at the outset.
[43]          
Trial documents are estimated to be between 12,000 and 16,000 pages.
[44]          
In Chandra v. CBC, 2015 ONSC 2980 the court declined to strike
the jury notice notwithstanding complexity and the matter involving 29,000
documents and 40 expert witnesses. The Court stated:
[45]          
The Defendants are concerned that Victoria could have a relapse in which
case there might need to be an adjournment of part of the trial to a future
date which will be unworkable with a jury. This is highly speculative. If that
were to happen, the Defendants could move before the trial judge to strike the
jury.
[46]          
The Defendants also argue that the interests of the civil backlog should
be taken into account in the exercise of the court’s discretion and that in
this case, this tips the balance in favour of striking the jury notice: Louis
v. Poitras, at paras. 2, 3.
[47]          
All but two of the cases referenced by the Defendants where jury notices
have been struck involved decisions made by the trial judge and these cases are
distinguishable.
[48]          
Thibault v. The Empire Life Insurance Company, 2012 ONSC 1723, 8
C.C.L.I. (5th) 272 was a successful motion to strike a jury before trial by a
motions judge. However, this case involved "a
host of complex legal issues including civil fraud, breach of contract, breach
of fiduciary duty, an insurer's obligation to deal with an insured in good
faith and the meaning of such obligation, an insured's obligation to bargain in
good faith, and the interpretation of complex insurance policies" in
addition to several questions of fact: at paras. 69-74. The Court also had
concerns about the need for the jury to assess two actuarial reports and
forensic accounting reports involving entries in a general ledger account over
a 16-year period. As well, the main claim was declaratory in nature. Justice
Thorburn (as she then was) noted that s. 108(3) of the Courts of Justice Act
provides that issues of fact and the assessment of damages in a claim for
declaratory relief shall be tried without jury: at para. 56. Thorburn J. also
held that it was not in the interests of justice to sever these claims from the
claim for declaratory relief: at para. 65.
[49]          
The legal issues in this case are not as
legally multifaceted and there are no issues that a jury is not permitted to
address.
[50]          
The case Lounds v. Lounds 2024 ONSC 2010 involved a jury trial
that was scheduled to take place in North Bay for six weeks. The main reason
why the jury was struck was that the courts in North Bay could not accommodate
a jury trial of that length. The onus here is on the Defendants and they have
provided no evidence that Toronto cannot accommodate a jury trial of this
length. They have had two pre-trials and many case conferences and no one has
ever advised them as much. I can advise as a judge of this court that Toronto
does have jury sittings that can accommodate a jury trial of this length.
[51]          
Although the Defendants argue that it is more practical, efficient and
an overall benefit to the civil justice system to strike a jury before trial, as
noted in Kempf v. Nguyen, citing Cowles v. Balac, sometimes it is
preferable to take a “wait and see” approach before deciding whether to
discharge the jury, because experience shows that in many cases “the
anticipated complexities of a case or other concerns do not materialize or at
least not to the extent originally asserted”: at para. 43. Waiting and seeing
allows courts to “better […] protect the substantive right of the party who
wants a jury trial and to only dismiss the jury when it becomes necessary”: at
para. 43.
[52]          
Given the Court of Appeal’s decision in Kempf v. Nguyen, Dow J.
observed in Ma v. RBC Life Insurance Company, 2016 ONSC 6417, at para.
13:
[53]          
In McIsaac v. MacKinnon, 2019 ONSC 2954, the defendant argued
that the complexity of the legal concept of “causation” coupled with the
complex and disputed scientific evidence
relating to a rare disorder
made the case unsuitable to be tried by a jury. The Court,
referring to the jurisprudence in Kempf declined to strike the jury, and
instead adopted a “wait and see approach.”
[54]          
In my view, although the matter is certainly complex, I am not satisfied
based upon the materials and submissions before me that the interests of
justice support striking the jury at this stage. In AB v. CD, 2018 ONSC
2696 even though Myers J. was dubious that the case before him was appropriate
for a jury, he concluded that the case law was clear that the decision to
strike a jury notice due to complexity is one for the trial judge absent
unusual circumstances.
[55]          
There are no unusual circumstances that require this jury notice to be
struck at this time.
[56]          
There is not even a trial date scheduled yet. It may be that as the
trial approaches, some of the contested issues that have created complexity
will fall off the table. It may be that even though there are thousands of
documents there are only a handful that are actually presented at trial which
is often the case.
[57]          
The “wait and see” approach preserves the Plaintiffs’ substantive right
while still leaving open the possibility that the Defendants could move to
strike the jury notice before the trial judge on the basis that it is in the
interests of justice. This is the preferable approach consistent with the case
law.
[58]          
The Plaintiffs are the successful party and presumptively entitled to
costs. They seek costs in the amount of $10,905 on a substantial indemnity
basis or $7,635 on a partial indemnity basis.
[59]          
There is no basis for a substantial indemnity costs award which are only
awarded where there has been reprehensible, scandalous or outrageous conduct on
the part of a party: see DUCA Financial Services Credit Union Ltd. v. Bozzo,
2010 ONSC 4601, at para. 5; Foulis v. Robinson (1978), 1978 CanLII 1307 (ON CA), 21 O.R. (2d)
769 (C.A.); and most recently Mars Canada Inc. v. Bemco Cash & Carry
Inc., 2018 ONCA 239, 140 O.R. (3d) 81, at para. 43.
[60]          
The partial indemnity costs claimed by the Plaintiffs are almost
identical to the costs set out in the Defendants’ Bill of Costs. The time spent
and rates charged are reasonable These are within the reasonable contemplation
of the Defendants Boucher v. Public Accountants Council for the Province of
Ontario (2004), 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R. (3d) 291 (C.A.), at para. 26.
[61]          
Thus, I award the Plaintiffs $7,635 payable within 15 days.