[1]              
The
plaintiffs make this motion seeking various relief regarding the estate of the
late Dean Joseph Costanza (“Dean Costanza”), including a suspensory order
pursuant to s. 59(1) of the Succession Law Reform Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.
S.26; a Mareva injunction restraining the defendant, Bozana Skojo (“Ms.
Skojo”), from dissipating or selling the proceeds received from a life insurance
policy payout; and an order that Ms. Skojo pay the life insurance policy proceeds
to her law firm, to be held in trust pending further court order or agreement
between the parties.
[2]              
The
main dispute centres on the payout of a life insurance policy obtained by Dean
Costanza from State Farm Insurance Company, now Desjardins Financial Security
Life Assurance Company (“Desjardins”), to the minor defendant, Matteo Costanza
by his litigation guardian, Ms. Skojo.
[3]              
On
February 9, 2012, a life insurance policy for a benefit of $500,000 was issued
to Dean Costanza by State Farm, now Desjardins; Dean Costanza had designated
his son, Matteo Costanza, as the primary beneficiary of the policy (“the Life
Insurance Policy”).
[4]              
The
plaintiff, Christina Price (“Ms. Price”), attests that she was involved in a
common law relationship with Dean Costanza and that they lived together for
approximately four years, from Spring 2014 until his death in December 2017. It
is Ms. Price’s evidence that, during this time, Dean Costanza acted as a parent
to her son, the minor plaintiff, Christos Price (“the Minor Price”).
[5]              
There
are a number of ongoing proceedings in relation to the estate of Dean Costanza:
[6]              
On
July 25, 2018, Kurz J. also made an order appointing Sheila Evans as the Estate
Trustee during litigation for her son, Dean Costanza, upon filing the
appropriate documents with the court.
[7]              
In
the Insurance Application, Matteo Costanza sought a declaration that the Life
Insurance Policy was valid, subsisting, and binding on Desjardins. Desjardins
argued that the policy was void ab initio due to purported fraud on the
part of Dean Costanza. By her decision dated January 18, 2022, Chozik J. held
that Desjardins had not met its burden of showing that Dean Costanza’s failure
to disclose or misrepresentation of fact in his application of life insurance
was fraudulently made. She concluded that the Life Insurance Policy was valid
and payable to Matteo Costanza.
[8]              
Desjardins
appealed from the judgment of Chozik J. to the Ontario Court of Appeal. By its
decision, dated January 26, 2023, the Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal.
[9]              
Following
the release of the Ontario Court of Appeal’s decision of January 26, 2023,
Desjardins made a motion seeking directions regarding the payout of the Life Insurance
Policy. By its Notice of Motion, dated May 11, 2023, Desjardins sought an order
directing it to pay the proceeds of the Life Insurance Policy into court. Among
the stated motion grounds were the following: that there were three other
proceedings in which the Life Insurance Policy funds are claimed by parties
other than Matteo Costanza, including the Price Application, the Skojo Action,
and the within action; that the interests of the claimants in the other
proceedings were not dealt with in Chozik J.’s decision dated January 18, 2022;
and that those interests “could represent competing claims” to the Life
Insurance Policy benefits. The plaintiffs in the within action were served with
the Desjardins motion but did not file any materials before the motion was
heard.
[10]          
On
June 14, 2023, Chozik J. heard Desjardins’ motion for directions. Her
endorsement indicates that Mr. Brown, counsel for the plaintiffs, made
submissions to the court asking that the proceeds of the subject policy be paid
into court for the potential benefit of his clients. Justice Chozik did not
accept those submissions. Instead, she ordered that the Life Insurance Policy proceeds
be paid to Ms. Skojo in trust for Matteo Constanza. Justice Chozik’s
endorsement reads:
[11]          
The
plaintiffs in the within action prepared a Notice of Appeal, dated June 15,
2023, appealing the June 14, 2023 Order of Chozik J. However, it does not
appear that the Notice of Appeal was filed (as required by Rule 61.04(4) of the
Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194) or perfected. Following
the expiry of the 30-day appeal period, Desjardins paid out the Life Insurance Policy
proceeds to Mackesy Smye LLP in trust. The funds were then paid to Ms. Skojo,
on behalf of Matteo Costanza, from the law firm’s trust account.
[12]          
The
plaintiffs made the within motion by way of Notice of Motion, dated July 27,
2023, after the Life Insurance Policy proceeds had been paid out. The
plaintiffs amended the motion, by way of an Amended Notice of Motion dated
August 17, 2023, seeking the following relief, among other things:
[13]          
The
motion heard by me is by way of the Amended Notice of Motion.
[14]          
At
the hearing of the motion, counsel for the plaintiffs advised that he was not presently
seeking an order consolidating the proceedings, so I will not be deciding that
issue by way of this decision. (I note that, by her endorsement dated October
6, 2023, Sheard J. indicated that she had advised the plaintiffs that the
relief sought to have this action heard together with actions commenced in a
different region was within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Regional Senior
Judge.) Further, at the hearing, no substantive arguments were made on behalf
of either party about the plaintiffs’ requests for leave to serve and file the
statement of claim attached as Schedule “A” to the Amended Notice of
Motion or for an accounting from Ms. Skojo. Rather, it was submitted that those
aspects of the plaintiffs’ motion should be adjourned. I have agreed to so
adjourn them.
[15]          
The
following issues will therefore be determined on this motion:
[16]          
By
s. 72 of the Succession Law Reform Act, certain assets dealt with by a
deceased before their death are deemed to be part of the deceased’s estate and
be made available “to be charged for payment” of a dependant’s support order.
Section 72 reads, in part:
[17]          
Counsel
for the plaintiffs submits that his clients were not a party to the Insurance Application
and, therefore, his clients should not be prevented from asserting a claim
against the Life Insurance Policy proceeds in this action.
[18]          
The
plaintiffs submit that the purposes underlying the statutory scheme of the Succession
Law Reform Act mandate the return of the life insurance proceeds in the
hands of Ms. Skojo, so that the issue of whether the Minor Plaintiff is
entitled to dependant claim relief can be decided.
[19]          
The
plaintiffs rely on the decision in Moores v. Hughes, 1981 CanLII 1870
(ON SC), (1981) 37 O.R. (2d) 785, wherein Robins J. (as he then was) described
the intent of s. 72 of the Succession Law Reform Act in the following
terms (at para. 16):
[20]          
The
plaintiffs also rely on the Ontario Court of Appeal’s decision in Madore-Ogilvie
(Litigation Guardian of) v. Ogilvie Estate, 2008 ONCA 39. However, I find
that that decision has no relevance to the case before me since it is concerned
with the ownership of a jointly-owned insurance policy.
[21]          
It
is the position of the defendant that the within motion constitutes a
collateral attack on the Order of Justice Chozik, dated June 14, 2023, and so is
improper and an abuse of the court’s process.
[22]          
As
indicated above, on June 14, 2023, Chozik J. ordered that the judgment of
September 28, 2021 be amended to declare that “the policy is payable” and to
direct that Desjardins pay to Ms. Skojo, in trust for Matteo Costanza, the
proceeds of the Life Insurance Policy in the amount of $500,000.00, as well as
the associated prejudgment and postjudgment interest, in satisfaction of the
judgment.
[23]          
In
Dagg v. Cameron Estate, 2017 ONCA 366, the Ontario Court of Appeal dealt
with the interplay between ss. 72(1)(f) and 72(7) of the Succession Law
Reform Act. In that decision, the Court of Appeal had to determine what
rights a support recipient, who was named as the irrevocable beneficiary of an
insurance policy, had to the policy’s proceeds in the face of a competing claim
by another dependant of the deceased made under Part V of the Succession Law
Reform Act. At paragraphs 75 through 78, the Court of Appeal held that,
where a payor is subject to a court order that requires them to name a support
recipient as an irrevocable beneficiary, the portion of the insurance proceeds
needed to satisfy the support payments is not subject to the s. 72(1)(f) “clawback”
provision. Rather, the support recipient, as the named beneficiary of the insurance
policy, is effectively a creditor of the deceased in a “transaction with
respect to which a creditor has rights”, in keeping with s. 72(7) and so s.
72(1)(f) does not apply.
[24]          
In
a similar vein as Dagg, I find that s. 72(7) of the Succession Law Reform
Act applies to inoculate the Life Insurance Policy proceeds from clawback in
this case. Here, Chozik J. ordered that the Life Insurance Policy proceeds are
payable to Matteo Costanza, as the designated beneficiary, and that such funds
are to be paid to Ms. Skojo on behalf of Matteo Costanza. That order has not
been appealed, or varied or set aside, so it is a valid enforceable court
order. I am satisfied that, by virtue of that order, Matteo Costanza is a
“creditor” of the deceased in a transaction with respect to which Matteo
Costanza has rights such that s. 72(7) applies and the Life Insurance Policy funds
are not captured by s. 72(1(f).
[25]          
In
my view, I also find that s. 72(1)(f) relates only to an amount that is “payable”
under a policy of insurance effected on the life of the deceased. Here, the evidence
is that the Life Insurance Policy funds have already been paid to Ms.
Skojo in trust for Matteo Costanza, pursuant to court order. Accordingly, they
are no longer payable.
[26]          
In
the result, I conclude that it is not available to this court to make any order
directing that the Life Insurance Policy funds be deemed to be part of the net
estate of the late Dean Costanza under s. 72(1)(f). This aspect of the
plaintiff’s motion is dismissed.
[27]          
Section
59(1) of the Succession Law Reform Act provides that, on application by
or on behalf of a dependant, the court may make an order suspending in whole or
in part the administration of the deceased’s estate, for such time and to such
extent as the court may decide.
[28]          
The
plaintiffs submit that they moved for s. 59 relief in the Price Application, upon
issuance of the Notice of Application on May 21, 2019. The defendant’s counsel
requested an adjournment of the application indicating that she would provide
the plaintiffs’ counsel with a copy of the defendant’s materials so that the
life insurance matter could be expedited. The requested materials were never
provided, however. As a result, the plaintiffs were prejudiced in terms of
being able to move forward with their application. The defendant’s counsel did
not put the plaintiffs’ counsel on notice that they would be alleging a lack of
due diligence as against the plaintiffs. It was the defendants who breached an
agreement and are now seeking to derive a strategic advantage from same. This
is not in the interests of justice.
[29]          
Despite
commencing proceedings back in February 2018 regarding the estate of Dean Costanza,
the plaintiffs did not obtain an order pursuant to s. 59 of the Succession
Law Reform Act to suspend the administration of the deceased’s estate and
effectively freeze the assets. The plaintiffs have not been diligent in taking
the necessary steps to preserve access to the proceeds of the estate prior to
the hearing of this motion.
[30]          
There
was no suspensory order obtained under s. 59 of the Succession Law Reform
Act prior to Justice Chozik’s Order of June 13, 2023, pertaining to the
estate of the late Dean Costanza.
[31]          
There
are two problems the plaintiffs face in obtaining a suspensory order at this
point in time concerning the Life Insurance Policy proceeds that have been paid
to Ms. Skojo on behalf of Matteo Costanza. First, a s. 59 order is made
suspending the administration of a deceased’s estate. Here, the Life Insurance
Policy proceeds were not paid to the deceased’s estate. There is no evidence
before me as to other assets currently in the deceased’s estate. Except for the
Life Insurance Policy proceeds, there are no other grounds put forward by the
plaintiffs on this motion to support the granting of an order suspending the
administration of the estate of Dean Costanza.
[32]          
Second,
making a suspensory order on the ground that the Life Insurance Proceeds are
subject to “clawback” under s. 72(1)(f) would constitute a collateral attack on
the Order made by Chozik J. directing the payment of those proceeds to Ms.
Skojo on behalf of Matteo Costanza. The rule against collateral attack was
described in Toronto (City) v. Canadian Union of Public Employees
(C.U.P.E.), Local 79, 2003 SCC 63, [2003] 3 S.C.R. 77, at para. 33, citing Wilson
v The Queen, 1983 CanLII 35 (SCC), [1983] 2 S.C.R. 594, at p. 599, as
follows:
[33]          
While
the plaintiffs do not explicitly seek to overturn the Order made by Chozik J.,
their request for a suspensory order is an implicit attack on the correctness
of Justice Chozik’s decision and its legal consequence. Such an attack is not
permitted.
[34]          
Collateral
attacks can also attract the application of the doctrine of abuse of process to
preclude parties from relitigating issues decided against them in a prior
proceeding. Allowing relitigation of an issue that has already been determined,
which relitigation could result in a different conclusion than that reached in
the first proceeding on the same issue, can “undermine the credibility of the
entire judicial process, thereby diminishing its authority, its credibility and
its aim of finality”: Toronto (City) v. C.U.P.E., Local 79, at para. 51.
[35]          
I
accept the argument made on behalf of the defendant that allowing the
plaintiffs to obtain a suspensory order in the present circumstances engages
the primary concerns of the abuse of process doctrine. Chozik J. has already ruled
and made an order respecting the payment of the Life Insurance Policy funds.
Permitting the plaintiffs to seek relief in a parallel proceeding that would
interfere with that court order would constitute an abuse of the court’s
process. Accordingly, this aspect of the plaintiffs’ motion is dismissed.
[36]          
The
plaintiffs submit that they have a strong prima facie case against the estate
of the late Dean Costanza for a dependant claim relief. The injunction sought relates
to assets held in Ontario by Ms. Skojo and there is a real risk of dissipation
given that: (a) the monies in the possession of Ms. Skojo properly belong to
the estate of Dean Costanza; and (b) the assets are being held in Ms. Skojo’s
bank accounts and are liquid, easily transferable, and difficult to trace once
transferred. The plaintiffs have given the necessary undertaking.
[37]          
The
defendant opposes the relief sought on the basis that the plaintiffs have not
met their onus required to satisfy the ordering of a Mareva injunction.
[38]          
Section
101 of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, provides that
this court may grant an interlocutory injunction “where it appears to a judge
of the court to be just or convenient to do so”.
[39]          
In
Mareva Compania Naviera, S.A. v. International Bulkcarriers, S.A., [1975]
2 Lloyd’s Rep 509, [1980] 1 All E.R. 213, Lord Denning, M.R. considered the
meaning of “just or convenient”, stating: “If it appears that the debt is due
and owing – and there is a danger that the debtor may dispose of his assets so
as to defeat it before judgment – the Court has jurisdiction in a proper case
to grant an interlocutory judgment so as to prevent his disposing of those
assets.” See also Manufacturers Life Insurance Co. v. Suggett, 1992
CarswellOnt 374, 13 C.P.C. (3d) 171, at para. 13.
[40]          
The
purpose of a Mareva injunction is to “tie up the assets of the defendant
… pending any judgment adverse to the defendant” so that the funds will then be
available for execution in satisfaction of the judgment: Chitel v. Rothbart,
1982 CanLII 1956 (ON CA), [1982] O.J. No. 3540, (Ont. C.A.), at para. 30.
[41]          
The
guidelines for granting a Mareva injunction were affirmed by the Ontario
Court of Appeal in Chitel, at paras. 44, 56-58, as follows:
[42]          
A
plaintiff bears the onus of satisfying the test for the Mareva injunction
order and can do so based on evidence from which reasonable inferences can be
drawn. A defendant must address the evidence and inference the plaintiff relies
upon to successfully oppose the motion: PPI Management Inc. v. Zhou, 2023
ONSC 3603, at para. 67.
[43]          
To
show a strong prima facie case, a plaintiff must show a strong
likelihood on the law and the evidence presented that, at trial, they will
ultimately be successful in proving the allegations set out in their claim: R.
v. Canadian Broadcasting Corp., 2018 SCC 5, at paras. 17-18.
[44]          
In
this case, I am not satisfied that the plaintiffs have established a strong
evidentiary basis showing a strong likelihood that they will be
successful in the dependant support claim being made. The evidence proferred consists
of Ms. Price’s attestation that Dean Costanza stood in locus parentis to
the Minor Plaintiff and had paid for kindergarten and Grade 1 school fees; a
letter, dated July 3, 2023, regarding two psychotherapy sessions held on
January 17 and February 10, 2018 for the Minor Plaintiff purportedly to address
his grief following the death of Dean Costanza; and a portion of a handwritten
card that is unaddressed. I agree with the submissions made on behalf of the defendant
that this is insufficient evidence concerning the particulars of the Minor
Plaintiff’s dependant support claim against the estate of Dean Costanza and/or
the amount thereof.
[45]          
However,
even if I am wrong in finding that no strong prima facie case has been
shown, more significantly, I find that the plaintiffs have not established that
Ms. Skojo has removed or dissipated any assets from the jurisdiction, or that
there is a real risk that she will do so, in order to avoid the plaintiffs’
claims.
[46]          
A
Mareva injunction will not issue unless there is a genuine risk of assets
disappearing: Aetna Financial Services Ltd. v. Fiegelman, 1985 CanLII 55 (SCC), [1985] 1
S.C.R. 2, at para. 26. Here, the plaintiffs have not shown, on a balance of
probabilities, that Ms. Skojo or her on behalf of Matteo Costanza is taking
steps to put either of their assets out of reach, either by removing them from
the jurisdiction of the court or by disposing of them. An order granting a Mareva
injunction cannot be based on speculation: Kreft v. Mezo, 2006 CanLII
14412 (ON SC), at para. 10.
[47]          
In
the result, I conclude that the plaintiffs have not met the onerous test
required to justify the granting of a Mareva injunction. Accordingly,
this aspect of the plaintiffs’ motion is dismissed.
[48]          
I
adopt and rely on my reasons for refusing to make a suspensory order under s.
59(1) of the Succession Law Reform Act, as set out above in paragraphs 32
through 35, to refuse to make an order directing Ms. Skojo to deposit the Life
Insurance Policy funds with her law firm, in trust, until further court order
or written agreement between the parties.
[49]          
I
accept the argument made on behalf of the defendant that, in the present
circumstances, allowing the plaintiffs to obtain this type of injunctive or
preservation relief constitutes a collateral attack on the June 14, 2023 Order
of Chozik J. and engages the primary concerns of the abuse of process doctrine.
[50]          
Justice
Chozik has already ruled against ordering the payment into court of the Life
Insurance Policy funds. Permitting the plaintiffs to seek effectively the same
relief by this motion – directing payment of those same proceeds into the trust
account of Mackesy Smye LLP – would result in the same consequence, that Matteo
Costanza would be deprived of the use of those funds. This would fly in the
face of the June 14, 2023 Order that directs that the Life Insurance Policy
funds are payable to Matteo Costanza. Accordingly, this aspect of the
plaintiffs’ motion is dismissed.
[51]          
For
the foregoing reasons, the plaintiffs’ motion as it relates to the relief
requested in paragraphs 4, 6, 7, and 8 of the Amended Notice of Motion, dated
August 17, 2023, is dismissed.
[52]          
The
plaintiffs’ motion as it relates to the relief requested in paragraphs 3, 5, 9,
10, 11 and 12 of the Amended Notice of Motion, dated August 17, 2023, is
adjourned unless resolved by agreement between the parties.
[53]          
I
would urge the parties to agree on costs. If they are unable to do so, then
costs submissions may be made as follows: