[1]              
On December 19, 2023, I released reasons in
this constitutional application: Bjorkquist et al. v. Attorney General
of Canada, 2023 ONSC 7151. I
released supplementary reasons on January 3, 2024: Bjorkquist et al. v.
Attorney General of Canada, 2024 ONSC 31. In these
reasons, I use the terms described in my earlier reasons.
[2]              
In my reasons and supplementary reasons on the merits, I found that that ss. 3(3)(a) and
3(3)(b) of the Citizenship Act,
R.S.C. 1985, c. C-29, which limit derivative citizenship to first generation
born abroad Canadians, contravene ss. 6 and 15 of the Charter of Rights
and Freedoms and as such, are unconstitutional and of no force or
effect pursuant to s. 52 of
the Constitution Act, 1982.
However, I suspended that declaration of invalidity
for a period of six months from the date of release of my reasons.
[3]              
On June 19, 2024, a day before the period of suspension of the
declaration of invalidity was due to expire, I released reasons on the
respondent’s motion for an extension of the suspension of the declaration of
invalidity: Bjorkquist et al. v. Attorney General
of Canada, 2024 ONSC 3554. In
those reasons, I raised concerns about the ongoing hardship to those whose
constitutional rights continued to be breached by the limits on derivative
citizenship. I found that the mechanism the respondent had put in place to
address urgent cases of hardship due to the unconstitutional law was ineffective,
and poorly communicated. I also raised concerns about the lack of progress of
Bill C-71, introduced by the government on May 23, 2024, less than a month
before the suspension was set to expire, in part to replace the sections of
the Citizenship Act that
I found to be unconstitutional.
[4]              
I granted an extension of the suspension of
the declaration of invalidity to August 9, 2024, and directed the respondent to
file further evidence, and the parties to reattend before me on August 1, 2024,
for me to consider whether a further extension ought to be granted.
[5]              
On August 2, 2024, I released reasons in which I concluded that the revised mechanism the respondent had put in place to
address urgent cases of hardship was sufficient to ensure that an extension of
the declaration of invalidity would not undermine confidence in the
administration of justice. I concluded that the circumstances continued to
warrant a suspension of the declaration of invalidity, and that it was likely
that remedial legislation would be adopted by December 19, 2024. Accordingly, I
granted the respondent’s motion for a further suspension of the declaration of
invalidity to December 19, 2024 at 11:59 p.m.
[6]              
In effect, this decision gave the respondent a
year from the original declaration of invalidity to pass remedial legislation
which had already been developed in significant measure at the time of my
original decision, although at that time, the changes to the legislation were
being advanced in a private member’s bill sponsored by a member of the New
Democratic Party.
[7]              
Now, in spite of the respondent’s assurances
in evidence to this court in the summer of 2024 that it had confidence it would
be able to pass remedial legislation by the December 19, 2024 deadline, the
respondent has returned seeking a further suspension of the declaration of
invalidity. Once again, the motion is an urgent motion.
[8]              
In view of the urgency with which I must address the issues in this
motion, I do not intend to repeat the law and findings I set out in my earlier
reasons, although I adopt them in these reasons. I will refer only to that
which is necessary to determine the issues raised on this motion in the
interests of releasing reasons as quickly as possible.
[9]              
The sole issue on this motion is whether I ought to grant the
respondent’s request to suspend the declaration of invalidity for a further
three-month period.
[10]          
The respondent raises many of the same arguments I have already heard
and accepted: citizenship legislation is complex and has far-reaching effects.
Allowing the declaration of invalidity to take effect without replacement
legislation would cause a legislative gap that would result in an unclear and
inconsistent application of citizenship law and an unknowable number of people
becoming automatic Canadian citizens, some of whom may not wish to become
Canadians.
[11]          
Moreover, the parliamentary process is complex and unpredictable. In
this case, the respondent argues, there has not been enough time to pass
remedial legislation.
[12]          
The respondent argues that the constitutional principle of the rule of
law and the orderly administration of justice weighs in favour of granting a
further extension to allow the democratic parliamentary process to continue.
[13]          
The factual context of the request for a further extension of time
requires some explanation. While a private member’s bill proposing changes to
the Citizenship Act had been under debate in Parliament, that bill was
not progressing. On May 23, 2024, five months after I found the legislation to
be unconstitutional, the government introduced Bill C-71 for first reading, and
then immediately brought the respondent’s first motion for an extension of
time. On the motion for an extension of time, I found that it was entirely
predictable that the private members’ bill was not going to be the vehicle to
make the legislation Charter-compliant, and that it would have been
preferable for the respondent to address the issue earlier. Nothing more
happened with respect to Bill C-71 before Parliament’s summer recess began on
June 20, 2024.
[14]          
During the summer break, the government engaged external stakeholders to
brief them on Bill C-71 and to facilitate the anticipated study of Bill C-71 by
the House and Senate. In anticipation of the passage of Bill C-71, Immigration,
Refugees and Citizenship Canada (“IRCC”) initiated the regulatory development
process required to operationalize Bill C-71.
[15]          
Summer break ended on September 16, 2024. On the first day back from
summer break, the Minister moved that Bill C-71 be read the second time and
referred to committee. The same day, the Parliamentary Secretary to the
Minister moved a motion during the Standing Committee on Citizenship and
Immigration’s (“CIMM”) meeting that Bill C-71 be deemed read a second time and
referred to the CIMM. The motion was not adopted.
[16]          
Also on September 16, 2024, the NDP Critic for Immigration, Refugees and
Citizenship, with government support, sought unanimous consent of the House
that Bill C-71 be deemed read a second time and referred to the CIMM. This
motion was not successful.
[17]          
Debate on the second reading continued on September 17, 2024, and was
scheduled to resume on September 25, 2024, but has not since advanced through
second reading. The respondent’s affiant states that other Parliamentary
business, outside of the government’s control, including concurrence debates,
took precedence.
[18]          
Certain days were not available for the government to try to advance
Bill C-71, including opposition days, and days on which non-confidence motions
were debated.
[19]          
Since September 26, 2024, the House has been seized with two motions of
privilege that have halted all other debates. Motions of privilege are not
subject to time limits for debate. As of November 29, 2024, the respondent’s
affiant deposes that government business has not happened in 36 days.
[20]          
But this is not correct. As counsel for the applicants points out, government
bills were considered after the motions of privilege were introduced. These
include Bill C-76, An Act to amend the Canada National Parks Act, which
progressed through second reading, report stage, and third reading on September
27, 2024. These also include Bill C-78, An Act respecting temporary cost of
living relief (affordability) (the Tax Break for All Canadians Act), which
received first, second, and third reading in the House of Commons on November
27 and 28, 2024.
[21]          
Bill C-71 has not been debated since September 17, 2024, but the
respondent’s affiant deposes that IRCC continues to prepare for its passage;
IRCC has been drafting the Order in Council.
[22]          
The government’s affiant deposes that once normal business resumes in
the House, the government intends to continue to take steps to expedite the
legislative process.
[23]          
On October 21, 2024 and October 29, 2024, the government put on notice
two motions which, if adopted, would either conclude second reading debate on
Bill C-71 or provide a maximum time allotment for second reading debate, and
the Bill would be deemed to pass all other legislative stages in the House of
Commons such that it could be introduced in the Senate. In this way, there
would be no consideration of the Bill by the CIMM, and the Bill would not be
subject to debate at third reading. The government now estimates that a further
three months will be required to pass the Bill.
[24]          
If neither of the October 21, 2024 or October 29, 2024 motions are
passed, Bill C-71 will continue to be debated at second reading, proceed to committee
study, and return to the House of Commons at the “report stage.” During the
report stage, amendments may be proposed to the text of the bill and debated.
Thereafter, the Bill would proceed to third reading, after which a vote will be
taken, prior to referral to the Senate. The Bill thereafter must go through a
similar legislative process in the Senate. If amended in the Senate, the Bill
returns to the House of Commons which must consider the Senate amendments. If
accepted, the Bill passes. If rejected, a message to that effect is sent to the
Senate. This process continues until both Houses agree on the form of the Bill.
Finally, it would receive Royal Assent.
[25]          
If the Bill takes the path outlined above, the government is confident
that the CIMM, comprised of a majority of supportive members who are familiar
with the issues having already spent time studying the private member’s bill
that pre-dated Bill C-71, can examine the Bill quickly. Other tactics can be
employed to speed up the legislative process, including time allocation,
unanimous consent motions, or efforts to have Bill C-71 considered by a
Committee of the Whole, that is, the entire membership of the House of
Commons.  As I have noted, the time allocation motions have been put on notice,
and the unanimous consent motions proposed have not been adopted.
[26]          
I also note that in affidavits filed on earlier motions for an extension
of the suspension of the declaration of invalidity, the respondent’s affiant
described tools the respondent could use to speed up the legislative process.
The government has not yet employed all of the tools at its disposal, though it
does not explain why not, especially when it is apparent that other government
business is being conducted, albeit in circumstances where the privilege
motions have been disrupting the normal business of the House.
[27]          
The evidence in the record indicates that Senator Gold, Government
Representative in the Senate, has moved that the Standing Senate Committee on
Social Affairs, Science and Technology be authorized to examine the subject
matter of Bill C-71 in advance of the Bill coming before the Senate, and that
it submit its final report to the Senate no later than December 10, 2024. This
motion was adopted on November 28, 2024, with pre-study set to have commenced
during the week of December 2, 2024. This measure has been taken to expedite
the legislative process. The respondent notes that the Senate passed the prior
private member’s bill through the Senate within days.
[28]          
The Senate appears poised to deal with the Bill quickly. I have no
criticisms of the Senate’s treatment of the proposed Bill as a priority.
[29]          
Ontario v. G., 2020 SCC 38, sets out the framework to apply to
suspensions of declarations of invalidity; although not specifically dealing
with extensions of suspensions, the parties agree that the principled framework
set out in G also applies to requests for such extensions. At para. 139,
the Court held that suspensions should be long enough to allow the legislature
to “carry out its responsibility diligently and effectively, while recognizing
that every additional day of rights violations will be a strong counterweight
against giving the legislature more time.”
[30]          
The Court also held that suspensions of declarations of invalidity will
be rare, consistent with the Court’s recent practice. The Court observed that
it has not suspended the effect of a declaration of invalidity since its
decision in Carter five years prior, making 13 immediately effective
declarations that legislation was of no force and effect for violating the Charter
over that period: G., at para. 133.
[31]          
In Carter v. Canada (A.G.), 2016 SCC 4 (“Carter 2”), the
Supreme Court of Canada dealt more directly with the question of extensions,
finding that “extraordinary circumstances must be shown” to justify an
extension: Carter 2, at para. 2. In Canada (Attorney General) v.
Descheneaux, 2017 QCCA 1238, the Quebec Court of Appeal identified four
non-exhaustive and non-cumulative factors to consider when determining if
extraordinary circumstances exist: (i) whether a change in circumstances
justifies the extension; (ii) whether the circumstances still warrant a
suspension; (iii) the likelihood that remedial legislation will be adopted; and
(iv) whether the extension undermines confidence in the administration of
justice.
[32]          
The respondent argues that the principled framework in G has
overtaken any suggestion that only extraordinary circumstances, like Parliament’s
dissolution for a general election, is required for an extension of time. It
argues that G. affords a more appropriate lens through which to consider
whether an extension ought to be granted than do the more limited, but
overlapping, factors identified in Descheneux.
[33]          
The respondent argues, based on G, that an extension should be
available where the respondent demonstrates that the coming into effect of the
declaration of invalidity would endanger an interest of such great importance
that, on balance, the benefits of delaying the effect of that declaration
outweigh the cost of preserving an unconstitutional law that violates Charter
rights, and that the government has acted diligently to respond to the
declaration of invalidity, but requires more time to do so: G., at para.
139.
[34]          
The respondent submits that this requires consideration of the impact of
the declaration of invalidity on the public, the impact of the extension on
rights holders, including in light of any interim relief that may be available
to them during the extension, and the diligence of the government in its
efforts to respond to the declaration of invalidity.
[35]          
The respondent argues that the Parliamentary process is difficult to
predict, and that a more appropriate standard by which to assess the progress
of Parliament is whether the government has acted with diligence and
effectiveness in responding to the declaration of invalidity. This, in the
respondent’s view, is enough to favour granting a further extension. The
respondent argues its evidence filed on the motion demonstrates that it has
made significant efforts to advance the remedial legislation and that it is
making progress. The respondent notes that the government is a minority
government, which impacts its ability to advance remedial legislation although
it has not led any evidence to suggest it does not have sufficient support in
the House to pass the Bill.
[36]          
I am satisfied that having replacement legislation in place prior to the
declaration of invalidity taking effect would be in the public interest.
However, even if the respondent is correct that the test in G has
overtaken the criteria in Descheneux, to grant a further extension, I
would have to be satisfied that the government has been acting diligently.
[37]          
While I accept that the respondent has taken steps to advance the
passage of the Bill, I am not satisfied that the respondent has treated the
declaration of unconstitutionality of the legislation with the priority it was
owed. It is not my role to set or evaluate the Parliamentary agenda, and I do
not suggest that Bill C-71 must be the respondent’s only or top priority.
[38]          
But in circumstances where the respondent has already obtained two
extensions of the suspension of the declaration of invalidity, in part due to
its evidence about the steps it would take to expedite the legislative process
to pass the Bill, it is incumbent on the respondent to treat Bill C-71 as a
priority. I am not convinced that it has done so.
[39]          
If the question of whether to extend the suspension were based solely on
the respondent’s legislative diligence, I would not grant the extension.
However, there are a number of factors I must balance in determining whether
the extension of the suspension is warranted.
[40]          
I am concerned that the interests of the public will be negatively
affected if the declaration of invalidity comes into force without replacement
legislation in place.
[41]          
I am also concerned about the negative impact of the unconstitutional
legislation on rights-holders. The applicants to this case have received
constitutional exemptions, but those who are similarly situated to them have
not. There are measures in place to deal with urgent cases of hardship that
suffice in the short-term, but that does not mean that others are left
suffering with hardship that does not qualify as urgent under IRCC’s processing
guidelines because the unconstitutional law remains in force. People’s lives
remain in limbo. There is a limit to how long that situation can be allowed to
continue.
[42]          
In balancing the diverging interests in this case, I note:
[43]          
Having regard to these factors, I conclude, reluctantly, that the
extension of time the respondent seeks ought to be granted. The respondent
shall have an extension of the suspension of the declaration of invalidity to March
19, 2025, at 11:59 p.m.
[44]          
The issue that remains is costs. Counsel for the applicants seeks costs
of responding to this motion on a substantial indemnity scale. Substantial
indemnity costs are generally warranted where there is an offer to settle that
has been beaten, which is obviously not applicable here, or where the party
ordered to pay costs has behaved in a manner that is scandalous or
reprehensible: Toronto Star Newspapers Ltd. v. Fraleigh, 2011 ONCA 555,
at para. 34.
[45]          
The respondent did not contest that an award of partial indemnity costs
is appropriate in the circumstances. This is public interest litigation, and as
I noted in my earlier decisions extending the period of suspension, the
applicants have played an important role in the respondent’s motions for
extensions of time. They have held the respondent to account, on behalf of all
the rights-holders currently suffering the impacts of an unconstitutional law.
[46]          
I agree, however, that costs on a partial indemnity scale are
appropriate, with one exception. I elevate those costs to reflect the work that
counsel for the applicants put in reviewing the legislative record over the
past months, without which I would not have been aware of the government
business that has been conducted in the House of Commons, because the
respondent’s affidavit evidence on this point was incomplete, and left an
erroneous impression that had to be corrected.
[47]          
The applicants’ costs outline reflects partial indemnity costs of
$8,777.73, and full indemnity costs of $14,629.55, inclusive of HST. There is
no basis on which to criticize the costs incurred by the applicants. The costs
are reasonable bearing in mind the tight timeline, the work undertaken, and the
value of the applicants’ work to the court.
[48]          
The respondent shall pay the applicants’ costs, which I fix at$11,000,
all-inclusive, within thirty days.