[1]              
 The Plaintiff seeks to remove
Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP (“Osler”) as counsel of record for the
Defendants in this proposed investors’ class action. The Defendants are former
directors and officers of Wayland Group Corp. (“Wayland”), a now insolvent
cannabis corporation that is itself subject of another proposed investors’ class
action, CV-21-00665194-00CP (the “Main Action”).
[2]              
Osler has a long history with this matter. The firm has
over time been counsel for Wayland in the Main Action, Wayland in its CCAA
application, the special committee of board of directors of Wayland during an
Ontario Securities Commission investigation, and for the Defendants when they
were the directors and officers of Wayland. A partner of the Osler firm was
appointed CEO of Wayland, while another partner of Osler was appointed General
Counsel of Wayland. The Plaintiff contends, inter alia, that some of
these roles conflict with each other and that, in any case, Osler has become
indistinguishable from the client it purports to represent.
[3]              
This motion was scheduled at a case conference held
June 26, 2024. At that conference, counsel raised the prospect that there might
be objections by Osler to some of the evidence contained in the moving party’s
motion record.
[4]              
I indicated at the time that any such objection may be
made in the context of the response to the motion. At that case conference 6
months ago, I did not have the motion materials before me and so did not know
the nature of the objections and their significance.
[5]              
The Plaintiff’s motion record contains a supporting affidavit of one of
his lawyers, Andrew Morganti. In that affidavit, Mr. Morganti sets out the
procedural history surrounding Wayland and the Defendants, and provides support
for the relief sought in the motion. The Defendants, through counsel retained
for this disqualification motion, have responded to that affidavit with an
affidavit of one of the Defendants as well as an affidavit of an Osler partner
who served as a corporate solicitor for Wayland.
[6]              
The Plaintiff then issued a Reply record, with a supplementary affidavit
by Mr. Morganti replying to the responding record and affidavits therein. In
his supplementary affidavit, Mr. Morganti set out a number of allegations of
professional misconduct by members of the Osler firm. More specifically, he deposed
that Osler has made intentional misrepresentations on behalf of Wayland
amounting to ‘conduct unbecoming a lawyer’. While these accusations were foreshadowed
by the Plaintiff’s Notice of Motion, they were absent from Mr. Morganti’s first
affidavit and the original motion record.
[7]              
It turns out that Defendants’ counsel strenuously objects not only to
the admissibility of certain evidence put forward and statements made by Mr.
Morganti in his supplementary affidavit, but to the timing of the production of
that evidence – i.e. in a Reply Record, leaving insufficient time for any new
responding affidavit and/or cross-examination. Counsel for the Defendants
submits that the allegations against Osler are extremely serious, and cannot be
permitted to go unanswered. She insists that the matter be adjourned so that this
late-filed evidence can be appropriately responded to.
[8]              
The Defendants also submit that some of the materials referenced by Mr.
Morganti in his supplementary affidavit are privileged. This material was
apparently acquired by the Plaintiff during the course of CCAA proceedings in
respect of Wayland. Plaintiff’s counsel says that a large database of documents
was sent to them by counsel for Wayland’s insurers, who had in turn received it
from Osler in its capacity as former counsel to Wayland and custodian of all of
Wayland’s documents.
[9]              
The supplementary affidavit provided by
Mr. Morganti is more expansive than is usual for an affidavit sown by counsel
of record. It not only identifies and appends certain documents – which would
be the usual limit of a lawyer’s affidavit – but it expounds on the affiant’s
view of those documents. Importantly, in paragraphs 10 and 11, it references,
but does not particularize or fully identify, correspondence between lawyers at
Osler and their client, Wayland, as then represented by the Defendants in their
capacity at the time of directors and officers of Wayland. In doing so, Mr.
Morganti has made it necessary for opposing counsel to seek an order
identifying those documents: Celanese v. Murray Demolition, 2006 SCC 36 (CanLII), [2006] 2 SCR
189, at paras. 62-63.
[10]          
At the hearing, Plaintiff’s counsel explained that he has been advised
by counsel for Wayland’s insurers that they forwarded to him the database of
documents of which Osler is custodian pursuant to an Order of Justice Penny
dated March 2, 2022 in the Wayland CCAA proceedings, less those identified by
the insurer’s counsel as “presumptively privileged documents”. That subset of
the Wayland database was apparently sorted out from the rest by using search
terms and applying those terms to the many thousands of Wayland documents. It is
therefore not a subset of documents that has actually been reviewed to
determine whether or not they are actually privileged. It would appear that the
“presumptively privileged documents” that have been withheld from production to
Plaintiff’s counsel may be either over-inclusive or under-inclusive of all of the
actually privileged documents in the Wayland database.
[11]          
Accordingly, the documents that Plaintiffs’ counsel have received, which
number in the hundreds of thousands, likely do include some privileged
materials. Indeed, Mr. Morganti’s paragraphs 10 and 11 confirm that this is so.
I understand that these were received inadvertently by Plaintiff’s counsel, but
nevertheless the privilege issue must be dealt with.
[12]          
Paragraph 4 of Justice Penny’s order indicates that those documents were
only provided to various parties for use in the main action to which the
present action is a companion. The Order makes no mention of the present action
since it was issued prior to the present Statement of Claim. Any use of
documents delivered pursuant to that Order will have to be specifically
authorized by the court.
[13]          
As indicated above, the privileged documents in the hands of Plaintiff’s
counsel will have to be identified and described by them. As the Supreme Court
set out in Celanese, at paras. 49-50, 65, this is to be done in
affidavit form. In present circumstances, that presumably requires a further
supplementary affidavit of Mr. Morganti’s, along with an opportunity to
cross-examine on that evidence.
[14]          
At the hearing, Plaintiff’s counsel indicated that there is some
confusion as to whom the disclosure and identification of privileged documents
is to be made. He accurately pointed out that the privilege belongs to Wayland,
which is now insolvent and is not a party to this case. That said, Justice
Penny’s Order specifically says that any party having come into the possession
of Wayland’s privileged documents is to advise Wayland’s former directors and
officers – i.e. the present Defendants. That direction by Justice Penny
provides a full answer to Plaintiff’s counsel’s question. The notification is
to go to the Defendants via their counsel here.
[15]          
This Osler disqualification motion must now be adjourned. Plaintiff’s
counsel must have time to prepare the relevant affidavit listing privileged
documents, and the Defendants and counsel must have an opportunity to review
those documents. The Defendants are permitted to file their supplementary
affidavit materials responding to the statements in Mr. Morganti’s
supplementary affidavit. And cross-examinations must be permitted to take
place.
[16]          
Counsel for the Plaintiff argues that all of this will take considerable
time and expense, and that it is not really necessary for the present motion.
That may or may not turn out to be the case, but it is necessary in the greater
scheme of this litigation to get the privileged documents identified and the
privilege issue dispensed with one way or another. While I do understand and
would ordinarily support the Plaintiff’s desire to expedite matters and proceed
as economically as possible, there are larger considerations of law and policy
at stake in the privilege issue.
[17]          
Once Mr. Morganti has served his new affidavit, counsel will be in a
position to work out a revised timetable. They may be in touch with my
assistant in order to obtain a new, mutually convenient motion date.
[18]          
Defendants’ counsel has asked for permission to
make submissions on costs of the adjournment. They may do so in writing. I
would ask Defendants’ counsel to email my assistant with brief submissions
within two weeks of today. I would also ask Plaintiffs’ counsel to email my
assistant equally brief submissions. They may do so within three weeks after
the Defendants’ submissions are received, since they will be bumping up against
the Christmas/New Year holiday.