[1]              
On March 25, 2021, a man is captured on CCTV walking
into a Canada Post Centre with Purolator services at Kipling and Bloor. He had
with him a small Canada Post box wrapped in saran wrap. He printed a shipping
label addressed to Margot Gauthier, from “marcus”. The sender’s address was
listed as the address of the Canada Post Centre, and the man paid in cash.
[2]              
Purolator withheld and opened the box under its
Terms and Conditions and found powder and crack cocaine inside. The police took
possession of it and later identified Mr. Animer through a fingerprint analysis
of the box and its Shipment Receipt. They did not file a   Report to Justice of
the items that they took from Purolator until September 16, 2024.
[3]              
Mr. Animer has been charged with possession of
cocaine and crack for the purpose of trafficking, and trafficking pursuant to ss.
5(1) and (2) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, R.S.C. 1996, c.
19 (“CDSA”). The Crown proceeded on the trafficking charges only, which form
counts three and four on the indictment.
[4]              
Mr. Animer argues that that the box, its
contents, and the Shipment Receipt should be excluded because the police
violated his s. 8 Charter rights when they failed to file a timely Report
to Justice pursuant to s. 489.1 of the Criminal Code of Canada,
R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46. While I agree that the police violated Mr. Animer’s s. 8
rights by failing to Report to Justice as soon as practicable, I decline to
exclude the evidence.
[5]              
Mr. Animer argues at trial that the Crown cannot
prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the man seen dropping off the box was him.
Even if the Crown met that burden, he submits that it is a reasonable inference
on the totality of the evidence that he was a blind courier.
[6]              
For the reasons that follow, I find that Mr.
Animer is the man dropping the box off. The only reasonable inference from the
whole of the evidence is that he knew of the box’s contents, or if he did not
know, it was only because he chose to remain deliberately ignorant. There is no
reasonable inference that he was a blind courier.
[7]              
The Crown’s case was largely entered through an
Agreed Statement of Facts (“ASF”) marked as Trial Exhibit 1.
[8]              
On the afternoon of March 25, 2021, a thin to
medium built black man with black hair tucked under black hooded jacket with
reflective tape, wearing black pants, a white T-shirt, and black shoes with a
white decal walked into a Canada Post Centre with Purolator services at Kipling
and Bloor. The man was carrying an already sealed and plastic wrapped Canada
Post box. He left the box on the scale at the counter to go to the self-serve
area to print a shipping label. The man returned to the counter and handed the
label to the employee. The employee put the shipping label in a clear plastic
sleeve and stuck it to the Canada Post box. The label listed the sender as
“marcus”, and the return address of the Purolator centre. The recipient was
Margot Gauthier. The man also gave the Purolator worker two copies of a Shipment
Receipt bearing the same information and PIN number (332835307247) as the
shipping label. He paid in cash, received back one copy of the Shipment Receipt
with a payment receipt affixed, and left the box with the employee.
[9]              
The employee decided that the box required some
investigation and she called her supervisor, who called the Manager of Loss and
Risk Prevention. The employee and supervisor put the sealed box and the
Shipment Receipt in the back storage area. There were only two or three
Purolator employees working at that location at the time. Neither employee who
was working at the time the box was dropped off opened it. At the end of the
shift, the employee set the alarm for the Centre and left, shortly after 9:00
p.m.
[10]          
The next morning (March 26, 2021), the Loss
Manager arrived at the location. When he retrieved the box from the storage
area, it was unopened, heavily and completely wrapped in saran wrap, and had
the shipping label bearing PIN 332835307247. I find no issue with continuity of
the box as left by the man with the Purolator employee. Wearing gloves and a
mask, he opened the box in the back storage area as permitted by Purolator’s Terms
and Conditions and saw white powder. He closed it up and moved it into a
Training Room where he opened the box again and inspected it more thoroughly.
It was at that time that he discovered five clear bags containing a white
substance. He took photos and called the police at 9:23 a.m.
[11]          
While waiting for the police, the Loss Manager
left the opened box, contents, and Shipment Receipt in the Training Room with a
“do not enter” sign on the door. He remained nearby and did not see any other
employees leaving or entering the Training Room. The only other access to the
Training Room was from a storage room that was locked with a master key. Retail
employees did not have a copy of this key. Only the Loss Manager did.
[12]          
Officer Besco, Detective Constable Metzger, and
another detective attended the Kipling Purolator and took the Canada Post box
with the affixed shipment label, the clear bags, and the Shipment Receipt. I am
satisfied that no one had access to the box or its contents when the Loss
Manager secured it in the Training Room. Ultimately, Health Canada concluded
that the bags contained a total of 555.6 grams of cocaine and 153.88 grams of crack
cocaine.
[13]          
At the time the police went to the Centre and retrieved
the box, its contents, and the Shipping Receipt, no one knew who the box
belonged to. However, the Loss Manager tied this box to an attempted shipment
the day before (March 24, 2021) at their Commerce Court location. On March 24,
2021, Purolator’s CCTV captured a thin to medium built black man with short,
braided hair sticking out from under a grey toque, wearing black pants, a white
T-shirt, and black shoes with a white decal walking into a Purolator self-serve
kiosk at Commerce Court in downtown Toronto. He was carrying a similar small
box. He wrapped the box in plastic wrap. He processed a shipping label that
indicated Anthony Brown as the sender and Margot Gauthier as the receiver. The
sender had a phone number, but his address was incomplete. The man took the
wrapped box, left the shipping label behind, and exited the self-serve kiosk.
Purolator employees retrieved the label bearing PIN number 332832706854. An
employee phoned Anthony Brown’s number as listed on the box and reached someone
who said they were not aware of the shipment and was not trying to send
anything.
[14]          
The police analyzed the box, the baggies, and Shipment
Receipt from March 25, 2021 for fingerprints. Mr. Animer’s and other prints
were found on the Shipment Receipt and on the outside of the box when
unassembled. In assembled form, his left middle fingerprint, right ring
fingerprint, and right thumbprint would be on the interior of the box. The
police also analyzed the saran wrap on the exterior of the box, the plastic
containing the shipping label, and the plastic bags containing the drugs. None
revealed Mr. Animer’s fingerprints.
[15]          
On July 8, 2021, the Toronto Drug Squad executed
a search warrant at Mr. Animer’s residence and found no further evidence. There
is no evidence of further investigation of Anthony Brown or surveillance of Mr.
Animer. There is no evidence of further investigation of the other prints found
on the Shipment Receipt that had hits on the police’s AFIS system.
[16]          
The parties agree that after the police took
possession of the box, the drugs, and the Shipment Receipt, they did not file a
Report to Justice pursuant to s. 489.1 of the Criminal Code until
September 16, 2024. There was no one assigned to the case at the time. The
Officer in charge came on board in or around November of 2022. The Crown argues
that there was initially no seizure and therefore no report required.
[17]          
While Mr. Animer’s identity was not known at the
time he dropped off the box, I find the police’s actions in taking possession
of the box amounts to a seizure under s. 489.1 of the Code. In R. v.
Lambert, 2023 ONCA 689, 169 O.R. (3d) 81, at para. 70, the Court of Appeal
for Ontario defined a seizure under s. 489.1 of the Code to mean “any
investigative conduct by the police in which they take control of a thing, to
the exclusion of a person holding a reasonable expectation of privacy in that
thing.” This includes what used to be known as a passive acquisition, when
third parties hand over items to the police.
[18]          
Mr. Animer is entitled to
rely on the Crown’s theory of the case to underpin the existence of his
subjective expectation: R. v. Jones, 2017 SCC 60 at para. 19. That theory posits that Mr. Animer knowingly possessed illegal
drugs and twice attempted to send them to Ms. Gauthier through Purolator. Even
though he attempted to distance himself from the package at the time of drop
off, I find that he had a subjective expectation of privacy over it. Prior to leaving
it with Purolator, Mr. Animer had possession and control of the item. He
created the label including a false sender address. He wrapped the box the day
prior. His fingerprints are on the box and the Shipment Receipt. In R. v. Dosanjh, 2022
ONCA 689, 163 O.R. (3d) 401, at para. 117, the Court of Appeal held that
“whether an individual has a direct interest in the subject matter of a search
is not defined by whether the subject matter is incriminating or not, but by
the degree to which the individual has a meaningful connection to the subject
matter – for example, through participation, authorship, ownership or control”.
In my view and on the Crown’s theory, Mr. Animer’s conduct gave him a direct
interest in the box and its contents.
[19]          
In R. v. Piatt,
2021 NSSC 20, 482 C.R.R. (2d) 36, at para. 72, the
Supreme Court of Nova Scotia concluded that the subjective expectation of
privacy threshold, which it qualified as a low bar, was satisfied because the
subject matter of the search had the capacity to reveal personal information
about the accused’s lifestyle. The same principle applies in this case.
[20]          
Mr. Animer’s expectation of
privacy is also objectively reasonable. Albeit diminished by the Purolator’s
Terms and Conditions which allows it to search packages, it is reasonable for
him to expect that his parcel would not be opened and handed over to a state
actor: Piatt at paras. 92-93.
[21]          
The police violated Mr. Animer’s s. 8 rights in
their late filing of the Report to Justice: R. v.
Garcia-Machado, 2015 ONCA 569, 126 O.R. (3d) 737, at
paras. 44-45. Section 489.1 of the Code requires the Report to Justice “as
soon as is practicable.” The seizure occurred on March 26, 2021. The Report was
filed on September 16, 2024. This is far from “as soon as practicable”.
[22]          
I do not, however, exclude the box, its contents,
and the Shipment Receipt under the s. 24(2) analysis. I
consider the three Grant factors which must be balanced:
[23]          
The late filing of the Report to Justice was negligent
but not purposeful. Officer Daniel Besco was the first to arrive at the Kipling
Purolator Centre. He took the box and the shipping label while Detective
Constable Metzger took the drugs. Officer Besco testified that when he filled
out the property report, he noted the items as “abandoned”. This triggered the
form to automatically indicate that no Report to Justice was needed. Officer
Besco testified, and I accept, that at the time of the seizure, he was not sure
if a Report to Justice was supposed to be done or was going to be done.
[24]          
D.C. Metzger admitted that not filing a Report
to Justice on the seized drugs as the exhibits officer was a mistake. She
testified that because no one had been arrested, it was a grey area in her
mind. She now knows that a Report should have been filed.
[25]          
That said, something fell through the cracks
somewhere. Even after the Officer in Charge was appointed in November of 2022,
no Report was filed until September 16, 2024. The defence argues that the misconduct
is serious because the police have not taken the issue seriously, did not
investigate what happened, and offer no systemic solution for the future.
[26]          
In a different case, the deficiencies that the
defence points out may amount to serious state misconduct. Given the
circumstances of the seizure in this case, it is not misconduct from which the
court should dissociate itself. Dissociation is less of a concern here where police
reporting practices when seizing items not associated with anyone, were unclear.
[27]          
Mr. Animer distanced himself from the package,
even though it was ultimately traced back to him. The
late Report to Justice had no impact on him. None of his personal belongings
were in jeopardy.
[28]          
However, the impact is on the system itself. The
requirement to file a Report to Justice is not simply a paper exercise: R.
v. Canary, 2018 ONCA 304, 361 C.C.C. (3d) 63, at para. 45. It is a built-in
system of checks and balances that the police should take seriously. For this
reason, this factor favours exclusion.
[29]          
Society has a strong interest in having this
case adjudicated on its merits. The allegation of trafficking of illegal drugs
is serious. The Crown has a strong circumstantial case that depends on the items
proposed to be excluded.
[30]          
In this case, the Charter violation raised by
the defence is not serious, nor is the impact on Mr. Animer. I consider however
that there is an impact on the criminal justice system where police continually
fail to report to justice or file them very late. On this topic, see Justice
Molloy’s comments in R. v. Fareed, 2023 ONSC 1581, 525 C.R.R. (2d) 112 (“Fareed”). However, unlike
in Fareed, there is ambiguity here as to what the officers should have
done. Officer Besco was led astray by a pre-populated form that indicated that no
Report to Justice was needed. The protocol was similarly unclear to DC Metzger
who seized and exhibited the drugs. And I accept from those officers that the
protocol for dealing with evidence obtained by third parties was generally
unclear to the police at the time.
[31]          
Ms. Schofield echoes Justice Molloy in her
submissions that at some point, the police need to be held accountable for
their habitual failures to report to justice. I agree, but this is not that
point. In balancing the factors, the evidence in this case should not be
excluded. A reasonable, dispassionate person fully apprised of the circumstances
would conclude that the admission of the evidence would not bring the
administration of justice into disrepute.
[32]          
In addition to the ASF, the Crown relies on a
fingerprint expert report, a drug valuation report, Health Canada certificates,
CCTV footage from a self-serve kiosk, Canada Post counter footage, footage of
the self-serve area at the Kipling location, the Canada Post box itself, the printed
shipping label, the Shipment Receipt, and photographs of these items to prove
its case.
[33]          
The Crown must prove the elements of trafficking
pursuant to s. 5(2) of the CDSA. All elements are admitted except for identity
and knowledge. First, is the person dropping off the package at the Kipling
Purolator on March 25, 2021 Mr. Animer? Second, if it is Mr. Animer, did he
know the contents of the package when he dropped it off?
[34]          
The Crown’s theory of the case is that Mr.
Animer assembled the box or helped assemble it, put drugs in it himself or
observed someone else doing so, and attempted to deliver it through the mail
knowing its contents.
[35]          
The defence argues that the Crown can neither
prove identity nor knowledge beyond a reasonable doubt. The man seen on CCTV
walking into the Purolator on March 25, 2021  is unidentifiable. Even if the
Crown can prove identity beyond a reasonable doubt, the defence argues that Mr.
Animer is a blind courier with no knowledge of the contents of the box.
[36]          
The Crown’s case against Mr. Animer is entirely
circumstantial. As such, I can only find Mr. Animer guilty if guilt is the only
reasonable inference arising from the whole of the evidence or lack of
evidence. In assessing the circumstantial evidence, I must consider other
plausible theories and other reasonable possibilities based on logic and human
experience, which are inconsistent with guilt: R. v. Villaroman, 2016
SCC 33, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 1000, at paras. 35-36 (“Villaroman”).
[37]          
The standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt
applies to the final evaluation of innocence or guilt and is not piecemeal to
individual items of evidence: R. v. Wu¸ 2017 ONCA 620, 2017 CarswellOnt
11450, at para. 15.
[38]          
I find that it is Mr. Animer who dropped off the
package on March 25, 2021 and attempted to do so on March 24, 2021. I also find
that he knew what was in the box or purposely decided not to know.
[39]          
The image of the person dropping off the package
on Canada Post’s CCTV is not clear. I conclude however that it was Mr. Animer
at the Kipling Purolator on March 25, 2021, because his fingerprints were found
on the Shipment Receipt that the person gave to the employee. The defence
points out that there were other prints on the Shipment Receipt that showed up
on the police database and that this raises doubt as to the identity of the
person seen entering. In other words, it is a reasonable alternative that the
person seen dropping off the box was not Mr. Animer.
[40]          
I disagree. Based on the agreed sequence of
events and the CCTV evidence, I conclude that the only way Mr. Animer’s prints
could have gotten on the Shipment Receipt was for him to have been the person
handing that document to the staff person at the counter. The parties agreed to
the following facts at paragraphs 32-38 of the ASF:
[41]          
From this sequence of events, Mr. Animer had to
be at the Kipling Purolator for his prints to be on the Shipment Receipt. I
find that it was him who handed it to the Purolator employee. There is no
evidence or suggestion that Mr. Animer would have had access to the Shipment
Receipt after it was left with Purolator. On the other hand, it is possible
that others touched the Shipment Receipt after it was left with the Purolator
worker. On March 26, 2021, the Loss Manager had access to the Shipment Receipt
as did the police who took possession of it. After that, there are likely
others who might have touched the Receipt. There is no evidence of how long the
other prints had been on the Shipment Receipt. As a matter of common sense and
logic, there is only one time in this sequence that Mr. Animer could have
touched it.
[42]          
I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that it
was Mr. Animer who attempted to ship the box of cocaine on March 25, 2021.
[43]          
I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that
Mr. Animer knew what he was sending or that the circumstances were inherently
suspicious such that the only reason he did not know of the contents was
because he chose to remain deliberately ignorant. It is the only reasonable
inference on the whole of the evidence.
[44]          
As noted above, I find it was Mr. Animer who
tried to deliver the package to Ms. Gauthier on March 25, 2021. I also find
that Mr. Animer was the person who attempted to send the same Canada Post box
through the self-serve kiosk the day before. First, the two men look alike in
terms of build and the clothing they were wearing underneath their outerwear.
This includes both men having a white decal on black shoes. Second, the box
that the person attempted to send on March 24, 2021 had the identical recipient
as the box Mr. Animer was sending on March 25, 2021. Third, the box looked the
same size and had the same markings. Fourth, on March 24, 2021 the person can
be seen wrapping a box in saran wrap. The box that Mr. Animer attempted to send
on March 25, 2021 looked the same size and was already heavily saran wrapped.
[45]          
As counter-points to these similarities, I have
considered the difference in the labelling of the packages, in so far as Mr.
Brown was listed on the shipping label created on March 24, 2021. I also
consider that there is no evidence of any investigative steps the police took
to rule out Mr. Brown as the real drug trafficker.
[46]          
That said, logic and human experience tell me
that it is highly unlikely that two different but similarly dressed people
attempted to send a significantly similar looking Canada Post box wrapped in
saran wrap to the same recipient within a day of each other. I do not know why the
person left the shipping label with Mr. Brown’s number behind. Perhaps he made
a mistake by putting Mr. Brown’s name down. Regardless, that gap in the
evidence does not cause me to deviate from the conclusion that it is Mr. Animer
that we see in the CCTV on March 24, 2021.
[47]          
The fingerprint evidence establishes that Mr.
Animer touched the box at some point in time before he touched it again to wrap
it in saran wrap. Exhibit 14A shows the location of his fingerprints. Three of
them, R10, R11 and R17, would be on the interior of the box if the box was assembled.
The prints labelled as R10 and R11 are on a flap that is tucked in under the
front flap when the box is assembled. The box was tendered as Trial Exhibit 9. Logic
dictates that prints R10 and R11 could only have gotten on the box if Mr.
Animer touched the unassembled box or assembled the box himself. Those prints
could not have been on the box simply from touching it to wrap it in saran
wrap.
[48]          
I find that Mr. Animer assembled the box. The
placement of his thumb on R17 (the small interior flap when assembled), the
number of prints found on the front flap, and the way this box is assembled is
more consistent with Mr. Animer assembling it than with him simply handing it
to someone to assemble and then touching it again to wrap it.
[49]          
Even if I am incorrect, unlike what one would
expect from a typical blind courier, Mr. Animer was involved in some way with
this box from the beginning. Whether he assembled it or not, Mr. Animer knew of
its contents or chose to avert his eyes in an inherently suspicious situation.
[50]          
Mr. Animer took unusual steps to deliver the box
to Ms. Gauthier. He first attended a self-serve kiosk to deliver the package
but abandoned that plan. The labelling was unconventional in the sense that it
had only a name and a number, and an incomplete address. This suggests that the
sender wanted to distance themselves from the package. Then, at the Kipling
location, Mr. Animer made up a sender, “marcus”, and indicated no personal
address on the shipping label; another indicator that he wanted to distance
himself or anyone else from the package. In both instances, he used untraceable
methods of payment – the first being a purchased gift card or credit card, and
the second being cash. Even if Mr. Animer was acting for someone else, he knew
that the contents of the box were such that the sender needed to be distanced
from it.
[51]          
I further find that Mr. Animer not only knew
that the contents were such that the box needed to be untraceable, but also
that it contained illegal drugs. In addition to my finding that Mr. Animer
assembled the box, Mr. Animer wrapped the box in saran wrap. Detective Duffus,
conceded to be a drug expert, would have stated, if called to testify, that
wrapping a box that contained cocaine or crack cocaine with plastic wrap is
consistent with an effort to stifle a chemical smell.[1] His evidence was accepted
as part of the Agreed Statement of Facts at Trial Exhibit 1. Even if Mr. Animer
did not assemble the box, I find that he knew what was in it and wrapped it
with saran wrap to conceal its contents. I do not accept that he just blindly
followed someone’s instructions to wrap it without knowing its contents.
[52]          
I also draw the reasonable inference that a
valuable item like this quantity of drugs would not be entrusted to anyone who
did not know the nature of the contents of the container they are found in: R.
v. Bains, 2015 ONCA 677, 127 O.R. (3d) 545, at paras. 156-157. Detective
Duffus values the 555.6 grams of crack cocaine between $25,246 and $110,120
depending on how it is sold. He values the 153.88 grams of powder cocaine
between $10,355 and $17,006 depending on how it is sold.
[53]          
The cumulative effect of the circumstantial
evidence raises the reasonable inference that even if Mr. Animer did not know
the contents of the box, he would necessarily have been suspicious and did not
make the necessary inquiries. The whole of the evidence does not support the
inference that he was a bona fide blind courier.
[54]          
The defence argues that there are simply too
many gaps in the Crown’s case for them to satisfy their onus. Nothing was
revealed on a search of Mr. Animer’s home and the police did not conduct any
surveillance that led to observations tying him to drug trafficking. There was
no evidence of investigating and ruling out Anthony Brown as the real
trafficker, nor any follow up on other prints that were found on the Shipment
Receipt and in the police’s system.
[55]          
None of these gaps leave me with reasonable
doubt. As noted in Villaroman, at para. 36 certain gaps in the evidence
may result in inferences other than guilt, but those inferences must be
reasonable and made in light of human experience and common sense. Despite the
gaps in evidence or the lack of other investigation, the Crown has presented a
tight chain of circumstantial evidence. It is not a reasonable inference from
the whole of the evidence that Mr. Animer was just handed a package to deliver
with no knowledge of its contents nor suspicion that triggered questions that
he chose not to ask. Mr. Animer was involved with this package from the very
beginning of the transaction. He either assembled the box or touched it before
the contents were put in it. He wrapped the box. He created a label with no
traceable sender. He paid in cash. On the totality of the evidence, the Crown
has satisfied me beyond a reasonable doubt that it was Mr. Animer who attempted
to send the box of powder and crack cocaine on March 25, 2021 and that he knew
or chose not to know that it contained illegal substances.
[56]          
I find Mr. Animer guilty beyond a reasonable
doubt of trafficking powder cocaine and crack cocaine.