[1]              
Dolorosa is a 92-year-old widow who
suffers from dementia. Her husband, Gaetano Ceci, died in June 2016. They
emigrated to Canada in 1963 from Italy. They had five children, one of whom,
Nancy De Franco, died in October 2022. Dolorosa’s
four surviving children are Ada De Novellis (“Ada”), Michael Ceci (“Michael”),
Dario Ceci (“Dario”) and Carmine Ceci (“Carmine”).
[2]              
In February 2023, Ada, Michael and
Ada’s husband, Enio De Novellis, commenced an application for an order
directing the sale of a property in Caledon, Ontario (“the Farm”) that is owned
by several family members, and for the payment of $30,000 in interest on
account of funds owned by Ada and Michael that were used to pay off the
mortgage on the Farm in 2017. Dolorosa owns a 10% interest in the Farm. See
Court File No. CV-23-00694230-00ES (“The Farm Sale Application”).
[3]              
On April 14, 2023, Ada and Michael
commenced two additional applications.
[4]              
First, Ada and Michael commenced an
application, as Nancy’s Estate Trustees, for an order striking out the notice
of objection filed by Dario and Carmine that challenges the validity of Nancy’s
Will which excludes Dario and Carmine as beneficiaries. See Court File No.
CV-23-00697967-00ES (“Application to Strike the Notice of Objection”).
[5]              
Second, Ada and Michael commenced this guardianship
application for, amongst other things: (a) an order that Dolorosa be assessed
by a certified capacity assessor; (b) an order that Dolorosa be found incapable
of managing property; (c) an order that the Public Guardian and Trustee (“PGT”)
arrange for legal representation to be provided to Dolorosa pursuant to section
3 of the Substitute Decisions Act, 1992, S.O. 1992, c. 30 (“SDA”); (d) an
order terminating any power of attorney documents executed by Dolorosa; (e) an
order declaring that Dario holds, by way of resulting or constructive trust,
50% of the beneficial interest in the Whitfield Property; (f) an order that
Dario transfer title to the Whitfield Property back into Dolorosa’s name; (g) that
leave to issue a Certificate of Pending Litigation be granted in respect of the
Whitfield Property; (h) an order compelling Dario to deliver a statement of
assets of Dolorosa’s property; (i) an order that Dario commence an application
for a passing of accounts beginning June 1, 2016; and (j) an order that Ada and
Michael be appointed as co-guardians for care for Dolorosa and as co-guardians
for property for Dolorosa.
[6]              
On this motion, Ada and Michael seek the
following relief:
[7]              
Further, the applicants and Dario have
agreed to an order that section 3 counsel shall be entitled to the release of
Dolorosa’s personal health records and medical records from any person or
facility where Dolorosa has received care, without the need for Dolorosa’s
consent to be provided.
[8]              
On February 23, 2018, Dario took
Dolorosa to Frank Sgro, a lawyer, where she signed, by marking an X, a
continuing power of attorney for property (“CPOAP”) and a power of attorney for
personal care that appointed Dario as her attorney. Dolorosa also signed: 1) a
transfer of the Whitfield Property from Dolorosa to Dolorosa and Dario, as
joint tenants, for no consideration; 2) a transfer of Dolorosa’s partial interest
in the Farm from Dolorosa to Dolorosa and Dario, as joint tenants; and 3) a declaration
of trust regarding the transfer of title to the Whitfield Property and the Farm
that appoints Dario as trustee. Dario states that these steps were taken in
order reduce the amount of estate administration tax that would otherwise be
payable on Dolorosa’s death. The applicants state that these documents were
signed without their knowledge. They also question whether Dolorosa had the
capacity to sign these documents and allege that she was coerced to sign these
documents. Dario states that the above transfers were done for estate purposes.
He does not claim any beneficial interest in the Whitfield Property or Dolorosa’s
share of the Farm beyond that which may be gifted to him in her will.
[9]              
Dario states that he moved into the Whitfield
Property in the Fall of 2019 in order to provide Dolorosa with companionship
and support. Such support is in addition to the 21 hours per week of publicly funded
personal support and homemaking services that Dolorosa receives, and the
live-in caregiver whom Dario states he hired in 2016.
[10]          
The applicants allege that Dario
neglects Dolorosa and that he has prevented her from seeing the applicants and
their children. They also allege that Dario has kept his siblings “in the dark”
about her medical condition and has attempted to cause rifts within the family in
order to gain control over their parents’ assets.
[11]          
A letter dated March 10, 2023 from Dolorosa’s
family physician, Dr. Sandy Shulman, states:
[12]          
In a letter dated May 1, 2023, Dr. Giovanni
Marotta found that DolorosaHe had “moderately severe dementia”. His letter
states:
[13]          
On November 17, 2023, Sanfilippo J. directed the
Public Guardian and Trustee to appoint counsel for Dolorosa pursuant to section
3 of the Substitute Decisions Act, 1992, S.O.
1992, c. 30 and ordered that Dolorosa’s assets may be used to pay for her
own legal fees.
[14]          
On December 6, 2023, Dario registered a
charge in the amount of $918,433.50 against title to the Whitfield Property in
favour of the Equitable Bank (“the Whitfield Charge”). The applicants state
that Dario failed to disclose the Whitfield Charge to them, and that he has not
provided an accounting of its proceeds. They believe that he has used some of
the proceeds for his own personal benefit.
[15]          
Dario states that $250,000 was advanced
on the Whitfield Charge in order to pay for legal fees and for Dolorosa’s
personal care expenses. Dario states that the stated amount of the charge is
much higher than the amount advanced under the charge so that he will be able
to increase the loaned amount without having to register another charge.
[16]          
Dario states that:
[17]          
The following issues are to be
determined on this motion:
[18]          
The applicants seek an order requiring
Dario to pass his accounts given his alleged attempts to take advantage of
Dolorosa’s assets for his personal benefit.
[19]          
Whether such relief should be granted
is governed by the principles outlined by the Ontario Court of Appeal in Lewis
v. Lewis, 2020 ONCA 56, 55 E.T.R. (4th) 161:
[20]          
The CPOAP states that “this power of
attorney can only be exercised during any subsequent legal incapacity on my
part to manage my property”. While Dario states that Dolorosa has never been
found to be incapable of managing her property, he nevertheless admits that,
since 2020, he has “stepped in to act as her attorney for property”. Given
these circumstances, I find that the applicants, as Dolorosa’s children, have a
genuine interest in Dolorosa’s welfare.
[21]          
Dario’s affidavit provides an
accounting including bank statements for all of Dolorosa’s accounts from 2017
to present. While he did not manage Dolorosa’s property prior to 2020, Dario
nevertheless attempts to explain various transactions. He provides a detailed
accounting of banking transactions for the period from January 1, 2022 going
forward. Dario further explains why he arranged for the transfer of the
Whitfield Property, the Whitfield Charge and how the funds drawn have been
used. He confirms that those funds have only been used to pay his legal fees in
this application (about $80,000.00) and not the other two applications. In
these circumstances, an order requiring Dario to deliver an accounting of the
proceeds from the Whitfield Charge is unnecessary.
[22]          
As noted, I accept Dario’s evidence that he has not used
Dolorosa’s assets to pay his legal expenses in respect of the other two
applications. Thus, this issue reduces to whether the applicants are correct in
their submission that Dario should not have used Dolorosa’s funds to pay his
own legal fees in respect of this guardianship application “… while the
validity of the power of attorney documents and trust documents upon which he
relies is being challenged [as it] would offend the court’s discretion to
allocate costs awards to parties while protecting the incapable person’s
property”. In support of this submission, the applicants submit that an
attorney must await the determination of a guardianship application on its
merits before it has a right to indemnification from the donor. The applicants’
reliance on Fiacco v. Lombardi, [2009] O.J. No. 3670 (Ont. S.C.) and Wercholoz v. Tonellotto,
2013 ONSC 1106 is misplaced as there was nothing said in those decisions which
supports their submission.
[23]          
The CPOAP states:
[24]          
A power of attorney is a type of agency
and is subject to various common law and statutory rules: Houston v. Houston,
2012 BCCA 300, 352 D.L.R. (4th) 125, at para. 26. The overarching purpose of
power of attorney statutes is to protect the property of a person found to be
incapable: See Ian M. Hull and Suzana Popovic-Montag, Power of Attorney
Litigation, 2nd ed. (LexisNexis Canada Inc., 2022), at pp. 25, 53.
[25]          
While the CPOAP allows an attorney to
receive compensation from the donor’s property for their services, and s. 40 of
the SDA provides that an attorney may take compensation in accordance with a
fee schedule prescribed by regulation, there is nothing in the SDA that
requires an attorney to be indemnified for their reasonably incurred expenses.
[26]          
There is nothing in the CPOAP that expressly
addresses the payment of the attorney’s legal expenses, as incurred, from the
donor’s property during the course of this appointment, nor is there anything
in the SDA or the Powers of Attorney Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.20 (“POAA”).
However, s. 2 of the POAA states:
[27]          
Whether the broad scope of powers
provided by the CPOAP and section 2 of the POAA support the payment of legal
expenses, as incurred, from the donor’s property must be considered in light of
the overarching purpose of these statutes but also in light of provisions of the
SDA.
[28]          
An attorney for property is a
fiduciary: SDA, ss. 32(1), 38(1). As such, an attorney for property is obliged
to act only for the benefit of the donor and not for their own benefit unless
it is done with the full knowledge and consent of the donor: Richardson Estate
v. Mew, 2009 ONCA 403, 96 O.R. (3d) 65, at para. 49. In Richardson,
Gillese J.A. stated, at para. 48, that “the scope of the attorney’s fiduciary
duties depends on whether the donor of the power is incapable at the time of
the transaction. If the donor is mentally incapable, the attorney’s position
approaches that of a trustee. If not, the relationship between donor and
attorney is similar to one of agency.”
[29]          
The powers and duties of a guardian of an
attorney for property shall be exercised and performed diligently and in good
faith: SDA, ss. 66(1), 67(1). If an attorney for property “does not know of a
wish or instruction applicable to the circumstances that the incapable person
expressed while capable, or if it is impossible to make the decision in
accordance with the wish or instruction, the guardian shall make the decision
in the incapable person’s best interests”: SDA, ss. 66(3), 67(1).
[30]          
An attorney acting under a continuing
power of attorney has a duty to keep accounts of all transactions if the
grantor is incapable of managing property or the attorney has reasonable
grounds to believe that the grantor is incapable of managing property: SDA ss.
32(6), 38(1). As noted, an attorney may be compelled to pass their accounts:
SDA, s. 42.
[31]          
The recovery of costs by an attorney
from the donor’s property following the determination of an application is
informed by the principles outlined by Sanfilippo J. in Bogue v. Bogue,
2024 ONSC 5403, at para. 6:
[32]          
The risks and consequences associated
with litigation involving a challenge to a power of attorney have been
described as follows:
[33]          
Public policy supports the view that an
attorney should be permitted to recover their costs in advance of a passing of
accounts. The views expressed below by Professor Oosterhoff, in respect of an estate
trustee being able to do so, are equally applicable to an attorney for
property:
[34]          
Rather than act unilaterally, it may be
prudent for an attorney to seek directions from the court regarding whether
legal expenses should be paid from the donor’s property as they are incurred,
and, if so, whether conditions should be imposed : Craven v. Osidacz, 2017
ONSC 1757, 26 E.T.R. (4th) 241, at para. 86; Albert Oosterhoff, Indemnity of
Estates Trustees Redux, WEL Blog, August 16, 2017.
[35]          
In this case, given the transfers and mortgage
noted above and notwithstanding the explanation that he has subsequently
provided, it would have been sensible for Dario to ask the court for directions
pursuant to s. 68 of the SDA regarding the use of his mother’s property to pay
for the legal expenses of responding to this guardianship application prior to
a passing of accounts. During submissions, I asked counsel for their views on
placing a charge on title to Dario’s home in the amount of $250,000 in favour
of Dolorosa, without interest, and payable if he is directed by this court to
reimburse Dolorosa for expenses paid using her property. Aside from providing
security, the charge will promote the proper and reasonable use of Dolorosa’s
property for legal expenses. Counsel for the applicants, Dario and section 3
counsel for Dolorosa expressed support for this approach.
[36]          
I decline to order that Dario reimburse
Dolorosa for funds taken from her property that were used to pay legal fees in
respect of this guardianship application. A charge, as described, shall be
placed on Dario’s home.
[37]          
The applicants ask for “an order
enjoining Dario from selling, removing, dissipating, alienating, transferring, assigning,
encumbering, or similarly dealing with any of Mrs. Ceci’s assets, including the
proceeds from the Whitfield Charge”.
[38]          
The Applicants rely on Rules 45.01 and
45.02 of the Rules of Civil Procedure.
[39]          
Rule 45.01(1) states that the “… court
may make an interim order for the custody or preservation of any property in
question in a proceeding or relevant to an issue in a proceeding, and for that
purpose may authorize entry on or into any property in the possession of a
party or of a person not a party”.
[40]          
As noted by Wilton-Siegel J. in Ballantry Construction Management Inc. v. GR (CAN)
Investment Co. Ltd., 2024 ONSC
2129, at para. 26:
[41]          
In this case, the applicants do not assert an interest in Dolorosa’s property
nor is it necessary to preserve her property as evidence in the proceedings.
Accordingly, Rule 45.01 is inapplicable.
[42]          
Rule 45.02 is also inapplicable as the applicants are not claiming a
right to a “specific fund”: Sadie Moranis Realty Corp. v. 1667038 Ontario
Inc., 2012 ONCA 475, 111 O.R. (3d) 401, at para. 19.
[43]          
The applicants also rely on s. 101 of the Courts of Justice Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43 and the three-part test for interlocutory relief established
by the Supreme Court of Canada in RJR-MacDonald Inc. v. Canada (Attorney
General), 1994 CanLII 117 (SCC), [1994] 1 S.C.R. 311:
[44]          
Dario acknowledges that whether he will be required to reimburse
Dolorosa for legal fees, despite his position that the guardianship application
lacks merit, is a serious issue.
[45]          
In addition to the charge that I have ordered be placed on his home for
Dolorosa’s benefit, Dario also owns a part interest in the Farm.  Neither the
applicants nor Dolorosa will suffer irreparable harm if this injunction is not
granted. Dolorosa will have security in the event that Dario is ordered to
reimburse those legal expenses that were paid with her property. Accordingly,
the motion for an interlocutory injunction is dismissed.
[46]          
Order to go as follows: