[1]    
       
This
is an appeal brought by the Crown against the acquittals imposed on June 18,
2024 by Wendl J. of the Ontario Court of Justice at Hamilton, Ontario.
[2]    
  Following
a three-day trial, the respondent, Shee Bowman, a.k.a. Shee McLean (“Bowman”)
was acquitted on charges of sexual assault and sexual interference, contrary to
their respective provisions of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46.
[3]    
  In the
Notice of Appeal and written materials, the appellant raised several grounds of
appeal against the acquittals, including that
the trial judge failed to consider material evidence and the insufficiency of
reasons.
[4]    
  In
very brief reasons, the trial judge went on to quote four excerpts from the
complainant’s evidence: three from her police interview, and one from her
cross-examination. Each of the excerpts address the complainant’s belief or
opinion about the respondent’s mental state at the relevant time, and one excerpt
includes her observations of the respondent.
[5]    
  In the
three-paragraph analysis which follows, the trial judge includes only three
sentences analyzing and addressing all of the evidence at trial.
[6]    
    The
trial judge concludes that he cannot find the acts occurred beyond a reasonable
doubt, because he “cannot reconcile these two facts: that he was performing
this action, on her testimony, and that he was asleep on the other hand.” The
trial judge held conclusively that his reasonable doubt relates only to the
reliability of the complainant and not to her credibility.
[7]    
  The appellant submits that the trial judge made
two legal errors which were central to his decision to reject the complainant’s
evidence. First, the trial judge misapprehended the evidence about whether the
respondent was asleep or awake at the time of the sexual touching. The trial judge
incorrectly concluded that the complainant testified that the respondent was
asleep. However, the complainant’s evidence was that, while the respondent
exhibited markers of sleep (having his eyes closed, breathing heavily, and
lightly snoring), the repeated and complex actions with his hands indicated
wakefulness. She testified that her opinion on whether the respondent had been
truly asleep or awake had gone back and forth and she was influenced by
statements made by the respondent to her and to his spouse.
[8]    
  Further,
the appellant contends that the trial judge failed to consider all of the
evidence of the complainant, and failed to consider any of the evidence of
other witnesses, including pertinent, admissible statements from the
respondent. In finding that the complainant testified that the respondent was
asleep, the appellant submits that the trial judge grossly misapprehended the
nature of her evidence. This misapprehension was essential to his ultimate finding
and produced a miscarriage of justice.
[9]    
  Second,
the appellant says that the trial judge erred by providing reasons that are so
deficient that they foreclose any meaningful appellate review. It is unknown
what findings of fact were made or inferences drawn, if any. Even if it is
presumed that the trial judge considered only the complainant’s observations of
the respondent at the time of the touching (and not a misapprehended opinion
about whether he was asleep or not) this evidence is not inconsistent with her
evidence about the touching. It is unknown why the judge found these two points
irreconcilable. The appellant requests that the acquittals be set aside, and a
new trial ordered.
[10]    
 The respondent submits that the trial judge did
not err. Counsel says that the
trial judge’s reasons were sufficient and addressed the relevant issue, namely
the complainant’s credibility. Given the evidence of the complainant’s claim
about the event and the respondent’s sleeping state, the trial judge explained
why this evidence raised a reasonable doubt.  It
was open to the trial judge to reach the verdict he did on the evidence
presented at trial.
[11]    
   The
respondent argues that the Crown’s argument fails to
appreciate and apply the contextual approach that must be taken to assessing
the sufficiency of reasons. Moreover, it fails to appreciate the content of
reasons required to explain an acquittal (as opposed to a conviction), which
may be no more than the basis of a reasonable doubt. Examined against the
appropriate legal backdrop, the reasons are sufficient and the appellant’s
argument must fail.
[12]    
 The respondent
contends that the finding that the complainant “testified” that he was asleep
while he allegedly touched her is amply grounded in the record.  While it is
true that at some junctures she stated this in terms of belief or appearance,
there is no doubt that the complainant testified that the respondent was
asleep. The appellant asserts that this finding was erroneous because the
complainant could not give direct evidence as to the respondent’s intent.
[13]    
 The
respondent replies that this assertion is of no assistance to the appellant as
the trial judge did not make any findings as to his intent. He did not make a
finding as to whether the respondent was in fact asleep. Nor did he make a
finding as to the veracity of the complainant’s evidence that he was. The trial
judge’s finding was that the complainant “testified that he was asleep”. That
finding didn’t require him to draw any inferences. It simply required him to
recite her evidence and there can be no assertion to the contrary.
[14]    
 While
couched as a misapprehension of the evidence, the respondent says that the
appellant’s grievance is really a complaint with the sufficiency of the trial
judge’s reasons for harbouring a reasonable doubt that the Crown had proven the
actus reus and an attack on the “reasonableness” of the acquittal.
[15]    
 The respondent
contends that the litany of complaints set out in paras. 62-68 of the
appellant’s factum is without merit.  Again, there can be no serious question
that the record amply supports this finding. This appeal ought to be dismissed.
[16]    
 Pursuant
to s. 686(1)(a) of the Criminal Code, appellate courts can set aside a
verdict when (a) the verdict is unreasonable or cannot be supported by the
evidence; (b) there was a wrong decision of law; or (c) on any ground where
there was a miscarriage of justice.
[17]    
 The
Crown brings this appeal pursuant to s. 813, which applies to summary offences.
Under s. 822, the provisions dealing with appeals relating to indictable
offences, specifically ss. 683 to 689 (with the exception of ss. 683(3) and
686(5)), apply to s. 813 appeals. The language of s. 813 does not restrict the
Crown's grounds of appeal (see R. v. Labadie, 2011 ONCA 227, at paras.
50-51), and s. 686(4) confers on the summary conviction appeal court the power
to (1) dismiss the appeal, or (2) allow the appeal, set aside the verdict and
either order a new trial, or remit the matter to the trial court and direct the
trial court to impose a sentence that is warranted in law.
[18]    
 It is
settled law that when considering an unreasonable verdict or an error in the
trial judge’s overall assessment of the evidence, deference must be afforded. An
appellate court is not entitled to re-try the case and substitute its view of
the evidence.
[19]    
 Section
686(4) of the Code sets out the powers of this Court on an appeal from
an acquittal. As compared to s. 686(1), which sets out the Court’s powers on an
appeal from conviction and provides three bases upon which an appeal may be
allowed, the power on Crown appeal is circumscribed.
[20]    
 The
Crown cites the trial judge's misapprehension of the evidence and insufficiency
of reasons as grounds for the appeal. Both will amount to an error of law where
the misapprehension of the evidence goes to the substance rather than the
detail and where the reasons are so deficient as to preclude any meaningful
appellate review: R. v. Lohrer, 2004 SCC 80, at para. 2; R. v.
Sheppard, 2002 SCC 26, at para. 1.
[21]    
 It is
settled law that when considering an unreasonable verdict or an error in the
trial judge’s overall assessment of the evidence, deference must be afforded: R.
v. W.H. 2013 SCC 22, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 180. A trial judge is not held to a
standard of perfection in the context of reasons. An appellate court is not
entitled to re-try the case and substitute its view of the evidence.
[22]    
 The
question is not whether the evidence is capable of raising a reasonable doubt
or whether another judge might have convicted the respondent. Rather, the court
must thoroughly re-examine, and to an extent at least, conduct a limited
re-weighing and consider the effect of the evidence: R. v. W.(R.),
1992 CanLII 56 (SCC), [1992] 2 S.C.R. 122. The question is whether the verdict was one that a
properly instructed jury or judge acting reasonably could have reached: R.
v. Biniaris, 2000 SCC 15, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 381, R. v. Yebes, 1987 CanLII 17 (SCC), [1987] 2
S.C.R. 168. It follows that a misapprehension of material evidence and
insufficiency of reasons can give rise to an unreasonable verdict.
[23]    
 Appellate
courts may only interfere with verdicts if they can clearly articulate the
basis upon which they conclude that the verdict is “inconsistent with the
requirements of a judicial appreciation of the evidence”: Biniaris, at
p. 384.
[24]    
 The
test for demonstrating an unreasonable verdict is an exacting one. A verdict
may also be found unreasonable if the trial judge has drawn an inference or
made a finding of fact essential to the verdict that is plainly contradicted by
the evidence relied on by the trial judge in support of the finding, or is shown
to be incompatible with the evidence that has not otherwise been contradicted
or rejected by the trial judge.  As held by
Doherty J.A. in R. v. Morrisey, 1995 CanLII 3498 (ON CA), [1995]
O.J. No. 639, (C.A.) trial judges
will commit a reversible error when they fail to take into account evidence
that is “relevant to a material issue” at trial:
[25]    
 I observe that in R. v. Clark (2005), SCC 2,
2005 SCC 2 (CanLII), [2005] 1 S.C.R. 6, the court held at para. 9:
[26]    
 The law with regards to palpable and overriding error was
summarized by the Court of Appeal for Ontario in R. v. D.T., 2014
ONCA 44, 305 C.C.C. (3d) 526, as follows, [citations omitted]:
[27]          
At the outset, I turn to the second issue advanced by the appellant;
namely, whether the trial judge provided reasons that were insufficient to
permit meaningful appellate review.
[28]        
An appeal based on insufficient reasons “will only be
allowed where the trial Judge’s reasons are so deficient that they foreclose
meaningful appellate review”: R. v. Dinardo, 2008
SCC 24, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 788, at paras.
24-25, citing Sheppard. Appellate
courts may allow an appeal based on insufficiency where the reasons, read in
the context of the evidentiary record and the live issues on which the trial
focused, fail to disclose an intelligible basis for the verdict. In other
words, appellate review of reasons for
decision must be done functionally and contextually. The core question in
determining whether a trial judge’s reasons are sufficient is whether the
reasons, read in context, explain why the judge decided as they did: R. v. G.F., 2021 SCC 20,
[2021] 1 S.C.R. 801, at para. 69.
[29]        
The law is well-established that when applying the
principle of reasonable doubt, a trial judge must consider the evidence as a
whole: R. v. Morin, 1988 CanLII 8 (SCC), [1988] 2 S.C.R. 345, aff’d, 1992 CanLII 40 (SCC), [1992] 3 S.C.R. 286 at p.
295-296, R. v. J.M.H., 2011 SCC 45, at paras. 31-32.
[30]        
A
failure “to sufficiently articulate how credibility and reliability concerns
are resolved may constitute reversible error”: R. v. A.M., 2014
ONCA 769, 123 O.R. (3d) 536, at para. 18; R. v. Slatter, 2019
ONCA 807 at para. 58. A judge need not review and resolve every inconsistency
or respond to every argument advanced by counsel. A.M. at para. 14.
[31]        
In the case of R. v. R.E.M., 2008
SCC 51, [2008] 3 S.C.R. 3, the Supreme Court had occasion to elaborate on
the general principles to be applied when considering the sufficiency of
reasons:
[32]        
The
respondent contends that while the trial judge’s reasons for why he held a reasonable
doubt may not be extensive, the underlying principles of the presumption of
innocence and the burden of proof dictate that extensive reasons are not
required.
[33]        
At the same time, the respondent also concedes that there
is no doubt the issue of intention was at the forefront of the submissions of
counsel in this trial, and that was not the basis upon which the trial judge
decided the present case. The respondent asserts that the trial judge never got
to assessing the issue of intention because he was unable to find the actus
reus was proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
[34]        
It is well-established that a trial judge’s findings on
the credibility and reliability of a witness are entitled to deference. What is
crucial, however, is the requirement that a trial judge explain their reasons
on credibility and reasonable doubt in a way that permits meaningful appellate
review: R. v. Gagnon, 2006 SCC 17 (CanLII), [2006] 1 S.C.R. 621.
[35]        
In this case, the trial judge’s reasons for judgment
engage just a few lines of transcript over approximately two pages. The trial
itself was three days. Submissions encompassed a full day with 56 pages of
transcript.
[36]        
Counsel made extensive submissions on the issue of the
complainant’s credibility and reliability (considering R.B.’s prone position at
the time of the incidents and the mechanics of Bowman’s reaching underneath her
with both hands, the late disclosure of the assault, and the K.B. not having
seen R.B. awake that night), as well as on the voluntariness of Bowman’s
actions (given R.B.’s evidence of having observed markers of sleep and at some
points believing he was sleeping). The trial judge asked counsel to provide
case law and submissions on Bowman’s inculpatory/exculpatory/spontaneous
utterances to K.B. at the time she confronted him (about R.B. cuddling up to
him, about not knowing what happened), as well as on the issue of sleep and
automatism.
[37]        
There was a thorough exchange between the judge and
defence counsel regarding the voluntariness of and intent behind Bowman’s
conduct given the defence’s position that he was sleeping – the judge wanted to
know how to reconcile his state of sleep with the complexity of conduct at
issue (i.e., digital penetration, not a brush of the arm).
[38]        
The record shows several issues were broached by counsel
and the trial judge as being pertinent to the outcome of the case, but which
were not addressed or resolved in the reasons. The trial concluded with the
trial judge noting there was a lot to consider, and “finer point analysis”
would be involved. Whether or not Bowman was asleep at the relevant times was a
central issue, and while there is some suggestion the judge’s findings of fact
on this issue were determinative, the limited engagement with the evidentiary
record leaves many questions.
[39]        
This segment of the appeal essentially turns on an
analysis of the trial judge's reasons for judgment in the context of the
evidentiary record. I have considered the reasons for judgment as a whole,
keeping in mind the purpose for which they were delivered. The trial judge’s
reasons were not intended to be, nor have I read them, “as a verbalization of
the entire process engaged in by the trial judge in reaching [his] verdict”: see
Morrissey, at p. 525.
[40]        
The trial judge held that the reliability of
the evidence led him to his conclusion. What is the explanation or analysis to
reach that conclusion?  With respect, the trial
judge’s reasons do not articulate any findings of fact, nor review any law that
could provide context or insight. For instance, it is unknown whether the judge
made findings regarding any of the respondent’s actions, or whether his
after-the-fact statements were considered in any way. It is also unknown
whether the judge accepted the complainant’s observations of the respondent at
the time of the touching. Or, whether the judge accepted as fact the
complainant’s subjective opinion of the respondent’s intent.
[41]        
This appellate court is unable to review the correctness
of the trial judge’s reasoning because, in effect, no reasons were given other
than conclusory comments.
[42]        
Further, I am persuaded that the trial judge fails to
explain how evidence of the respondent touching the complainant is inconsistent
with also being asleep. This very prospect was the subject of much of the
colloquies between the trial judge and both Crown and defence counsel during
closing submissions and related questioning posed by the judge throughout the
trial.
[43]        
While it was not lost on the trial judge that a person may
move and act out physically in their sleep. His core subject, and the related
law of intent, was at the forefront of both Crown and defence counsel’s extensive
submissions. This was all but unaddressed.
[44]        
Indeed, the complainant could not give direct evidence on
the respondent’s intent. The complainant was only able to speak to her
observations. Inferences could then be drawn by the trial judge, based on
findings of fact. However, in this case, the trial judge did not articulate any
findings of fact or explain what inferences were made, if any.
[45]        
It bears repeating that sufficiency of reasons
should be judged in their entire context by what the trial judge has stated in
the context of the issues, and the submissions of counsel at trial. Thus,
proceeding with deference, I must ask myself whether the reasons, in their
entire context, considered with the evidentiary record, the submissions of
counsel and the live issues at the trial, reveals the basis for the verdict
reached. If the answer to this question is affirmative, the reasons are not
deficient, notwithstanding lack of detail and notwithstanding the fact that
they are less than ideal.
[46]        
The complainant’s evidence regarding what she believed
about the respondent’s mental state was far more nuanced and fluid than what
was revealed in the four excerpts included in the reasons. There were no fewer
than six unacknowledged portions of the complainant’s evidence where she
discusses her thoughts on whether the respondent was asleep or not. Within some
of those omitted portions, the complainant states that she did not believe that
the respondent was asleep. This includes her statement to police indicating
that when she was in the bathroom with the respondent, “[…] he was telling me
that he was asleep the whole time and he didn’t know what happened. And I
didn’t believe him […].”
[47]        
Indeed, the trial judge was required to consider the
entirety of the complainant's evidence, in the context of all of the evidence,
in reaching a conclusion respecting whether the elements of the offences of sexual
assault and sexual interference were made out beyond a reasonable doubt? The
lack of reasons clearly demonstrate that this was not done. The trial judge
considered only four discrete portions of the complainant’s evidence relating
to the respondent being asleep or awake, and inexplicably disregarded or failed
to explain the rest of her and the other evidence adduced at trial.
[48]        
It is true that a trial judge should not be
found to have erred in law because he or she has failed to reconcile every
frailty in the evidence or allude to every relevant principle of law.  Nor does
a trial judge have to deal with every inconsistency in the testimony of a
witness.
[49]        
That being said, I have to agree with the appellant that
the judge’s reasons are so bereft and devoid of analysis that they fail to
convey why the jurist came to his decision.
[50]        
In
my opinion, the trial judge failed to analyze the material credibility and
reliability issues and the evidence at trial which was the subject of lengthy
submissions made by both the Crown and defence as to the requisite mental
element. Rather, the reasons offer a brief reference to the actus reus, in
the form of a perfunctory, conclusory findings. I would allow the appeal on this basis.
[51]        
For
all of the aforementioned reasons, with respect, the trial judge provided
insufficient reasons for meaningful appellate review. The appeal is allowed and
the acquittals are set aside. The matter is remitted back to the Ontario Court
of Justice for a new trial before a different judge.