[1]              
Kristine McGinn and Stephen Bleeker have worked
together at Assurance Home Care Inc., a company they have jointly owned and
managed, since 2017. Assurance provides a wide variety of home care services to
seniors in hospitals, retirement homes and private residences. Assurance has
grown and expanded into new markets based on their efforts. Each brought
different strengths and expertise to this joint enterprise. Since 2023,
tensions between Ms. McGinn and Mr. Bleeker have grown. Ms. McGinn and Mr.
Bleeker have very different views on what has been occurring concerning these
tensions.
[2]              
Mr. Bleeker is the principal and trustee of the
Janice R. MacDonald Trust, which holds 60% of Assurance shares. He also serves
as the company's Chief Executive Officer, Secretary, and Treasurer. Ms. McGinn holds
the remaining 40% of the shares. She is the Chief Operating Officer, director,
officer, and employee of Assurance.
[3]              
On September 6, 2024, Mr. Bleeker purported to
terminate Ms. McGinn as an employee and officer of Assurance without cause. He
revoked Ms. McGinn’s access to all company resources, including email. He
instructed corporate counsel to issue an order to the Board of Directors that
sought to call a shareholder meeting to remove Ms. McGinn from the Board of
Directors.
[4]              
On September 12, 2024, the parties appeared
before Regional Senior Justice MacLeod for an urgent case conference. An
interim consent order was granted to pause the attempt to remove Ms. McGinn as
a director, pending the outcome of this application. Ms. McGinn presently
remains excluded from the day-to-day management of Assurance.
[5]              
Ms. McGinn brings this application for the
following relief:
[6]              
The respondents consent to this court making an
order that the applicant’s claims against the respondents be referred to
arbitration in accordance with the Shareholders’ Agreement and the Notice of Arbitration
but oppose the balance of the applicant’s requests for relief. An order for
this relief shall be issued.
[7]              
In light of the need for me to render a decision
quickly, time does not permit a detailed reference to the evidence in these
reasons for decision.
[8]              
I find that the applicant is entitled to an
interim injunction as sought for the following reasons.
[9]              
Stephen Bleeker founded Assurance in July 2015
to provide home care services to clients. By the summer of 2016, Assurance was
up and running and had served over thirty clients. Assurance started as an
Ottawa-based endeavour.
[10]          
In November 2016, Mr. Bleeker sought to fill in
knowledge gaps in clinical nursing skills. Ms. McGinn joined Assurance as a 40%
shareholder, working for one year for no salary. Mr. Bleeker was appointed
Chief Executive Officer, Secretary, and Treasurer of the Board. Ms. McGinn was
appointed as Director of Operations and Business Development. Later, Ms. McGinn
would be appointed Chief Operations Officer.
[11]          
Mr. Bleeker was primarily involved in the
financial and business side of Assurance. Ms. McGinn’s role was more
operational in nature. Ms. McGinn has a background in nursing and has spent her
entire career working in the healthcare industry. Mr. Bleeker and Ms. McGinn were
jointly involved in operational decisions and the day-to-day management of
Assurance. To a significant degree, Ms. McGinn was the company's public face.
Her image appears on the Assurance website. Mr. Bleeker has publicly acknowledged
her as his business partner and praised her contributions to Assurance.
[12]          
Mr. Bleeker and Ms. McGinn disagree about their respective
roles at Assurance. Mr. Bleeker maintains that he, as founder, CEO, and
majority shareholder, was the final decision-maker at Assurance. While he would
seek Ms. McGinn’s feedback on decisions and collaborate with her, his evidence
contradicts Ms. McGinn’s evidence that she understood that she would be
involved in all operational decisions and management, including matters related
to staffing, strategic direction, and finances.
[13]          
Commencing in 2019, Ms. McGinn and Mr. Bleeker drew
equal salaries from the company.
[14]          
Mr. Bleeker and Ms. McGinn are signatories to two
shareholders’ agreements dated December 1, 2017, and March 2, 2020,
respectively, between the Janice R. MacDonald Trust and Ms. McGinn.
[15]          
Pursuant to the Shareholders’ Agreement dated
March 2, 2020:
[16]          
The Shareholders’ Agreement contains a robust
dispute resolution mechanism. Section 2.5 states that “any dispute,
controversy, or claim arising out of or relating to this Agreement, or the
breach, termination, or invalidity thereof, will be resolved in accordance with
the dispute resolution procedures” contained in Schedule “B” to the agreement.
Of importance to the issues before me, the Schedule states that “in the event
of any deadlock, dispute, claim, question or difference arising between the
parties, the parties shall use their best endeavours to settle such deadlock,
dispute, claim, question or difference. To this effect, they shall consult and
negotiate with each other, in good faith and understanding of their mutual
interests, to reach a just and equitable solution satisfactory to all of the
parties.” The agreement provides that if the negotiations fail, then the
parties shall be referred to arbitration.
[17]          
Section 3.5 of both Shareholders’ Agreements provide
that the agreements shall not confer upon any shareholder any right with
respect to the creation/continuation of any employment with Assurance, nor
shall it interfere with or effect in any manner any right or power of Assurance
to terminate any employment/consulting relationship with or without cause,
which right is expressly preserved.
[18]          
Around 2020, Mr. Bleeker and Ms. McGinn expanded
Assurance into Toronto without much success. The two decided that Ms. McGinn
would move to Toronto to lead the Toronto operations and the desired expansion
into this new market for Assurance. Following this new plan being put into
place, Assurance had considerable success in Toronto.
[19]          
Ms. McGinn’s plan to move to Toronto was her
idea. While she only intended to stay in Toronto for several months, she
extended her stay on several occasions. Ms. McGinn and Mr. Bleeker agreed that
Ms. McGinn would lead the efforts in Toronto, and Mr. Bleeker would continue as
CEO in Ottawa.
[20]          
According to Mr. Bleeker, Assurance’s expansion
in Toronto was attributable to the following factors:
[21]          
Ms. McGinn succeeded in closing potential
clients in Toronto.
[22]          
Given the Toronto expansion, Ms. McGinn's
capacities were stretched by her role in Toronto and her ongoing duties in
Ottawa, where she continued to run Assurance with Mr. Bleeker.
[23]          
In late 2022 or early 2023, Mr. Bleeker and Ms.
McGinn received two unsolicited offers from third parties to purchase
Assurance. Both offers stipulated that Ms. McGinn would remain as COO, but Mr.
Bleeker would be replaced as CEO. The first of the two purchasers had identified
an individual to operate Assurance. In contrast, the second purchaser, a
private equity firm, was only interested in acquiring 100% of Assurance to permit
a merger with a larger company.
[24]          
While Ms. McGinn favoured a sale to the second purchaser,
the prospective purchaser described Assurance’s financial statements as “fat”—the
operating expenses took up a higher percentage of revenue than was desirable
for the purchaser. According to Mr. Bleeker, Ms. McGinn wished to adopt a
“skinny budget,” but Mr. Bleeker disagreed. Ultimately, in April 2023, Mr.
Bleeker and Ms. McGinn agreed to walk away from both purchasers.
[25]          
The evidence of both Mr. Bleeker and Ms. McGinn
points to the potential purchasers as contributing to the tensions between them.
[26]          
The evidence of Mr. Bleeker and Ms. McGinn both
describe rising tensions between them.
[27]          
Mr. Bleeker’s affidavit details his view of
incidents of Ms. McGinn not “following protocol” by acting independently in
operational matters or hiring decisions. He notes that in July 2023, Ms. McGinn
moved ahead with her plan to return to Ottawa, taking unilateral steps to
recruit her replacement. She stated that she would consult with him regarding the
final selection, but Mr. Bleeker asserts that Ms. McGinn’s plan excluded him
from this critical process.
[28]          
Ms. McGinn describes the efforts of Mr. Bleeker
to exclude her from the business meetings that she usually attended.
[29]          
Mr. Bleeker and Ms. McGinn tried to work through
their conflicts: a coach was used, and Mr. Bleeker also proposed using a
professional who specialized in helping business partners in conflict. These
efforts were not successful. On November 2, 2023, Ms. McGinn wrote to Mr.
Bleeker to express her wish to leave Assurance. Ms. McGinn clarified that she
wished to continue her role with Assurance until she was bought out or they sold
the company.
[30]          
Mr. Bleeker’s affidavit details the revived discussions
in 2024 with the second potential purchaser from late 2022/early 2023. These
discussions again contributed to tensions between Mr. Bleeker and Ms. McGinn.
[31]          
During the summer of 2024, Mr. Bleeker and Ms.
McGinn corresponded about her return to Ottawa from Toronto but could not agree
on a plan.
[32]          
On August 21, 2024, Ms. McGinn emailed Assurance
staff advising them that Assurance would be looking to hire an employee in
Toronto to replace her so that she could return to her duties at Assurance in
the Ottawa head office in the fall.
[33]          
Mr. Bleeker viewed Ms. McGinn’s act of sending the
email as a direct act of insubordination. His affidavit details earlier
concerns that Mr. Bleeker had regarding Ms. McGinn’s performance and his view
that it would be in the best interest of Assurance if she were to leave the
day-to-day business.
[34]          
Mr. Bleeker sought to terminate Ms. McGinn on
September 6, 2024. He asked Ms. McGinn to meet him and Assurance’s head of
human resources about an undefined human resources matter. Ms. McGinn declined
to attend.
[35]          
Mr. Bleeker purported to terminate Ms. McGinn as
an employee and officer of Assurance “without cause” by sending a letter
described as a notice of termination. He also took steps to consolidate his
removal of Ms. McGinn from Assurance’s operations and governance by:
[36]          
As a result of Ms. McGinn’s purported
termination, she was no longer permitted to attend meetings with staff or to
deal with clients.
[37]          
Ms. McGinn did not accept that Mr. Bleeker had
the authority to terminate her as he purported to do. Through counsel, she disputed
Mr. Bleeker’s authority to take the steps he had taken and asked him to restore
her access to all company resources. Ms. McGinn invoked the dispute resolution
process outlined in the Shareholders’ Agreement and demanded that Mr. Bleeker
take no further steps to undermine her rights pending negotiation or
arbitration. Mr. Bleeker never responded.
[38]          
On September 9, 2024, Ms. McGinn commenced an application
for urgent injunctive relief to prevent Mr. Bleeker from completing his plan to
remove her as a director, officer, and employee of Assurance.
[39]          
An urgent case conference was held before
Regional Senior Justice MacLeod on September 12, 2024. On consent, Justice
MacLeod issued an order directing that Ms. McGinn remain a director of
Assurance and that Mr. Bleeker provide her with certain financial information
pending the hearing of the application.
[40]          
Ms. McGinn cannot access her company email or
other company resources, so she is excluded from the day-to-day operations of
Assurance. Mr. Bleeker continues to take the position that Ms. McGinn has been
terminated as an employee and officer of Assurance.
[41]          
At the conclusion of submissions before me, the
parties agreed that the consent order of Justice MacLeod would continue until the
release of these reasons for decision.
[42]          
The applicant's position is that the court
should grant a prohibitive injunction to protect Ms. McGinn's interests in
Assurance, pending arbitration. The applicant submits that the conditions for
injunctive relief are present, and should Mr. Bleeker not be enjoined, he will
have created an unfair tactical advantage for himself in the pending
arbitration. The applicant submits that contrary to the dispute resolution
process mandated by the Shareholders’ Agreement, absent injunctive relief, Mr.
Bleeker will be able to remove Ms. McGinn from Assurance’s management before
the arbitral panel can determine whether he has the authority to do so.
[43]          
The respondents’ position is that the applicant
does not meet the test required for injunctive relief and that the respondents
have not breached the Shareholders’ Agreement. They argue that the applicant
has not been subject to any oppressive conduct and that Mr. Bleeker took
actions that were, in his judgment, in the best interests of Assurance. They
submit that the application should be dismissed.
[44]          
Unlike the applicant, the respondents take the
position that the injunction sought is both mandatory and prohibitive in
nature. To the extent that the injunction is mandatory, a more rigorous test must
be applied.
[45]          
Finally, the parties agree that I should make an
order that the applicant’s claims against the respondents be referred to
arbitration in accordance with the Shareholders’ Agreement and the Notice of
Arbitration.
[46]          
The issues that I must decide on this
application are:
[47]          
The applicant raised this issue, but the
respondents did not argue it in written or oral submissions. As such, I will
only briefly address this issue.
[48]          
I am satisfied that I have jurisdiction to grant
injunctive relief in aid of arbitrations.
[49]          
This relief is derived from at least three
sources:
[50]          
In numerous cases, this court has awarded
injunctive relief in support of arbitrations: 1338121 Ontario v. FDV Inc.,
2011 ONSC 3816, at para. 53, and Bombardier Transportation Canada Inc. v.
Metrolinx, at para. 77, Lord v. Clearspring Spectrum Holdings LP,
2017 ONSC 2246, and Ontario Nurses Association v. Eatonville/Henley Place,
2020 ONSC 2467.
[51]          
The nature of the injunction requested is a
critical determination in my analysis. The nature of the injunction determines
the test I must apply.
[52]          
The applicant submits that the injunction sought
in this case is prohibitive in nature in that it does not seek to establish a
new right but rather simply requires Mr. Bleeker to comply with the dispute
resolution process mandated by the Shareholders’ Agreement. The requested
injunction would require Mr. Bleeker to convince the arbitral panel that he is
entitled to remove Ms. McGinn as director, officer, and employee before purporting
to do so unilaterally.
[53]          
In support of this position, Ms. McGinn asserts
that there is no principled basis to impose upon her the higher burden required
by a mandatory injunction. She argues that the higher burden placed upon those
seeking mandatory injunctions is based on the principle that mandatory injunctions
can be more burdensome or costly for the party required to comply with the
injunction. Ms. McGinn states that this would not be the case here—the
injunction merely preserves the status quo before Mr. Bleeker sought to
remove her from the management of Assurance. It merely prevents Mr. Bleeker
from benefiting from his alleged misconduct pending the outcome of the arbitration.
[54]          
The respondents argue that the applicant’s
request to return Ms. McGinn to the status quo ante is both mandatory
and prohibitive in nature. According to the respondents, the injunction is
mandatory as it seeks to reinstitute Ms. McGinn in her position as an employee.
It is prohibitive insofar as the application seeks an injunction restraining
the respondents from taking steps to remove Ms. McGinn as a director of
Assurance.
[55]          
The respondents generally rely on Boni v.
Leonardo Worldwide Corporation, 2018 ONSC 1875 as an appropriate “roadmap”
for me to follow in deciding this application. Concerning the issue of the
nature of the injunction, they rely on p. 5 of Boni:
[56]          
I find that the injunctive relief in this case
is prohibitive in nature.
[57]          
The parties agree insofar as the injunction
seeks to prevent Ms. McGinn’s removal as an officer and director of Assurance.
I agree that the requested injunction to prevent her removal from the Board of
Assurance is prohibitive.
[58]          
With respect to the injunction requested to
establish the status quo ante of Ms. McGill’s employment, I find that the
relief sought is prohibitive despite the language cited above in Boni.
While this application's injunctive relief seeks to reinstate the status quo
ante, it is disputed whether the respondents had the authority to take the
impugned steps in light of the Shareholders’ Agreement and the dispute
resolution process mandated by it. The legitimacy of the termination of Ms.
McGinn is one of the questions to be determined by the arbitral board.
[59]          
In International Steel Services Inc. v. Dynatec
Madagascar SA, 2016 ONSC 2810, Justice Newbould considered an interim
injunction application to restrain the respondent from interfering with the
applicant’s contractual rights under a Sulphuric Acid Plant Operation and
Maintenance Agreement, pending the arbitral determination of certain disputes
regarding the continuing existence of the agreement. At para. 42, Justice
Newbould stated:
[60]          
I have also read and found persuasive the reasons
of D.M. Brown J (as he then was) in 1323257 Ontario Ltd. (c.o.b. Hyundai of
Thornhill) v. Hyundai Auto Canada Corp. (2009), 2009 CanLII 494 (ON SC), 55 B.L.R. (4th)
265 where he adopted TDL Group Ltd. as follows:
[61]          
Here, the applicant seeks an injunction requiring
Mr. Bleeker to comply with the dispute resolution process mandated by the
Shareholders’ Agreement—a process that the respondents agree is engaged in
these circumstances. Both the applicant and the respondents agreed to be bound
by this dispute resolution mechanism. The injunction would require the arbitral
panel's consideration of whether Mr. Bleeker is entitled, further to the
Shareholders’ Agreement, to remove Ms. McGinn as an employee unilaterally
before attempting to do so. As such, I am satisfied that the relief sought is
prohibitive in nature.
[62]          
Given that the injunctive relief sought is
prohibitive in nature, the well-known three-part test set out in RJR-MacDonald
Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General), 1994 CanLII 117 (SCC), [1994] 1 SCR 311, applies.
[63]          
In considering the RJR-MacDonald test, I
have considered the comments of Schabas J. in Pioneering Technology Corp v.
Comber et al., 2019 ONSC 3278, where he described, at para. 12, the manner
the test is to be applied: “It is accepted that not all parts of the RJR
test must always be met by the moving party, and that the three parts must be
assessed as a whole, that strength on one branch may compensate for weakness on
another branch. In some circumstances, a showing of a strong prima facie
case is required, rather than just a serious issue to be tried, such as when a
restrictive covenant is sought to be enforced or restrictions are placed on the
ability to earn a livelihood: Jet Print Inc. v. Cohen, 1999 CarswellOnt
2357 (Ont. S.C.J.) at para. 11.”
[64]          
The applicant argues that the serious issue is
whether Mr. Bleeker’s conduct in unilaterally locking Ms. McGinn out of Assurance
was permitted by the Shareholders’ Agreement and the dispute resolution process
outlined in it. The applicant submits that the dispute resolution process
requires the parties to attempt to negotiate any dispute, deadlock, difference
or claim between them for 60 days. If those negotiations fail, they are
required to submit their dispute to arbitration.
[65]          
The applicant argues, first, that the impugned
conduct of Mr. Bleeker is a prima facie breach of the dispute resolution
mechanism contained within the Shareholders’ Agreement. Second, in
acting unilaterally and without engaging in the dispute resolution process, the
applicant argues that Mr. Bleeker has deprived the arbitral panel of the opportunity
to decide whether an obviously arguable dispute falls within the terms of the
dispute process.
[66]          
The respondents submit that as the injunction
sought is mandatory in nature, the standard to be applied by me in deciding
whether an injunction should be issued is an elevated one of a “strong prima
facie case” as articulated by the Supreme Court in R. v. Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation, 2018 SCC 5.
[67]          
The respondents submit that the applicant does
not have a strong prima facie case because:
[68]          
As noted above, I have concluded that the injunction
sought is prohibitive in nature. As such, only a serious issue must be shown. I
am satisfied that this standard has been met. While I need not decide the
merits of the anticipated arbitration, I am satisfied that whether Mr. Bleeker had
the unilateral authority to dismiss Ms. McGinn as an employee, director and
officer of Assurance constitutes a serious issue to be argued. The dispute
resolution mechanism is broadly worded, and the Shareholders’ Agreement does
not allocate specific authority to the CEO to act as Mr. Bleeker purported to
do. I come to this conclusion despite section 3.5 of the Shareholders’
Agreement entitled “No Right to Continued Employment.” I am not persuaded that
it forecloses the applicant’s argument or the existence of a serious issue to
be decided.
[69]          
I have considered the application of the
business judgment rule. I accept the proposition of the respondents that the
courts must be cautious before becoming enmeshed in business decisions. I also
accept the submission that an interventionist and expansive reading of the
dispute resolution mechanism contained in the Shareholders’ Agreement could send
every disagreement between the parties to arbitration and bring the business to
a grinding halt. Still, I do not find that the applicant proposes an extreme
interpretation. In my view, the dispute referred to arbitration is, at the very
least, a serious issue to be argued.
[70]          
Irreparable harm is harm that cannot be
quantified in monetary terms or that cannot be cured, usually because one party
cannot collect damages from the other.
[71]          
The applicant argues that she will suffer
irreparable harm if I do not grant this injunction in two ways:
[72]          
The respondents submit that there is no evidence
that Ms. McGinn will suffer irreparable harm—harm that is not compensable by an
award of damages. They argue that if the arbitral panel determines that a
buyout is warranted, then any damages or terms of a buyout can be calculated
based on the current value of the shares of Assurance.
[73]          
With respect to the applicant’s argument that
she will suffer reputational harm, I do not find that Mr. Bleeker’s conduct can
be fairly described as increasingly erratic. While his clear misstatement of the
circumstances of Ms. McGinn’s departure in a Slack message to Assurance’s
employees is troubling, the balance of the conduct of the respondents described
by the applicant does not amount to erratic behaviour. I do not find a clear
inference that Ms. McGinn and Assurance will suffer irreparable reputational
harm if the injunction is not granted, and Mr. Bleeker continues to manage
Assurance to the exclusion of Ms. McGinn. Mr. Bleeker and Ms. McGinn have worked
together since 2017, and their joint efforts have led to a successful and
growing enterprise despite the present conflict. Mr. Bleeker is dedicated to
the success of Assurance—the reputation of Assurance and Ms. McGinn are intertwined,
and, as such, I conclude that the likelihood of Ms. McGinn suffering
reputational harm is remote.
[74]          
I am satisfied, however, that failing to grant
the injunction will significantly diminish or extinguish the availability of
the requested remedy of a shotgun/buy-sell order. A shotgun/buy-sell order resolves
deadlocks in a two-shareholder corporation. It provides for one party, shareholder
#1, to make an offer to either buy the interest of the other shareholder, shareholder
#2, or sell shareholder #1’s own interest at the same stipulated price per
share and further allows the receiving party, shareholder #2, to decide whether
to be the buyer or the seller. Excluding the applicant from the day-to-day
management and leadership of Assurance while the arbitration process unfolds
diminishes the likelihood of an arbitral panel making an order to implement
this remedy —the panel would not find it feasible to order a remedy that could
have the effect of destabilizing Assurance with the reinstallation of Ms.
McGinn after months of exclusion. As such, the applicant will suffer
irreparable harm should I not grant the injunctive relief.
[75]          
In obiter, Justice F.L. Myers came to a
similar conclusion when commenting on injunctive relief in Lord v.
Clearspring Spectrum Holdings L.P., 2017 ONSC 2246, at para. 60, when he stated:
[76]          
See also Best v. Darling 2020 NBQB 104 at
para. 45 and 46.
[77]          
In conclusion, the applicant has met the irreparable
harm requirement in this case.
[78]          
The third part of the test requires “a
determination of which of the two parties will suffer the greater harm from the
granting or refusal of an interlocutory injunction, pending a decision on the
merits”: RJR-MacDonald, at para. 62.
[79]          
The applicant submits that the relevant
considerations in determining the balance of convenience include the parties’
obligations under the Shareholders’ Agreement, the integrity of the arbitration
process, and the best interests of Assurance. She submits that these factors
all militate in her favour.
[80]          
In relation to these factors, she argues:
[81]          
The respondents submit that Ms. McGinn’s return
would lead to a decline in morale, an increase in staff turnover and a loss of
key talent—undermining the stability and operational efficiency of Assurance.
The respondents argue that Ms. McGinn’s reinstatement would exacerbate tension
and lead to a misalignment in leadership.
[82]          
I do not accept the respondents’ assertion that
Ms. McGinn’s return would lead to lost revenue, a decline in morale and a loss
of key talent. The evidentiary basis for this submission is based on
inadmissible hearsay. Mr. Bleeker’s affidavit on this point relies on
statements made by unidentified employees of Assurance. The assertions relied
upon by Mr. Bleeker are contested in the affidavit evidence of the applicant.
[83]          
I acknowledge that the relationship between Ms.
McGinn and Mr. Bleeker is tense. The conduct of Mr. Bleeker has doubtlessly
increased that tension. That said, despite their past differences, they have been
able to work together in the interest of advancing their joint enterprise. I am
satisfied that this would continue in the future pending the outcome of the
arbitration.
[84]          
I have considered the respondents’ submission
based on Boni that “[given the] significant evidence of hostility over a
lengthy period of time, it is unreasonable to think that it would be in the
interests of either party to continue this hostile relationship that will
require ongoing court supervision, particularly when termination of the
relationship may be inevitable”: Boni, at para 66.
[85]          
While the conclusion cited above is compelling,
such a conclusion turns on the particular facts of the case. I find that the
facts before me are very different from those in Boni. The circumstances
in Boni were that:
[86]          
The circumstances before me reflect that Ms.
McGinn is a successful partner in her joint enterprise with Mr. Bleeker—one of
two principals. A deterioration between the applicant and employees of
Assurance has not been established. The respondents purportedly terminated her unilaterally
without resorting to the dispute resolution mechanism, and arbitration is
forthcoming. In summary, the circumstances between this case and Boni
are dissimilar.
[87]          
In FDV, the parties had agreed to
arbitrate in circumstances where there was little chance of their business relationship
continuing. At para. 40, Justice D. M. Brown noted  that although “their relationship
had broken down…arbitration is an appropriate forum in which to determine, in
effect, who will end up buying out whom and at what price.” I accept that FDV
confirms that interim injunctive relief requiring parties to continue working
together pending arbitration may be appropriate where they have agreed to
adjudicate the merits of their dispute through arbitration. In agreeing with
this submission, I do acknowledge that in FDV, neither party adduced evidence
suggesting the wait for arbitration would prejudice the ongoing operations of
the company. That said, I have found that Mr. Bleeker’s evidence on this point
is inadmissible and contested by the applicant.
[88]          
I find that in light of the unilateral conduct
of  Mr. Bleeker in terminating Ms. McGinn, despite a dispute resolution
mechanism in the Shareholders’ Agreement, the equities of the situation favour
the applicant: see Indal Ltd. v. Halko (1976), 1976 CarswellON 273, at
para. 24. If the injunction is not granted, the applicant will very likely be deprived
of part of the remedy sought by her—the integrity of the arbitration process
will be compromised. The balance of convenience would weigh in favour of
preserving the status quo prior to the alleged breach pending the outcome of
any arbitration.
[89]          
I conclude that the balance of convenience
weighs in favour of preserving the status quo prior to the alleged
breach, pending the outcome of arbitration.
[90]          
The applicant is entitled to injunctive relief preserving
the status quo ante as of September 5, 2024.
[91]          
Specifically, the following shall be issued:
[92]          
I encourage the parties to settle the costs of
the motion. If they cannot, the applicant may serve and file written cost
submissions, together will a Bill of Costs, by December 17, 2024. The
respondents may serve and file responding written cost submissions by January
17, 2025. The cost submissions shall not exceed three pages in length,
excluding the Bill of Costs.