[1]              
msi Spergel Inc. is the licensed insolvency
trustee charged with the administration of the bankrupt estate of Jose Lava
Suguitan (the “Bankrupt”). The Bankrupt was deemed to have made an assignment
in bankruptcy on March 3, 2023.
[2]              
The Trustee applies under s. 96(1)(b)(ii) of the
BIA for a declaration that the Bankrupt’s August 15, 2018 transfer of his
interest in a Florida Property to his wife, Sarah Morrison, was a transfer at
undervalue and therefore void. The Trustee also seeks an order that Ms.
Morrison pay to the Trustee $250,000 (USD), representing the purchase price on her
subsequent sale of that property in 2020.
[3]              
Under s. 96(1)(b)(ii), the court may declare
that a transaction at undervalue is void if three preconditions are met:
[4]              
Section 2 of the BIA defines a transfer at
undervalue to mean the “disposition of property or provision of services for
which no consideration is received by the debtor or for which the consideration
received by the debtor is conspicuously less than the fair market value of the
consideration given by the debtor”.
[5]              
The property in issue is in Florida: 17941
Bonita National Blvd., # 318, Bonita Springs, FL 34135-8674. The evidence establishes,
and I find, that:
[6]              
I will address the nature of the interest in the
Florida Property that the Bankrupt transferred to Ms. Morrison in 2018 later in
these reasons, but, by any measure, the value of the transferred Florida Property
in 2018 was conspicuously less than fair market value. Thus, the transfer was
indisputably at undervalue.
[7]              
Persons are related to each other if they are
individuals connected by blood, relationship, marriage, common-law partnership
or adoption. Ms. Morrison admits that she was married to the Bankrupt at the
time of the transfer (they remain husband and wife today), thereby satisfying
the condition that they are related parties under to the BIA.
[8]              
Subsection 4(5) of the BIA states that persons
who are related to each other are deemed not to deal with each other at arm’s
length while so related. For the purpose of ss. 95(1)(b) or 96(1)(b), these
persons are, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, deemed not to deal
with each other at arm’s length. There is no evidence to the contrary. Thus, it
is clear that the parties to the transfer of the Florida Property were not
dealing at arms’ length.
[9]              
The Bankrupt was deemed to have made an
assignment in bankruptcy on March 3, 2023. The impugned transfer of the Florida
Property took place on August 15, 2018. Thus, the transfer took place within
five years prior to the bankruptcy.
[10]          
The final requirement for the application of s.
96 is the intent to defraud, defeat or delay creditors. This is the issue on
which the dispute between the parties focussed and upon which the outcome of
the Trustee’s motion principally turns.
[11]          
The Trustee maintains that the Bankrupt knew he
was in financial trouble prior to the transfer; he had already been sued by two
investors and within a matter of months, was subject to many additional
investor claims. The Trustee maintains that the intent to defraud, defeat or
delay creditors should be inferred from the surrounding circumstances, which
reveal the existence of a number of the “badges of fraud”.
[12]          
Ms. Morrison maintains that the transfer was
made for personal and family financial planning purposes which had nothing to
do with any actual or pending financial troubles and/or lawsuits against her
husband.
[13]          
Section 96(1)(b)(ii) provides that if the
criteria discussed in paras. 4 to 9 above are satisfied, a transaction my be
set aside if: (A) the transferor was insolvent at the time of the transfer or
was rendered insolvent by it, or (B) the debtor intended to defraud, defeat or
delay a creditor. Options (A) and (B) in s. 96(1)(b)(ii) are clearly
disjunctive. It is (B), whether the debtor intended, by the transfer, to “defraud,
defeat or delay” his creditors, which is relevant to this case.
[14]          
Whether the debtor intended to defraud, defeat,
or delay a creditor is a question of fact to be decided based on all the
circumstances that existed at the time of the transfer: Urbancorp Toronto
Management Inc. (Re), 2019 ONCA 757, at para. 53; Montor Business Corp.
(Trustee of) v. Goldfinger, 2016 ONCA 406, 36 C.B.R. (6th) 169, at para.
72.
[15]          
Because it is often difficult to adduce evidence
of a debtor’s subjective intent, the intent requirement is usually proved
through evidence of “badges of fraud”. Badges of fraud are suspicious
circumstances from which a court may infer the debtor’s intent to defraud,
defeat, or delay a creditor (Urbancorp, at para. 52; Montor, at
para. 72). The badges of fraud approach to inferring a debtor’s intent to
defraud creditors dates back to Twyne’s Case in 1601 (Wood (2018), at p.
24; Twyne’s Case (1601), 3 Co. Rep. 80b, 76 E.R. 809: see Aquino v.
Bondfield Construction Co., 2024 SCC 31.
[16]          
Case law has recognized the following
non-exhaustive examples of badges of fraud:
[17]          
The badges of fraud represent evidentiary rules
developed over time which, when considered in all the circumstances, may enable
the court to make a finding unless the proponents of the transaction can
explain away the suspicious circumstances. The legal or persuasive burden to
prove the case remains on the applicant throughout. Nevertheless, the applicant
may raise an inference of fraud sufficient to shift the evidentiary
burden to the respondent if the plaintiff can establish that the transaction
has characteristics which are typically associated with fraudulent intent.
Proof of one or more of the badges of fraud will not necessarily compel a
finding for the applicant but they may raise a prima facie
evidentiary case which it would be prudent for the defendant to rebut. In such
circumstances, there is an evidentiary onus on the defence to adduce evidence
showing an absence of fraudulent intent, failing which the respondent risks
having an adverse inference of fraudulent intent drawn from the surrounding
circumstances: Indcondo v. Sloan, 2014 ONSC 4018 at para. 53, aff’d 2015
ONCA 752.
[18]          
The transfer of property to a person in a close
relationship is itself a badge of fraud. In such cases, the testimony of the
parties as to their subjective intent must be scrutinized with care and
suspicion. It will be seldom that such evidence can be safely acted upon as
sufficient on its own. In cases involving a transfer to near relatives, as
matter of prudence, the court should look for corroborative evidence of the bona
fides of the transaction: Indcondo, para 56.
[19]          
I start with the observation that it is the
transferor’s intent, not the intent of the transferee, which determines the
outcome. While evidence of the transferee’s intent may be relevant, it is only
relevant in so far as it may cast light on the key question – the intent of the
transferor.
[20]          
The principal factors relied on by the Trustee
in this case are:
[21]          
Proof of the first three “badges” is not in dispute.
There is no question that the transfer of the Bankrupt’s interest in the
Florida Property was to a closely related person – his wife. There is also no question
that the Bankrupt’s interest was worth considerably more than $10. Likewise, both
the Bankrupt and Ms. Morrison continued to make use of the Florida Property
after the transfer.
[22]          
The dispute is over: a) whether the transfer was
made with knowledge of potentially serious financial consequences due claims by
clients of the Bankrupt for the recovery of investments they made by way of
loans to various real estate development projects as a result of
recommendations made by the Bankrupt; and (b) whether this evidence is
sufficient, together with the other relevant surrounding circumstances, to
infer an intent to defraud, defeat or delay the Bankrupt’s creditors.
[23]          
The Bankrupt was an investment advisor. His
company, Sugi Financial, was an investment firm providing private financial
advisory services to client investors. The Bankrupt introduced some of his
clients to an investment, structured as a loan, in various real estate
development projects owned by Hetti Group Inc. The Bankrupt’s clients did not
receive the value they expected and wanted their loans repaid. The loans were
never repaid.
[24]          
Particular reliance is placed by the Trustee on
two actions bearing court file numbers CV-18-00000246-0000 (Pearl Tumandao
claiming $500,000) and CV-18- 00601380-0000 (Betty Snell & Dwayne Snell claiming
$429,000) which were commenced prior to the date the transfer of Florida Property
occurred. Demands for the return of their investments were made by some of the
Bankrupt’s client as early as October 2017 and at least formal demand was made
in April 2017. In addition, on July 13, 2018, Betty and Dwayne Snell
successfully obtained leave to register certificates of pending litigation
against title to three properties, one of which was owned by the Bankrupt at
the time. This occurred just over a month before the Bankrupt transferred his
interest in the Florida Property to Ms. Morrison.
[25]          
Ultimately, the Bankrupt was named as a
defendant in ten actions totalling millions of dollars. It was the Bankrupt’s
exposure to claims for damages in these actions that became the main driver for
the Bankrupt’s filing of his notice of intention under the BIA. The bankruptcy
was deemed to have occurred on March 3, 2023 when the Bankrupt failed to file a
cash flow statement or a proposal within the required time under the BIA. The
claims in the Bankrupt’s estate are roughly:
[26]          
In essence, the Trustee argues that by the time
of the transfer of the Bankrupt’s interest in the Florida Property to Ms.
Morrison, he was aware that demands had been and were being made against him for
the loss of his clients’ investments, at least two actions had been commenced
against him claiming significant damages for various breaches of duty and
breaches of contract and, in one case, a certificate of pending litigation had
been obtained by two of the plaintiffs against a property that he owned.
[27]          
The record shows that the Bankrupt was not
entirely forthcoming or co-operative with the Trustee in the disclosure of
information when these proceedings began. The Trustee was required to obtain
two orders from Associate Judge Rappos against the Bankrupt for disclosure of
information and documentation.
[28]          
The Bankrupt filed no evidence and was not
examined in connection with this application. There is material in the record
filed by the Bankrupt in connection with a claim against him for the costs of
the motions before Associate Judge Rappos, however, which touches on some of
issues in this application.[1]
[29]          
Ms. Morrison filed an affidavit and was cross
examined. She also filed a factum. The evidence in opposition to the Trustee
application comes entirely from Ms. Morrison by way of her affidavit and cross
examination.
[30]          
Ms. Morrison, in her affidavit and factum,
makes, in essence, five points:
[31]          
Ms. Morrison relies on cases such as Indcondo
and Royal Bank of Canada v. Clarke, 2009 BCSC 481 for the proposition
that transfers aligned with family agreements are legitimate, even within the 5
year period, provided they lack the relevant indicia of fraud. Ms.
Morrison submits that the Bankrupt’s transfer of his interest in the Florida
Property to her was “part of a legitimate family plan, consistent with marital,
health, and long-term planning considerations”.
[32]          
I am unable to accept these arguments. There is
no evidence supporting or corroborating the alleged mutual agreement regarding
marital property. In any event, on her own evidence, Ms. Morrison was not the
only owner upon acquisition; she shared ownership with her husband. They did
this so that the Bankrupt could benefit from the use of the Florida Property
and the associated amenities.
[33]          
I am also unable to agree that because the
Bankrupt did not attempt to prefer the interests of his wife over the interests
of his creditors by transferring all of his properties into his wife’s name, this
shows that he did not intend to prefer the interests of his wife over his
creditors regarding the transfer of the Florida Property. It simply does not
logically or rationally follow.
[34]          
I agree with Ms. Morrison that transactions
which are done for legitimate family financial planning, even within the 5 year
period, are not necessarily void. But, as Ms. Morrison concedes in her written
evidence and submissions, the critical issue is the question of intention at
the time of the transfer, which must be inferred from the evidence of the
surrounding circumstances. The two central findings in Indcondo, for
example, turn on this very point. One property was transferred at a time when
the surrounding circumstances did not include the debtor’s knowledge of future
claims and potential liabilities. The transfer was found not to be motivated by
an intent to defeat creditors. Another property was transferred later, after
the debtor had knowledge of pending claims and potential liabilities. This
second transfer was found to have been motivated by an intent to defeat
creditors and was ruled void.
[35]          
Similarly, in the Clarke case, Mr. Clarke
transferred his one-half interest in real property to his wife while he
remained indebted to the moving party in the sum of $146,649.25. The court acknowledged
that couples commonly arrange their affairs so that family assets are not at
risk to business creditors. There would have been no problem for the Clarkes
had they originally purchased the property in Mrs. Clarke’s name alone for the
reason of trying to keep their residence out of reach of Mr. Clarke’s potential
or future creditors. The problem was, having purchased the property in their
names jointly, the subsequent transfer of Mr. Clarke’s interest was at a
time when there were known creditors. This engaged the “badges of fraud”
analysis and enabled the court to conclude that: “The evidence is clear that
the purpose of the transfer of Mr. Clarke’s one-half interest was to insulate
his one-half share in the Property from creditors”: at para. 14.
[36]          
Here the evidence clearly establishes that the
Bankrupt knew he was being sued for almost $1 million by at least two clients.
In one of those cases, the plaintiffs obtained a certificate of pending
litigation against a property owned by the Bankrupt. This was all before the
transfer of his interest in the Florida Property. There is also circumstantial
evidence that he was aware that other clients were also concerned and making
demands for the return of their loan investments and that additional lawsuits
would likely follow. These facts constitute a powerful indication that the
timing of the Bankrupt’s transfer of his interest in the Florida Property to
Ms. Morrison was motivated by an intention to prefer her interests over the
interests of those who had asserted, or were likely to assert, significant claims
against him for the loss of their investments. This inference has not been
rebutted by the evidence and arguments presented in this case.
[37]          
For these reasons, I find that the transfer
which took place on August 15, 2018, by which the Bankrupt transferred his
interest in the Florida Property to Ms. Morrison, meets the preconditions set
out in s. 96(1)(b)(ii) of the BIA and that the transfer is void.
[38]          
The Trustee maintains that the transfer on
August 15, 2018 shows only the Bankrupt as transferor and only Ms. Morrison as
the transferee. On this basis, the Trustee maintains that the Bankrupt had a
100% interest in the Florida Property on August 15, 2018 and that he
transferred that 100% interest to his wife. The Trustee therefore asks for an
order that the full amount of the proceeds of transfer, $250,000, be found due
and payable to the Trustee by Ms. Morrison.
[39]          
I am unable to agree with the Trustee’s argument
on this issue.
[40]          
Firstly, the record clearly supports the
conclusion that the Florida Property was acquired by both the Bankrupt and Ms.
Morrison. The November 25, 2015 Special Warranty Deed names them both as
Grantees. The accompanying title insurance report is addressed to both the
Bankrupt and Ms. Morrison and the title insurance document itself clearly
records that title in fee simple is vested in both the Bankrupt and Ms.
Morrison and that the insureds are both the Bankrupt and Ms. Morrison.
[41]          
There is no evidence that ownership changed
before the transfer on August 15, 2018.
[42]          
In the absence of any evidence to the contrary
(of which there is none), I find that on the date of purchase, November 25, 2015,
up to the day of the transfer on August 15, 2018, the Bankrupt and Ms. Morrison
each owned an undivided half interest in the Florida Property.
[43]          
In the face of this finding, there can be no
doubt that the transfer that took place on August 15, 2018 was only a transfer
of the Bankrupt’s half interest. Ms. Morrison could not have been the
transferee of the other half interest in the Florida Property because she
already owned it and the Bankrupt did not.
[44]          
Accordingly, I find that the “transaction” that
is void is restricted to the transfer of the Bankrupt’s half interest in the
Florida Property.
[45]          
I also find that, although Ms. Morrison sold the
Florida Property in 2020 for $250,000, she only received net proceeds of
$234,680.36. Accordingly, the amount for which Ms. Morrison is liable to
account as a result of the void transaction is half of the net proceeds: $117,340.18.
[46]          
The Trustee succeeded in establishing that the
2018 transfer was void but did not succeed in establishing that the Bankrupt
transferred a 100% interest to Ms. Morrison. The Trustee is entitled to costs.
Having regard to the relevant factors, including considerations of
proportionality and what the losing party might reasonably expect to pay, I
award all inclusive partial indemnity costs to the Trustee of $5,000.