[1]              
This endorsement is further to my reasons for
decision in this ten-day trial heard between February 26, 2024, and March 11,
2024.[1]
It addresses the calculation and finalization of certain damages issues arising
from my reasons for decision.
[2]              
To provide context for this endorsement, I will draw
heavily on the overview found in paragraphs 1 to 10 of my reasons for decision.
[3]              
From 1978 to 2023, a grocery store served as the
anchor tenant of a shopping mall in Mississauga. The lease for the premises had
an initial term of 20 years and was renewed five times, each for an additional
five-year term.
[4]              
In 2009, a major dispute arose between the
parties regarding how the rent should be calculated. Once that happened, each
side identified a laundry list of historical grievances with the other. The
relationship soured as each party repeatedly sought to utilize its economic
power to advance its position at the expense of the other.
[5]              
The tenant started this action in 2009. The
landlord counterclaimed. By the time the action reached trial in 2024, the
pleadings and their repeated amendments spanned tabs A to Q of the trial
record. The parties obtained leave to amend their pleadings again on the first
day of trial. As the trial progressed, the parties abandoned several of the
issues in dispute.
[6]              
In my reasons for decision, I reached the
following conclusions.
[7]              
First, I found that the tenant’s decision to
assign the lease to a related company in 1987 was irrelevant to any of the
issues in dispute. Even if the tenant did not immediately advise the landlord
of the assignment, I found that the landlord knew about the assignment long
before the 2009 rent dispute and did nothing about it. The landlord’s concern
over the assignment appeared to me to be driven primarily by a desire to obtain
a strategic or tactical advantage in the litigation, not by genuine concern
over whether the tenant followed all the required formalities.
[8]              
Second, I found that the landlord knowingly
inflated the invoices that it sent to the tenant for common area maintenance
charges. The landlord inflated the CAM invoices in three ways:
[9]              
I held that the landlord’s CAM charges needed to
be recalculated in accordance with my reasons for decision. Moreover, as I
found that the landlord knowingly delivered false invoices to the tenant, I also
held that the landlord was not entitled to interest on any unpaid CAM charges.
[10]          
Third, I found that by June 2009, it was
necessary to replace, not simply repair, the roof over the leased premises. I held
that the lease permitted the tenant to replace the roof and allocated this
expense to the landlord, not to the tenant. I held that the tenant was entitled
to be reimbursed for the entire cost of the roof replacement.
[11]          
Fourth, I held that s. 38 of the lease modified
the calculation of rent contained in Article III of the lease. Put simply, I
agreed with the tenant’s interpretation of the lease and its method of
calculating the rent owing to the landlord starting with the first lease
renewal (December 1, 1998, to November 30, 2003) and thereafter. I also
dismissed the landlord’s counterclaim for unpaid rent that is based on its
interpretation of the rent provision.
[12]          
Fifth, I found that the tenant unjustly enriched
the landlord by overpaying the rent under the lease for the two years prior to
the initiation of its claim. The landlord was enriched by $493,269.66 and the tenant
suffered a corresponding deprivation. In my view, there was no juristic reason
for the landlord’s enrichment and no equitable principles justify denying the
tenant’s recovery.
[13]          
At paragraphs 328 and 329 of my reasons for
decision, I asked the parties to work out the accounting of who owed what to
whom in accordance with my reasons for decision and to arrange for a further
attendance if they could not reach an agreement:
[14]          
The parties were not able to reach agreement.
The landlord filed written submissions on August 16, 2024, and reply
submissions on September 20, 2024. The tenant provided responding submissions
on September 16, 2024, and sur-reply submissions on September 27, 2024.
[15]          
This endorsement must be read alongside my
original reasons for decision, from which I will excerpt only when necessary.
[16]          
In my reasons for decision, I made a series of findings
about the CAM charges. In paragraph 61 of my reasons, I directed the parties to
recalculate the CAM charges in accordance with my reasons:
[17]          
The parties made good progress on the
calculation process, but identified four areas where they could not reach an
agreement.
[18]          
The landlord seeks to recover unpaid CAM charges
for the years 2009 to 2011. As I will explain below, the landlord first issued
invoices for these amounts in 2013 and did not amend its pleading to seek to
recover these amounts until 2019. The tenant submits that these claims are
statute barred. For the reasons that follow, I agree with the tenant.
[19]          
The evidence at trial demonstrated that the
landlord invoiced the tenant for CAM charges on a regular basis, usually within
the first six months of the following year. The evidence demonstrated that the
landlord delivered invoices as follows:
[20]          
The landlord adopted a very different approach
for the invoices for 2009, 2010, and 2011 CAM charges. The landlord did not
deliver those three invoices until July 31, 2013, despite the significant
litigation with the tenant that started in 2009.
[21]          
On February 24, 2010, the landlord delivered its
statement of defence and counterclaim. In paragraph 50(c) of the counterclaim,
the landlord pleaded that the tenant owed the landlord $281,627 for unpaid CAM charges
for the years spanning 2000 to 2008. Although the pleading was issued in 2010,
the landlord did not make a claim for the 2009 CAM charges. Paragraph 30 of the
statement of defence set out on a year-by-year basis the precise amounts allegedly
owed by the tenant:
[22]          
On July 22, 2010, the landlord issued an amended
statement of defence and counterclaim. The landlord did not amend either
paragraph 30 of the statement of defence (which became paragraph 40 of the
amended defence) or paragraph 50(c) of the counterclaim (which became paragraph
62(c) of the amended counterclaim). Therefore, on July 22, 2010, the landlord
did not advance a claim for the 2009 CAM charge, despite the fact that, based
on its historical practice, it would have invoiced the tenant for the 2009 CAM charge
before the date of its amended pleading.
[23]          
About a year later, on July 12, 2011, the
landlord issued a fresh as amended statement of defence and counterclaim. The
landlord did not amend paragraph 40 (formerly 30) of the amended statement of
defence, or paragraph 62(c) (formerly 50(c)) of the amended counterclaim. Therefore,
on July 12, 2011, the landlord did not advance a claim for the 2009 or 2010 CAM
charges despite the fact that, based on its historical practice, it would have
invoiced the tenant for the 2009 and 2010 CAM charges before the date of its fresh
as amended statement of defence and counterclaim.
[24]          
Indeed, the landlord never advanced a claim for
unpaid CAM charges for the years 2009 to 2011 until March 1, 2019, when it
issued its “Thrice Amended Statement of Defence and Counterclaim.” In this
pleading, the landlord amended what became paragraph 99 of the counterclaim (formerly
paragraph 62(c)) to now claim “$512,491.00 for amounts owing for CAM from 2000
to 2011.” The landlord also amended what became paragraph 75 of the thrice
amended statement of defence (formerly paragraph 40) as follows:
[25]          
Both parties submit that I should apply the
six-year limitation period contained in s. 17 of the Real Property Limitations
Act.[2]
Subsection 17(1) of the Real Property Limitations Act provides as
follows:
[26]          
Rent is defined in s. 1 of the Real Property
Limitations Act to include “all annuities and periodical sums of money charged
upon or payable out of land.”
[27]          
First, I do not accept that the landlord’s
inclusion of the phrase “outstanding rent would be updated prior to trial” in
the original statement of defence and counterclaim is sufficient to put the
plaintiff on notice of the claim for unpaid CAM charges for 2009 to 2011. This
is particularly the case where the statement of defence and counterclaim
expressly included only the years spanning 2000 to 2008. An update to
outstanding rent is not the same as a new claim for unpaid CAM charges in a
different year in respect of a totally different set of expenses.
[28]          
Second, I do not accept the landlord’s reliance
on s. 117 of the Courts of Justice Act to forestall the running of the
limitation period on unpaid CAM charges.[3]
Given the way the landlord pleaded its claim, including a chart that stopped in
2008, they needed to do something more to put the tenant on notice if it wished
to claim for unpaid CAM charges for 2009 to 2011.
[29]          
Third, the landlord amended its pleading in 2010
and 2011, and while it updated its calculation of other forms of unpaid rent,
it did not include a claim for 2009 or 2010 unpaid CAM charges. The landlord
turned its mind to exactly what it alleged the tenant owed to it under the
lease on the days it amended the claim. Nevertheless, the landlord did not
amend the claim to add a claim for unpaid CAM charges for those years.
[30]          
Fourth, I do not accept the landlord’s submission
that the limitation period did not start to run until it issued the three
invoices on July 31, 2013. To accept that submission would allow the landlord
to engage in entirely self-serving strategic and tactical behaviour. On the
landlord’s theory, it could choose not to deliver an invoice and thereby toll
the limitation period for as long as it believed such delay to be to its
advantage. I would be reluctant to embrace a rule that would create such
perverse incentives.
[31]          
In a case involving an action for breach of
contract related to the construction of a residential cottage and tennis court,
Nordheimer J. (as he then was), rejected the position now advanced by the
landlord.[4]
The case was decided under the six-year limitation period contained in the old Limitations
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L.15. Justice Nordheimer rejected the submission that
a plaintiff’s limitation period did not begin to run until it delivered an
invoice:
[32]          
Justice Nordheimer concluded that it was
appropriate to have the limitation period begin to run after the expiration of
a reasonable period of time for the plaintiff to deliver an invoice to the
defendant plus a reasonable period of time for the defendant to pay the
invoice. To determine the reasonable period of time, Nordheimer J. looked to
the past practice of the parties:
[33]          
The court has followed this approach in other
cases and I agree with it.[7]
[34]          
In this case, the landlord had established a
very clear practice of delivering CAM invoices no later than June of the
following year. It followed this pattern in 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2008, 2013,
and 2015. Each invoice marked was due on receipt. In my view, it is reasonable
to add a further 30 days to allow for the tenant to remit payment. Therefore, I
find that the limitation period began to run on the CAM charges as follows:
[35]          
As noted above, the landlord did not advance a
claim for unpaid CAM charges from 2009 to 2011 until March 1, 2019, when it
issued its “Thrice Amended Statement of Defence and Counterclaim.” This is well
after the expiration of the relevant limitation periods. Therefore, I dismiss
the landlord’s claims for unpaid CAM charges for the years 2009 to 2011 as
statute barred under the Real Property Limitations Act.
[36]          
The tenant submits that, given this result, it
owes $78,420.84 in unpaid CAM charges to the landlord for the period from 2002
to 2008. The landlord did not challenge this calculation.
[37]          
Each of the landlord and the tenant seek orders permitting
equitable set-off of certain amounts related to the CAM charges.
[38]          
The tenant submits that it overpaid $1.3 million
in rent to the landlord that it could not recover as damages because the claim
was statute barred. The tenant submits that it is entitled to an order
permitting equitable set-off of this amount against the $78,420.84 in unpaid CAM
charges that it owes to the landlord. For its part, the landlord seeks to set off
the amount of the statute-barred claim for 2009 to 2011 CAM charges against any
amounts it is held to owe to the tenant. I decline to order that either party
may benefit from equitable set-off related to the CAM charges.
[39]          
The Supreme Court of Canada recently explained
equitable set-off as follows:
[40]          
The parties agree on the applicable legal
principles. The leading case on equitable set-off in Canada is the Supreme
Court of Canada’s decision in Holt v. Telford.[9] Justice Wilson identified
five principles governing equitable set-off:
[41]          
I would not permit the tenant to set off the
rent it overpaid against the CAM charges that it underpaid. The tenant is
responsible for failing to calculate the rent correctly for many years. As I
explained in paragraphs 290 to 293 of my reasons for decision:
[42]          
As I held in my reasons for decision, the tenant
was entitled to recover some of these amounts from the landlord through unjust
enrichment, but the tenant’s claim for older payments was statute barred.
However, beyond the recoverable amounts, I think it is equitable to leave that
loss where it fell. The tenant is solely responsible for the overpayments,
which it made long ago. I think it would be inequitable to allow the tenant to
set off the overpaid rent against other amounts it owes to the landlord for
different expenses that it was required to pay under the lease. Although these
charges both arise under the lease, rent charges are different than CAM
charges. I decline to make an order allowing the tenant to set off its overpaid
rent against the underpaid CAM charges.
[43]          
Similarly, I reject the landlord’s request to
set off the amount of its statute-barred claim for 2009 to 2011 CAM charges. As
explained in paragraphs 59 to 171 of my reasons for decision, I found that the
landlord engaged in significant misfeasance with respect to its CAM charges to
the tenant. I summarized these findings in paragraph 60 of my reasons for
decision:
[44]          
The landlord does not come to court with clean
hands. Its iniquitous conduct has an immediate and necessary relationship to
the amount of the CAM charges such that it would be unjust to grant relief in
the circumstances. I decline to make an order for equitable set-off in favour
of the landlord.
[45]          
The tenant submits that it is entitled to
prejudgment interest on its overpayment of CAM charges to the landlord without
first deducting the amounts of underpaid CAM charges it owes to the landlord. I
disagree.
[46]          
This tenant’s approach is artificial and does
not properly reflect the time value of money or the fact that each side owes
money to the other for a series of discrete events over a long period of time.
It is true that I disallowed the landlord’s claim to 10% per year interest on
unpaid CAM charges because those amounts were not due and payable at a time
that the landlord knowingly issued false invoices.[11] I disagree with the tenant’s
submission that it is necessary to adopt its approach to prejudgment interest owed
to the tenant “to give full effect” to my decision.
[47]          
In my view, all amounts that I have found to be
owing should be netted out and then prejudgment interest should be applied.
[48]          
In light of these findings, the parties have
calculated the CAM adjustment as follows:
[49]          
The net result is that, as of May 6, 2024, the
landlord owes the tenant $120,745, plus prejudgment interest of $18,508.72 with
respect to the CAM charges over the history of the dispute.
[50]          
The landlord submits that there should be a
recalculation of the rent owed by the tenant to the landlord. The landlord
makes two distinct but related submissions with respect to the recalculation of
the rent:
[51]          
At trial, the tenant submitted that it was
entitled to restitution in the amount of $493,269.66, plus HST, representing
the amount it mistakenly overpaid as minimum rent (between April 1, 2007, and
March 25, 2009) and percentage rent (March 25, 2007, to March 25, 2009). I
found that the tenant was entitled to recover the amount claimed on the basis
of unjust enrichment.
[52]          
In its post-trial submissions, the landlord
submits that the amount of the tenant’s recovery should be recalculated and
that the tenant is only entitled to $461,047.92. The landlord makes the
following submissions:
[53]          
I do not accept the landlord’s submissions for three
reasons.
[54]          
First, in my reasons for decision, I accepted
the tenant’s evidence and submissions on the quantification of its damages and
ordered that the tenant recover $493,269.66. I would be reluctant to revisit
this decision without good reason.
[55]          
Second, the tenant filed evidence and
calculations in support of its claim that it overpaid rent in the amount of $493,269.66.
The tenant filed a detailed three-page spreadsheet setting out its calculation
of rent overpayments, which became Exhibit 10 (Tab 48). The spreadsheet
provided a detailed set of calculations demonstrating how the tenant justified
its claim that it had overpaid a total of $1,880,426.25 in base rent and
percentage rent between 1999 and 2009. It also precisely calculated the $493,269.66
total overpayment of minimum rent and percentage rent for the two-year period
before it issued its notice of action on March 25, 2009.
[56]          
During trial, the landlord never challenged the
tenant’s evidence on damages or the tenant’s calculation of the amount of rent
owing for the two-year period before the notice of action was issued, if the
tenant’s interpretation of the lease was correct. Counsel for the landlord did
not cross-examine any of the tenant’s witnesses on either the tenant’s methodology
or calculations set out in Exhibit 10 (Tab 48).
[57]          
Third, given the landlord’s answers to
undertakings, the tenant had no notice or reason to believe that the landlord
would challenge its damages calculations. In 2022, the tenant brought a
refusals motion before Associate Justice McGraw.[12] In the reasons for
decision, Associate Justice McGraw made the following order:
[58]          
The landlord did not comply with the deadline in
the court order. However, a few weeks before trial, the landlord provided its
answer:
[59]          
In its answer to the undertaking, the landlord explicitly
accepted the tenant’s calculation of the amount it would be entitled to recover.
The tenant then led evidence of that amount in Exhibit 10 (Tab 48). Given the
landlord’s answer to the undertaking, which it delivered shortly before trial,
it is difficult to see how it could subsequently challenge the tenant’s calculations
without leave of the court, which it neither sought nor obtained.
[60]          
For the reasons set out above, I do not accept
the landlord’s submissions with respect to the recalculation of the amount by
which the tenant unjustly enriched the landlord between 2007 and 2009. I decline
to adjust my award to the tenant of $493,269.66, plus HST, representing the
amount by which it unjustly enriched the landlord.
[61]          
The landlord submits that that it is entitled to
an order that the tenant underpaid rent between April 1, 2009, to November 30,
2023, in the total amount of $1,448,989.79. To oversimplify for purposes of
this introduction, the landlord submits that once the tenant overpaid the
actual rent owing under the contract, that amount became “rent paid” and all
future rent amounts are calculated upon that number. Therefore, even though the
tenant identified its error in 2009, correctly interpreted the lease,
calculated the amount owing, and paid that amount in full starting in 2009, the
landlord was entitled to have the rent after 2009 calculated based in part on
the incorrect amount of rent paid prior to that time. For convenience, I will
refer to this as the landlord’s Rent Paid Theory.
[62]          
The landlord starts its submission by pointing
to s. 38 of the lease, which states:
[63]          
The landlord then submits that the “minimum
rental” should be calculated on the basis of the amounts actually paid by the
tenant, regardless of the fact that I found that the lease did not oblige the
tenant to pay those amounts:
[64]          
The landlord submits (and I held) that the Limitations
Act, 2002, meant that the tenant could recover the payments that unjustly
enriched the landlord only for the two years prior to the date of its notice of
action. The landlord extrapolates from that holding to submit that “amounts
paid as rent prior to that date are unaffected.” Building on its Rent Paid
Theory, the landlord makes the following submissions in support of its request for
an order requiring the tenant to pay an additional $1,448,989.79 in rent:
[65]          
Schedule C to the landlord’s written submission
is a 287-row, six-column spread sheet of calculations. To foreshadow one of my
concerns, the landlord did not put Schedule C or the operation of the renewal formula
set out above into evidence at trial. For a constellation of related reasons
set out below, I would not give effect to the landlord’s Rent Paid Theory.
[66]          
The tenant submits that I should not allow the
landlord to advance the Rent Paid Theory because the landlord first advanced it
after the completion of the trial. I do not think this submission is quite correct,
although it is understandable given how the landlord proceeded at trial. Almost
all of the landlord’s time, energy, evidence, and submissions focussed on
proving that its interpretation of the lease was correct and that the tenant owed
over $15 million in unpaid rent and interest. The landlord submitted that the
correct interpretation of the lease required the tenant to pay to the landlord
1.25% of all sales in excess of $10 million and to fold those amounts into
minimum rental at the beginning of each renewal period. In my reasons for
decision, I summarized the landlord’s position as follows:
[67]          
The landlord’s Rent Paid Theory is an alternative
submission, which posits that even if the tenant’s interpretation of the lease
was correct, the landlord was still entitled to a significant judgment in its
favour. Each of the two lawyers representing the landlord appear to have made
passing reference to the Rent Paid Theory in their oral submissions at the end
of the trial. Mr. Solmon closed his oral submissions as follows:
[68]          
Mr. McReynolds then made submissions regarding
the CAM payments, the roof, and what he indicated would be “a limitations
issue.” Mr. McReynolds closed his submissions as follows:
[69]          
Given these brief references during the closing submissions
of counsel for the landlord, I cannot accept the tenant’s submission that the
landlord never raised the Rent Paid Theory until after trial. It is more
accurate to say that the landlord first raised the Rent Paid Theory at trial in
its closing submissions.
[70]          
The landlord also sought leave to introduce
evidence from its pre-trial conference memo, ostensibly to assert that the
tenant was aware of the Rent Paid Theory. I deny the landlord leave to do so. The
trial judge should not receive pre-trial conference communications except in
the most unusual circumstances. I see no benefit to admitting this evidence to
aid my understanding of what the landlord may have said in an attempt to reach
a negotiated resolution of the case before trial. As I will explain below, in
my view, the landlord’s answers to undertakings and what happened during trial
are far more important than what the landlord might have said at the pre-trial
conference.
[71]          
In any event, I would not give effect to the
landlord’s submission for three related reasons:
[72]          
In support of the Rent Paid Theory, the landlord
filed written submissions explaining its interpretation of the lease and Schedule
C, which sets out the damages it claims to be owed under the Rent Paid Theory.
The landlord’s witness gave no evidence in support of either the Rent Paid
Theory or the damages calculations in Schedule C. The landlord did not file an
expert damages report at trial. The landlord did not put its damages
calculations in Schedule C into evidence and the tenant had no ability to
cross-examine on those calculations.
[73]          
Importantly, the Rent Paid Theory and the
damages calculations in Schedule C are inconsistent with answers to
undertakings given by the landlord.
[74]          
Examinations for discovery in this proceeding
took place on February 25 and 26, 2021. In March 2022, the parties each brought
motions to compel the other to answer undertakings and refusals. In his reasons
for decision, Associate Justice McGraw confirmed that the landlord agreed to
answer undertaking #3, which required the landlord to quantify its claim for
minimum rent owing for the periods from 2009 to present:
[75]          
On December 6, 2023, the landlord delivered its
answers to undertakings and refusals.[15]
In answer to Undertaking #3, the landlord stated, “Please see Minimum Rent,
Percentage Rent and Interest Short Payment and Schedules A and B, attached.”
The landlord attached an overview in chart form that summarized and broke down its
claim for unpaid minimum and percentage rent from April 1, 2009 to June 30,
2022:
[76]          
In Schedule A, the landlord set out a month-by-month
breakdown of the amounts it claimed the tenant owed for unpaid minimum rent and
interest for each year from 2009 to June 30, 2022.
[77]          
In Schedule B, the landlord set out the amounts it
claimed the tenant owed for unpaid percentage rent between 2009 and 2021. It
set out the tenant’s annual sales for each year, calculated 1.25% of the sales
above $10 million, added HST, and deducted the amount actually paid by the
tenant in each year, to reach the total amount allegedly owing for each year.
The landlord then calculated the accrued interest on that amount up to June
2022.
[78]          
At trial, the landlord introduced into evidence
versions of the charts that fulfilled Undertaking #3. The landlord updated the charts
to include all amounts owing as minimum rent and percentage rent up to November
30, 2023:
[79]          
Neither the answer to Undertaking #3 nor Exhibit
3 was predicated on or consistent with the Rent Paid Theory. All the data is predicated
on the court accepting the landlord’s primary argument at trial: that the
correct interpretation of the lease required the tenant to pay to the landlord
1.25% of all sales in excess of $10 million and to fold those amounts into
minimum rental at the beginning of each renewal period.
[80]          
I find that if the landlord wished to advance the
Rent Paid Theory at trial, it was required to provide a breakdown of the
amounts allegedly owed by the tenant under this theory as part of its answer to
Undertaking #3. The landlord was required to provide a complete answer to its
undertaking to “provide a breakdown of the amounts…regarding the alleged
minimum rent owing from April 1, 2009, to the present,” including a breakdown
of amounts under the alternate Rent Paid Theory. It did not do so.
[81]          
In addition, if the landlord intended to recover
damages under the Rent Paid Theory, it needed to do so on the basis of evidence
at trial that the tenant could test through cross-examination. If the landlord
wished to be relieved of the consequences of not fulfilling its undertaking so
that it could call evidence to prove damages under the Rent Paid Theory, it
needed to seek leave of the court during the trial. It did not do so.
[82]          
I decline to consider the landlord’s claim under
the Rent Paid Theory.
[83]          
However, even if I were to consider the Rent
Paid Theory, I would not accept the landlord’s argument. In essence, the landlord
submits that once the tenant overpaid the rent by incorrectly interpreting the
lease, the tenant was stuck. On the landlord’s theory, the overpayment would
roll forward into all future rent calculations. That interpretation of the
lease is inconsistent with sound commercial principles and good business sense.[16]  The landlord’s Rent
Paid Theory is not commercially reasonable. An overpayment is a mistake,
capable of being corrected. It is not a vested right of the landlord to be capitalized
into the economic value of the lease. Looking at the parties’ relationship, and
the considering commercial reasonableness, I would reject the Rent Paid Theory,
which borders on a commercially absurd interpretation of the lease.
[84]          
I do not accept the landlord’s submission that the
Limitations Act, 2002 entitles it to recover under the Rent Paid Theory.
The Limitations Act, 2002 prevented the tenant from recovering its
overpayments more than two years before it noticed the overpayments and
commenced the litigation. The Limitations Act, 2002 says nothing about
what the lease required the tenant to pay in rent after it corrected its error
in 2009.
[85]          
I reject the landlord’s claim for any additional
rent for the period spanning 2009 to 2023. Given that finding, I need not determine
whether the landlord’s rent calculations are correct (the tenant asserts that the
landlord’s calculations should be reduced by $64,308.05) or decide whether the
landlord would be entitled to interest on any amount found to be owing at 10%
per year.
[86]          
For completeness, if the landlord was entitled to
the additional rent for the period from 2009 to 2023 on its recalculation
theory, then I would have to consider whether the tenant should be allowed to
set off its overpayment of rent against the rent owed to the landlord under the
Rent Paid Theory. This issue would raise different considerations than setting
rent overpayments off against CAM charge underpayments, which I did not allow
above, but I do not reach this issue.
[87]          
Based on my reasons for decision, supplemented
by this endorsement, I award the tenant $1,359,799.88 in damages, including
pre-judgment interest calculated to May 6, 2024, comprising:
[88]          
If the parties are not able to agree on the
costs of the proceeding, the tenant may email its costs submission of no more
than five double-spaced pages to my judicial assistant on or before December 6,
2024. The landlord may deliver its responding submission of no more than three
double-spaced pages on or before December 13, 2024. No reply submissions are to
be delivered without leave.