[1]             
The Defendant brought a motion to have the
Plaintiffs’ action dismissed or permanently stayed.  For the reasons that
follow, the motion is dismissed.
[2]             
This action involves a sub-contract (the
contract) between the Plaintiffs (JLPM) and the Defendant, (Ferrovial).
[3]             
The Plaintiff, JLPM, is a sole proprietorship
registered pursuant to the laws of the Province of Ontario with its office
located in North Bay, Ontario.  The Plaintiff, Dwight Anthony Jr., is the
registered owner of JLPM.  The Defendant, Ferrovial Services Canada Limited is
a corporation registered pursuant to the laws of the Province of Alberta.
[4]             
In January, 2019, the Ontario Ministry of
Transportation (MTO) contracted with Ferrovial[1]
for the latter to provide highway maintenance.
[5]             
In or around April 2019, JLPM entered into an
agreement with Ferrovial to provide vegetation and maintenance work for five
picnic sites and rest areas along Highway 17 for a seven-year term.  That work
began in or around May, 2019.
[6]             
The formal contract between Ferrovial and JLPM,
effective May 1, 2019, was not signed until October 9, 2019.
[7]             
The contract contained a termination provision
that provided Ferrovial the option to terminate or suspend the contract due to,
among other things, its convenience or when it was deemed to be in the best
interest of Ferrovial to do so.  On February 25, 2021, Ferrovial  terminated
its agreement with JLPM.
[8]             
The contract also contained a “Law and Venue”
provision, which stipulates that the venue of any judicial proceeding arising
from the contract shall be Travis County, Texas.  The contractor (JLPM) waived
any and all defences to a change of venue based upon forum non convenience or
any other procedural theory.
[9]             
The Plaintiffs commenced an action in Ontario in
which they seek damages for breach of contract, negligence, negligent
misrepresentation and/or unjust enrichment.  Their allegations include that
there was an express or implied term that the parties would perform their
duties and exercise their rights reasonably, in good faith and with honesty,
that the defendant failed to do so, and that the termination is unenforceable
at law.
[10]         
Ferrovial disputes the merits of the action.  However,
it has not yet served a Statement of Defence.  Instead, it has brought a motion
for an order pursuant to s. 106 of the Courts of Justice Act and Rule
21.01(3) of the Rules of Civil Procedure for a permanent stay or
dismissal of the action on the ground that it was brought in Ontario contrary
to the contract’s Law and Venue provision, also referred to as a forum selection
clause (FSC).
[11]         
JLPM opposed the motion.
[12]         
Section 106 of the Courts of Justice Act,
dealing with stays of proceedings, says that a court, on its own initiative or
on motion by any person, whether or not a party, may stay any proceeding in the
court on such terms as are considered just.
[13]         
Rule 21.01(3) of the Rules of Civil Procedure
then states:
[14]         
The leading Canadian case dealing with the
enforcement of FSCs was Zi Pompey Industrie v. ECU-Line N.V., 2003 SCC
27.[2]  It drew from the English
case the “Eleftheria”[3]. 
These cases arose in commercial contexts.  The 2017 Supreme Court of Canada
case of Douez v. Facebook Inc.,[4]
then dealt with FSCs in the consumer context.
[15]         
Pompey set out
the two-part “strong cause” test.  It went on to say that FSCs are generally to
be encouraged by the courts as they create certainty and security in
transaction, derivatives of order and fairness, which are critical components
or private international law.  This test rightly imposes the burden on the
plaintiff to satisfy the court that there is good reason it should not be bound
by the FSC.  It is essential that courts give full weight to the desirability
of holding contracting parties to their agreements.
[16]         
The test was well summarized by the Ontario
Court of Appeal in Loan Away Inc. v.  Facebook Canada Ltd. [5]
[17]         
The contract contained a “Surviving Clauses”
provision which stated that the provisions of the contract related to warranty,
indemnity, audit and confidentiality would survive its termination.  JLPM
submitted that the terms of the contract were no longer operative once it was
terminated by Ferrovial, save and except for those provisions that were
expressly contained in the “Surviving Clauses” term, that it is clear and
unambiguous as to which sections of the contract would survive its termination,
and that these did not include the Law and Venue clause.  Furthermore, it
submitted, any ambiguity would be read in favour of JLPM on the basis of contra
proferentum as it was Ferrovial that had drafted the standard form contract.