[1]              
On August 28, 2024, this court granted an initial order under the Companies’
Creditors Arrangement Act, R.S.C. 1985 c. C-36 (the “CCAA”) providing for,
among other items, an initial stay of proceedings against the applicants and
certain of their affiliates and the appointment of Alvarez & Marsal Canada
Inc. as monitor (the “Monitor”). The applicants own, operate and franchise
retail dispensaries and an online platform selling cannabis products and
accessories under the name “Tokyo Smoke.”
[2]              
On September 6, 2024, Cavanagh J. issued an amended and restated initial
order (the “ARIO”) that extended the stay of proceedings up to and
including December 6, 2024, and provided various other related relief.
[3]              
Justice Cavanagh approved a sale and investment solicitation process on
September 18, 2024, and on that day adjourned the applicants’ motion for a
related proceeding stay, the motion before me today, to today’s date.
[4]              
The applicants are currently in the throes of the court-approved sale
and investment solicitation process within the CCAA proceedings (“SISP”) for
which the current bid deadline is November 11, 2024. The closing of the
Successful Bid (as defined in the SISP) is expected to take place by December
6, 2024.
[5]              
Prior to the CCAA proceeding, on March 8, 2024, certain of the
applicants, and DAK Capital Inc. (“DAK”) were named as defendants (collectively
the “TS Respondents”) in a Notice of Arbitration filed by Canopy Growth
Corporation (“Canopy” and the “Canopy Arbitration”).
[6]              
The Canopy Arbitration alleges breaches of a Share Purchase Agreement
dated September 23, 2022, as amended by an Amendment to Share Purchase
Agreement dated December 30, 2022 (the “SPA”). DAK is alleged to have
guaranteed certain payments claimed to be owing under the SPA. As a result of
the stay of proceedings under the initial order and the ARIO, the Canopy
Arbitration is (undisputedly) stayed as against all of the defendants therein
except DAK.
[7]              
The issue before me is whether Canopy may proceed in the near term with
the Canopy Arbitration as against DAK.
[8]              
Canopy maintains that there is no impediment to the Canopy Arbitration
proceeding as against DAK, and that the Canopy Arbitration ought to proceed
expeditiously.
[9]              
The applicants say that although DAK is solvent and is not subject to
the CCAA stay, DAK and the TS Respondents share a centralized management team,
that the ongoing Canopy Arbitration will therefore necessitate substantial
participation from the TS Respondents, and that such participation would, if
required in the near term, distract from and undermine the engagement of the
management team in the SISP and restructuring effort, at a critical time in those
endeavors.
[10]          
I note that the Monitor echoes and supports the applicants’ position. In
a Supplement to its Second Report, at para. 4.3, the Monitor expresses the view
that:
[11]          
While of course the Monitor’s input on the practical implications of the
court’s decision is helpful and warrants careful consideration, the resolution
of the motion before me entails a determination of contested legal issues.
[12]          
That is, specifically, the parties disagree on the threshold question as
to whether or not, in these circumstances, this court has the jurisdiction under
section 11 of the CCAA to extend the stay of proceedings to encompass DAK.
[13]          
Canopy asserts that, while orders extending stays of proceedings to
third-party guarantors have been made in Ontario, such orders have only ever
been made on an unopposed basis, and even then, with cautions uttered by this
court about whether or not jurisdiction exists to do so.
[14]          
Canopy’s position is based on the interplay between subsections 11.02
and 11.04 of the CCAA.
[15]          
Its argument begins with the language of s. 11.04, which provides that:
[16]          
Canopy characterizes this language as clear and unambiguous, and argues
that it prohibits the extension of the stay of proceedings to a third-party
guarantor.
[17]          
It points out that s. 11.04 does not, like other sections within Part II
of the CCAA (concerning Jurisdiction of the Courts) feature express exceptions
and/or provide the court with discretion.
[18]          
For example, Canopy notes, the prohibition regarding the appointment of
a company’s auditor as monitor in section 11.7(2) is prefaced with the words
“Except with the permission of the court and on any conditions that the court
may impose…”
[19]          
Canopy also argues that it is important to distinguish between a stay of
third-party litigation and proceedings involving a guarantee. It says that
courts have clearly exercised discretion under s. 11 to stay third-party
litigation not involving a guarantee, and that there is no prohibition in the
CCAA against the court doing so. On the other hand, Canopy emphasizes,
guarantees and letters of credit are singled out in s. 11.04. In response to
the applicants’ primary submission, discussed below, Canopy asserts that it is
“not credible” and in fact “absurd” to suggest that the purpose of s. 11.04 is
to ensure that an order under s. 11.02 does not stay proceedings against
guarantors while a party can circumvent that prohibition simply by invoking s.
11.
[20]          
Canopy also maintains, from a policy perspective that it says should
influence the interpretation of provisions of the CCAA, that the legislation is
explicitly intended to facilitate compromises and arrangements between
companies and their creditors, and that it is not the scheme of the CCAA to
undermine the rights of a creditor against a third-party guarantor.
[21]          
The applicants’ spin on the overriding policy objectives is to
note that the CCAA serves important remedial objectives, and that among those
objectives is the notion that generally companies retain greater value as going
concerns. As such, the applicants assert, reorganization serves the public
interest by facilitating the survival of companies for the good of the economy
and the “complex web of interdependent relationships, avoiding the harmful
consequences of liquidation” (see Century Services Inc. v. Canada (Attorney
General), 2010 SCC 60, [2010] 3 S.C.R. 379).
[22]          
The applicants rely, for support of the court’s jurisdiction to make the
order they seek, on s. 11 of the CCAA. They note the broad purview of s. 11,
and that, subject to specified restrictions set out in the Act, the court may
make any order that it considers appropriate in the circumstances at hand.
[23]          
They observe that courts have repeatedly used these broad powers to
extend stays of proceedings to non-parties, including guarantors.
[24]          
In that regard, the applicants reference Pride Group Holdings Inc.,
2024 ONSC 1830, a case from earlier this year in which Morawetz C.J. extended a
stay of proceedings to include certain guarantors who had provided personal
guarantees relative to a CCAA applicant’s obligations, and against whom certain
lenders had threatened proceedings.
[25]          
To similar effect, the applicants rely on Morawetz C.J.’s decision in Nordstrom
Canada Retail Inc., 2023 ONSC 1422 and Bed Bath & Beyond Canada
Limited (Re), 2023 ONSC 1014 (“BBB”).
[26]          
The applicants also cite Kimmel J.’s decision earlier this year in Balboa
Inc. et al. (Re), Court File No. CV-24-00713254, in which Her Honour, in
granting a stay in favour of non‑applicant parties who had provided
guarantees in respect of certain of the applicants’ obligations, wrote:
[27]          
In response to these authorities, Canopy points to passages in Morawetz
C.J.’s decisions in Nordstrom and BBB, respectively, in which His
Honour extended a “Parent Stay” in the absence of opposition by any
landlord (in Nordstrom) and extended a Third-Party Stay relative to
certain indemnities, again without opposition from affected landlords, (in BBB).
In doing so, Morawetz C.J. in each case said that, in view of the
consensual nature of the requests, the extension of the stays had “no
precedential value” and added that “the issue of [non-party stay orders] is not
free from doubt.”
[28]          
While that is fair and accurate, it does not, in my view, address the
decision of Kimmel J. in Re Balboa, nor Morawetz C.J.’s decision in Pride,
which decisions do not repeat Morawetz C.J.’s proviso (in Nordstrom and
BBB) about the implications of non-opposition.
[29]          
In Re Balboa, Kimmel J. specifically turned her mind to the
passages from Morawetz C.J.’s decisions in Nordstrom and BBB on
which Canopy relies before me, and, after reviewing those and additional
authorities bearing on these issues, noted that even in Nordstrom and BBB
Morawetz C.J. had ultimately granted a stay in favour of certain non-applicant
guarantors on an initial CCAA application, notwithstanding the language of s.
11.04.
[30]          
Moreover, Kimmel J. said, at para. 34:
[31]          
Justice Kimmel then stated her conclusion that s. 11 confers the
jurisdiction to make the (extended) stay order.
[32]          
Equally compelling is Morawetz C.J.’s decision in Pride.
[33]          
In discussing the submission of the applicants before him that the stay
of proceedings should be extended to the Personal Guarantors, he wrote, at paras.
33-35:
[34]          
Accordingly, notwithstanding Morawetz C.J.’s earlier caution about the precedential
value (or otherwise) of an unopposed order, it appears clear in Re Balboa,
cited by Morawetz C.J. with approval in the passage above, and in particular in
His Honour’s own decision in Pride, that he recognizes the jurisdiction
conferred by s. 11 to order this type of relief notwithstanding the provisions
of s. 11.04.
[35]          
The applicants argue that this interpretation is supported also by parsing
the language of ss. 11.02 and 11.04 and the interplay between them.
[36]          
The applicants observe, first, that the subparagraphs of subsection
11.02(2) in each case contemplate a stay order in certain prescribed
circumstances “against the company.” Correspondingly, these provisions do not
speak to the court’s jurisdiction to grant stays in respect of any other
entity.
[37]          
Section 11.04, the applicants argue, clarifies that orders under s.
11.02 do not on their own affect guarantees in relation to the debtor company.
Specifically, s. 11.04 says that:
[38]          
The applicants assert that s. 11.04 simply means that any stay granted
by the court over the debtor company using its powers under section 11.02
(which again are expressly limited to “the company”) does not affect a
guarantee in respect of the debtor company.
[39]          
In other words, the applicants argue, s. 11.04 is a deeming provision
intended to clarify the scope and effect of an order made under s. 11.02, and
is not prohibitive. To that end, the applicants contrast the language of s.
11.04 with the language of, for example, s. 11.08: “No order may be made under
section 11.02 that…”
[40]          
The applicants argue that Parliament made a choice not to use such
prohibitive language in s. 11.04, and that therefore s. 11.04 does not bar any
relief under s. 11.02, or delimit the court’s authority generally (as found in
s. 11) to make an order staying a guarantee.
[41]          
The applicants also note in this respect that s. 11.04 does not purport
to limit or clarify the relief that may be granted under the general powers of
s. 11. As such, say the applicants, s. 11.04 must be read by the court so as
not to frustrate the remedial effect of the CCAA by restricting the court’s
broad powers under s. 11.
[42]          
In support of their argument concerning the proposition that s. 11.04
only applies to specified stays of proceedings against the debtor company under
s. 11.02, the applicants rely on the 2022 article by James D. Gage and Trevor
Courtis: “Staying Guarantees by Non-Debtors and Section 11.04 of the CCAA” (2022)
20 Annual Rev. Insolvency L., 2022 CanLIIDocs 4310 (the “Gage and Courtis
Article”).
[43]          
The Gage and Courtis Article traces the evolution of the relevant
provisions, and notes that the predecessor to s. 11.04 did contain the kind of
blanket prohibition that the respondents wish to read into s. 11.04. That
predecessor section, s. 11.2, provided that:
[44]          
This blanket prohibition was removed as part of a 2009 amendment to the
CCAA.
[45]          
Mr. Gage and Mr. Courtis conclude:
[46]          
I find this logic compelling, and it leads me to join company with
Kimmel J. and Morawetz C.J. in the view that the court may stay guarantee
claims under s. 11 in appropriate circumstances.
[47]          
I also find that the circumstances before me qualify as appropriate
circumstances in which to extend the stay to DAK.
[48]          
While there is a debate between the parties as to whether or not the
evidence demonstrates that the applicants’ management will be distracted and
occupied by the Canopy Arbitration to the extent they claim, I accept and rely
upon the Monitor’s view, as a court-appointed officer, that allowing the Canopy
Arbitration to proceed would be counterproductive to the SISP and the overall
restructuring effort.
[49]          
I should note before concluding that Canopy cites and relies on two
cases from Alberta that it says support its interpretation of the interplay
between s. 11.02 and s. 11.04, and its position that no stay should be extended
here.
[50]          
It appears to me that the first of those cases, Northern
Transportation Company Limited (Re), 2016 ABQB 522, was driven by
factors other than an analysis of the effect of s. 11, 11.02 and 11.04 of the
CCAA.
[51]          
Paragraphs 43 and 44 of that decision, in my view, provide insight into
what was animating the court in that case, being such factors as the location
of the corporate debtor, the location of the non-consumer good collateral, and
conflicts with the governing law clause chosen by the parties in their
contract, and a concern that the B.C. PPSA did not give the court the ability
to intervene “to relieve the debtor from the consequences of the default, or to
stay enforcement of any payment acceleration provision of a security agreement
that triggers upon default.”
[52]          
Meaning no disrespect, the court’s interpretation of the effect of the
relevant provisions of s. 11 of the CCAA is not the subject of detailed analysis
and is not in any event the basis on which the decision turns.
[53]          
The other Alberta decision, the decision of Nixon A.C.J. in Mantle
Materials Group Ltd. (Re), 2024 ABKB 19, in fact references a passage
from Northern Transportation leaving open the granting of stays in “certain
exceptional circumstances”, cites the Gage and Courtis Article with approval,
and finds that the case was one in which it was appropriate to extend the stay
as requested: at paras. 57-58. I find that this decision is consistent with the
Ontario cases cited above, and in no way disinclines me to grant the relief I
propose to grant.
[54]          
Accordingly, I grant the applicants’ motion, and extend the stay to DAK
as requested.
[55]          
I do not propose to do so indefinitely. Once there is an approved bid
pursuant to the current SISP  and once the resulting transaction is completed,
the stay vis-à-vis DAK should be lifted and the Canopy Arbitration should
proceed.