[1]              
The Applicant Neda Ataei (the “Mother”) brings
an Application to set aside a separation agreement dated June 15, 2018 (the
“Separation Agreement”) on the grounds that she signed it under duress. The
Mother alleges that the Respondent Saeed Kalantari (the “Father”) blackmailed
the Mother into signing the Separation Agreement. In the alternative, the
Mother requests an order to vary the child support and spousal support
provisions in the Separation Agreement. The Father opposes setting aside the
Separation Agreement because the terms are clear, and the parties had
independent legal advice.
[2]              
On November 23, 2023, the court ordered a
bifurcated trial to proceed on the issue of the validity of the Separation
Agreement pursuant to paragraph 1 of the Mother’s Amended Application. The Amended
Application, paragraph 1 states that the Applicant seeks an “order setting aside the Separation Agreement or a
provision in it, pursuant to s. 56(4)(c) of the Family Law Act, on
account of the fact that she signed the Separation Agreement under duress.” 
A trial on whether the Mother signed the Separation Agreement under duress was
held.
[3]              
I dismiss the Mother’s Application to set aside
the Separation Agreement on the grounds that she signed it under duress. There
is evidence that the Mother felt that she was being blackmailed before the
Separation Agreement was signed, that the Mother felt pressured by the Father, the
Mother was vulnerable, and the Mother found the separation difficult. There is
also evidence that the Mother was blackmailed by the Father’s girlfriend after
the Separation Agreement was signed. However, there is evidence that the Mother’s
vulnerabilities were compensated by her lawyer and that she was not under
duress when she signed the Separation Agreement.
[4]              
The parties started living together in 1989 and
were married in Iran on March 1, 1991. The parties have two children, one
daughter who was born on July 2, 1995 and is now 29 years old, and a daughter who
was born on May 12, 2006 and is now 18 years old.
[5]              
The parties moved to Canada in 1997. The Mother
worked as a nurse and the Father worked as a physician in 2004. The Mother
financially supported the family while the Father completed his medical
licensing process in Canada. The Mother did not work from 2005 to 2008 due to
childcare responsibilities as well as the fact that the family had to move to
Manitoba due to the Father’s work and licensing requirements.
[6]              
The Mother was hospitalized in 2015 and diagnosed
with Cushing Syndrome. The Mother was under the care of a psychiatrist, Dr. Eve
Cabalo of North York General Hospital from October 27, 2015 to August 30, 2018.
The Mother was also under the care of a psychiatrist, Dr. Szabo from August
2017 to March 2021.
[7]              
One of the physicians who treated the Mother at
North York General Hospital was Dr. Safar Zadeh who later entered into a
relationship with the Father.
[8]              
The parties’ relationship broke down in 2016. The
parties separated on March 1, 2017.
[9]              
The Father started an Application on March 24,
2017 seeking custody, child support and equalization. The parties entered into
a domestic contract dated August 23, 2017 dealing with the listing and sale of
the matrimonial home.
[10]          
The parties attended a full day mediation in
2017.
[11]          
The Father’s counsel sent a draft of the
Separation Agreement to the Mother’s counsel on April 30, 2018. The parties entered
into the Separation Agreement on June 15, 2018. The parties were represented by
senior family law counsel.
[12]          
Dr. Zadeh, who was then not treating the Mother,
accessed the Mother’s medical file on January 10, 16, and April 18, 2019. The
Father and Dr. Zadeh started living together on August 1, 2019 and separated on
July 4, 2020. Dr. Zadeh commenced an application against the Father. The Mother
loaned the Father the amount of $100,000 to assist him with his legal issues
with Dr. Zadeh.
[13]          
In October 2019, the Mother commenced her
Application.
[14]          
The Mother also complained about Dr. Zadeh’s
conduct to the College of Physicians and Surgeons including on the issue of
threats to disclose the Mother’s personal health information (Ataei v. Zadeh,
2021 CanLII 112393 (ONHPARB). The College found that Dr. Zadeh committed acts
of professional misconduct and suspended her license for five months (College
of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario v. Safar Zadeh, 2023 ONPSDT 8).
[15]          
The Family Law Act, s. 56(4) provides
that a court may set aside a domestic contract as follows:
[16]          
The Ontario Court of Appeal held in Virc v. Blair et al., 2014 ONCA 392, 119 O.R. (3d) 721, at para. 52, cited in Tadayon
v. Mohtashami 2015 ONCA 777 at para. 33: that in determining whether a domestic contract should be set aside
pursuant to s.56(4), the court must follow a two-step process:
[17]          
This trial deals with whether the Separation
Agreement may be set aside in accordance with contract law. Under contract law,
the Separation Agreement may be set aside for unconscionability, undue
influence, mistake, repudiation, duress, misrepresentation, fraud, and
repudiation. The key issue in this case is whether the Separation Agreement may
be set aside because the Mother was under duress (s.56(4)(c)). I note that
disclosure, which is disputed by the parties, must still be determined
separately from this trial (s. 56(4)(a)). If the Mother demonstrates that she
was under duress, then the court must consider whether it is appropriate to
exercise its discretion to set aside the Separation Agreement.
[18]          
Duress is defined in Ludmer v. Ludmer,
2013 ONSC 784 at para. 53 as follows,
[19]          
Duress can include "coercion, intimidation
or the application of illegitimate pressure" (Toscano v. Toscano,
2015 ONSC 487, at para. 72).
[20]          
The court must consider the circumstances of negotiation
and execution of the Separation Agreement as set out in Miglin v. Miglin, 2003 SCC 24 (CanLII), [2003]
1 S.C.R. 303. Bastarache and Arbour JJ. held at paras. 81 to 83,
[21]          
The significance of counsel or other professionals,
as discussed in Miglin, was addressed by Abella J. in Rick v. Brandsema,
2009 SCC 10 at paras. 61 and 62,
[22]          
In Anderson v. Anderson, 2023 SCC 13,
Karakatsanis J. commented that the curative impact of legal advice should not
be taken as given at para. 35,
[23]          
It is important to note that “vulnerability
cannot be equated to duress” (Ramdial v. Davis, 2015 ONCA 726 at para.
42). As held in Ramdial at para. 42,  “duress is the coercion of
a person’s will through illegitimate pressure, with one party dominating the
will of another at the time that a contract is executed: Gordon v. Roebuck
(1992), 1992 CanLII 7443 (ON CA), 9 O.R. (3d) 1 (C.A.); Stott v. Merit
Investment Corp. (1988), 1988 CanLII 192 (ON CA), 63 O.R. (2d) 545 (C.A.),
leave to appeal refused, [1988] S.C.C.A. No. 185.”
[24]          
I do not find that the Mother was under duress
when she signed the Separation Agreement because of the professional assistance
of the Mother’s lawyer. I find that the Mother felt pressured by the Father, was
vulnerable, found the separation difficult, and felt that she was being “blackmailed”.
However, the Mother’s lawyer ensured that she was not under duress and the
Mother’s lawyer compensated for the Mother’s vulnerabilities. Also, I find that
the blackmailing by Dr. Zadeh occurred after the Separation Agreement was
signed.
[25]          
A problem with the Mother’s allegations of
duress by the Father and Dr. Zadeh is the sequence of events which is not
consistent with the timing of when the Separation Agreement was negotiated and signed.
The Mother alleges that at the time the Separation Agreement was signed, she
was being blackmailed and threatened by the Father and his partner, Dr. Zadeh. The
Mother alleges that the Father and Dr. Zadeh began their relationship in May
2017 when the Father attended Dr. Zadeh’s party. The Father denies that he had
a romantic relationship with Dr. Zadeh in May 2017 and states that he spent
time at the party hosted by Dr. Zadeh speaking to the Mother on the telephone.
The Father and Dr. Zadeh, both of whom were credible, testified that they began
dating in December 2018. The Separation Agreement was signed on June 15, 2018
before the Father and Dr. Zadeh began dating.
[26]          
The “blackmailing” by Dr. Zadeh occurred after
the Separation Agreement was signed. Dr. Zadeh admits that she accessed the
Mother’s medical records in 2019 which is several months after the signing of
the Separation Agreement in June 2018. Dr. Zadeh then disclosed the Mother’s
personal health information to others without the Mother’s consent. Dr. Zadeh
sent a text message with screenshots of the Mother’s file to the Father. Dr.
Zadeh also sent a Facebook message dated April 19, 2019 to the Mother’s friend,
indicating that the Mother was mentally ill. Dr. Zadeh stated that the Mother’s
history and what the Mother was doing could be used in a lawsuit against the
Mother for harassment and defamation, and used against the Mother in custody proceedings
for her younger daughter. Again, these “blackmailing” events occurred after the
Separation Agreement was signed.
[27]          
In regard to the “blackmailing” by the Father
alone, I am persuaded that the Mother felt that she was pressured by the Father,
found the separation difficult, and was vulnerable. The Mother states that at
the time of signing, she was told that if she failed to sign the Separation
Agreement as drafted, the Father would reveal prejudicial confidential
information about her medical and psychiatric history to her friends, family,
and the broader Iranian community in the Toronto area. The Mother states that
the Father was threatening to disclose her psychiatric history and tell people
that she was bi-polar, had multiple personality disorder, anxiety, that she was
mentally unstable, and that she was unfaithful in their marriage. She further states
that the Father threatened to disclose that she was a drug addict who was fired
for stealing medication from the hospital. The Mother produced a photograph
full of needles and drugs that she says the Father showed her and threatened to
disclose to prove that she was a drug addict. The photograph is compelling
evidence of the drugs that the Mother was taking at the time and her
vulnerability.
[28]          
The Father denied “blackmailing” the Mother or
taking or using the photograph. The Father described a troubled marriage since
2007. He alleged that the Mother had an affair and that the police became
involved. They saw a counsellor and reconciled. The Father stated that the
Mother’s health struggles began at that point and gradually worsened through
the months and years until their separation. The Father stated that he had
supported the Mother’s mental health and attended medical appointments with
her. The Father testified that he never blackmailed the Mother. He concedes
that he took their daughters away during very stressful times in the summer. The
Father’s actions with respect to the children coupled with the Mother’s mental
health issues made her more vulnerable.
[29]          
The Mother’s mother, Ms. Tahereh Memarian, could
not pinpoint the time period when the Mother was under duress. She testified
that the Mother was forced to sign the Separation Agreement under pressure and
under threat by the Father. However, Ms. Memarian was not able to provide
relevant dates. Ms. Memarian stated that “it was during the time she was
separated.”
[30]          
It is clear that the Mother found the separation
difficult. Dr. Ali Khalifeh, who operated botox and filler injection classes
that the Mother attended in 2018, testified that the separation was difficult
for the Mother. Dr. Khalifeh was a credible witness but had only limited
interactions with the Mother.
[31]          
The strongest evidence supporting the Mother’s
position is the evidence given by Dr. Szabo, a psychologist who treated the
Mother from 2017 to 2021. Dr. Szabo wrote in a progress note dated November 7,
2017, “Upset about circumstances of divorce settlement- tried to negotiate – but
he is threatening and offering much less than legally warranted. Blackmailing
because of my psychiatric history…” Dr. Szabo testified that these were the
Mother’s words. The progress note is based on the Mother’s self-reporting to
the doctor. Dr. Szabo explained that the Mother suffered trauma of the
separation. Dr. Szabo that there were two major themes, the Father “pulling in”
the children against the Mother if she didn’t agree with medical treatment and
how the Father and his girlfriend trying to harass the Mother by saying she was
crazy and unfit. However, there is another note dated February 6, 2018 which
reads: “Her [Neda’s] lawyer is reluctant to settle at this time and threatens
to resign if she [Neda] settles – He feels that [Neda] is shortchanged, but she
is tired and cannot take more acrimony and underhanded requests by husband.”
[32]          
While I am persuaded that the Mother felt that she
was pressured by the Father, was vulnerable, and found the separation and the
negotiating process difficult, I am not persuaded that she was under duress
when she signed the Separation Agreement. Based on Mr. Siegel’s evidence, I do
not find there existed a situation in which the Mother had no alternative but
to submit to the pressure by the Father. I find that the Mother’s
vulnerabilities and the pressure that she felt by the Father were compensated
for by the professional assistance of Mr. Siegel. Mr. Siegel protected the
Mother by refusing to act as her counsel if she wanted to sign an unfair
Separation Agreement. The negotiation process was lengthy and the Mother was
able to take the time she needed to consider the Separation Agreement before
she signed it.
[33]          
Mr. Siegel, who was a credible witness,
testified that the Separation Agreement was negotiated over a period of time. He
explained that there was litigation, pleadings had been exchanged, there was
mediation by a terrific mediator, negotiations ensued after that, and letters
were exchanged and finally an agreement was signed. Mr. Siegel stated that the
Mother did not tell him that she was being blackmailed. He added that if the
Mother had told him that she had been blackmailed, he would have made a note in
his file or within a letter. Mr. Siegel did describe the Mother as “extremely
distraught” for most of his representation of her and “very emotional”.
[34]          
Mr. Siegel wrote detailed emails to the Mother
confirming his advice not to sign the Separation Agreement “as is”.   There
were two instances when Mr. Siegel stated that he could no longer represent the
Mother because she was not following his advice. Mr. Siegel says bluntly on May
29, 2018, “Once I resign you will [be able] to sign whatever you want. I can’t
allow myself to be party to such a situation where you are clearly prepared to
sign whatever he wants just to have this over. Sorry. You are free to do
whatever you want. I respect that. Equally though, you have to respect if I
choose not to be part of it.” The Mother responded, in part, “Please understand
my situation and try to end everything in the most easiest way. I appreciate
and I don’t want you to resign from my case.” Mr. Siegel then continued to
negotiate the Separation Agreement. The Mother listened to Mr. Siegel’s advice,
which resulted in more favourable terms for her. Mr. Siegel testified that it
was very difficult for him to get the Mother to agree and go along with his
advice and that’s always a challenge as a family law lawyer.
[35]          
Mr. Siegel wrote to the Mother on June 4, 2018
at 12:58 pm, “I just cannot be part of this deal any longer. I worry you are
simply agreeing to whatever Mr. Kalantari wants because you are tired and want
it over. While I understand your reasons, I cannot sign off on your agreement.
I think he is taking advantage of you and the wording of the agreement is
wholly deficient in some parts which I have already detailed to you many times.
It is therefore your road to travel on your own should you be happy with it…” The
Mother responds after several exchanges, “I don’t feel well. After your email I
feel really awful. Please give me 24 hours to collect my thoughts and talk to
you.” It is important that the Mother asked for and received 24 hours to
collect her thoughts about the Separation Agreement. On June 5, 2018, the Mother
then responds that she wants Mr. Siegel to continue and send a letter to the
Father’s lawyer including his suggestions about sharing custody, life
insurance, and other matters. The Mother followed Mr. Siegel’s advice.
[36]          
On June 13, 2018 at 12:17 pm, Mr. Siegel states
that he received a revised agreement from the Father’s lawyer and that the
Mother is much better off now that they had pushed for the changes. Mr. Siegel
further states, “And stop being pressured by them. Take your time and ensure
this gets done right. I hope you see that as a result of the letters we’ve sent
back you are much better off than had you been had you simply signed 2 months
ago.”  The Mother then agreed to all of the changes that Mr. Siegel advised her
to make except for approximately six changes. The Mother states on June 13,
2018 at 12:40 pm “Dear Brahm, I understand your comments and I know you are
trying to protect my rights. But I don’t have any problem with that…Can we
please go ahead and finish this now…” The Mother then states at 12:41 pm, “…Plus
I should say I don’t have any more money to spend on this case.” The Mother
subsequently met with Mr. Siegel on June 15, 2018 and signed the Separation
Agreement. Mr. Siegel signed a Certificate of Independent Legal Advice dated
June 15, 2018 confirming that the Mother entered into the Separation Agreement
of her own volition without any fear, threats, compulsion or influence by the
Father or any other person.
[37]          
The series of email exchanges between the Mother
and Mr. Siegel indicate that the Mother’s will was not dominated by the Father
at the time the Separation Agreement was signed. The Mother had the ability and
time to consider and make use of Mr. Siegel’s legal advice and professional
assistance. The legal advice and professional assistance had a curative impact.
The evidence is clear that Mr. Siegel compensated for the Mother’s
vulnerabilities through the negotiation and execution process.
[38]          
Given my findings, I am not required to proceed
to the next step and analyze whether it is appropriate for the court to
exercise its discretion to set aside the Separation Agreement.
[39]          
I conclude that the Mother was not under duress
when she signed the Separation Agreement. I dismiss the Mother’s request for an
order setting aside the Separation Agreement or a provision in it, pursuant to
s. 56(4)(c) of the Family Law Act, on account of the fact that she
signed the Separation Agreement under duress. My conclusion and disposition are
without prejudice to the Mother to request an order to set aside the Separation
Agreement for disclosure which is disputed by the parties.
[40]          
If the parties are unable to agree on costs, the
parties may submit costs submissions up to five pages in length, double-spaced,
within 30 days.