[1]              
Jamaal Koehler trafficked, controlled, drugged,
assaulted, and sexually assaulted N.F. in late 2019 and early 2020.  He pleaded
guilty to six counts as follows:
[2]              
He now comes before the court for sentencing.
[3]              
Mr. Koehler met N.F. when she was working as a
food delivery person in October 2019.  They exchanged telephone numbers and
began to spend time together.  In November 2019 Mr. Koehler proposed that N.F.
begin working for him as an escort.  He proposed that she would provide the
sexual services while he provided transportation and protection.  They would
split the earnings 50/50.  Mr. Koehler took sexualized photographs of N.F.  She
then posted the advertisements on adult websites.  N.F. then began to see
customers.  Mr. Koehler drove her to appointments and picked her up after she
provided sexual services.  She gave him 50% of her earnings at first.  Later,
he took all her earnings.  Over the time she escorted for him she earned about
$4000.00.  He kept $3000.00 of it.
[4]              
In December 2019, while at his apartment, Mr.
Koehler held N.F. down and put what he said was cocaine in her nose.  She lost
consciousness.  When she awoke, she saw she had vomited.  Mr. Koehler then told
her that he gave her fentanyl and administered a “narcon” kit on her to revive
her.  Mr. Koehler then began to provide fentanyl to N.F. to keep her addicted
so that she needed him.
[5]              
Mr. Koehler assaulted and sexually assaulted
N.F. on several occasions while they were together.  Prior to Christmas, 2019,
Mr. Koehler became angry with N.F.  He punched her and scratched her.  Her face
and body were bruised.  Mr. Koehler held her in a closet for a week while the
marks healed.  He later used a lighter to burn her and cut her leg.  He locked
her in his condo for a week after that, again to conceal her injuries.
[6]              
Mr. Koehler sexually assaulted N.F. regularly,
using his penis and his fingers – which caused her to go to the hospital on one
occasion to seek medical attention.  He even asked how could be raping her if
he was her boyfriend.  He sexually assaulted her both vaginally and anally.
[7]              
In January 2020 N.F. told Mr. Koehler that she
wanted out.  Mr. Koehler began to take all her earnings.  He told her that she
now owed him a headache fee.  He also showed her a firearm.  He dug it up from
a backyard, loaded it, and fired it out the window of his car while driving to
determine if it still functioned.
[8]              
On January 22, 2020, N.F. saw customers at a
motel in Scarborough.  While she was there Mr. Koehler gave her a mixture of
Percocet and fentanyl to snort. He then drove her around, and in a fit of
jealousy about another man, assaulted her again by choking her and biting her. 
He then used zip-ties to tie N.F.’s hands together and zip-tied her to the door
of his car.  He said, “this is real human trafficking, isn’t it?”  N.F. was
eventually able to break the zip ties and escape. She ran into the motel.  The
motel staff called 911 for her.  N.F. was taken to the hospital.  She sustained
bruising, cuts, burns, and bites on her body.  Photographs and diagrams of
N.F.’s injuries were entered into evidence.
[9]              
Mr. Koehler had threatened to kill N.F. and
kidnap her brother.  N.F. advised the police of this.  The police attended
N.F.’s home.  N.F.’s mother told the police that Mr. Koehler had been there and
said he would be back.  The police intercepted him driving back to N.F.’s
home.  The police found several items described by N.F. in the car, including
cut zip ties, a package of zip ties, condoms, and a receipt for zip ties from
the Home Depot.  Photographs of items seized from Mr. Koehler’s car included
zip ties, a debt list, and a folding knife as described by N.F.
[10]          
Mr. Koehler’s vehicle was subsequently examined
by the Centre of Forensic Sciences.  The investigators found gunshot residue in
it, confirming N.F.’s account that Mr. Koehler had fired a gun from it.
[11]          
N.F. provided a victim impact statement.  Her
relationship with Mr. Koehler has had a tremendous impact on N.F.  She will be
forever physically and emotionally scarred.  She described how Mr. Koehler
abused her.  He essentially kept her captive for two months.  She was not
allowed to eat, use the washroom, or do anything without his permission.  He
manipulated her with a combination of pretend romance, drugs, physical abuse,
and sexual abuse.  N.F. suffered physical injuries that she still deals with,
including a brain injury.  The brain injury has caused her difficulties at
work, at school, and in her ability to concentrate.  The brain injury continues
to impact memory and cognitive function.  She will require lifelong treatment
for it.  She has had to pay for therapy.  The experience has affected her
ability to relate to and love the members of her family, including her husband
and her daughter.  She has intimacy issues, trust issues, and panic attacks. 
She fears that Mr. Koehler will seek her out for revenge.
[12]          
Mr. Koehler provided an affidavit to the court,
setting out some of his background.  I also gleaned information from a letter
written by his mother.  He was born and raised in Canada.  He is now 30 years
old.  He grew up living with his mother.  Mr. Koehler says that he ever went to
bed hungry, and never lacked for clothing.  His mother worked hard and worked
long hours.  She was frequently at work when he got up, and she often was still
at work when he came home.  Although his mother was able to provide for him,
they were not wealthy.  I think his family is best described as “working
poor”.  Mr. Koehler grew up in areas where crime and violence were present. 
His mother had an abusive partner at one point.  He left the home and was
homeless for a short time.  His father was often absent from his life when he
was growing up. He has a better relationship with his father now.
[13]          
Mr. Koehler says that his upbringing led him to
use and sell drugs.  By age 25, he says, he was addicted to hard drugs and used
drugs daily.  There is some corroboration for that assertion.  Mr. Koehler has
a criminal record.  In 2018 he was convicted of possession of a schedule I drug
for the purpose of trafficking.  He received a $50 fine in light of six months
pre-sentence custody.  He was also placed on a weapons prohibition.
[14]          
Mr. Koehler stated in his affidavit that he has
been the victim of systemic racism by the police.  He says that the police
targeted him.  He believes that police officers always assumed that he was
involved in drugs or criminal activity.  His mother corroborated that claim in
her letter to the court.
[15]          
Mr. Koehler also became involved in competitive
hockey and played at a high level but felt that he was exposed to degrading and
racist comments.  He became discouraged and did not want to play hockey anymore
although that had been his passion.  He was suspended for life from the Greater
Toronto Hockey League – although he claims he was not at fault, something his
mother also agrees with.  Mr. Koehler also described how he developed anxiety
and learning disabilities.
[16]          
I accept that Mr. Koehler may well have been the
victim of systemic and overt racism as he describes it in both hockey and from
the police.  Such things have been well-documented in other cases (at least as
far as the police are concerned) and there is no evidence to contradict him. 
That said, it is important to note that the police, and the competitive hockey
authorities, are not in a position to respond to these allegations. 
Nonetheless, I agree that I can take into account what have come to be called
the “Morris” factor: R. v. Morris, 2021 ONCA 680.  The real question, as
Morris teaches, however, is whether there is some connection between
systemic racism suffered by the accused and the offence.  With respect, I
struggle to find any connection.  Mr. Koehler pretended to start a romantic
relationship with N.F., abused her, trafficked her, raped her, and administered
fentanyl to her.  He did it for profit and for his own gratification.  It is
not clear to me the role that institutional and overt racism played in his
decision to commit these crimes.
[17]          
Human trafficking in this case contrary to s.
279.01(1)(b) of the Criminal Code carries a maximum penalty of 14 years
imprisonment, as does administering a noxious substance contrary to s.
245(1)(a) of the Criminal Code.  The other offences that Mr. Koehler
pleaded guilty to all carry a maximum penalty of ten years.
[18]          
Two main cases set out the ranges for the
offences at issue here: R. v. A.J.K., 2022 ONCA 487, dealing with
penetrative sexual assaults; and R. v. A.E., 2018 ONSC 471, dealing with
the range of sentence for human trafficking.  Ranges, of course, are not
straightjackets.  Sentencing judges must impose sentences that are fit, and
sentencing ranges are a tool to assist judges in reaching proportionate
sentences.  They are “navigational buoys” that ensure sentences reflect the
appropriate sentencing principles: R. v. Parranto, 2021 SCC 46, at paras.
3 and 16.  Sentencing is an individual process, and the application of the
principles in a particular case may render a sentence at a particular place
within the range – or, under the right circumstances, outside the range.
[19]          
In R. v. A.J.K., the Court of Appeal
found that the starting point for penetrative sexual assaults is generally 3-5
years in the penitentiary.  In R. v. A.E., supra, Boswell J.
noted that the range of sentence for human trafficking is very wide, but the
range has been rising.  The usual range is now four to eight years.  This range
has been accepted by many judges of this court: R. v. H-O., 2022 ONSC
4900; R. v. Abedini, 2019 CarswellOnt 24260, [2019] O.J. No. 6947
(Sup.Ct.); R. v. K.P., 2023 ONSC 676; R. v. S.L., 2024 ONSC 2263;
R. v. Swaby, 2024 ONSC 6141.
[20]          
Crown counsel’s position is that I should impose
a sentence of ten years imprisonment, as well as a lifetime Sex Offender
Information Registry Act order (“SOIRA”), a s. 109 order, a no-contact order,
and a DNA order (which is mandatory for some of the offences) as well as a
restitution order and a forfeiture order.
[21]          
The Crown’s position is that I should impose the
following sentences:
[22]          
I will mention a few of the cases that Crown
counsel relies on.
[23]          
The Crown relied on R. v. Dak, an
unreported decision of Justice Kennedy of the Superior Court in Kitchener dated
December 12, 2023.  I recently reviewed this case in R. v. Swaby,
supra.  Dak pleaded guilty to possession of a loaded restricted firearm and
possession of cocaine for the purpose of trafficking.  He was convicted after a
trial of human trafficking and threatening in relation to one complainant, his
partner.  Dak was a youthful first offender with difficult personal
circumstances.  He introduced his partner to sex work.  He used emotional
manipulation and physical violence at least once to enforce compliance.  He
kept all her earnings and controlled her work in the sex trade for about 9
months.  After reviewing the cases Kennedy J. agreed that 4-8 years is the
range for human trafficking offences.  Kennedy J. would have sentenced Mr. Dak
to 5 ½ years on the human trafficking offence alone and would have imposed a
global sentence of 12.  After considering the principle of totality, however,
he imposed a global sentence of 9 years before reductions for pre-sentence
custody. He imposed a restitution order of about $48,000 and gave Mr. Dak 10
years to pay after release from custody.
[24]          
The Crown also relied on R. v. A.S., 2017
ONSC 802.  My colleague Quigley J. convicted the offender of one count of
sexual assault; two counts of procuring; one count of receiving a material
benefit from human trafficking; one count of aggravated assault; one count of
assault with a weapon; three counts of assault; and one count of choking.  The
human trafficking took place over the course of 5 ½ years, with a long break
while A.S. was in jail.  The offender introduced the complainant to stripping
and escorting.  He groomed her and used violence and intimidation to control
her.  The violence included burning her, choking her, and cutting her with a
piece of glass.  He forced her to work both as an escort and a stripper.  The
offender had a lengthy criminal record and was 35 years old.  A pre-sentence
report described him as a career criminal who was reasonably likely to
re-offend.  Quigley J. sentenced the offender to a global thirteen-year
sentence (after taking totality into account) less pre-sentencing custody.
[25]          
The Crown also relied on R. v. Ferguson,
an unreported decision of the Superior Court dated June 21, 2023.  The offender
pleaded guilty to one count of assault causing bodily harm; one count of
procuring; and one count of human trafficking.  The victim was 17 when she met
the offender.  They commenced a romantic relationship, but he told her that if
she wanted to be with him, she had to work in the sex trade.  She had no
previous experience.  He took her to Edmonton, where she immediately began
escorting under the offender’s control.  He took photos of her and posted
advertisements of her, set prices, set the rules, and forced her to provide
some sexual services against her wishes.  He kept all her earnings.  The victim
worked all over Canada for a short period in October 2018 and then again for
about a month in November 2019.  The offender used violence and intimidation to
control the victim, including assaulting her, choking her to unconsciousness,
and burning her in the shower without letting her seek medical help.  She
suffered a concussion and cuts and bruising because of his abuse.  The offender
sexually assaulted her vaginally and anally.  He also forced objects into her
vagina.  Durno J. sentenced the offender to a global sentence of 8 years, based
on a joint submission, less pre-sentence custody and credit for harsh
conditions of custody.
[26]          
In R. v. T.T., 2022 ONSC 722, the
offender was convicted after a jury trial of 9 offences, including one count of
human trafficking; two counts of receiving a material benefit from sexual
services; one count of procuring; one count of advertising sexual services; one
count of sexual assault; and three counts related to making, possessing, and
possessing for publication child pornography.  The victim was 17 and living in
a group home when she met the offender and his co-accused.  She was persuaded
to begin escorting.  Photos were taken and advertised on a website.  The
offender and his co-accused provided alcohol and drugs to the victim and took
all her earnings.  The abuse lasted three days and included a sexual assault by
the offender of the victim.  The offender was 40 years old.  He had community
support and took educational courses while in jail to improve himself.  He
apologized to the victim and asked for forgiveness (which did not quite square
the fact that he had a jury trial).  My colleague Kelly J. sentenced the
offender to a global sentence of 8 years, less pre-sentence custody, and after
considering time spent on house arrest and harsh conditions of custody.
[27]          
I turn now to the defence position.  Mr.
Petrouchinova argues that the appropriate range for this offence is 5-7 years. 
Mr. Koehler has already spent over five years in custody on an enhanced basis: Criminal
Code, s. 719(3.1).  That is before accounting for harsh conditions of
custody.  He has a strong plan of action in place for when he is released. 
Given his time in custody, the proper range of sentence, the mitigation of his
guilty plea, and the good plan, Ms. Petrouchinova’s submission is that Mr.
Koehler is in a time served position.
[28]          
I will briefly review two of the cases relied on
by the defence in relation to human trafficking.
[29]          
In R. v. M.E.D., 2022 ONSC 1899, the
offender was convicted of multiple human trafficking and sexual services
offences regarding A.M. over the course of about 1 ½ months.  A.M. was a
university student who was kicked out of her house.  M.E.D. persuaded her to
meet expenses by working in the sex trade.  M.E.D. had a challenging
upbringing, living some of his time with his father after his mother was
involved in an abusive relationship.  He had difficulties in school.  He was 28
years old at the time of sentencing.  He had been on welfare. And appears to
have not held steady employment.  He said he regretted the “situation”.  He had
a minor criminal record.  He exercised significant control over A.M. and kept
all of her earnings, which amounted to about $5000.  A.M. was 22 years old and
vulnerable emotionally and financially.  He used some violence and demanded
sexual favours from A.M.  Ultimately, she had to “buy” her freedom from M.E.D.
for $10,000.  My colleague Justice Kelly would have sentenced M.E.D. to ten
years incarceration but after accounting for his terms of release and harsh
conditions of custody, she imposed a global sentence of seven years, less
pre-sentence custody.
[30]          
In R. v. Gordon, 2023 ONSC 1036, the
offender pleaded guilty before me to five counts including pointing a firearm,
unlawful confinement, receiving a financial benefit from human trafficking,
human trafficking, and assault causing bodily harm.  The complainant was a
dancer at an adult entertainment establishment.  The offender engaged in
classic pimping behaviour, controlling the victim using violence and
intimidation – including pointing a firearm.  He suffered significantly harsh
conditions of custody.  He was at the high end of the range, and I would have
sentenced him to a sentence of 9 years in the penitentiary but after accounting
for mitigating factors, including harsh conditions of custody, I sentenced him
to 7 years less time served.
[31]          
The most important aggravating factor in this
case is the nature of the offence.  Mr. Koehler brutalized and manipulated N.F.
for his own sexual and financial gratification.  His treatment of her was
unspeakable.
[32]          
It is highly aggravating that when Mr. Koehler
administered a noxious substance to N.F., he administered fentanyl.  This was
not a “date rape” drug where the victim experienced no lasting side effects –
not to trivialize date-rape drugs.  Fentanyl is in a significantly more lethal
category of noxious substances.  Mr. Koehler had to revive N.F. with a “narcon”
kit.  No expert evidence is required to know that fentanyl can be deadly – it
is the source of thousands of overdose deaths in Canada each year: R. v.
Parranto, supra.  It is extremely fortunate for everyone – including
Mr. Koehler – that N.F. did not die.  Although Mr. Koehler will be sentenced
separately on this charge – meaning it is not aggravating to the other charges
– the nature of the substance that he administered is an aggravating factor on
the charge of administering a noxious substance.
[33]          
It is also aggravating that N.F. was Mr.
Koehler’s domestic partner.  She felt that they were in a romantic
relationship.  In addition to this being a case of human trafficking, it is
also a case of intimate partner violence.  That is a statutory aggravating
factor: Criminal Code, s. 718.2(a)(ii).  There was a very significant
impact on N.F.  For her, the experience has been life changing.  This, too, is
a statutory aggravating factor: Criminal Code, s. 718.2(a)(iii.1).
[34]          
It is aggravating that Mr. Koehler threatened to
kill N.F.’s family.  That must have been terrifying to N.F., as she knew he had
a gun and had seen him fire it.  Mr. Koehler in fact went to N.F.’s home, spoke
to her mother, and was heading back there when he was arrested.
[35]          
Finally, Mr. Koehler’s criminal record is
aggravating.  As noted, he has a conviction for drug trafficking.
[36]          
The chief mitigating factor in this case is that
Mr. Koehler pleaded guilty.  By pleading guilty Mr. Koehler took responsibility
for the offence.  Mr. Koehler also wrote a letter of apology to N.F.  In the
letter, he apologized for lying to her, deceiving her, hurting her, and
betraying her trust.  He also apologized for betraying and abusing the trust of
N.F.’s mother and brother.
[37]          
It is also mitigating  that by pleading guilty
Mr. Koehler spared N.F. from having to testify.  Many complainants say that
testifying, especially during cross-examination, can be just as traumatizing as
the actual events.  By sparing N.F. from testifying Mr. Koehler not only saved
court resources, he did one of the very few things he could do for N.F.
[38]          
A mitigating factor is that Mr. Koehler has been
productive while in custody.  He has taken a number of Ministry courses
including: Problem Solving; Substance Use; Supportive Relationships; Goal
Setting; Recognizing Healthy Relationship; Life Skills Workshop; Communication
Skills; Money Management; and Anger Management.
[39]          
Mr. Koehler also filed several letters of
support:
[40]          
Mr. Koehler described his plan upon release from
custody.  The fact that he has a plan is mitigating.  The focus of Mr.
Koehler’s plan is to work with his uncle at his business, Music System
Warehouse, from Tuesdays to Saturdays.  He intends to enrol in and actively
attend Narcotics Anonymous five days per week.  He intends to enroll in a
business management course at Humber College as well as an apprenticeship
program to become a plumber.
[41]          
The mitigation represented by the plan of action
is tempered, unfortunately, by the fact that Mr. Koehler has not done well on
bail.  Mr. Koehler was arrested on January 23, 2020. He was released on a
surety bail on April 1, 2020.  His father was his surety.  He was placed on
house arrest with a GPS monitor.  On March 1, 2021, 11 months later, Mr.
Koehler’s father revoked his bail after an “assault radio call” to the police. 
His father denied that there had been an assault but wanted his son removed
from the house.  On March 15, 2021, Mr. Koehler was released on another surety
bail to his mother and his aunt.  He was to wear an ankle monitor.  On April 5,
2021, about three weeks after his second release, Mr. Koehler was driving with
his mother when he became violent.  He ripped his ankle monitor off and threw
it out of window of the car.  He also took his mother’s phone and threw that
out of the car.  He took the car and disappeared.  On May 3, 2021, Mr.
Koehler’s lawyer asked to be removed from the record as she could not reach her
client.  Mr. Koehler was arrested on May 13, 2021.  He has been in custody ever
since.
[42]          
Mr. Koehler’s behaviour while on bail is
obviously not an aggravating factor and I do not treat it as an aggravating
factor.  It does, however, give me some pause when I consider his prospects for
rehabilitation.  While I accept his assertion that the last 3 ½ years that he
has spent in custody has significantly affected him, I think his prospects are
uncertain.  I believe that he is sincere when he says that he wants to change,
and I accept that he has matured, but his behaviour on bail tells me that it
will be a difficult road for him.  Accordingly, while the plan of action is a
reasonable one and I treat it as a mitigating factor, the mitigation is
limited.
[43]          
Ms. Gharabaway argues that Mr. Koehler should be
subject to a lifetime SOIRA order due to the multiple counts that give rise to
such an order.
[44]          
Sexual assault is a primary offence under the
SOIRA provisions: Criminal Code, s. 490.011(1)(xvii).  Where a court
convicts an offender of a primary offence, it shall make a SOIRA order unless
it is satisfied that there is no connection between the making of the order and
the purpose of assisting law enforcement; or, that the making of the order
would be grossly disproportionate.  Where a court makes a SOIRA order it ends
20 years after it is made if the offence carries a maximum sentence of 10 or 14
years: Criminal Code s. 490.013(2)(b). The maximum penalty for sexual
assault is ten years.
[45]          
Mr. Koehler has not satisfied me that there
would be no connection between the making or the order and the purpose of
assisting law enforcement in the investigation of sex crimes.  Mr. Koehler is a
repeat offender.  With his experience he is now well-versed in the ways of
human trafficking, the sex trade, and the use of sexual violence to control his
victim.  I am not saying that he will repeat his behaviour, but should he do so
the consequences to the next victim could be just as, or more devastating as
they were to N.F.  I am also not satisfied that the impact of the making of the
order on Mr. Koehler’s privacy or liberty is grossly disproportionate to the
public interest in protecting society.  Although Mr. Koehler need only satisfy
the court on one ground, I find that he cannot satisfy either.  In coming to
this conclusion, I apply the factors set out in s. 490.012(4).  The sexual
assaults included vaginal and anal penetration.  They were committed in the
context of Mr. Koehler pimping N.F.  The relationship involved intimate partner
violence.  All the circumstances point towards the making of an order.
[46]          
What is the appropriate length of the SOIRA
order?  To make a lifetime SOIRA order, the offender must be convicted of more
than one designated offence: Criminal Code, s. 490.013(3)(a).  The court
must also be satisfied that the offences demonstrate or form part of a pattern
showing that the offender is at an increased risk of committing a sexual crime.
[47]          
Administering a noxious thing, human
trafficking, and receiving a material benefit from human trafficking are all
secondary offences: Criminal Code, s. 490.011(1)(vi), (xi), and (xii).
[48]          
Pursuant to s. 490.012(5), the court shall make
an order in respect of a secondary offence only if satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that the offender committed the secondary offence with intent
to commit a primary offence.  In other words, for me to make an order in
respect of the secondary offences I would need to find that they were committed
with the intent to commit sexual assault.  Respectfully, I do not think I can
make that finding.  Mr. Koehler was first and foremost a pimp who used sexual
violence in the context of an intimate partner relationship where his intimate
partner was also his employee.  The violence was part of the control.  Prior to
involving N.F. in the sex trade, they were involved in a consensual
relationship.  I see no evidence that he committed human trafficking or
administered a noxious thing in order to sexually assault N.F.  It was the
other way around: he sexually assaulted N.F. after he began to exploit her and
use her for his own financial and sexual purposes.
[49]          
Accordingly, I decline to find that a lifetime
SOIRA order should be made in respect of multiple offences.  The length of the
order will be 20 years.
[50]          
Mr. Koehler was initially in custody on these
charges from his arrest on January 24, 2020, until March 31, 2020, a period of
68 days.   He was then in custody from March 1, 2021, to March 15, 2021, a
period of 14 days.  He has now been in custody since May 13, 2021, until
sentencing today, a period of 1287 days.  The total is thus 1369 days.  That is
about 45.6 months.  At the rate of 1.5:1 as set out in s. 719(3.1) of the Criminal
Code, that works out to 2053.5, or rounded up to 2054 days.  That is the
equivalent of just about 68.45 months.
[51]          
Mr. Koehler has spent all his time in custody at
the Toronto East Detention Centre.  The incarceration summary indicates that he
was locked down for 361 days.  He was in custody during much of the Covid-19
pandemic.  He was also on droplet protection for 43 days.
[52]          
Mr. Koehler filed an affidavit describing some
of the conditions of his stay at Toronto East.  He made numerous allegations of
poor treatment.  John Lawson, the Toronto East Detention Centre Security
Manager, responded to some of the allegations in Mr. Koehler’s affidavit.
[53]          
In his affidavit Mr. Koehler described some of
the conditions of his stay.  During his first stay in custody, a period of 68
days, he was threatened due to the nature of his charges.  He was assaulted on
his range and at one point moved to a special handling unit for his own
safety.  He had only a limited amount of exposure outside his cell.  He says
that he was generally in his cell for 23 hours per day.  He had limited access
to fresh air or showers.
[54]          
Mr. Koehler was released on March 31, 2020, but
went back into custody on March 1, 2021.  He was initially placed in an
isolation unit for Covid purposes.  He was released on March 15, 2021 but went
back into custody again on May 13, 2021.
[55]          
When he went back into custody in May 2021, Mr.
Koehler was again placed in a Covid isolation unit.  He had multiple days where
he was not let out of his cell.  He was then placed on a regular range.  He
says that he had to be moved when other inmates discovered his sexual assault
charges.  He then spent time in a special housing unit and a maximum security
unit.  He was very secluded in that unit, and terrified of the other inmates. 
He says that no cleaners came in to sanitize the range.  He says that he asked
to be transferred, but the correctional officers ignored that request. Mr.
Lawson responded that he has searched the records and could find no record of
any written request to change units.
[56]          
Mr. Koehler asserted that correctional officers
constantly woke him up at night, searched his cells numerous times, and took
his sheets, forcing him to sleep without a blanket or a cover.  Mr. Koehler
also stated that clean sheets are rarely given at the Toronto East – he often
had to sleep on the same sheets for 3 or 4 months at a time.  In his response,
Mr. Lawson disputed both assertions.  He stated that inmates are provided with
two bedsheets and a blanket.  In the winter they are allocated two blankets. 
He states that sheets are never removed unless they are replaced with laundered
sheets and blankets at the end of the search, and inmates are never left
without blankets or sheets.  He also stated that bed sheets are exchanged
bi-weekly with laundered sheets and that inmates are never left for months
without a sheet exchange.
[57]          
Mr. Koehler asserted that due to the extensive
lockdowns he only accessed the yard once or twice per month and has had rare
access to the shower.  In July 2023 was transferred to a regular unit and forced
to triple bunk.  He contracted covid in the institution and was very sick for
two weeks.  It was very difficult to access programs, have a haircut, or get
into the gym.  He stated that correctional officers have taken away his hygiene
products or tossed his hygiene products into the toilet.
[58]          
Troublingly, Mr. Koehler told correctional
officers that he was having stomach pain.  He says that they ignored that.  He
states that when he was taken to see a doctor outside the institution, that
doctor said that he had had a stomach infection for two years.  He was
eventually taken to a hospital where he was diagnosed with H-pylori infection
and given special anti-biotics.
[59]          
Mr. Koehler also described trouble with his
shoes.  He complained of ankle and knee problems and often had to walk around
the range barefoot.  Eventually he received new shoes.  In his response, Mr.
Lawson recalled speaking to Mr. Koehler about this issue in July 2024 and
advised him to speak to the doctor.  Mr. Lawson did not receive a note from a
doctor about this issue but made an exception and issued new shoes to Mr.
Koehler.
[60]          
It is very difficult to assess the impact of
jail on Mr. Koehler.  He has legitimate complaints: there have been a
significant number of lockdowns, and triple bunking is a problem at the Toronto
East Detention Centre.  Being on droplet protection during the Covid pandemic
was undoubtedly a hardship, as judges of this Court and the Ontario Court of
Justice have regularly observed.  Triple bunking and lockdowns are especially
harsh.  In particular, the untreated medical issue is especially troubling.  It
is utterly unacceptable that Mr. Koehler had a long-running untreated stomach
infection.
[61]          
That said, I cannot accept at face value those
assertions that are disputed by Mr. Lawson, and I do not accept them.  As I
have said, I do not doubt that Mr. Koehler has experienced harsh conditions of
custody and is entitled to mitigation: R. v. Duncan, 2016 ONCA 754.  As
Doherty J.A. stated in R. v. Marshall, 2021 ONCA 344, however, at para.
53, the Duncan credit is not a deduction from an otherwise appropriate
sentence, but rather a factor to be taken into account.  Duncan credit
can not justify an unfit sentence.  As my colleague Kelly J. stated in R. v.
T.T., supra, at para. 34:
[62]          
Accordingly, I treat the harsh conditions of
custody as an important mitigating factor, especially the untreated stomach
infection, but I decline to credit a specific number of days or use a
mathematical formula.
[63]          
The fundamental principle of sentencing is that
a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree
of responsibility of the offender.  The principles of denunciation and
deterrence are paramount in crimes of human trafficking and exploitation, but
those principles must be balanced by rehabilitation and totality.  At the end
of the day, the goal is a fit and proportionate sentence, but the challenge in
any sentencing is to balance all the relevant principles.  On the one hand, Mr.
Koehler committed terrible crimes against N.F., abused her, sexually violated
her, controlled her with drugs, and administered fentanyl to her.  On the other
hand, Mr. Koehler appears to be genuinely remorseful, is relatively young, has
apologized and taken responsibility for his actions, and has at least some
rehabilitative potential.  The sentencing objectives of denunciation,
deterrence (general and specific), restraint, and rehabilitation must all be
balanced.  As well, the principle of totality must be applied – a sentence must
not be so severe that it crushes all hope of rehabilitation.
[64]          
One way to assess Mr. Koehler’s actions is to
apply the “Tang” principles: R. v. Tang, 1997 ABCA 174 (CanLII), [1997] A.J. No. 460 (C.A.). 
See also: R. v. Lopez, 2018 ONSC 4749 at para. 64; and R. v. A.E.,
supra, at para. 56.  I make the following observations:
[65]          
When I consider cases set out by both counsel
and look at the range of sentence, I find that the ten-year sentence suggested
by Ms. Gharabaway is well within the global range when all factors are taken
into account, although it is at the high end considering the guilty plea and
the harsh conditions of custody.  I find that the low end suggested by Ms.
Petrouchinova, 5 years, or just under a time-served sentence, is simply too
low.  It would result in an unfit sentence and would not reflect the gravity of
these offences.  The higher end of the range she suggests, 7 years, is closer
to the mark, but in my respectful view still not sufficiently denunciatory.
[66]          
When I consider all of the factors, I find that
the human trafficking and material benefit offences in this case are serious. 
They tend to the middle of the range when I apply the Tang factors. 
Ordinarily such things as sexual abuse or assaults on the victim are
aggravating factors.  In this case, however, Mr. Koehler is being sentenced
separately for those offences.  On their own, therefore, the human trafficking
and receiving a material benefit from human trafficking convictions merit
sentences in the range of 5-6 years for each, given the range of sentence set
out in the cases.  On its own, the sexual assault conviction merits a sentence
in the range of 4 years when I consider the principles in R. v. A.J.K., supra. 
The administering a noxious substance on its own merits at least another 2-3
years in the penitentiary given the nature of the substance and the resulting
overdose.  The assault causing bodily harm and unlawful confinement offences
merit sentences in the lower penitentiary or upper reformatory range. 
Sentencing principles suggest that the human trafficking and material benefit
sentences could be concurrent to each other (and in accordance with the
principle of totality will be), but all the other sentences should be
consecutive.  That would translate to a global sentence in the range of 12 to
14 years before any credit for harsh conditions of custody or accounting for
the principle of totality.  I say this explicitly so that Mr. Koehler
understands just how seriously the courts treat this offence.  In sentencing
Mr. Koehler, as I have already mentioned, I must also respect the principle of
restraint and the principle that sentences should not be unduly long or harsh: Criminal
Code, s. 718.2(b) and s. 718.2(c).
[67]          
When I consider the harsh conditions of
pre-sentence custody, and the principle of totality, as well as the guilty
plea, the fact that N.F. was spared from testifying, and the principles of
rehabilitation, general and specific deterrence, and denunciation, I find that
a global sentence of 7 ½ years, or 2,738 days, is appropriate.  Mr. Koehler is
credited with 2054 days thus leaving 684 days (or just under 23 months) left to
serve.
[68]          
The warrant of committal will read as follows:
[69]          
There will also be the following ancillary
orders:
[70]          
On the single count of fail to comply with a recognizance,
there will be a sentence of 30 days concurrent to the sentence Mr. Koehler is
now going to serve.