[1]         
On
February 21, 2022, at Milton, Ontario, the police observed a motor vehicle
weaving on the roadway. A traffic stop was initiated, and after quite some time
the motor vehicle came to rest on the shoulder of Highway 401.
[2]         
In
speaking with the driver of the motor vehicle, Jagtar Dhamrait (“Dhamrait”),
the police officer noticed that the driver’s speech was slurred, and an odour
of alcohol was emanating from his breath. Dhamrait admitted to having consumed
two beers.
[3]         
Dhamrait
failed an approved roadside screening device test. He was arrested for “over
80”, read his right to counsel, a caution, and a formal breath demand. He was
transported to the police station for further testing.
[4]         
At
the police station, after a lengthy interaction with the qualified breath
technician, Dhamrait never did provide suitable samples of his breath for
analysis.
[5]         
Dhamrait
was charged with impaired operation of a conveyance contrary to section
320.14(1)(a) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, as amended (“Criminal
Code”), and he was further charged with having failed or refused to comply
with a demand made by a peace officer under section 320.27 or 320.28 of the Criminal
Code, contrary to section 320.15(1) of the Criminal Code.
[6]         
After
a two-day trial, during which three police officers testified and Dhamrait did
not testify, in written reasons for judgment dated June 22, 2023, Dhamrait was
convicted of having failed or refused to comply with the breath demand.  He was
acquitted on the impaired operation count.
[7]         
Dhamrait
appeals against his conviction. There is no sentence appeal.
[8]         
For
the following reasons, despite Mr. Little’s very able submissions on behalf of
the appellant, I would dismiss the appeal.
[9]         
The
hearing before the trial judge proceeded as a blended voir dire and
trial. Dhamrait had brought an application “for an order excluding all
evidence, observations, oral utterances, and statements of [Dhamrait] prior to
and after his arrest”. The application was brought under sections 10(b) and
24(2) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (“Charter”).
[10]       The
trial judge dismissed the Charter application, finding that the police
officers had fulfilled their informational and implementational duties in terms
of Dhamrait’s right to counsel, and that Dhamrait had not been reasonably
diligent in exercising his right to counsel (para. 60 of the reasons for
judgment).
[11]       After
dismissing the Charter application, the trial judge analyzed the section
320.15(1) offence. He correctly set out the offence section and the essential
elements of the offence (paras. 62-64 of the reasons for judgment).
[12]       The
trial judge then found that the essential elements of the offence had been made
out, and specifically that “Dhamrait simply refused to provide the required
evidentiary breath samples” (para. 64 of the reasons for judgment).
[13]       The
trial judge then discussed whether there was a reasonable excuse for Dhamrait
having failed or refused to comply with the breath demand, citing the medical
evidence tendered at trial about Dhamrait’s “chronic idiopathic hives”
condition.
[14]       The
penultimate conclusion of the trial judge was that there was no reasonable
excuse for non-compliance with the breath demand. It was not a matter of
negotiation between Dhamrait and the police officer. Dhamrait had been given
ample time, approximately 45 minutes, to comply, but he simply did not comply
in that he never once put the mouthpiece to his mouth. The police officer had
acted reasonably in advising Dhamrait that he had a final five-minute window to
comply, and Dhamrait still did not comply (paras. 41 and 70 of the reasons for
judgment).
[15]       This
Court’s jurisdiction to hear Dhamrait’s appeal derives from section 812(1)(a)
of the Criminal Code, under Part XVII, which provides that the Superior
Court of Justice is the “appeal court” for summary conviction offences.
[16]       The
within appeal is brought under section 813(a) of the Criminal Code,
which provides, in part, that the defendant may appeal (i) from conviction
and/or (ii) against a sentence.
[17]       It is
alleged on behalf of Dhamrait that (i) the trial judge erred in finding that
there was no section 10(b) Charter violation, and (ii) the trial erred
in his analysis of the failure or refusal to provide a breath sample offence.
[18]      
More
specifically, on the Charter issue, it is alleged that (a) the trial
judge failed to recognize that there was no urgency here and, thus, the police
officer ought to have permitted Dhamrait a further consultation with counsel,
and (b) the trial judge erred in finding that Dhamrait was not being reasonably
diligent in exercising his right to counsel, and (c) the trial judge
misapprehended the evidence and/or gave insufficient reasons on the Charter
application.
[19]       On the
section 320.15(1) offence itself, it is alleged that (a) the trial judge failed
to make the necessary finding of fact that the refusal was unequivocal, and (b)
the trial judge erred in law in terms of the onus of proof with regard to
reasonable excuse, and (c) the trial judge’s reasons were generally
insufficient.
[20]       There
are three possible bases upon which the within appeal may be allowed: (i) the
verdict is unreasonable or cannot be supported by the evidence; (ii) there was
a wrong decision made on a question of law, and/or (iii) there has been a
miscarriage of justice. R. v. Hunt, 2024 ONSC 5454 (CanLII), at
paragraph 11; R. v. McLean, 2021 ONSC 34 (CanLII), at paragraph 11.
[21]       Though
questions of law are generally reviewed on a standard of correctness, the
jurisdiction of this Court to review a finding of fact made by the trial judge
is limited. I am not entitled to retry the case or to substitute my own view of
the evidence for that of the trial judge. This is not a retrial. This Court has
no basis upon which to interfere with the trial judge’s findings unless they
are unreasonable or unsupported by the evidence.  R. v. Smits, 2012 ONCA
524 (CanLII), at paragraph 67, 294 O.A.C. 355, 102 W.C.B. (2d) 316 (Ont. C.A.),
[2012] CarswellOnt 9437 (C.A.), [2012] O.J. No. 3629 (C.A.), 36 M.V.R. (6th)
217 (Ont. C.A.); R. v. Grosse (1996), 1996 CanLII 6643 (ON CA), 29 O.R.
(3d) 785 (C.A.), at pages 791-792; R. v. Hunt, supra, at paragraph 12; R.
v. McLean, supra, at paragraph 13; R. v. Doyle, [2006] O.J. No. 315
(C.A.), at paragraph 6.
[22]       Put
another way, the factual findings of a trial judge are entitled to deference,
and an appellate court may only interfere where there has been a palpable and
overriding error. Findings of fact and factual inferences must be clearly
wrong, unsupported by the evidence, or otherwise unreasonable before an
appellate court can interfere. R. v. Hunt, supra, at paragraph 13; R.
v. Clark, 2005 SCC 2, at paragraph 9, [2005] 1 S.C.R. 6 (S.C.C.), 249
D.L.R. (4th) 257 (S.C.C.), 193 C.C.C. (3d) 289 (S.C.C.), 25 C.R. (6th)
197 (S.C.C.), [2005] S.C.J. No. 4 (S.C.C.); R. v. Sheahan, 2017 ONCA
159, at paragraph 12, 8 M.V.R. (7th) 1 (Ont. C.A.); R. v. R.E.M.,
[2008] 3 S.C.R. 3 (S.C.C.), at paragraph 54, 2008 SCC 51 (CanLII); Housen v.
Nikolaisen, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235 (S.C.C.), at paragraphs 10 and 23, 2002 SCC
33 (CanLII).
[23]       I
would not give effect to any of the arguments advanced on behalf of the
appellant. I do not see any error committed by the trial judge, whether factual
or legal, in his decision to dismiss the Charter application.
[24]       I
agree with counsel for the appellant that there was no real urgency here.
Permitting even more time for Dhamrait to look through his cellular telephone
and find the name and telephone number of the lawyer that he claimed he wanted
to contact, and then contact that lawyer, would not have made any subsequent
breath sample results statutorily inadmissible, for example.
[25]       That
is not the point, however. The point is that Dhamrait had already exercised his
right to counsel. “Dhamrait was on the phone with counsel of choice within 12
minutes of arriving at the police station and within 30 minutes of arrest”
(para. 54 of the reasons for judgment).
[26]       There
were no changed circumstances after that initial consultation. No new
procedures involving Dhamrait (he had already been arrested and read the formal
breath demand and, thus, he knew that he was required to provide suitable
samples of his breath at the police station). No change in the jeopardy facing
Dhamrait. No reason to believe that the first information provided to Dhamrait
by counsel of choice was deficient. And nothing else to suggest that a second
consultation with counsel was necessary to serve the underlying purpose of
section 10(b), that is to provide the detainee with legal advice that is
relevant to his right to choose whether to cooperate with the police
investigation or not.  R. v. Sinclair, 2010 SCC 35, [2010] 2 S.C.R. 310,
at para. 2.
[27]       In the
circumstances of this case, it was unnecessary for the trial judge to have
analyzed at all whether Dhamrait was reasonably diligent in exercising his second
opportunity to consult with counsel.
[28]       Having
done so, however, I find that the trial judge got it correct. His factual
findings are entitled to deference and are fully dispositive of the issue –
Dhamrait was given ten minutes to look through his cellular telephone and find
the contact number for the lawyer that he then wanted to call; Dhamrait was
warned by the police officer that the breath tests would proceed afterwards;
Dhamrait was clearly “stalling”; and Dhamrait spent much of the time looking at
his emails on his cellular telephone and asking the police officer about
contacting non-lawyers or a medical doctor (paras. 54 and 57 of the reasons for
judgment).
[29]       Those
findings of fact, none of which can be said to be infected by palpable and
overriding error, led inescapably to the trial judge’s conclusion that Dhamrait
was not being reasonably diligent in exercising his second opportunity to
consult with counsel.
[30]       In
summary, it matters not that the trial judge did not refer to the lack of any
real urgency in this case. There was no legal right for Dhamrait to consult
again with counsel in any event. Further, there was no error committed by the
trial judge in finding that Dhamrait was not being reasonably diligent in
exercising his right to counsel.  And finally, there was no misapprehension of
the evidence by or insufficient reasons given by the trial judge.
[31]       The
misapprehension of the evidence argument appears to be premised on the
following.  After the ten-minute window referred to above, the police officer
took the cellular telephone away from Dhamrait. After that, and just before the
expiration of five minutes, after which the Intoxilyzer instrument would have
had to be reset, Dhamrait asked again to speak to counsel or duty counsel. The
police officer refused to permit that.
[32]       The
trial judge did not ignore that evidence. The trial judge did not get that
evidence wrong. Rather, that evidence was thoroughly outlined by the trial
judge at paragraphs 38-43 of the reasons for judgment. It is obvious from the
reasons for judgment as a whole that the trial judge did not view that
last-minute additional request by Dhamrait, and the police officer’s refusal to
grant it, as amounting to a breach of Dhamrait’s right to counsel. Apart from
the fact that a second consultation with counsel was not even called for in
these circumstances, I see no error in the trial judge’s treatment of that
evidence.
[33]       In
terms of the complaint about insufficient reasons, I respectfully disagree.
[34]       A very
helpful summary of the legal principles applicable to a sufficiency of reasons
argument is found in the decision of the Court of Appeal for Ontario, Doherty
J.A. writing for the Court, in R. v. J.J.R.D., 2006 CanLII 40088. 
Paragraphs 26-33 of that decision are set out below.
[35]       In my
view, the trial judge’s reasons for judgment sufficiently explain to Dhamrait
the route that was taken to dismiss his Charter application, and those
reasons for judgment clearly allow for meaningful and effective appellate
review. Very succinctly put, the Charter application was dismissed
because Dhamrait was not reasonably diligent in exercising the opportunity
afforded to him to have a second consultation with counsel.
[36]       Again,
I would not give effect to any of the arguments advanced on behalf of the
appellant. I do not see any error committed by the trial judge, whether factual
or legal, in his decision to find Dhamrait guilty of the offence under section
320.15(1) of the Criminal Code.
[37]       I
agree with counsel for the appellant that the reasons of the trial judge could
have been clearer.  For example, instead of spending considerable time in the
reasons for judgment discussing whether Dhamrait had a reasonable excuse for
not complying with the breath demand, which was not really the way in which the
case was argued by the defence at trial, the trial judge could have made his
reasons for judgment clear that, having already dismissed the Charter
application, he would now address the argument by the defence that the Crown
had failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the failure or refusal to
provide the breath sample was unequivocal.
[38]       I also
agree with counsel for the appellant that the issues of (i) whether the failure
or refusal was unequivocal and (ii) whether the accused’s right to counsel was
violated are, in many cases, separate and distinct matters. In other words,
there can be no violation of the right to counsel, whether because it was not
raised at all or because it was raised and dismissed, but yet an acquittal on
the basis that the Crown failed to prove that the failure or refusal was
unequivocal.
[39]       I
further agree with counsel for the appellant that the trial judge did not
expressly find that Dhamrait’s failure or refusal to provide the breath sample
was “unequivocal”; rather, he found that Dhamrait had “simply refused” to
comply (para. 64 of the reasons for judgment).
[40]       As
well, I agree with counsel for the appellant that the failure or refusal must
have been clear and unequivocal, and that whether there was an unequivocal
refusal is a finding of fact. HMTQ v. Armstrong, 2022 ONSC 52, at paras.
61 and 73, citing R. v. Belanger, [1993] O.J. No. 1492 and R. v.
Nanji, 2006 CanLII 7391 (ON CA).
[41]       I
further agree with counsel for the appellant that there are many examples of
cases where, on a summary conviction appeal, a new trial was ordered in a
drinking and driving case because the trial judge failed to address or resolve
one of the central live issues before the trial judge. R. v. Brown, 2011
ONSC 6725, at paras. 14-17; R. v. Barac, 2014 ONSC 804, at paras. 16-17
and 27-30; R. v. Maitland, 2016 ONSC 1737, at paras. 25-28; and R. v.
Javed, 2018 ONSC 7553, at paras. 3-4, 19, 23, and 25-28.
[42]       Finally,
I agree with counsel for the appellant that the onus of proof was different as
between the Charter application and the trial proper. On the former,
Dhamrait bore the onus of proof on a balance of probabilities. On the latter,
it was the Crown’s burden to prove the essential elements of the offence beyond
a reasonable doubt.
[43]       Nevertheless,
I see no reason for this Court to intervene in the particular circumstances of
this case.
[44]       The
reasons for judgment must be read as a whole. The trial judge’s finding that
Dhamrait simply refused to comply with the breath demand, coupled with the
trial judge’s findings of fact on the Charter application, must be taken
as a finding that the refusal was unequivocal.
[45]       In
other words, the only live issue about whether the refusal was unequivocal was
the argument by defence counsel at trial (not Mr. Little) that it was not
unequivocal because it should be treated as being provisional rather than final
in nature, relying upon R. v. Mandryk, 2012 ONSC 3964 and other
authorities. There was nothing else raised that could have affected the
determination of whether the refusal was unequivocal, such as an uncertain
response from the subject after being demanded to provide the breath sample, as
just one example.
[46]       In the
particular circumstances of this case, for the trial judge to have had a
reasonable doubt about whether Dhamrait had failed or refused to comply, in the
sense that the refusal was not unequivocal, he would have had to base that
reasonable doubt on the very same issue that he had already decided against Dhamrait. 
That would have led to an absurd result, in my respectful view.
[47]       It
would have been akin, for example, to a judge dismissing a Charter
application to exclude a confession, finding that the detainee did not have her
right to counsel violated as alleged by the detainee, but then ruling that the
statement was inadmissible because the Crown had failed to prove its
voluntariness beyond a reasonable doubt, and grounding that conclusion on
the very same issue that was the subject of the Charter application
– some mischief regarding the right to counsel (as opposed to a different issue
like operating mind or a threat, as two examples only).
[48]       Put
yet another way, in an effort to further explain myself, in the particular
circumstances of this case, the only thing capable of pointing towards
any equivocality in Dhamrait’s refusal to provide the breath sample was his
request to have a second consultation with counsel, but the trial judge had
already found that Dhamrait deliberately stalled in exercising that right and,
thus, nothing improper or unreasonable had occurred on the part of the police. 
For the trial judge to then have ignored all of that and acquitted Dhamrait on
the refusal, finding that he had “simply refused” to comply but that it was not
“clear and unequivocal” because of his request to consult with counsel a
second time, would have been absurd, with respect.
[49]       In
summary, the trial judge did not err in failing to make the necessary finding
of fact that the refusal was unequivocal, as that finding is implicit in a fair
reading of the reasons for judgment as a whole. Further, there is a discernible
route that the trial judge took to render the verdict of guilty on the refusal
count, such that the reasons for judgment are capable of meaningful and
effective appellate review.  In short, the breath demand was proper, and
Dhamrait failed or refused to comply (which I have found, on these particular
facts, impliedly included a determination that the refusal was “clear and
unequivocal”), and intentionally so, and without any reasonable excuse.
[50]       On the
final question of whether the trial judge erred in law in terms of the onus of
proof with regard to reasonable excuse, it matters not.  As the appellant
himself argues, it was not a live issue at trial whether Dhamrait had a
reasonable excuse for not complying with the breath demand because of his hives
condition, and thus, nothing turned on the trial judge’s impugned statement at
paragraph 66 of the reasons for judgment: that the law “requires the accused to
establish the factual foundation for the excuse on a balance of
probabilities”.
[51]       This
Court is not going to find an error in law and grant the conviction appeal on
the basis of something said by the trial judge which relates to a subject that
everyone agrees was not a live issue at trial and, therefore, did not need to
be analyzed in any event.
[52]       I
would accordingly dismiss the conviction appeal.