[1]              
This is a motion brought by the Applicant, Ms. H.,
against her daughter, the Respondent, Ms. B.[1],
for an interim order allowing her to have contact with her twin, two-year-old
granddaughters who were born in July, 2022.
[2]              
Although the motion as originally framed sought
six-hour contact on either Saturday or Sunday of alternating weekends and contact
of three to four hours on alternating Friday evening, when the motion was
argued, Ms. H. indicated that she was prepared to accept whatever contact the
court might allow her.
[3]              
Ms. B.’s position is that a contact order is not
in the best interests of the children. She requested that the  motion be
dismissed.
[4]              
The second respondent, J.L., is the father of
the children. He resides in Quebec and did not participate in the motion.
[5]              
The relationship between Ms. H. and Ms. B. has
long been strained, beginning as far back as Ms. B.’s teenage years. While they
disagree on the underlying reasons, Ms. B. first left her parents’ home at 14
or 15 years of age and lived away from them for a few years. She returned once
or twice for brief periods before beginning, in 2020, to cohabit in Quebec with
Mr. L., whom she met in 2019.
[6]              
Ms. B.’s relationship with Mr. L. was marked by
repeated acts of domestic violence that he perpetrated against her. She
terminated at least one earlier pregnancy after Mr. L. insisted that she do so.
They finally separated in March 2023, after he had been charged with a number
of criminal offences, some involving physical violence, with Ms. B. being the
victim.
[7]              
Ms. B. contacted Ms. H. seeking her assistance
to return to Ontario. In response, Ms. H. secured a moving van and drove to
Montreal to retrieve Ms. B., the children and some of their possessions, after
which she drove them back to stay with her at her residence in London. It was
not the first time that Ms. H. had travelled to Quebec. She had also visited
the children in the hospital in Montreal after their birth.
[8]              
Ms. B. and the children resided with Ms. H. from
March 5, 2023 until March 26, 2024, when they left following a disagreement
between Ms. H. and Ms. B. during the evening of March 25, 2024 over Ms. B.’s
plan to “sleep train” the children by leaving them to cry themselves to sleep after
being placed in bed that evening. It was a parenting technique with which Ms. H.
did not agree, telling Ms. B. that she was being abusive and neglectful of the
children. The disagreement escalated and, ultimately, Ms. B. called police, who
attended the residence. No criminal charges were laid, despite allegations of
Ms. H. making physical contact with Ms. B. and Ms. B. breaking a door, both of
which were denied by the allegedly responsible party.
[9]              
The next day, Ms. B. took the children to, and
secured residence in, a domestic violence shelter. Ms. H. has not seen the
children since that time.
[10]          
Prior to moving into Ms. H.’s residence in March
2023, Ms. B. and the children also stayed at her residence on multiple
occasions. She specifically identified visits at the following times:
[11]          
From the beginning of their cohabitation, she
and Ms. B. divided childcare between them on a 50/50 basis, with Ms. B. caring
for one child overnight while she cared for the other. She included in the word
“care” the feeding, changing, burping and settling of whatever child she was
responsible for at the time.
[12]          
If she was not at work or attending school, the
children would “race” into her bedroom in the morning and jump on her bed, ready
to play with her. She described the children “always” crying when she went to
work if they were awake when she left, so much so that she would contact them
by FaceTime on her arrival.
[13]          
According to her evidence, the children’s daily
routine “with [her]” included her visiting them upon their awakening, a visit
which caused the children to display their happiness at seeing her. She cleaned
them and dressed them for the day. She then listed a number of activities that
she engaged in with the children throughout the day, including doing crafts,
playing with them, going outside, having lunch, putting them down for a nap,
waking them, giving them a snack; going outside again, having dinner, playing
after dinner, bathing them and putting them to bed.
[14]          
There was no mention of Ms. B. being involved in
any of these activities.
[15]          
She regularly took them to the park, read to
them every day, developed communication boards for them and sang songs with
them.
[16]          
She listed a number of fun activities in which
the children liked to engage without indicating if either party participated
with them.
[17]          
One of the children loved to visit farms and
zoos with her and to cuddle regularly with her in her bed. The other child was
said to be independent and inquisitive, but cautious, not liking to dirty her
hands.
[18]          
She was present for the children’s medical appointments
at the beginning of 2024, and “helped the girls meet and exceed developmental
milestones.”
[19]          
She listed a number of attractions within the
City of London to which she took the children and indicated that when she had a
day off she would be with them “all of my time.”
[20]          
She expressed the opinion that the children were
“deeply bonded” with her, directing words and gestures to her, asking to be
picked up, and objecting when she put them down or if she left their sight.
[21]          
She described the children as being the light
and joy of her life, waiting for her to return from work, running up to her for
a hug and a kiss. She could see the children’s love for her in their eyes.
[22]          
She opined that the children love her and need
her. She wishes to be reunited with the children immediately, for their best
interests.
[23]          
Ms. H. offered the following information about
Ms. B., ostensibly to assist the court in determining whether she should have
contact with her grandchildren:
[24]          
According to Ms. H., Ms. B.:
[25]          
Ms. H. further claimed that, after she returned
to work in December 2022, prior to which she had helped Ms. B. get the girls on
a routine because she needed “so much help personally and especially in caring
for the girls,” she would return home from 12–14-hour shifts to find the
children smelling like urine, still wearing the pyjamas she had placed them in
24 hours before. Moreover, their highchairs would have a “day’s worth of food
in them, not having been cleaned between meals.”
[26]          
Ms. H. further deposed that the children did not
seem to care whenever Ms. B. left or returned to the residence. As she saw it,
the children did not behave as though they were bonded with their mother
because she did not see eye contact between the children and Ms. B., or any
effort on their part to get her attention.
[27]          
Despite what she called their “challenges,” Ms. H.
asserted that she and Ms. B. “did pretty well together,” while also
acknowledging that there was friction in their relationship.
[28]          
According to Ms. H., her efforts to “strike a
balance between stepping in to make sure the girls got what they needed and
supporting Ms. B. as she learned to be a parent” caused much conflict between
her and Ms. B. to which the children were exposed.
[29]          
Notwithstanding, Ms. H. asserted that, because
she wanted to help her daughter and grandchildren escape from Mr. L., after she
had returned them to Ontario, she “paid for everything in the house” and for
the children except their food and diapers, and drove them everywhere.
[30]          
She further assisted Ms. B. in completing her
last high school credit in the summer of 2023 and helped her register for
courses at Fanshawe College in the autumn of 2024.
[31]          
She seeks the contact order because her home is
the only stable and permanent residence the children have known or remembered.
She is also concerned about the lack of stability in their lives and is worried
that the children feel abandoned by her.
[32]          
She denied staying with Ms. H. for most of the
periods that she had alleged in her affidavit. The children were born in Quebec
in mid-July, 2022 and spent a month in the hospital, two weeks of which were in
the neo-natal intensive care unit.[4] That
excluded the claim that she stayed with Ms. H. during the middle two weeks of
July, 2022. She further denied staying with Ms. H. for any part of September,
October[5], or
November 2022, or February, 2023. She agreed that she brought the children to
Ontario for an extended Christmas visit in December 2022.
[33]          
She indicated that, when Ms. H. attended the
hospital after the birth of the children, she was denied access to Ms. B.’s
room because of Covid restrictions. As a result, Ms. H. became angry, resulting
in her removal from the hospital by security.[6]
[34]          
With the benefit of counselling and therapy, she
was able to acknowledge that she was caught up in a cycle of violence in her
relationship with Mr. L.. She lived with him in Montréal from 2021 until March
2023. Over that period, she returned to Ms. H.’s residence for a period of
approximately one month because of Mr. L.’ assaults, after which they
reconciled and she returned to him.
[35]          
Following the episode in which the violence
perpetrated against her by Mr. L. resulted in his criminal charges, and finally
resolving to leave the relationship, she contacted Ms. H. in March 2023 to
inform her and to seek her assistance in leaving by asking Ms. H. to allow her
and the children to move in with Ms. H..
[36]          
She selected Ms. H.’s residence because it was
the only option that she could think of which would be immediately available to
her and the children. She was also hoping that, perhaps, things would be
different between her and Ms. H. when she and the children moved into her
residence.
[37]          
Recognizing that the two had a troubled history[7], however, Ms. B. planned
to stay with the children at the home of Ms. H. for only a brief period.
[38]          
At first, things went reasonably well. Ms. H.
was supportive and offered to assist with the children. She also told Ms. B.
that she need not worry about paying for anything. All costs were to be covered
by Ms. H..
[39]          
That is not how things turned out.
[40]          
Within a short period, the problematic
relationship that had plagued her and Ms. H. since she had been much younger
re-emerged.
[41]          
According to Ms. B., Ms. H. repeatedly
threatened to oust her and the children from her home. Ms. H.’s moods were
unpredictable and she would often speak abusively to or yell at Ms. B.,
criticizing her parenting of the children[8],
sometimes making such statements in the children’s presence.
[42]          
More than once, during arguments between the
woman, Ms. H. would tell the children that their mother was “being a real bitch
today.” In order to avoid Ms. H. when she was in such moods, Ms. B. and the
children hid in the basement.
[43]          
Despite Ms. H.’s assurance that she would bear
the costs of Ms. B. and the children staying with her, Ms. H. communicated to
Ontario Works (OW) the fact that Ms. B. and the children were staying at her
residence.[9]
As a result, the shelter allowance portion of Ms. B.’s OW cheque was, instead,
paid to Ms. H.[10]
and Ms. B. was assessed with having received $3,000.00 that she ought not to
have been paid. She is now indebted to OW in that amount.
[44]          
Ms. H. complained to Ms. B. about her conduct in
the home. To avoid the possibility of Ms. B. using too much electricity, when
Ms. H. left the home she would remove and take with her the fuses which were
necessary for electricity reaching the lights in certain parts of the home,
resulting in Ms. B. and the children not being able to use those areas.[11]
[45]          
According to Ms. B., by March 2024 she had
concluded that she and the children could no longer reside with Ms. H.. In the
final few days preceding Ms. B. leaving the home with the children, Ms. H.’s
moodiness was creating a toxic environment in the home. The altercation between
them on March 25, 2024 was about the manner by which Ms. B. was attempting to
address the children’s crying when put to bed. Police were summoned but no
charges were laid against either party. The following day Ms. B. moved the
children to the shelter in St. Thomas where they were assessed and accepted as
residents.[12]
[46]          
On leaving, Ms. B. had also removed some of the
children’s items from Ms. H.’s residence. A short while later, Ms. B. attempted
to retrieve the balance of the children’s items from Ms. H. but was denied
access to them for a period of two months. Even retrieving the items involved
drama between the women involving Ms. H. changing the agreed-upon retrieval
date,[13] which
led to the loss of Ms. B.’s helpers for the retrieval. The children had to
accompany Ms. B. when the retrieval of their items finally occurred.
[47]          
She called Ms. H.’s description of her
relationship with the children “imagined” and indicated that she did not wish
to expose the children to any more of Ms. H.’s emotional abuse.
[48]          
In responding to some of Ms. H.’s specific
allegations, Ms. B.:
[49]          
She is concerned that, were the children to have
contact with Ms. H. “at this time,” they might be exposed to hostile comments
about her against which she would be unable to insulate them.
[50]          
She also expressed concern about the safety of
the children were they to have contact with Ms. H. at present because of an
event that occurred at the home of Ms. H. in May 2024. Ms. H.’s car was set on
fire in the driveway. The perpetrator is unidentified, his or her motives are
unknown, and the crime remains unsolved.
[51]          
Ms. Coyne submitted that while the degree to
which Ms. H. was involved with the children was in dispute, the fact of her
involvement was not. She submitted that the evidence of Ms. H. clearly
established that she had a substantial and meaningful relationship with the
children which long predated Ms. B.’s termination of contact between them in
March 2024.
[52]          
As evidence of that, she cited the many things
that Ms. H. indicated that she did for the children while they lived with her,
and before. She further noted that Ms. B. was comfortable leaving the children
with Ms. H.. Accordingly, Ms. B. must have considered Ms. H. to be a safe
person to care for the children.
[53]          
Ms. Coyne also acknowledged the occasional
acrimony between the parties which, she said,  clouded their relationship. She
cited there being a cycle of verbal conflict and resolution between the
parties.
[54]          
Ms. Coyne differentiated the cycle of verbal
conflict and resolution that existed between Ms. H. and Ms. B. from a cycle of
violence, which did not exist between them. She pointed to the frequent visits
to Quebec by Ms. H. to visit with Ms. B. and the children, something that she
submitted would not have occurred if violence had existed in the relationship
between Ms. H. and Ms. B.. She suggested that Ms. B. would have avoided her
mother if she was really as abusive as she now claims her mother to be.
[55]          
She said that the main objection raised by Ms. B.
to continued contact between Ms. H. and the children was Ms. H.’s alleged denigration
of Ms. B..
[56]          
She characterized Ms. B.’s evidence as being
full of anger. Her anger, according to Ms. Coyne, caused Ms. B. to minimize Ms.
H.’s role in the lives of the children and her relationships with them, all
contrary to the evidence  up to March 2024, which established that Ms. B. had
no real concerns about Ms. H.’s care of the children.
[57]          
Ms. Coyne lastly noted that the parties had
managed to get along with minimal conflict for a year prior to Ms. B. moving
out with the children in March 2024. This reasonably peaceful coexistence lends
itself, in the submission of Ms. Coyne, to an order for contact between Ms. H.
and the children.
[58]          
Ms. Veenstra submitted that the evidence of Ms. B.,
and her history with her mother,  establish that Ms. H.’s residence was not the
safe haven for the children or Ms. B. that Ms. H. attempts to portray.
[59]          
She pointed to the evidence of Ms. B. about
there being a honeymoon period after she and the children moved in with Ms. H.
in March 2023, but that it did not last long before Ms. H. began to criticize
Ms. B.’s care of the children.
[60]          
She asked me to note, when considering the text
messages produced by Ms. H., that she  produced no text message demonstrating a
positive relationship between her and Ms. B. which was dated after October 1,
2023. Pointing out that Ms. H. could have produced more recent text messages
indicative of a positive relationship between her and Ms. B. if she had wanted
to, Ms. Veenstra submitted that I can reasonably infer that none were produced
because those which came into existence after October 2023 were more likely
indicative of the deteriorating and belittling relationship described by Ms. B.
than the loving relationship claimed by Ms. H..
[61]          
By sometime in the latter months of 2023, the
children were witnesses to the hostility of their grandmother towards their
mother and living in a toxic environment created by Ms. H., in the submission
of Ms. Veenstra.
[62]          
She suggested that, while issues of credibility
between the parties cannot be resolved on a motion, I could reasonably infer that
Ms. H. was attempting to mislead the court when, in her initial affidavit, she
claimed that she allowed Ms. B. and the children to live with her at virtually
no cost. This was because Ms. H. was later compelled to admit, only after Ms. B.
disclosed it, that she was charging Ms. B. rent of $500.00 per month. She
suggested that, in light of Ms. H.’s failure to disclose the payments, I should
carefully scrutinize her evidence on key contentious points.
[63]          
Since this is a motion, I ought not to make
definitive findings of credibility.
[64]          
As an example, Ms. B.’s assertion that the
children were in the hospital for a period of one month after their birth was
contradicted by her text message to Ms. H.. However, while that text message
appears to have undercut Ms. B.’s evidence about the total length of the
children’s stay in the hospital, it did not contradict her assertion that they
were in the neo-natal intensive care unit for two weeks, nor her assertion that
she did not stay with Ms. H. during the middle two weeks of July 2022.  Ms. B.,
of course, had neither an opportunity to respond to the text evidence, or to
explain it.
[65]          
By way of further example, Ms. Veenstra’s
submission that I should carefully scrutinize the evidence of Ms. H. because of
the contradiction between her assertion that she allowed Ms. B. and the
children to live with her free of charge and the fact that she charged Ms. B.
rent of $500.00 per month could equally allow for other conclusions to be drawn,
aside from Ms. H. attempting to mislead the court. While she failed to explain
how she came to be discussing Ms. B.’s residential arrangements with OW, that
discussion appears to have occurred at some point after Ms. B. had been
residing with her for six months. The fact that Ms. B. now owes OW $3,000.00
suggests that she may have been collecting the shelter allowance portion of an
OW payment from the beginning of her stay with Ms. H.. If so, an argument could
be made that Ms. B. was not being forthright with OW, which could impact how
one views her evidence. I do not know because these issues are really
tangential to the key issue on the motion. Assuming that this evidence is
relevant, however, the conclusions to be drawn from it are better left to
trial.
[66]          
Ms. H.’s request for a contact order must be
decided under s. 24 of the Children's Law Reform Act, R.S.O. 1990, s. c.
C. 12, the most relevant subsections of which provide as follows:
[67]          
Before I analyze the facts in this case, it is
appropriate to set out that process by referring to the cases through which it
was developed.
[68]          
In Ninkovic v. Utjesinovic, [2019] O.J.
No. 656, at para. 57, Justice L. Madsen wrote:
[69]          
In Chapman, at para. 21, Justice Abella
had written, on behalf of the panel which heard the appeal in the case:
[70]          
Subsequently, in Giansante v. DiChiara,
2005 CanLII 26446 (ON SC), [2005] O.J. No. 3184, Justice C.S. Nelson, after referring to Chapman and
its resolution in favour of parental autonomy, held that a court “can step in
when a parent has acted in a way that arbitrarily imperils a positive
grandparent-grandchild relationship.” As a result, Justice Nelson reformulated
the Chapman principle to account for such cases, writing at paragraph
18:
[71]          
Justice Nelson’s formulation of the test in Giansante
was further refined by Justice M. Kurz in Torabi v. Patterson, [2016] O.J. No. 1972 (O.C.J.), where he wrote:
[72]          
The trial judge’s utilization of this
formulation of the test in analysing a claim for contact was noted without
adverse comment by the Court of Appeal in B.F. v. A.N., 2024 ONCA 94 (CanLII), [2024] O.J. No. 656 at
footnote 3. Accordingly, I now turn to consider its application.
[73]          
The onus is on Ms. H. to establish that the
answer to this question, like the others, is “yes.”
[74]          
In F.S. v. N.J., 2024 ONCJ 199 (CanLII), [2024] O.J. No. 1792
(O.C.J.), Justice Sherr found that the appropriate time to determine whether a
positive grandparent-grandchild relationship exists is when the parents
terminated the grandparent/child contact. In this case, that was March 2024,
when Ms. B. removed the children from Ms. H.’s home.
[75]          
The evidence establishes to my satisfaction that,
at that time, Ms. H. did have a relationship with her grandchildren. They had
resided with Ms. H. for a year, and had been there on prior occasions, the
number being a matter of dispute between Ms. H. and Ms. B..
[76]          
The real question to be answered is whether that
relationship was positive.
[77]          
In Torabi v. Patterson, at para. 72,
Justice Kurz wrote, citing Sproule v. Sproule, [2012] O.J. No. 6423 (O.C.J.), that
[78]          
Justice Kurz concluded, at para. 88, that “the
legal threshold of a "positive" relationship with the child as
defined above, one that would allow the court to consider superseding its
normal deference to a parent or parents, is necessarily a high one.”
[79]          
In F.S. v. N.J., Justice Sherr wrote:
[80]          
I found much of the evidence of Ms. Hill about
her relationship with the children to be difficult to follow.
[81]          
Firstly, she was often unclear about when she
engaged in some of the activities with the children. For example, her reference
to the activities that she was engaging in with the children around the time of
her delayed return to work in December 2022 clearly related to a time before
Ms. B. and the children were living with her. Other examples of activities in
which she participated with the children did not indicate when they occurred.
[82]          
To that point, she deposed that after December
2022 she returned to work and resumed her attendance in an educational program.
These activities were said to have consumed as much as  12 to 14 hours of her
time per day. Given that evidence, I am left to wonder, when she also described
days during which she seemed to have spent the entire day with the children,
and was apparently the only person providing care for them, when these days
occurred? Were they before or after December 2022? If after, did they occur on
weekends? Were they after March 2023? If before, did they occur in London or
Montreal?
[83]          
These questions are relevant because the focus
of the inquiry is on the quality of the Ms. H.’s relationship with her
grandchildren, and that focus must be from the perspective of the
grandchildren, objectively assessed.
[84]          
In that regard, much of Ms. H.’s evidence, but
not all, seemed to focus not on the quality of her relationship with her
grandchildren but on the quantity of time that she spent with them. Her
recitation of the many things that she claimed to have done with the children
read as if she were listing the items on a to-do list. In many cases, no
reference was made to how the children reacted to her providing such services,
or engaging with them.
[85]          
However, Ms. H. also provided evidence which
suggested to me that there were occasions when she and the children engaged in
activities during which the children displayed affection towards her. I find
that, at least on those occasions, the children viewed positively their
relationship with her. I am referring to such uncontradicted evidence as the
children racing into her bedroom in the morning and jumping on her bed ready to
play with her, singing songs with her, cuddling with or asking to be picked up
by her, waiting for her to return from work, then running up to her for a hug
and a kiss. As to this latter example, Ms. H. did produce a text message from
Ms. B. with a photo of one of the children standing by a window. The text from
Ms. B. read, “[child’s name] says hurry.”
[86]          
I also cannot overlook the fact that the
children did live with their mother and Ms. H. in her home for a continuous
one-year period.
[87]          
Having regard to all of the factors that I have
noted, I find for the purposes of this motion that Ms. H. has established that,
in March 2024, a positive grandparent-grandchild relationship already existed
between her and her grandchildren.
[88]          
The answer to this question is ”yes,” as Ms.
Veenstra conceded would be the case if I were to have found that there was a positive
grandparent-grandchild relationship.
[89]          
The evidence is clear that, since she left Ms. H.’s
residence in March 2024, Ms. B. has not permitted any contact between Ms. H.
and the children. Clearly, her action has imperilled the positive
grandparent-grandchild relationship that I have found to have existed in March
2024.
[90]          
In Giansante v. DiChiara, Justice Nelson
held, at para. 27, that a parent acts arbitrarily when the evidence shows that
his or her decisions about access are based on considerations other than the
best interests of the child.
[91]          
Ms. B. claims that, while things did go well
between her and Ms. H. when she and the children first moved in with her in
March 2023, over time the relationship between the two women deteriorated to
the point that the atmosphere in Ms. H. home became too toxic for the children
to continue to be exposed to it. The toxicity arose from the constant arguments
between the adults, and Ms. H.’s variable moods and constant belittling
comments about Ms. B.’s parenting of the children.
[92]          
Ms. H. claims that Ms. B. constructed the false
narrative that her home is a toxic environment in order to secure speedy
acceptance into the domestic violence shelter.
[93]          
This was a motion brought by a party seeking to
resume what I have found to be a positive relationship with her grandchildren.
One might think that the bulk of her evidence would speak to that issue.
[94]          
Instead, I find that Ms. H., through her lengthy
recitation of the weaknesses and alleged historical negative behaviours of Ms. B.
as a teenager, actually provided evidence which inferentially supported the
claim of Ms. B. that Ms. H. belittled her about her parenting of the children,
and often in their presence.
[95]          
I take as a prime example, the evidence of Ms. H.
that “someone” suggested that the teenaged Ms. B. had Borderline Personality
Disorder. Such a clause should never have been asserted in her affidavit. It is
unattributed, it violates Rule 14(19(a), and it could only have been offered to
cast Ms. B. in a negative light.
[96]          
Worse than that, however, by deposing that Ms. B.
“immediately escalates if even the possibility of her having Borderline
Personality Disorder is mentioned to her ‘calmly and compassionately’” because
her “mental health has deteriorated,” Ms. H. has left it wide open for me to
infer, as I do, that the person who mentions (present tense) to Ms. B. “calmly
and compassionately” that she has Borderline Personality Disorder is Ms. H.. I
ask: why would she do so? What is its relevance to this motion? I conclude that
it is an epithet which Ms. H. has used as a weapon against Ms. B. as a person.
[97]          
Relatedly, I note, again, the use of the present
tense when Ms. H. described Ms. B. as subjecting Ms. H. and her estranged
spouse “to years of verbal and mental abuse since she was 12,” suggesting that
such behaviour continues, at least as Ms. H. sees it and would want the court
to conclude.
[98]          
The same comment can be made about many of Ms. H.’s
negative revelations about Ms. B. as a youth. If she was prepared to put them
in an affidavit, it is not too difficult to conceive that she might also have
hurled them at Ms. B. during arguments between the two – arguments which both
acknowledged occurred on a regular basis.
[99]          
Beyond this, however, I also ask why I would
have been told about an old YCJA charge which may not have resulted in a
conviction? It is not relevant to any issue on the motion.
[100]       Moreover, I find that Ms. H. clearly exaggerated what she sees as
negative parenting by Ms. B.. It is difficult to conceive that she seriously expected
that a court would not conclude that she was being hyperbolic when she deposed
that Ms. B. “avoided the children, laying around on her phone for 10-16 hours a
day, neglecting” them; or that she “did not know how to comfort the children or
distract them;” or that she did not socialize with the girls at mealtimes,
being on her telephone instead; or that she left the children unbathed for
days, or left them in their urine-soaked pyjamas for 12-14 hours.
[101]       If all of this is ultimately found to be true then, surely, Ms. B.
is a poor parent. If so, I would ask why Ms. H. did not do more to protect her
grandchildren from such awful parenting by Ms. B.. Why seek only a contact
order instead of placement of the children in her care? These are questions
that will need to be answered at trial.
[102]       While I have little doubt that Ms. B.’s children are loved by Ms. H.,
her low opinion of her daughter leapt off the pages of her affidavits. That low
opinion was undoubtedly given voice during arguments between them. As a result,
the children were probably exposed to extremely negative comments by Ms. H.
about their mother, including that she is “a bitch.”
[103]       When that occurred, the love that Ms. H. feels for her grandchildren
was clearly overwhelmed by  her anger towards Ms. B.. It is not in the
children’s best interests to be exposed to such an environment.
[104]       Moreover, merely removing Ms. B. from the contact equation would not
suffice because Ms. H. has shown herself to be unable to isolate the children
from her feelings about their mother. Ms. B.’s absence would be no guarantee
that Ms. H. would not find some parenting deficiency about which to comment to
the children.
[105]       In Chapman, the Court of Appeal allowed an appeal from a
ruling that permitted a grandmother to have continued contact with her
grandchildren. Among the findings by the trial court were that there was an
element of “unfortunate” conflict between the parents and the paternal
grandmother, described by the trial judge as a "strong-willed
woman who is used to having her own way." There was also evidence that the
grandmother constantly interfered in the lives of the parents.
[106]       In Nichols v. Herdman, 2015 CarswellOnt 9262, Justice Suzanne
Stevenson found that a parental decision to end grandparent contact was not
arbitrary in circumstances where there were “longstanding problems in the
relationship” between the grandmother and her daughter, the child’s mother.
Justice Stevenson found that the grandparents had regularly raised questions
about how their granddaughter was being parented by the parents. When the
parents announced that they were moving, the grandparents overreacted and a
large argument ensued.
[107]       As Justice Stevenson wrote, at para. 62, about the parents’ right to
make the decision to move:
[108]       Is this much different than Ms. B.’s decision as a parent to try to
address the  children’s crying at bedtime in a manner not approved of by Ms. H.,
who clearly thought that she knew better than Ms. B.? It is not.
[109]       Justice Stevenson questioned whether whatever the parents in the
case before her decided about matters concerning their daughter would ever be
acceptable to the grandparents. Again, I do not see a difference from the facts
of this case, given Ms. H.’s obviously low opinion of her daughter.
[110]       As Justice Nelson wrote at para. 30 of Giansante, “There
will, of course, be circumstances in which a conflict between grandparents and
parents is such that it will inevitably have an adverse impact on the
children.”
[111]       This is one of those cases. I find, for the purposes of this motion
that, on the totality of the evidence, Ms. B. did not act arbitrarily in
terminating Ms. H.’s contact with her grandchildren.
[112]       As Justice Sherr wrote at para. 119 in F.S. v. N.J., a
decision to not allow grandparent contact by means of an order “does not
necessarily mean the…grandmother…will never have a relationship with the
[children].”
[113]       Because of this decision, Ms. H. is not granted a specific right to
contact with her granddaughters. That is up to Ms. B., as their mother. As she
deposed, she does not want the children to have contact with Ms. H. at this
time.
[114]       As I noted during submissions, these women have a love/hate
relationship. For all I know, by this time they may have reconciled. If they
have not, I suggest that they both take the time to reflect on their
relationship and try to address their issues before the children have further
contact with Ms. H..
[115]       Given the state of affairs between the parties, I find that to order
costs against Ms. H. would likely only exacerbate the currently negative
relationship between them. I decline to do so.