[1]              
The defendants move for summary judgment in this defamation action,
alleging that there is no genuine issue requiring a trial on the question of
whether the alleged defamatory statements were made.
[2]              
The plaintiff is the uncle of the defendants, who are his nephews, and are
first cousins of one another. Because two of the parties share the same last
name, I refer to the plaintiff as “the plaintiff” in these reasons. I refer to
the defendants as Mr. Alli and Dr. Shakur.
[3]              
The statement of claim pleads four categories of defamatory statements:
(i) an alleged statement in 2013 whereby Dr. Shakur is alleged to have called
the plaintiff a rapist; (ii) an alleged text message sent by Dr. Shakur to Mr.
Alli in which Dr. Shakur is alleged to have communicated that the plaintiff had
raped a member of their family; (iii) an alleged statement by Mr. Alli to the
plaintiff’s sister, Bibi Nazeeman Mohamed (“Bibi Mohamed”) repeating the
alleged text message; and (iv) “other false and defamatory statements” which Dr.
Shakur and/or Mr. Alli are alleged to have made to other members of the
plaintiff’s family and the community at large accusing the plaintiff of
sexually assaulting various individuals, including members of the plaintiff’s
family.
[4]              
The plaintiff has now narrowed his allegations. He is not pursuing his
claim for the alleged 2013 statement, nor the alleged “other false and
defamatory statements.” This claim thus concentrates on: (i) whether Dr. Shakur
defamed the plaintiff in a text sent to Mr. Alli; and (ii) whether Mr. Alli
defamed the plaintiff by repeating the contents of the alleged text to Bibi
Mohamed in a telephone call.
[5]              
At the same time as the plaintiff commenced this action, he commenced a
second action against Mr. Alli and Mr. Alli’s mother, who is also the
plaintiff’s sister-in-law, Bibi Nesha Rahamatun Alli (“Mrs. Alli”), also in
defamation (the “second action”). In the second action, he claims that Mrs.
Alli made false and defamatory statements about him on August 1, 2021, to the
effect that he had sexually assaulted her on two occasions. He alleges these
statements were made to persons including Mr. Alli, the plaintiff’s siblings,
including his brother and Mrs. Alli’s husband, Ashraf Alli (who I refer to by
his full name in these reasons), and other members of the plaintiff’s family.
[6]              
In the second action, he also alleges that either Mrs. Alli or Mr. Alli
sent a false and defamatory email to the plaintiff’s siblings from Ashraf
Alli’s email account accusing the plaintiff of sexually assaulting Mrs. Alli
once, and attempting to do so on other occasions.
[7]              
The plaintiff further pleads that Mrs. Alli and/or Mr. Alli have made
other false and defamatory statements about him to other individuals, including
other members of the plaintiff’s family and the community at large, accusing
him of sexually assaulting others, including other members of his family.
[8]              
At this juncture, I note that the evidence is that, on August 1, 2021,
Ashraf Alli was ill with brain cancer, and was having difficulty communicating
due to throat problems he was having as a result of chemotherapy and medication.
On that day, his wife, Mrs. Alli, told him that she had been sexually assaulted
by his brother, the plaintiff, in the past. The evidence indicates that Ashraf
Alli told some of his siblings (who are also the plaintiff’s siblings) what his
wife had said. At this point in time, Ashraf Alli’s condition was making his
communication difficult, so some of what he conveyed was done through Mr. Alli,
who was asked to speak on the phone with Mrs. Mohamed and convey to her what
Ashraf Alli was saying about the plaintiff.
[9]              
Mrs. Alli and Mr. Alli defended the second action. Mrs. Alli also
counterclaimed against the plaintiff for damages arising out of the plaintiff’s
alleged sexual assault of Mrs. Alli. In his reply pleading, the plaintiff
admits having a sexual relationship with Mrs. Alli, but alleges it was
consensual.
[10]          
The defendants in this action move for summary judgment on a relatively
narrow point. They argue that there is no genuine issue requiring a trial
regarding the question of whether the alleged defamatory text was sent, or
repeated. They argue that the evidence allows me to conclude that the
statements were never made. As a result, they seek a summary dismissal of the
claim.
[11]          
This motion raises the following issues for determination:
[12]          
The defendants also raised the question of whether there was a genuine
issue requiring a trial on the issue of whether the plaintiff suffered any
damages. I have not considered this issue in any detail. In Park Lawn
Corporation v. Kahu Capital Partners Ltd., 2023 ONCA 129, at para. 47, the
Court of Appeal, quoting from Bent v. Platnik, 2020 SCC 23, at para.
144, held that general damages are presumed in defamation actions. Accordingly,
the lack of evidence of actual harm suffered by the plaintiff does not justify
a summary dismissal of the claim.
[13]          
In Hyrniak v. Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7, the Supreme Court of Canada
heralded a culture shift in civil litigation to create an environment promoting
timely and affordable access to the civil justice system: Hyrniak, at
para. 2.
[14]          
It concluded that summary judgment is appropriate when there is no
genuine issue requiring trial, which will be the case “when the judge is able
to reach a fair and just determination on the merits on a motion for summary
judgment.” To reach a fair and just determination on the merits, the process
must: (i) allow the judge to make the necessary findings of fact; (ii) allow
the judge to apply the law to the facts; and (iii) be a proportionate, more
expeditious and less expensive means to achieve a just result: Hyrniak,
at para. 49.
[15]          
The Court noted that r. 20.02(2.2) of the Rules of Civil Procedure,
R.R.O. Reg. 194, gives the motion judge the power to hear oral evidence to
assist her in making findings under r. 20.02(2.1), which include weighing the
evidence, evaluating the credibility of a deponent, and drawing any reasonable
inference from the evidence. It held that the power to hear oral evidence
should be employed when it allows the judge to reach a fair and just
adjudication on the merits and it is the proportionate course of action. The
Court noted this is more likely to be the case when the oral evidence required
is limited: Hryniak, at para. 63.
[16]          
At paragraph 62 of Hryniak, the Court endorsed the guidelines that
had been articulated by the Court of Appeal; the power to hear oral evidence
should be exercised when:
[17]          
The Court described the approach to a motion for summary judgment,
concluding that the judge should first determine if there is a genuine issue
requiring a trial based on the only evidence before her, without using the new
fact-finding powers in r. 20.02. If it appears that there is a genuine issue
requiring a trial, the motion judge should determine if the need for a trial
can be avoided by using the powers in r. 20.02 (2.1) and (2.2). The judge may
exercise her discretion to use those powers provided their use is not against
the interests of justice. The use of the powers in r. 20.02(2.1) and (2.2) will
not be against the interest of justice “if they will lead to a fair and just
result and will serve the goals of timeliness, affordability and
proportionality in light of the litigation as a whole”: Hryniak, at
para. 66.
[18]          
On a summary judgment motion, the judge is entitled to assume that each
party has put their best foot forward, and there is no additional evidence that
will be adduced at trial that has not been adduced on the motion: Mazza v.
Ornge Corporate Services Inc., 2016 ONCA 753, at para. 9; Broadgrain
Commodities Inc. v. Continental Casualty Company, 2018 ONCA 438, at para.
7.
[19]          
In this case, before the motion was returned before me, I read the
entirety of the record, including the entirety of each transcript of
cross-examination that was filed. I heard counsel’s arguments on why summary
judgment was, or was not, appropriate.
[20]          
As I describe in greater detail in my analysis below, in his evidence, Dr.
Shakur denies sending Mr. Alli a text in which he called the plaintiff a
rapist. Mr. Alli denies receiving such a text from Dr. Shakur. No text has been
produced. No person deposes to ever having seen such a text.
[21]          
Mr. Alli denies telling Mrs. Mohamed that he had received a text from Dr.
Shakur in which Dr. Shakur called the plaintiff a rapist. Mrs. Mohamed states
that he did tell her he had received such a text. Mrs. Mohamed never saw any
such text message.
[22]          
Mr. Alli gave evidence about a telephone call with Mrs. Mohamed, which I
reference briefly above. This call occurred when his father, Ashraf Alli, who
was then ill with brain cancer and had difficulty communicating, had just
learned from his wife, Mrs. Alli, that the plaintiff had allegedly sexually
assaulted her. Mr. Alli says his father asked him to communicate what he was
saying to Mrs. Mohamed over the phone, and that during this call, Ashraf Alli
said something about a text message, but it had nothing to do with Dr. Shakur
or Mr. Alli; he did not know what it was about.
[23]          
Mrs. Mohamed gave evidence that there was a phone call between her and
Mr. Alli on August 1, 2021, right after Ashraf Alli learned of Mrs. Alli’s
allegations of sexual assault. She testified that there was a second call
between her and Mr. Alli on August 3, 2021, when she states Mr. Alli told her
about the text message.
[24]          
At the end of the hearing, I concluded that I could not determine the
summary judgment motion without using the fact-finding powers in r. 20.04(2.1)
and (2.2). I concluded there was a limited credibility contest between Mr. Alli
and Mrs. Mohamed about whether there had been any discussion between them about
the alleged text message from Dr. Shakur to Mr. Alli. I concluded that the need
for a trial could well be avoided by hearing oral evidence from those two
witnesses on that discrete issue, and that the evidence on the issue could have
significant impact on whether the summary judgment motion is granted. I was
able to return the parties for a hearing at which the evidence could be led
within less than a month.
[25]          
Accordingly, I advised the parties that I would exercise my discretion
to hear oral evidence from Mr. Alli and Mrs. Mohamad about the telephone
conversation(s) they may have had between August 1, 2023 and August 3, 2023,
during which time Mrs. Mohamad alleges, and Mr. Alli denies, that Mr. Alli
repeated the content of the alleged text message sent to Mr. Alli by Dr. Shakur.
[26]          
I heard that evidence on December 11, 2024. Having heard the evidence, I
am in a position to exercise the expanded fact-finding powers in r. 20.04(2.1)
to make determinations of credibility.
[27]          
 I am of the view that the defendants have proven that summary judgment
is appropriate in this case. There is no genuine issue requiring a trial. The
defendants have proven that no text message exists, and that no discussion
between Mr. Alli and Ms. Mohamed occurred about the alleged text message.
[28]          
Below, I explain why I reach this conclusion on the evidence. First, I
address the plaintiff’s argument that summary judgment is not appropriate due
to the overlap in the issues between this action and the second action.
[29]          
The plaintiff argued that the issues in this action overlap
substantially with the issues in the second action, such that summary judgment
in this action would be, in effect, partial summary judgment, and risk
inconsistent findings of fact and inefficient use of judicial resources, given
that the second action is continuing.
[30]          
I reject this argument.
[31]          
First, the plaintiff (through previous counsel) commenced two separate
actions involving one common defendant arising out of different alleged
defamatory statements[1]
in which he claims he was called a rapist. He had the option of commencing a
single action, but he deliberately chose not to.
[32]          
Second, on September 12, 2023, I ordered a timetable in this action to
bring this motion to a hearing. It has now been well over a year, and the
plaintiff has not moved to consolidate the two actions or take any steps to
have them heard together. While the plaintiff indicated in oral argument that
it was obvious such a step would be taken, I am left wondering why, if it is so
obvious, it has not already been done.
[33]          
The plaintiff chose to commence two actions. He chose to defend this
motion having taken no steps to consolidate the two actions. He cannot rely on
his own choices to claim summary judgment is not appropriate in this case. The
plaintiff has to live with his choices. The impact, if any, of any findings I
make in these reasons on the second action will be a matter to be sorted out in
that action.
[34]          
I now turn to consider whether there is a genuine issue requiring a
trial with respect to the existence of (i) the alleged text message, or (ii)
the alleged repetition of the alleged text message.
[35]          
The plaintiff alleges in his statement of claim that Dr. Shakur sent Mr.
Alli a text message in May or June of 2019 in which he claimed that the
plaintiff had sexually assaulted a member of his own family.
[36]          
The defendants served a demand for particulars, in which the plaintiff was
asked to identify particulars of the text message and to whom it was sent. The
plaintiff’s response indicated that the “particulars of the text message are
within the knowledge of the defendants and not of the plaintiff. The text
message was repeated to [Mrs. Mohamed].”
[37]          
Dr. Shakur denies sending such a text message.
[38]          
Mr. Alli denies receiving such a text message.
[39]          
Mr. Alli gave evidence that between May 2019 and August 2021, he did not
recall any texts from Dr. Shakur. He said that there may have been a text
message along the lines of “how’s the family,” in that period of time, because
they had “kind of rekindled [their] relationship” around then, but that they
were not very close. They had not had a relationship in 10 years, and had
texted perhaps no more than five times during the period in question. The text
messages started when Ashraf Alli was diagnosed with cancer, and Dr. Shakur
reached out to say he was sorry to hear about the news.
[40]          
Dr. Shakur’s evidence about his communication with Mr. Alli was broadly
consistent. He said that from 2013 to 2020, when his grandfather died, he did
not text with Mr. Alli at all. After 2020, his text messages with Mr. Alli were
“sporadic.” He described them as “condolences when the grandfather passed away.
Birthday invitations occasionally.”
[41]          
In answers to undertakings, Dr. Shakur and Mr. Alli each confirmed they
have no text messages between themselves for a period from 2020 to August 2021.
[42]          
The plaintiff has never seen the alleged text message. Although the
plaintiff pleads the alleged text message was sent in May or June 2019, during
his cross-examination, he insisted that the alleged text message was sent after
he sent a What’s App message to a family group that was formed to discuss
prayers for a recently-deceased family member on June 23, 2020. In the What’s
App chat, the plaintiff writes (errors in original):
[43]          
The reference to “the doctor” is a reference to Dr. Shakur. The
reference to the Shakur family, and Dr. Shakur’s former spouse appears to be
out of place in the group chat. According to the plaintiff, Dr. Shakur was
angry about the comment in the group chat and it was after reading it that he
sent the alleged text to Mr. Alli. There is absolutely no evidence to support
this theory which, as I have noted, is inconsistent with the plaintiff’s
pleading.
[44]          
The only evidence that the text message exists comes from Mrs. Mohamed, who
deposes that on August 3, 2021, Mr. Alli told her during a phone conversation
that he had received a text message from Dr. Shakur which stated that the
plaintiff had raped some member of the family, and that he said he had received
the text message two years earlier, before the What’s App message. She then
telephoned the plaintiff and told her what Mr. Alli had said about the text
message. She has never seen the text message.
[45]          
To the extent that the plaintiff seeks to rely on Mrs. Mohamed’s
evidence that Dr. Shakur sent a text message to Mr. Alli calling the plaintiff
a rapist, it is hearsay. It is inadmissible for proof of the truth of its
contents unless an exception to the hearsay rule applies.
[46]          
The plaintiff argued at the hearing that hearsay was admissible in the
discretion of the court. That is not the test to admit hearsay. I asked the
plaintiff to address the necessity and reliability of the statement. The
argument boiled down to this: Mrs. Mohamed’s evidence is necessary because the
defendants are not telling the truth. And the defendants are not reliable
witnesses on the topic of the text, except, apparently, Mr. Alli at the time he
first allegedly disclosed the text to Mrs. Mohamed.
[47]          
The hearsay evidence of Mrs. Mohamed is not necessary. The alleged sender
and alleged receiver of the text have given evidence, including on
cross-examination, that the text was neither sent nor received. They have
searched their phones and confirmed they have no such text message. Hearsay is
not an alternative proof strategy for a plaintiff who cannot find other
evidence despite the actual and best sources of evidence being available.
[48]          
There is no admissible evidence before me to prove the existence of a
text message in which the plaintiff is called a rapist. However, there is
evidence, from Mr. Alli, Dr. Shakur, and the search of their telephones, that
no such text was ever sent or received. I find that no text was sent by Dr.
Shakur to Mr. Alli in which Dr. Shakur called the plaintiff a rapist. The
action against Dr. Shakur is thus dismissed.
[49]          
Even though there was never any text, it is possible that Mr. Alli could
have made a defamatory statement about the plaintiff to Mrs. Mohamed if he told
her about a (non-existent) text message in which the plaintiff was called a
rapist. I must thus consider whether the allegation that Mr. Alli made a
defamatory statement by telling Ms. Mohamed about the alleged text raises a
genuine issue requiring a trial.
[50]          
In oral cross-examinations, both Mrs. Mohamed and Mr. Alli gave evidence
that was inconsistent with their prior evidence, but in minor ways that reflect
the frailty of human memory rather than any serious credibility or reliability
concerns.
[51]          
However, the transcript of Mrs. Mohamed’s cross-examination raises
serious concerns about her objectivity as a witness. While certain that Mr.
Alli had told her about the alleged text message, and equally certain that the
plaintiff had not sexually assaulted Mrs. Alli, Mrs. Mohamed was much more
circumspect about problematic conduct the plaintiff had clearly engaged in.
[52]          
For example, when asked about his allegedly consensual sexual relations
with Mrs. Alli, Mrs. Mohamed first suggested she did not know when the plaintiff
had had sex with Mrs. Alli, but perhaps it was before her marriage to Ashraf
Alli. When reminded that the plaintiff’s own pleading admits that the sexual
relations took place during the marriage of Mrs. Alli and Ashraf Alli, she
raised questions about who initiated the relations. Then, when asked if she
believed that the plaintiff had consensual sexual relations with Mrs. Alli,
Mrs. Mohamed said “That, I can’t say. I’d have to know more about it.”
[53]          
Then, when asked about the timing of the alleged text message, and the
plaintiff’s What’s App message about the “Shakur family,” and the happy ex-wife
of “the doctor,” she acknowledged she was part of the What’s App group chat.
When shown the message from the plaintiff, she testified she was not sure
whether the “Shakur family” was Dr. Shakur’s family, although there is no
suggestion it could be another Shakur family. When her attention was drawn to
the comment about the ex-wife, Mrs. Mohamed claimed not to know who the
plaintiff meant by “the doctor,” when it is apparent on its face that the
comment referred to Dr. Shakur. The plaintiff’s own evidence is to that effect.
[54]          
Mrs. Mohamed was an apologist for the plaintiff having engaged in sexual
relations (whether consensual or not) with their brother’s wife, suggested it
was Mrs. Alli who initiated those relations, and claimed not to know who the
plaintiff was talking about when asked about the plaintiff’s mean-spirited
comment about Dr. Shakur. Mrs. Mohamed’s evidence on these points was not
credible. She did not demonstrate herself to be an impartial witness in her
cross-examination transcript.
[55]          
Where Ms. Mohamed’s evidence conflicts with Mr. Alli’s evidence, I
prefer the evidence of Mr. Alli. His evidence did not raise the credibility
concerns I noted in Ms. Mohamed’s evidence.
[56]          
I conclude that Ashraf Alli made reference to a text message in the conversation
he and Mr. Alli had with Ms. Mohamed on August 1, 2024, during the conversation
where Mrs. Alli’s allegations of sexual assault against the plaintiff were
discussed. Ms. Mohamed is mistaken in her belief that a text message accusing
the plaintiff of sexual assault was discussed during the conversation she had
with Mr. Alli on August 3, 2024.
[57]          
Because I find that Mr. Alli never made the alleged defamatory
statement, I dismiss the claim against Mr. Alli.
[58]          
At my direction, by the hearing of the motion, the parties had uploaded
their bills of costs and relevant offers to settle. I proposed to counsel that,
once I had written my reasons on the merits, I would review the bills of costs
and the offers to settle, and determine costs without further submissions. The
parties were agreeable. That is the process I have followed.
[59]          
The three main purposes of modern costs rules are to indemnify
successful litigants for the costs of litigation, to encourage settlement, and
to discourage and sanction inappropriate behaviour by litigants: see Fong v.
Chan (1999), 1999 CanLII 2052 (ON CA), 46 O.R. (3d) 330, at para. 22.
[60]          
Subject to the provisions of an act or the rules of this court, costs
are in the discretion of the court, pursuant to s. 131 of the Courts of
Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43. The court exercises its discretion
considering the factors enumerated in r. 57.01 of the Rules of Civil
Procedure, including the principle of indemnity, the reasonable
expectations of the unsuccessful party, and the complexity and importance of
the issues. Overall, costs must be fair and reasonable: see Boucher v.
Public Accountants Council for the Province of Ontario (2004), 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R. (3d)
291 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 38. A costs award should reflect what the court views
as a fair and reasonable contribution by the unsuccessful party to the
successful party rather than any exact measure of the actual costs to the
successful litigant: see Zesta Engineering Ltd. v. Cloutier (2002), 2002 CanLII 25577 (ON CA), 21 C.C.E.L.
(3d) 161 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 4.
[61]          
The defendants are the successful parties on the motion and are
presumptively entitled to their costs of the motion and the action.
[62]          
The costs outline filed by the defendants in respect of the action and
the motion supports all-inclusive costs on a partial indemnity basis including
HST of $33,104.47, or costs on a substantial indemnity scale, of $48,325.57. of
which $2,662.27 are disbursements.
[63]          
The costs outline filed by the plaintiff supports all-inclusive partial
indemnity costs of $24,101.92, or substantial indemnity costs of $34,636.18, of
which $2,913.40 are disbursements
[64]          
The parties each made offers to settle. The plaintiff sought apologies
and payment of damages. His offer is not relevant to costs.
[65]          
The defendants delivered two offers to settle. The first, dated August
18, 2022, was for a dismissal without costs, available for thirty days, and
thereafter, a dismissal with costs on a substantial indemnity basis. On October
28, 2024, the defendants made a further offer, for a dismissal of the action
with costs of the motion and the action on a partial indemnity basis in the
amount of $22,230 plus HST and disbursements of $2,392 plus HST. Both offers
were r. 49 offers. The first was replaced by the second, but can still be
considered under r. 49.13.
[66]          
In my view, the defendants have beaten their offers to settle. The
plaintiff would have been better off to take the first offer when it was made,
or the second offer when it was made, before additional costs were incurred at
the hearing of the motion.
[67]          
Unfortunately, counsel’s costs outline does not break out what fees was
incurred after the commencement of the action, on February 2, 2022, up until
the date of the first offer. I conclude that the bulk of the fees were incurred
after the first offer. In my view, although the first offer must be considered
under r. 49.13 rather than r. 49.10, it is just to award substantial indemnity
costs from that point forward.
[68]          
In determining the quantum of costs that is fair and reasonable, I note
that the defendants’ costs are significantly higher than the plaintiff’s costs,
and conclude that the costs claimed by the defendants are outside of the
reasonable expectations of the plaintiff.
[69]          
The litigation was important to all parties. It was not particularly
complex. The defendants approached the issues in a focused manner, which
resulted in an efficient resolution to the action. No party acted improperly in
the litigation.
[70]          
Considering these factors, I fix the defendants’ costs at $30,000, to be
paid by the plaintiff to the defendants within thirty days.