[1]              
This Endorsement addresses costs on the motion
for default judgment brought by the Defendant Joseph Gavin Briggs in respect of
his counterclaim. Mr. Briggs was successful in his motion and was granted $45,285.00
in damages, plus pre-judgment interest and disbursements. I subsequently
invited the parties to provide submissions on costs. I have now reviewed both
parties’ submissions.
[2]              
In exercising my discretion
to fix costs under s. 131 of the Courts of Justice Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c C.43, I may consider the factors enumerated in Rule 57.01 of the
Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg 194.
Those factors include the result achieved, the amounts claimed and recovered,
the complexity and importance of the issues in the proceeding, the principle of
indemnity, the reasonable expectations of the unsuccessful party, and any other
matter relevant to costs.
[3]              
In the recent case of Apotex Inc. v. Eli
Lilly Canada Inc., 2022 ONCA 587, the Court of Appeal for Ontario restated
the general principles to be applied when
courts exercise their discretion to award costs.
The Court held that, when assessing costs,
a court is to undertake a critical examination of the relevant
factors, as applied
to the costs claimed, and then “step back and consider the result
produced and question whether, in all the circumstances, the result is fair and
reasonable” (at para. 60). The overarching objective is to fix an amount for costs that is objectively reasonable, fair, and proportionate for the unsuccessful party to pay in the
circumstances of the case, rather than to fix an amount based on the actual costs.
[4]              
Applying these principles here, I note that Mr.
Briggs was entirely successful in his motion for default judgment. He recovered
approximately $45,000.00 in damages, including aggravated and punitive damages.
Mr. Alessandro’s conduct, which included evading service, not attending at scheduled
court dates, and generally acting in an obstructive manner, undoubtedly
increased the costs of the litigation over a period of many years. In addition,
in my Reasons for Decision granting default judgment, I found that Mr.
Alessandro abused Mr. Briggs’ trust “on repeated occasions” by purporting to
provide legal advice he was not qualified to give, acting in contravention of
Mr. Briggs’ instructions, and lying to Mr. Briggs about having done so. I found
that Mr. Alessandro “used his knowledge of the court system to defraud” Mr.
Briggs and others “for his own gain”. All these factors support granting a
costs award in Mr. Briggs’ favour.
[5]              
It is clear at law that costs may be awarded
even where counsel has acted pro bono (1465778
Ontario Inc. v. 1122077 Ontario Ltd., 2006
CanLII 35819 (ONCA), at para. 35). In my view, important policy
considerations support this approach. As this court
recently held in Bocchini v. Attorney General of Canada, 2024 ONSC
4181 (at para. 100), allowing costs awards in cases where counsel work pro
bono “ensures that all parties know they are not free to abuse the system
without fear of the sanction” of an adverse costs award. It also “promotes
access to justice by enabling and encouraging more lawyers to volunteer to work
pro bono in deserving cases.” In my view, both of these principles apply
in this case and underscore the appropriateness of a costs award.
[6]              
I award Mr. Briggs his costs in the amount of
$15,000.00, inclusive of HST. I consider this to be a fair and reasonable
amount for Mr. Alessandro to pay. He is to pay this amount within 30 days.