[1]              
This is an application to interpret the last will and testament of
Eleanor Martha Devonport, dated October 15, 1997. Eleanor died on July 17, 2022.
[2]              
In her will, Eleanor gifted a residential property to her son, Peter
Devonport. Peter was Catherine Devonport’s spouse. He predeceased his mother,
Eleanor.
[3]              
Catherine argues that the property passed to her by operation of the
anti-lapse provision in s. 31 of the Succession Law Reform Act, R.S.O.
1990, c. S.26.
[4]              
Nancy Devonport – Eleanor’s only surviving child – disagrees. Nancy
argues that Eleanor expressed the contrary intention in her will, and so the
anti-lapse provision does not apply. She argues that the gift lapsed and the
property became part of the residue of Eleanor’s estate, to which Nancy is
entitled.
[5]              
This is a paradigm case of the operation of the anti-lapse provision. I
conclude that Eleanor’s will is clear and unambiguous. Interpreted from the
time the will was made, Eleanor intended to bequeath Peter the property “absolutely”.
No contrary intention appears in the will that ousts s. 31 of the Act. Thus, by
virtue of its operation, the property passed to Catherine and did not lapse
into the residue of Eleanor’s estate.
[6]              
Eleanor’s will was probated and a certificate of appointment as estate
trustee with a will was issued to Nancy on March 17, 2023. Nancy is the estate
trustee and sole remaining beneficiary of Eleanor’s estate.
[7]              
Catherine is the estate trustee and sole beneficiary of Peter’s estate. Catherine
and Peter did not have any children.
[8]              
The property in dispute is a residential triplex on Hopewell Avenue in
Ottawa. The Hopewell property was originally owned by Peter and Nancy’s
grandfather. Following his death, title was transferred to Peter and Nancy’s
father, Lorne Devonport. Lorne died on July 1, 2005 and title was transferred
to Eleanor.
[9]              
Peter and Catherine moved into the second-floor apartment of the
Hopewell property in 1976, a few years after they married. They paid rent to
Lorne, and then to Eleanor. Catherine remained in the apartment following
Peter’s death and continued to pay rent.
[10]          
Eleanor also owned another property on Apeldoorn Avenue in Ottawa, which
she left to Nancy in her will. In April 2018, while Eleanor was alive, Nancy,
in her capacity as Eleanor’s attorney for property, sold the Apeldoorn Property
to a third party for $770,000.00. The proceeds of sale were used in part to
assist in Eleanor’s care. I infer from Nancy’s application for a certificate of
appointment of estate trustee with a will that the remaining value of the
estate, excluding the Hopewell property, is around $301,130 at the time of the
application.
[11]          
Nancy moved into the main floor apartment of the Hopewell property in
2019.
[12]          
The following issues arise on this application:
[13]          
In the analysis below, I consider the anti-lapse provision in s. 31 of
the Act, the general principles applicable to interpreting a will, and then I apply
them to Eleanor’s will. Having concluded that the Hopewell property passes to
Catherine, I consider the ancillary issues raised on the application.
[14]          
The main issue on this application is whether the anti-lapse provision in
s. 31 of the Act applies to the gift of the Hopewell property to Peter,
preventing it from lapsing into the residue of Eleanor’s estate.
[15]          
At common law, when a gift is made through a will to a beneficiary who
dies before the testator, the gift fails and “lapses” into the residue of the
estate. In Ontario, the Legislature enacted an anti-lapse provision to prevent
the gift from lapsing. Section 31, the anti-lapse provision, provides:
[16]          
The opening words of s. 31 allow the testator to oust the operation of
the anti-lapse provision by expressing a contrary intention in their will.
[17]          
The court’s task in interpreting a will is to determine the testator’s
actual or subjective intention as to how she intended to dispose of her
property: Ross v. Canada Trust Company, 2021 ONCA 161, 458 D.L.R. (4th)
39, at para. 36; Trezzi v. Trezzi, 2019 ONCA 978, 150 O.R. (3d) 663, at
para. 13.
[18]          
To ascertain the testator’s intentions at the time that the will was
made, the court must interpret the entire will – not just the disputed
provisions. In doing so, the court considers the surrounding facts and
circumstances – this is known as the “armchair rule”: Ross, at para. 38;
Trezzi, at para. 13; Re Burke, 1959 CanLII 113 (ON CA), [1960] O.R. 26 (C.A.), at p. 30. The
court “assumes the same knowledge the testator had, at the time of making the
will, in regard to the nature and extent of her assets, the makeup of her
family, and her relationship to its members”: Ross, at para. 39.
[19]          
At one time, courts only considered the surrounding circumstances when the
testator’s intention could not be ascertained from the plain meaning of the
will’s language. But now, the Court of Appeal has recognized the armchair rule
as the over-arching framework within which the court applies the various tools
for will construction: Ross, at paras. 40-41.
[20]          
How does one ascertain the testator’s intentions? The starting point is
that that the primary evidence of a testator’s intention is the will itself.  In
considering evidence external to the will, a distinction is drawn between
direct extrinsic evidence about the testator’s intentions and indirect extrinsic
evidence of surrounding circumstances. The two should not be conflated. See generally
Kurt v. Kurt and Sullivan, 2023 ONSC 6599, at paras. 30-34.
[21]          
Direct extrinsic evidence from third parties about the testator’s
intentions is generally inadmissible: Rudaczyk Estate v. Ukrainian
Evangelical Baptist Assn. of Eastern Canada (1989), 1989 CanLII 4129 (ON SC), 69 O.R. (2d) 613 (H.C.),
per Watt J. (as he then was); Stafford Estate v. Thissen, [1996] O.J.
No. 1957 (Gen. Div.), per LaForme J. (as he then was). In Rudaczyk, Justice
Watt approved of the following statement of principle, at p. 618, from p. 55 of
Thomas G. Feeney, The Canadian Law of Wills, 2nd ed, vol. 2 (Toronto:
Butterworths, 1982):
[22]          
There are exceptions to the general principle: Kurt, at para. 34.
One exception is that evidence of intent in the form of the testator’s
instructions to the solicitor who drafted her will may be admissible to
establish a drafting error, but only when the solicitor admits to the drafting
error: Kurt, at paras. 35, 46-48.
[23]          
By contrast to direct extrinsic evidence of the testator’s intentions, indirect
extrinsic evidence of surrounding circumstances is admissible: Ross, at
para. 38. The latter evidence includes “the character and occupation of the
testator, the amount, extent and condition of his property and the number,
identity and general relationship of immediate family and relatives to the
testator”: Marion v. Marion Estate (2009), 49 E.T.R. (3d) 128 (Ont.
S.C.),  at para. 26; see also Kurt, at para. 31.
[24]          
Nancy argues that the anti-lapse provision does not apply because
Eleanor’s will manifested a contrary intention, which she says is expressed
through the following:
[25]          
Eleanor’s intentions are clear and unambiguous.
[26]          
Had Lorne not predeceased Eleanor, he would have inherited the whole of
Eleanor’s estate, absolutely, under clause 3(d) of the will, “Residuary Estate
to Spouse”. But Eleanor also contemplated the eventuality that Lorne would
predecease her. Eleanor’s will addresses this eventuality through the following
two clauses: the “Alternative Transfer of Property” clause (3(e)) and the
“Alternate Residuary Estate for Issue” clause (3(f)). The former gifts two
specific real properties; the latter addresses the disposition of the residue
of her estate.
[27]          
The Alternative Transfer of Property clause provides:
[28]          
The Alternate Residuary Estate for Issue clause provides:
[29]          
Peter was to receive the Hopewell property “absolutely” and Nancy was to
receive the Apeldoorn property “absolutely”.
[30]          
Peter and Nancy were also to receive an equal share of
the residue of Eleanor’s estate, from which Eleanor
excluded the Hopewell and Apeldoorn properties. She did so through the language
“my trustees shall, subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph 3(e) above,
divide my residuary estate into two (2) equal shares…” (emphasis added).
[31]          
Eleanor turned her mind to what
would happen if one or the other of her children predeceased her. In doing so,
Eleanor treated the specific bequests of the Hopewell and Apeldoorn properties
differently than the residue of her estate. If either Peter or Nancy predeceased Eleanor
and did not leave any issue surviving Eleanor, then his or her share of the
residue of the estate was to be paid to Eleanor’s remaining surviving child. But
Eleanor did not make the same disposition in relation to the Hopewell and
Apeldoorn properties. This supports the interpretation that Eleanor did not
intend the Hopewell property to go to Nancy if Peter predeceased Eleanor.
[32]          
Nancy argues that there are two provisions that manifest a contrary
intention. First, she argues that the transfer of the Hopewell property “absolutely”
in the Alternative Transfer of Property clause manifests a contrary intention.
I disagree.
[33]          
The words “for their own use absolutely” – or, as here, the word “absolutely”
– are not in themselves sufficient to demonstrate a contrary intention; it
depends upon the totality of the will, the language used in the will, and the
circumstances surrounding the creation of the will to determine the necessary
intention of the testator: Dodge v. Girard (1993), 1993 CanLII 5457 (ON SC), 15 O.R. (3d) 422 (Gen.
Div.); Tonon v. Vendruscolo (1986), 25 E.T.R. 201 (Ont. H.C.); but see Re
Coughlin (1982), 1982 CanLII 1863 (ON SC), 36 O.R. (2d) 446 (H.C.).
[34]          
I conclude that Eleanor’s
intention in transferring the Hopewell property to Peter “absolutely” has its ordinary
meaning, which is a gift of a full estate in fee simple. The word “absolutely”
in the context of Eleanor’s will did not express an intention to oust the
anti-lapse rule. Nor did Eleanor express any intention to gift over the
Hopewell estate to Nancy should Peter predecease Eleanor.
[35]          
Under the guise of evidence of
surrounding circumstances, Nancy tendered evidence from the solicitor who
drafted Eleanor’s will. Catherine objected to the admissibility of this
evidence.
[36]          
The solicitor’s evidence is inadmissible
because it was direct evidence of Eleanor’s intentions, including her drafting
instructions. There was no suggestion of a drafting error, nor did the
solicitor admit to one. Even if I were wrong, I find that, on balance, the
solicitor’s evidence does not support the view that Eleanor’s will
expressed a contrary intention so as to render the anti-lapse provision
inapplicable.
[37]          
The second provision that Nancy argues manifests a contrary intention is
a clause in Eleanor’s will excluding any gifts from falling into a
beneficiary’s marital property (clause 6). Again, I disagree.
[38]          
Clause 6, “Other”, is a common clause that is intended to exclude the testamentary
gift from, for example, the beneficiary’s net family property under s. 4(2) of the
Family Law Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. F.3. The clause would only become
operative if one of the beneficiaries separated or divorced.
[39]          
Eleanor’s intention in including this clause was to protect Peter if he
had separated or divorced from Catherine during his lifetime. It does not demonstrate
Eleanor’s intention to prevent the Hopewell property from passing to Catherine
following Peter’s death.
[40]          
The final argument that Nancy advances is that Eleanor intended to treat
Peter and Nancy equally and that the Alternative Transfer of Property clause is
best understood as a class or joint gift of all her real property to her
children.
[41]          
I agree that Eleanor generally sought to treat Peter and Nancy equally. They
were each to receive specific real property at the time the will was made, and
the residue of the estate was to be split equally between them. But Eleanor’s
general objective of treating Peter and Nancy equally does not manifest an
intention that would oust the anti-lapse provision in respect of the Hopewell
property. The court cannot re-write Eleanor’s will.
[42]          
And no language in the Alternative Transfer of Property clause or
elsewhere in the will, even considering the surrounding circumstances, leads to
the conclusion that the properties were intended as class or joint gifts. To
the contrary, Eleanor made specific gifts to each of her children: the Hopewell
property to Peter and the Apeldoorn property to Nancy. The specific gifts are
supported by the circumstances at the time the will was made: Peter and
Catherine lived at Hopewell.
[43]          
I agree with Ian Hull & Suzana Popovic-Montag, Feeney’s Canadian
Law of Wills, 4th ed (LexisNexis, 2024), ch. 13, at para. 13.21 that “[i]t
is a relatively easy matter of drafting to expressly provide for a contrary
intent” and that courts should not “find a contrary intent by conjecture or
stretched inference”, especially where the will is prepared by a solicitor.
Nancy’s interpretation of the will would produce a strained interpretation of Eleanor’s
will and is contrary to its pellucid terms.
[44]          
Having considered Eleanor’s will in its entirety and the surrounding
circumstances, I conclude that Eleanor’s will did not manifest a contrary
intention that ousts the anti-lapse provision. The anti-lapse provision thus
applies to Eleanor’s gift of the Hopewell property to Peter.
[45]          
There is no dispute that the other conditions of s. 31 of the Act have
been satisfied.
[46]          
Thus, the gift of the Hopewell property does not lapse, and it goes to
Catherine, as the sole beneficiary of Peter’s estate.
[47]          
Nancy argues that awarding the Hopewell property to Catherine would unjustly
enrich Catherine. Nancy did not bring a cross-application to advance an unjust
enrichment claim. In any event, there is no merit to this argument.
[48]          
To determine whether there has been an unjust enrichment, the court must
consider: (a) whether Catherine has been enriched; (b) whether Nancy has
suffered a corresponding deprivation; and if so, (c) whether there is a
juristic reason for Catherine being enriched at Nancy’s expense: Kerr v.
Baranow, 2011 SCC 10, [2011] 1 S.C.R. 269, at para. 3.
[49]          
An absence of juristic reason is one where “there
is no reason in law or justice for the defendant’s retention of the
benefit conferred by the plaintiff, making its retention “unjust” in the
circumstances of the case”: Kerr, at para. 40.
[50]          
There is plainly a juristic reason for Catherine’s enrichment – the
combined juristic effect of Eleanor’s will, Peter’s will, and s. 31 of the Act.
In these circumstances, Catherine’s retention of the Hopewell property is not
unjust.
[51]          
Given that Catherine has been the rightful owner of the Hopewell
property since Eleanor’s passing, I direct that Nancy account to Catherine for
her dealings in respect of the property from July 17, 2022 until the property is
conveyed to Catherine.
[52]          
For this period, Catherine is entitled to any income, less expenses,
generated by the Hopewell property. Further, Catherine is entitled to be
reimbursed for the rent that she has been paying to Eleanor’s estate.
[53]          
The costs of the accounting are not to be borne by Catherine.
[54]          
There is no provision in Eleanor’s will for Nancy to live in the
Hopewell property rent-free. As the rightful owner of the Hopewell property since
Eleanor’s passing, Catherine is entitled to occupation rent from Nancy.
[55]          
Catherine has been paying Eleanor’s estate approximately $1,698 per
month since Eleanor died. Catherine and Nancy’s apartments are nearly the same
in size and layout. Although Catherine’s apartment has a dishwasher and Nancy’s
does not, I am not persuaded that this should result in a lesser rent.
[56]          
Catherine is therefore entitled to $1,698 per month from Nancy from July
17, 2022 until the property is conveyed to Catherine.
[57]          
The application is allowed.
[58]          
Catherine is presumptively entitled to costs on the application. If the parties cannot agree on costs, they can each make written
submissions to me of no more than 1,000 words within two weeks of the release
of these reasons for judgment. These are to be sent to scj.assistants@ontario.ca to my attention.