[1]              
This is a decision on the Defendants’ motion, pursuant to Rule 20 of the
Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, (“the Rules”), alleging that
the Plaintiff’s action is appropriate for summary judgment as it raises no
genuine issue requiring a trial. The sole issue on this motion is to determine
is whether the Plaintiff's action for malicious prosecution presents a genuine
issue requiring at trial.
[2]              
In 2013, the Defendant, Richard Tabak, reported
to the Ontario Provincial Police (“OPP”) that while driving his vehicle on the
highways he was experiencing instances of an oncoming vehicle swerving over the
median onto his side of the road. He identified the vehicles involved in these
incidents as belonging to the Plaintiff. The OPP instructed Mr. Tabak to keep a
log of the incidents and to avoid interacting with the Plaintiff. Mr. Tabak
captured video recordings of the incidents as they occurred on April 3, April
17, and June 3, 2015.
[3]              
The Plaintiff was subsequently charged with
criminal harassment and dangerous driving, contrary to the Criminal Code,
R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46.
[4]              
The Defendant, Jeff Pauze, gave a statement to
the OPP after the criminal charges were laid against the Plaintiff.
[5]              
The Defendant, Nicki Reid, cannot remember
giving a statement to the OPP and was not called to testify at the preliminary
inquiry into the criminal charges. A statement made by Ms. Reid to the OPP has
never been produced in these proceedings.
[6]              
The preliminary inquiry was held before Justice
K.E.M. Moore in June and December 2018. Both Mr. Tabak and Mr. Pauze testified
and were cross-examined under oath at the preliminary inquiry.
[7]              
At the conclusion of the preliminary inquiry,
Justice Moore committed the Plaintiff to stand trial on the charges.
[8]              
The charges against the Plaintiff were stayed by
the Crown on October 2, 2019.
[9]              
The Moving Parties brought a motion for summary
judgment because, they state, there are no issues requiring a trial in this
matter. They argue that the Plaintiff has not met the high threshold for
establishing malicious prosecution in this case and therefore, the action
should be dismissed.
[10]          
The Plaintiff contends that there are issues of
credibility as to whether the Moving Parties had reasonable and probable
grounds to initiate criminal proceedings against him and whether the
proceedings were motivated by malice towards the Plaintiff.
[11]          
For the reasons that follow, I find that there
are no issues requiring a trial in this matter and therefore, summary judgment
is granted. The evidence clearly demonstrates that the Plaintiff has not met
the test for malicious prosecution. Therefore, the action is dismissed.
[12]          
I find that the Defendants did not initiate the
criminal proceedings. After an independent investigation and consultation with
the Crown prosecutor, the OPP initiated criminal proceedings. A preliminary
inquiry was held following which Justice Moore committed the Plaintiff to stand
trial. The weight of the evidence in this case does not support the inferences
suggested by the Plaintiff that the Defendants pursued criminal prosecution
against the Plaintiff to get back at him for past actions.
[13]          
Mr. Tabak is a self-employed carpenter and
contractor who has been working throughout the Rockport, Gananoque and Lansdowne
communities for approximately 25 years. Both Mr. Pauze and Ms. Reid have worked
for Mr. Tabak in various capacities intermittently throughout the years.
[14]          
The Plaintiff is a long-time resident of the Thousand
Islands region.
[15]          
The Plaintiff and Ms. Reid were in a romantic relationship
in the past but have not seen each other for about ten years. Ms. Reid obtained
a peace bond against the Plaintiff as a result of allegations of harassment occurring
between March 2010 and December 2012.
[16]          
The Plaintiff and Mr. Pauze have known of each
other for many years because they were neighbours and grew up in the same area.
They are not otherwise socially or professionally acquainted.
[17]          
Mr. Tabak did some carpentry work on the
Plaintiff's properties in the past. The Plaintiff claims that he terminated the
contract with Mr. Tabak because he was not happy with the quality and speed of
the work Mr. Tabak was doing.
[18]          
In 2013, Mr. Tabak pleaded guilty to a charge of
impaired driving and his driver’s licence was suspended for several months. The
Plaintiff believes that Mr. Tabak thought it was the Plaintiff who reported Mr.
Tabak to the police.
[19]          
In or around 2014, Mr. Tabak spoke with OPP Constable
Sinclair about his concerns that a white GMC dual-wheel truck and a white Chevy
Volt, which were owned and operated by the Plaintiff, were swerving into the
oncoming lane as he was approaching in his vehicle.
[20]          
Constable Sinclair instructed Mr. Tabak to keep
a log of the incidents and to avoid interacting with the Plaintiff.
[21]          
From January 23, 2014 to June of 2015, Mr. Tabak
kept a log of the swerving incidents. He also video-recorded three incidents on
April 3, April 17 and June 3, 2015.
[22]          
Mr. Tabak provided the three videos he had
recorded along with his witness statement incorporating the handwritten logs he
had taken from 2014 to 2015 to Constable Sinclair of the OPP.
[23]          
In his Will-say prepared for the prosecution's
Crown Brief, Constable Sinclair declared the following:
[24]          
After he was charged, the Plaintiff was released
further to an undertaking and promise to appear that contained conditions
requiring him to stay away from Mr. Tabak, Mr. Pauze and Ms. Reid.
[25]          
After the charges were laid, Mr. Pauze provided
a witness statement dated February 24, 2017 at the request of Constable
Sinclair, which described the swerving incidents he had witnessed in 2015.
[26]          
Along with the statement from Mr. Tabak and Mr.
Pauze, Constable Sinclair also obtained a statement over the phone from another
witness, Ethan Earle. Mr. Earle's statement, included in the prosecution's
Crown brief, stated as follows:
[27]          
In the examination for discovery, Mr. Pauze
stated that he recognized the Plaintiff driving the vehicle that swerved
towards Mr. Tabak’s vehicle.
[28]          
During the preliminary inquiry before Justice
K.E.M. Moore, both Mr. Tabak and Mr. Pauze testified under oath and were
cross-examined on their evidence regarding the swerving incidents.
[29]          
At the conclusion of the preliminary inquiry,
Justice Moore indicated that having reviewed the evidence, which included the
video recordings, she was satisfied that there was some evidence before the
Court upon which a jury could find Mr. Anderson guilty. Justice Moore committed
the Plaintiff to stand trial on the charges. The charges were subsequently
stayed.
[30]          
The Court may grant summary judgment if the Court is satisfied there is
no genuine issue requiring a trial. Even if the Court determines there are genuine
issues requiring a trial, the Court should determine if the need for a trial
can be avoided using the powers under Rules 20.04(2.1) and (2.2).[1]
[31]          
Summary judgment is appropriate where the material provided on the
motion "[g]ives the judge confidence that she can find the necessary facts
and apply the relevant legal principles so as to resolve the dispute."[2]
[32]          
Both the Plaintiff and the Defendants adduced and made reference to
various police records, occurrence reports and synopses contained in the
prosecution's Crown Brief. The Defendants gave Notice under section 35 of the Evidence
Act to admit these documents as a record of the act, transaction, occurrence,
or events.
[33]          
Criminal offence records and occurrence reports are presumed to be
reliable, and the first- hand observations of police officers recorded therein
are generally admissible. Such records have been considered and relied on by
this Court in determining summary judgment motions.[3]
[34]          
A report authored by a police officer is admissible as to the extent of
what that officer personally observed or communicated and understood likely
transpired. However, third-party statements recorded in police records are not
admissible unless they fall within one of the hearsay exceptions.[4]
[35]          
The comments of the parties, as recorded in police
records may be admitted as statements against interest.[5]
[36]          
I find that the records, occurrence reports and synopses in the
prosecution’s Crown Brief are admissible. However, I have not considered any
hearsay evidence contained in those documents that does not fit within a
hearsay exception as outlined above.
[37]          
There are four necessary elements that a plaintiff must prove in a claim
for malicious prosecution:
[38]          
All four elements must be satisfied for the plaintiff to succeed. The
burden is on the plaintiff to establish malicious prosecution.[6]
[39]          
The bar is set very high in a claim of malicious
prosecution; a plaintiff has very difficult burden to meet to make out the
claim.[7]
[40]          
In the present case, the Defendants concede that
the second element of the test has been met. However, they assert that none of
the other three elements are satisfied, and a trial is not needed to establish
this.
[41]          
Ordinarily the court will view the police
officer who lays the charges as the initiator of the prosecution.[8] Even where a citizen
gives his or her fullest cooperation and assistance to the police and the Crown
in a criminal prosecution, there is no compelling reason to deem him or her an
initiator of a prosecution where the actual prosecutor is readily identifiable
and has had the ability to exercise an independent discretion whether to lay
charges or not.[9]
[42]          
In Kefeli v. Centennial College of Applied
Arts & Technology, 2002 CanLII 45008 (ONCA), (“Kefeli”), the
Ontario Court of Appeal held that unless the following three conditions apply,
the court will view the police officer who laid the charges as the person who
set the prosecution in motion:
[43]          
The Court of Appeal offered an example in Kefeli
of a situation where it might be impossible for the police to conduct an
independent investigation and exercise their discretion:
[44]          
In D'Addario v. Smith, 2015 ONSC 6652,
Justice Beaudoin observed that the case law has identified very limited
instances in which it will be impossible for the prosecutor or police to
exercise any independent discretion in laying the charge.[12] One such case is where
the defendant has knowingly withheld exculpatory information that the police
could not be expected to find in all the circumstances.[13]
[45]          
The courts have emphasized that some measure of
police discretion is possible unless the victim was the sole witness to the
assault. Where there are other witnesses, the police have the discretion to
interview them and to assess their credibility prior to laying a charge.[14]
[46]          
In D’Addario, Justice Beaudoin was
dealing with a motion for non-suit, which is somewhat analogous to a motion for
summary judgment. Justice Beaudoin held that even if it were accepted that the
defendants’ statements to the police constable were false, that fact alone was
not enough for a jury to conclude that they initiated the prosecution. Much
more was required to meet the high bar of malicious prosecution. There had to
be evidence that the defendants withheld exculpatory evidence; that they
pressured the police in laying the charges or somehow compromised the
independence of the prosecution.
[47]          
Similarly, in Estate of Shanthakumar v RBC,
2023 ONSC 6100, at para 70, this court stated that when the plaintiff alleges
that the defendants supplied the police with false information or withheld
information, they must also demonstrate that the police did not have an
opportunity to conduct their own independent investigation and exercise their
own independent discretion.[15]
[48]          
In the present case, even if it could be said
that Mr. Tabak provided false information (which is far from clear), Constable
Sinclair was not deprived of the opportunity to conduct his own independent
investigation. He had at his disposal the video evidence of three incidents
where the vehicle in question crossed the centre line. That provides a solid
basis for concluding that the investigation was independent; Constable Sinclair
was able to determine for himself whether the driving in question was dangerous
and was not reliant upon the witnesses’ description of the events.
[49]          
The Plaintiff states that the identity of the
driver cannot be determined from the video recordings and therefore, Constable
Sinclair was reliant on the allegedly false information provided by Mr. Tabak. However,
Constable Sinclair was not in fact, reliant upon Mr. Tabak’s identification of
the Plaintiff as the driver of the vehicles. There were two other witnesses,
Mr. Pauze and Mr. Earl, who both identified the Plaintiff as the driver who
crossed the centre line while driving towards Mr. Tabak’s vehicle. Those two
witnesses provided statements to the OPP.
[50]          
Constable Sinclair also interviewed the
Plaintiff who, although denying that he had engaged in the conduct in question,
acknowledged that there was “bad blood” between him and Mr. Tabak and that it
related to Ms. Reid. Constable Sinclair was thus alerted to the possibility
that Mr. Tabak might be using the criminal justice system as a way of seeking
revenge against the Plaintiff. In fact, Constable Sinclair lives in the same
area as the Plaintiff and the Defendants and stated that it was “no secret”
that the Plaintiff didn’t like Mr. Tabak. Thus, Detective Sinclair had all the
information he needed to conduct an independent investigation of circumstances
giving rise to the charges, including the possibility that Mr. Tabak might be
trying to “frame” the Plaintiff.
[51]          
I find that Constable Sinclair exercised his
independent discretion to lay the charges against the Plaintiff. This is not
one of those exceptional situations where it was impossible for the police to
exercise any independent discretion in laying the charge. The investigation was
undertaken over at least a one-year period, during which a significant amount
of evidence, including video recordings, was obtained. There was no evidence
that the video footage was fake, no evidence that Mr. Tabak withheld
exculpatory information from the OPP, and no evidence that any of the
Defendants undermined the independence of the police investigation. Moreover, there
were several witnesses to the alleged offences. Finally, before laying the
charges, Constable Sinclair consulted with the Crown prosecutor.
[52]          
Therefore, I find that the criminal proceedings
were not initiated by Mr. Tabak, nor were they initiated by Mr. Pauze or Ms.
Reid.
[53]          
The initiation requirement cannot be met where the
defendant did not contact the police to make the complaint (that is, was not
the complainant in the criminal investigation) or take an active role in the
prosecution.[16]
Neither Ms. Reid nor Mr. Pauze made the complaint to the OPP, nor did they take
an active role in the investigation. Furthermore, Mr. Pauze did not make his statement
to the OPP until after the charges were laid and therefore, could not be
said to have initiated the charges.
[54]          
Ms. Reid’s involvement in the proceedings was
minimal, at best. Her alleged statement to the OPP has not been produced and
would appear to be non-existent. Although the Plaintiff stated during his
police interview that he had “watched Nicki’s statement and Nicki said that she
was come (sic) to the police because Rick told her to look at the statement”
the meaning of that statement is unclear. The fact that Ms. Reid was named in
the recognizance likely has more to do with the fact that both Mr. Tabak and
the Plaintiff indicated that the bad blood between them related to Ms. Reid.
[55]          
For these reasons, I find that none of the
Defendants initiated the criminal proceedings. Although this ends the inquiry
since all the elements of the tort of malicious prosecution must be met to
satisfy the test, I will go on to analyse the remaining two elements, but only
with respect to Mr. Pauze and Mr. Tabak. Ms. Reid had very little to do with
the matter and should not have been named as a Defendant.
[56]          
The Plaintiff says there were no reasonable and
probable grounds for the charges. However, the questions of whether there were
reasonable and probable grounds is only an issue where the Defendants have been
found to have initiated the charges. Therefore, as in the case of Ebagua v.
National Rent A Car et al., 2015 ONSC 979, the assumption in assessing this
element of the test is that the Defendants did initiate the charges. The
following then, is a hypothetical or alternative assessment of this issue in
case I am wrong on the issue of the initiation of the charges.[17]
[57]          
To meet this part of the test, the Plaintiff must prove that the
prosecutor did not actually believe that there were reasonable and probable
grounds for initiating the prosecution and that it was not objectively
reasonable to believe that there were reasonable and probable grounds for
initiating the prosecution.[18]
[58]          
The Plaintiff states that there are two key evidentiary issues that go
to the issue of reasonable and probable cause:
[59]          
Firstly, the Plaintiff states that the three videos do not show anything
close to what Mr. Tabak and Mr. Pauze allege to have happened. Mr. Tabak
testified at the preliminary inquiry that the three videos he took are
representative of the general pattern of the incidents where the Plaintiff
allegedly tried to run him off the road, and which he also confirmed during his
discovery and at the cross-examination on his affidavits.
[60]          
The Plaintiff pointed to Mr. Pauze’s statement at discovery that he
witnessed an oncoming vehicle going over the centre line so that half of it was
over the line ("middle of the car was in the middle of the line"). He
also said the oncoming vehicle stayed like that for some time ("more than
a swerve"). However, the Plaintiff states that the three videos show a
vehicle coming in the opposite direction and barely touching the centre line
(not crossing it), and then only for a fleeting instant. The driver of the
approaching vehicle in the videos was not playing chicken or crossed into the
oncoming lane, in the Plaintiff’s view.
[61]          
The Plaintiff states that this is evidence that Mr. Pauze was not
telling the truth and misled the police into believing that the Plaintiff was
driving dangerously.
[62]          
The problem with the Plaintiff’s argument is that the police, prosecutor
and preliminary inquiry judge all viewed the video evidence and formed the opinion
that the totality of the evidence could lead to a finding of dangerous driving.
Regardless of what was said during the civil discovery, the video evidence
spoke for itself.
[63]          
The Crown prosecutor took Mr. Tabak through the video evidence. Mr.
Pauze gave evidence at the preliminary inquiry and was cross-examined on that
evidence. The Plaintiff may have his own view of what the video evidence shows,
but that does not give rise to an inference that Mr. Pauze was lying in his
description of the other incidents.
[64]          
The Plaintiff also puts forward the evidence of a witness, Janet
Laronde, who came forward after the preliminary inquiry who, he says, will
testify that Mr. Pauze told her that Mr. Tabak persuaded Mr. Pauze to lie about
the vehicle swerving into the oncoming traffic. This person, who allegedly
worked with Mr. Pauze at the Thousand Island Addictions and Treatment Centre
(the Centre), will apparently say that Mr. Pauze told her he was never in the
car with Mr. Tabak when the alleged swerving happened. Ms. Laronde stated
during examinations that Mr. Pauze said Mr. Tabak told him he had to make a
statement.
[65]          
The difficulty with the Plaintiff’s position on this point is that at
its best, the evidence could only establish that Mr. Tabak put Mr. Pauze up to
lying about his presence in the car when the swerving incidents were alleged to
have occurred. However, this would not be sufficient to establish that Mr.
Tabak lacked reasonable and probable grounds to lay a complaint. Mr. Tabak
might well have sought Mr. Pauze’s support for the charges, but this does not necessarily
mean that Mr. Tabak was lying about the swerving or the identity of the person
swerving.
[66]          
Nevertheless, if I give the Plaintiff the benefit of the doubt on this point
and find that there may be a triable issue as to whether Mr. Pauze (and Mr.
Tabak) lacked reasonable and probable grounds for initiating the criminal
proceedings, I may then exercise my power under clause 2 of subrule 20.04(2.1)
of the Rules to make a credibility determination.
[67]          
Mr. Pauze has provided affidavit evidence on
this motion in which he vehemently denies making a statement to anyone at the
Centre to the effect that Mr. Tabak told him to lie about being in the car with
him during the swerving incidents. Mr. Pauze states that he worked in
maintenance at the Centre for only three months and did not get to know anyone
there very well.
[68]          
Mr. Pauze’s evidence with respect to the alleged
statement that Mr. Tabak told him to lie was unshaken on cross-examination.
[69]          
In another affidavit in support of the motion,
Mr. Pauze states that he was in Mr. Tabak’s car on two occasions when the
swerving incidents occurred and that he recognized the driver as the Plaintiff.
He deposed in his affidavit that the evidence he gave under oath at the
Plaintiff’s preliminary inquiry describing the swerving incidents he
experienced as a passenger in Mr. Tabak’s car in 2015, was, and remains, true
to the best of his knowledge and belief.
[70]          
Ms. Laronde was cross-examined on her affidavit
in which she stated that Mr. Pauze had told her that he was not in Mr. Tabak’s
vehicle. Ms. Laronde testified that she never really got to know her co-workers
enough to talk to them about anything personal. She stated that she was not
close at all with Mr. Pauze; she would make him a sandwich in the morning, and
he would go on his way. Ms. Laronde was unable to remember the context of the
conversation. She stated that the whole conversation was only about five to
eight minutes. Ms. Laronde stated that Mr. Pauze told her that he was not in
the car when the swerving incidents happened but was told by Mr. Tabak to say
that he was. Then, she stated, Mr. Pauze “went on his merry way with his
sandwich back to work”.
[71]          
Ms. Laronde also stated that after Mr. Pauze
told her that he had made a false statement about not being in the car with Mr.
Tabak, she did not ask him any further questions. She went straight to her
boss, Mr. Chris Fagan, and told him about the “confession”. She stated that she
knew that Mr. Fagan and the Plaintiff knew each other.
[72]          
I find that Ms. Laronde’s evidence with respect
to Mr. Pauze’s statement is not credible. I find it highly implausible that Mr.
Pauze would have made this very serious confession to someone whom he barely
knew in a brief conversation in the kitchen and then have gone on his “merry
way”. Ms. Laronde’s evidence on other points was also not credible.
[73]          
For example, Ms. Laronde testified that she gave
Mr. Pauze a breakfast sandwich every day for free. She testified that she had the
discretion to do this even though she acknowledged that there was a memo that
said only those employees who worked double shifts could have a free meal. In
contrast, Mr. Pauze testified that he had to pay for his meals, including
breakfast. Ms. Laronde’s evidence on this point was not internally consistent,
nor was it plausible.
[74]          
Mr. Pauze gave a statement to the OPP that he
was in Mr. Tabak’s car and that he witnessed the swerving. This statement was
consistent with his testimony at the preliminary inquiry. He provided
affidavits in support of the present motion in which he deposed that he was in
the car and witnessed the swerving. He stated that he did not tell Ms. Laronde
that Mr. Tabak had told him to lie. Mr. Pauze was cross-examined on those
affidavits and his evidence was unshaken. I find therefore, that his evidence
that he was in the car with Mr. Tabak and witnessed the swerving incidents is
credible. There is no basis for a trial on this issue.
[75]          
In conclusion, I find that if Mr. Pauze
and Mr. Tabak could be said to have initiated the criminal proceedings (which
is highly unlikely), they had reasonable and probable grounds to do so. They
were in the car when the swerving incidents happened and identified the
Plaintiff as the person who was doing the swerving.
[76]          
With respect to malice, the Plaintiff must show that the actual motive
for the prosecution was improper or demonstrate that the prosecution can only
be explained by imputing a wrong motive.[19]
A bald allegation of malice is insufficient.[20]
[77]          
The Plaintiff alleges that there is credible evidence that Mr. Tabak
harbors ill will towards the Plaintiff. It started when the Plaintiff fired Mr.
Tabak from contracting jobs at his properties and intensified when Mr. Tabak
was arrested and convicted for drunk driving and lost his driving privileges,
causing him significant personal and professional inconvenience.
[78]          
The Plaintiff believes that Mr. Tabak thought he had reported him for
drunk driving, leading to his arrest, conviction and the temporary loss of his
driver's license. This allegedly happened before Mr. Tabak complained to the
police about the Plaintiff trying to "run him off the road".
[79]          
Apparently, there were also issues with respect to potential jealousy
regarding Ms. Reid, which allegedly fueled the ill will between Mr. Tabak and
the Plaintiff.
[80]          
Finally, an individual named Dave Lindsay testified that some time
before 2015 (that is, before the Plaintiff was charged), Mr. Tabak said to him
that "Gary [the Plaintiff] will get what Gary has got coming to him."
Mr. Lindsay also testified that Mr. Tabak spoke negatively about the Plaintiff.
The Plaintiff believes that this is further evidence of the ill will that Mr. Tabak
had towards him before the criminal charges were laid.
[81]          
I find however, that it is simply not the case here that the prosecution
can only be accounted for by implying malice to the Defendants. The prosecution
can be accounted for by the OPP’s independent investigation, the Crown
prosecutor’s opinion and the finding made by Justice Moore at the preliminary
inquiry that there was an evidentiary basis for committing the matter to trial.
[82]          
There is no genuine issue for trial in the present case. It is clear, on
the basis of the record before me and without making any findings on contested
facts or drawing inferences, that the Defendants were not the initiators of the
criminal proceedings. As such, a trial is wholly unnecessary and the motion for
summary judgment is granted.
[83]          
Ms. Reid had little to no involvement in the matter. Even if Mr. Tabak
and Mr. Pauze were the initiators of the proceedings, there is no need for a
trial to establish the other elements of the tort. If they initiated the
proceedings, Mr. Tabak and Mr. Pauze had reasonable and probable grounds upon
which to initiate a complaint and to participate in the criminal proceedings. If
there was malice that partially motivated the prosecution, it was not the only
basis for the proceedings.
[84]          
The motion for summary judgment is granted and the action dismissed.
[85]          
The Defendants were entirely successful on the
motion and are therefore, presumptively entitled to their costs. I find that
there is no basis upon which to deny the Defendants their costs.
[86]          
The Defendants seek their costs of the motion
and the action on an elevated basis.
[87]          
The fixing of costs is a discretionary decision
under section 131 of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C-43.
That discretion is generally to be exercised in accordance with the factors
listed in Rule 57.01 of the Rules. These include the principle of indemnity for
the successful party (s. 57.01(1)(0.a)), the expectations of the unsuccessful party
(s. 57.01(1)(0.b)), the amount claimed and recovered (s. 57.01(1)(a)), and the
complexity of the issues (s. 57.01(1)(c)). Overall, the court is required to
consider what is “fair and reasonable” in fixing costs and is to do so with a
view to balancing compensation of the successful party with the goal of
fostering access to justice.[21]
[88]          
The Defendants have not explained the reason
that they are seeking “elevated costs”. I see nothing in the proceedings that
would justify an increase in the costs beyond partial indemnity rates. Indeed,
in my view, the awarding of costs on a partial indemnity basis in this case
properly balances the competing considerations of access to justice and
providing compensation to the successful party.
[89]          
The amount claimed on a partial indemnity basis
for both the action and the summary judgment motion is $40,851.36. I have
reviewed the hours and rates in the Costs Outlines submitted by the Defendants.
They are reasonable and unexceptional. The Plaintiff claimed significant
damages from the Defendants, each private citizens, for malicious prosecution
arising from charges of criminal harassment and dangerous driving laid by the
OPP in February 2017. One of the Defendants, Nicki Reid, had very little to no
involvement in this matter and should not have been named as a defendant. Mr.
Pauze only became involved when asked to provide a statement by the OPP after
the charges had been laid. The bar is very high for the tort of malicious
prosecution. Therefore, the risk of losing on a motion for summary judgment is significant.
[90]          
The Plaintiff would have been well aware of the
risk he was taking in proceeding with this litigation. His own costs for the
summary judgment motion alone were $21,485.04. That does not include the work
that was done taking the action up to the conclusion of examinations for
discovery. Therefore, the Plaintiff could reasonably have expected to pay
significantly more than $21,000 for the Defendants’ costs if he lost the motion
and the action was dismissed.
[91]          
Accordingly, I find that it is fair and
reasonable for the Plaintiff to pay the Defendants the aggregate sum of $40,851.36
in costs inclusive of disbursements and HST.