[1]          
On the evening of
September 17, 2021, Gursevek Jagpal, only 21 years old, was shot and killed.
[2]          
The shooting took
place on a residential street in Mississauga during an altercation between two
groups. A member of one group, a 16-year-old boy ("the young
person"), discharged a handgun repeatedly at Mr. Jagpal and others in his
group.
[3]          
Three bullets struck
Mr. Jagpal: one in the chest and two in his left thigh; one of the bullets
severed a major artery in his thigh and caused his death. A second young man, a
friend of Mr. Jagpal, was also shot in the leg but thankfully survived his
injury.
[4]          
In earlier
proceedings, the young person who shot and killed Mr. Jagpal pleaded guilty to
manslaughter and was sentenced for that offence under the Youth Criminal
Justice Act, S.C. 2002, c. 1.
[5]          
Following a trial, a
jury found Mr. Sandhu not guilty of second-degree murder but guilty of the
lesser included offence of manslaughter for his role as a party to the fatal
shooting.
[6]          
As the judge who
presided over Mr. Sandhu's trial, I must now sentence him for his role in this
senseless crime.
[7]          
In September 2021,
Mr. Sandhu, only 18, was embroiled in a dispute with another young man of the
same age, Mr. Bhoon. Although they had once been friends, their relationship
had deteriorated for reasons less than fully explained by the evidence heard at
trial.
[8]          
On September 17,
2021, during the lunch hour, Mr. Sandhu and Mr. Bhoon had a confrontation in
the parking lot of a high school. Later that afternoon, Mr. Sandhu escalated
the conflict by smashing all the windows of Mr. Bhoon's parked car.
[9]          
After he did so, Mr.
Sandhu eventually returned to his home, where a surveillance camera captured
him interacting with his brother and his brother's friends in front of his
house. His brother's friends included the young person, who had the handgun
tucked out of sight in his waistband at the time.
[10]       
That evening, Mr.
Bhoon, his older cousin, Mr. Jagpal, and two friends, Mr. Sadhara and Mr.
Banga, attended Mr. Sandhu's home. During their trial testimony, Mr. Bhoon, Mr.
Sadhara, and Mr. Banga insisted they had only gone to Mr. Sandhu's residence to
speak to his parents about obtaining compensation for the broken car windows.
Nevertheless, the evidence suggested they came prepared for trouble. For
example, Mr. Jagpal had a baseball bat in his car, and Mr. Banga acknowledged
bringing a metal rod with him that evening and leaving it next to or inside Mr.
Jagpal's vehicle.
[11]       
The evidence at
trial established that Mr. Bhoon and his group's attendance at Mr. Sandhu's
home angered him. That was apparent from the footage from the surveillance
camera that captured events in front of his home that evening before any
violence occurred. Although the situation became calmer once Mr. Sandhu's
father came home, the surveillance recording demonstrates that Mr. Sandhu
continued exchanging words with Mr. Bhoon and those in his group even after
that. Mr. Bhoon, Mr. Sadhara, and Mr. Banga each testified that Mr. Sandhu was
angry and that while he stood on his front porch, he brandished a knife at them
and urged them to stay put and threatened that they would "see what would
happen" if they did.
[12]       
While Mr. Bhoon, Mr.
Jagpal, Mr. Sadhara, and Mr. Banga were outside talking to Mr. Sandhu's father
at the Sandhu home, phone records show that Mr. Sandhu called his brother, who
was at a nearby park with his friends, including the young person with the
loaded handgun.
[13]       
After receiving the
call, Mr. Sandhu's brother and his brother’s friends hurried to the Sandhu
residence on foot. Shortly before they arrived, Mr. Sandhu disconnected the
surveillance camera at his home, thereby eliminating what would have been the
best evidence of what happened next.[1]
[14]       
Much of the evidence
at the trial focused on what occurred after Mr. Sandhu's brother and his brother’s
friends arrived on the street that evening. It is undisputed that there was an
exchange of words between Mr. Bhoon and Mr. Jagpal's group and Mr. Sandhu's
brother's group, and in the midst of that, the young person produced and
pointed his handgun in the direction of the other group.
[15]       
On the street in
front of Mr. Sandhu's home, not far from Mr. Jagpal's car, the young person
with the handgun began firing it while aiming in the direction of Mr. Jagpal.
The police recovered three spent shell casings in that area.
[16]       
A critical issue at
trial was what, if anything, Mr. Sandhu said to the young person with the
handgun before and after he began discharging it.
[17]       
Mr. Bhoon testified
to hearing Mr. Sandhu while he stood on his porch, yelling, "Give him
leggaz," which he understood to be Toronto rap nomenclature for shooting
someone in the legs. Similarly, Mr. Banga testified to hearing Mr. Sandhu
yelling loudly, "Give him leggaz, give him leggaz." While Mr. Sadhara
testified that Mr. Sandhu was yelling, "Shoot them in the face, shoot them
in the face."
[18]       
The young person who
shot Mr. Jagpal testified that he had neither seen nor heard Mr. Sandhu before
or after he began firing the gun. He denied hearing Mr. Sandhu yelling at him
to "give him a leggaz" or "shoot him in the face." The
shooter maintained that he decided to fire his handgun uninfluenced by anything
Mr. Sandhu did or said.
[19]       
The shooter's
account found support in the testimony of Mr. Sandhu's girlfriend at the time,
who maintained that she and Mr. Sandhu were inside his residence, along with
his grandfather, when they first heard the sound of gunshots.
[20]       
Additionally, an
independent witness assisting a neighbour a few houses up the street to unload
groceries from his car testified to seeing Mr. Sandhu's brother's group arrive
on the street. After they hurriedly walked past, he testified there was
complete silence before he heard the sound of gunshots, which was consistent
with Mr. Sandhu not yelling anything before the shooting began.
[21]       
After the initial
gunshots, Mr. Jagpal, by then armed with a bat, and Mr. Sadhara, who admitted
that by then he was armed with the metal rod, began chasing Mr. Sandhu's
brother's group, who took flight down Mr. Sandhu's street and onto an adjoining
street.
[22]       
Mr. Sadhara
acknowledged catching up with a member of the fleeing group and striking him on
the head or shoulder with a metal rod. However, the evidence suggested that, in
actuality, he had used a machete (one of the members of Mr. Sandhu's brother's
group sustained a severe head injury, and a machete located at the scene by
police was forensically determined through DNA analysis to have his blood on
it).
[23]       
On that second
street, the young person with the handgun fired several additional shots as he
fled. The police recovered a single shell casing in the intersection where the
two streets met and six further spent shell casings on the adjoining street.
The shooter testified that with the second volley of shots, he discharged the
handgun as he ran, pointing it behind him and firing it indiscriminately.
[24]       
Only after the
gunfire subsided did Mr. Sadhara and Mr. Jagpal realize they had been shot. Mr.
Jagpal soon collapsed onto the pavement and lost consciousness.
[25]       
It is uncertain
whether the initial or later gunfire struck Mr. Jagpal. However, it seems most
likely that he was hit during the first volley, as the shooter aimed before
firing the initial shots and only discharged the gun indiscriminately while
fleeing. Nevertheless, the jury did not need to resolve that issue to assess
Mr. Sandhu's potential liability.
[26]       
The Crown also
introduced after-the-fact conduct evidence as part of its case against Mr.
Sandhu.
[27]       
First, there was the
recording of a 911 call that Mr. Sandhu's father placed while the shooting
remained ongoing; the sounds of gunshots are audible on the recording. The
Crown introduced that recording because Mr. Sandhu eventually took the phone
and misled the 911 operator when he denied that guns were involved in the
incident.
[28]       
Second, there was
evidence that Mr. Sandhu, while Mr. Jagpal and Mr. Sadhara lay wounded on the
street, mocked them while videotaping them with his phone. Police ultimately
recovered Mr. Sandhu's phone, but it was wiped clean of all data through a
factory reset shortly after the shooting.
[29]       
With the parties'
agreement, the court instructed the jury regarding Mr. Sandhu's potential
liability for manslaughter and murder as either an aider or an abettor.
[30]       
The jury's verdict
finding Mr. Sandhu not guilty of murder but guilty of the lesser included
offence of manslaughter reveals that they were satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt that he aided or abetted the assault with the firearm that caused Mr.
Jagpal's death but were not similarly convinced that he possessed the mens
rea required for murder.
[31]       
The instructions
given to the jury concerning Mr. Sandhu's potential liability as an aider or an
abettor to manslaughter provide insight into what the jury must have found to
return a guilty verdict for that offence.
[32]       
The Crown's case
against Mr. Sandhu for manslaughter as an aider relied on the totality of the
abovementioned evidence. The court instructed the jury that to find him guilty
as an aider; they would need to be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr.
Sandhu did something to assist the young person in carrying out the assault
with a weapon (the shooting) that caused Mr. Jagpal's death, knowing that he
would use his firearm to assault him or other members of Mr. Bhoon's group and
intending to help him in doing so.
[33]       
The Crown's case
against Mr. Sandhu for manslaughter as an abettor depended on the comments
attributed to him by Mr. Bhoon, Mr. Banga and Mr. Sadhara. The court instructed
the jury that to find Mr. Sandhu guilty as an abettor, they would need to be
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Sandhu encouraged the young person
to carry out the shooting that caused Mr. Jagpal's death, knowing that he would
use his firearm to assault him or other members of Mr. Bhoon's group and
intending to encourage him to do so.
[34]       
Further, the court
instructed the jury that they did not need to all agree on the form of Mr.
Sandhu's involvement; some could conclude he was an aider, others that he was
an abettor. However, they would all need to be satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt that he participated in the fatal assault in either of those two ways to
find him guilty of the lesser but included offence of manslaughter.
[35]       
The guilty verdict
for manslaughter, standing alone, would not have shed much light on whether the
jury found Mr. Sandhu guilty as an aider or as an abettor. Ordinarily,
as part of sentencing, the court would have had to decide that question: see Criminal
Code, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46, s. 724(2); R. v. Aragon, 2022 ONCA 244,
413 C.C.C. (3d) 79, at para. 106-107.
[36]       
However, during its
deliberations, the jury asked a question which revealed that in finding Mr.
Sandhu guilty, they accepted that he encouraged the young person to shoot Mr.
Jagpal and other members of Mr. Bhoon's group in the legs. The question read:
[37]       
During sentencing
submissions, defence counsel, Mr. Crothers, argued that, for sentencing
purposes, given the indeterminacy of the evidence heard at trial, the court
should not understand the jury's verdict as necessarily predicated on all of
the jurors accepting that Mr. Sandhu was either an aider or abettor to the
fatal assault knowing that a firearm was involved. Respectfully, I disagree.
[38]       
Considering all the
evidence, the instructions regarding the potential routes to liability for
manslaughter, and the jury's question—which revealed that they all found
("we heard") Mr. Sandhu had yelled the "leggaz" comment to
the shooter—it is clear that they determined, beyond a reasonable doubt, that
Mr. Sandhu abetted the assault that caused Mr. Jagpal's death and that he did
so knowing a firearm was involved.
[39]       
Mr. Jagpal's
immediate and extended family members prepared victim impact statements, some
of which they read aloud at the sentencing hearing. These statements were
poignant. They described Mr. Jagpal as a loving, generous, kind-hearted, loyal,
and vibrant person who positively impacted everyone who knew him.[2]
[40]       
Mr. Jagpal was a
cornerstone of his close-knit family, and his loss has deeply affected them
all. The impact on his father has been particularly acute, resulting in him
suffering a complete breakdown in his mental health. Sadly, yet understandably,
it is unlikely that anyone in Mr. Jagpal's immediate or extended family will
ever be the same because of the senseless crime that claimed his young life.
[41]       
Unfortunately, no
sentence the court imposes can rectify the tragedy of Mr. Jagpal's death or
undo the profound harm his untimely passing has occasioned for those who loved
him.
[42]       
At the time of his
offence, Mr. Sandhu was only 18. He is now 21. He does not have a criminal
record.
[43]       
Mr. Sandhu was born
in Toronto and is the oldest of two siblings; his brother is a few years
younger.
[44]       
Mr. Sandhu enjoyed a
positive upbringing. Throughout his life, including since his arrest, he has
had the love and support of both his parents.
[45]       
Mr. Sandhu grew up
in an environment where his parents always met his material and emotional needs.
Unlike far too many offenders who come before this court for sentencing, Mr.
Sandhu thankfully had an upbringing free from neglect, abuse or the ravages of
addiction.
[46]       
Mr. Sandhu was a
good student who earned above-average grades. As a result, he graduated from
high school with no difficulty.
[47]       
After his September
17, 2021 arrest, Mr. Sandhu spent 49 days in custody before being released on
bail. His parents acted as his sureties, and his mother stopped working so that
she could supervise him on bail. His release terms were stringent, requiring
Mr. Sandhu to remain inside his residence unless in the company of one of his
sureties.
[48]       
Since his release on
bail, Mr. Sandhu has worked with his father, who owns construction and trucking
businesses. Initially, Mr. Sandhu performed administrative work in his father's
construction business. He subsequently obtained his commercial trucking license
and assisted his father with his trucking business. Most recently, he has been
a full-time construction worker for his father's business.
[49]       
Mr. Sandhu has
enrolled in construction engineering and real estate programs. However, his
advancement in these programs has been on hold because of these proceedings.
[50]       
Mr. Sandhu aspires
to be an entrepreneur like his father and aims to establish a home-building
company and expand his father's trucking business.
[51]       
When interviewed by
the author of the Pre-Sentence Report, Mr. Sandhu did not address the
circumstances of his offence. Nevertheless, he reportedly expressed his
"deepest sympathy" for Mr. Jagpal and his family "for the
misfortune they have experienced."
[52]       
Mr. Sandhu elected
not to address the court directly at the end of the sentencing hearing.
Instead, Mr. Crothers shared with the court some comments that Mr. Sandhu had
made during their discussions, including that not a single day had passed
without him thinking about what happened on September 17, 2021, and the impact
of that day's events on Mr. Jagpal's family.
[53]       
The parties agree on
the ancillary orders the court should issue as part of sentencing, including a
DNA order and a lifetime weapons prohibition order under section 109 of the Criminal
Code. However, they disagree about the length of the custodial sentence the
court should impose. That stemmed partly from their differing interpretations
of the jury's verdict.
[54]       
As explained above,
the clear implication of the jury's verdict is that they were satisfied beyond
a reasonable doubt that Mr. Sandhu had knowledge of the handgun and encouraged
the young person to use it in carrying out the fatal assault.
[55]       
On behalf of the
Crown, Ms. Holmes urged the court to make just such a finding and argued that,
if it did, the applicable sentencing range would be between eight and 12 years
of imprisonment for that offence.
[56]       
Despite the
mitigating factors she acknowledged, including Mr. Sandhu's youth, his status
as a first offender, and his family support, Ms. Holmes argued that several
aggravating factors justify a sentence in the middle of the range: ten years
imprisonment.
[57]       
In terms of the
aggravating factors, Ms. Holmes submitted there were several. She noted that
Mr. Sandhu's conflict with Mr. Bhoon set the events that culminated in Mr.
Jagpal's death in motion. He summoned his brother and his brother's friends to
the scene, knowing, she submitted, that the young person had a handgun. He
disconnected the surveillance camera at his home to facilitate the crime. When
his brother's group arrived, Mr. Sandhu encouraged the young person to
discharge his firearm, resulting in Mr. Jagpal's death. Further, Ms. Holmes
argued that a "young person" became involved in a serious crime
because of Mr. Sandhu.
[58]       
Additionally, Ms.
Holmes submitted that Mr. Sandhu's actions after the crime (mocking Mr. Jagpal
and Mr. Sadhara as they lay injured on the street after the shooting) are also
aggravating. As were his efforts to obstruct justice by lying to the 911
operator and destroying evidence by resetting his phone. Finally, Ms. Holmes
emphasized the profound impact of the crime on Mr. Jagpal's immediate and
extended family.
[59]       
In contrast, on
behalf of Mr. Sandhu, Mr. Crothers submitted that even if the jury's verdict
was understood as prefaced on a finding that he encouraged the young person to
shoot Mr. Jagpal with his firearm, the appropriate sentencing range was between
six to eight years of imprisonment.
[60]       
In his submissions,
Mr. Crothers emphasized the same mitigating factors that Ms. Holmes conceded,
which, combined, he argued, point toward the need for a sentence that
prioritizes Mr. Sandhu's rehabilitation.
[61]       
Additionally, Mr.
Crothers submitted that the circumstances of this case are distinguishable from
many of the sentencing precedents relied upon by the Crown. He argued that
courts impose sentences in the eight to 12-year range in circumstances far
worse than those in this case. For example, situations in which there is
significant planning involved to commit some other offence, like a robbery, and
the principal commits murder, and the party is guilty of manslaughter. In that
regard, Mr. Crothers emphasized that the young person was convicted of
manslaughter, not murder.
[62]       
In contrast, Mr.
Crothers submitted that the evidence at Mr. Sandhu's trial suggests this was a
spontaneous confrontation and that Mr. Sandhu only learned that the young
person had a firearm shortly before he encouraged him to discharge it. There is
no basis to conclude, Mr. Crothers argued, that Mr. Sandhu knew about the
handgun when he summoned his brother and his friends that night.
[63]       
Given the mitigating
factors and the unique circumstances of this offence, Mr. Crothers argued that
after giving due weight to Mr. Sandhu's time spent on house arrest bail and
crediting him for his time spent in pre-sentence custody, the appropriate
sentence is four to five years of imprisonment.
[64]       
Sentencing is
discretionary by nature. There is no set formula that judges can follow to
decide the appropriate sentence. Instead, judges must consider the purpose and
objectives of sentencing and be mindful of the governing sentencing principles,
especially the need to impose a proportionate sentence. Against that backdrop
and after accounting for the aggravating and mitigating factors, the sentencing
judge must fashion a just and appropriate sentence.
[65]       
Sentencing judges
must remember the fundamental purpose of sentencing, which Parliament has
identified as protecting society and contributing "to respect for the law
and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society": Criminal
Code, s. 718.
[66]       
Achieving that
purpose requires the court to impose "just sanctions" that reflect
one or more traditional sentencing objectives: see Criminal Code, s.
718. These include denunciation, general and specific deterrence, separation of
offenders from society, rehabilitation, reparation to victims, promoting a
sense of responsibility in offenders, and acknowledging the harm done to
victims and the community: see ss. 718(a)-(f).
[67]       
Ultimately, the
court must respect the fundamental principle of sentencing: that any sentence
"must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of
responsibility of the offender": Criminal Code, s. 718.1. In other
words, the sentence must fit both the seriousness of the crime and the
offender's level of moral blameworthiness in its commission: see R. v.
Ipeelee, 2012 SCC 13, [2012] 1 S.C.R. 433, at paras. 36-37; R. v.
Nasogaluak, 2010 SCC 6, [2010] 1 S.C.R. 206, at paras. 40-43.
[68]       
The principle of
parity is an essential consideration in arriving at a proportionate sentence.
Proportionality is a function of the circumstances of the offence and offender
compared to sentences previously imposed on similar offenders for similar
offences committed in similar circumstances. As the Supreme Court has
explained, a sentencing judge must reconcile individualization and parity to
achieve a proportionate sentence: see R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64, [2015]
3 S.C.R. 1089, at para. 53, citing Criminal Code, ss. 718.2(a) and (b).
However, they do not operate in tension; "parity is an expression of
proportionality": R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9, [2020] 1 S.C.R. 424,
at para. 32; see also at paras. 30-33 more generally; see also R. v.
Bissonnette, 2022 SCC 23, 80 C.R. (7th) 127, at para. 51.
[69]       
Sentencing youthful
first offenders, such as Mr. Sandhu, involves unique considerations. Recently,
in R. v. Habib, 2024 ONCA 830, the Court of Appeal made some general
observations about the sentencing of youthful first offenders before
reiterating certain well-established sentencing principles that apply when
sentencing them.
[70]       
By way of general
observations, the Court of Appeal in Habib noted that sentences imposed
on youthful first offenders must hold them accountable, especially for serious
offences, such as crimes involving significant personal violence: see Habib,
at para. 30. In such cases, the objectives of denunciation and deterrence
(general and specific) remain essential: see Habib, at para. 30.
However, general deterrence carries less weight since young adults often lack
the maturity to be influenced by the sentences imposed on others: see Habib,
at fn. 2. As a result, a crime's seriousness and public safety concerns may
necessitate significant prison terms, even for youthful first offenders. Practically
speaking, it may not always be feasible for these offenders to avoid
incarceration, for sentencing judges to impose only the shortest prison terms
or impose a sentence at the lowest end of the applicable range: see Habib,
at para. 30.
[71]       
The Court of Appeal
in Habib then reminded sentencing judges to carefully consider and apply
several well-established sentencing principles when sentencing such youthful
offenders.
[72]       
First, sentencing
judges must exercise restraint when sentencing youthful first offenders. That
means not imprisoning them when possible. And, if imprisonment is necessary,
imposing the shortest sentence capable of achieving the principles and
objectives of sentencing: see Habib, at para. 31.
[73]       
Second, when
sentencing youthful first offenders, sentencing judges must impose sentences
that prioritize rehabilitation as the paramount sentencing objective: see Habib,
at para. 31. When the offender's circumstances require it, they must also
prioritize specific deterrence: see Habib, at para. 31.
[74]       
Third, sentencing
judges cannot focus exclusively on denunciation and general deterrence or
elevate those objectives above rehabilitation or specific deterrence when
sentencing youthful first offenders: see Habib, at para. 31.
[75]       
Finally, whenever
sentencing young adults, sentencing judges must consider their reduced moral
culpability and the harsher impact of incarceration on them due to their stage
of life: see Habib, at para. 31.
[76]       
With the purpose,
objectives and principles of sentencing summarized, these reasons turn next to
the specific guidance provided by Parliament, the Court of Appeal for Ontario,
and the decisions of this court regarding sentencing for manslaughter using a
firearm.
[77]       
The maximum
punishment for manslaughter is life imprisonment. Although Parliament has not
prescribed a minimum sentence for manslaughter generally, using a firearm in
its commission attracts a minimum penalty of imprisonment for four years: see Criminal
Code, s. 236(a).
[78]       
The range of
sentences for manslaughter is well established. In R. v. Kerr, 2023 ONSC
3892, Justice Schreck helpfully summarized the sentencing ranges for
manslaughter developed by the sentencing precedents, writing, at para. 29:
[79]       
These ranges are in
keeping with the gravely serious nature of manslaughter, which requires
sentences that usually must prioritize denunciation and deterrence. In most
cases of manslaughter, the offender has committed an unlawful act that created
an objectively foreseeable risk of bodily harm, and which significantly
contributed to the victim's death. The ranges account for the different
circumstances involved in each manslaughter case (which can vary from near
murder, at one end of the spectrum, to near accident, at the other), along with
the unique personal circumstances of each offender.
[80]       
As explained above,
in all the circumstances, the clear implication of the jury's verdict was a
finding that Mr. Sandhu was subjectively aware that the young person would use
a firearm in carrying out the fatal assault he abetted. Therefore, his offence
appropriately falls within the second and more culpable sentencing range: see R.
v. Kwakye, 2015 ONCA 108, at para. 5. As a result, I agree with the Crown
that the applicable sentencing range for Mr. Sandhu's offence is between eight
and 12 years of imprisonment.
[81]       
Lastly, it deserves
mentioning that sentencing ranges are "guidelines rather than hard and
fast rules": Nasogaluak, at para. 44. They help structure a
sentencing judge's exercise of their discretion because they reflect the
application of the objectives and principles of sentencing when it comes to
sentencing for a particular offence: see Lacasse, at para. 57.
Nevertheless, a sentencing judge may determine that a sentence below or above
the established range is necessary, given that the "determination of a
just and appropriate sentence is a highly individualized exercise that goes
beyond a purely mathematical calculation": Lacasse, at para. 58;
see also Nasogaluak, at para. 44.
[82]       
In determining the
appropriate sentence, a sentencing judge must consider any aggravating or
mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the offender: see Criminal
Code, s. 718.2(a).
[83]       
An inventory of
aggravating and mitigating circumstances relating to the offence and the
offender is essential to evaluating the offence's gravity and the offender's
degree of responsibility in its commission. They push the sentence up or down
the scale of appropriate sentences within the established sentencing range: see
Nasogaluak, at para. 43.
[84]       
I will begin with
the aggravating factors before turning to the mitigating.
[85]       
First, Mr. Sandhu
engaged in some planning before committing his offence, which is a significant
aggravating factor: see Criminal Code, s. 718.21(b). Although that was a
contested issue at the sentencing hearing, I am satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt that he did. In coming to that conclusion, I rely on the cumulative
effect of all the evidence, which includes Mr. Sandhu's extreme anger at Mr.
Bhoon's group for being at his home that evening, his ominous threat for them
to wait and "see what would happen," his summoning of his brother and
his brother's friends to the location, and, most critically, his disconnecting
the surveillance camera before their arrival. Based on all this evidence, I am
sure Mr. Sandhu orchestrated the confrontation between the two groups, anticipating
violence would be the result; the cumulative effect of all the evidence leaves
no alternative explanation.
[86]       
Second, the steps
that Mr. Sandhu took after the shooting to cover up the crime are also
aggravating. By the time he was on the phone with the 911 operator, Mr. Sandhu
knew there had been a shooting. Instead of telling the truth to ensure that
emergency personnel could respond appropriately to the men who lay injured on
the street, Mr. Sandhu lied. Further, Mr. Sandhu restored his phone to factory
settings shortly after the shooting, no doubt because he had, rather callously,
mocked Mr. Jagpal and Mr. Sadhara as they lay injured on the street. Mr.
Sandhu's conduct in the aftermath of the shooting is a significant aggravating
factor.
[87]       
Finally, the
devastating impact of Mr. Sandhu's crime on Mr. Jagpal's immediate and extended
family is an aggravating factor: see Criminal Code, s. 718.2(a)(iii.1).
They have been profoundly affected by this senseless crime and the tragic loss
of Mr. Jagpal at such a young age. Unfortunately, due to Mr. Sandhu's actions,
their lives will never be the same.
[88]       
Before turning to
the mitigating factors, it is necessary to address a further potential
aggravating factor that the Crown urged the court to find.
[89]       
Ms. Holmes argued
that Mr. Sandhu was aware the young person possessed a handgun when he called
his brother and asked him to return to their residence along with his brother’s
friends. If true, it would make Mr. Sandhu's criminal conduct even more
culpable, suggesting that he had planned for a shooting rather than a street
brawl.
[90]       
There is no direct
evidence that Mr. Sandhu knew about the handgun before the young person
brandished it on the street that evening, and before Mr. Sandhu encouraged him
to shoot Mr. Jagpal and other members of Mr. Bhoon's group in the legs. During
his testimony, the young person denied that Mr. Sandhu knew he had a gun.
However, given the verdict, the jury must have rejected the young person's
testimony. I agree with their assessment that the young person was not a
credible witness.
[91]       
Based on everything
Mr. Sandhu said and did before, during, and immediately after the fatal
confrontation, it seems likely that he was aware of the handgun beforehand.
However, I cannot be sure of this. The same evidence also furnishes an
alternative inference: that Mr. Sandhu called his brother and his brother's
friends that evening anticipating a violent altercation would ensue when they
arrived and remained unaware of the handgun until the young person brandished
it. Upon seeing the gun, he may have succumbed to his anger and rashly
encouraged its use. While this second scenario seems less likely, the evidence
does not meet the stringent standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt
required for establishing aggravating facts on sentencing: see Criminal Code,
s. 724(3)(e).
[92]       
I turn next to the
mitigating factors. There are several, and at least some of them are
significant.
[93]       
First, there is Mr.
Sandhu's youth. At the time, he was only 18 years old—an offender's youth is a
significant mitigating factor when sentencing. Unlike older adults, "young
adults are more impulsive, emotionally volatile, and susceptible to negative
influences and bad judgment," which "can make them less blameworthy
than more mature adults": Habib, at para. 35.
[94]       
Second, Mr. Sandhu
does not have a criminal record; he is a first offender. The absence of a prior
criminal record is also a mitigating factor when sentencing: see R. v. Dobis
(2002), 2002 CanLII 32815 (ON CA), 58 O.R. (3d) 536 (C.A.), at para. 28. No doubt, that is because the
absence of a criminal record suggests that before their offence, an offender had
lived a prosocial life, suggesting their offence may be an aberration which
reflects positively on their prospects for rehabilitation: see Clayton C. Ruby,
Sentencing, 10th ed. (Toronto: LexisNexis, 2020), at §8.16.
[95]       
Third, throughout
his life and since he committed his offence, Mr. Sandhu has enjoyed the love
and support of his parents. Family support is a mitigating factor because it
bodes well for an offender's eventual reintegration into the community and
potential for rehabilitation.
[96]       
Fourth, Mr. Sandhu
has spent nearly three years subject to very restrictive bail conditions. He
has only been allowed to leave his home when accompanied by one of his
sureties. Therefore, Mr. Sandhu's time subject to house arrest bail is
deserving of consideration as a relevant mitigating factor and something the
court must consider in determining the appropriate sentence: see R. v.
Downes (2006), 2006 CanLII 3957 (ON CA), 79 O.R. (3d) 321 (C.A.), at para. 37.
[97]       
Finally, based on
his comments to the author of the pre-sentence report and Mr. Crothers, Mr.
Sandhu has expressed some remorse for his crime. When an offender is genuinely
remorseful, it demonstrates they have insight into their wrongdoing and take
responsibility for it, which reflects positively on their prospects for
rehabilitation. As a result, genuine remorse constitutes a mitigating factor:
see R. v. Reeve, 2020 ONCA 381, 151 O.R. (3d) 65, at para. 11.
[98]       
However, I am
hard-pressed to place too much weight on Mr. Sandhu's comments to the author of
the pre-sentence report—his expression of "sympathy" for Mr. Jagpal's
family falls far short of accepting responsibility. It is also difficult to
gauge whether Mr. Sandhu is genuinely remorseful based on comments filtered
through the representations of defence counsel. In the circumstances, I am less
than satisfied that Mr. Sandhu accepts full responsibility for his role in
causing Mr. Jagpal's death and, therefore, that he is genuinely remorseful for
his actions.
[99]       
To arrive at the
appropriate sentence, the court must remember the purpose, objectives, and
principles of sentencing, the sentencing range for manslaughter with a firearm,
and the aggravating and mitigating circumstances relating to Mr. Sandhu and his
offence. While doing so, the court must respect the principle of parity, an
essential guide in arriving at a proportionate sentence. Finally, the court
must be especially mindful of the principles that guide the exercise of its
discretion when sentencing youthful offenders.
[100]    
As
noted, Mr. Sandhu's offence falls within the eight to 12-year sentencing range.
That is because of the significant aggravating factors surrounding its
commission, particularly: (i) that he summoned his brother and his brother's
friends to his residence that evening intending to facilitate a violent
confrontation, (ii) that, after he saw the handgun, he repeatedly encouraged
the young person to shoot Mr. Jagpal and the other members of Mr. Bhoon's group
in the legs, and (iii) the efforts he undertook in the aftermath of the crime
to conceal his involvement.
[101]    
This
collection of circumstances makes Mr. Sandhu's offence a gravely serious
example of manslaughter. Extensive research has failed to yield a sentencing
precedent that parallels the circumstances of this offence. Nevertheless,
manslaughter sentencing decisions involving youthful first offenders who were
parties to shootings are instructive at arriving at an appropriate sentence,
remembering that proportionality requires respecting the principle of parity.
[102]    
In R.
v. Khan, 2023 ONCA 553, the offender participated in a home
invasion robbery during which one of his accomplices shot and killed the
victim. The trial judge found that he knew about the gun and that it might be
used during the robbery. The offender was 18 years old at the time of the
offence and had no prior criminal record. He had a supportive family but fell
in with a negative peer group and became involved with gang activity. He
attempted to plead guilty to manslaughter at the beginning of his murder trial,
but the Crown rejected his plea. The jury found him guilty of manslaughter. The
trial judge concluded he was genuinely remorseful and expressed cautious
optimism about his rehabilitative prospects. The Court of Appeal upheld the
trial judge's sentence of eight and a half years in prison, describing it as
"at the lower end of the applicable range": at para. 14.
[103]     In Kwayke,
the offender participated in a robbery during which an accomplice shot and
killed the victim. He was 18 at the time of the offence and did not have a
criminal record. The Court of Appeal identified two errors in principle, the
trial judge’s failure to give adequate weight to rehabilitation and his failure
to address whether the offender knew that his accomplice would use the gun.
After assessing the evidence at trial, the Court of Appeal could not conclude
that the offender foresaw the risk of his accomplice using the firearm: at
para. 5. It reduced the ten-year sentence imposed by the trial judge and
substituted a seven-year sentence: at para. 6.
[104]     In R.
v. Wilson, 2024 ONSC 1357, the offender pleaded guilty to
manslaughter. Along with five others, he planned to rob the victim of drugs.
During the robbery, one of his accomplices produced a handgun and shot and
killed the victim. There was no evidence that anyone other than the shooter had
brought a weapon to the robbery or that anyone other than the shooter knew
about the handgun before its use: at para. 10. At the time of the offence, the
offender was 20 and had no criminal record. The trial judge imposed a five-year
sentence, less credit for pre-sentence custody.
[105]     The youthful first
offenders in each of these cases participated
in robberies during which their accomplices shot and killed the victim, thereby
making them culpable for manslaughter as parties under section 21(2) of the Criminal
Code because robbery is a crime that invariably gives rise to an
objectively foreseeable risk of occasioning bodily harm to the victim: see R. v. Jackson 1993 CanLII 53 (SCC), [1993] 4 S.C.R.
573, at p. 586-587; R. v. Portillo (2003), 2003 CanLII 5709 (ON CA), 176 C.C.C. (3d) 467 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 73. Their
sentences varied based on their level of culpability, a function of whether
they knew about the firearm and, if they did, whether they also subjectively appreciated
the potential for its use.
[106]     By comparison, Mr. Sandhu's role in causing Mr. Jagpal's death
is much more blameworthy. Although Mr. Sandhu did not participate in a planned
robbery, he made sustained efforts to orchestrate a violent confrontation. Even
more critically, he played an instrumental role in the killing by repeatedly
encouraging the young person to shoot Mr. Jagpal and the other members of Mr.
Bhoon's group in the legs. Therefore, his conduct is more culpable because it
gave rise to a far more obvious risk of occasioning serious bodily harm to the
victims.
[107]     As a result, if not for the significant mitigating factors, the
circumstances of his offence would have warranted a sentence at the upper end
of the applicable range; Mr. Sandhu's offence is simply that serious.
[108]     However, to properly
account for the mitigating factors, particularly Mr. Sandhu's youth, the fact
that he is a first offender, and his family support, all of which indicate he
has strong rehabilitative prospects, a sentence of nine years imprisonment is
appropriate. That sentence also accounts for Mr. Sandhu's three years spent
subject to very restrictive bail conditions.
[109]     At the same time, a
nine-year sentence is substantial enough to adequately address the objectives
of denunciation and deterrence, which are pressing considerations because the
crime involved deadly handgun violence. Any shorter sentence would not
sufficiently account for the gravity of Mr. Sandhu's crime.
[110]    
Although
nine-years imprisonment is a very long sentence for someone like Mr. Sandhu,
who is only 21 and still in the very early stages of maturing into adulthood,
it still leaves much room for his eventual rehabilitation, which remains a
pressing sentencing objective because of his age and the fact that he does not
have any prior criminal record.
[111]    
For
these reasons, nine years of imprisonment is the appropriate sentence given the
circumstances of this offence and this offender.
[112]    
Mr.
Sandhu spent 49 days in pre-sentence custody before securing his release on
bail. He is entitled to credit for that time at the ordinary rate of 1.5 days
to 1: see Criminal Code, ss. 719(3),
719(3.1); R. v. Summers, 2014 SCC 26,
[2014] S.C.R. 575, at para. 71. It
follows that Mr. Sandhu should
receive 74 days of credit for his time spent in pre-sentence custody.
[113]    
Accordingly,
Mr. Sandhu is sentenced to 8 years and 291 days of
imprisonment.
[114]    
Additionally,
the court shall issue a DNA order and a lifetime weapons prohibition order
under section 109 of the Criminal Code.
[115]    
Finally,
a $200 victim surcharge is payable, and Mr. Sandhu will have ten years to pay
that amount.