[1]              
On February 12, 2015, Cristy Mitton (“Mitton”) lost
control of her vehicle, entered the lane of Ronald Busch’s (“Busch”) oncoming
vehicle, and a collision resulted. Both drivers were seriously injured. Busch
commenced an action against Mitton for damages. Mitton commenced a Third Party Claim
against the Ministry of Transportation and its winter operation’s contractor,
Carillion Canada Inc. alleging negligent winter maintenance. The MTO is
vicariously responsible for any liability found against Carillon Canada. Accordingly,
the third parties will collectively be referred to as the “MTO”.
[2]              
The parties agree that Busch has no liability for
this accident. The main action between Busch and Mitton resolved with Mitton
admitting 1% liability and paying Busch’s damages. The MTO accepts this
settlement of the main action as reasonable.
[3]              
The sole issue at trial is the liability of the
MTO.
[4]              
Four fact witnesses were called at trial:
[5]              
In addition, Mitton’s counsel read in excerpts
from the transcript of the discovery of Lloyd George, Superintendent of
Construction and Operations with Carillion Canada and John Potts, Maintenance
Superintendent with the Ministry of Transportation.
[6]              
The parties also provided the court with a Joint
Liability Brief. Given the resolution of the main action, some of the documents
had to be removed. The removal of those documents was on consent. The redacted
Joint Liability Brief was entered as an exhibit and the parties agreed on the
use to which those remaining documents could be put for evidentiary purposes.
[7]              
Each party called one expert. While the expert
reports were not put into evidence, the parties agreed to make many of the
summaries, charts and photos contained therein formal exhibits at trial to be
relied upon as evidence. The parties also agreed to file the GPS recordings
relied upon by the experts as exhibits.
[8]              
Overall, there were very few factual
inconsistencies between the various witnesses. The experts also accepted the
underlying documentation as accurate.
[9]              
On the morning of February 12, 2015, Busch testified
that he left his home on Lake Dore Road for work at the Canadian Forces base in
Petawawa. Busch remembered that morning as being very cold, with sufficient
snow on his vehicle that he had to brush it off. There was no ice on his
vehicle, only loose snow. Busch also recalled there was enough snow accumulation
for him to note that he would need to use his snowblower on his driveway when
he returned home later that evening.
[10]          
Busch was asked for his recollection of the
temperature. He thought it was between -15˚C and -20˚C. He did not
know for certain. He described it as a beautiful, clear morning.
[11]          
From Lake Dore Road, Busch turned northbound on
Highway 41 towards Pembroke. He described Highway 41 as “snow covered to centre
bare”. When Busch was asked to give his definition of “snow covered to centre
bare,” he indicated he meant parts of the roadway were snow covered and other
parts of the roadway were bare pavement at the centre but remained snow covered
closer to the shoulders on each side.
[12]          
Highway 41 is a two-lane highway with a posted
speed limit of 80 km/hr. When conditions are good, Busch would normally drive 90-95
km/hr on this highway. Due to the conditions on February 12, 2015, Busch reduced
his speed to 70 km/hr. He had no problem with traction while on Highway 41. He
described the roads as “not great” but would not call them poor.
[13]          
Busch recalled having traveled for about five
minutes on Highway 41, and had just passed Walsh’s Road, when he saw Mitton’s
sedan in the southbound lane driving towards him. He recalled Mitton’s vehicle coming
over a slight rise and slight bend in the highway when he saw the back end of
the vehicle swing into his northbound lane. As he watched, Mitton’s vehicle
seemed to correct, with its back end returning to the southbound lane and Busch
recalled thinking: “oh they’ve got it”. A brief moment later, the vehicle’s back
end swung more heavily into his lane. Busch then watched as the vehicle’s front
end “hooked” sharply turning into his northbound lane. Busch pressed hard on
the brake and moved into the shoulder but could not avoid the collision. Mitton’s
vehicle collided with the driver’s side of Busch’s vehicle at a 30-45˚
angle.
[14]          
On cross-examination, Busch confirmed that he
saw Mitton lose control as she was coming out of a slight bend in the highway.
He believed Mitton was traveling at a greater speed than he was but could not
be sure. When Busch braked hard after the Mitton vehicle “hooked” into his
lane, he had no issue with skidding or sliding.
[15]          
Mitton was called as a witness. She had no
recollection of the day of the accident and had no evidence as to either the
driving conditions that morning, or the cause of her loss of control. She
described herself as a careful and experienced driver. She was very familiar
with this stretch of Highway 41 as it was her route to work. She was driving to
work on the day in question and does not believe she was in any hurry. Her
evidence was that she would normally adjust her speed for the road conditions.
[16]          
The winter forecast for February 12, 2015 predicted
temperatures to drop during the daytime hours on February 12. This is atypical.
Generally temperatures rise during daytime hours and get colder overnight. On
February 12, it was forecasted to do the opposite.
[17]          
Both parties agree that as of 6:00 a.m. on
February 12th, the likely temperature in the area of the accident
was -12˚C. The temperature continued to fall. When salting commenced at
7:24 a.m., the temperature in the area of the accident had dropped to between
-14˚C and -15˚C. By the time of the accident, the temperature in the
area was between -15˚C and -17˚C.[1]
Temperatures were forecasted to continue to fall, reaching -29˚C in the
evening of February 12.
[18]          
Sunrise on February 12, 2015 was at 7:15 a.m.
[19]          
The parties agree that this accident occurred at
8:23 a.m.
[20]          
Lars Romeski (“Romeski”) was an ambulance attendant
on scene. He completed the Ambulance Call Report (“ACR”) for Busch. In addition
to the information in the ACR, Romeski also has an independent recollection of
this accident. He recalled it being extremely cold that morning, so much so
that as he provided medical attention to Busch, he needed to swap out with
another attendant to warm his hands. He also recalled that one of the concerns
he had when treating Busch was Busch’s risk of hypothermia. Fortunately, Busch,
a helicopter pilot with the Canadian military, was wearing long underwear under
his flight suit.
[21]          
On the ACR, Romeski recorded the temperature as -15˚C
plus windchill.[2]
 He also recorded the roads on his way to the accident scene as being “poor”,
but made no specific note about Highway 41, the accident site, or the area of
the highway where Mitton likely lost control.
[22]          
Staff Sergeant Maryann MacNeil (“MacNeil”) was one
of the police officers investigating this accident. MacNeil completed the Motor
Vehicle Accident Report (“MVAR”). She does not have any independent
recollection of this accident other than what was recorded in her notes and on the
MVAR. Any notations regarding the roadway she made were with respect to the
collision site. MacNeil did not record any observation of the area where Mitton
likely lost control. MacNeil also did not record the outside temperature at the
time of the accident. Her notes last recorded the temperature at 6:00 a.m. as
-12˚C.
[23]          
For the collision site, MacNeil recorded the
roadway as flat and straight with loose snow. There is an option on the MVAR to
record “ice” as the roadway’s condition. MacNeil did not select that option. She
did not give evidence of having any difficulty driving to the accident scene. When
determining the cause of the accident, MacNeil marked that Mitton was driving
too fast for the conditions. During her evidence, she agreed that the
conditions of the road contributed to the accident.
[24]          
No witnesses were called to give evidence of icy
roads in this area. Neither of the first responders testified to slipping while
walking around the scene attending to Busch and Mitton.  The court was not
given any approximate distance between where Mitton lost control and where the
collision occurred.
[25]          
The MTO has established winter maintenance
instructions for its contractors: Maintenance Operating Instruction M-700-C:Winter
Maintenance Operations During Winter Season (“M-700-C”).[3] In describing the
efficacy of the recommended treatments within these instructions, the MTO
states:
[26]          
Within these instructions, the winter operators
are required to monitor weather reports and regularly patrol the roadways in
order to make informed decisions on whether to plow, salt, or sand. Those three
actions are the tools within the winter maintenance operator’s toolbox.[4]
[27]          
With respect to sanding, the relevant portions
of M-700-C are:
[28]          
With respect to salting, the relevant portions
of M-700-C are:
[29]          
There is a chart within M-700-C to clarify for
contractors which tools (plowing, sanding, or salting) are recommended to be
used under certain conditions. For temperatures between -12˚C and -18˚C,
with packed snow, sanding is recommended to be applied on slippery sections.
Salt is not recommended unless temperatures are expected to rise. At the bottom
of that table, however, the following provision is included:
[30]          
Ongoing patrolling is required to determine if
the winter operations are being successful and/or to identify any areas that
require specific attention. Patrolling was a key issue in dispute between the
experts. Therefore, the patrolling requirements under M-700-C must be borne in
mind.
[31]          
Within M-700-C, there are specific patrolling
requirements:
[32]          
Therefore, under the contract, patrolling is
required in advance and during a winter event. Patrollers will note the
conditions on their routes and will call into the MTO field office to report
those conditions and steps being taken. The stretch of Highway 41 at issue in
this litigation is referred to either as Route 22 or Patrol No. 4373A,
depending on which MTO record is being reviewed.
[33]          
A patroller is required to complete a Road
Patrol Information sheet setting out the routes, the patroller, and documenting
road conditions and steps taken. There are no Road Patrol Information sheets
for Patrol Route 4373A. There are patrolling records for nearby routes 4373 and
4372. The patroller who completed those records was Gerard Lorbetskie (“Lorbetskie”).
[34]          
The MTO logs record Lorbetskie calling into the
field office and providing a report of the temperature, road conditions, and
winter operations for 4373, 4372 and 4373A, notwithstanding he does not appear
to have traversed Route 4373A at any point during his shift. The information he
provides for these three routes is identical.
[35]          
At 7:20 a.m. on February 12,. Lorbetskie called
into the field office and reported the following to operator M.Campbell for
4373A:
[36]          
Lorbetskie gave the same exact information for
Route 4372 and 4373. It seems clear that Lorbetskie was using his patrolling of
nearby routes and simply assuming those same conditions existed on Patrol Route
4373A.
[37]          
The MTO set a target for its contractors to
reach bare pavement as soon as possible after a winter event.[5] For a Class 2 Highway
such as Highway 41, the contractual target is for the contractor to reach bare
pavement in their geographic area within 16 hours of the winter event ending.
[38]          
As both experts explained to the court, if snow becomes
packed on the roadway, it cannot be cleared by plowing alone. It also cannot be
cleared by spreading sand. Sand does not break up snow-packed roads as the snow
has already bonded to the roadway. Sand only provides immediate traction. The
only way to clear packed snow is to spread salt, wait for approximately 30
minutes for the salt to create a brine to break up the packed snow, and then
plow the brine/broken snow mixture away. Given the falling temperatures, had
salt not been applied to break up the snow during the morning of February 12,
the roads would have remained partially snow-packed until the temperatures
began to rise again. There was no evidence of when temperatures were expected
to rise, only that temperatures were going to continue to fall to -29˚C
throughout the day on February 12.
[39]          
Each side called one expert. For Mitton, that
expert was Russell Brownlee (“Brownlee”). The MTO’s expert was Timothy Leggett
(“Leggett”). Neither party took issue with the qualification of the other’s
expert. Both were qualified to provide an opinion as to the appropriateness and
sufficiency of the winter maintenance undertaken by the MTO on February 11-12,
2015 and the impact of that winter maintenance on Mitton’s loss of control of
her vehicle. Leggett was also qualified as an expert in accident
reconstruction.
[40]          
Brownlee’s criticisms with respect to the MTO’s
maintenance can be summarized as follows:
[41]          
The accident occurred on Plow and Spread Route
22 (“Route 22”). A patrolling supervisor and patrollers operated in the area,
but none passed over Route 22 specifically. While Brownlee conceded that winter
operators could also provide patrolling functions, it was his opinion that
designated patrollers (i.e., individuals who were only tasked with the
patrolling function) should have been actively monitoring the area particularly
as salt was being used to ensure it was effective. In Brownlee’s opinion, had
patrollers been actively patrolling Route 22, the MTO would have realized that
salt would have limited effectiveness and that sanding and continuous plowing
were required.
[42]          
During his cross-examination, Brownlee was
questioned about each action taken by the MTO between 5:15 p.m. on February 11 and
6:40 a.m. on February 12. He had no issue with any of the operations performed
during that time period. Although there was no evidence of patrolling, Brownlee
accepted that each step taken by the winter operator made sense for the time of
day and apparent road conditions and therefore, was appropriate. Those steps
included:
[43]          
Brownlee’s criticism of the MTO appears to be
based on the fact that hills and curves were treated with sand during the 11:15
p.m. pass and the 5:10 a.m. pass but nothing other than plowing was done for
the straight stretches of the highway.
[44]          
The difficulty in Brownlee’s evidence is that he
appears to have assumed Mitton lost control on a straight and flat area of
Highway 41. While it is true that the collision occurred on a straight portion
of the highway, Busch’s evidence was that Mitton lost control as her vehicle
was coming over a hill and coming out of a slight bend in the roadway. That was
the only evidence as to where Mitton lost control.
[45]          
I note that the map of Route 22 filed as an
Exhibit depicts the area of the collision is in the middle of a long, straight
stretch of Highway 41, but this map does not identify every slight curve in the
highway, nor does it show hills. The GPS video of the winter operator’s actions
as he is sanding “hills and curves” confirms sand is being applied throughout
this stretch the highway, either because there is a slight bend in the road
that is not picked up by this map, or there is a hill.
[46]          
As a result, I find that Brownlee was mistaken
in his conclusion that the area in which Mitton lost control had not been
treated with sand prior to the accident. I find it more probable than not that
the area where Mitton lost control was treated with sand during the winter operations
performed on February 11 between 7:15 p.m. and 8:40 p.m., and between 11:15
p.m. and 00:34 a.m., and on February 12 between 5:10 a.m. and 6:40 a.m.
[47]          
At 7:24 a.m. on February 12, the winter operator
began to salt the northbound lane reaching the area of the collision and where
Mitton lost control at approximately 7:45 a.m. In Brownlee’s opinion, given the
time of day (shortly after sunrise) and the air temperature (below -12˚C),
spreading salt at this time was contrary to industrypractice. In his view, had
continuous plowing and sanding occurred during the winter operations performed
at 7:24 a.m., this would have likely addressed the snow-covered sections of the
roadway and improved traction for Mitton, thereby reducing the chance of her
losing control of her vehicle.
[48]          
Brownlee conceded, however, that had sand been
applied on the run at 7:24 a.m., while the temperatures continued to drop, salt
would not have been usable in the runs that followed. This would mean that this
stretch of Highway 41 would have continued to be snow-packed until the
temperatures rose above -18˚C during the daytime hours. That could have
been days later. According to Brownlee, it is not uncommon for northern
highways to remain partially snow-packed during the winter months.
[49]          
During cross-examination, Brownlee was asked
about the winter operations that continued after the accident. Even though the
temperature continued to fall, the MTO spread salt again later that morning and,
by late afternoon, the highway had been returned to bare pavement. Brownlee did
not criticize the second application of salt at 1:00 p.m. on February 12 even
though it was applied when the temperature was -17˚C because, in his view,
it was a sunny day and he presumed that the road surface temperature had increased
from the sun and traffic. As long as the roads were being properly monitored to
ensure they met the proper conditions for the salt’s effectiveness and a
refreeze was not occurring, Brownlee took no issue with the MTO exercising
judgment and using salt below the preferred temperature of -12˚C.
[50]          
The difficulty with this part of Brownlee’s
opinion is that there is not enough time between the application of salt at
7:45 a.m. on February 12 and the accident at 8:23 a.m. for the MTO to do
anything other than what it was doing—returning to plow the salt brine/broken
up snow mixture that had formed on the highway. This is not a case where the
MTO applied salt and left the road unattended for hours. The accident
unfortunately occurred in the middle of the ongoing winter operations.
[51]          
The MTO called Leggett as their expert. Leggett
is a registered professional mechanical engineer in the provinces of British
Columbia and Ontario. He has been involved in motor vehicle accident
reconstruction with a particular emphasis on winter road maintenance.
[52]          
Leggett agreed with Brownlee’s timeline of the
winter operations performed, but he did not take issue with a lack of
patrolling. In his opinion, the individuals performing the winter operations
also perform a patrolling function, thereby meeting the patrolling requirements
under the contract.
[53]          
In Leggett’s view, the snow removal contractor
made the right decision to switch from salt to sand in the early hours of February
12 for the following reasons:
[54]          
During cross-examination, Leggett was faced with
the decision of Wasylyk v. County of Simcoe[8], a case in which he
testified as an expert witness on behalf of the plaintiff. As in the case
before me, in Wasylyk, Leggett examined winter road maintenance
procedures, policies, and practices in effect as of the date of the collision
and provided his opinion as to whether the decision to use salt in that case
was appropriate. In Wasylyk, Leggett opined that in the circumstances of
that case, salt should not have been used. The following is the trial judge’s
summary of Leggett’s opinion commencing at para. 146:
[55]          
Mitton suggests that Leggett is being
inconsistent in his opinion in the case before me by now suggesting salting was
appropriate, by failing to find a refreeze, and by failing to find an issue
with the level of patrolling performed.
[56]          
The difficulty for Mitton is that the winter
event in Wasylyk was completely different than the winter event on February
11-12, 2015. In Wasylyk, the ongoing weather event was much heavier.
Once the snow stopped, the winter maintenance operators in Wasylyk had
to contend with drifting snow and ongoing snow squalls: see Wasylyk, at
para. 18.
[57]          
Leggett, testifying in Wasylyk, gave
evidence that salt acts as a binding agent to snow. As a result, when there are
snow squalls or significant drifting snow and salt is spread, it causes that
drifting snow to stick to the roadway instead of blowing by. In other words, it
acts like a magnet, creating snow-packed roadways rather than preventing them:
at para. 147. However, in the case before me, there is no reference to drifting
snow in the area of the accident at the time the decision was made to switch
from sand to salt.
[58]          
With respect to a refreeze, Leggett conceded in
his evidence before me that a refreeze can occur when salt is applied at too
low a temperature. There is, however, no evidence that such a refreeze occurred
between the salt application at 7:45 a.m. and the accident at 8:23 a.m. on
February 12.
[59]          
Finally, while Leggett criticized the
municipality in Wasylyk for not continuously patrolling after they began
to apply salt, in this case, there is insufficient time between the salt
application and the time of the accident to have any concern over lack of
patrolling. In addition, Leggett accepts that winter operators provide a
patrolling function and one such operator was on his way back to plow the
subject area. Mitton’s vehicle was, unfortunately, ahead of the plow.
[60]          
As a result, I do not find Leggett’s opinion in
the case before me to be inconsistent with Wasylyk.
[61]          
As stated several times in these reasons, the experts
agreed on most of the chronology and the decisions made by the MTO. Where the
experts differed, I preferred the opinion of Leggett for the following reasons:
[62]          
Based all of the evidence, I make the following
findings of fact:
[63]          
The following issues were tried before me:
[64]          
The MTO takes the position that this litigation
is barred from moving forward following Mitton’s admission of 1% liability when
settling the main action. In the alternative, the MTO states that the
circumstances of this accident demonstrate obvious negligence on the part of
Mitton, therefore barring any liability against the MTO.
[65]          
To support this proposition, the MTO relies upon
a series of cases that state that road authorities do not have a duty to
maintain the roadway for negligent drivers: see e.g., Deering v. Scugog
(Township)[10].
The MTO submits that any duty of road authorities is only owed to the ordinary
driver exercising reasonable care. When defining “ordinary driver”, the MTO relies
upon the following quote from McLeod v. General Motors of Canada Limited et
al.[11]:
[66]          
Simply put, it is the MTO’s position that once a
driver is found to be negligent, the MTO no longer has a duty of care to that
driver and cannot be found evenly partially responsible for the loss. Interestingly,
the quote above is only part of the paragraph from McLeod. The MTO left
out the following sentences that precede what it quoted to the court:
[67]          
Mistakes attract liability in civil cases. The
court’s comments in McLeod cannot be reconciled with the MTO’s
submission that only innocent drivers can sue road authorities. There is also a
significant difference between a driver who runs a stop sign[13] and a driver who fails
to reduce her speed enough for the winter conditions as would appear to be the
case with Mitton.
[68]          
Here, the MTO relies upon the police officer’s
conclusion that Mitton was “driving too fast for the road conditions” as a confirmation
that Mitton was “driving at excessive speeds” and therefore negligent as found
in Deering[14];
however, I have no evidence of the actual speed of Mitton’s vehicle. She may
have made a mistake in failing to reduce her speed given the slipperiness of
the roadway at a curve; however, that mistake does not necessarily place 100%
responsibility on her and zero responsibility on the road authority responsible
for maintaining that curve during this winter event. Accepting the MTO’s argument
could potentially insulate road authorities from their winter maintenance responsibilities
provided they could place some element of mistake or misjudgment on the driver.
[69]          
I also note that Mitton’s admission of 1%
liability was necessary resolve the main action, pay the plaintiff, and proceed
solely with the trial of the Third Party Claim. It was an acknowledgement that,
given the facts of this case, Mitton would more than likely be found to be
partially responsible for the accident. I do not accept that this admission
acts as a barrier to Mitton pursuing the MTO. Mitton’s decision to resolve the
main action was prudent. It saved court time, the use of judicial resources, and
avoided dragging an innocent plaintiff through a full trial. These types of practical
concessions in litigation that streamline trials should be encouraged.
[70]          
The area of Highway 41 in question is classified
as a King’s Highway. Its maintenance is governed by the Public Transportation
and Highway Improvement Act (“PTHIA”)[15].
[71]          
The relevant statutory provisions under the PTHIA
are as follows:
[72]          
Mitton argues that upon the first fall of snow,
a King’s Highway falls into a state of non-repair requiring the MTO to correct
the default. Mitton takes the position that once that state of non-repair
occurs, the burden shifts to the MTO to prove it performed appropriate winter
maintenance. Put another way, according to Mitton, as soon as a winter event
starts, the MTO is responsible for every accident that occurs on their highways
during that winter event unless they can prove otherwise.
[73]          
I do not agree. In my view, this is far too
strict of a test. There is no obligation to commence winter operations at the
first fall of snow: see Simms v. Municipality of Metropolitan Toronto et al.[16]
[74]          
The MTO argues that the appropriate test for
liability is as stated by Rouleau J.A. in Lloyd v. Bush [“Lloyd (ONCA)”][17]:
[75]          
Many of the cases relied upon by both parties
involve roadways that are maintained by municipalities; however, there are
statutory defences under the Municipal Act, 2001[18] that are not available
under the PTHIA. As a result, I have applied a modified version of the Lloyd
(ONCA) test:
[76]          
This modified test is also consistent with
earlier caselaw such as Montani v. Matthews[19].
[77]          
In the case of R. v. Côté et al.[20], a state of non-repair
was found to be equivalent to a special and highly dangerous situation at a
certain location on the highway which otherwise to persons reasonably using it
was quite passable and usable for traffic.
[78]          
In Frank v. Central
Elgin[21], Laskin J.A. expanded the concept of “highly special dangerous situation”:
[79]          
In Lloyd (ONCA)[22], the court defined
a state of non-repair in this way:
[80]          
The winter event of February 11-12, 2015 caused Highway
41 to become partially snow-packed. It was partially snow-packed where Mitton
lost control. Both experts agree that snow-packed roads create a danger for
users of the highway.
[81]          
I therefore find that this stretch of Highway 41
was in a state of non-repair.
[82]          
The Supreme Court of Canada restated the test
for causation in Clements v. Clements[23], holding that the
question of causation does not involve merely identifying which causal factors
were involved in a particular event, but rather calls for a determination of
what causal factor(s) were necessary to a particular event:
[83]          
Mitton is a qualified driver who is very
familiar with driving on Highway 41 as this was her route to work. There is no
evidence that she was distracted or that her driving skills were impeded in any
way. It was a bright and clear day. Sections of Highway 41 were partially snow-packed.
Busch described the roads as “not great”.
[84]          
I find that, on a balance of probabilities, had
the road not been partially snow-packed, Mitton would not have lost control.
Causation has been met.
[85]          
Under the third prong of the test, the MTO has
the onus of proving that it took reasonable steps to prevent or address the
state of non-repair.
[86]          
Compliance with minimum standards or contractual
requirements does not provide a road authority with a complete defence. The
corollary is also true. The failure to comply does not automatically create
liability on the road authority. The facts of each case must be analyzed to
determine if reasonable steps were taken to address a state of non-repair: see e.g.
Lloyd (ONSC).[24]
[87]          
I have had the benefit of winter maintenance
records that both experts agree provide a reliable account of what maintenance
was performed. Even though Mitton has attempted to argue that there are
inconsistencies in the records, Mitton’s expert Brownlee, an expert in
reviewing these types of records, found the records to be sufficiently accurate
to allow him to render an opinion. Leggett, who has been an expert in over 500
cases, testified that the winter maintenance records produced by the MTO in
this case are one of the most complete sets of records he has ever reviewed.
[88]          
This is not always the case. In other cases, the
trial judge must piece together the winter operations performed from the
records kept and viva voce evidence: see e.g., Lloyd (ONSC).[25]
[89]          
Although there was no dedicated patroller who
traversed Route 22 during this winter event, I find that the winter operators
did provide a patrolling function. This is evidenced by their logs and by the
GPS video that shows the operator spot-sanding material during the runs that
began at 11:15 p.m. and 5:10 a.m.
[90]          
I also do not believe that patrolling or lack
thereof was causative to the state of the roadway when Mitton lost control as
the salt had only recently been applied and was still in the process of
creating the brine when the accident. Although I do not believe there was a
refreeze, even if there had been the beginning of a refreeze, the plow was already
on its way to this area. An independent patroller could not have identified a
dangerous situation and alerted the winter operator faster than what was
already being done.
[91]          
At 7:24 a.m. on February 12, the contractor
switched from applying sand to salt. After six days of evidence, that is the
singular decision that forms the crux of Mitton’s allegation against the MTO.
[92]          
Mitton makes the following arguments:
[93]          
The short answer is no. It does not. While using
salt is not recommended when temperatures are less than -12˚C, it is not
prohibited. The contract allows for the winter maintenance operator to use its
judgment. That was what was done here.
[94]          
The experts agreed that if salt had not been
applied as of that early morning pass at 7:46 a.m., the window to apply salt might
have closed as the temperature continued to drop. This would have meant that
the snow-packed roadway could have continued to be snow-packed until the
temperatures started to rise again. According to Leggett, the contractor had a
decision to make that morning—use this opportunity to apply salt and break up
the packed snow on the roadway to return the road to bare pavement, the safest
condition for drivers, or leave the packed snow on the roadway and continue to
apply sand until the temperature rose.
[95]          
This was a judgment call made when there was an
atypical forecast projecting falling temperatures during the day. There is a
reason the maintenance contract provides for the use of judgment. These are not
black and white decisions. Users of the highway rely on the expertise of winter
maintenance officials to use the information they have to make the best
decision possible. I find the MTO made the best decision it could on the
information available to it. I further find that the decision to switch from
sand to salt that morning was reasonable.
[96]          
While there does not have to be direct evidence
of a refreeze on this stretch of the road, and both experts acknowledge refreeze
could occur under these circumstances, I cannot reconcile Mitton’s suggestion of
a refreeze with the complete lack of evidence of any serious issue with this
roadway other than Mitton’s loss of control. Mitton’s read-ins from the
MTO’s transcripts suggest the MTO should have noted the condition of the
roadway when its plow eventually passed through the area after the accident;
the implication being that the lack of evidence on the condition of roadway is
the fault of the MTO. The court does not have any evidence as to how long it
took to clear the accident scene and reopen the roadway to allow the MTO
vehicles into the area. Any post-observations by the MTO would therefore likely
be irrelevant.
[97]          
The best evidence of the condition of this
roadway is from the three factual witnesses, Busch, Romeski, and MacNeil. None
of these witnesses testified to icy conditions on Highway 41. MacNeil’s MVAR also
did not record icy conditions.
[98]          
I also note that Busch’s uncontradicted evidence
was that his vehicle did not slide or skid when he pushed hard on his brakes to
try to avoid the collision. There is also no evidence of any other accidents in
the area or any alert from the police to the MTO to reattend this area after
the accident because of unsafe road conditions.
[99]          
On the evidence before me, I find that a
refreeze did not occur. I do not know why Mitton lost control but there is insufficient
evidence to support a finding that it was because the MTO’s use of salt created
an unsafe condition.
[100]      
This hypothetical misstates the issue before the
court. The issue is not whether the Ministry could have used a different
substance – the issue I must determine is whether the use of salt was
reasonable under all of the circumstances. For the reasons already stated, I
find that it was.
[101]      
As a result of the above, I find that the MTO’s
winter operations were reasonably addressing the state of non-repair of the
highway at the time of the accident. As a result, there is no liability on the
MTO.
[102]      
Given my finding that there is no liability on
the MTO, the last issue is moot.
[103]      
The Third Party Claim is dismissed.
[104]      
If the parties cannot agree on costs, the MTO
will have until Friday, December 6, 2024 to file cost submissions of no more
than 5 pages in length, double-spaced, excluding any offers to settle or bill
of costs. Mitton will have until Friday, December 13, 2024 to file responding cost
submissions under the same page restrictions.