[1]              
Following the demise of their 25-year marriage
in 2007, the parties resolved the spousal support issue mid-trial in 2013. Justice
de Sousa granted a final order (“Final Order”) dated February 1, 2013, whereby the
Husband would pay the Wife spousal support of $15,500.00 per month, as well as
an unqualified payment of $100,000.00. The Order included a mutual restraining
order prohibiting communication or approaching the other or being within 200
metres of their residences unless there was consent in writing through the
Wife’s lawyer. Additionally, the Order provided for the Husband to maintain $1 million
of irrevocable life insurance on his life in favour of the Wife. The Order was
to be enforced through the FRO.
[2]              
The Husband, a doctor, has recently given notice
of his intention to retire from his place of employment, and is seeking to
terminate spousal support. Though he initially commenced the motion to
terminate in Quebec, that was the improper jurisdiction.
[3]              
In the intervening time, the Wife commenced a
Motion to Change to readdress and readjust spousal support from January 1, 2014,
onward due to her continued declining health.
[4]              
This motion was argued in both official languages
but given that the Moving Party to the Motion to Change was the Wife, and she
pled in English, this Ruling is being released in English. The court will
provide a translation upon request of either party.
[5]              
Importantly, I did not consider inadmissible
hearsay evidence either party attempted to rely upon, including for instance
letters appended to affidavits not in compliance with the Family Law Rules
or the rules of evidence.
[6]              
The parties were married from June 19, 1982.
They separated on October 22, 2007 and divorced on May 27, 2009.
[7]              
Together, the parties had 3 children, born in 1985,
1986 and 1989.  The children are now fully independent adults.  At separation,
the youngest child was 17 years old, the oldest 21 years old. At the time the
Final Order was granted, the youngest was 23 years old.
[8]              
The Wife was qualified as a bilingual elementary
school teacher and worked one year early in their marriage. Following the birth
of the children, she chose to educate their children from home. In 2003, when
she stopped teaching the children, she decided not to return to work.
[9]              
It was not disputed that the Wife supported the
Husband’s education and training by making these career sacrifices.
[10]          
The Husband however argued that from 2003 until
2008 the Wife could work as she was taking care of the billing for his medical
practice for which she was remunerated.
[11]          
It was advanced by the Wife that she was unable
to return to work due to physiological and psychological reasons. In support of
her argument, she provided letters produced for the 2013 trial from her family
physician since the early 1990’s, Dr. Lise Beaubien, accompanied with her Acknowledgement
of Expert’s Duty. In 2012, Dr. Beaubien concluded that the Wife’s symptoms of
anxiety and depression were related to chronic PTSD, a consequence of chronic
physical and emotional abuse.  At that time, Dr. Beaubien felt the Wife would never
be able to sustain gainful employment due to her ongoing issues.
[12]          
In 2011, Dr. Bakish of the Ottawa
Psychopharmacology Clinic completed an IME at the Husband’s request. Attached
to his report was the Acknowledgement of Expert’s Duty. The report noted that
the Wife’s father psychologically abused her, and that she may suffer from chronic
PTSD due to the childhood abuse.  It was determined that the Wife suffers from
a major depressive disorder, anxious type which is complicated by a chronic
post traumatic stress disorder and has medication hypersensitivity. The
Doctor’s report also stated there was a very high probability that the abuse
experienced by the Wife prior to the date of marriage may have made it much
easier to develop or worsen PTSD with a new stressor. Further, it indicted that
as the Wife is hyper aroused, she seemed to be extremely sensitive to the
Husband’s alleged behaviour and believed there to be an unquantifiable association.
Dr. Bakish indicated that the Wife was at that time unable to work.
[13]          
Also, pre-dating the original trial dates, Dr. Black,
the Wife’s obstetrician, provided a report as to the Wife’s health at the
beginning of the marriage by way of letter dated July 29, 2011, along with an Acknowledgement
of Expert’s Duty. His evidence can best be summarized as indicating the Wife
was of excellent health and she has no other significant medical issues. While
the Wife argued this report went unchallenged, it is important to note that the
trial was resolved prior to completion. Further, Dr. Black made no specific
mention as to the Wife’s mental health, which as an obstetrician, would not
have been within his field of expertise.
[14]          
The Wife maintained that the physical abuse by
her father was “not physical abuse such as [she] suffered from [the Husband].” 
This was a contentious issue.
[15]          
In 2013, mid-trial, spousal support was resolved
on consent of both parties. Both parties agree that the support amount fixed
was based on mid-range support and the parties’ 2011 income. There is no
comment in the Final Order by Justice de Sousa as to the basis for spousal
support entitlement, quantum, or range.
[16]          
The Wife contended that the Husband “forced” the
matter to be heard bilingually, when in the past he proceeded in English, therefore
he was “unnecessarily prolonging and complicating this case and trying to hurt [her]
once again. It is [her] position that [the Husband] ought to be held
responsible for time and costs thrown away regardless of the cause in this
continuing of his effort to control and abuse me.”
[17]          
The Wife attributed the Husband’s attempt to
terminate spousal support in Quebec was a calculated move as “he knew I was ill
and hope [sic] I would simply not respond”, and as an attempt to deprive her of
her legal representation given her lawyer does not speak French.
[18]          
The Husband articulated his comfort level was greater
by pleading his case in French and he commenced the matter in the province in
which he resides.
[19]          
I am not persuaded there was an ulterior motive
for the Husband initially commencing the matter in Quebec. Further, pursuant to
s.126 of the Courts of Justice Act, the Husband’s language rights are
protected by the court. Bilingual proceedings are his right. Therefore, the Wife’s
submissions on this issue are rejected.
[20]          
In the context of this Motion to Change, both
parties relied on evidence from several experts. Most, if not all, at some
point in the litigation, complied with the requirement of filing an
Acknowledgment of Experts Duty.
[21]          
The evidence of Dr.
Garnham was tendered to be both based on her being a participant expert and a
litigation expert. There is a distinction that needs to be drawn about these
two types of experts. For reasons set out below, I find that Dr. Garnham’s
opinion evidence went beyond the scope of her expertise, and thus evidence
outside of her expertise is afforded no weight.
[22]          
As set out in Westerhof v. Gee Estate, participant
experts are defined as:
[23]          
Thus, “participant
experts” may give opinion evidence without complying with Rule 53.03 of
the Rules of
Civil Procedure (and thus Rule 20.1 of
the Family Law
Rules).
[24]          
In essence, the
distinction between participant and litigation experts turns on the words
“engaged by or on behalf of a party.” Participant experts testify to opinions
formed during their involvement in a matter. They are not engaged by a
party to form their opinions, and they do not form their opinions for the
purpose of the litigation. As such, a party does not “engage” an expert “to
provide [opinion] evidence in relation to a proceeding” simply by calling the
expert to testify about an opinion the expert has already formed.
[25]          
Similarly, the court
noted that if a participant expert also proffers
opinion evidence extending beyond the limits described above, they must
comply with rule 53.03 RCP
[or Rule 20.1 FLR] with respect to the portion of their opinions
extending beyond those limits.
[26]          
Rules 20.1(2) and (3) Family Law Rules
specifies that it is the duty of every expert: to:
[27]          
Rule 20.2(2) FLR requires: A party who
wishes to call a litigation expert as a witness at trial shall, at least six
days before the settlement conference, serve on all other parties and file a
report signed by the expert and containing, at a minimum, the following:
[28]          
Rule 20.2(14) stipulates that a party who wishes
to call a participant expert as a witness at trial shall,
[29]          
In Westerhof v. Gee Estate, a treating physician was permitted to testify about
opinions that arose directly from his treatment of his patient, the plaintiff
in the case. The treating physician was not required to comply with Rule 53.03,
and his opinion evidence was admitted for the truth of its contents. This was
because he formed his opinions relevant to the matters at issue while
participating in the events as part of the ordinary exercise of his expertise.
Accordingly, rather than being a stranger to the underlying events who gave an
opinion based on a review of documents or statements from others concerning
what had taken place, the treating physician formed his opinion based on direct
knowledge of the underlying facts. He was therefore a participant witness.
See Westerhof v. Gee Estate, supra, at
para. 70.
[30]          
The case law informs me
that I must first determine if the participant expert’s opinion falls within
the scope of what is allowed. Specifically, whether their opinion evidence is based upon their observation of or participation in the
events at issue; and if they formed that opinion as “part of the ordinary
exercise of his or her skill, knowledge, training and experience while
observing or participating in such events.” Then, looking at the court’s
gatekeeping function, the court may exclude evidence as inadmissible if it does
not meet  the criteria applicable to all expert evidence (Mohan factors):
[31]          
The party seeking to tender the expert evidence
has the evidential and legal burden to satisfy these criteria on a balance of probabilities.
See R. c. J. (J.), 2000 SCC 51 (S.C.C.) at
para. 50.
[32]          
The Supreme Court of Canada has recognized that
being properly qualified as an expert witness includes being willing and able
to fulfil one's duty to the court, which includes a duty of
impartiality. The court stated:
[33]          
The court in White Burgess Langille Inman v. Abbott and Haliburton Co.,
opined on long-standing concerns regarding expert witnesses:
[34]          
The court went on to conclude in White Burgess Langille Inman v. Abbott and Haliburton Co.:
[35]          
Unless mentioned herein, the evidence proffered
by the experts in this Motion to Change meet the requirements outlined above,
and thus their evidence is properly admissible.
[36]          
Dr. Garnham, the Wife’s psychiatrist, provided
letters under the guise of a participant expert and litigation expert. The Family
Law Rules provide distinct definitions for participant
experts and litigation experts, the latter of which is required to provide an Acknowledgment
of Expert’s Duty. This form requires the signatory to acknowledge that their
opinion evidence is “fair, objective and non-partisan... and is related to only
to matters which are within my area of expertise” and that the duty to the
court prevails over any obligation to the party.
[37]          
The most recent
evidence from Dr. Garnham, were her letters (“reports”) dated February 12,
2024, March 12, 2024, and August 4, 2024. In the first letter, Dr. Garnham
indicated that she was “providing this letter on behalf of [the Wife] regarding
her request for a retroactive increase in spousal support.” … “I have been
asked to comment specifically on the reason for her 'delay' in asking for
increased spousal support retroactively.” … She opines that “[t]herefore, my
medical opinion is that it is not at all surprising that [the Wife] has not
brought this issue forward sooner. I have been [the Wife’s] psychiatrist for
many years and I have witnessed the psychological damage that has occurred
whenever she must deal with her ex-husband.”  She also provided an addendum to
the report of February 12, 2024, on March 12, 2024, whereby she identified the
Wife’s PTSD as being a direct result of the Husband’s “physical, psychological
and verbal abuse throughout their marriage.”
[38]          
In Dr. Garnham’s letter
dated April 13, 2023, [B663 in Case Center], she refused to provide the medical
file upon which she based her opinion. Rule 20.2(14) FLR states that the participant
expert is to serve a copy of any documents supporting the opinion evidence the
participant expert plans to provide. In that same letter, Dr. Garnham stated: “[o]ther
than Ativan, she is unable to tolerate any traditional western pharmaceuticals
due to severe and, at times, life-threatening side-effects. This has made it
very difficult to treat her PTSD and Depression/Anxiety as effectively as
anti-depressants could.” However, at questioning, the Wife was unable to give
any evidence as to any “life-threatening side effects” which undermined this
opinion. Additionally, the medical evidence provided does not support the
conclusion that the Wife has Sjogren’s Syndrome. Further, in her report of
August 4, 2024, Dr. Garnham was asked to comment about the Husband’s
affidavit and opined that the Wife “has not fabricated nor attempted to
deceive” about her diagnosis of Sjogren’s Syndrome.
[39]          
Dr. Garnham is the Wife’s psychiatrist, yet I find
her opinion evidence went beyond the scope of her expertise. She refused to
provide her medical files which form the basis for the opinion, and instead
provided a two-page letter. Further, I find that much of her evidence did not
meet her duty of impartiality nor was it unbiased. Thus, any evidence that Dr.
Garnham provided that went beyond the scope of her expertise as a psychiatrist
is afforded no weight.
[40]          
Both parties sought to rely on their respective experts’
financial reports. The Husband provided a report from Jamie Jocsak (“Jocsak
report”) whereas the Wife provided a report from Baker Tilly (“Baker Tilly report”).
The parties each argue frailties regarding the other’s reports. Both reports
however comply with the FLR, and I find them to be properly in evidence.
[41]          
The Jocsak report, drafted by Jamie Jocsak, an Actuary
(F.S.A. / F.C.I.A.), dated June 22, 2023, was commissioned to determine the
difference between the Husband’s and Wife’s expected retirement income, based
on all assets currently available to them. The calculations in the report were
intended to be used to assist in income determination for the purpose of
determining post-retirement spousal support payable, if any.
[42]          
The Jocsak report makes the following
assumptions:
[43]          
The report relies on the parties’ respective financial
statements, which included their total RRSP values’ bank account values; total
cash / investments for the Husband’s professional corporation; total
non-registered investment value for the Wife; total TFSA value and total
home/rental equity (market value less mortgage). However, for the Husband, the
report used “[e]qual to 50% of the account balance, account joint with the
Husband’s current spouse, and equal to 50% of the equity in [the home in] Cantley
and [the rental property in] Ottawa, equity split with the Husband’s current
spouse (joint owner of both properties).”
[44]          
The report determined that the total after tax
income in retirement for the Husband will be $94,822; for the Wife: $80,621,
with a difference of $14,201.  The Equivalent total pre-tax (gross) income in
retirement for the Husband will be $134,252; for the Wife: $107,964; with a
difference of $26,288.
[45]          
An additional report was dated June 25, 2024,
addressing the Wife’s medical expenses, charitable donations and tax rates
used.
[46]          
Regarding the Wife’s medical expenses, the
report provided that if the Wife claimed medical expenses of approximately
$36,000 per year, based on the analysis in the June 2023 Actuarial Report, she
will not pay any income tax (i.e., her net income will increase by $6,099 per
year from the amount indicated in the June 2023 Actuarial Report, her projected
income tax).
[47]          
Based on the Wife’s charitable donations from
2010 to 2022, accumulating these amounts with interest based on the average
annual interest rates on personal fixed terms deposits results in a cumulative
value of $266,921.23 with interest as of July 1, 2023. Based on the same
assumptions and methodology detailed in the June 2023 Actuarial Report, these
funds are projected to have been sufficient to provide the Wife with an annual
after-tax income of $12,000 per year in 2023 dollars for her lifetime which
increases by the assumed future annual increase in CPI [consumer price index] each
year.
[48]          
Finally, while the initial report applied the
tax rates for an Ontario resident to the Husband, he resides in Quebec. Applying
tax rates for a Quebec resident to the Husband’s projected retirement income,
based on the analysis in the June 2023 Actuarial Report, the Husband will pay
additional income tax of $3,682 per year (i.e., his net income will decrease by
$3,682 per year from the amount indicated in the June 2023 Actuarial Report,
his projected additional income tax payable as a Quebec resident).
[49]          
The Baker Tilly report, who are Chartered
Professional Accountants, was commissioned with a view of calculating the
income available to the Husband for each of the 2012 to 2022 taxation years,
for the purpose of establishing support payments. For this report, they defined
"income available for support purposes" as the income available to
the Husband, during the time in question, that can reasonably be expected to
continue into the foreseeable future.  The report relied on sections 16 to 19
of the Child Support Guidelines in calculating the income available to
the Husband.
[50]          
Amongst the considerations detailed in the
report were the following:
[51]          
The report considered the professional
corporations balance sheets and income statements. The financial statements
showed that the professional corporation earned between $450,000 and $550,000
in revenues per year, with one exceptional year in 2014 where it earned
$640,000 in revenues; it carried an investment portfolio on its balance sheet
and earned a small amount of income related to portfolio investments each year
under review; salaries comprise the majority of expenses each year under
review, averaging 33-40% of revenues from 2021-2016, and jumping to 63-78% of
revenues in subsequent years; dividends were declared each year under review,
and capital dividends were declared some of the years under review; and the
corporation leased vehicles which the Husband also used for personal purposes.
[52]          
It reviewed copies of two Experts Reports (the
“Pittman Reports”) from the original trial, referencing 2007 to 2011 years and
made adjustments in line with s.16 of the Child Support Guidelines for
expenses such as meals and home office expenses.  It also made adjustments from
the 2012 to 2022 calendar years in conformity with Scheduled III of the Guidelines.
[53]          
It considered the Husband’s pattern of income
pursuant to s.17 of the Guidelines, as well as the income he is expected
to earn in the future with the following adjustments:
[54]          
There was a review of the pre-tax corporate
income as per s.18 of the Guidelines and what is available for
distribution from the professional corporation from 2012 to 2022.
[55]          
Thereafter, consideration of imputation of
income pursuant to s.19 of the Guidelines. Some amounts were imputed to
the Husband to include for instance some of the costs for meals and home
office.
[56]          
The report concluded that the Husband had the
following income available to him:
[57]          
The August 14, 2024, updated report of from
Baker Tilly provided for the Husband’s 2023 year and concluded that he had $
425,900 available income. The assumptions and methodology include similar
considerations as above, as well as the pension split for 2023.
[58]          
I note that the evidence does not support a
finding that the Husband has 100% ownership of the rental property located in Ottawa.
[59]          
The Wife was born September 28, 1961. When this
Motion to Change was argued, the Wife was 62 years old, turning 63 in late September
2024. The Husband was born December 19, 1960. At the hearing, the Husband was
63 years old, turning 64 in December 2024.
[60]          
In her Motion to Change dated August 26, 2022,
the Wife sought high-end spousal support retroactive to January 1, 2014. The
basis for this change was her deteriorating health and her continued inability
to work. At the hearing, she submitted it would be most appropriate to receive
a 50/50 NDI split due to the cost of her medical expenses.
[61]          
In her draft order at the hearing, she requested
annual disclosure “deemed necessary by a valuator to determine income for
spousal support purposes.”  She also sought a finding that the Husband engaged
in blameworthy conduct by refusing to provide financial disclosure from 2013 onward,
and a finding that the Husband’s income significantly and materially increased
from 2013 to 2022 and fixing spousal support arrears at $292,356.00.
[62]          
Regarding her deteriorating health, in her
Motion to Change, she stated:
[63]          
In her Affidavit in support of the final motion,
the Wife advanced continued inability to work, worsening chronic fatigue,
regular medial appointments, etc. Since the Final Order, the Wife identified
new medical issues such as sleep apnea from 2017; Raynaud’s syndrome from 2019;
concussion from 2019; a second concussion in early March 2024; and Pelvic Floor
Physiotherapy which started in June 2023.
[64]          
It was unclear how or if these were related to
the breakdown of the relationship. Other ailments were generalized without
dates or pre-date the Final Order. In her list of ailments, the Wife included:
“too risky to receive any vaccines including flu vaccine; to be able to drive
to North Bay to visit my son and my grandchildren, I need to stay in motel
overnight both ways” but did not indicate how this was relevant to the
threshold test. In her more recent evidence, the Wife suggested her 2024
expenses were to be over $45,000.00.
[65]          
The Wife was allegedly surprised by the receipt
of a medical note from Dr. Karsh, her family doctor, which identified that she
did not meet the criteria for Sjogren’s syndrome. The Wife maintained despite
same that “as far as I am aware, I think I have Sjogren syndrome among my many
health challenges, but I depend on my doctors for that particular diagnosis.”
[66]          
The Wife argued that the settlement resulting in
the Final Order was based on the Husband earning $425,284.00 “with weighted
average and personal expenses.”
[67]          
Her claim was based on a compensatory and
non-compensatory support, as she had sacrificed her career, was the primary
caregiver for the children and helped put the Husband through his medical
training.
[68]          
The Wife’s psychotherapist concurred with the
2011 report from Dr. Bakish and the 2023 report from Dr. Garnham that she
suffers from PTSD, major depressive disorder and major anxiety disorder. She
also suffers from post concussion symptoms.
[69]          
The Wife advanced evidence regarding several
incidents of abuse that pre-dated the 2013 Final Order to support her assertion
that the Husband was the cause of the PTSD. Despite this, it was conceded that
her childhood abuse also played in role in her diagnosis of PTSD.
[70]          
The Wife recognized there was no obligation to
exchange financial information. Nevertheless, she argued that she had sent to
her Husband, through her counsel or accountant, her Notices of Assessment
yearly and has requested same from him. The Husband had apparently refused to
provide disclosure, and in 2021 accused the Wife of harassing him with the
requests. The Wife submitted that disclosure was outstanding from 2011, and
that inevitably the Husband’s income would have increased.  She contended, “I
think it only fair that [the Husband] be ordered to pay increased spousal
support as per the Guidelines from January 1, 2014, as he has an ability
to pay for support for my needs on a retroactive basis and going forward.”
[71]          
The Wife instructed the parties’ mutual
accountant, Steve Ernst, on February 1, 2013, to release her Income Tax Returns
and Notices of Assessment and/or reassessments to the Husband annually. These
have been provided to the Husband since July 30, 2013.
[72]          
On April 21, 2015, the Wife, by way of
correspondence through her lawyer, requested financial disclosure from the
Husband, going back to 2012. In that letter, Mr. Hamon indicated to the
Husband, “[y]ou have an annual obligation to provide this information under the
Child Support Guidelines” (Caselaw has held that there is a similar
obligation for spousal support even though the obligation is not strictly
rooted under statute law).” Counsel provided the Wife’s 2014 Income Tax Return.
The Husband denied being able to find this letter, and at questioning was not
in a position to confirm or deny receipt of same.
[73]          
Other correspondences were sent by Mr. Hamon on
September 29, 2015 and December 11, 2015. The Husband confirmed receipt of correspondence
from December 11, 2015. The Wife argued the Husband must have received the
April 2015 letter as he referenced it in other correspondence.
[74]          
The evidence established that after the letter
of June 30, 2017, there were no further specific requests for financial
disclosure until the Wife served the Motion to Change signed August 26, 2022,
issued October 13, 2022.
[75]          
The Wife advanced that the Husband should be “held
responsible for causing a condition that prevents [her] from working.” The
Husband admitted to having slapped the Wife on three occasions and agreed it
had been inappropriate. The Wife meanwhile advanced there were approximately 74
allegations of abuse and accused the Husband of being a pathological liar.
[76]          
The Wife relied on a report by Dr. Garnham,
dated August 4, 2024, as both a participant expert and expert, responding to
the Husband’s affidavit. The Acknowledgment of Expert’s Duty was attached. Dr.
Garnham indicated that the psychological damage to the Wife is not limited to
PSTD symptoms and instead affected her physical health, and being called a
hypochondriac is extremely detrimental to a patient with PTSD.
[77]          
The Wife also attached evidence of other medical
diagnoses to support her alternative medical treatment.
[78]          
Ultimately, the Wife was not opposed to the
Husband retiring, but advanced, based on the Jocsak report, which included his
pension and other savings income, he should continue to pay support given her desperate
need, at high range.
[79]          
The Wife did not dispute that an income be
attributed to her from her savings, but suggested this should only occur as of
when she turned 65 years of age, being September 28, 2026. This is also despite
no income having been attributed to her in the Final Order and despite the
Husband’s admission that she was unable to work due to psychological issues.
[80]          
The Wife accused the Husband of being a “serial
liar” and did not accept that the representation by him of the RAMQ payments as
an accurate picture of his financial situation. She based this assertion on her
prior involvement in the Husband’s billings with RAMQ and on a release signed in
about 2011where she discovered the Husband omitted salient financial
information. Further, she argued the financial information was not accurately
reflective of his income as he took vacation with their children during the
reporting period. This information was only articulated in the Wife’s reply
affidavit.
[81]          
The Wife also submitted that the RAMQ earnings were
not the Husband’s only income, as he has received revenue from other sources
including those listed below, such as in 2005 and 2007.
[82]          
Unfortunately, the Husband was not afforded a
right of reply to this evidence as it was raised in reply, but admitted to
having spoken at 4 conferences, earning approximately $2,000.00 per conference.
[83]          
A review of the 2005- and 2007-income sources
provided by the Wife show income additional to RAMQ being $11,978 (with $4,940
from study income) and $15,245 (with $13,035 for study income), respectively.
[84]          
The Wife took issue with the Husband’s argument
about the charitable donations as these were religious participation expenses
similar to his own. Attached to her evidence was a chart of charitable expenses
incurred by the Husband from 2012 to 2022, ranging between $7,605 in 2013 to as
high as $15,973 in 2019. She asserted that support should be based on their income
rather that their personal choices, apart from her medical expenses, which were
as a result of the marriage.
[85]          
The Husband argued that the Wife has not
demonstrated sufficient evidence of a material change in circumstances which
were not foreseeable at the time the Final Order was rendered.
[86]          
In his Response Motion to Change, as clarified
in his Notice of Motion for the hearing, the Husband sought an order that
spousal support terminate as of June 1, 2024, or another date to be determined
by the court. Alternatively, the Husband sought to impute an annual income of
$98,720 to the Wife; that as of January 1, 2024, and until its ultimate
termination on December 31, 2024, the Husband pay spousal support of $1,728 per
month, that he receive credit for the $15,500 per month already paid by him, with
reimbursement of his overpayment. The Husband also sought orders either terminating
the requirement to maintain a life insurance policy in favour of the wife or
alternatively reducing the amount and termination once support was no longer
payable. His originating process sought termination as early as June 2023.
[87]          
The Final Order was pursuant to the Spousal
Support Advisory Guidelines, in a mid-range quantum. The Husband argued
there were no material changes in circumstances articulated that would allow
for high-range support or 50/50 NDI split.  The Final Order contained neither a
review clause nor a financial disclosure obligation.
[88]          
He disputed the Wife’s greater need for support.
According to her financial statement of October 13, 2022, the Wife was able to
accumulate assets and investments of  $1,528,485.00; she had minimal debts such
as her mortgage of $45,000.00; and was able to make charitable donations of
$1,700.00 per month.
[89]          
Further, the Wife waited 9 years prior to
bringing a Motion to Change, that she has not been placed in any financial
hardship during those 9 years despite never having returned to work following
separation. Her accumulation of wealth was due to the spousal support paid by
the Husband. The Wife only started the proceedings for retroactive support
after the Husband requested termination of support in Quebec, where he resides,
which was found to be the wrong jurisdiction.
[90]          
Since separation, the Wife has made no effort to
return to the workplace. Her sole source of revenue has been the spousal
support he has been paying. Nonetheless, he acknowledged her having some
psychological diagnoses which prevent her from being able to work.
[91]          
An order for retroactive support would cause the
Husband financial difficulties. He argued he has a new wife and is the midst of
retiring, and as such did not have the means to pay additional support to the
Wife, who had no additional needs.
[92]          
As part of his Response, the Husband set out the
following table for the parties’ respective incomes:
[93]          
The Husband is an internal medicine specialist
as well as offering consultation services for the emergency room and intensive
care. He has been in the medical field for approximately 38 years. He works out
of three different hospitals, principally through the CISSS de l’Outaouais.
Over and above his day job, he works on-call, which necessitates him being
available 24 hours, for five of the seven days.
[94]          
The Husband anticipated taking his full
retirement as of December 1, 2023, but this was impossible given the current
Final Order. As such, he has provided notice of his pre-retirement on April 25,
2024, effective June 1, 2024. While the Husband attempted to rely on a letter
provided by Dr. Moleski, the Head of Internal Medicine at the CISSS, that letter
was not properly in evidence to permit it to be used as truth of its contents. Nevertheless,
the Husband’s move toward retirement was not contested.
[95]          
The Husband conceded that his decision to retire
was voluntary, but was reasonable given his age, health and reduced abilities.
He advanced that he has a stressful career rendered even more difficult since
the pandemic and has increased anxiety and insomnia and now sees a
psychologist.  He also noted that he had a complaint made against him which
caused him stress and anxiety and made him doubt his competencies. He added
that the field of medicine has continued to develop exponentially, and he finds
it difficult to keep up. He has difficulties coping with the on-call night
shifts, which are part of his practice. He worked between 55 and 58 on-call
night shifts per year in the past three years.
[96]          
It was articulated that his family doctor, Dr.
St-Pierre, recommended that he significantly reduce his work hours. He
therefore decided and advised on April 25, 2024, of his intention to retire.
Prior to fully retiring, he must meet all his patients, ensure continued
services for them, stop meeting new patients and stop on-call shifts. He
estimated he had six to 12 months to prepare for his retirement and organize
his patients. Due to this change in schedule, his income will continue to
significantly decrease, particularly as the majority of his salary is from the
on-call and consultation services.
[97]          
The Husband provided evidence of decreased
income from his employer, the RAMQ (Régie de l’assurance maladie Québec). As
noted above though, the Wife argued that during this time the husband was also
on vacation and suggested that it was possible the Husband withheld billings to
reflect a modified reality to support his argument.
[98]          
The Husband estimated that his gross corporate
income for 2024 would be between $240,000 to $260,000, and net corporate
revenue around $200,000.  Nevertheless, he has continued to pay the ordered
spousal support of $15,500 per month, drawing down on his savings.
[99]          
As for anticipated 2025 income, the Husband
relied on Jocsak report. Based on this report, the Husband’s projected income
at retirement will be $134,252.00 (gross) and $94,822.00 (net), while the
Wife’s projected annual income at retirement will be $107,964 (gross) and
$80,621.00 (net) without spousal support, which represents difference of only
$26,288.00 (gross) and $14,201.00 (net) between their two retirement incomes. The
Wife would not have to pay taxes given the level of her medical expenses; thus
her net income would increase by $6,099.00 per year and the Husband’s net
income would decrease by $3,682.00 as he resides in Quebec. Further, if the
Wife had invested her charitable donations made since 2010, she could have
received an additional income of $12,000.00 per year, which would result in a
higher income than the Husband.
[100]      
Based on this information, the Husband argued
that the support paid by him since 2010 ought to be sufficient to permit the
Wife to be financially independent upon the Husband’s retirement. Moreover, he
will not have the capacity to pay support upon full retirement due to his
income and financial obligations.
[101]      
The Husband took the position that the Wife has
made no efforts to become financially independent since separation over 15
years ago. He has paid over $2.1 million dollars in support since 2010. The
Wife has very little debt and sufficient investments to permit her to meet her
needs without support. He advanced that income ought to be imputed to the Wife
based on the withdrawals she can make from her assets, as per the Jocsak
report. Her expenses as listed in her then-only financial statement, dated
October 22, 2022, were grossly exaggerated.
[102]      
The Husband admitted that at the beginning of
their relationship, he had hit the Wife on three separate occasions. The
relationship greatly deteriorated in 2006, and the couple attended counselling
in Missouri in an attempt to help their marriage. The Husband asserted that at
no time did the Wife accuse him of being an abusive husband and no such
conclusions were drawn by the psychologist. As for Dr. Graham who composed a
letter dated March 12, 2024, that doctor never met the Husband, and omitted any
mention of the Wife having been abused by her father. The letters tendered by
the Wife to establish the Husband as being abusive were explained by him to be
attempts to reestablish a good relationship with his then Wife, and he
attempted to recognize in those letters the Wife’s feelings, as recommended in
counselling.
[103]      
The Husband relied on the transcription of an
audio recording from 2003 which was put to the Wife in questioning where the
undertaking [Undertaking 16, Exhibit 15] was not responded to by the Wife. In
that recording, the Wife spoke very positively of the relationship with her
Husband, that the knot in her stomach was gone, that she was safe and
cherished, that he was gentle, and her opinions were sought out before anyone
else’s.  I note that this particular undertaking was not set out in the list of
undertakings as uploaded to Case Center.
[104]      
The Husband argued that based on questioning,
the Wife has been self-diagnosing health problems and incurred significant
expenses for supplements and naturopathic treatment which were not prescribed
or recommended by medical doctors. For instance, in 2022, about $24,000 of the
expenses were incurred for non-psychiatric supplements, naturopathic treatments
and other treatments.
[105]      
Additionally, the Wife claimed to suffer from
several illnesses, including Sjogren’s Syndrome and having had a cerebral
concussion in 2019. However, she was unable to provide proof of these diagnoses.
She stated that she suffers from life-threatening allergies but was unable to
name them or provide proof as to any instance where she has had a
life-threatening allergic reaction. The Wife takes several supplements and
participates in several treatments that have been recommended by a naturopath
and not prescribed by a physician, some of which were not approved by the
Wife’s doctors. The Husband provided evidence that her doctor had advised
against continued naturopathic treatment as some could be harmful to her.
[106]      
As an alternate argument, the Husband argued
that income of $98, 720 ought to be imputed to the Wife, and when using the
mid-point of the SSAG’s and the Husband’s pre-retirement income of $200,000,
support for 2024 should be $1,728 per month, and it should terminate December
31, 2024.
[107]      
The Wife submitted that the Husband’s new wife ought
to have provided full financial disclosure to get an accurate view of the
couple’s means. However, as set out in Angulo v. Angulo, 2019 ONSC 1456
at paragraph 57, a former spouse is not entitled to the "full financial
picture" of a spouse's new partner by right. Such disclosure would be
extensive and intrusive. As Kristjanson J. stated in Politis v. Politis,
2018 ONSC 323 (Ont. S.C.J.) at para. 17:
[108]      
In consideration of the parties’ incomes, both sought
imputation for the other. Section 19(e) of the Child Support Guidelines permits
the imputation of income to a spouse where "the spouse's property is not
reasonably utilized to generate income.” It has been held that the method of
calculating a spouse’s income pursuant to the Guidelines can be used as
an aid in calculating income for the purpose of determining spousal support:
Rilli v. Rilli, 2006 CanLII 34451 (ON SC), 2006 CarswellOnt 6335 at para. 28.
[109]      
A review of the Wife’s financial statement dated
July 25, 2024 [B346] shows she has been unemployed since 2009. Her sole source
of income is spousal support of $15,500.00 per month, or $186,000.00 annually. Listed
in her expenses are: $20,400.00 annually for charity; $30,000.00 for RRSP
purchases; and $45,000.00 for health-related expenses inclusive of dental and
eye care. Her net worth is $1,574,592.09, including her home which she
estimates to be worth $575,000.00, mortgage free; $948,537 of investments or
RRSP’s; and $41,989 in cash or bank accounts. The Wife’s Financial Statement of
October 13, 2022 showed her net worth to be $1,475,551.36.
[110]      
The Wife submitted that based on the Baker Tilly
report, a total of $317,640 of income ought to be imputed from 2012 to 2022 to
the Husband, based on “unreasonably deducted expenses” in those 10 years. According
to her Divorcemate calculation, she argued there has been an underpayment of
mid-range spousal support of $295,308 from 2012 to 2023.
[111]      
The Wife argued that the Husband lives with his
new wife in a home he values at $960,600.00 and an income property worth $758,000,
totalling $1,718,600, or $859,300 to the Husband. The Husband placed his income
property into the joint names of he and his wife for one dollar on October 5, 2010,
for tax planning purposes. Nevertheless, despite it being jointly held, the
Husband claims 100% of the revenues or expenses. The mortgage and lines of
credit result in a net equity of approximately $1,139,715, or $569,857.50 for
the Husband. She advanced that rental income property revenue ought to be
adjusted as per her chart [B279], which included adjustments for capital cost
allowance; insurance, interest, etc. The adjustments take the net revenue of
$6,261.34 to either $72,942.40 or in her submission of “bare bones”
adjustments, $31,278.59.
[112]      
Based on the Husband’s financial statement dated
July 25, 2024, he estimated his net income from his professional corporation to
$200,000.00, and less in 2025 when he would be fully retired. He estimated his
total income to be $206,261.40 for 2024 from all income sources. He has
$614,000 of assets, of which $573,000 are RRSP’s. The Husband’s net worth is
$1,182,799.27.
[113]      
The Husband also contributes toward charity, ranging
post-separation from $11,255 in 2015 to $13,983 in 2016, and $17,362 in 2012.
[114]      
This is a conventional case whereby the payor
wants to retire and terminate spousal support, and the recipient wants spousal
support to continue.  The following are considerations the court must apply.
[115]      
Section 17(1) of the Divorce Act provides
that a court of competent jurisdiction may make an order varying, rescinding or
suspending, retroactively or prospectively, a support order or any provision of
one, on application by either or both former spouses.
[116]      
Before a spousal support order can be varied,
s.17(4.1) of the Divorce Act requires that: “the court shall satisfy itself that a change in the condition, means,
needs or other circumstances of either former spouse has occurred since the
making of the spousal support order or the last variation order made in respect
of that order, and, in making the variation order, the court shall take that
change into consideration.”
[117]      
The Supreme Court of Canada established the
analysis to be applied by the court in considering a variation application
in Willick v.
Willick, 1994 CanLII 28 (SCC), [1994] 3 S.C.R. 670 (S.C.C.), at p. 688, as follows:
[118]      
The Supreme Court of
Canada articulated the fundamental principles respecting entitlement of spousal
support in the cases of Moge v. Moge, 1992 CanLII 25 (SCC), [1992] 3 S.C.R. 813 and Bracklow
v. Bracklow, 1999 CanLII 715 (SCC), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 420. There are three conceptual bases for
entitlement to spousal support. First, a spousal support obligation may arise
on a compensatory basis, in recognition that upon marriage breakdown, there
should be an equitable distribution between the parties of the economic
consequences of the marriage. In other words, spouses are entitled to be
compensated for the contributions which they made to the marriage and for
economic losses which they experienced as a result of the marriage: See Moge
v. Moge, supra, at paras. 68-70; also see K.
(V.) v. S. (T.) 2011 ONSC 4305, at para. 245.
[119]      
Entitlement can also arise in appropriate
circumstances on a contractual or consensual basis, as a result of express or
implied agreements between spouses that purport to either create or negate a
spousal support obligation. (See Bracklaw
v. Bracklow, supra. at para. 38.) Finally, entitlement may exist on a
non-compensatory basis, as a result of the needs of a spouse. This ground for
spousal support establishes that a spouse may be obliged to pay support based
on the other spouse's economic need, even if that need does not arise as a
result of the roles adopted during the marriage. This basis for spousal support
is founded on the view that "marriage is a relationship involving mutual
obligations and interdependencies that may be difficult to unravel when the
marriage breaks down.”: K. (V.) v. S. (T.) 2011 ONSC 4305, at para. 246.
[120]      
While the Supreme Court of Canada delineated
several fundamental principles and guidelines respecting the issue of spousal
support in Moge v.
Moge and Bracklow v. Bracklow, it also emphasized in Bracklow that the
determination of spousal support claims ultimately remains a highly
discretionary and individualized undertaking by the trial judge, who must take
into consideration the various factors and objectives set out in the Divorce Act and
the particular circumstances of each case: K. (V.) v. S. (T.) 2011 ONSC
4305, at para. 247.
[121]      
In St-Jean v. Fridgen, Trousdale J. held
that a wide variety of factors are considered to determine whether and when a
support payor may reduce or terminate support upon retirement:
[122]      
As discussed in Haworth v. Howarth, the
payor’s substantial decrease in annual income meets the threshold for variation
as the original agreement expressly contemplated a salary level far exceeding
what the payor would receive in retirement. “As
in Schulstad v.
Schulstad, 2017 ONCA 95, 91 R.F.L. (7th) 84 (Ont. C.A.), while retirement may have been
within the parties' contemplation at the time, the effect of that retirement
was not considered in fixing the amount of support. Again, as in Schulstad, it would not
have been possible for the parties, or the judge making the original order, to
know what the respondent's financial circumstances would be at retirement some
25 years later.” See Haworth v. Haworth, 2018 ONCA 1055 at para. 14.  In
that case however, the payor was 72 years old when he ultimately retired, and
the court found this was not a situation where the payor took early retirement to
avoid support obligations: Haworth v. Haworth, supra, at para. 12.
[123]      
In a nutshell, the Wife sought to retroactively
adjust spousal support. The Wife argued the Husband had engaged in blameworthy
conduct by refusing to disclose his financial statements from 2013 onward,
which would have permitted her to make timely requests for a variation of
support. She also relied on her medical issues, specifically her PTSD, to
explain why she delayed in commencing the motion to vary.
[124]      
The Husband argued that the Wife’s Motion to
Change ought to be rejected as there has not been a material change in
circumstances since the Final Order. There were no provisions for review of
quantum of support in the Final Order or requiring exchange of financial
disclosure. Moreover, the quantum was based on a mid-range point, and there is
no justification to vary it to high-range support or 50/50 NDI.
[125]      
To determine if the
conditions for variation exist, the court must be satisfied that there has been
a material change in the condition, means, needs or other circumstances of
either former spouse has occurred since the making of the spousal support. The
change must be substantial, continuing and not foreseeable at the time of the
original order.
[126]      
Both parties agree the
Final Order was made on consent prior to the conclusion of the 2013 trial and reflected
mid-range support based the Wife not having any income and the Husband’s 2011
income. There were no determinations made by Justice de Sousa as to whether the
Final Order was based on compensatory or non-compensatory support, or both.
[127]      
At trial, the Wife
submitted medical evidence confirming she was unable to work. The Wife argued that
the Husband’s abuse was the cause of the Wife’s inability to work. However, there
was also an IME report which detailed reports of abuse prior to marriage by the
Wife’s father.
[128]      
It was uncontested that
the Wife had stayed at home to raise the children despite her training to be a
teacher, following which she assisted the Husband with billings for his medical
practice. Given her role in the relationship, the Wife argued that support was
clearly compensatory.
[129]      
The evidence advanced
for this Motion to Change was similar to that relied upon by the Wife in 2013.
She provided this court with a plethora of medical evidence to support her asserted
inability to work. Some of the medical evidence was problematic in that it
contained opinion evidence which was not within the scope of the treating
doctor and contrary to the Acknowledgement of Expert’s Duty.
[130]      
Nevertheless, the
Husband conceded, and I find, that the Wife continues to suffer from psychological
issues and continues to be unable to work. I find that she suffers from PTSD
amongst other health issues. I am not prepared to find that the Husband was the
sole cause of the PTSD, nor am I persuaded it is necessary to make any findings
about the Husband being a “pathological liar”.
[131]      
The Wife continues to have health issues which
necessitate regular use of medication. The cost of the medical expenses in 2013
was approximately $27,722.79. It was advanced at the motion that the cost for
her medication, including naturopathy treatment, was estimated to be $45,000.00
in 2024. It was also argued that the Wife’s medication costs did not increase
every year, but there was a significant escalation at the time the Motion to
Change was commenced. A review of the annual expenses is found at A478.
[132]      
The Husband disputed the cost of naturopathic
treatments as being medical expenses, particularly when unsupported by her
medical doctor.
[133]      
There was sufficient evidence to conclude, on a
balance of probabilities, that most of these expenses are accepted as legitimate
medical expenses by CRA, address her medical sensitivities, and that they work
for her.
[134]      
The evidence did not however support a finding
that the Wife has ever suffered from life-threatening allergies or life-threatening
side effects. Further, on a balance, on the evidence before me, I am not
persuaded that the Wife suffers from Sjogren’s Syndrome.
[135]      
Nevertheless, based on the significant increase
of her medical expenses, I am persuaded that the Wife has met the threshold to
establish there has been a material change of circumstances.
[136]      
As for his own variation request, the Husband
advanced that his retirement and corresponding decrease in income was a
material change in circumstance.
[137]      
Again, the court must
be satisfied that there has been a material change in the condition, means,
needs or other circumstances of either former spouse has occurred since the
making of the spousal support, such change must be substantial, continuing and
not foreseeable at the time of the original order.
[138]      
The Wife argued that
“pre-retirement” did not meet the test of being continuous as it was a
temporary adjustment of income. The Husband continues to hold his medical
licence and has other sources of income. She relied on L.M.P. v. L.S.,
2011 SCC 64 for the proposition that the change in circumstances must have a
significant impact on the recipient’s needs for support or payor’s ability to
pay. Based on his continued substantial income; rental property and his new
wife’s contribution to the household, the Husband’s “pre-retirement” income
does not materially diminish his ability to meet his spousal support
obligations.
[139]      
However, and at the
Motion, she did not oppose the Husband’s claim of a material change and
articulated a desire for a proportional balanced adjustment to the spousal
support based on the proper valuation of his income.
[140]      
I find the Husband, at the age of 62, has given
his notice of retirement and has begun winding up his practice. He is no longer
seeing new patients and no longer working on-call shifts which included having
to be available 24 hours per day. He was experiencing health issues and having
difficulty keeping up with medical advancements. It was uncontested that the
decision to retire was voluntary.
[141]      
I find, based on his personal circumstances, and
the criteria set out in the relevant jurisprudence, the Husband’s voluntary decision
to retire was reasonable. It is evident to me that this decision was not
motivated by a desire to avoid paying spousal support.
[142]      
The Husband advanced that his gross corporate
annual income for 2024 was estimated to be between $240,000 to $260,000, and
net corporate income to be approximately $200,000.00. Despite this, he has
continued to pay full spousal support until ordered otherwise, and thus had
relied on his savings to pay his expenses.
[143]      
As required by the Divorce Act, I am
satisfied that a material change has been established for several reasons,
including the financial impact due to the Husband’s retirement. Like in Shulstad
v. Shulstad, though the Final Order did not contemplate a termination date,
there was no evidence that Justice De Sousa was able to assess the impact of
retirement: Shulstad v. Shulstad, 2017 ONCA 95, at para. 31.
[144]      
This warrants a review of spousal support and
the corresponding obligation to maintain a $1 million life insurance policy.
[145]      
When the Wife was 45 years old, and the Husband
46 years old, their 25-year relationship ended. The Final Order made by Justice
de Sousa in 2013 provided for ongoing spousal support without reference to a termination
or review date.
[146]      
Having determined there has been a material
change in circumstances, in accordance with s.17(7)
of the Divorce Act, a variation order varying a spousal support
order should:
[147]      
The evidence as I find it shows that the Wife
forwent career opportunities to care for the parties’ children. These actions
favoured the Husband’s career and were to the Wife’s detriment. The Wife also
assisted the Husband with billings prior to separation.
[148]      
As a consequence of their relationship and actions
taken during same, the lack of personal income from the Wife, the 25-year
marriage, and the Wife’s mental health and physical health ailments, I am of
the view that the Wife’s entitlement to spousal support is grounded in both compensatory
and non-compensatory support.
[149]      
I must therefore determine whether it is
consistent with the objectives of spousal support, on either ground, to terminate,
reduce or continue to require the Husband to pay spousal support after
retirement.
[150]      
Both parties agreed that the Final Order was
based on mid-range spousal support calculation.
[151]      
The evidence established that since the Final
Order, the Husband has paid over $2.1 million of spousal support.
[152]      
The parties are now 63 and 62 years old. The
Wife accepts that the Husband is permitted to retire. The Husband accepts the
Wife is unable to return to work, at least due to her psychological health
issues.
[153]      
As noted above, both parties are seeking to
impute income to the other and provided experts reports to support their
respective positions.
[154]      
The Supreme Court of
Canada in Boston v. Boston articulated that under a compensatory support
order, the recipient has an obligation to use the property equalized between
the parties in an income-producing way.  Said otherwise, the recipient spousal
must use the assets received on equalization to create a "pension" to
provide for her future support: Boston v. Boston, 2001 SCC 43 at para.
54. The court went on to state:
[155]      
In Campbell v. Vaughan, the New Brunswick
Court of Appeal upheld the motion judges’ decision regarding an imputation of
income to the spouse in recognition of income that could have been earned on
her investments: “[The Wife] cannot sit on assets worth one-half million
dollars and not have them generate revenue. Although it is unlikely that she
will be employed given that she was out of the labour force for a long time,
she still has an obligation to attempt to generate economic self-sufficiency.
By not using these resources to produce some income, she is not reasonably
utilizing her property to generate income contrary to paragraph 19(1)(e) of the Federal Child Support
Guidelines, SOR/97-175.”: Campbell v. Vaughan 2016 NBCA 9,
at para. 24.
[156]      
The Husband relied on K. (V.) v. S. (T.)
2011 ONSC 4305, at para. 254 for the proposition that the court may attribute
income to a party when it is determined that the party was not reasonably using
its resources or has not been able to reasonably explain the reasons for its
failure.
[157]      
The Wife referenced s. 12.4 of the Spousal
Support Advisory Guidelines which addresses illness and disability, to
support her claim that her unusually high medical costs can increase support
payable.  The SSAGs and SSAG Revised Users Guide discussed this notion
but notes that this is less frequently applied by the courts and is “the least
consistent with Bracklow [v. Bracklow, 1999 CanLII 715 (SCC), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 420]]”. 
The SSAG RUG remark some courts broadening the “illness and disability”
exception to be more akin to a “basic social obligation” exception given the
recipient’s basic needs go beyond the support formulas. However, “[the authors]
believe that the sheer breadth of a basic social
obligation exception would undermine the integrity and consistency of any
formula or guidelines.”
[158]      
The Wife also cited Fisher v. Fisher,
2008 ONCA 11 to support her submission that this court move quantum of support
from the mid-range to the high range. The Wife also cited Boston v. Boston, 2001
SCC 43 at para. 55 to buttress her argument that she was unable to generate
economic self-sufficiency.
[159]      
After reviewing the evidence and relevant
jurisprudence, I find that it would be most equitable for spousal support
payments to be reduced through a transition period before they terminate as the
Wife’s initial compensatory and needs basis for entitlement to support continue
to exist despite the Husband’s retirement.
[160]      
In terms of her compensatory entitlement, this
was a long-term traditional marriage where the Wife made significant sacrifices
for the Husband’s career. At the very beginning of their marriage, she worked
as a teacher, but forwent that career to raise and educate their children. As
the children grew older, she continued to remain at home and instead helped the
Husband with his billings. The evidence established the Wife never returned to
the workforce as a teacher. The Husband was the main financial provider for the
family. In addition, the Wife experienced health issues which continue to prevent
her from being able to secure employment.
[161]      
The Wife’s continuing need for support is
measured against the parties’ marital standard of living and the Wife’s limited
earning capacity. See Schulstad v. Schulstad, 2017 ONCA 94 at paras. 56
and 57.
[162]      
However, I must also analyze the Husband’s
current ability to pay, which will significantly decrease once he is fully
retired.
[163]      
As noted in Schulstad v. Schulstad, at
para. 60, a payor's retirement also has a particular impact on the SSAG
analysis. Recognizing this impact, Rogerson and Thompson state the following in
s. 19(e) of the Spousal Support Advisory Guidelines: The Revised User's
Guide (Ottawa: Department of Justice Canada, 2016):
[164]      
I accept that both parties have the obligation
to draw down on their respective capital resources to address their needs, and
in the case of the husband, pay support. The Wife conceded this point but only
after she turns 65 years old.
[165]      
A review of the Jocsak Actuarial reports helps guide
the court in determining the proper incomes attributable to each spouse. The
report suggested the Husband’s total gross income at retirement would be
$134,252 (net $94,822) and the Wife’s would be $107,964 (net $80,621).  This
was arguably as of 2025 for the Husband as he is currently winding down his
practice.
[166]      
The Wife disputed the results of the Jocsak
report as there was no consideration of her elevated medical expenses and failed
to factor in the assets or income of the Husband’s new wife of 14 years. She
argued the new wife’s income and co-ownership of their revenue property was
relevant to the calculation of his standard of living in comparison to hers.
Further, the report did not factor in the repercussions of the Husband adding
the new wife to title on the income property, it now being a jointly owned
property. It was submitted by the Husband this was tax planning purposes, but
the Husband solely deducts CCA for this rental, which the Wife advanced ought
not be excluded for spousal support purposes. For the 2023 net income of the
rental property, the Husband claimed $6,261.34, where, based on her evidence,
his net rental income with the Wife’s adjustments, should be $72,952.22 [B817]
and [B802]. At the very least, the Wife sought an adjustment of $10,954 due to
the Husband’s erroneous interest calculation.
[167]      
Despite the report having been disclosed in
2023, these concerns and the chart were only advanced in the Wife’s reply
affidavit, thus the Husband was not afforded an opportunity to respond.
[168]      
The reality is that the Husband co-owns both his
home and rental property with his new wife. The evidence shows that this happened
in or around 2010 for at least one of the properties, and therefore I am not
prepared to conclude it was to reduce his assets upon retirement. As such, no adjustments
will be made based on this submission.
[169]      
The Wife also contended in her reply that the
CPP amount attributed to her did not reflect reality. She provided a statement
from September 29, 2020, which estimated her future CPP benefits, indicating
$3,727.08 annually as opposed to attribution of $8,238.00 in the report. This
results in a difference of $4,510.92.
[170]      
I find it is appropriate to adjusted for inputs
to the Wife’s net income to remove the CPP and OAS given my findings below. I
also find it appropriate to adjust for the Husband residing in Quebec (his net
income will decrease by $3,682). I note that the Wife could be entitled to CPP
of $198.78 [B826] per month as of 60 years of age. The evidence however does
not show that she is currently in receipt of CPP or OAS.
[171]      
Turning to the argument advanced by the Wife
that the court ought to adjust the net rental income property revenue from
$6,261.34 to either $72,942.40, or a “bare bones” adjustments of $31,278.59. In
submissions, she also articulated that the court should attribute $25,017 to
account for the rental property.
[172]      
I accept that the CCA for the rental property
ought to be added back into income ($14,062.88) [A608] as per Schedule III of
the Child Support Guidelines.
[173]      
The evidence showed that in 2022, the Husband
paid just over $11,000.00 for interest and bank charges regarding the rental
property expenses. In 2023, he claimed on his Income Tax Return $22,073.42 for
interest and bank charges [A608].  When questioned about the increased
interest, the Husband explained the amount claimed in 2022 was his error and
was lower as it did not include the interest for the mortgage and the line of
credit. This error was thereafter corrected on the 2022 return. As for 2023,
the figure provided was fairly accurate according to the Husband, considering
the repairs and the increased cost of interest for the bank. On a balance, I
accept the Husband’s evidence on this point.
[174]      
The remainder of the Wife’s suggested
adjustments were unsupported assertions without evidence, i.e., the assertion
that the rent was “well below market” should be supported by a professional
rental appraisal.
[175]      
The RAMQ billings show that from January 1, 2024,
to August 8, 2024, the Husband has received $192,906.28. The Wife argued that a
portion of this time was when the Husband was on holidays, therefore it did not
accurately reflect his annual earnings. She provided no evidence to support
this assertion, which was raised in her reply affidavit. Nevertheless, I find
it is reasonable that the Husband be permitted to take some holiday time during
the year, and therefore am not persuaded that the chart is an inaccurate
reflection of the Husband’s year to date earnings.
[176]      
Regarding the Wife’s charitable donations, the
Husband argued that had the Wife accumulated those amounts, as of July 1, 2023,
the cumulative value would be $266,921.23. The Husband provided evidence that this
could give the Wife with an annual after-tax income of $12,000.00 for her
lifetime. I note the Husband made similar charitable donations. Imputation of
income is discretionary. In this case, on these facts, I am not prepared to go
back retrospectively to adjust the Wife’s donations in order to impute income
to her.
[177]      
While the evidence supports a finding that the
Husband has given his notice of retirement and is currently winding up his
involvement with the hospitals, it did not address whether the Husband was giving
up his medical licence and whether he would be providing services in any other capacity,
such as speaking engagements. However, the uncontested evidence was that the
Husband received a complaint which affected him and he was unable to keep up
with the medical advancements. As such, I am not prepared to find that he will
continue to work in any capacity after he retires. Also, due to a lack of
evidentiary foundation, I cannot support the Wife’s argument to impute one
quarter of his current gross income, or approximately $106,000.00 (as per her
Divorcemate Calculation - B1406). Though she provided a long list of other sources
of income he has had in the past, these also not sufficiently quantified to
permit the court to adopt the Wife’s rationale.
[178]      
At its highest, the Wife’s evidence regarding
other sources of income included: $8,000.00 for speaking engagements in 2023, for
which he was paid $2,000.00 each time.  In 2005 he received income from
additional sources of $7,038 plus $4,940.00 from “study income”; and in 2007 he
had income from additional sources of $2,210 plus $13,035.00 from “study income”.
There was no evidence that the Husband would continue to have any “study income”
in the future. Removing that possible input, at best the Wife’s argument was
between $2,210 to $7,038 additional income, plus any possible speaking income.
[179]      
Again, the Husband was not provided an
opportunity to comment about the additional income sources as this was in reply
evidence. His Financial Statement indicated that income from all income sources
would be $206,261.40.
[180]      
A review of the RAMQ billings showed a steady
decline of billings from January 2024 of approximately $52,057 to May 2024 of $35,103,
to June 2024 of $7,414 and July 2024 of $2,915.
[181]      
A review of the Divorcemate calculations
provided by counsel necessitated the parties to reattend to help determine the
proper inputs as the calculations were not comparable. For instance, some calculations
provide gross income from the Jocsak report, while others use net income. Some
use “self-employment income (net) when another uses “other non-taxable income
(auto gross-up)”. It was important to use the same language to achieve the just
result.
[182]      
Having heard submissions and reviewing the
evidence provided, including the Divorcemate calculations, taking into
consideration the Jocsak report and the adjustments that I accept, for the
purpose of determining ongoing spousal support, I find the incomes and
imputations found below are appropriate in these circumstances.
[183]      
Based on the evidence before me, the Husband grossed
approximately $192,906.28 from RAMQ. Recognizing that there are reasonable
deductions permitted through his corporation, and following the decreasing flow
of income consistent with retirement, which I accept, I find it reasonable to
impute income for 2024 in the amount of $200,000.00.
[184]      
Both parties agreed that it was reasonable to
use the Husband’s 2023 Income Tax Return [A589] inputs to determine the proper
apportionment of income. In 2023, the apportionment reflected 80% as employment
income and 20% as “other than eligible” dividend income.
[185]      
I also find it reasonable to use the 2023
figures for CCA and for net rental expenses.
[186]      
As for “other” additional sources of income, on
this evidence, I am not persuaded it is appropriate to impute an additional income.
[187]      
Given the evidence was that it would take
between six and twelve months to fully wind down his practice, and that he gave
his notice in April 2025, based on his continued decline of billings, I accept
that the Husband will have to rely on his assets as income as of 2025.  As
such, I will rely primarily on the Jocsak report as the primary source of
income for 2025. Further, from 2025 onward, I have removed the Net Rental
Income as that has been considered in the Jocsak report in determining the
Husband’s income. Additionally, I will continue to include the CCA as there was
no evidence that the rental property was being disposed of in the near future.
[188]      
I decline to include income to the Wife
regarding the charitable donations. I will however impute income to her as of
January 1, 2024 based on the Jocsak report, subject to my comments contained
herein.
[189]      
The Wife submitted that her medical expenses
ought to be accounted for in Divorcemate as “tax credits” (medical expenses) and
“cash flow adjustment (other cash flow amount - decrease NDI)”. The Husband
argued, based on the Jocsak report, that there was not actual decrease to NDI
as the Wife receives the equivalent tax credits or tax deductions for this
amount. I accept the Wife’s argument and therefore I have used these inputs in
the calculations. In these circumstances, I decline to increase the Wife’s
income by $6,099.00 based on the medical expenses. Instead, I have included
that expense the Divorcemate Calculations as a Tax Credit and adjustment to the
NDI. I also accept for the purpose of this motion to change the estimate
provided of $45,000.00.
[190]      
As such, I find that Husband’s and Wife’s income
ought to be imputed as follows:
[191]      
At the time of the Final Order, the Husband’s
income was approximately $425,284. Based on his pre-retirement and projected
income, his situation is now considerably different.
[192]      
In 2013, the Wife was suffering from health
issues which restricted her ability to be employed. This has not changed.
[193]      
The Husband and Wife both submit that the Final
Order reflected mid-range spousal support. While the Wife argued at the motion
that the range ought to be shifted to high-range support, or 50/50 NDI split
due to her compensatory entitlement and needs, I am not persuaded that would be
appropriate in these circumstances. Though I accept that the cost to meet the
Wife’s health issues have increased, this is in part due to the treatment plan
she chooses to follow. I am not persuaded that the evidence at this motion
supports an adjustment of the range support from 2013.
[194]      
I note that the Husband has paid approximately $2.1
million of spousal support since separation. Currently, the parties’ net worth
is similar, with the Wife’s being $1,574,592.09 and the Husband’s being
$1,182,799.27.
[195]      
Pursuant to the Divorce Act, the
objectives of spousal support are to recognize any economic advantages or
disadvantages to the former spouses arising from the marriage or its breakdown;
apportion between the former spouses any financial consequences arising from
the care of any child of the marriage over and above any obligation for the
support of any child of the marriage; relieve any economic hardship of the
former spouses arising from the breakdown of the marriage; and in so far as
practicable, promote the economic self-sufficiency of each former spouse within
a reasonable period of time.
[196]      
I am of the view that the Wife continues to be
entitled to compensatory support, for a further two-year transitional period,
until September 30, 2026. At that point, the Wife will be 65 years old and the
Husband 66 years old, and I find that a termination as of September 2026 will
have met the objectives of spousal support.
[197]      
I find it reasonable in the circumstances, considering
when the Motion to Change was commenced, when the Husband gave notice of his
retirement in April 2024 and that his income has experienced a significant drop
as of June 2024, that the recalculation of spousal support ought to commence as
of June 1, 2024.
[198]      
I find it appropriate that the Husband pay
mid-range spousal support in accordance with the incomes and/or inputs noted
above.
[199]      
Thus, for commencing June 1, 2024, based on
mid-range support, the Husband is ordered to pay $5,999.00 per month, until
December 31, 2024. As the Husband has continued to pay $15,500.00 per month based
on the 2013 Final Order, for which he is commended, this results in an
overpayment of $9,501.00 per month since June 1, 2024.
[200]      
For both 2025 and 2026 years, based on mid-range
support, the Husband shall pay $1,423.00 per month, commencing January 1, 2025,
and terminating September 30, 2026.
[201]      
The Wife sought an order to retroactively adjust
spousal support payable by the Husband and fixing arrears at $292,356.00. She
relied on the Baker Tilly Report to support her claim.
[202]      
She provided evidence that her mental health
precluded her from advancing her claims until October 2022, when she commenced
her Motion to Change.
[203]      
The Husband contended that the Wife waited over
nine years prior to bringing a retroactive review of support. She has never
found herself in a precarious financial position during that time despite never
having returned to work. Further, it was unreasonable to advance this claim at
this time, given her admission of incurring legal fees annually since 2014
related to starting a review of support based on income tax returns, but had
not taken the necessary steps to claim retroactive spousal support prior to
fall of 2022.
[204]      
Colucci established
that first, the court must determine if there has been a material change in
circumstances. Once that test is established, then the court must look at the
date of effective notice for the requested change, failing which the court
would look at the date of actual notice. Effective notice for retroactive
increase requests by the recipient requires the recipient to broach the topic
with the payor. The Wife’s view was that effective notice occurred at the
latest, in April 2015 when her lawyer sent a request for financial information
to the Husband.
[205]      
The Husband meanwhile submitted that a claim for
retroactive support would cause him financial difficulties as he will soon be
fully retired and does not have the means to make such a payment. In this
regard he relied on Kerr v. Baranow, 2011 SCC 10, which addressed the S.
(D.B.) factors which were equally applicable on the issue of spousal
support, namely, the needs of the recipient, the
conduct of the payor, the reason for the delay in seeking support and any
hardship the retroactive award may occasion on the payor spouse: Kerr
v. Baranow, 2011 SCC 10, at para. 207.
[206]      
However, as noted in Kerr,
in spousal support cases, these factors must be considered and weighed in
light of the different legal principles and objectives that underpin spousal as
compared with child support: Kerr v. Baranow, 2011 SCC 10, ibid. The court remarked that spousal support
has a very different legal basis than child support. There is no presumptive entitlement
to spousal support, a spouse is under no obligation to look after the legal
interests of their former spouse; and in spousal support there is highly
discretionary balancing of means and needs.
[207]      
The court in Angulo v. Angulo noted, “the court must consider the recipient's needs, the
conduct of the payor, any hardship the retroactive award may occasion on the
payor, and the reason for the delay in seeking support. (Kerr v. Baranow, 2011 SCC 10 (S.C.C.) at para 207; P. (S.) v. P. (R.), 2011 ONCA 336 (Ont. C.A.)). A consideration of these factors does not favour a
retroactive spousal support award.”: See Angulo v. Angulo, 2019 ONSC 1456,
at para. 79.  In that case, the court was not convinced as to the explanation
proffered on the delay in seeking past adjustments, particularly in the face of
the payor having complied with his obligations to pay support for 14 years and
having retired two years prior. The court found that the recipient’s needs did
not justify the retroactive award as she had considerable equity in her home
and could continue to earn rental income, coupled with the terms of the
separation agreement alluding to the use of each party’s capital for support.
[208]      
As articulated in Riznek v. Riznek, 2022
BCSC 2068, there are no mandatory disclosure provisions in the SSAG’s. In
Riznek, the court cited Arsenault v. Blanchard, 2018 NBQB 14, which
was a case where the payor husband sought to vary spousal support and the
recipient wife sought to retroactively increase support based on the husband’s
increased income since the date of the original order. The court noted there
was no requirement for an annual exchange of income information. In Arsenault,
the court held that absent
such a requirement, the failure to disclose income increases was not
blameworthy conduct for the purposes of the retroactive variation analysis: See
Riznek v. Riznek, 2022 BCSC 2068, at para. 78.
[209]      
The court in Riznek went on to find that
the comments regarding spousal support from Kerr v. Baranow support the view that there is no free-standing
obligation for ongoing and continuous financial and income disclosure in
respect to spousal support issues and that failure to disclose will be one of a
number of factors that will inform the analysis of ongoing and/or retroactive
spousal support: Riznek v. Riznek, 2022 BCSC 2068, at para. 81.
[210]      
Further, the
court in Riznek distinguished Colucci v. Colucci, 2021 SCC 24,
which was a child support case, and found that the law does not support the
existence of a duty to disclose material increases to income, absent a clear
term to that effect in a valid order. The absence of a clear term of annual
disclosure in the final order demonstrated that the order was intended to give
the parties finality and certainty with respect to spousal support: Riznek
v. Riznek, 2022 BCSC 2068, at para. 121.
[211]      
In support of her argument that the Husband
engaged in blameworthy behaviour, the Wife relied on Hevey v. Hevey,
2021 ONCA 740 where the court found the same imperatives as set out in Colucci
apply when dealing with issues of retroactive spousal support, namely that
courts must encourage proactive financial disclosure and in no way reward those
who improperly withhold, hide or misrepresent information they ought to have
shared: Hevey v. Hevey, 2021 ONCA 740 at para. 54.
[212]      
The facts in Colucci are distinguishable,
as are those in Hevey. Colucci was a child support case where the
payor father was found to be a recalcitrant payor, in arrears of approximately
$170,000.00 representing 16 years of child support, seeking a retroactive
decrease of support.  The law regarding the parental obligations to support
their child and provide timely financial disclosure is clear. In Hevey,
there was a misrepresentation of disclosure of arguably $21 million leading to
a waiver of equalization and support.
[213]      
On the issue of delay, the Wife relied on Legge
v. Legge, 2023 BCCA 365 wherein the court articulated that though there may
be delay occasioned by a support recipient, the court should consider along
with this factor the excuse proffered for the delay. In that case, it was a
lack of financial resources and “her mental resources were taxed by the
conflict with her spouse.” Similarly, here, the Wife articulated that her
mental health precluded her from advancing her claim in a timelier fashion.
[214]      
I have already determined there has been a
material change in circumstances.
[215]      
The Baker Tilly reports indicated that the
Husband has underestimated his income for spousal support in the amount of
$317,640.00, inclusive of the 2023 income [see B849].
[216]      
While the Wife occasioned to have her Income Tax
Returns and Notices of Assessment sent to the Husband as of July 2013, I am not
persuaded that the Husband would have been aware that these were sent to him for
him to reciprocate disclosure.
[217]      
Though the Wife argued that she was unable to
bring this matter back to court prior to 2022 due to her mental health, the
evidence established that from 2013 to 2022, she nevertheless incurred legal
fees annually, presumably in relation to support as she claimed the expense on
her Income Tax Returns [A479].  She articulated: “My lawyer has been asking me
to provide him with information to bring a motion to change earlier but my
health has simply not allowed for me to do this.” She also provided a letter
from her doctor who opined that it was reasonable for her not to pursue the
claim due to her PTSD.
[218]      
I accept that the Wife’s date of effective
notice of request for financial disclosure was April 21, 2015.
[219]      
The Wife acknowledged there was no obligation in
the Final Order to exchange financial disclosure.
[220]      
The jurisprudence confirms there is no presumptive
entitlement to spousal support, a spouse is under no obligation to look after
the legal interests of their former spouse; and in determinations of spousal
support there is highly discretionary balancing of means and needs. There are
no mandatory disclosure provisions in the SSAG’s.
[221]      
The court must
consider the recipient's needs, the conduct of the payor, any hardship the
retroactive award may occasion on the payor, and the reason for the delay in
seeking support.
[222]      
The Husband made all the required support
payments in a timely fashion therefore I am not prepared to find him to be a
recalcitrant payor. While the Wife argued the
Husband engaged in blameworthy behaviour by not providing financial disclosure,
on the facts of this case, I am not prepared to make such a finding. The
Final Order imposed no obligation to exchange financial disclosure and it
specifically restrained the parties from communicating with each other unless
both parties consented to same in writing “as exchanged through [the Wife’s
lawyer] or his designate.”
[223]      
I am not persuaded it
is appropriate to award retroactive spousal support. Though the Wife has
serious mental and physical health ailments, she was able to seek annual legal
advice with her lawyer, who repeatedly asked her to provide evidence in order to
pursue the support claim.  She waited until 2022, when the Husband was amid
arranging his affairs to retire. The Husband has complied with his obligations
to pay support for the past 11 years. The Wife’s needs do not justify a
retroactive award. The award would create significant hardship for the Husband.
[224]      
As such, the request
for retroactive spousal support is dismissed. Pursuant to this determination, I
am not of the view that a finding as to the Husband’s increase of income is
necessary.
[225]      
The Final Order provided that the Husband maintain
a Life Insurance Policy (“LIP”) of $1 million to secure spousal support. In
order to do so, he maintained three LIP’s naming the Wife as irrevocable
beneficiary, at a cost of $5,529 for 2024. One of the policies decreased
annually as of him turning 61 years old. He argued he was no longer in a
position to maintain $1 million worth of Life Insurance. He requested
termination of this term or alternatively a reduction and eventual termination.
Any reduction should reflect the continuing obligation for support.
[226]      
The Wife agreed that the insurance obligation
should be reduced to a reasonable amount as determined by FamilySure insurance
or another mutually accepted actuary or insurance company.
[227]      
The Ontario Court of Appeal in Katz v. Katz found
that the power under the Family Law Act to order a spouse to obtain insurance
to secure payment of support payments that are binding on the payor's estate
also exists under the Divorce Act: Katz v. Katz, 2014 ONCA 606, at para. 73.
[228]      
However, the court cautioned that “consideration
should be given to the amount of insurance that is appropriate. It should not
exceed the total amount of support likely to be payable over the duration of
the support award. Moreover, the required insurance should generally be
somewhat less than the total support anticipated where the court determines
that the recipient will be able to invest the proceeds of an insurance payout.
Further, the amount of insurance to be maintained should decline over time as
the total amount of support payable over the duration of the award diminishes.
The obligation to maintain insurance should end when the support obligation
ceases — and provision should be made to allow the payor spouse to deal with
the policy at that time. Finally, when proceeding under the Divorce Act, the
court should first order that the support obligation is binding on the payor's
estate.” Katz v. Katz, 2014 ONCA 606, at para. 74.
[229]      
In Hubault Virgili c. Virgili, 2021 NBCA
7, the court found fit in a situation where there was a variation of spousal
support to also reduce the amount of life insurance coverage to be maintained
to secure it.
[230]      
I find that it is reasonable in these
circumstances to reduce the Life Insurance Policy to $73,299.00, which is
representative of spousal support obligations ordered above, terminating on
September 30, 2026.
[231]      
Commencing June 1, 2024, and on the first day of
each month until December 31, 2024, based on mid-range support, the Husband shall
pay to the Wife $5,999.00 per month for mid-range spousal support.
[232]      
From January 1, 2025, until the termination of
spousal support effective September 30, 2026, based on mid-range support, the
Husband shall pay to the Wife $1,423.00 per month.
[233]      
The parties shall quantify the overpayment of
spousal support made by the Husband and include the amount in the draft final
order. The overpayment shall be repaid by the Wife to the Husband no later that
December 6, 2025, unless there is an agreement in writing to afford her more
time.
[234]      
The Wife’s claim to retroactive adjustment of
spousal support is dismissed.
[235]      
The Husband shall maintain a Life Insurance
Policy to guarantee his support obligations, naming the Wife as the irrevocable
beneficiary, in the amount of $73,299.00 until October 1, 2026, at which time
he may terminate that policy. The Wife shall sign any necessary documentation
to terminate that irrevocable beneficiary designation upon the Husband making
the final payment of spousal support.
[236]      
The parties are invited to resolve the issue of
costs between them.  Failing resolution, costs submissions shall be sent to
Desormeau J’s attention, both by filing at the Ottawa courthouse and a courtesy
copy being sent to my judicial assistant: CornwallJudicialAssistants@ontario.ca.
The Husband has 30 days from the release of this ruling, and the Wife has 30
days thereafter.  Maximum 3 pages plus bills of costs and (case name, citation,
and paragraph number only for caselaw). Should no submissions be received
within the timelines outlined above, the costs issue shall be deemed to having
been resolved.