[1]              
The
moving party, the defendant, Labourers’ International Union of North America,
Local 837 (“the Defendant”), makes this motion seeking to dismiss the within action
on the basis that the court has no jurisdiction to determine the issues raised
by the plaintiff, Patrick Kolacz (“the Plaintiff”). The Defendant contends
that, pursuant to the applicable collective agreement, it is the Ontario Labour
Relations Board (“the OLRB” or “the Board”) and a labour arbitrator that have
the exclusive jurisdiction to determine the issues raised in the statement of
claim.
[2]              
The
responding party, the Plaintiff, alleges that ECMI LP/ECMI GP Inc. (“Empire
Homes” or the “Employer”) improperly terminated his employment and that the
Defendant failed in its duty to represent him with respect to that layoff/termination.
His position is that the action should not be dismissed because, in his
statement of claim, he pleads causes of action like coercion, defamation and
breach of his human rights and the OLRB has no jurisdiction over such issues.
[3]              
The
Defendant is a construction trade union within the meaning of sections 1 and
126 of the Labour Relations Act, 1995, S.O. 1995, c. 1, Sched. A (“the
Act”).
[4]              
At
the material time, the Defendant was the certified bargaining agent for
construction labourers engaged in home building for Empire Homes in and around
the City of Hamilton and the Niagara Region. The Defendant was party to a
collective agreement with Empire Homes for those employees.
[5]              
The
Plaintiff was a member of the Defendant working for Empire Homes pursuant to
the collective agreement. The Plaintiff was not employed by the Defendant.
[6]              
Until
his layoff/termination, the Plaintiff worked for the Employer at the Calderwood
jobsite in Thorold.
[7]              
In
early January 2022, the Employer advised the parties that there was no further
work on the Calderwood jobsite that met the Plaintiff's functional abilities
based on his medical condition and that it would be transferring the Plaintiff
to a different work location, being the Avalon jobsite, where there was indoor
work; otherwise, it would have to lay off the Plaintiff due to a lack of work.
[8]              
The
Defendant’s evidence is that it understood that the Plaintiff had a medical
condition that prevented him from working outdoors during the winter months.
The Employer knew of this condition. Accordingly, the Plaintiff was provided
with indoor work by the Employer at the Calderwood jobsite during the winter
months.
[9]              
The
Plaintiff’s evidence is that he had been working for years without
accommodation, both inside and, at times, outside during winter months. It was
only upon hearing of the Employer’s intention to transfer him to Avalon that
the Plaintiff requested accommodation due to his disabilities/medical
conditions.
[10]          
In
discussing the feasibility of the proposed transfer, the Plaintiff advised the
Defendant and the Employer that he had a second medical condition that precluded
him from driving, so he would not be able to drive himself to the Avalon
jobsite. This condition had not been previously disclosed by the Plaintiff. It
was suggested to the Plaintiff by the Defendant that he could obtain a ride
with his brother, who was a foreman at the Avalon jobsite. The evidence of the
Defendant is that the Plaintiff advised that he did not want to do so, for
personal reasons. The Plaintiff’s evidence is that, when he asked his “brother”
(who is not a biological relative) for a ride, the response he received was, “don’t
take this wrong but I don’t want to get involved,” and this is the person the
Defendant wanted him to get a daily ride from.
[11]          
The
Plaintiff did not attend the Avalon jobsite for work. The Employer laid off the
Plaintiff on January 10, 2022.
[12]          
On
February 9, 2022, the Plaintiff applied to the OLRB, pursuant to s. 96 of the Labour
Relations Act, alleging that the Defendant had breached its duty of fair
representation under s. 74 of the Act by failing to initiate a grievance on his
behalf with respect to his layoff/termination of employment by Empire Homes (“the
Duty of Fair Representation Application”).
[13]          
In
response, the Defendant submitted that the Applicant had not pleaded a prima
facie case for a s. 74 violation. It requested that the OLRB summarily
dismiss the application pursuant to s. 96 of the Labour Relations Act
and Rule 39.1 of the OLRB’s Rules of Procedure. Before the OLRB, the Defendant
submitted that it had considered the basis for and merits of a grievance
relating to the layoff on behalf of the Plaintiff, pursuant to the collective
agreement. It determined not to pursue a grievance as: (i) there was no work on
the Calderwood jobsite that fell within the Plaintiff’s functional abilities;
(ii) the only work available that would meet his functional abilities was at
the Avalon jobsite, which the Applicant either refused to do and/or was unable
to do because of his medical driving restriction; and (iii) the collective
agreement permitted the Employer to transfer employees to various jobsites
within the geographical jurisdiction of the collective agreement.
[14]          
On
May 6, 2022, the Board directed the Plaintiff to serve and file his response to
the summary dismissal request by May 20, 2022. He did so. Both the Plaintiff’s
application and his written submissions in response to the request to dismiss
were considered by the OLRB.
[15]          
On
September 21, 2022, the OLRB exercised its discretion and dismissed the Plaintiff’s
application for failing to raise a prima facie case. At paragraph 7 of
its decision, the OLRB referenced its decision in Kenneth Edward Homer,
[1993] OLRB Rep. May 433, citing paragraphs 5 through 8, which outline the
principles relevant to a s. 74 determination as follows:
[16]          
In
dismissing the Duty of Fair Representation Application, the OLRB wrote (at
para. 13 of its decision):
[17]          
The
Plaintiff did not seek to judicially review the decision of the OLRB.
[18]          
The
Plaintiff commenced the within action on November 22, 2023.
[19]          
By
its Notice of Motion, dated January 24, 2024, the Defendant seeks a dismissal
of the action.
[20]          
It
is the position of the Defendant that the essential character of the Plaintiff’s
claims, made in the statement of claim, are the same allegations of unfair
representation as he made in the Duty of Fair Representation Application that
was dismissed by the OLRB, that is, that he was unlawfully laid off from his
job and that the Defendant failed to properly represent him. Claims about the
Plaintiff’s workplace are within the exclusive jurisdiction of the labour
arbitrator appointed pursuant to the collective agreement. Claims about the
fairness of the Defendant’s representation are within the exclusive
jurisdiction of the OLRB. Accordingly, this proceeding should be dismissed
pursuant to Rule 21.01(3)(a) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O.
1990, Reg. 194, on the basis that the court has no jurisdiction over the
subject matter of the proceeding.
[21]          
The
Defendant alternatively submits that the action should be dismissed pursuant to
Rule 21.01(3)(d) as being an abuse of the process of the court since the issues
raised by the Plaintiff were determined by the OLRB more than a year ago. In
the further alternative, the Defendant argues that the statement of claim should
be struck under Rule 21.01(1)(b) as it discloses no reasonable cause of action.
[22]          
It
is the Plaintiff’s position that this is not an employment issue case but,
rather, is a case about “a breach of human rights resulting in discrimination” against
him. He has disabilities and, when he tried to follow the grievance/arbitration
steps to have those disabilities accommodated, the Defendant unfairly and
unlawfully refused to properly discuss things with him in order to find out
what his actual dispute and concerns were about.
[23]          
The
Plaintiff argues that the only issue before the OLRB was the duty of fair
representation and that nothing else was determined by the Board. No
discrimination or disability or human rights claims were made in that
proceeding. The Plaintiff argues that he has five companion claims to which his
human rights claim can attach in this civil action. The Plaintiff stresses that
his complaints as set out in the statement of claim do not relate to the
grievance but to his breach of contract, coercion, wrongful dismissal and
defamation claims against the Defendant.
[24]          
The
Plaintiff submits that he has two disabilities, and his employment was terminated
because he had to turn down a transfer to a different jobsite due to his
medical restrictions. Both the Defendant and the Employer knew of his
disabilities and accompanying medical restrictions preventing his transfer, yet
they chose to ignore them by giving him the options they did. Since the
Defendant breached the Ontario Human Rights Code, the matter is a human
rights case and is out of the hands of the OLRB; it is properly before the
court.
[25]          
The
Plaintiff submits that the OLRB’s handling of the Duty of Fair Representation
Application was done in a “discriminatory, arbitrary and … bad faith way” since
it “ignor[ed] all medical evidence proving the Plaintiff has not one but two”
disabilities. Therefore, he was left with no choice but to turn to the court.
The Plaintiff further submits that, in any event, the OLRB does not have the
jurisdiction to rule on discrimination and human rights claims. The collective
agreement cannot override human rights and the obligations to accommodate
employees with disabilities.
[26]          
The
Plaintiff submits that this court must decide if a unionized, disabled worker
“in Ontario can be legally terminated for their [disabilities] without human
rights and disability rights or the accommodation process being considered or
followed if the representing union decides so.”
[27]          
While
the OLRB’s decision was released in late September 2022, the Plaintiff did not
see it until 2023 because he did not have an internet connection or a
residence. By the time he became aware of the decision, he could not have filed
a case with the Ontario Human Rights Tribunal because the one-year limitation
period had expired.
[28]          
The
Plaintiff submits that he tried to keep his statement of claim pleadings simple
and that he expects detailed evidence will come out at the examination for
discovery, which evidence will then be used at trial. If the statement of claim
pleadings are inadequate, he requested an extension to file an amended
statement of claim.
[29]          
The
issues to be determined on the motion are:
[30]          
Section
48(1) of the Labour Relations Act provides:
[31]          
In
Weber v. Ontario Hydro, 1995 CanLII 108 (SCC), [1995] 2 S.C.R. 929, the
Supreme Court of Canada considered what is now s. 48(1) of the Labour
Relations Act. At para. 45 of the decision, McLachlin J. held that the
reference to “all differences between the parties” applies to all disputes
between the parties, and “makes arbitration the only remedy for such
differences.” She further stated: “The object of the provision -- and what is
thus excluded from the courts -- is all proceedings arising from the difference
between the parties, however those proceedings may be framed. Where the dispute
falls within the terms of the Act, there is no room for concurrent
proceedings.” McLachlin J. cautioned, at para. 49, that permitting “innovative
pleaders to evade the legislative prohibition on parallel court actions” could
undermine the purpose of the legislation and the intention of the parties to
the collective agreement.
[32]          
This
means that, where the essence of a claim arises from an employment dispute that
is subject to a collective agreement, a party cannot escape the arbitration
regime by describing his or her claim as a tort or a contract breach: Sloan
v. York Region District School Board, 2000 CanLII 15416 (ON CA), 98
A.C.W.S. (3d) 825, at para. 3, leave to appeal to the S.C.C. denied [2000]
S.C.C.A. No. 472; and Bhaduria v. Toronto Board of Education, 1999
CanLII 4745 (ON CA), 117 O.A.C. 356 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 4, leave to appeal to
the S.C.C. denied [1999] S.C.C.A. No. 212.
[33]          
It
must be determined whether the principle in Weber applies to the dispute
between the parties in the within proceeding. This requires the court to define
the essential character of the dispute and identify if it arises from the
interpretation, application, administration or violation of the collective
agreement, in which case the court is precluded from taking jurisdiction.
[34]          
In
Ortiz v. Patrk (1998), 26 C.P.C. (4th) 56 (Ont. Gen. Div.), the
plaintiff was a member of a union. It was alleged that, following a “long
history of friction” between the plaintiff and his supervisor, Patrk, there was
a culminating incident of the plaintiff using abusive language and threatening
remarks to Patrk. Those threatening remarks were reported to the police and the
plaintiff was arrested and charged, although the Crown ultimately withdrew the
charges. The plaintiff was terminated for cause. That termination was grieved
and referred to arbitration. The plaintiff commenced an action against his
supervisor, plant manager and employer claiming, among other things, damages
for malicious prosecution, abuse of process, libel and slander, negligence,
injurious falsehood, special damages for loss of income, loss of pension, loss
of health plan and other employment benefits, and punitive and aggravated
damages. The employer made a motion seeking the dismissal of the action on the
grounds that the court had no jurisdiction over the action’s subject matter and
that grievance proceedings were pending. The court noted that the plaintiff had
“grown disenchanted with the arbitration regime” and felt that the union was
not “assiduously” pursuing his grievance. The court reviewed the statutory and
collective bargaining regime and the applicable law, including Weber. The
court ultimately held that the essential character of the dispute fell within
the jurisdiction of an arbitrator under a collective agreement and dismissed
the action as against all of the defendants due to the absence of jurisdiction
of the court over the subject matters raised in the claim. The court also held
that the dispute arising from the complaint made to the police about the workplace
incident “stands on the same footing as the dispute arising from the incident
itself”. As a result, the collective agreement and the Labour Relations Act
required that all disputes arising out of it be referred to binding
arbitration.
[35]          
In
Bhaduria v. Toronto Board of Education (1999), 1999 CanLII 4745 (ON CA), 117 O.A.C. 356 (Ont.
C.A.), leave to appeal to the S.C.C. denied [1999] S.C.C.A. No. 212, the
plaintiff had been terminated from his teaching position with the school board.
He commenced a civil action alleging violations of his constitutional rights
and defamation by various of the school board trustees. The court at first
instance struck out the claims for relief made in the statement of claim on the
basis that the dispute stemmed from the disciplinary process and therefore the
proper forum for adjudication of the complaints was arbitration, but permitted
the defamation claim against the school board to continue. On appeal, however,
the Ontario Court of Appeal held that all of Mr. Bhaduria’s claims, including
the defamation claim, were covered under the principle in Weber since
the essential character of the claims pertained to his termination from his
teaching position and arose under the collective agreement. Mr. Bhaduria was
therefore precluded from proceeding with a civil action by Weber as the
allegations fell within the exclusive jurisdiction of the grievance and
arbitration process.
[36]          
In
the present case, a review of the Plaintiff’s complaint to the OLRB makes it
clear that he raised that, among other things, he believed the Defendant
improperly denied his grievance for wrongful dismissal/layoff and he alleged
discrimination against disabled members on the part of the Defendant because it
agreed with the Employer that there was “no adequate work” and that the
Defendant tried to force him to move “to another site against restrictions
saying that [the Employer] can do it according to contract”. The Plaintiff also
raised before the OLRB his argument that no contract can go against medical
restrictions, and the fact that he believed there was available work for him to
perform at the Calderwood jobsite. Ultimately, the OLRB dismissed the
Plaintiff’s application without a hearing for failing to raise a prima facie
case. It held that the Defendant fulfilled its s. 74 obligations in arriving at
its conclusion not to pursue a grievance on the Plaintiff’s behalf against the
Employer; and that the Plaintiff had not established that the Defendant’s
representation of him was arbitrary, discriminatory or in bad faith.
[37]          
Section
74 of the Labour Relations Act codifies a union’s duty of fair
representation. It reads:
[38]          
The
duty of fair representation regulates a wide range of union activity, including
where unions refuse to pursue grievances or settle grievances against the
wishes of grievors. Where such decisions are impacted by (i) arbitrariness,
(ii) discrimination, or (iii) bad faith, a union violates s. 74 of the Labour
Relations Act and its decisions can be set aside by the OLRB: Themelis
v. Toronto, 2021 ONSC 250 (Div. Ct.), at para. 9.
[39]          
Sections
96(4) and 114 of the Labour Relations Act provide exclusive jurisdiction
to the OLRB to determine complaints about allegations of violations of the duty
of fair representation. The Supreme Court of Canada has confirmed that duty of
fair representation claims should proceed before a labour board where the
legislative scheme provides the procedure for adjudicating an alleged breach of
that duty: see Gendron v. Supply & Services Union of the P.S.A.C., Local
50057, 1990 CanLII 110 (SCC), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1298, at paras. 49, and
59-60.
[40]          
Where
it is found that, in substance, a party’s pleading can only be characterized as
a complaint against the union for breach of the duty of fair representation, it
necessarily follows that the claim falls within the exclusive jurisdiction of
the OLRB: Gendron, at paras. 59-60; Vernon v. General Motors of Canada
Ltd. (2005), 2005 CanLII 3323 (ON CA), 250 D.L.R. (4th) 259 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 30; and Themelis,
at para. 15.
[41]          
In
the within statement of claim, the Plaintiff pleads the following causes of
action:
[42]          
Fairly,
the Plaintiff admits that his claims of discrimination on the basis of
disability, wrongful dismissal, unfair representation, conspiracy to commit a
crime against a union member, compensatory damages, and punitive damages are
all directly related to his employment relationship with the Employer. However,
he contends that the remaining causes of action: defamation of
character/slander, coercion, and breach of contract are not, and present as
stand-alone allegations against the Defendant before the court.
[43]          
The
facts pleaded in support of the Plaintiff’s claim for defamation of
character/slander are centred on the Defendant purportedly alleging that the
Plaintiff’s medical note was “forged”, and read as follows:
[44]          
The
facts pleaded by the Plaintiff in support of his claim for coercion are as
follows:
[45]          
The
facts pleaded by the Plaintiff in support of his claim for breach of contract
are as follows:
[46]          
In
my view, each of these causes of action as pleaded are based on the Defendant’s
conduct in its representation of the Plaintiff regarding his workplace issues
with the Employer. The facts of the dispute between the parties all pertain to
the adequacy of the Defendant’s representation of the Plaintiff and its
response to the Employer’s decision to transfer/terminate the Plaintiff. As the
Plaintiff’s representative vis-à-vis the Employer, the Defendant discussed the
situation with the Employer and then decided that it would not proceed with a
grievance. The Defendant is entitled to make that decision. If a member does
not agree with the union, s/he can file a complaint alleging a breach of the
duty of fair representation. The Plaintiff did that. The OLRB received and
considered the submissions from both parties and then determined that the
Plaintiff had not made a prima facie case that the Defendant’s
representation of him was arbitrary, discriminatory or in bad faith. Such a
decision was within the jurisdiction of the OLRB to make. If the Plaintiff was
not in agreement with the OLRB’s decision, his remedy was to apply for a
judicial review of the decision.
[47]          
It
is clear that the Plaintiff is dissatisfied with the OLRB’s decision to dismiss
his application. There is not a full record of evidence given the stage of this
proceeding, so there may be other relevant information existing. However, based
on what is before me, it is perhaps not unreasonable why the Plaintiff would
question whether his driving restriction was adequately considered by both the
Employer and the Defendant, especially in light of the Defendant’s purported resolution
that the Plaintiff get a ride from his brother to the Avalon jobsite. However,
it is not open to the Plaintiff to seek to displace or disturb the OLRB’s
ruling by prosecuting the within action. The Plaintiff’s complaints have been
processed in the manner contemplated by the collective agreement and the Labour
Relations Act. It is not appropriate for the court to intervene in that
process.
[48]          
The
Plaintiff’s complaints focus on his allegation that he has been discriminated
against in the workplace based on disability and that his reputation and
position within the Defendant and the Employer have been affected. Complaints
of discrimination come within the scope of the collective agreement as do
complaints relating to the unlawful dismissal of employees. On the basis of Ortiz
and Bhaduria, the Plaintiff’s complaints about defamation, coercion and breach
of contract by the Defendant also come within the scope of the labour relations
relationship since the facts supporting those allegations all centre around the
Defendant’s response to and handling of the Plaintiff’s medical restrictions
and the Employer’s transfer decision.
[49]          
This
dispute is well within the usual scope of employer-employee relations. The Plaintiff
was an employee at the material time. The dispute arose directly from that
relationship and the rights and obligations set out in the applicable
collective agreement. The alleged wrongdoing occurred at the workplace in the
course of the Defendant handling of the Plaintiff’s complaint against the
Employer. The essential character of the dispute between the parties arises out
of the interpretation, application, administration or violation of the
collective agreement and the fairness of the Defendant’s representation of a
union member. The Labour Relations Act provides for the exclusive
jurisdiction of a labour arbitrator to resolve workplace disputes pursuant to a
collective agreement and for the OLRB to adjudicate complaints about a union
allegedly failing in its duty of fair representation.
[50]          
I
do not accept the Plaintiff’s arguments that the OLRB has no jurisdiction to
consider claims of discrimination based on disability. By virtue of s. 48(12)(j)
of the Labour Relations Act, an arbitrator has the express power “to
interpret and apply human rights and other employment-related statutes, despite
any conflict between those statutes and the terms of the collective agreement”.
Section 54 of the Labour Relations Act provides that a collective
agreement cannot discriminate against any person if the discrimination is
contrary to the Human Rights Code or the Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedoms. More significantly to this case, the focus of s. 74 of the
Act is whether or not a union has been discriminatory, arbitrary or has acted
in bad faith in the representation of one of its members. In considering that
issue, the OLRB clearly has the discretion to consider human rights issues.
[51]          
For
the foregoing reasons, I conclude that the court lacks jurisdiction to deal
with the claims made by the Plaintiff in this proceeding and so the action must
be dismissed.
[52]          
In
the circumstances, I do not need to deal with the Defendant’s alternative arguments.
However, in the event I am wrong on the jurisdiction issue, I will address the
issue of whether this proceeding should be dismissed as being an abuse of
process.
[53]          
In
the Supreme Court of Canada’s decision in Behn v. Moulton Contracting Ltd.,
2013 SCC 26, at paras. 40-41, LeBel J., for a unanimous court, wrote as follows
respecting abuse of process:
[54]          
As
noted by the Supreme Court of Canada in Penner v. Niagara (Regional Police
Services Board), 2013 SCC 19 (CanLII), [2013] 2 S.C.R. 125, at para. 28:
[55]          
The
Plaintiff’s claim challenges the integrity, consistency and finality of the OLRB’s
adjudicative process. It is clear that the Plaintiff is seeking to relitigate
issues properly raised and determined in the Duty of Fair Representation
Application.
[56]          
The
Duty of Fair Representation Application and the OLRB’s decision therein involved
essentially the same issues raised in the statement of claim, being the
adequacy of the Defendant’s representation of the Plaintiff. The Plaintiff was
the complainant in the Duty of Fair Representation Application and the
Defendant was the respondent. The Plaintiff had the opportunity at that time to
advance his claims and argue his case. His claims were dismissed by the OLRB.
He did not judicially review the Board’s decision. To allow the Plaintiff to
advance the same claims now in this civil action and require the Defendant to
defend itself again from those claims would not promote judicial economy,
consistency or finality.
[57]          
I
am satisfied that the statement of claim amounts to an abuse of process as it
is clearly an attempt by the plaintiff to re-litigate a decision of the OLRB in
another forum. As the Ontario Court of Appeal held in Total Mechanical
Systems Limited v. Sheet Metal Workers’ International Association, Local 30,
2017 ONCA 559, at para. 14, “while not all re-litigation is necessarily
abusive, permitting a collateral challenge in a court action on an issue within
the exclusive jurisdiction of the OLRB … is damaging to the integrity of the
administration of justice.” Such a claim is “vexatious and violate[s] the
fundamental principles of justice underlying the community’s sense of fair play
and decency.” (See also Toronto (City) v. C.U.P.E., Local 79, 2003 SCC 63 (CanLII), 2003
CarswellOnt 4328 (S.C.C.), at para. 35.)
[58]          
Here,
the viability of the Plaintiff’s complaint of unfair representation by the
Defendant has already been adjudicated upon by the OLRB which properly had
jurisdiction over this matter pursuant to s. 74 of the Act and because the
“essential character” of the claim arises from the collective agreement. The
OLRB has exclusive jurisdiction to deal with the issues that form the basis of
the Plaintiff’s claims in this action, and it has made a determination
dismissing the Duty of Fair Representation Application. The doctrine of abuse
of process is designed to preclude this type of action from proceeding and is,
in my view, applicable in this case to grant the relief requested by the
Defendant.
[59]          
Accordingly,
I dismiss the within proceeding as being an abuse of the process of the court.
[60]          
It
is not necessary for me to address the issue of whether this proceeding should
be dismissed for failing to disclose a cause of action properly before this
court, given my earlier rulings found above.
[61]          
In
my view, it is plain and obvious that the matters alleged against the Defendant
by the Plaintiff arise expressly or inferentially out of circumstances captured
by the interpretation and administration of the collective agreement which governed
his employment, and from the Defendant’s duties and obligations, primarily the
duty of fair representation, imposed by the operation of the Labour
Relations Act.  I have concluded that the authorities such as Weber and
Gendron apply in the circumstances.
[62]          
I
am not prepared to exercise my jurisdiction to allow the Plaintiff to amend his
statement of claim. The entirety of the Plaintiff’s allegations and the nature
of his claims stem from his employment and the Defendant’s representation of
him in light of the applicable collective agreement. Given this, there are no
amendments which the Plaintiff could plead that would bring the allegations set
out in the statement of claim within the jurisdiction of the court: Dominion
Trust Co. v. Kesmark Ltd., 1981 CanLII 2912 (ON SC), (1981) 129 D.L.R. (3d)
357, at para. 14.
[63]          
Accordingly,
I decline to grant the Plaintiff’s request for leave to amend the statement of
claim.
[64]          
For
all of these reasons, the Plaintiff’s action against the Defendant is dismissed
by reason of the absence of jurisdiction of this court over the subject matter
in the claim, and by reason of the action constituting an abuse of the process
of the court.
[65]          
I
would urge the parties to agree on costs. If they are unable to do so, then
costs submissions may be made as follows: