[1]              
The Crown Applicant seeks to tender evidence at
trial of certain “extrinsic discreditable conduct” or “extrinsic misconduct”,
as it is referred to in the law of evidence. The two accused, Bezabeh and
Harker, are charged in a four count Indictment with murder, attempt murder, and
two lesser included offences. There was a third co-accused, Campbell-Brown, who
was severed during pre-trial motions because of delay that he was causing. In
addition, there is a fourth alleged co-perpetrator who is being tried
separately in Youth Justice Court (one A. C.-M.). He has pleaded guilty to
first degree murder and is awaiting sentencing.
[2]              
The Indictment relates to two shootings that
took place in a neighbourhood of north-west Toronto on June 19, 2022. The two
shooting incidents are closely related by time, place, and circumstance. There
has been no suggestion that counts relating to the two separate shootings
should be severed. Once all the evidence has been heard at trial, I will decide
whether the evidence relating to one shooting incident is relevant and
admissible in relation to the other shooting incident. That issue is not
the subject of the present “extrinsic misconduct” motion.
[3]              
I heard a number of pre-trial motions in the
days leading up to jury selection and the formal commencement of the trial. The
present motion was the last of these pre-trial motions. I heard argument of the
motion on November 18, 2022. At the end of argument, I made a number of
preliminary oral rulings and gave certain directions to the parties, so that
jury selection could commence the next day. These are my Reasons for Judgement
in relation to those preliminary rulings and directions on the “extrinsic
misconduct” motion. I have referred to them as preliminary rulings, in
the event that circumstances change during the trial (which is presently
ongoing).
[4]              
The parties sensibly agreed to the background
facts that are relevant to this motion and they summarized those facts in
written materials. In addition, the evidence of “extrinsic misconduct” that is
the subject of the motion was tendered as photographs or videos obtained from
various seizures. As a result, it took little time to present the factual
record on the motion.
[5]              
The evidence of alleged “extrinsic misconduct”
that is at issue on this motion comes from three different sources. First, the
police executed a search warrant at a townhouse residence in London on July 8,
2022. This was 19 days after the two shootings had taken place in Toronto.
Inside the residence, the police seized two loaded handguns and a great deal of
ammunition. The seized handguns are not alleged to be the murder or
attempt murder weapons used in this case. They are simply generally similar
handguns. Some of the ammunition seized at the residence is the same as
ammunition used in this case and some is not. The facts relating to the
execution of this search warrant at the townhouse in London are set out in
detail in my ruling dismissing a Charter motion relating to that search
and seizure. See: R. v. Bezabeh, 2024 ONSC 6332.
[6]              
The second source of “extrinsic misconduct”
evidence was found in Harker’s cell phone which was seized incident to his
arrest. These photos and videos include images of Harker in possession of a
handgun or handguns, as well as certain ammunition. There are also images of
Harker associating with the co-accused and with others. Finally, there are
images of Harker’s location on certain dates and of the clothing that he was
wearing on certain occasions.
[7]              
The third source of “extrinsic misconduct”
evidence was found in Bezabeh’s cell phone which was seized during the search
of the London townhouse. These photos and videos include images of Bezabeh in
possession of a handgun or handguns. There are also images of Bezabeh
associating with the co-accused and with others. Finally, there are images of
Bezabeh wearing blue surgical or latex gloves while holding firearms.
[8]              
I will describe the above three kinds of
“extrinsic misconduct” evidence in greater detail in the next section of my
Reasons, when analysing admissibility of the evidence. Before turning to that
analysis, it is important to set out the background facts relating to the two
shooting incidents. It is from those facts that the issues in the case arise
and it is those issues that assist in determining whether the legitimate
probative value of the “extrinsic misconduct” evidence exceeds any prejudicial
effect.
[9]              
As noted above, the two shooting incidents took
place on June 19, 2022 in Toronto. The first shooting was on Amaranth Court at
about 4:17 p.m.  The second shooting was on Lotherton Pathway at about 4:23
p.m.  These two locations are in the same general neighbourhood of north-west
Toronto and they were closely proximate in time. In addition, both shootings
involved a beige or gold coloured Chevrolet Equinox motor vehicle with license
plate CTSD 309. This vehicle had been stolen about a month before the
shootings. Its license plate was removed and a stolen license plate (CTSD 309)
was affixed to the vehicle shortly before the shootings. Finally, shell casings
found at the scenes of the two shooting incidents were tested. This forensic
analysis inferred that the same gun was used in both shootings, that only one
gun was used in the first shooting, and that three guns were used in the second
shooting.
[10]          
It could be inferred from the above
circumstances, that the two shootings were carried out by the same
perpetrators. However, there were differences between the two incidents that
emerged from eyewitness accounts and from video surveillance evidence. In the
first shooting incident, none of the occupants exited the Chevrolet Equinox.
The gunshots were apparently fired from the driver side window or windows of
the car. Fifteen 9mm Luger calibre Hornady brand shell casings were found at
the scene. They were all fired from the same gun. The victim, David Joseph,
suffered three gunshot wounds but he survived. The Crown alleges that Harker
was the driver and that he fired the approximately 15 gunshots in this first
incident. The Crown seeks to identify Harker as the driver of the Chevrolet
Equinox, mainly relying on video surveillance images, his relatively
distinctive clothing, the fact that he had the key to the Chevrolet Equinox on
arrest, and evidence from his cell phone. Mr. Stauffer advised the Court during
oral argument of the motion that Harker’s identity as the driver will not
be an issue at trial.
[11]          
In the second shooting incident, three
passengers exited from the Chevrolet Equinox. All three fired guns at the
deceased, Jaron Williams. Twenty-eight shell casings were found at the scene.
They were fired from three separate guns. They included the same Hornady 9mm
Luger calibre shell casings left at the scene of the first shooting, as well as
a number of other different shell casings. The Crown will seek to identify
Bezabeh as one of the three gunmen who exited the vehicle at the scene of the second
shooting, mainly relying on video surveillance images, certain aspects of his
clothing (in particular, blue surgical gloves), and evidence from his cell
phone. Identity is a disputed issue in relation to Bezabeh. The driver
(admittedly Harker) did not exit the vehicle during this second shooting and he
is not alleged to be one of the three gunmen. The severed co-accused,
Campbell-Brown, did not exit the vehicle during either of the two shootings. He
is alleged to have remained in the middle of the rear seat. His main role was as
the alleged driver of a second motor vehicle, a Ford Escape, which will be
discussed below. In addition, it is alleged that Campbell-Brown was knowingly
present at both shootings, aiding or abetting and acting in concert with the
principals. Finally, the young person A. C.-M. is alleged to be one of the
three gunmen who exited the Chevrolet Equinox during the second shooting.
[12]          
It can be seen that Harker is alleged to be a
principal who fired a handgun at the victim during the attempt murder on
Amaranth Court and he is alleged to be an aider or abettor who drove the
Chevrolet Equinox during the murder on Lotherton Pathway. On the other hand,
Bezabeh is alleged to be an aider or abettor who was knowingly present in the
Chevrolet Equinox and was acting in concert during the first shooting but he is
alleged to be one of the three principals who fired handguns at the victim
during the second shooting. In other words, knowing participation or party
liability in the two shootings is an issue for both Harker and Bezabeh.
[13]          
It can be inferred that there were five
occupants in the Chevrolet Equinox. That vehicle was abandoned and its stolen
license plates were removed, shortly after the two shooting incidents. The five
occupants all exited the Chevrolet Equinox and got into a black Ford Escape,
apparently driven by Campbell-Brown. Video surveillance evidence shows close
coordination between the two vehicles, both before and after the two shootings,
inferring some degree of planning.
[14]          
The video surveillance evidence shows that the
black Ford Escape was driven to London, shortly after the two shootings, and
immediately after the five suspects had abandoned the stolen Chevrolet Equinox.
The Ford Escape was parked on Blackwell Boulevard in London and four occupants
of the vehicle entered a townhouse on that street. Once the police learned that
the suspects had fled Toronto in the black Ford Escape and that four suspects
had entered this townhouse in London, a search warrant was obtained. As noted
above, the search warrant was executed at the townhouse on July 8, 2022. It is
unknown where the fifth suspect was dropped off after the black Ford Escape
left Toronto on June 19, 2022 and drove to London. This fifth suspect, who is
one of the three gunmen in the second shooting, has never been identified or
charged.
[15]          
Harker and Campbell-Brown were arrested in
Montreal on July 2, 2022, six days before the search warrant was executed in
London on July 8, 2022. Harker and Campbell-Brown had possession of the black
Ford Escape in Montreal, after it had apparently been driven there from the
London townhouse where it was last seen on June 19, 2022. Campbell-Brown had
the key to the Ford Escape and Harker had the key to the Chevrolet Equinox.
There were relevant shell casings and bullets found in both cars. Relevant
clothing was also seized as a result of the arrests in Montreal and the search
warrant executed in London.
[16]          
Finally, analysis of Harker’s cell phone (seized
in Montreal) and Bezabeh’s cell phone (seized in London), as well as video
surveillance evidence, tracked their movements on June 18th and 19th,
2022. They appear to have left the Blackwell Boulevard townhouse in London on
June 18, 2022 and travelled to Toronto in the Ford Escape (together with
Campbell-Brown and perhaps others). Similar cell tower evidence and video
surveillance evidence tracked the movements of the Ford Escape and the
Chevrolet Equinox, before and after the shooting, and captured images of
persons associated with the two vehicles.
[17]          
The governing evidence law principles relating to the admissibility of
“extrinsic discreditable conduct” are now well-settled. For example, in R.
v. Stubbs (2013), 2013 ONCA 514 (CanLII), 300 C.C.C. (3d) 181 at paras. 54-56
(Ont. C.A.) they were summarized succinctly by Watt J.A. (Sharpe and Gillese
JJ.A. concurring):
[18]          
There is now a long line of authority applying the above principles in
the context that arises on the present motion, namely, prior or subsequent
possession of the means to commit the offence (namely, the murder weapon and/or
a weapon similar to the murder weapon). My colleague Nakatsuru J. helpfully
summarized many of these authorities in a recent decision of this Court, R.
v. Bailey and Garwood, 2023 ONSC 2499 at para. 3, as follows:
[19]          
The principles set out in the above line of authority must be applied to
a variety of different factual circumstances that arise from the different
kinds of “extrinsic discreditable conduct” that the Crown seeks to tender in
the present case. I will begin with the most probative of these various items
of prior or subsequent conduct and will end with the least probative.
[20]          
In my view, the images found stored in Harker’s cell phone are the most
probative. These photos and videos show Harker in possession of a handgun (or
handguns) on dates proximate to the June 19, 2022 shootings. The images that
precede the date of the shooting – from June 11, 14, 17, and 18, 2022 – are
important because they not only show Harker in possession of a handgun in the
days leading up to the shooting but they show him at the 1195 Blackwell
townhouse in London and they show him wearing the same clothing that one of the
alleged perpetrators (the driver of the Chevrolet Equinox) was wearing at the
time of the shootings. The images from the actual date of the June 19, 2022
shooting, show Harker in possession of a handgun with an extended magazine while
wearing the same relatively distinctive clothing as the driver of the Chevrolet
Equinox. The handgun’s extended magazine may be significant because the driver
of the Chevrolet Equinox may have fired as many as 15 gunshots from the
driver’s window of that car, during the first shooting. This would presumably
require a large magazine. There are a number of additional images from Harker’s
phone showing him associating with Bezabeh and/or Campbell-Brown and/or A.
C.-M., either before or after the shootings. In some of these images, one or
more of these co-accused possessed a firearm and/or is wearing similar clothing
to that worn by one or more of the perpetrators during the shootings. Finally,
there is one image of Harker after the shootings, on June 28, 2022, apparently
with a firearm in his hand.
[21]          
I am satisfied that the totality of the above images have a high degree
of legitimate probative value that is unrelated to general bad character. The
images are closely proximate to the shooting and they connect Harker to a
handgun (or handguns) that may have been the one (or ones) used in the
shootings. They also connect him to clothing that is similar to clothing worn
during the shootings. In addition, they connect him to alleged co-perpetrators
and they assist in assessing the character of his relationship with these
alleged co-perpetrators (a point that will be discussed below in greater
detail). Finally, they connect him to the townhouse in London from which the
perpetrators appear to have left on June 18, 2022 and to which they apparently returned
on June 19, 2022.
[22]          
In all these circumstances, this evidence has high probative value in
relation to the issues of identity and party liability. Indeed, some of this
evidence is so proximate to the two shootings that it may not be “extrinsic” at
all. It is also relevant to planning and deliberation in the period leading up
to the shootings. For example, the evidence shows Harker on June 11, 2022
examining ammunition stored in two separate magazines that may be consistent
with ammunition used in the shootings. The video images also show him on June
17, 18, and 19, 2022, moving from London to Toronto while possessing a handgun
or handguns, during the days and hours leading up to the two shootings (this
inference of planning and deliberation will also be discussed in greater detail
below).
[23]          
In my view, there is a legitimate inference from the totality of the
images stored in Harker’s phone, that he is one of the perpetrators because he
possessed the kind of gun and ammunition needed to commit the shootings, he
wore relatively distinctive clothing similar to that worn by one of the
perpetrators, and he was associating with three other alleged perpetrators
before and after the shootings (including while one or more of them possessed a
firearm, inferring common knowledge and acceptance amongst this group of their
collective possession and/or use of firearms). All of the above uses of the
images in Harker’s phone have nothing to do with bad character. They relate
directly to the essential elements of the offences charged. Any moral prejudice
due to the risk that the jury will reason on the basis of general bad character
or disposition to commit the offences, can be controlled by a strong limiting
jury instruction. Any reasoning prejudice is minor because the images found in
Harker’s phone can easily be proved through real and demonstrative evidence,
without any apparent challenge to its reliability or credibility and without
any undue expenditure of trial time.
[24]          
I appreciate that Harker has indicated through counsel that he will
admit that he was the driver of the Chevrolet Equinox and that he wore certain relatively
distinctive clothing. He was, therefore, involved to some degree in the two shootings.
However, he does not admit that he was a principal who fired from the driver’s
window during the first shooting, he does not admit prior knowledge in relation
to aiding or abetting a murder by the alleged principals in the second
shooting, and he does not admit planning and deliberation. All these issues are
important and the above body of evidence has significant probative value in
relation to those issues. In addition, any prejudice is either minimal or it
can be prevented with a strong limiting jury instruction.
[25]          
In spite of the above analysis, I excluded some of the images from
Harker’s cell phone videos. The Crown tendered 20 slides of video images seized
from Harker’s phone. There were six slides that I ruled inadmissible for narrow
reasons, specific to the particular images. For example, “Slide Two” is a
particularly frightening image of Harker holding two handguns together,
pointing them directly at the viewer, and pretending to shoot. The date of this
image (June 14, 2022) and the location (the townhouse at 1195 Blackwell) means
that this slide is quite probative as it shows Harker in possession of two
handguns five days before the shooting and it locates him at the place where
the alleged perpetrators likely prepared for their departure to Toronto on June
18, 2022. However, the Crown can prove these points with a number of other
images (for example, with the images created on June 11, 17 and 18, 2022) and
without the same risk of moral prejudice that may arise from the potentially emotional
reaction to an image like “Slide Two”. Accordingly, I excluded this slide.
Similarly, “Slides Three, Four, and Five” are images of Harker that may have
been created a few hours after the shootings, on June 19, 2022, wearing the
same relatively distinctive clothing worn by the driver of the Chevrolet
Equinox. These images may be legitimately probative, depending on their date,
as they may locate Harker back at the London townhouse shortly after the
shootings wearing the clothing worn by one of the alleged perpetrators.
However, there are uncertainties about the date when these images were created.
In addition, Harker has admitted that he was the driver who wore this relatively
distinctive clothing. Finally, these slides include potentially prejudicial
images, depicting a scantily clad female pointing a gun at the viewer while
standing beside Harker, and they depict Harker displaying a relatively large
amount of cash. Harker’s female associate with the gun and the display of cash introduce
extraneous distractions that may give rise to both moral and reasoning
prejudice. For all these reasons, I excluded “Slides Three, Four, and Five”. I
had the Crown edit “Slide Six”, as it included a sinister and irrelevant image
of two young men handcuffed in the basement of the London townhouse on June 29,
2022, some ten days after the shootings. I also excluded “Slide Eight” as it
showed little more than Harker apparently smoking drugs, together with some
evidence of association that was repetitive of other less potentially
prejudicial images. I similarly excluded “Slide Fourteen” as it simply depicted
Harker smoking drugs and holding money.
[26]          
The remaining images from Harker’s phone are all admissible because
their legitimate probative value greatly exceeds their prejudicial effect.
[27]          
In my view, the images found stored in Bezabeh’s cell phone have very
similar legitimate probative value to those found in Harker’s cell phone. There
are images on dates prior to the shootings – on April 25, May 12, June 5 and
11, 2022 – showing Bezabeh holding what appears to be a handgun with an
extended magazine while wearing blue gloves (in one image), pointing a firearm
in Campbell-Brown’s presence (in two other images), holding or possessing a
firearm (in two other images), and holding or possessing a firearm in Harker’s
presence (in one other image). Some of these images can be connected to the
1195 Blackwell townhouse in London and some depict one or more of the
co-accused wearing clothing that is similar to that worn by the perpetrators of
the two shootings on June 19, 2022. The one image of Bezabeh wearing blue
gloves while holding a handgun with an extended magazine is particularly
probative because one of the perpetrators in the second shooting (who is
alleged to be Bezabeh) was wearing blue surgical gloves while firing at the
deceased. In addition, blue surgical gloves were found during the search of the
1195 Blackwell townhouse on July 8, 2022, which is where Bezabeh was found and
arrested. And finally, there were 28 shell casings found at the scene of the
second shooting, and one of the handguns used in this second shooting appeared
to have an extended magazine.
[28]          
There are also images from Bezabeh’s cell phone taken after the June 19,
2022 shootings – on June 28, 29, and July 4, 2022 – showing Bezabeh associating
with Campbell-Brown and/or Harker and/or both. In one image, Bezabeh again
appears to be holding a firearm while wearing blue gloves. Once again, some of
these images can be connected to the 1195 Blackwell townhouse and some can be
connected to clothing worn by one or more of the alleged perpetrators of the
shootings. Finally, there are two undated images. One is of Bezabeh and
Campbell-Brown and the other is of Bezabeh, Harker, and Campbell-Brown. In
these images, Campbell-Brown and Harker are wearing clothing similar to that
worn by two of the alleged perpetrators during the June 19, 2022 shootings.
[29]          
I am satisfied that all of these images have much the same significant
probative value as the images found in Harker’s phone, for similar reasons.
They are highly probative of the issues of identity and party liability because
they are proximate in time to the June 19, 2022 shootings, they connect Bezabeh
to a handgun (or handguns) similar to those used in the shootings, they connect
him to the alleged co-accused in the two shootings (and infer common knowledge
and acceptance amongst the group of their collective possession and use of
handguns), they connect him to clothing being worn by the co-accused that is
similar to clothing worn during the shootings, and they connect him to the
London townhouse that the alleged perpetrators left from on June 18, 2022, and
then returned to on June 19, 2022. The above legitimate inferences related to
identity and party liability do not involve reasoning through general bad
character or disposition. They involve reasoning through inferential connection
to the known circumstances of the two shootings. I acknowledge that the images found
on Harker’s cell phone have greater probative value than the images found on
Bezabeh’s phone. That is because there are four images created on Harker’s
phone on the actual day of the shootings. However, the above summarized images
from Bezabeh’s phone also have high probative value because they are closely
proximate in time to the shootings and they connect Bezabeh to the shootings in
the multiple ways set out above. In addition, any moral prejudice can be controlled
by a strong limiting instruction to the jury. There is little or no reasoning
prejudice, for the same reasons as those set out above in relation to Harker’s
phone.
[30]          
There was one image in Bezabeh’s cell phone (“Slide Nineteen”) that
particularly concerned me. It is dated July 3, 2022 and it shows Bezabeh
holding three handguns together while pointing them at the camera. He is
wearing what appear to be blue surgical or latex gloves. This image is
particularly frightening because Bezabeh is holding multiple guns at the same
time and he is pointing them at the person taking the video or photo (and, in
effect, at any person viewing the image). Its legitimate probative value is
that, once again, it shows Bezabeh wearing blue latex or surgical gloves while
holding handguns at a time reasonably proximate to the two shootings. The
recurring nature of this particular image is legitimately probative of a habit
or practice or inclination to wear blue latex or surgical gloves when holding a
handgun (although there are other images where Bezabeh is not wearing gloves
while holding a gun). As explained above, this inference concerning the wearing
of blue surgical gloves when handling a firearm is significant in relation to
the second shooting where one of the three gunmen can be seen wearing blue
gloves while firing at the deceased. On the other hand, there is potential
moral prejudice arising from this image for the same reasons discussed above in
relation to “Slide Two” seized from Harker’s phone. I am concerned that these two
images, of Harker and Bezabeh holding and pretending to fire a total of five
guns at the viewer, may elicit an emotional reaction from some jurors that will
be difficult to control with a limiting instruction. As a result, I asked the
parties to consider an admission to the effect that a third image was seized
from the cell phone of Bezabeh, depicting him holding a handgun while wearing
blue surgical gloves, and that it was created on July 3, 2022. Alternatively, I
suggested that the Crown could simply ask the witness who introduces evidence
of the images found in Bezabeh’s cell phone whether there was a third image
dated July 3, 2022 of Bezabeh wearing blue surgical gloves while holding a
handgun, and the witness could simply answer “yes, there was.” I will then explain
to the jury that it was unnecessary to file the actual video image because of
the two earlier similar images. In effect, I ruled that the image should be
edited in a way that preserved its legitimate probative value but removed those
aspects of the image that may give rise to a risk of moral prejudice. The
suggested admission would achieve those purposes, in my view, as would the use
of limited oral testimony, without any of the risks associated with admitting
the actual image itself. Once the trial proceeded, counsel made an admission
along the lines of what had been suggested.
[31]          
There were three other images found in Bezabeh’s phone that the Crown
agreed not to tender when pressed, or that I excluded (“Slides 14, 15, and 16”).
Two of them were undated and they all added little to other images that had
already been ruled admissible.
[32]          
For all these reasons, most of the images from Bezabeh’s cell phone were
ruled admissible because their legitimate probative value substantially exceeded
any prejudicial effect.
[33]          
During oral argument of the motion, counsel for both Bezabeh and for
Harker made submissions about the form of the evidence of prior and subsequent
gun possession, if this evidence was ruled admissible. Mr. Stauffer submitted
that still images from the videos could be admitted, showing Harker in
possession of a handgun or handguns, in order to lessen the more disturbing
character of the video evidence. Mr. Derstine submitted that an agreed
statement of fact could be drafted, admitting that Bezabeh openly possessed a
handgun or handguns on certain dates, that others were present on some of these
occasions, and that they all appeared to be friendly and close to each other.
In response, the Crown submitted that the videos were the “best evidence.”
[34]          
If the only relevance of the cell phone video evidence was to infer
identity from the fact of prior and subsequent gun possession, this submission
would have greater force. That is because the simple fact of prior and
subsequent gun possession can be fully captured in a still photograph or an
admission. However, the legitimate probative force of the video images seized
from Harker’s and Bezabeh’s cell phones goes well beyond merely inferring
identity from the fact of prior and subsequent gun possession.
[35]          
In my view, the full character of the relationship between Harker,
Bezabeh, Campbell-Brown, and the young person (A. C.-M.), is one of the more
important aspects of the “extrinsic misconduct” videos. The nature of that
relationship does not fully emerge from a still image or an agreed statement of
fact. The videos depict the relationship between these four individuals in a
forceful and complete way that would not be replicated by written words or
still images.
[36]          
This cell phone video evidence, depicting the character of the
relationship between the four accused, is relevant to a number of issues in this
case. Proof of identity is the first issue to which this body of evidence is
relevant. The inference of identity of the gunmen that emerges from these video
images is not based simply on the fact of prior and subsequent gun possession.
Rather, an inference of identity also emerges from the character of the
relationship between Harker and his associates. On the particular facts of this
case, there is overwhelming evidence connecting the stolen Chevrolet Equinox to
the two shootings. There is almost equally compelling evidence inferring that
Harker was the driver of that vehicle during the two shootings. As a result, I was
advised during argument of the motion that Harker will admit this fact, and
that admission has now been made at trial. Once Harker is anchored to the two
shootings in this way, the identities of his close associates and the nature of
his relationship with those associates in the days before and after the two
shootings becomes important circumstantial evidence in helping to identify the
four passengers in the Chevrolet Equinox. The extent to which Harker’s
relationship with certain associates is tied up with the open display of
handguns (and with posturing, mimicking, and apparently preparing for the use
of loaded handguns) is particularly helpful in inferring the likely identity of
the four passengers he took with him in the Chevrolet Equinox when he drove to
the scenes of the two shootings.
[37]          
The second issue to which the character of the relationship between
Harker, Bezabeh, Campbell-Brown, and A. C.-M. relates is party liability. Five
persons attended at the two shootings in the Chevrolet Equinox. There appears
to have been only one principal in the first shooting and there were three
principals in the second shooting. Party liability is an important issue in
this case for both Harker and Bezabeh. In Harker’s case, there is compelling
evidence that he was present at the scene of both shootings, as explained
above. If he drove the other parties to the scene of the two shootings, with
prior knowledge that one or more of them intended to use firearms in order to
carry out a shooting, then Harker would be a s. 21 aider or abettor to one or
more of the four offences charged, depending on the extent of his prior
knowledge. Dickson J. (as he then was) explained the law on this point in his
seminal decision in R. v. Dunlop and Sylvester (1979), 1979 CanLII 20 (SCC), 47 C.C.C. (2d) 93
at pp. 106-110 (S.C.C.):
[38]          
More recently, in R. v. Kinkead, supra
at paras. 65-84, Simmons J.A. (Charron J.A., as she then was, and Feldman J.A.
concurring) upheld the decision of the trial judge who had admitted evidence of
prior discreditable conduct on the following basis:
[39]          
The underlined passages from Dunlop and
Sylvester and from Kinkead, set out above, stress the importance of
prior knowledge in relation to party liability, including prior knowledge that certain
kinds of weapons would be used at the scene of an anticipated crime. Harker’s
prior knowledge, when he drove the Chevrolet Equinox to the scene of the two
shootings, can be inferred from the character of his relationship with his
associates, both before and after the two shootings, and whether their
relationship involved the open display of handguns, posturing with handguns,
and apparently preparing for the use of loaded handguns. The same reasoning
applies to Bezabeh. He is alleged to be an aider or abettor at the scene of the
first shooting. If he was present in the Chevrolet Equinox, with prior
knowledge that a shooting was going to occur, it could be inferred that he was
“ready to assist the main culprit”, as Dickson J. put it in Dunlop and
Sylvester, and that he was “acting in concert” and “intended to signify
approval” by his attendance, as Cave J. and Hawkins J. put it in Coney.
[40]          
The third issue to which the character of the
relationship between Harker and Bezabeh and their associates relates is
“planning and deliberation”. As explained above, the videos on Harker’s and
Bezabeh’s cell phones, together with the video surveillance and cell tower
tracking evidence, are capable of inferring a planned course of conduct including
arming themselves with loaded handguns, traveling  to Toronto in the Ford
Escape on June 18, 2022, staying at a certain residence in Toronto, obtaining
the stolen Chevrolet Equinox and stolen license plate used in the two shootings,
and then returning to London in the Ford Escape after the shootings. The
character of the ongoing relationship between the four associates that emerges
from the cell phone videos may assist in evaluating the extent to which Harker
and Bezabeh participated in this apparent planning and preparation for the two
shootings and the extent to which they believed, after the fact, that nothing
had gone wrong with any plan. See, e.g. R. v. MacKinnon and Crooks
(1999), 1999 CanLII 1723 (ON CA), 132 C.C.C. (3d) 545 at paras. 10-16 (Ont. C.A.); R. v. Poitras (2002),
2002 CanLII 23583 (ON CA), 1 C.R. (6th) 366 at paras. 9-14 (Ont. C.A.).
[41]          
In my view, the totality of the above three
issues to which the cell phone video evidence relates, justifies and even
requires presenting that evidence in its true original form. A number of still
images or an admission would significantly limit, omit, and fail to capture the
real probative force of the evidence. It would amount to editing the evidence
in a way that distorts by omission. The law relating to editing has always
required that the effect of any editing must not distort the true meaning of
the evidence. See: R. v. Beatty (1944), 1944 CanLII 22 (SCC), 81 C.C.C. 1 (S.C.C.); R. v.
Alward and Mooney (1977), 1977 CanLII 166 (SCC), 35 C.C.C. (2d) 392 at 396 (S.C.C.); R. v. Otis
(1978), 1978 CanLII 2350 (ON CA), 39 C.C.C. (2d) 304 at 307-9 (Ont. C.A.); R. v. C. (F.) (1996),
1996 CanLII 623 (ON CA), 104 C.C.C. (3d) 461 at 472-3 (Ont. C.A.); R. v. L. (L.) (2009), 2009 ONCA 413 (CanLII), 244
C.C.C. (3d) 149 at 152-5 (Ont. C.A.); R. v. Creary and Creary, 2019 ONSC
4843 at para. 17.
[42]          
I will not repeat my previous analysis to the
effect that any moral prejudice from the cell phone video images can be
controlled by a strong limiting instruction and that any reasoning prejudice is
minimal.
[43]          
In my view, the ammunition seized at the London townhouse on July 8,
2022 has considerable probative value. In the first place, it is this townhouse
from which the alleged perpetrators departed on June 18, 2022 and to which they
returned on June 19, 2022. The search of the townhouse on July 8, 2022, some 19
days after the two shootings, was reasonably proximate in time to the
shootings. In the second place, the two shootings required a large quantity of
ammunition because at least 15 bullets were fired at the scene of the first
shooting, at least 28 bullets were fired at the scene of the second shooting,
three separate handguns were used in the two shootings, and one or more of
those handguns appeared to have an extended magazine. There were approximately 151
rounds of ammunition found during the search of the London townhouse, inferring
access by the occupants to a reasonably large quantity of ammunition. Third,
and most importantly, there were Hornady 9mm shell casings, Hornady 40 S&W
shell casings, and FC 9mm shell casings left at the scene of the two shootings.
All three of these kinds of ammunition were found during the search of the
London townhouse on July 8, 2022, as well as some other kinds of ammunition.
[44]          
I am satisfied that it can reasonably be inferred from all the above
circumstances, that the alleged perpetrators of the two shootings had access to
the kinds of ammunition they required, in the quantities they required, at the
time they required it, and at the townhouse where they apparently prepared for
the two shootings. In a circumstantial case, this one item of evidence is not
insignificant, when combined with the other circumstances relating to identity.
The use of this evidence, in order to draw the above inferences, does not
involve any reasoning through general bad character or disposition. Rather, the
above inferences relate to the element of identity and they are based on the
circumstances of the offences and on the fact that the alleged perpetrators
appeared to be connected to this particular townhouse in London where the
ammunition they needed was apparently available.
[45]          
Balanced against the above legitimate probative value of this evidence,
the seizure of this large quantity of ammunition gives rise to little or no
moral prejudice. The possession of ammunition, in the absence of illegal
handguns (which I will address below), is not per se illegal.
Furthermore, if it is “extrinsic misconduct”, it is a kind of misconduct that
pales in comparison to the two shootings in this case. Finally, there is little
or no reasoning prejudice as the evidence of the seizures will take minimal
trial time and there is no challenge to the credibility and reliability of this
evidence.
[46]          
For all the above reasons, I was satisfied that the seizure of approximately
151 rounds of ammunition at the London townhouse on July 8, 2022 is admissible
because its probative value significantly exceeds its prejudicial effect.
[47]          
The last item of “extrinsic misconduct” evidence that the Crown seeks to
tender on this motion is the seizure of two loaded handguns during the search
of the London townhouse on July 8, 2022. This item of evidence has the least
probative value of all the “extrinsic misconduct” evidence that the Crown seeks
to tender at trial. In terms of its probative value, forensic testing of the
two handguns positively determined that they were not used in the two
shootings on June 19, 2022. This fundamentally distinguishes these two handguns
from the handguns depicted in Harker’s and Bezabeh’s cell phone videos, which
may well have been used in the shootings. In addition, two of the alleged
perpetrators (Harker and Campbell-Brown) had left the London townhouse and had
been arrested in Montreal on July 2, 2022. Accordingly, the inference that they
had access to the two handguns seized in London on July 8, 2022 was weak.
Bezabeh was present in the London townhouse on July 8, 2022 when the two
handguns were seized but he was only one of six persons who were present.
Accordingly, the inference that he had access to the two handguns has some
weaknesses. Most importantly, the Crown already has much more probative proof
of the two accused’s actual possession of handguns, given that I have
admitted a number of highly probative images of both accused holding handguns
at the relevant time, as depicted in various photos and videos stored on their
cell phones (for all the reasons set out above). Binnie J., speaking for the
Court in the leading decision on this topic, R. v. Handy (2002), 2002 SCC 56 (CanLII), 164 C.C.C. (3d) 481 at paras. 73-74 and 83 (S.C.C.), stated
that the probative value and prejudice from certain evidence must be assessed
in relation to “its ability to advance or refute a live issue”, and in
relation to the “relative importance” of that issue and “whether the
Crown can prove its point with less prejudicial evidence” [emphasis
added].
[48]          
For all the reasons set out above, I am satisfied that
the seizure of the two loaded handguns at the London townhouse on July 8, 2022
has minimal probative value. If I had not already admitted the much more
probative evidence of actual handgun possession at the relevant time, found in the
video images on Harker’s and Bezabeh’s cell phones, I might well have taken a
different view of this issue.
[49]          
Balanced against that minimal probative value, the
seizure of the two loaded handguns has some prejudicial effect. It is per se
illegal to possess these two loaded handguns. More importantly, it will
unnecessarily occupy and distract the jury in trying to determine the true
probative value of this evidence of access to handguns on July 8, 2022 (19
days after the shootings) when, in my view, this is simply unnecessary. On the
particular facts of this case, there is already clear evidence inferring that
Harker and Bezabeh actually possessed handguns, at the time of the
shootings. Accordingly, it is a wasteful distraction to inquire into whether
they also had access to handguns at a later date.
[50]          
For all these reasons, the seizure of the two loaded
handguns on July 8, 2022 is inadmissible. The minimal probative value of this
evidence is outweighed by its prejudicial effect.
[51]          
The Crown advised during oral argument that it was not
seeking to admit evidence that two bullet proof vests and a large over-capacity
drum magazine were also seized during the execution of the London townhouse
search warrant. None of these items relate to issues in the present case.
[52]          
For all the above reasons, I made a number of oral rulings and gave
counsel certain directions on November 18, 2024 at the end of oral argument
concerning the admissibility of “extrinsic discreditable conduct”.