[1]             
The
Appellant, Fatmir Yryku, appeals from his August 18, 2023 conviction at trial
by the Honourable Justice A.M. Calsavara on a charge of Failure or Refusal to Comply
with a Breath Demand under Criminal Code s. 320.15(1).
[2]             
The
conviction followed a motor vehicle collision, which took place on March 1,
2022 at between 6:30 – 7:00 p.m. on Longfield Road, Acton, outside the Appellant’s
residence. The collision occurred when a Dodge Ram pick-up truck (the “truck”) driven
by Steve Mitchell (“Mitchell”) sideswiped a silver Ford Escape vehicle (the
“Ford”), which the trial judge found to have been driven by the Appellant.
[3]             
Following
the accident, Mitchell observed the Appellant reverse the Ford back into his
driveway, get out of the vehicle and enter his home. He then had a pointed
discussion with the Appellant. At some point afterwards, the Appellant’s wife, Katia
Hernandez, emerged from the home. She was wearing shorts, despite the
winter-like weather at the time.
[4]             
After
police arrived at the scene, Mitchell identified the Appellant as the driver of
the Ford. He also indicated that he felt that the Appellant had been drinking. However,
both the Appellant and Ms. Hernandez claimed to the police that she was the
driver of the Ford at the time of the accident.
[5]             
One of
the officers at the scene who spoke to the parties, Constable Norris, formed
the suspicion that the Appellant was the driver of the Ford and had consumed
alcohol. Constable Norris demanded that the Appellant provide a sample of his
breath to an Approved Screening Device (“ASD”), which was present at the scene.
But the Appellant refused. The Appellant justified his refusal with the claim that
his wife had been the driver of the Ford. Later at the police station, the
Appellant again refused to provide a breath sample, this time upon demand by a
qualified technician, to an Approved Instrument (“AI”).
[6]             
The
Appellant was charged with Impaired Operation of a Conveyance under Criminal
Code s. 320.14(1)(a) and Failure or Refusal to Comply with a Breath Demand
under s. 320.15(1). While only one refusal is necessary for conviction under s.
320.15(1), the charge against the Appellant cited both refusals.
[7]             
Following
a trial in which both the Appellant and Ms. Hernandez testified, the trial
judge acquitted the Appellant of the charge of Impaired Driving but convicted
him of Failure or Refusal to Comply with a Breath Demand. The trial judge provided
a synopsis of her reasoning for the conviction of the Accused in her oral
reasons as follows:
[8]             
This
appeal raises the following issues:
[9]             
For the
reasons that follow, I find that the trial judge made no errors in her analysis
of the law or facts and dismiss this appeal.
[10]          
The
Information charging the Appellant stated:
[11]          
This
charge offers two alternative paths for conviction: either the refusal to
provide a breath sample to an ASD (s. 320.27) or refusal to provide a breath
sample to an AI (s. 320.28). The evidence and findings of the trial judge
support a conviction on either path.
[12]          
Under s.
320.27(1) and (2), the test for valid grounds to demand that a driver provide a
breath sample to an ASD is “reasonable suspicion” that the person has been operating
a conveyance[1]
in the past three hours and that they have alcohol in their system: R v. Schouten, 135 OR (3d) 200 (Ont. C.A.).  The
“reasonable suspicion” test should not be conflated with “reasonable and
probable grounds”. It need not be the only inference available from a
particular constellation of facts: R v Chehill, 2013 SCC 49 at
paras. 22 -32.
[13]          
As
Moldaver J. wrote for the majority of the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. MacKenzie, 2013 SCC 50 (CanLII), [2013] 3 S.C.R. 250, at paras. 72 – 74, the test for reasonable
suspicion is a broad one:
[14]          
Recently,
in R. v. Breault, 2023 SCC 9, the Supreme Court wrote at para. 40 that s. 320.27(2) “authorizes the
random screening of drivers by peace officers who have an ASD in their
possession and who are acting in the course of the lawful exercise of their
powers, even if there are no reasonable grounds to suspect that a stopped
driver has alcohol in their body.”
[15]          
At trial,
Mitchell testified that he was driving the truck on a residential street close
to his home when he observed the Ford reverse out of a driveway and into the
opposing lane in relation to the direction it faced. Mitchell testified that as
he drove by the Ford, which was facing the same direction as him but on the
wrong side of the road, the driver of the Ford drove across into his lane and
into his driver’s side door and side-swiped his truck’s passenger door to the
side of the truck bed and tire.
[16]          
As
recounted by the trial judge, Mitchell further testified that following the
accident:
[17]          
The
Appellant’s wife,
Ms. Hernandez,
walked out of the Yryku house shortly after this exchange. Mitchell testified
that she was wearing shorts, boots, and a parka, even though the conditions at
the time were still winter-like.
[18]          
The trial
judge found that when the police arrived, about ten minutes after Mitchell’s
911 call, the Appellant was again aggressive and yelling. He insisted that he
was not the driver. He refused Constable Norris’ demand that he provide a
sample of his breath into an ASD even though one was available at the scene. He
did the same thing later at the police station when a qualified breathalyser
technician demanded that he provide a breath sample into an AI.
[19]          
Both the
Appellant and Ms. Hernandez testified at trial that she was the driver of the
Ford at the time of the accident. The Appellant also testified that he had
consumed two beers on the day of the accident, but felt that he had not been
impaired. Nonetheless, he did not wish to drive because of his consumption of
the beers,
[20]          
There was
no dispute at trial that the Appellant had refused both breath sample demands.
[21]          
The trial
judge based her finding that Constable Norris, had a reasonable suspicion that
the Appellant had been driving the Ford in the past three hours and that he had
alcohol in his system on the following:
[22]          
There is
no dispute that the police had an ASD with them at the time that they made the
ASD demand.
[23]          
The
Appellant justified both of his refusals with his claim that he had not been
driving at the time of the accident and that a mistake had been made as to the
identify of the driver.  He said that he had lost all faith in the police when
they took Mitchell’s identification of him at face value and ignored what he
and his wife had to say.
[24]          
In light
of the evidence cited above, there is no error with the trial judge’s finding
that Constable Norris had legal grounds to make the breath demand under s.
320.27(1)(a). In light of that finding, the issue of the propriety of the s.
320.28 demand is moot.
[25]          
Nonetheless,
as the issue is raised, I agree with the trial judge that police had reasonable
grounds to make the s. 320.28 demand as well.
[26]          
As Durno
J. (ad hoc), wrote for the Ontario Court of Appeal regarding the reasonable
grounds standard of what is now s. 320.28(1) in R v Bush, 2010 ONCA 554
at paras. 37 -38:
[27]          
The
reasonable standard does not equate to the civil standard of balance of
probabilities because that standard requires a finding that one version of
events is more probable than the others. Such a finding is not required under the
reasonable grounds standard: R v Hayatibahar, 2022 ONSC 1281, at para. 138. The central
difference between the two standards is “the absence of weighing probabilities in
applying the "reasonable grounds to believe" standard. The latter can
exist even in the face of a competing probability”: Hayatibahar, at para. 129, citing The Director of
Criminal Property and Forfeiture v. Ramdath et al, 2021 MBCA 23 at para. 27.
[28]          
The
Appellant argues that the narratives of himself and his wife, Ms. Hernandez, preclude
the Crown’s claim to reasonable grounds to demand a breath sample under s.
320.28(1)(a)(i). However, the trial judge found that police not only had a
reasonable suspicion but reasonable and probable grounds to believe that the
Appellant had driven the Ford at the time of the accident and at his ability to
drive was impaired to any degree by alcohol at the time.
[29]          
The
Appellant was identified by Mitchell as the driver of the Ford. He displayed
signs of intoxication and was argumentative with police officers. His wife was
oddly dressed for the weather and unable to explain the mechanism of the crash.
Based on the test for the reasonable standard set out above, the trial judge
made no error in finding that the police had reasonable grounds to demand an AI
breath sample.  The fact of a competing claim as to the identity of the driver
of the Ford does not obviate the reasonableness of the demand for a breath
sample.
[30]          
The
Appellant argues that the police demand that he provide a breath sample to an
ASD was not legal because it was not made as soon as practicable. The Appellant
adds that the trial judge failed to refer to the decision of the Supreme Court
of Canada in Breault.
[31]          
At para.
20 of Breault, the Supreme Court stated that the question before it was whether “the validity of a demand
made by a peace officer under s. 254(2)(b) Cr. C. require that the
officer have immediate access to an ASD at the time the demand is made?”.
[32]          
Former s.
254(2)(b), which
has been replaced with similar but not identical wording by s. 310.27(1)(a), stated that:
[33]      
The court
found that the word, “forthwith”, should be interpreted in its common
understanding of "immediately" or "without delay": para. 29.
That means that when the roadside breath demand is made, the driver must comply
immediately: para. 31. But it also means that the time to administer the ASD is
not to be interpreted flexibly. Rather, the court found that there is no
presumption of validity to a breath demand made when an ASD is not present at
the place of the demand.
[34]          
That is largely because the requirement that, upon demand, the
driver must provide a breath sample to an ASD forthwith limits the potential to
consult with counsel. As the court stated at para. 35:
[35]          
Thus, subject to unusual circumstances, the police must be able to
immediately offer the ASD testing immediately after making the demand for that
demand to be legal.
[36]          
Section
254 has been replaced by current s. 320.27(1)(a). In the current version, the
word “forthwith” has been replaced with “immediately”. Nonetheless, the Supreme
Court stated at para. 44 that its guidance regarding s. 254(2)(b) should apply
to s. 320.27(1)(a) as well.
[37]          
There are
two problems with the Appellant’s arguments. First of all, the police had an
ASD at the scene. Not only is there is no evidence of a violation of s. 320.27
regarding the ASD demand, the issue does not appear have even been raised at
trial.
[38]          
Second, as
the Crown points out, the Appellant is conflating two obligations, one of which
arises under the ASD demand and the second of which applies to the AI demand.
Under s. 320.27(1)(b), the roadside ASD demand must be complied
with “immediately”. Under s. 320.28((1)(a), the AI demand, made
at a police station, must be made “as soon as practicable”.
[39]          
The
Appellant writes in his factum that
[40]          
As the
Crown properly points out, the section of the trial judgment to which the
Appellant refers dealt with the AI demand by Constable Copeland, not the ASD
demand made by Constable Norris. As set out above, the Supreme Court’s guidance
in Breault was not concerned with what is now s. 320.28(1)(a).
[41]          
Constable
Copeland testified that she forgot to make the AI demand at the scene before
taking the Appellant to the police station, because of the Appellant’s
behaviour at the scene. The trial judge found that despite that omission, the
demand made at the police station by the qualified technician still met the
test of s. 320.28(1)(a). That finding was available to the trial judge and not
in error.
[42]          
The term,
“as soon as practicable”, should be read as "within a reasonably
prompt time", not "as soon as possible": R v Squires, 2002 CanLII 44982 (ON CA), [2002] O.J. No 2314 at
paras. 31-32 (Ont. C.A.). A qualified officer may make a breath demand as soon
as practicable if the demand is made after being informed of the officer’s
observations and forming their own reasonable grounds for making the demand: R
v Guenter, 2016 ONCA 572 at paras. 89-94.
[43]          
Thus, the
trial judge made no error in finding that the AI breath demand by the qualified
technician was made as soon as practicable.
[44]          
In other
words, there was no error by the trial judge in regard to either breath demand.
[45]          
The
Appellant argues that the trial judge erred in her application of the R. v W.(D.)[2] test in
finding that he was the driver of the Ford at the time of the accident.  He further
argues that the analysis that led to her finding him not guilty of Impaired Operation
“subconsciously or otherwise” informed her finding of guilt on the charge of
Refuse to Provide a Breath Sample. He makes this assertion despite the fact
that he was acquitted of the Impaired Operation charge.
[46]          
The
obvious answer to this argument is that the trial judge’s finding about the
identity of the driver of the Ford at the time of the accident is irrelevant to
the charge of Refuse to Provide a Breath Sample. There is no doubt that the Appellant
refused to provide his breath sample, when required to do so for either the ASD
or the AI.
[47]          
The credibility
of the Appellant and his wife regarding whether he drove the Ford at the time
of the accident is irrelevant to his obligation under each of s. 320.27(1)(b)
or 320.28(1)(a) to provide a breath sample. As set out below, the law is clear
that he need not have been the driver of the Ford for the breath demand to be a
legal one.
[48]          
I add
that it was open on the evidence for the trial judge to find that the evidence
of the Appellant and his wife, Ms. Hernandez, was incredible and to accept the
evidence of Mitchell and the attending officers was credible. As the Court of
Appeal for Ontario in wrote in R. v. G.C., 2021 ONCA 44, at para. 15:
[49]          
Further,
in her decision, the trial judge gave detailed and compelling reasons for her
acceptance of the evidence tendered by the Crown and her rejection of the
evidence of the Appellant and Ms. Hernandez. She stated:
[50]          
The
credibility findings of the trial judge here are grounded in the evidence and
entitled to appellate deference: R v. W.H., 2013 SCC 22 (CanLII), [2013] 2 SCR 180, at para. 30, citing. R. v. W. (R.), 1992 CanLII 56 (SCC), [1992] 2
S.C.R. 122, at p. 131. There is no merit to this ground of appeal.
[51]          
In R. v. Taraschuk, 1975 CanLII 37 (SCC), [1977] 1 S.C.R.
385, the Supreme Court of Canada laid out a principle that has remained
constant in Canadian law for 47 years regarding the demand to supply a breath
sample under the Criminal Code. The fact that a person is acquitted of a
charge of impaired driving is not a lawful excuse for a refusal to provide a
breath sample following a lawful demand.
[52]          
The principle of “vertical” stare decisis makes the
principle enunciated in Taraschuk binding on inferior courts such as
this one, subject to certain limited exceptions described below. As the Supreme
Court wrote in Canada (Attorney General) v. Bedford, 2013 SCC 72, at para. 38: “[c]ertainty
in the law requires that courts follow and apply authoritative precedents.
Indeed, this is the foundational principle upon which the common law relies.”
[53]          
Lower
courts may only change binding precedent “if new legal issues are raised
as a consequence of significant developments in the law, or if there is a
change in the circumstances or evidence that fundamentally shifts the
parameters of the debate": Bedford at para. 42.
[54]          
The new evidence exception is a narrow one: R. v. Comeau 2018 SCC 15, at
para. 30. As the Supreme Court wrote in Bedford at para. 44: “a lower court is not entitled to ignore
binding precedent, and the threshold for revisiting a matter is not an easy one
to reach... This balances the need for finality and stability with the
recognition that when an appropriate case arises for revisiting precedent, a
lower court must be able to perform its full role” (see also Comeau at
para. 30).
[55]          
Despite that high bar, the Appellant submits that this court
should ignore the binding decision of the highest court in this land in Taraschuk
because of the fact that it was a pre-Charter case and because of
the particular facts of this case. The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms came into effect
some 42 years ago, as part of the Constitution Act, 1982, RSC
1985, Appendix II, No 44, Schedule B. That was just five years after Taraschuk was released, or
37 years ago. Despite the lengthy passage of time, the Taraschuk principle has
yet to be overturned or modified.
[56]          
The Appellant asserts that the key factual difference between this
case and Taraschuk is the fact that he offered his excuse at the time of
the demand, rather than ex post facto at trial, as occurred in Taraschuk.
[57]          
The
timing of the proffer of the purportedly legal excuse in Taraschuk (the accused was acquitted of
impaired driving at trial) was not a factor in the Supreme Court’s
determination. As in Taraschuk, the Appellant here was acquitted at
trial of the charge of impaired driving.  Laskin C.J.’s reference in Taraschuk
to “a reasonable excuse, ex post facto so to speak”, is to the
acquittal, not the timing of the offer of the excuse. Nothing stood or fell on
that timing and nothing in that timing changes the principle set out in Taraschuk.
[58]          
In sum the Appellant has offered the court no reason to depart
from the principle set out in Taraschuk.
[59]          
For the
reasons set out above, I dismiss this appeal.