[1]              
The
sole issue to be determined was costs of a motion, returnable August 15, 2024.  Parties
agreed that the substance of the motion would not be argued.
[2]              
The
Respondent submitted the issue of costs should be reserved to the trial judge.
In the alternative, he sought costs on a partial indemnity basis.  While the
Respondent had withdrawn his substantive motion, he sought an order that the
parties attend mediation.  This was relief he had sought in his substantive
motion.
[3]              
The
Applicant’s position was that she was presumptively entitled to costs pursuant
to r. 24(1) and 24(10) of the Family Law Rules (“FLR”), and that costs
should be decided promptly. She also sought costs for an earlier court
appearance on a full recovery basis, where costs were reserved to the judge
scheduled to hear the substantive motion.
[4]              
The
Applicant further argued the Respondent’s request for the parties to attend
mediation should be dismissed, because the parties agreed the only issue for
determination was costs.
[5]              
While
the issues are straightforward, it raises the recurring problem of overlapping
jurisdiction between the Ontario Court of Justice (“OCJ”) and Superior Court of
Justice (“SCJ”) because there is no Unified Family Court in the Toronto region. 
I must touch on this issue, and consider the parties motion materials, to
properly consider costs.
[6]              
The
parties married October 5, 2002, and separated October 1, 2014. They have two
children.  A Separation Agreement (“Agreement”) was executed in 2018, with an effective
date of July 1, 2018.
[7]              
On
November 10, 2023, the Applicant filed the Agreement with the OCJ to enforce
the support provisions of the Agreement by the Family Responsibility Office.
[8]              
On February
7, 2024, the Applicant served her Form 8 Application for a divorce and
corollary relief, seeking child and spousal support pursuant to the Divorce
Act and provincial legislation. The Application states the parties executed
the Agreement and that it had been filed with the OCJ for enforcement purposes.
The Applicant summarized terms of the Agreement regarding parenting time, child
support, and spousal support, within her Application.
[9]              
The
Respondent’s position was that the SCJ does not have jurisdiction to change,
vary, or set aside an Order of the OCJ. This is not disputed. In correspondence
to the Applicant, he maintained the only jurisdiction of the SCJ is to determine
the divorce.  He argued the Applicant’s pleadings were unclear and her approach
to the issue of jurisdiction was highhanded and unreasonable. He understood the
Applicant sought a redetermination of the support issues agreed to and set out
in the Agreement.
[10]          
The
Applicant scheduled a TBST court appearance to seek direction of the Court on
how to proceed and to address the issue of jurisdiction based on the parties’
positions.
[11]          
On
April 8, 2024, Diamond, J. granted leave to the Respondent to challenge the
jurisdiction of this Court on the grounds of (a) s. 35 of the Family Law Act
(“FLA”), and (b) terms of the parties’ Agreement. The parties were directed
not to schedule a case conference prior to a decision on the issue of
jurisdiction.
[12]          
The
Respondent served his Notice of Motion, together with an Offer to Settle, on
the Applicant on June 4, 2024. The Respondent sought (i) to dismiss the
Applicant’s request for relief in her Application, save for her claim for a divorce,
on the basis that this Court does not have jurisdiction to vary, change, or set
aside the parties’ Agreement; (ii) directing the parties to proceed to a family
dispute resolution process, pursuant to section 7(3) or 16.1(6) of the Divorce
Act or, alternatively, to proceed to mediation based on the Dispute Resolution
provisions at section 7 of the Agreement; and, (iii) for costs on a full
recovery basis of her Application from the date of service and for this motion.
[13]          
As a
condition of the Respondent’s Offer to Settle, the Applicant was required to
amend her Application to only seek a divorce and an order incorporating terms
of the Agreement. After which she had a choice to proceed to mediation or commence
a fresh proceeding in the SCJ once the divorce order had incorporated the terms
of the Agreement. The Offer addressed costs from the date of service of her
Application and for the substantive Motion that was to be argued August 15,
2024.
[14]          
The
parties corresponded after service of the Notice of Motion. On August 6, 2024,
counsel for the Applicant wrote, “To be as clear as we can, we are
proceeding with Ms Stamegne’s [sic] claims for child and spousal support as
corollary relief under the Divorce Act”. The Respondent stated that this is
the first time the Applicant’s counsel clarified the manner of the proceeding.
[15]          
On
August 7, 2024, the Respondent replied, that based on the Applicant’s position,
“which was not sufficiently clear until your email of yesterday’s date,
there is no need for Mr. Ouellet to proceed with this motion”. The
Respondent proposed withdrawing his Motion and reserving costs to the trial
judge. The Applicant disagreed and requested costs. Hence, the parties agreed submissions
as to costs would be heard on the date scheduled for the motion.
[16]          
As
required under the FLR, the parties served and filed Form 14C Confirmation
of Motion forms. The Respondent’s form stated, “The sole issue for this
attendance is to determine the costs of the Motion returnable August 15, 2024.
The substance of the Motion will not be argued and the Motion will be
withdrawn.” [Emphasis added].
[17]          
Both
parties served and filed costs submissions and confirmed the only issue for
determination was costs.  This was not the case.
[18]          
The
issues to be determined are:
[19]          
I
find that since the Agreement was filed with the OCJ and is now an Order of
that Court, there is no jurisdiction for the SCJ to enforce the terms of the
Agreement, including directing the parties to attend mediation pursuant to s. 7
of the Agreement. The OCJ must make an order to enforce the Agreement.
[20]          
Section
35 of the FLA provides parties with a summary procedure to file a
domestic contract with the OCJ or a Unified Family Court and to seek
enforcement or variation of a term of the agreement as if it were an order of
the court. This section does not include the SCJ. It was created to facilitate
the recovery of support payments, and to make things more efficient and
expedient. A filed domestic contract provides notice to the other party that
one intends to enforce or change the agreement.
[21]          
The
Applicant in this case filed the Agreement in the OCJ.  It is therefore
enforceable as an order of that court.
[22]          
The
Applicant then initiated a Form 8 Application for a divorce and seeks corollary
relief pursuant to the Divorce Act which she is also entitled to do.
[23]          
This
is where the discord arose. The Applicant’s actions suggested to the Respondent
her intent to vary or change an Order of the OCJ and this Court has no
jurisdiction to vary or enforce an order of that court. Once an agreement is
filed, the order is not subject to review, revision, or amendment by another
court. Jasen v. Karassik, 2009 ONCA 245, Francisco v. Francisco,
2017 ONCJ 323, Ridley v. DeRose, 2015 ONSC 5635.
[24]          
However,
in Houle v. Trottier, 2012 ONSC 6661, the Divisional Court overturned
the motion judge’s decision that the SCJ lacked jurisdiction to hear corollary
relief under the Divorce Act where a separation agreement had been filed
with the OCJ under s. 35 of the FLA because the application was a
separate application and not one to vary the other court’s order. The
Divisional Court held at paragraphs 10 to 13,
[25]          
The
Court acknowledged there was “no limitation in the Divorce Act, which
prevents or restricts former spouses from making an application for corollary
relief on the basis that there is a prior order under applicable provincial
legislation”.
[26]          
Houle
was
followed by Kristjanson, J. in Buffet v. Lacuesta, 2023 ONSC 5528. The
Respondent conceded the SCJ had jurisdiction to hear an application for
corollary relief under the Divorce Act where there was a Final Order of
the OCJ.  However, he asked the Court to use its discretion to have the
Applicant’s corollary relief application dismissed or for the court to decline
to exercise its jurisdiction over corollary relief. The Respondent argued the
parties Final Order was the result of a lengthy, complex, and negotiated
settlement, where significant time and money had been expended, and the
Applicant was not seeking any corollary relief she did not request or was not
available in the OCJ.
[27]          
In
dismissing the Respondent’s application, Kristjanson, J. referred to s. 15.1 of
the Divorce Act which provides for discretionary decisions, “including
the power to make interim decisions, and to impose terms and conditions.” She then
stated, “This does not mean that the negotiated settlement leading to the
Consent, and the Final Order of the Ontario Court of Justice, will be
disregarded”. S. 15.1(5) and (7) provides for consideration of previous orders
and/or negotiated agreements.
[28]          
The
Applicant’s Application had checked boxes for the corollary relief she was
seeking and the statutory legislation she relied upon, namely, the Divorce
Act and provincial legislation.  If there were still ambiguities, counsel
should have discussed the matter by phone rather than each picking and choosing
what they would respond to in the email exchanges. The Applicant maintained
throughout that this is a fresh application for a divorce, child and spousal
support pursuant to the Divorce Act, and the SCJ is the only court in
this region where she can obtain such relief.  She never sought to change the
Agreement under section 35 of the FLA, and it was clear in her
Application what relief she sought.
[29]          
Based
on these authorities, and had I been required to rule on it if the motion
proceeded, I would find this Court has jurisdiction to deal with the corollary
relief in the Applicant’s Application under the Divorce Act.
[30]          
I
disagree with the Respondent’s submission that the Applicant’s position is
fundamentally different than her pleadings. A conversation between counsel months
earlier, rather than through emails or texts, may have resolved the issue.
[31]          
If I
have erred on this issue, I would have dismissed the Respondent’s motion for an
order that parties attend mediation because his Confirmation form indicated he
withdrew his motion, which included relief of compelling mediation.  He did not
further update the form as required under r. 14 (11.2) FLR.   Judges and
opposing parties rely on Confirmation forms filed.  His Confirmation form
stated the sole issue was the determination of costs and his Motion will be
withdrawn.
[32]          
The
Applicant filed a similar updated Confirmation form, stating the only issue
before the court is the costs of the Respondent’s aborted motion.
[33]          
The
Respondent argued there was no successful party as the merits were not determined. 
He says the Motion was necessitated by the lack of clarity in the Applicant’s
pleadings and her failure to clarify same when asked.
[34]          
I
find the Applicant was more successful and is presumptively entitled to costs
(r. 24(1) FLR).
[35]          
Contrary
to the Respondent’s position at the hearing, he communicated his intention to
withdraw his motion, thereby entitling the Applicant to costs.  Relying on
14(16) and 24(1), Spies J. in Murphy v. Murphy, 2010 ONSC 6204 at para.
15, held that a party shall pay the costs of the other in relation to a
withdrawn motion up to the date of the withdrawal, unless the court orders or
the parties agree otherwise.  The same reasoning in Murphy applies to
this case.
[36]          
I
also note that at this motion to deal only with costs, and where the Respondent
had withdrawn his motion, he was still seeking an order for the parties to
attend mediation, for which he was not successful.
[37]          
The
Respondent requested costs be reserved to the trial judge as the entirety of
the history of the proceedings and the impact of this issue, including the
Agreement/Order on the Applicant’s claims for support need to be assessed on a
full record.
[38]          
I disagree.
 Costs are to be determined after every step in a proceeding (r. 24(10) FLR).
 While Diamond J. granted leave to the Respondent to bring his motion and
ordered a determination of the issue prior to conducting a case conference, the
fact that the Respondent withdrew his motion suggests a ruling on jurisdiction
was not necessary for this case to proceed. This is not a case where it is
appropriate to reserve the issue of costs to a trial judge.
[39]          
Costs
are in the discretion of the court: s.131 of the Courts of Justice Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43.  The
court shall consider various factors when determining costs (r. 24(12) FLR),
including the reasonableness or bad faith conduct of a party (r. 24(5) and
24(8) FLR).
[40]          
There
are cost consequences in the FLR where a party fails to accept an offer
that is as favourable or more favourable than an offer to settle (r. 18).
[41]          
Modern
family costs rules are designed to foster four fundamental purposes: (i) to
indemnify successful litigants for the cost of litigation; (ii) to encourage
settlements; (iii) to discourage and sanction inappropriate behaviour by
litigants; and (iv) to ensure that cases are dealt with justly: Mattina v.
Mattina, 2018 ONCA 867, at para. 10; see also Serra v. Serra, 2009 ONCA 395 and Beaver
v. Hill, 2018 ONCA 840, (2018) 143 O.R. (3d) 519.
[42]          
Costs
should reflect what is a fair and reasonable amount an unsuccessful party should
pay. The touchstone considerations of costs awards are proportionality and
reasonableness: Beaver v. Hill, at para. 12.
[43]          
The
Applicant seeks costs of $15,434.75 on a partial indemnity basis prior to her
Offer to Settle and on a full indemnity basis afterwards. As the successful
party she is entitled to costs.
[44]          
After
examination and review of the Applicant’s Offer to Settle, dated July 16, 2024,
I am satisfied that the Applicant achieved the same if not more success than
her offer. The cost consequences of r. 18(14) apply as of the date of her
offer.
[45]          
The reasonableness
of the parties’ conduct is a relevant factor when making a cost order.  Contrary
to their allegations around the other party’s conduct, I do not find that
either party acted in bad faith within the meaning as set out in Jackson v.
Mayerle, 2016 ONSC 1556, (2016) 130 O.R. (3d) 683 at paras. 56-60.  There
were issues that needed to be vetted and discussed; it is just unfortunate the
parties were unable to do so without the involvement of the court.
[46]          
The
Applicant considered bringing a constitutional challenge regarding the
two-tiered system in Toronto and the prejudice and unfairness of not having a
Unified Family Court. Ultimately, she decided not to pursue this issue but
included her consultations with others and consideration of this issue in her
bill of costs. In determining the appropriate quantum to award the Applicant, I
have excluded billings related to those consultations.
[47]          
I
have also considered the Respondent’s submissions on time spent, his offer to
settle, legal fees incurred, use of lawyers and/or staff with lower hourly
rates, the complexity of the issues, and the background leading to the motion.
[48]          
After
considering these factors and the authorities, I order the Respondent to pay
the Applicant costs of this motion and the TBST appearance fixed in the amount
of $11,000 inclusive of HST and disbursements.
[49]          
This
quantum of costs is not unreasonable and what the Respondent ought to have
expected to pay, given that the Respondent was seeking $10,249.95 in partial
indemnity costs.
[50]          
This
case highlights the difficulties and problems that exist in Toronto, and other
areas of the province, that do not have Unified Family Courts.   For example, if
the Respondent seeks to enforce the Agreement, now made an Order in the OCJ, he
must litigate in that court.  Alternatively, he can try to expedite proceedings
in the SCJ to respond to the corollary relief sought and seek to adjust any
overpayments or underpayments from the net sale proceeds (or potential buyout)
of the Matrimonial Home.
[51]          
This
seems at odds with the primary objectives of the FLR which are set out
in Rule 2(2) to enable courts to deal justly with cases.  Other jurists have commented
on the need to for Unified Family Courts throughout the province. This motion
could have been avoided, with the associated cost and frustration to the
parties, if there were Unified Family Courts throughout Ontario.
[52]          
As
Shore, J. stated in T.M. v. CAS et al., 2023 ONSC 5048 at para. 1: “This
case is another example of how the general public would be better served if
there was a Unified Family Court in Toronto, instead of a dual/parallel court
system.”
[53]          
Similarly,
in Nodder v. Wasserman, 2023 ONSC 6982, at para. 15, Vella, J.
commented, “this issue arises, in part, because of the anomaly left by the
Legislature by having designated certain regions in Ontario within the
jurisdiction of the Family Court of the Superior Court of Justice, and other
regions, including Toronto, to maintain the OCJ, and Superior Court of Justice with
respective jurisdictions to hear family matters under the FLA and other
family law legislation (such as the Children’s Law Reform Act).”
[54]          
And
more recently in F.W. v. D.B., 2024 ONSC 4823, at paragraph 1: