[1]              
This is an application under s. 60 of the Trustee
Act, RSO 1990, c. T-23 and rr. 14.05(3) and 75.06 of the Rules of Civil
Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194 for the court’s advice and direction in
connection with the sale of a family cottage bequeathed by Ronald French to his
seven adult children. The Estate Trustees are two of the deceased’s children.
The remaining five children are all beneficiaries of the Estate and the named Respondents
in this application.
[2]              
In July 2024, the Estate Trustees determined that
the cottage had to be sold to pay the debts of the Estate. Before listing the
cottage for sale, they asked their siblings, the Respondents, if anyone wished
to buy it. Two siblings, Philip French and Anita Ouellette,[1] expressed interest and subsequently
made three identical offers to purchase well below the fair market value of the
cottage. The Estate Trustees rejected those offers and listed the cottage on
MLS. They ultimately negotiated a sale to an arm’s length purchaser for
significantly more than Philip and Anita had offered to pay. When Philip and
Anita learned of the accepted offer, they immediately made another formal offer
to purchase, this time for $10,000 more than the arm’s length purchaser’s
offer. The Estate Trustees fear litigation by both proposed buyers, and
therefore seek direction from the court as to which offer they ought to accept.
[3]              
For the reasons that follow, I find that the
offer to purchase made by Philip and Anita is the superior offer.
[4]              
Ronald Louis French died on August 7, 2023. His
wife predeceased him. Ronald died with a Will dated April 7, 2023.
[5]              
Ronald had seven adult children. He named his
son, Roger Earl French, and his daughter, Lynette Marie Shaw, Estate Trustees.
Roger and Lynette were appointed Estate Trustees by Certificate of Appointment
dated March 1, 2024.
[6]              
Ronald divided his modest estate among his
children as follows:
[7]              
The Estate’s lawyer and accountant estimate the
value of the estate before debts and expenses and not including the cottage to
be $37,778. The debts of the estate are approximately $40,000, before taking
into account capital gains tax on the cottage. As will be discussed further
below, Philip and Anita dispute that any debts are owed by the Estate.
[8]              
Ronald inherited the cottage from his late
mother in 1983. The cottage is located in Temagami, Ontario, which is
approximately eight hours by car from Amherstburg, Ontario, where Ronald and
his children have long resided. In 1994, Ronald designated the cottage as his
primary residence for tax purposes.
[9]              
The estate accountant has prepared an opinion
regarding the potential capital gains tax that might be payable on the cottage.
If the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) does not accept the primary residence
designation of the cottage, the tax liability and penalties will be
approximately $80,000. Even if CRA accepts the designation, there is still a
tax liability of approximately $21,000 as not all of the capital gains are
sheltered under the principal residence designation. Until the Estate seeks a
clearance certificate, it will not know for certain whether CRA will issue a
notice of reassessment.
[10]          
In July 2024, with the advice of the Estate
lawyer, Roger and Lynette determined that there were insufficient assets to pay
the liabilities of the Estate without a sale of the cottage. Accordingly, they
obtained three letters of opinion from two realtors in Temagami which put the
value of the cottage at either $435,000 or $450,000.
[11]          
On July 30, 2024, Roger and Lynette wrote to
their siblings and advised of the three letters of opinion. They then asked
that anyone interested in purchasing the cottage should let them know by August
6, 2024. The Respondents all received copies of the letters of opinion on
August 8, 2024.
[12]          
Philip and Anita immediately expressed interest
in buying the cottage. On August 30, 2024, they submitted an offer of $250,000,
with conditions including financing and home inspection. The Estate Trustees
counteroffered at $450,000, which offer was not accepted.
[13]          
On September 6, 2024, Philip and Anita submitted
a second offer to purchase of $250,000. It was not accepted.
[14]          
On September 11, 2024, the Estate Trustees
listed the cottage for sale on MLS at a list price of $450,000.
[15]          
Philip and Anita, through their real estate
agent, submitted a third offer on September 13, 2024. This offer was also for
$250,000 and included a number of other conditions, including that the “Seller
[the Estate] agrees to winterize any and all buildings on the property, prior
to completion” or “shall be responsible for any costs or expenses incurred by
the Buyer if the property is not properly winterized”. The offer also contained
a non-disclosure clause which prevented the Estate Trustees from disclosing any
part of Philip and Anita’s offer. The Estate’s realtor rejected the offer.
[16]          
The Estate Trustees eventually received an offer
to purchase from Filagro Gemignani through his numbered company 2586248 Ontario
Inc (“258”). The offer was too low but after seven counteroffers, they arrived
at an agreed sale price of $430,000. The Agreement of Purchase and Sale dated
October 13, 2024 contained the following important condition: “The parties
acknowledge that a Court Order is required in order to close the subject
transaction. In the event that the Court Order is not received within the
30-day extension period, the Buyer shall have the opportunity to be released
from this Agreement of Purchase and Sale and the deposit shall be returned to
the Buyer in full without deduction.”
[17]          
On October 30, 2024, the Estate Trustees
commenced this application for an order approving the sale of the cottage to
258, returnable on November 12, 2024, two days before the scheduled closing
date.
[18]          
Upon receipt of the application, Philip and
Anita submitted a revised offer to purchase the cottage. This offer, dated
November 6, 2024, was without conditions and for $440,000, or $10,000 more than
the accepted offer by 258.
[19]          
Philip and Anita filed a Responding Record on
November 8, 2024, alleging that the Estate Trustees have not acted transparently
or in good faith. They seek an order approving the sale of the cottage to them.
They also seek orders for a full accounting of the Estate assets and
liabilities and holding the proceeds of any sale in trust pending further court
order.
[20]          
The application was adjourned to December 10,
2024 to permit cross-examinations and further material to be filed. In their
supplementary application record and as confirmed by their counsel at the
outset of the hearing, the Estate Trustees now seek advice and direction from
the court, not an order approving the sale of the cottage to 258.
[21]          
The issues to be decided on this application are
as follows:
[22]          
An Estate Trustee may make an application under
s. 60 of the Trustee Act and rule 14.05(3)(a), (d) and (f) for approval
of a sale as set out in an accepted agreement of purchase and sale when the
sale agreement provides that it is conditional upon the Estate Trustee
obtaining approval of the court: McKay Estate v Love (1992), 1992 CanLII 7508 (ON SC), 6 O.R. (3d)
511 (S.C.), aff’d (1992), 6 O.R. (3d) 519 (C.A.).
[23]          
Rule 14.05(3)(f) allows the estate trustees to
apply to the court for approval of their decision to sell assets of the estate
before their decision is acted upon, so that subsequent litigation can be
avoided: McKay at 515.
[24]          
This court has previously
heard and determined motions for directions brought by an estate trustee regarding a pending sale of an asset in
respect of which the beneficiaries disagreed (see, for example, Brass
v. Berkley Estate et al, 2020 ONSC 6615  and
Eisenstein v. Joel, 2022 ONSC 4104).
[25]          
A court will generally not
interfere with the management of an estate, make business decisions for the
trustees or provide advice on a proposed sale, because that is the
responsibility of the trustee. “It is not for the court to interject its
opinion as to who is right, but only to look at bad faith or unfairness”: McKay at 513.
[26]          
As set out by the court
in McKay, the Estate Trustees must satisfy the Court that:
[27]          
If the estate trustees have the discretionary
power to sell estate assets, and the evidence shows on balance that they have
acted in good faith and fairly, then the court will not interfere in their
decisions or business judgment.
[28]          
The deceased by his Will vested all of his
property in the Estate Trustees in trust. He bequeathed the cottage to his
seven adult children as joint tenants-in-common. The deceased in his Will
obligated the Estate Trustees to first satisfy the estate’s liabilities.
[29]          
Section 6 of the Will further provides that the
Estate Trustees have the following powers:
[30]          
The language of s. 6 of the Will accords with s.
17 of the Trustee Act, which provides that a trustee with a power of
sale can sell property on terms it thinks fit, without being answerable for any
loss.
[31]          
Section 17 of the Estate Administration Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. E.22 further provides that property automatically vests in the
personal representative, and the powers of sale conferred on them can be exercised
for paying debts or distributing the estate among beneficiaries. Notably, the
consent of the beneficiaries to effect the sale is not required unless the
proceeds are for the purposes of distribution only.
[32]          
In a factum filed on the day of the hearing of
the application, Philip and Anita raised for the first time that a sale of the
cottage was premature because the estate had no debts and there remained
approximately $7000 in cash in the Estate as of November 21, 2024. The
prematurity argument was not made in the Responding Record. In his affidavit
sworn November 8, 2024, Philip sought an order approving the sale to him and
Anita, not an order that the cottage be transferred to the beneficiaries as
joint tenants. Since August 2024, all of the siblings have proceeded on the
basis that a sale was needed.
[33]          
The evidence establishes that the Estate will have
further expenses to pay. Although Respondent’s counsel was dismissive of the
Estate accountant’s letter regarding the capital gains tax, no competing
evidence by a tax expert or accountant was offered. Until a clearance
certificate is sought, the extent of the capital gains tax is not certain, but
there is a minimum tax liability of $21,000. The cash on hand is insufficient
to pay even this lower amount of capital gains tax.
[34]          
Moreover, counsel for the Estate Trustees stated
that Roger and Lynette will be seeking trustee compensation, and there will
continue to be legal fees payable to the Estate lawyer, if not also to
litigation counsel. These are all debts of the Estate. By selling the cottage,
the Estate Trustees have acted prudently to ensure the Estate can meet its
liabilities.
[35]          
In any event, as counsel for the Respondents
acknowledged, under the Partition Act, RSO 1990, c. P.4, a tenant in
common may compel partition or sale. There is no evidence that the seven
siblings intend to share the cottage, including its upkeep and expenses. Given
the animosity that has sadly developed between the siblings, peaceful
coexistence is unlikely. To defer the sale of the cottage is to delay the
inevitable.
[36]          
I am satisfied that the Estate Trustees have the
power to exercise their discretion to sell the cottage rather than retain it
for a further period of time.
[37]          
Roger and Lynette obtained three letters of
opinion from two realtors before listing or negotiating the sale of the
cottage. Two letters of opinion valued the property at $450,000 and the third
recommended listing the property at $435,000 to attract the best selling price.
Roger and Lynette gave the beneficiaries the opportunity to buy the cottage
well in advance of listing it on MLS. The beneficiaries were given the letters
of opinion. The cottage was listed for sale publicly only after Philip and
Anita had made their offer of $250,000 and had rejected the counteroffer of
$450,000.
[38]          
The Respondents knew that the cottage had been
listed. Text messages between the seven siblings in September 2024 referred to
the cottage being ‘listed’. Philip and Anita’s third offer of purchase and sale
was made by their real estate agent in response to the MLS listing.
[39]          
While there is no evidence that the Estate
Trustees immediately told the beneficiaries that the Estate had received and
accepted the offer to purchase by 258, I am not persuaded that this conduct
evidences bad faith. As Estate Trustees, they have the power and the
responsibility to effect the sale. There were no pending offers to purchase by
Philip and Anita at the time and there was no reason for the Estate Trustees to
believe that any were forthcoming. In addition, s. 17 of the Estate
Administration Act does not require the beneficiaries’ consent where the
purpose of the sale is to satisfy the Estate’s debts and to make a
distribution.
[40]          
Some of the Respondents criticize the Estate
Trustees for not having gotten certified appraisals or allowing them access to
the cottage so that they could commission their own appraisals. I find this
criticism misplaced. By September 13, 2024, Philip and Anita had retained a
real estate agent; he did not request a viewing.
[41]          
More importantly, there is nothing to suggest
the arms’ length opinions of value were deficient. Indeed, 258’s offer to
purchase the cottage for $430,000 is perhaps the best proof that the opinions
of value accurately estimated the market value of the cottage. As observed by the court in Ballard Estate (Re) (1994), 1994 CanLII 7305 (ON SC), 20 O.R. (3d) 189 (S.C.), at para. 50, the
traditional method of arriving at fair market value (of an asset in an estate)
is to expose the asset for sale in the marketplace.
[42]          
The cottage was listed with
an asking price of $450,000. The MLS listing was active for 49 days and
attracted 3,968 views. The Estate Trustees and 258 exchanged seven
counteroffers before the sale price of $430,000 was accepted. The accepted
price is within range of the values in the three letters of opinion and clearly
superior to the first three offers made by Philip and Anita.
[43]          
The Estate Trustees inserted
in 258’s agreement of purchase and sale a requirement for court approval and promptly brought an application. There was
no secrecy as the Respondents allege.
[44]          
Based on all of the evidence, I find that the
Estate Trustees acted in good faith in their decision to sell, and in the
manner in which they conducted the sale.
[45]          
The Estate Trustees informed the Respondents
that the cottage needed to be sold to pay the Estate’s debts and offered them
the opportunity to buy it before listing it publicly. Their consistent
objective was to sell the cottage at fair market value and distribute the
proceeds equally among the beneficiaries, after the Estate’s debts had been
paid.
[46]          
Philip and Anita’s allegations of unfairness
stem from their distrust of Roger and Lynette. They allege that Roger and
Lynette have not cooperated with the Respondents, have withheld information and
failed to provide adequate disclosures. Two siblings, Rhonda and Juliette,
share these concerns. Another sibling, Vincent, does not.
[47]          
The Estate Trustees did the following shortly
after the death of their father:
[48]          
The steps taken by the Estate Trustees have been
reasonable. Specifically as to the sale of the cottage, I find that they acted
prudently and with a view to maximizing the sale price and thereby maximizing
the distribution to each beneficiary.
[49]          
Had the Estate Trustees accepted Philip and
Anita’s first three offers, the Estate would have been justifiably exposed to
litigation by the remaining beneficiaries. A sale of the cottage for $250,000
would have been improvident. A sale of the cottage for $250,000 that also
required the Estate to pay to winterize it and then to keep the offer secret
from the other beneficiaries would have been an egregious violation of the
Estate Trustees’ fiduciary duties.
[50]          
The Respondents are not satisfied with the
pre-death financial disclosure provided by the Estate Trustees. For example,
through their lawyer, Philip and Anita asked for Ronald’s monthly bank
statements for two years prior to death. The Estate lawyer provided one year of
such records but declined to provide the rest on the basis that there is no
evidence anyone but Ronald controlled those bank accounts or that he lacked
capacity at the time.
[51]          
It is unclear whether the Respondents claim
these disputes around disclosure are proof of unfairness for the purposes of
the test in McKay or evidence justifying an order under the Estates
Act for a full accounting, or both.
[52]          
The financial disclosure dispute is not proof of
unfairness. Rarely, if ever, will the court order an investigation into a competent testator’s
private pre-death financial affairs without an evidentiary threshold that
raises a “significant concern” that there has been some potential abuse that
needs to be investigated further, and then, only after considering a testator’s
privacy rights: see the discussions in Seepa v. Seepa, 2017
ONSC 5368, at para. 28; Robertson v. Harding, 2018 MBCA 67, at
paras. 44 and 45; Tinline v. Tinline Estate, 2013
SKQB 167; Fair v. Campbell Estate (2002), 3 E.T.R. (3d) 67
(Ont. S.C.); and Gastle v. Gastle Estate, 2014
ONSC 7099, 6 E.T.R. (4th) 120.
[53]          
There is also no nexus between the pre-death
financial disclosure dispute and the question of whether the Estate Trustees
have treated the beneficiaries fairly in respect of the sale of the cottage. At
best, the complaint may be that there should be more money in the estate and
that it would be sufficient to pay the Estate’s debts, obviating the need to
sell the cottage. If that is the theory, the Respondents did not meet their
burden to establish an evidential basis of impropriety.
[54]          
I find no basis for concluding that the Estate
Trustees have acted unfairly, let alone that they had violated their fiduciary
duties.
[55]          
Having found that the Estate Trustees have the
power to sell the cottage, that they acted in good faith in listing and
negotiating the offer with 258, and that they were fair as between the
beneficiaries, I must now consider what opinion, advice or direction to give to
the Estate regarding the sale of the cottage.
[56]          
Neither counsel could point me to a decision with
a factual matrix similar to the one at bar.
[57]          
McKay involved an
application by the trustee for court approval of the sale of certain property.
The sale was supported by two of three residual beneficiaries of the estate,
but opposed by the third. Steele J. ultimately approved the sale.
[58]          
The point of contention in McKay was that
one beneficiary objected to the price negotiated by the estate trustees as too
low. It was not a case, like the one at bar, involving competing offers to
purchase where one offer was made by the objecting beneficiaries. This
distinction is important insofar as I am being asked not only whether the sale
to 258 has been conducted fairly and in the beneficiaries’ best interests, but
also which of the competing offers should be accepted.
[59]          
In approving the sale of land in McKay,
Steele J. said at p. 515: “The court should not look at whether or not the sale
is the most advantageous sale. If it did so, it would be interjecting its view
into the decision-making process. However, the court should look at the
evidence before it to determine whether the sale is so improper that it
infringes on the issue of good faith or fairness.” On appeal, the Court of
Appeal confirmed that courts should generally not give an executor advice as to
how to exercise their discretion respecting a proposed sale (at p. 519).
However, given the impasse and the agreement of the parties that the Court
should address the merits of the proposed sale, the Court of Appeal found that
the sale price was the best that could be obtained.
[60]          
Having found that the Estate
Trustees acted fairly and in good faith in listing the cottage for sale and
accepting the 258 offer, I could order that the Estate may exercise its
discretion to complete the sale
to 258 or, if in its business judgment, the sale to Philip and Anita is the
better offer, accept and complete it. In other words, I would heed the words of
the Court of Appeal in McKay and “decline to intervene and give an
executor advice as to how he should exercise his discretion respecting a
proposed sale” (at 519).
[61]          
As was the case in McKay,
however, I will, with some reservations, address the two offers to purchase on
their merits. Since both 258 and Philip and Anita have intimated that
litigation may flow from a
decision to sell to one purchaser over the other, the Estate is correct to seek
direction under s. 60 of the Trustee Act and r. 14.05(3) in order to
avoid subsequent litigation.
[62]          
 The competing offers are
virtually identical on their terms. Both are for cash and without conditions other than the requirement to get court
approval. The only salient difference is that 258’s accepted offer is $430,000
while Philip and Anita have offered $440,000.
[63]          
Respondent’s counsel also
submitted that the sale to his clients would be more in keeping with the deceased’s wishes that the cottage remain
in the family.
[64]          
Although 258 had notice and
its counsel attended the hearing of the application, he did not make
submissions. Significantly, 258 did not take a position on the application and
did not object to the sale to Philip and Anita. Had it done so, I might view
the imminent risk of litigation against the estate by 258 as a consideration
favouring the 258 purchase in light of the costs of litigation and the resulting
depletion of the Estate’s assets. Not having contested
the sale to Philip and Anita, 258 cannot reasonably complain after the fact,
and certainly not in light of my conclusion that the Estate Trustees have acted
fairly and in good faith.
[65]          
In the result, I find that the offer to purchase
dated November 6, 2024 made by Philip and Anita is the better offer.
[66]          
In their Responding Record, Philip and Anita
seek an order requiring a full accounting of the Estate.
[67]          
Rule 74.15(1)(h) of
the Rules of Civil Procedure provides that any person who
appears to have a financial
interest in the estate may move for an order requiring an estate trustee to
pass accounts.
[68]          
Although the Respondents
have the right to apply for an order requiring the Estate Trustees to pass
accounts, whether such an order should be made is a matter of discretion. 
In Widdifield  on Executors and Trustees, 6th
ed., at para. 14.2.2, it is stated that “the right to compel an accounting is not an absolute right
regardless of the circumstances, but is within the sound discretion of the
court.” (See also Gastle v. Gastle Estate at para 20.)
[69]          
Cause needs to be shown
before ordering a passing of accounts. The principal basis for the request is
that pre-financial disclosure of the deceased’s assets and expenses going back
more than one year prior to
death has not been provided. Based on the law cited in Seepa v Seepa,
that is not a reasonable request and does not
constitute cause for the purposes of an order for a full accounting. The
disclosure made to date by the Estate Trustees and their advisors has been
reasonable.
[70]          
Once the Estate has
completed the sale of the cottage and obtained a clearance certificate, further
disclosure will need to be
made to the beneficiaries. If at that time the Respondents believe that
disclosure has not been complete, they are free to bring a motion for an order
under r. 74.15(1)(h).
[71]          
I find that the Estate
Trustees have the power to sell the cottage and have acted in good faith in
selling it in a manner that would treat the beneficiaries fairly. The Estate
Trustees have asked for advice as to which offer to purchase to accept. Based
on all of the circumstances, the Court’s advice is to accept the offer made by
Philip and Anita on November 6, 2024. I decline to approve the sale to 258, and
direct the Estate Trustees to accept the offer made by Philip and Anita.
[72]          
If the parties cannot agree
on costs, they may submit cost outlines and brief submissions of no more than
five pages by January 10, 2025.