[1]              
Mr. O’Shane Mitchell pleaded guilty and was convicted of three counts of
reckless discharge of a firearm[1]
and one count of possession of a loaded firearm.[2]
[2]              
The convictions arise from a shooting incident committed in a bachelor apartment
located in Parkdale, a community in the City of Toronto. Mr. Mitchell attended
at the apartment with a firearm. During an altercation, one of the occupants,
Mr. Abel Gime, was shot by Mr. Mitchell multiple times and died. Three
others were shot and wounded.
[3]              
Crown counsel accepts that Mr. Mitchell was acting in self-defence when
he shot and killed Mr. Gime. Crown counsel submits and Mr. Mitchell agrees that
he was reckless as to the life and safety of Ms. Angela Batisse, Mr. Jersey
Delgado and Mr. Zakareeya Khan when the firearm was intentionally discharged
during the incident and bullets hit them.
[4]              
Crown counsel seeks a global sentence of nine to ten years’ imprisonment
for Mr. Mitchell. Counsel for Mr. Mitchell submits that the appropriate
sentence is five years. All counsel agree that Mr. Mitchell should receive
credit for time already served. They also agree on the imposition of ancillary
orders: a DNA order; a s. 109 order for 20 years; and a no contact order,
pursuant to s. 743.21 of the Criminal Code.  Those orders are granted.
[5]              
For the reasons set out below, I find that the appropriate sentence for
Mr. Mitchell is a global one of imprisonment of six years (72 months), less
credit of three years (36 months), for a sentence of three years (36 months) left
to serve.
[6]              
The facts giving rise to the pleas were provided by way of an Agreed
Statement of Facts. It provides as follows:
[7]              
These are the facts upon which Mr. Mitchell is being sentenced.
[8]              
No victim impact statements were filed. The family of Mr. Gime was present
during the plea and sentencing submissions.
[9]              
The following is a summary of Mr. Mitchell’s background that was
provided by way of an affidavit and counsel’s submissions:
[10]          
Mr. Mitchell has the support of his family and his community. Several
letters were provided to the court on his behalf. They may be summarized as
follows:
[11]          
Records were filed from the Toronto South Detention Centre (“TSDC”)
regarding Mr. Mitchell’s pre-sentence incarceration. They show that Mr. Mitchell
was in lockdown for 168 days, either fully or partially, between December 8,
2022 and November 1, 2024 while incarcerated there. (Mr. Mitchell submits that
the records are inaccurate based on his calculations, referred to below.)
[12]          
Mr. Mitchell provided some details regarding the conditions of his
pre-sentence incarceration in his affidavit which may be summarized as follows:
[13]          
Mr. Mitchell has expressed remorse for his actions. He accepts
responsibility. At the conclusion of the sentencing hearing, Mr. Mitchell addressed
the court, apologizing for his conduct and indicating that he wishes to do
better upon his release.
[14]          
The following is a summary of the legal principles applicable in
sentencing for reckless discharge and possession of a firearm.
[15]          
In determining an appropriate sentence for Mr.
Mitchell, regard must be had to the sentencing objectives in s. 718 of the Criminal
Code, which provides as follows:
[16]          
The sentencing judge must also have regard to
the following: any aggravating and mitigating factors, including those listed
in ss. 718.2(a)(i) to (vii); the principle that a sentence should be similar to
sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in
similar circumstances (s. 718.2(b)); the principle that where consecutive
sentences are imposed, the combined sentence should not be unduly long or harsh
(s. 718.2(c)); and the principle that courts should exercise restraint in
imposing imprisonment (ss. 718.2(d) and (e)).[5]
[17]          
Imposing a proportionate sentence is a highly individualized exercise,
tailored to the gravity of the offence, the blameworthiness of the offender,
and the harm caused by the crime.[6] 
There is no such thing as a uniform sentence for a particular crime.[7] However, ranges
can provide guidance.
[18]          
Counsel provided sentencing precedents in cases involving convictions
for reckless discharge of a firearm and possession of a loaded firearm. I do
not intend to refer to all those authorities here, but as the sentencing court,
I have considered them.
[19]          
Mr. Mitchell has been convicted of three counts of reckless
discharge of a firearm. Section 244.2(3)(a)(i) of the Criminal Code
provides that the mandatory minimum penalty for a first offence is five years
if a restricted or prohibited firearm is used in the commission of the offence.
That mandatory minimum sentence applies in this case.
[20]          
Crown counsel relies on the case of R. v. Bellissimo, where
the Court of Appeal referred to a range of 7 to 11 years for “serious gun related
offences”.[8]
While it is uncertain what offence Mr. Bellissimo was convicted of, it is clear
from the short endorsement that he fired several shots in a restaurant. He
injured two people, one significantly, and narrowly missed killing a third
victim.[9]
[21]          
Bellissimo has been referred to in many cases and
sentences have been imposed that fall within that range. However, there are
cases that imposed sentences below that range, some of which may be summarized
as follows:
[22]          
There is no mandatory minimum sentence for possessing loaded
firearms. However, courts have repeatedly recognized that firearms pose
a significant danger to our community and that exemplary sentences must be
imposed that denounce such conduct and deter others from possessing such
dangerous weapons.[13]
[23]          
It is agreed that Mr. Mitchell should be given credit for the time he
has spent in pre-sentence custody, pursuant to s. 719(3.1) of the Criminal
Code and R. v. Summers.[14]
[24]          
It is also agreed that in certain circumstances, harsh pre-sentence
incarceration conditions can be relevant to the determination of an appropriate
sentence pursuant to R. v. Duncan.[15]
The approach to be taken in considering the harsh conditions of pre-sentence
incarceration was clarified by Doherty J.A. in R. v. Marshall.[16]
The practice of assigning a credit of a specific number of days or months to
punitive conditions of pre-sentence custody is not to be encouraged. The reason
is that it may skew the fact that the harshness of pre-trial custody is only
one of many factors that go into the determination of an appropriate sentence.[17]
 That said, pre-sentence custody is a relevant consideration on sentencing.
[25]          
Anti-black racism is also a consideration on sentence. In R. v. Morris,
the Court of Appeal held that the sentencing court can properly consider
anti-black racism and its impact on the offender’s responsibility to assist in
the selection of an appropriate sentence in the circumstances.[18]
However, our Court of Appeal held that there must be some connection between
the racism identified and the circumstances that explain or mitigate the
criminal conduct. The Court held as follows, at paragraph 97:
[26]          
I will now turn to a consideration of the fit sentence.
[27]          
In considering the fit sentence for Mr. Mitchell, I find the following
to be the aggravating factors:
[28]          
In considering the fit sentence for Mr. Mitchell, I find the following
to be the mitigating factors:
[29]          
The offences committed by Mr. Mitchell are very serious. He possessed,
brandished and discharged a firearm during an altercation in a small apartment
occupied by several adults. Although he was acting in self-defence when he
discharged the firearm at Mr. Gime who was aggressively approaching him, he hit
and injured three others in the apartment. Mr. Gime died from his injuries. Ms.
Battisse, Mr. Delgado and Mr. Khan were all taken to hospital, treated for
their wounds and released.
[30]          
Mr. Mitchell has accepted responsibility for his actions and has pleaded
guilty to those offences involving the three victims who were shot and
survived. He rightly contested the murder charge involving Mr. Gime, submitting
that he was acting in self-defence. That charge was withdrawn by Crown
counsel.
[31]          
While no victim impact statements were filed, the family of Mr. Gime was
present during the proceedings. Mr. Gime is more than a name on an indictment. It
goes without saying that the loss of Mr. Gime affected his family, causing them
grief. It is another loss to our community because of gun violence. It also
goes without saying that the three other victims would have suffered both
physical and emotional harm as a result of having been shot.
[32]          
Mr. Mitchell is a relatively young man who grew up in difficult
circumstances. He was not encouraged to pursue an education, having been told
he was not capable of academic success. He was employed in odd jobs, thinking
that he was good for nothing else. The locations in which he lived were marked
by violence. He witnessed shootings. He was a young, Black male in Toronto whose
freedom was routinely interfered with because of the colour of his skin. His
opportunities were limited.
[33]          
I have taken into account anti-black racism and its impact on Mr.
Mitchell. For example, when Mr. Mitchell’s educational and employment
achievements are put into context, his history may be more reflective of
institutional biases and systematic inadequacies faced by Mr. Mitchell than by
any lack of potential or interest on Mr. Mitchell’s part. It also assists to
explain how he came to commit the offence.[20]
[34]          
Although the paramount principles in sentencing Mr. Mitchell are
denunciation and deterrence, rehabilitation cannot be ignored. The appropriate
sentence must be one through which our society feels protected and which deters
others from committing similar crimes, without crushing Mr. Mitchell’s hopes of
rehabilitation.
[35]          
Mr. Mitchell’s family would suggest that he gravitated towards a peer
group involved in criminality. That led to his conflict with the law in
Saskatchewan and his involvement in this incident. On a more positive note,
this incident appears to have been a turning point in his life.
[36]          
Mr. Mitchell’s time spent incarcerated while awaiting the disposition of
these charges has allowed him to reflect on the life he wishes to leave behind
and the life he wishes to embrace in the future. That includes marriage to his
supportive girlfriend, starting a family, securing an education and pro-social
employment. His community is prepared to help him navigate a pro-social future
when he is released from custody. In my view, Mr. Mitchell has high rehabilitative
prospects.
[37]          
In reaching my conclusion about the fit sentence, I am mindful of the
fact that this is Mr. Mitchell’s first visit to the penitentiary and of
the direction of Rosenberg J.A. in R. v. Borde that a “first
penitentiary sentence should be as short as possible”.[21]
There is no question that a penitentiary sentence is warranted based on the
gravity of the offence. In fact, a penitentiary sentence is mandatory. However,
the question remains regarding the length of that sentence.
[38]          
The offences committed by Mr. Mitchell arise out of the same
circumstances.[22]
He possessed the loaded firearm and discharged it in the context of an
altercation with Mr. Delgado and Mr. Gime. Crown counsel did not seek to prove
that Mr. Mitchell possessed the firearm for a long period of time before he
discharged it in the apartment. As such, all offences were temporally
interlinked and arise out of the same criminal transaction.[23]
All counsel submit, and I agree, that the sentences imposed should be
concurrent to each other.
[39]          
In my view, the objectives of sentencing can be met without imposing a
sentence of nine to ten years as submitted by Crown counsel. Having considered
the aggravating and mitigating factors of this case, I was of the view that a
sentence of seven years (and possibly eight) would be appropriate. However, all
counsel submit, and I agree, that an adjustment of Mr. Mitchell’s sentence
is appropriate due to the conditions of his pre-sentence incarceration.
[40]          
I find that Mr. Mitchell has experienced conditions that are more
difficult or punitive than the restrictions normally associated with pre-trial
detention. This is due to the lockdowns at the TSDC and the conditions of Mr.
Mitchell’s incarceration while he was there, including triple bunking.
[41]          
There has been hardship suffered due to the lockdowns, most of which were
the result of staff shortages. I echo the sentiments of my colleagues, that although
the message is being sent to our government that they must properly staff
institutions to permit inmates to reside in humane conditions, that issue has remained,
for the most part, unresolved.[24]
[42]          
While I would have been inclined to impose a sentence of seven years’
imprisonment (84 months), I will reduce it to six years (72 months) to account
for the harsh conditions of Mr. Mitchell’s pre-sentence incarceration.
There has been a punitive impact due to the hardship of pre-sentence custody.
[43]          
It is my view that a sentence of six years’ imprisonment balances all
the relevant sentencing principles and objectives. It is a sentence that
sufficiently punishes and denounces Mr. Mitchell’s dangerous conduct and, to
the extent possible, will assist in deterring others from engaging in such
conduct. It imposes significant consequences that Mr. Mitchell will feel
because it is a detour from the goals he seeks to achieve in life. However, it
avoids a crushing sentence that may endanger society and Mr. Mitchell’s
successful rehabilitation into the community. Lastly, it considers his
susceptibility to bad influences, as well as the violence, poverty and racism
he experienced growing up. As stated in R. v. Habib, “these factors do
not excuse his dangerous actions but still have a mitigating effect”.[25]
[44]          
A sentence of six years’ imprisonment is also required to achieve
proportionality and parity. It is a sentence similar to those imposed on similar
offenders who committed these types of offences. However, this case is also
unique. Mr. Mitchell brandished and used the firearm in the context of
self-defence. Unlike other offenders referred to above, he did not approach and
intentionally shoot the occupants of a car or others outside a nightclub. Unfortunately,
the three surviving victims of these offences were the collateral damage of Mr.
Mitchell using his firearm in lawful self-defence.
[45]          
Mr. Mitchell has spent 735 days (just over two years) in custody.
Enhanced at one and a half days for each day spent in pre-sentence custody
(pursuant to Summers), Mr. Mitchell will be given credit for three years.
This leaves a sentence to be served of three years.
[46]          
Mr. Mitchell is sentenced to a global period of incarceration of six
years (72 months). Mr. Mitchell will be given credit of three years. This
requires that Mr. Mitchell serve another three years in custody.
[47]          
The custodial sentences will be imposed as follows:
[48]          
I also order that Mr. Mitchell be
subject to a prohibition order under s. 109(1)(a) of the Criminal Code.
Pursuant to s. 109(2), I direct that Mr. Mitchell be prohibited from
possessing any weapon as defined by the Criminal Code for life.
[49]          
Reckless discharge of a firearm is a primary designated offence within
the meaning of s. 487.04 of the Criminal Code and accordingly, a
DNA order is mandatory. Therefore, I direct that Mr. Mitchell provide a
sample of his DNA.
[50]          
Lastly, I order that Mr. Mitchell have no contact with the family of Mr.
Gime nor of Ms. Battisse, Mr. Delgado and Mr. Khan pursuant to s. 743.21
of the Criminal Code.