[1]          
This was a motion
for particulars brought by the Defendants and heard by me on October 4th,
2024.  At the conclusion of the Defendants’ arguments and after taking the
lunch break, I dismissed the motion without calling on Plaintiff’s counsel and
provided oral reasons for my decision.  At the conclusion of those reasons, I
noted that I reserved the right to add to or edit the transcript of the oral
reasons.
[2]          
I have provided
the parties with a copy of the actual transcription.  What follows are the
lightly edited reasons for my decision.  They are the finalized version of my
reasons for decision.
[3]          
The facts set out
in this background summation are taken from the Statement of Claim and from
other documents I have received. They
are not final findings of fact and are not binding upon the trial judge or any subsequent judge that hears from the parties on an appeal or other motion.
[4]          
This summation
is for the purposes of understanding my disposition of the
motion.
[5]          
The personal
plaintiffs and defendants have known each other for some period of time. The plaintiff
Joginder is the father of the plaintiff’s Amritpal and Ramjit
[6]          
The corporate defendant, PSW, is a corporation incorporated pursuant to the laws
of Canada.  It was apparently carrying on business as a trucking company.  The defendants Hardeep Bahniwal,
Narinder Gill and Sandeep Gill, were
owners and operators of the company, and Joginder was a longstanding friend of the three of them.
[7]          
On October 2021,
all of the plaintiffs started working for PSW in some capacity. According
to the Statement of Claim,
in and around January of 2022,
the individual defendants personally and on behalf of PSW proposed to the plaintiffs, Joginder and his sons that
they should become 50 per cent shareholders of PSW. Paragraph 11 of the
Statement of Claim states:
[8]          
The pleading then
goes on to set out the terms of that agreement.
The business operated for some time and assets   were put into this business by both
the defendants and the plaintiffs.
[9]          
The assets that
were put in to PSW are particularized in some detail in the Statement of Claim, but it is not necessary for me to
specifically enumerate them in this summary.
[10]     
In addition, PSW purchased new assets.
[11]     
In the summer of 2022, the plaintiffs asked for the business records
of the company. The defendants:
[12]          
The plaintiffs
took the view that the return of their equipment was not all that they were
entitled to. The plaintiffs were of the view that they were entitled to some of
the profits of the business as well. The plaintiffs made a number of requests
to obtain the records of PSW, both themselves and through their counsel. They
were rebuffed on all occasions.
[13]          
As a result, they started the claim. The nature
of the claim is in its essence, a claim for breach of contract,
unjust enrichment and fraudulent payment of sums by the defendants to themselves from the business.
[14]          
Described in
those claims and in this claim of fraudulent behaviour, are various claims in respect of the oppression remedy and a request to pierce the corporate veil and hold the
individual defendants liable for any losses.
[15]          
The Statement of Claim in this matter
was issued August
3rd, 2023 and served shortly
thereafter. There was a request to inspect documents, and a demand for
particulars. The response to this demand
for particulars was provided January
11th, 2024. Email exchanges filed on the record outlined
show that, from the defendants’ perspective, the Plaintiff’s responses
were not sufficient.
[16]          
The back and
forth between the parties resulted in an Amended Statement of Claim, dated June
21st, 2024. I pause to note that in the materials
it is suggested that this amendment was not made on consent. I would note that you can amend a Statement
of Claim at any time prior to the
closing of pleadings, and the pleadings were not closed in this particular case.  Throughout the rest of these
reasons, my references to the Statement of Claim are to this Amended Claim.
[17]          
This Amended
Statement of Claim outlined additional facts and details of various transactions. It resulted in a
further demand for particulars that is some 26 paragraphs in length.
[18]          
The plaintiffs
outright refused to respond to this
additional request for particulars at all, which resulted in this motion.
[19]          
A number
of cases were filed, and I have reviewed them both prior to Court and during the
lunch break. A number of principles emerge from these cases. First, the
procedure for particulars is set out in Rule 25.10 and gives the court the
power to order or not to order particulars.
[20]          
Second, the case
law is well summarized in a decision of then Master McGraw, now Associate Judge
McGraw, in 3 Dogs Daycare Inc.
v. Dogtopia Enterprises Canada Inc.,
2021 ONSC 514. At paragraph 21 of that decision,
there are a number of different principles that are summarized as follows:
[21]          
In respect to point,
xiv, in terms of the minimum level of material
fact disclosure, although
there has been no motion
to strike before me in this matter, I do not see anything that would cause me to find that there
was a lack of particularity sufficient to justify a motion striking the
pleading as irregular.
[22]          
In addition, one
of the other points that is made in the case law comes from Ballard v.
Stavro (1997), Carswell Ont. 3424. At paragraph 83 of that decision, Madam
Justice Epstein, of our court as she then was, was quoting from a previous
case, a decision of H.A. Imports of Canada Ltd. v. General Mills, Inc. et
al., (1985) 1983 CanLII 1722 (ON SC), 42 OR (2d) 645 (Ont.)
In the H.A. Imports decision, Justice
O’Brien stated,
[23]          
With these
background principles in mind, I now turn
to the specifics.
[24]          
I wish to start with some general issues. The most important of the general issues that are raised in this
motion is the question of conspiracy. The defendants claim that there is a lack
of clarity and precision in the pleadings in
this regard. In that respect, during the course of this argument Mr. Ostermeier
he directed my attention to two specific questions:
[25]          
In that respect he directed my attention to the decision
in Van-Rob Inc. v Rapid Metals LLC, 2016 ONSC 1321.
[26]          
However, in Van-Rob
Inc., the court stated at paragraph 6 as follows,
[27]          
In this respect,
this decision also references the decision in Pennyfeather v. Timminco Ltd.,
[2011] ONSC 4257.
[28]          
In their factum,
the Defendants made a number of
statements in respect of the conspiracy. In that regard, I particularly note
the statement that was made at
paragraph 31 of the Defendants’ factum which reads,
[29]          
There are a
number of problems with this submission, in my view. The first one is that the
paragraph that reads, “directing wrongful things to be done” actually comes
from paragraph 48 of the Amended Statement of Claim. That paragraph goes on to
say “namely to misappropriate money owing to the plaintiffs for the defendants’ personal use.”  That
paragraph of the Statement of Claim clearly provides more particulars than the
Defendant’s factum asserts.
[30]          
The second
problem with this argument, is that the facts
with respect to the conspiracy, are not known with precision by the Plaintiffs
and they cannot be known by precision by the Plaintiffs, because the Plaintiffs
have asked for access to the materials and they have been refused that access.
[31]          
It is interesting
to me to note in that regard what comes immediately after Madam
Justice Epstein produces
the quote from the decision of Justice O’Brien (set out at paragraph
22, above).  At paragraph 84 of the Stavro
decision, she goes on to say:
[32]          
In my view, that paragraph
is completely applicable to the circumstances I have before me.
[33]          
In this case, the
Statement of Claim describes in detail the parties’ and their relationship. It alleges that there was an agreement to conspire between
the three defendants to deny
the plaintiffs their share of the profits. It states the objectives and purposes of the conspiracy, which were
to deny the plaintiffs their share of the profits in the company. It sets out
the overt acts in furtherance of the conspiracy, to the extent that they are
known, and alleges the damage suffered by the plaintiffs again to the extent that
they are known.
[34]          
From my
perspective, permitting a further motion on particulars on this matter would prevent
the plaintiffs from advancing their otherwise valid claim by requiring
them to respond to requests for particulars that
cannot be satisfied. In my view, that applies to all of the Defendants’ concerns about the
conspiracy allegations in the Statement of Claim.
[35]          
The other general
argument that was advanced was that, after the Defendants asked for further
particulars of the Amended Statement of Claim in June of 2024, the Plaintiffs
simply provided a blanket denial of these further requests.  The Defendants
argue that the blanket response from the Plaintiffs was unreasonable and should
not be permitted.
[36]          
I do not share the
Defendants’ concerns for two reasons: a) there
was a previous request for particulars, that was answered in part, and; b)
there was a fresh as Amended Statement of Claim that outlines various things in more detail.  Even a cursory
review of that pleading reveals that there are very specific changes and
additions that the Plaintiffs have made to that pleading to address issues of
particulars.
[37]          
At that point,
having provided both a detailed response and an amended pleading, unless there is something specific
that was missing, it was open
to the plaintiffs to say enough, you have what you need and it is time for you to plead.
[38]          
From that
conclusion, it follows that I am not going to accede to the Defendants’ request
that an order simply requiring an answer to the requested pleading be provided.
In my view, acceding to that request would be permitting particulars to be used
as a delay tactic, as set out in point (xi) from Three Dogs.
[39]          
In short, granting
an order requiring an answer, would almost inevitably result in further
requests for particulars that would result in additional delay.        It must be remembered that the facts
underlying this matter are now more than two years old, and the action itself
is more than a year old.
[40]          
In that respect,
I would direct the parties to the Report of the Committee conducting a review
of the Rules of Civil Procedure. One of the things that the first phase of the report
makes clear is that there are
problems with delays, as a result of motion culture. In that respect, they outline the goals of their reforms,
and they say at the bottom of page 19 of their phase 1 report,
[41]          
From my
perspective, it is the first category that is most important in this particular
case.  Specifically, the report speaks to pursuing “reforms that may reduce
existing motion/factum culture, even mandating presumptive efforts, inferences
arising from improper refusals and impose a cap on the number of
non-dispositive motions.”
[42]          
This is the kind
of non-dispositive motion that, from my perspective, is something that I am
concerned will cause too much delay.  It has long been a feature of the civil
litigation motions culture.
[43]          
Having made those
general observations, I am going to now to turn to a review
of some of the specifics of the 26 paragraph document
that I’ve been provided with. It sets out the particulars that are
requested. As I begin this review, however, I would note that it is possible, and I emphasize
possible, some of these might benefit from some further clarification.
[44]          
However, it must
be remembered that orders for particulars are discretionary and the court must be satisfied that the order is just in the circumstances
of each case. See: Fairburn v. Sage
(1925) 1925 CanLII 403 (ON CA), CanLII 403, (ONCA) 56 O.L.R. 462, and Watson v. Trojan
Unlimited, 2016 ONSC 2740. This brings me to the specifics in the Demand for Particulars.
[45]          
The first three
paragraphs of the specifics sought in the Defendants’ particulars all relate to
employment issues.  I am of the view that the employment issues are
sufficiently particularized and that nothing further is needed.
[46]          
As an example of
why I have reached this conclusion, attention should be paid to the second
request for particulars which reads, “With respect to paragraph 9 of the Amended
Statement of Claim, particularly with respect to Ranjit’s alleged work with PSW
as a mechanic, i.e. in what capacity was he working with PSW?” From my
perspective, it would seem to be obvious that the response to that request was
that Ranjit was working as a mechanic.
[47]          
Given this type
of request, it is difficult to see how additional particulars can be provided.
However, if something is missing, it will come out during the discovery
process.
[48]          
Moving to
paragraph 4 of the request for particulars, there is a series of questions in
terms of the definition of the word “share” and the definition of the word “profit”.
From my perspective, those appear to me to be legal
questions that are not
required to be provided as particulars.
[49]          
The Defendants’
have also asked for particulars of   the employment agreements. That is information that can be obtained in the course of discovery.  The terms of the agreements
are also facts that should be within the knowledge of the Defendants.
[50]          
 Paragraph 5 of
the request for particulars seeks further particulars about various payments
that have been made.       I would note in
respect of these paragraphs, and they are paragraphs 5A to H, there are
significant details already contained in the Statement of Claim.  Any missing
information can be obtained at discovery.
[51]          
This brings me to
paragraph 6 of the request for particulars, which states “with respect to paragraph 13 of the Amended
Statement of Claim, particulars of which
corporation and their entity is being alleged to have benefited from the
alleged purchase of the assets in which business account is alleged to have contributed
to the funds for the mechanical service standard”. This request for particulars
must be remembered in the context of the other allegations that have been made,
which include an allegation that the defendants have refused to provide the plaintiffs
to access to any books and records.
[52]          
In my view, this
is a glaring example of the type of question that can best be answered by the
defendants.  In other words, it is covered by Madam Justice Epstein observation
that there are going to be documents that within the purview of the defendants.
[53]          
With respect to
paragraph 7, there are further requests for further particulars on VIN numbers.
This request is repeated elsewhere in the pleadings requests.  From my perspective,
these requests can be dealt with by either an inspection request or through
discovery
[54]          
Given the delay in this case, however, I will not permit a request to inspect to be
served before a Statement of Defence is served and filed.  There is nothing
that I see in the Statement of Claim or in the Demand for Particulars that
would justify the further delay that would inevitably be attendant upon
[55]          
Paragraph 8 deals
with transfers of shares in PSW or any other shareholders and to the
plaintiffs. Again, that’s a question that the Plaintiffs will not know, and the
Defendants will know, because the Defendants appear to be in possession of the
share register.
[56]          
Paragraph 9
raises that can be answered with
respect to the discovery.  I would note that this observation applies to many
of the other requests for particulars and I do not intend to review them all.  They
can all be answered with the observations that the information has already been
provided, is already in the knowledge of the Defendants or can properly be
asked on discovery.  However, in order to emphasize these points, I will
provide a few more examples.
[57]          
For example, I
would note paragraphs 12 and 13 read as follows, “Paragraph 12, with respect to
paragraph 22 of the Amended Statement of Claim full particulars regarding the
allegations of the improperly withdrawn funds”. “Paragraph 13 with respect to
paragraph 23 of the Amended Statement of Claim, full particulars of the
allegations that are included, the wages and profit share being alleged to have
been unpaid.”
[58]          
Again, those are
documents that are going to be part
of the corporation’s books and
records. From my perspective,
they are not something that the Defendant can
keep all of the books and records and then require the Plaintiff to
provide particulars of what are in those books and records.
[59]          
Ultimately, I am
dismissing all of these requests because they are all within the purview of the defendants, have been sufficiently
particularized or can be obtained on discovery.  In the circumstances, an order
for particulars would not be just on the facts of this case.
[60]          
Therefore, for
all of these Reasons, the motion brought by the defendants is dismissed.
Their Statement of Defence is due within
20 days.  I retain jurisdiction over this matter to address any issues if there
are any reasons why the Statement of Defence cannot be delivered within 20 days
from today’s date.
[61]          
In terms of
costs, the parties were directed to provide costs submissions of no more than 3
pages each, single spaced, exclusive of case law, bills of costs and offers to
settle. The plaintiffs’ were due seven days from the date the motion was heard,
the defendants’ were due 7 days thereafter. There is no need or right to reply
to those cost submissions without leave
of the court, and if I do not receive cost submissions in that timetable, there
will be no order as to costs.