[1]         
Raymond Nicolini and
Vilson Da Silva were friends. They both worked in the construction industry.
Nicolini engaged Da Silva to do drywall work on a construction project. Around
the same time, Nicolini loaned Da Silva money for Da Silva’s carpentry business.
A few months later, Nicolini advanced some more money to Da Silva.
[2]         
But then their
relationship broke down. The drywall work stopped. The loans weren’t repaid. Matters
escalated. They hadn’t memorialize their various agreements. Nicolini tried to
enforce the loans against Da Silva and Daenn Monteiro Loureiro’s home. Da Silva
registered a lien on the project. Nicolini and Da Silva sued and countersued.
In short, Nicolini and Da Silva went to war.
[3]         
This complex litigation
history raises fourteen issues:
[4]          For the reasons discussed below, I conclude
as follows:
[5]         
I also order that the
mortgage registered against Da Silva and Loureiro’s matrimonial home shall be
discharged upon the payment of the amounts in paragraph 4(b) above.
[6]         
Leblon Drywall is a
drywall construction business. It was incorporated by Da Silva as a special
purpose vehicle for drywall, metal framing, and insulation work on the Sorrento
Retirement residence. Da Silva also owns and operates Leblon Carpentry, a
carpentry business. Loureiro is Da Silva’s wife.
[7]         
King Station Facility Inc.
is a development company. It owns the lands for the Sorrento Retirement project.
InSite is a construction manager. I infer that Sayward is an investment
company. Nicolini is an officer, director, and shareholder of King Station,
InSite, and Sayward. They’re his companies.
[8]         
This dispute is really
between Da Silva and Nicolini, although through their various companies. As a
result, for ease, I generally refer to Da Silva or Nicolini, though the rights
and claims may be held by the other parties.
[9]         
In 2018, InSite engaged
Leblon Drywall to supply drywall for the construction of Sorrento Retirement. Da
Silva alleges that InSite and King Station didn’t pay Leblon Drywall for its
work. Leblon Drywall started a lien action in November 2020 (CV-20-4085).
InSite and King Station counterclaimed. Nicolini alleges that Leblon Drywall
defaulted on the contract before the work was finished, and InSite had to
repair the deficiencies. King Station paid over $1.1m into court to vacate the
lien.
[10]      In 2019, Nicolini loaned $300,000 to Da
Silva, Loureiro, and Leblon Carpentry through Sayward. The loan was secured by
a mortgage on Da Silva and Louriero’s matrimonial home. In 2020, Nicolini
advanced another $300,000 to Leblon Carpentry. Nicolini says this advance was
another loan to Da Silva, Loureiro, and Leblon Carpentry, and it was secured by
the same mortgage as the 2019 loan. Da Silva responds that the advance was for
a joint venture between Leblon Carpentry and Sayward. The loans weren’t fully
repaid. Nicolini threatened to sell Da Silva and Loureiro’s home. In October
2020, Sayward sued Da Silva, Loureiro, and Leblon Carpentry for breach of
contract (CV-20-1448). The mortgage remains on title. Da Silva and Loureiro
counterclaimed for an order restraining Sayward from enforcing the mortgage
security.
[11]      In July 2020, InSite sued Da Silva, Leblon
Drywall, and Leblon Carpentry for several torts, including oppression and
conspiracy (CV-22-1933). Nicolini alleges that Da Silva started the lien action
in retaliation for the Sayward action.
[12]      Nicolini, Da Silva, and Loureiro all testified at
trial. In addition, there were several other witnesses:
[13]      Nicolini didn’t cross-examine Palanki or
Beccaro.
[14]      Credibility and reliability are different.
Credibility has to do with a witness’s veracity; reliability with the accuracy
of the witness’s testimony. Reliability engages consideration of the witness’s
ability to accurately observe, recall, and recount events in issue. Any witness
whose evidence on an issue isn’t credible can’t give reliable evidence on the
same point. Credibility, on the other hand, isn’t a proxy for reliability: a
credible witness may give unreliable evidence. See R v GF, 2021 SCC 20,
at para 82; R v HC, 2009 ONCA 56, at para 41.
[15]      I don’t find Da Silva or Nicolini to be
credible. They seemed dishonest when it suited their purposes. Their interest
in particular outcomes led them to exaggerate evidence that was favourable to
them, and discount evidence that was prejudicial to them. Their evidence often
contradicted documents and other witnesses. It was, at many junctures,
unreasonable. They both told deliberate lies to further their theories of the
case.
[16]      I also don’t find Palanki or Moore to be
credible witnesses. Palanki’s evidence was inconsistent and often contradicted.
He admitted being loyal to Da Silva, which tainted his evidence. Moore’s
evidence about his presence at the negotiations between Nicolini and Da Silva—the
core of his testimony—was directly contradicted by other witnesses, including
Da Silva.
[17]      The other witnesses were, for the most
part, credible and reliable. Their evidence largely tracked with each other and
the documents, and they seemed honest.
[18]      Da Silva argues that I should draw an
adverse inference against Nicolini because of his failure to call certain
witnesses to testify. See S Lederman, M Fuerst & H Stewart, Sopinka,
Lederman & Bryant: The Law of Evidence in Canada, 6th ed
(LexisNexisCanada, 2022), at ¶6.509. When a trial judge draws an adverse inference,
they must make clear the nature and details of the inference drawn. See Conte
v Pettle, 2024 ONCA 733, at para 12.
[19]      Da Silva contends that because Nicolini
didn’t call the subcontractors and labourers that allegedly did the deficiency
work, I should conclude that they would’ve contradicted Nicolini’s case or at
least wouldn’t support it. I don’t agree that these witnesses were “material”.
It’s Nicolini’s burden to prove the deficiencies. If he doesn’t call the
necessary evidence, he won’t meet his burden, and his claim will fail. In any
event, as I discuss below, I find that Nicolini agreed that he wouldn’t make a
claim against Da Silva for the deficiencies, so it doesn’t matter. Da Silva
also argues that Nicolini failed to produce information to him about “how much
money was received by Insite from King Station” and “how much it actually cost
Insite for the materials it supplied”. He says I should draw an adverse inference
against Nicolini. I don’t know what inference he wants me to draw, or how it’s
relevant to the issues in dispute.
[20]      As discussed above, there are three proceedings:
[21]      Regional Senior Justice Ricchetti (as he was then)
case managed these proceedings. He made several findings or orders that are
either relevant to the trial or provide important context:
[22]      Nicolini and Da Silva were examined for
discovery on behalf of themselves and their companies. The parties agreed that
the evidence given on the summary judgment motion could also be used at trial
under the Rules of Civil Procedure, r 31.11.
[23]      The trials proceeded as a summary trial:
the parties adduced evidence by affidavit. Nicolini presented his case first.
He, Munro, and Wortzman were cross-examined on their affidavits. Da Silva
presented his case next. He, Dourado, Moore, and Loureiro were cross-examined.
The parties’ affidavits were made exhibits.
[24]      Da Silva at first objected to the
admissibility of some exhibits attached to Nicolini’s affidavit. He withdrew
those objections because the exhibits met the test for threshold reliability,
but he reserved the right to argue that they weren’t ultimately reliable. In
his closing address, he didn’t argue admissibility other than a single hearsay
issue. I agree that paragraph 125 of Nicolini’s trial affidavit is hearsay
evidence and thus inadmissible. But, as I discuss below, it doesn’t matter as
other witnesses admitted the same facts.
[25]      For reading in examinations of the adverse
party, Da Silva filed tables listing the evidence from Nicolini’s transcripts.
Nicolini filed a table listing qualifying answers. The parties also marked
several other documents as exhibits.
[26]      In April 2019, Nicolini loaned $300,000 to Da
Silva, Loureiro, and Leblon Carpentry through Sayward to fund Leblon
Carpentry’s operations. Da Silva repaid $300,000 in late 2019. Nicolini claims
that Da Silva, Loureiro, and Leblon Carpentry nonetheless breached the loan
agreement by failing to pay all of the principal, the promised interest, and a “Facility
Fee”. Da Silva responds that he paid $30,000 towards the interest soon after
the loan matured, so little or nothing is owing.
[27]      I agree with Nicolini. I find that the Da
Silva, Loureiro, and Leblon Carpentry didn’t pay all of the principal, the
outstanding interest, or the fee. As a result, they breached the loan
agreement.
[28]      Da Silva, Loureiro, and Leblon Carpentry issued a promissory note to Sayward as
security for the loan. Da Silva and Loureiro also granted Sayward a mortgage
over their matrimonial home as further security. The promissory note evidenced
the terms of the loan:
[29]      Da Silva didn’t repay the loan by July 12th.
In October 2019, Nicolini registered the mortgage on Da Silva and Loureiro’s
home. The mortgage incorporated the terms of the promissory note.
[30]      Da Silva eventually made significant
payments on the loan—$170,000 on October 31st, and another $130,000 on
December 3rd.
[31]      Da Silva says he gave $30,000 in cash to
Munro in September 2019 to cover any interest. He says he saw her send a text
message to Nicolini confirming receipt. The text message wasn’t introduced into
evidence.
[32]      There’s no evidence to corroborate Da
Silva’s narrative. He hasn’t produced a receipt for the payment. Leaving aside
proof of payment in the event of a dispute with Nicolini, it doesn’t make sense
that Da Silva wouldn’t get a receipt given that he could have deducted the
interest and fee as a business expense.
[33]      Further, Da Silva’s position contradicts
subsequent statements made by his lawyer at the time, Paul Guaragna:
[34]      Da Silva and Loureiro didn’t ask for the
mortgage to be discharged until September 2020—if, in fact, Da Silva had paid
off the principal and interest by December 2019, there was no reason to leave
the mortgage on title and risk that Nicolini could force a sale.
[35]      There’s also no communications
corroborating Da Silva’s version of the events. Between August 2019 and October
2019, Munro was hounding Da Silva to pay off the loan. I infer that Da Silva
gave Munro a cheque for $300,000 in August 2019 but told her not to cash it
immediately. He kept putting her off until late October, when he finally gave
her a draft for $170,000. It’s not believable that Da Silva and Munro would
trade multiple messages during this period about the loan, and neither of them
acknowledged the $30,000 interest payment. Or that Nicolini wouldn’t apply the
$30,000 cash payment to the loan principal.
[36]      Loureiro’s evidence accords with Nicolini’s
narrative. She said that the mortgage wasn’t discharged because they still owed
interest and fees. Her evidence was that they gave two drafts to Nicolini “to
pay [the loan] off”, and then $40,000 to Guaragna to pay “any remaining
balance”.
[37]      Da Silva says he made a mistake in not
telling Guaragna about the $30,000 payment, which is why Guaragna never once refers
to it. That doesn’t make sense. It’s not believable that Da Silva would let Guaragna
repeatedly acknowledge to Nicolini that Da Silva owed interest and fees if Da
Silva had paid the interest the year before. Similarly, it doesn’t make sense
that Da Silva would voluntarily pay $40,000 into court when, according to him, he
owed less than $10,000.
[38]      The more reasonable explanation is that Da
Silva knew he owed Nicolini another $40,000 but because of their ongoing
business relationship, he didn’t see the need to make the payment. There was a
fair amount of money flowing between Da Silva’s and Nicolini’s companies until
May 2020. But when their relationship broke down, and Nicolini threatened to
sell Da Silva and Loureiro’s home, Da Silva had to repay the debt. I don’t know
why Da Silva manufactured a story about prepaying the interest given all the
evidence to the contrary.
[39]      As a result, I find that Da Silva,
Loureiro, and Leblon Carpentry breached the 2019 loan agreement by failing to
pay off the loan.
[40]      Nicolini claims that his damages for breach
of the 2019 loan are $57,473.28 as of April 15, 2024. Da Silva argues that
“maximum owing” is $38,627.78 because Nicolini refused to accept his offer in
September 2020 to pay money into court in exchange for discharging the
mortgage. The difference between their positions is outstanding interest
between November 2020 and April 2024.
[41]      Nicolini’s position is that he was owed $31,972.78
as of October 7, 2020. The per diem interest amount is $15.77. He started legal
proceedings on October 23, 2020. Thus, as of that date, the outstanding
interest and fee is $38,909.29 ($31,972.78 + $236.51 + $6700). I order
and adjudge that Leblon Construction, Da Silva, and Loureiro shall pay to
Sayward the amount of $38,909.29 for outstanding interest and the Facility Fee
on the 2019 loan.
[42]      Nicolini also seeks an award of interest at
a prejudgment interest rate of 18 percent. Da Silva effectively argues that
there should be no interest because Nicolini unreasonably rejected their offer
to pay $40,000 into trust or into court.
[43]      I agree with Da Silva. As a result, I order
and adjudge that Leblon Construction, Da Silva, and Loureiro shall pay
prejudgment interest at the statutory rate of 0.5 percent from the start of the
action to the date of this judgment.
[44]      Absent exceptional circumstances, the
interest rate which had governed the loan before breach would be the
appropriate rate to govern the post-breach loan. The application of a lower
interest rate would be unjust to the lender. See Bank of America Canada v
Mutual Trust Co., 2002 SCC 43, at para 49. Exceptional circumstances may
include vague or unclear terms, overriding policy concerns such as a criminal
interest rate, unconscionable conduct by the lender, or commercially
unsophisticated parties. See Lundy’s Regency Arms Corp. v Niagara Hospitality
Hotels Inc., 2016 ONSC 4199, at para 14.
[45]      I find that Nicolini’s conduct towards this
loan and the enforcement of the mortgage was unreasonable. It would be unjust
to apply the contractual interest rate in these exceptional circumstances.
[46]      In August 2020, Nicolini sent a Notice of
Intention to Enforce Security under section 244(1) of the Bankruptcy and
Insolvency Act, RSC 1985, c B-3. He claimed a total amount of indebtedness
of $520,288.80 (which included amounts under the 2019 loan and the 2020 loan).
Then, in September 2020, he sent a notice of sale under the Mortgages Act,
RSO 1990, c M.40, again claiming an indebtedness of over $520,000. He
threatened to sell Da Silva and Loureiro’s matrimonial home in October 2020 if
the full amount of the indebtedness wasn’t paid.
[47]      Nicolini refused to discharge the mortgage
because he insisted that the mortgage was valid security for the 2020 loan. As
I elaborate on below, it wasn’t. Nicolini’s unreasonable position has
encumbered Da Silva and Loureiro’s matrimonial home for over four years, all
over a debt that they offered to pay off in November 2020.
[48]      For the same reason, the judgment bears
interest at the statutory postjudgment interest rate of 6 percent per year
starting on the date of this judgment.
[49]      Finally, I order that the mortgage
registered as Instrument No. YR3020482 against Da Silva and Loureiro’s
matrimonial home shall be discharged upon the payment of the judgment in
paragraphs 41-48 above.
[50]      In 2020Q1, Nicolini gave another $300,000
to Da Silva through Sayward. He says it was a loan to Da Silva, Loureiro, and
Leblon Carpentry. Da Silva responds that the money was an investment in a joint
venture between Leblon Carpentry and Sayward.
[51]      I agree with Nicolini. I find that he
loaned $300,000 to Leblon Carpentry and Da Silva (but not Loureiro, as I
discuss below). I find that there was no joint venture between Leblon Carpentry
and Sayward.
[52]      The parties agree that there’s no written
agreement documenting either the loan or the joint venture agreement. When
dealing with contracts which are substantially or wholly oral, it’s necessary
to distill from the words and actions of the parties what they intended. The
test of what the parties agreed to requires an objective determination. See S
& J Gareri Trucking Ltd. v Onyx Corp., 2016 ONCA 505, at para 7. As a
result, I must rely on the parties’ oral evidence of their intentions, which is
in direct contrast.
[53]      According to Nicolini, Da Silva asked him in January
2020 for a loan for Leblon Carpentry:
[54]      Nicolini says he was reluctant to lend
money to Da Silva again because the 2019 loan was in default and he didn’t want
to lose access to the funds, even for three months. To entice Nicolini to make
the loan, Da Silva offered to pay Nicolini 1/2 of the profits from the two
projects. In February 2020, Da Silva provided Nicolini with spreadsheets
showing the estimated profit. According to Nicolini, the spreadsheets had
mathematical mistakes, so Munro created her own spreadsheets showing Nicolini’s
profit share to be $291,481.25 for the two projects, which Da Silva agreed
with.
[55]      Nicolini says the parties agreed on the
following loan terms:
[56]      According to Nicolini, the parties also
agreed that he would get the profit share regardless of Da Silva’s recovery. In
other words, if Da Silva earned more than the estimated profits, he would keep
the surplus but he would also cover any shortage if it earned less than
estimated.
[57]      Finally, Nicolini says that Da Silva agreed
that they would use the security documents from the 2019 loan to avoid Da Silva
paying to discharge the mortgage and register a new mortgage. As a result,
Loureiro was also a party to the loan even though she didn’t participate in any
of the loan negotiations. Nicolini is adamant that he wouldn’t have given Da
Silva an unsecured loan.
[58]      Da Silva paid $150,000 to Nicolini between
May 2020 and June 2020. Nicolini claims that the rest of the loan principal,
the interest, and his share of the projects’ profits are unpaid.
[59]      In contrast, De Silva says that Nicolini was party to
a joint venture project:
[60]      According to Da Silva, the expected profit
was, at most, $3 per square foot, or $131,100 ($3 x 19 houses x 2300 sq. ft.).
The builder didn’t accept this offer. Da Silva says that Nicolini accepted that
the joint venture would make less profit than initially estimated because the
builder had “millions and millions of jobs to do in the future”, and if they
did this job for “cheaper”, they “make some money each, and then…going to go up
from there.” That said, Da Silva also stated there was no guarantee that he and
Nicolini would be partners on any future jobs for that builder.
[61]      Da Silva says that he earned only
$68,235.59 in profits from the Briarwood project, meaning that he owes
$22,745.20 for Nicolini’s share of the profits. Da Silva acknowledges that he
also owes $150,000 to the joint venture.
[62]      I find that Nicolini’s advance of $300,000
in 2020 was a loan and not a contribution to a joint venture. I prefer Nicolini’s
evidence on this issue. The idea of a joint venture doesn’t make commercial
sense. In a joint venture, both parties contribute something to the
undertaking, share in the risk or the reward, and have mutual control over the
project. See 1088558 Ontario Inc v Musial, 2022 ONSC 5239, at para 123.
[63]      First, under Da Silva’s theory, the parties
didn’t share the risks and rewards of the venture. Nicolini contributed
$300,000. Da Silva contributed labour and materials. Usually, in a joint
venture, if the project loses money, the parties share the loss. But, here, Da
Silva says he had to repay Nicolini even if the project didn’t make a profit.
Da Silva is describing a loan not a strategic partnership.
[64]      Second, there’s no evidence that Nicolini
had any control or input into the completion of Da Silva’s work on the projects.
He had no control or oversight over Da Silva’s negotiations with the owner or
trades, or Da Silva’s costs. It doesn’t make commercial sense that Nicolini,
who has extensive experience in construction management, would defer all of the
management of the contract to Da Silva if they were in a joint venture.
[65]      Finally, there’s no evidence that Nicolini
was interested in future joint ventures. And, as Da Silva admitted, there was
no agreement between him and Nicolini that they would work together again.
[66]      The more reasonable explanation is that
Nicolini again loaned money to Da Silva but, as I discuss below, this time they
agreed that Nicolini would be reimbursed through a profit share. Da Silva may
have called this agreement a joint venture. But it was a loan.
[67]      Unlike the 2019 loan, there’s no promissory
note or other written agreement for the 2020 loan. Nicolini argues that
Loureiro is a party to the loan. Da Silva argues that only Leblon Carpentry is
indebted to Nicolini.
[68]    
 I find that Leblon Carpentry and Da Silva are the
counter-parties to the loan. I find that Loureiro is not a party.
[69]      There’s no dispute that Loureiro agreed to
be liable for repayment of the 2019 loan, as shown by the promissory note and
the mortgage. But there’s also no dispute that Loureiro had no involvement in
the negotiation of the 2020 loan. Nicolini relies on Loureiro’s admission that
she depended on Da Silva to negotiate the 2019 loan fairly, and to repay the
loan. He argues that I can infer that she did the same for the 2020 loan, in
part because both loans were for the same amount and had the same purpose—to
fund Leblon Construction. But Loureiro knew nothing about the 2020 loan until
she got the BIA notice in August 2020.
[70]      Though Loureiro didn’t ask for the mortgage
to be discharged until September 2020, it’s unclear that she even knew that the
mortgage was still on title to do so. I infer from all the evidence that she
thought that Da Silva had repaid the 2019 loan, and the matrimonial home was
free and clear. She didn’t know that Da Silva had borrowed another $300,000
from Nicolini. When Da Silva and Nicolini’s relationship broke down and
Nicolini threatened to sell the home, Loureiro learned that the 2019 loan
hadn’t been paid in full and Nicolini was alleging he was owed another debt.
[71]      Nicolini is an experienced and
sophisticated businessperson. If he wanted to make Loureiro jointly liable for
the 2020 loan, he could’ve insisted on a fresh promissory note or a new loan
agreement. It would’ve cost almost nothing for Nicolini or his lawyers to
reformat the April 2020 promissory note, especially compared to the amount of
the investment. I can’t find that Loureiro was a party to the loan absent any
evidence of her consent or agreement.
[72]       That said, I reject Da Silva’s argument
that he wasn’t a party to the loan. Unlike Loureiro, he was directly involved
in the negotiations with Nicolini. Though Da Silva denies that he borrowed
money from Nicolini, he doesn’t dispute that he and Nicolini made some
agreement that led to Nicolini giving $300,000 to Leblon Construction. It
doesn’t matter that only Leblon Construction was a party to the Briarwood
subcontract—just because the general contractor didn’t insist on Da Silva’s
personal liability doesn’t mean that Nicolini didn’t do so either.
[73]      Nicolini insisted on some security for the 2019
loan. I believe his evidence that, eight months later, he still needed some
security, especially given Leblon Carpentry may have become unable to repay the
debt. It makes commercial sense that Nicolini would’ve required Da Silva to
personally guarantee the loan by being a party.
[74]      Given that Loureiro isn’t a party to the
loan and didn’t consent to the mortgage being used as security for the 2020
loan, I find that the mortgage is security only for the 2019 loan.
[75]      I accept that Nicolini intended for the
existing mortgage to be security for the 2020 loan. It was convenient to
continue the preexisting security to avoid legal costs, given the loans were
for the same amount, and since the mortgage was already registered on title.
But Nicolini didn’t take the steps necessary to properly encumber the matrimonial
home. Again, he’s an experienced and sophisticated businessperson, with access
to legal advice. He knew Loureiro and Da Silva were married, and the 2019
mortgage was on their matrimonial home. He needed to obtain Loureiro’s consent,
which he failed to do. As a result, the loan was, effectively, unsecured.
[76]      A spouse can’t encumber an interest in the
matrimonial home unless the other spouse “joins in the instrument or consents
to the transaction”. See Family Law Act, RSO 1990, c F.3, s 21(a). The
purpose of this law is to “protect the interests of spouses in matrimonial
property by prohibiting unilateral dealings that threaten to interfere with
their interest.” See Peerenboom v Peerenboom, 2020 ONCA 240, at para 24.
If the mortgagee knows the mortgagors are spouses, “extra precaution” must be
taken to ensure that both spouses signed the mortgage and received independent
legal advice. See Iori v Village Building Supplies (1977) Ltd., 2005
CanLII 23122, at paras 20-21, aff’d 2007 ONCA 156.
[77]      Though Loureiro hasn’t applied under
section 23 of the FLA to set aside the mortgage transaction, her defence
effectively seeks the same result. It wouldn’t have made sense for Loureiro to
start FLA proceedings against her husband once she learned about the
mortgage (and the parties were embroiled in these claims)—Nicolini is the
adverse party.
[78]      If Loureiro had done so, the transaction
would’ve been set aside. If a spouse encumbers an interest in a matrimonial
home without consent, the transaction may be set aside unless the person
holding the encumbrance at the time of the application acquired it for value,
in good faith and without notice, at the time of acquiring it or agreeing to
acquire it, that the property was a matrimonial home. See FLA, s 21(2). Again,
Nicolini knew that Da Silva and Loureiro were married, and he knew it was their
matrimonial home. See, e.g., Shouldice v Shouldice, 2016 ONSC
6203, at paras 147, 152. He should have taken extra precaution.
[79]      The parties make several arguments about
the Statute of Frauds, RSO 1990, c S.19, the doctrine of part
performance, the Bills of Exchange Act, RSC 1985, c B.4, and the parol
evidence rule. There’s no evidence of an oral agreement between Loureiro and
Sayward, either for the 2020 loan or amending the promissory note for the 2019
loan, so I don’t consider these submissions in detail.
[80]      As a result, I find that the mortgage is
security only for the 2019 loan.
[81]      Nicolini’s claim for breach of the 2020
loan agreement relies on three terms: (a) the interest rate to be paid is 18
percent; (b) he was guaranteed 1/2 of the estimated profits from Leblon
Construction’s work on the Briarwood project ($104,831.15) and (c) he was guaranteed
1/2 of the estimated profits on the Fifth Avenue project ($186,650.10).
[82]      Da Silva responds that: (a) the parties
didn’t agree to any interest rate; (b) Nicolini is only entitled to 1/3 of
Leblon Construction’s actual profits on the Briarwood project ($22,745.20); and
(c) Nicolini isn’t entitled to any profits from the Fifth Avenue Project
(Leblon Construction’s profits were $92,970.44).
[83]      Nicolini claims that the parties amended
the promissory note from the 2019 loan to apply to the 2020 loan, meaning that
the same interest rate applied.
[84]      I don’t agree. The promissory note is very
specific to the 2019 loan. Amending the note would require agreement to change
the due date, the borrowers (or get Loureiro’s consent), and the payment terms,
and delete the Facility Fee. Though Nicolini says he and Da Silva agreed to a
new due date, there’s no evidence about the parties agreeing to delete the
Facility Fee or changing the payment so that interest began accruing upon funds
being advanced instead of on the due date. And I’ve already found that Loureiro
didn’t know anything about the 2020 loan.
[85]      I’m also not prepared to find that the
parties orally agreed to an 18 percent interest rate. Again, there’s no
evidence about them doing so. Moreover, as I discuss below, it doesn’t make
commercial sense for Da Silva to agree to pay 18 percent interest and a
share of the projects’ profits.
[86]      In April 2019, when Nicolini made a
short-term loan to Da Silva that wasn’t tied to a specific project, it makes
sense that he would seek compensation in the form of interest for temporarily
parting with his funds. But, as I discuss below, I find that Nicolini’s
compensation for the 2020 loan was only the profit share.
[87]      Again, Nicolini argues that he’s guaranteed
1/2 of Da Silva’s estimated profits from the Briarwood project ($104,831.15). Da
Silva responds that Nicolini is only entitled to 1/3 of Leblon Construction’s
actual profits. These submissions raise two interrelated issues: (a) whether Da
Silva guaranteed the profit share based on his estimates at the time of the
loan; and (b) if not, the amount of the profit share.
[88]      I find that Nicolini and Da Silva agreed
that Leblon Construction would pay Nicolini 1/3 of its actual profits on the
Briarwood project as compensation for the 2020 loan.
[89]      Nicolini makes four arguments for finding
that Da Silva guaranteed a return of $104,831.15 from his profits on the Briarwood
project. First, Da Silva admits that he owes some profit share to Nicolini.
This argument isn’t probative of whether the profit share was based on Da
Silva’s estimated or actual profit or the amount.
[90]      Second, Nicolini says he wouldn’t have lent
$300,000 to Da Silva without a guaranteed return because of the size of the
loan, the expected rate of return, and the prior default. The loan was not
small. Given that the interest rate for the 2019 loan was 18 percent (although
after a three-month interest free period), it’s reasonable that Nicolini
expected a similar rate of return on his investment (around $13,500). Finally,
Da Silva’s default of the 2019 loan for almost five months created some
uncertainty for Nicolini.
[91]      That all said, Nicolini’s risk was
mitigated by the mortgage on Da Silva and Loureiro’s marital home. I
acknowledge that I’ve found that the mortgage didn’t apply to the 2020 loan. But
when Nicolini loaned the money, he thought he had valid security. And Sayward
is an investment business. There’s no evidence that Nicolini was lending
personal funds or faced any financial prejudice in making this loan. Further,
Nicolini and Da Silva were in business together on the Sorrento Retirement
project. Da Silva couldn’t abscond with Nicolini’s money given that they were
in regular contact on the job site.
[92]      Third, Nicolini argues that he negotiated a
guarantee because he had no ability to “independently verify” Leblon
Construction’s profit. I don’t accept this argument. It’s not that he couldn’t
verify the profit—he just didn’t negotiate any oversight terms with Da Silva.
[93]      Finally, Nicolini says Da Silva agreed to a
guaranteed profit share based on the spreadsheets created by Munro. I don’t
find Nicolini’s evidence about the spreadsheets to be credible or reliable. As
a result, I don’t rely on the spreadsheets as evidence of a guaranteed profit
share or for the amount of the profit share.
[94]      Nicolini’s evidence is that he received two
spreadsheets from Da Silva, which showed the estimated profits for each of the
two projects ($209,424.28 for Briarwood and $158,567.60 for Fifth Avenue).[1] He says that he and Munro found
mistakes in the spreadsheets, so Munro created her own versions. The versions
produced by Nicolini show the estimated profits to be higher ($209,662.29 for
Briarwood and $379,646.30 for Fifth Avenue). There are two versions of each of
Munro’s spreadsheet: one shows “Ray Share” being 1/2 (as shown above) and other
shows it being 1/3.[2]
[95]      Both of Munro’s spreadsheets include a row labelled
“Ray Share”:
[96]      Nicolini argues that Da Silva accepted Munro’s
spreadsheets, and thus guaranteed the return on Nicolini’s investment.
[97]      To begin, there’s nothing on Munro’s
spreadsheets that would suggest the parties agreed on a guaranteed profit
share. At it’s highest, the spreadsheets show Nicolini calculating his share if
he received either 1/2 or 1/3 of the estimated profits.
[98]      Nicolini’s argument about the spreadsheets
is bolstered by his oral evidence. But I don’t believe him on this point.
[99]      Nicolini’s position is that he asked
Wortzman to share in the deal, in which case each of Nicolini, Wortzman, and Da
Silva would receive 1/3 of the profits. But neither Wortzman or Da Silva were
interested. So Nicolini says that he and Da Silva agreed to a 50/50 share of
the guaranteed profits as reflected in these spreadsheets.
[100]       Wortzman testified that Nicolini asked him to join the
deal before Nicolini advanced the first tranche of funds under the loan
(i.e., before January 7, 2020). This timing makes sense: Nicolini would’ve asked
Wortzman to share in the deal before finalizing the agreement with Da Silva.
[101]                         
But that doesn’t
explain how or why “Ray Share” is on Munro’s spreadsheets. Those spreadsheets
were created in February 2020.
[102]       Munro testified that she created the spreadsheets for
Nicolini to “keep track of the invoices” because Nicolini wasn’t “getting paid
properly”. This evidence only makes sense if the spreadsheets were created
after Nicolini and Da Silva agreed on the terms of the loan, the money started
flowing, and Da Silva wasn’t repaying the loan. The metadata for the
spreadsheets relied on by Nicolini state they were created on January 30, 2020
(after the first advances). That metadata aligns with Munro’s evidence that she
created the spreadsheets after the loan was negotiated. At trial, Nicolini
reluctantly admitted that these spreadsheets were made in February 2020.
[103]       In that case, there would be no need to show Nicolini’s
share in a three-way deal because Wortzman had already rejected the proposal.
Unless Nicolini’s share was, in fact, 1/3.
[104]       Munro testified that Nicolini told her to put into the
spreadsheets the lines about “Ray Share”. Nicolini told her that he was “50
percent invested” in the projects but there was a “different understanding
before at the one-third.” Given that the spreadsheets were created after the
parties negotiated the terms of the loan, the only reasonable inference from
this evidence is that the “Ray Share” lines were added at Nicolini’s request
after the loan was advanced.
[105]       The spreadsheets contain invoice data up to June 11,
2020, which is consistent with them being used as tracking documents, and not
the basis for the parties’ oral agreement. The use of tracking sheets
contradicts Nicolini’s position that he was guaranteed a return. Nicolini’s
thesis is that Da Silva had to repay the $300,000 loan, 18 percent in interest,
and $104,712.14 from Leblon Construction’s profits regardless of whether he made
money or lost money on the Briarwood project. It doesn’t make sense that Munro
would meticulously track Leblon Construction’s revenues and costs (at the cost
of her time) if Nicolini was guaranteed a return, especially where the
investment was supposed to be secured by a mortgage on Da Silva and Loureiro’s
matrimonial home.
[106]       Nicolini also argues that anything less than a
guaranteed profit participation doesn’t make sense. I disagree. In fact,
Nicolini’s thesis doesn’t make sense. If Nicolini is right, Da Silva borrowed
$300,000 for three months, and agreed to repay the original advance, 18 percent
interest ($13,500), and over $290,000 in profits. That’s a 400 percent
return on Nicolini’s investment. Given that Nicolini loaned Da Silva the same
amount of money a few months earlier and accepted 18 percent interest, it
doesn’t make sense that he would demand 20x that amount even given Da Silva’s
history of default. Though perhaps Da Silva made this deal because, without it,
he couldn’t get a loan anywhere else, I find that hard to believe. Da Silva
could’ve found a lender that would’ve loaned him $300,000 on a short-term basis
at a non-criminal interest rate, which would still be better than the deal he
apparently negotiated with Nicolini.
[107]    
  Taking all of this evidence together, the
most reasonable explanation is:
[108]      
 Even if Da Silva’s
estimates were exaggerated (as they ultimately were), Nicolini had a lot of
room to do better than the 18 percent interest rate he’d used a few months
before. If Da Silva’s profits were only $41,000, Nicolini would still earn more
than he did under the 2019 loan.
[109]      
As a result, again, I
find that Nicolini and Da Silva agreed that Leblon Construction would pay Nicolini
1/3 of its profits on the Briarwood project as compensation for the 2020 loan.
[110]       The Fifth Avenue project raises some of the same
issues as the Briarwood project. Nicolini argues that he was guaranteed 1/2 of
the estimated profits on the Fifth Avenue project ($186,650.10). Da Silva
responds that Nicolini isn’t entitled to any profits from the Fifth Avenue
Project.
[111]       I find that Da Silva also agreed to pay 1/3 of actual
profits from the Fifth Avenue project. To begin, I find that there was no
agreement on a guaranteed profit for the Fifth Avenue project for the same
reasons that there was no guarantee for the Briarwood project.
[112]       Da Silva admits he gave Nicolini a spreadsheet showing
the anticipated profits for the Fifth Avenue project. He says it was for
Nicolini to use as a model for a different project that Da Silva was part of.
This explanation is plausible, though Nicolini’s experience in the construction
management business meant he must have had access to such models.
[113]       In March 2020, Munro asked Leblon Construction’s
Project Manager, Andressa Beccaro, for cash receipts and invoices for the Fifth
Avenue project. Beccaro provided the invoices, copying Da Silva on the email.
Beccaro’s trial evidence is that Nicolini wasn’t “involved in any way with the
Fifth Avenue project.” She says that Munro didn’t tell her why she was asking
for the cash receipts and invoices. But Beccaro doesn’t explain why she gave
the documents to Munro if Nicolini had nothing to do with the Fifth Avenue
project. For his part, Da Silva says the invoices were sent by mistake but he
doesn’t explain why he or Beccaro didn’t correct the misunderstanding. Da Silva
argues that he trusted Munro so didn’t question her.
[114]       To believe Da Silva’s theory, I have to believe that
Munro created a spreadsheet for Fifth Avenue even though Nicolini wasn’t
sharing in the project’s profits. And then I have to believe she meticulously
tracked the revenues and costs for over four months (with documents provided by
Da Silva and Beccaro) either because of some gross misunderstanding or because
Nicolini had decided, in February 2020, to exploit the Fifth Avenue spreadsheet.
That’s unreasonable.
[115]       The more reasonable explanation is that Da Silva
needed funds to complete these two projects, and Nicolini was prepared to lend
the funds provided he earned a healthy rate of return. Again, he thought the
loan was secured by a mortgage on Da Silva’s home, and he was working with Da
Silva on the Sorrento Retirement project so the risk of default was minimal.
[116]       Using Da Silva’s admittedly incorrect spreadsheet,
Nicolini would get over $50,000 in profit for a short-term investment. That
number would increase to almost $125,000 once the math was corrected. Again, Da
Silva could make only $40,000 on both projects and Nicolini would still
do better than he did under the 2019 loan.
[117]       Da Silva acknowledges that the loan hasn’t been repaid
in full. I find that Leblon Construction and Da Silva are liable to Sayward for
$203,735.20, which is the unpaid portion of the 2020 loan ($150,000) and
1/3 of the actual profits that Leblon Construction earned from the two projects
($22,745.20 + $30,990).
[118]       I also find that Leblon Construction and Da Silva are
liable for prejudgment interest at the statutory interest rate from the start
of the claim to the date of this judgment, and the statutory postjudgment
interest rate from the date of this judgment. As I discussed above, there was
no contractual interest rate.
[119]       I order and adjudge that Leblon Construction, Da
Silva, and Loureiro shall pay to Sayward the amount of $203,735.20 and
prejudgment interest at the statutory rate of 0.5 percent from the start of the
action to the date of this judgment.
[120]       Nicolini engaged Da Silva in September 2018 to do
drywall work on the Sorrento Retirement project. Like with the 2020 loan agreement,
Da Silva and Nicolini agree that there’s no written contract between them. They
now disagree about the terms of the contract.
[121]       There’s no dispute that the contract was between
InSite and Leblon Drywall. Da Silva alleges that King Station was also a party
to the contract. Though Nicolini is an officer or director of King Station,
there’s no evidence that he was negotiating the contract for both King Station
and InSite. The general contractor, not the owner, usually engages subtrades. I
can’t find that King Station was a party.
[122]       Oral agreements are legally binding contracts, just
like written agreements, if they meet all necessary requirements (e.g., price,
timing, and scope of work). See Hollowcore Inc. v Visocchi, 2014 ONSC
6802, at para 85, rev’d on other grounds, 2016 ONCA 600; Cleanol Integrated
Services Ltd. v Johnstone, 2015 ONSC 768, at para 34).
[123]       Da Silva argued that, if there’s no contract, Leblon
Drywall is entitled to recover on a quantum meruit basis if there was no
contract between the parties. There’s no dispute about the existence of an
oral contract—the only dispute is about the essential terms. As a result, I
don’t need to consider these submissions.
[124]       Da Silva’s position is that the contract value of
$2,234,510 plus HST. Nicolini’s position is that the contract value was $1,177,648
plus HST.
[125]       I prefer Nicolini’s evidence on this issue. As a
result, I find that the contract price was $1,330,742, inclusive of taxes ($1,177,648
+ 13 percent HST). Da Silva concedes that Leblon Drywall has been paid
$1,617,119.54—Nicolini never explained this overpayment, though it’s common for
there to be extras on a fixed-price contract.
[126]       Da Silva argues that he and Nicolini fixed the
contract price using the lowest comparative quote that they obtained for the
work. Eco Drywall Inc. quoted $1,787,608 plus HST for labour, materials, and
equipment. But it’s a non-union company. Da Silva says that he and Nicolini expected
that the project would become unionized, so they agreed to add a mark-up of 25
percent to account for union labour rates ($2,234,510 = $1,787,608 + 25
percent markup).
[127]       In contrast, Nicolini says he, Da Silva, and Wortzman
negotiated the price based on Da Silva’s estimated costs. In Spring 2018,
Nicolini and Da Silva met to discuss engaging Da Silva to supply drywall labour
for the project. Da Silva had a relationship with Palanki, an experienced
drywall foreperson. Da Silva proposed that Palanki would help price the job and
act as the site foreperson. Palanki prepared a “takeoff” (i.e., how much
material they would need to complete the job). The takeoff included estimated
union labour rates.
[128]       On July 9, 2018, Da Silva emailed the takeoff to
Nicolini, under the subject line “Prices”. Da Silva then met Nicolini and
Wortzman. Wortzman used the estimated labour rates and the material pricing
from the takeoff to calculate the contract price using a spreadsheet. On July
16, 2018, Wortzman emailed the spreadsheet to Da Silva, under the subject
“Retirement Residence Contract Value”, and wrote: “The attached is what we came
up with at our last meeting at Ray’s office.” This document has a price if
$1,681,742 (exclusive of taxes)—it includes materials, labour, and profit.
[129]       Nicolini says they all agreed on a price of $1,155,742
plus HST for the labour portion of the contract. Nicolini would supply the
materials. The price was increased to $1,177,648 plus HST in October 2018 when
the parties agreed to add framing doors in the scope of work.
[130]       Nicolini says that he got quotes from Eco Drywall to
cross-check Da Silva’s pricing. Again, Eco Drywall quoted the job in August
2018 for $1,787,608 plus HST. The quote is for: “a supplied and install lump
sum price as per drawings to furnish labour, materials and necessary
equipment”. On August 27, 2018, Pereira texted Nicolini: “Ray my metal frame
incluid [sic] labor is $446 k plus hst”. Eco Drywall provided a second quote
for $1,736,608 plus HST.
[131]       Both of Eco Drywall’s quotes (which I find included
non-union labour and materials) were higher than pricing calculated by Wortzman
using Palanki’s takeoff. As a result, Nicolini engaged Da Silva in September
2019.
[132]       Da Silva’s narrative doesn’t make sense. First,
there’s no evidence of Da Silva ever suggesting the price was $2,234,510 before
it registered a lien claim in September 2020. In contrast, there’s
documentation from Wortzman to Da Silva suggesting they all calculated a price
of $1,155,742 for labour.
[133]       Second, Da Silva’s evidence that Eco Drywall’s quote
didn’t include materials is contradicted by the quote itself, which expressly
states that it includes materials. It also contradicts Pereira’s August 2018
text message to Nicolini—the metal framing component of the quote included
materials, suggesting that the rest of the quote did too.
[134]       Third, Da Silva’s position is inconsistent. If the
parties had agreed to fix the price based on Eco Drywall’s quote, why did Nicolini
use Eco Drywall’s first, higher quote, not the second, lower quote? It doesn’t
make sense that Nicolini would pay even $50,000 more than he had to if that was
the parties’ agreement.
[135]       Fourth, Da Silva’s price is higher than Eco Drywall’s
quotes. It doesn’t make sense that Nicolini wouldn’t engage Eco Drywall in that
case. InSite isn’t a unionized workplace—it was using other non-union
subcontractors on the project. The only reason it used unionized workers is
because Leblon Construction is a unionized employer, and Da Silva assumed
(rightly) that Leblon Drywall would be treated as a common employer.
[136]       Finally, Nicolini and Wortzman’s evidence is
corroborated by the cost consultant’s reports. These reports repeatedly state
that the “Sub Drywall” budget is $1.85 million, which equals the total drywall
price of $1,681,742 plus a 10 percent markup ($168,260) for InSite.
[137]       The parties agree that the scope of the job was to
supply labour for drywall work, metal framing, and insulation. They disagree
over whether the scope included taping. Da Silva says it didn’t. Nicolini says
it did.
[138]       Da Silva’s only evidence in support of his position is
Palanki’s affidavit, where Palanki asserts that the scope of work didn’t
include taping because he didn’t include labour estimates in the takeoff.
[139]       In contrast, Nicolini relies on three sets of
documents. First, several of Leblon Drywall’s invoices include labour done by
tapers. Second,  the acknowledgment signed by Da Silva in May 2020 describes
the scope of work as “metal framing, boarding and taping labour performed by
Leblon….” To add, the takeoff has a reference to tape: “TAPE 13212”.
[140]       Based on this evidence, I find that the scope of work
included taping. Regardless of whether the takeoff included taping, Da Silva was
passing on taping costs to Nicolini and later acknowledged that the scope
included taping.
[141]       Da Silva argues that Leblon Drywall was, in effect, a
joint venture between him and Nicolini: Da Silva would be Leblon Drywall’s sole
officer and director, and Nicolini would personally receive 1/3 of the profits
from the drywall job (to the exclusion of InSite and King Station).
[142]       Other than Da Silva’s and Moore’s oral evidence,
there’s nothing else that supports this claim. I don’t believe either of them. Da
Silva’s argument rests on a convoluted theory that other drywallers were
charging much more than him for the job (which Moore introduced, for the first
time, in cross-examination with no supporting documents). So Nicolini engaged
Da Silva (who had no experience drywalling before), which had the twin benefits
of reducing King Station’s costs and giving Nicolini a kickback (in breach of
his legal duties to King Station). Though I have trouble with Nicolini’s evidence,
Da Silva and Moore’s evidence alone, which is also unreliable, isn’t enough to
prove this claim.
[143]       Da Silva argues that he wasn’t paid for work between
April 2020 and September 2020, when Nicolini stopped him from finishing the job
and fixing any deficiencies. He claims that he’s owed over $900,000 based on a
contract price of $2.5 million. Nicolini responds that he and Da Silva mutually
agreed to terminate the contract in April 2020. Thus, Nicolini argues that he
doesn’t owe anything to Da Silva even if the contract price is $2.5 million.
[144]       Given my finding that the final contract price was $1,330,742
and Da Silva has been paid $1,617,119.54, Leblon Drywall hasn’t suffered a
loss. As a result, Leblon Drywall’s claim for breach of contract is dismissed.
[145]       If I’m wrong about the price, I consider the parties’
arguments about the termination of the drywall contract. Nicolini argues that
the parties mutually agreed to end the drywall contract in April 2020, when the
job was 98 percent complete. He took over finishing the work and repairing any
deficiencies. Da Silva says that he was pressured into signing the termination
document to help Nicolini mislead the project’s lenders, the union, the federal
government, and King Station.
[146]       I prefer Nicolini’s evidence. As a result, I find that
the parties mutually terminated the contact and effectively released each other
of any claims.
[147]       Palanki left the project in January 2019. Nicolini
says that Da Silva’s work on the job declined after that. Nicolini states he
hired other trades to remedy the deficiencies and complete the job. By March
2020, he was losing money.
[148]    
  According to Nicolini, he and Da Silva met
in April 2020 to negotiate an oral termination agreement:
[149]       On May 7, 2020, Da Silva signed an “Acknowledgment of
All Amounts Due”. The Acknowledgment states that InSite paid $1,644,847 to
Leblon Drywall for “metal framing, boarding and taping labour”. According to
Nicolini, the purpose of this type of statement is to ensure there’s no dispute
with their subcontractors at the end of a contract.
[150]       After April 2020, Da Silva didn’t submit any further
timesheets or invoices to InSite for payment. He didn’t communicate to Nicolini
about the work until September 2020, including never asking for payment. Munro
told the union that Leblon Drywall wasn’t on site, and she didn’t submit any
more reports or union dues after April 2020.
[151]       Dourado and Daniel Martins completed the job. Dourado
provided timesheets for his and Martins’s hours to Munro, not Leblon Drywall.
InSite paid them directly. InSite issued T4 slips to the workers. InSite issued
ROEs to the workers, which showed they worked until June 2020.
[152]       Da Silva agrees that he signed the Acknowledgment, but
he says he was pressured to do so to help Nicolini mislead InSite’s lenders,
the union, and the federal government. Da Silva’s theory is that Nicolini used
the Acknowledgment to convince InSite’s lenders and the union that Leblon
Drywall walked off the job in April, which allowed InSite to use non-union
labour and get further advances from its banks and COVID funding from the
government.
[153]       As part of the scheme, Da Silva says he continued to
work on the job until September 2020, using Dourado, Martins, and other workers.
He submits that Dourado’s and Martins’s paperwork was part of the scheme. His
claim is that he didn’t get paid for any work they did between April 2020 and
September 2020.
[154]       Da Silva introduced invoices from Martins and Dourado
showing that they worked 800 hours on the job between May 2020 and August 2020
(the same period they were being paid by InSite). These invoices show an hourly
rate of $43.23. Dourado’s hourly rate between October 2019 and February 2020
was $29.62. That’s how much InSite paid him as well. Da Silva’s explanation is
that the invoices supported a cash “top-up” of $13.61 that he paid directly to
the workers.
[155]       I don’t find these invoices credible. The story
doesn’t make sense. Even if I accepted Da Silva’s narrative, why would he agree
to pay the workers a 47 percent premium? Why would Nicolini, who according to
Da Silva was sharing in Leblon Drywall’s profits, agree to reduce his profit
share by paying the workers a premium? Why would Da Silva risk breaching the
collective agreement by employing unionized workers indirectly? Da Silva also
didn’t explain whether he paid the workers’ full rate or just the top up after
InSite terminated their employment in June (presumably they wouldn’t work for
just the top-up). Finally, Dourado contradicted Da Silva—Dourado said that Da
Silva paid him in cash for the full amount of the invoices, not just a top up.
If Dourado is believed, he was paid twice for the same work.
[156]       Da Silva and Dourado also introduced evidence that
Dourado was working on the job on September 2, 2020. There’s a cheque to
Dourado from Leblon Drywall, dated September 2nd and photos of
Dourado on site on that day. I find that Da Silva and Dourado manufactured this
evidence to “bootstrap” Da Silva’s lien claim. Leblon Drywall preserved its
lien claim on September 18, 2020. Under section 31(3)(a) of the Construction
Lien Act, RSO 1990, c C.30, a contractor’s lien expires at the end of the
45-day period following the completion or abandonment of the contract.[4] The court will not permit a
claimant to bootstrap its claim by late attendance at a job site after its lien
rights have expired. See Urbacon Building Groups Corp. v Guelph (City),
2012 ONSC 81, at para 4.
[157]       Other than Dourado’s pictures from September 2nd,
there’s no evidence that Da Silva or his workers were on site any time in the
45 days before the lien was registered (or even after April 30th).
Dourado says Martins took the photos. It’s suspicious that the only photos
Martins ever took of Dourado were on the same day that Nicolini refused to
allow Leblon Drywall on the job. There’s no evidence of Martins being paid for
that day’s work. It’s suspicious that Da Silva paid Dourado by cheque for this
day’s wages but cash for all the other days. Dourado said his practice was to
sign in with the project foreperson but he didn’t do so this day. As a result,
I find that the lien was registered out of time—the drywall contracted was
terminated at least by May 7, 2020, meaning that the lien should’ve been preserved
by June.
[158]       For me to accept Da Silva’s evidence, I need to infer
that Nicolini was so motivated by greed that he, with Munro’s help, would
defraud everyone and anyone he came across. I can’t do that. First, Da Silva
has significant credibility issues.
[159]       Second, there’s no evidence—circumstantial or
direct—that otherwise supports this claim. In fact, common sense suggests
otherwise. Martins and Dourado were paid $44,382.23. Union dues were 25
percent. It doesn’t make sense that Nicolini would go to the lengths suggested
by Da Silva to defraud the union of only $11,000 on a multi-million dollar
project.
[160]       Finally, and most importantly, Da Silva’s theory turns
on him being a co-conspirator in Nicolini’s scheme. To accept Da Silva’s
evidence is to also accept that he went along with the plan. Otherwise, why
didn’t he continue submitting timesheets or invoices for the work Leblon
Drywall did? Why did he go along with Munro’s apparent lies to the union, which
put him, a unionized employer, at greater risk than InSite?
[161]       The whole story is unbelievable. The more reasonable
explanation is that, by May 2020, the business relationship between Nicolini
and Da Silva was over. Da Silva, by that point, had been paid more than the
contract price, so he was prepared to leave the job unfinished. Nicolini, who
had paid more than the contract price, needed to finish the job on budget so he
did it himself rather than use Da Silva. They agreed, like many sophisticated
businesspeople do, that a walk-away deal was better for both of them.
[162]       Any person who gives written notice of a lien, (a) for
an amount which the person knows or ought to know is grossly in excess of the
amount which the person is owed; or (b) where the person knows or ought to know
that the person does not have a lien, is liable to any person who suffers
damages as a result. See Construction Lien Act, s 35(1).[5]
[163]       Nicolini submits that the lien was grossly exaggerated
given the contract price, the paid invoices, and the lack of evidence about any
work after April 30th. Da Silva argues that Leblon Drywall has a
lien for the contract price, as defined under sections 14(1) and 1(1) of the Construction
Lien Act. That said, he doesn’t make any alternative submissions where, as I’ve
found here, the contract price is less than the paid invoices.
[164]       Nicolini hasn’t advanced a claim for damages from the
allegedly exaggerated lien. I appreciate that King Station was required to pay
into court a good deal of money, but Nicolini hasn’t articulated his losses as
a result of doing so. Thus, I need not decide this issue.
[165]       If the contractor significantly fails to complete the
work or delivers poor-quality work, the owner may have grounds to terminate the
contract. In such cases, the owner can claim damages, which typically involve
the cost of fixing the issues or completing the unfinished work. See D &
M Steel Ltd. v 51 Construction Ltd., 2018 ONSC 2171, at para 51. The
framework for analysis is as follows:
[166]       The claimant should be put in the same monetary
position they would’ve been if the contract had been fulfilled. The injured party may have their claim to damages limited,
reduced, or denied if they fail to mitigate their injuries. See Safe
Step Building Treatments Inc. v 1382680 Ontario Inc., 2004 CanLII 35054, at
paras 58-60, 81 (Sup Ct).
[167]      
Nicolini alleges that InSite
incurred $1,211,219 (inclusive of taxes) in costs to remedy Leblon Drywall’s
deficiencies. Da Silva responds that Nicolini hasn’t proved his claim and, in
any event, InSite failed to mitigate its losses.
[168]       Nicolini’s claim is fully answered by InSite’s pleading
that the parties “agreed that neither party would make a claim against the
other for payment under the [drywall] Contract or damages arising therefrom.”
Nicolini affirmed his position in his evidence about the termination agreement:
[169]       Given my finding that the parties mutually terminated
the drywall contract on these terms, Nicolini can’t pursue Da Silva for any
deficiency-related costs. Nicolini also makes passing reference to an
overpayment of $342,259. At trial, Nicolini agreed that this amount was covered
by the termination agreement: “Part of the agreement, the termination
agreement, was we weren’t going to seek this and he was going to just terminate
and away you go. That was the deal.”
[170]       Alternatively, I would have found that Nicolini failed
to mitigate InSite’s injuries by refusing to allow Da Silva to correct the work
or remedy the alleged defects. Nicolini’s argument about the deficiencies is
confusing. He says that he hired other workers to fix the deficiencies while Da
Silva was onsite. That doesn’t make any sense—give the fixed price contract,
why didn’t Nicolini ask Da Silva to correct the deficiencies at Leblon
Drywall’s cost? To the extent that Nicolini discovered deficiencies after Da
Silva left the job, Da Silva should have been permitted to remedy the defects.
Nicolini’s failure to allow him to do so disentitled him to damages. See D
& M Steel Ltd., at para 52.
[171]       In Nicolini’s closing address, he submits that Da
Silva and his companies oppressed Sayward. There’s no claim for oppression in
Sayward’s action against Da Silva, Loureiro, and Leblon Carpentry. In any
event, I’ve found that Da Silva and Leblon Carpentry are liable to Sayward in
contract. As a result, it’s unnecessary for me to consider Sayward’s oppression
claim because the remedy it seeks (repayment of the loans) is duplicative. See J.S.M.
Corporation (Ontario) Ltd. v The Brick Furniture Warehouse Ltd., 2008 ONCA
183, at para 58.
[172]       InSite, in contrast, did sue Da Silva, Leblon Drywall,
and Leblon Carpentry for oppression. But InSite isn’t a “complainant” under the
Business Corporations Act, RSO 1990, c. B.16. It’s not a creditor (never
mind a securityholder, director, or officer) of Leblon Drywall. First, I’ve
already found that Nicolini released InSite’s claims for damages arising from
the deficiencies and the costs overruns. Second, the oppression remedy wasn’t
intended to be a “substitute for an ordinary right of action in contract….” See
J.S.M. Corporation (Ontario) Ltd., at paras 65-66. To prove that InSite
was a creditor, Nicolini had to show “unlawful and internal corporate
manoeuvres” by Leblon Drywall that it couldn’t protect itself against. It
hasn’t done so. So it can’t claim oppression.
[173]       Again, Nicolini’s closing address claims that Da Silva
and his companies conspired against Sayward and InSite. Sayward didn’t claim
conspiracy in its action; InSite did. It claims $1.2 million in damages, which
is comprised of its costs of the completing the “scope of work and remedy
deficiencies” and the “overpayment by InSite to Leblon”.
[174]    
  The tort of conspiracy to injure is
recognized where:
[175]       Nicolini argues that Da Silva registered the lien
against the project to retaliate against him for trying to enforce the loans.
I’m not persuaded that Da Silva’s “predominant purpose” was to injure InSite. By
August 2020, both men were on a war footing. Da Silva had been exited from the
Sorrento Retirement project. Nicolini believed that he’d overpaid Da Silva, and
there was still more work to do. Da Silva owed Nicolini a small amount on the
2019 loan. The 2020 loan was still unpaid. Nicolini fired the first salvo by
demanding that Da Silva pay him over $500,000 or risk losing his house. Da
Silva fired back by making a lien claim. The totality of the evidence leads me
to conclude that both men took these steps to try to leverage a resolution. In
that way, they were trying to cause pain to each other. Nicolini says as much:
“I believe that Da Silva intentionally retaliated against me for
demanding payment of the Sayward Loans by registering the Claim for Lien”
(emphasis added).
[176]       But I’m not persuaded that Da Silva used the lien
claim to specifically injure InSite. I say that, in part, because Nicolini has
introduced no evidence about InSite’s injuries other than King Station had to
pay a lot of money into court. That’s inconvenient for King Station but it’s
not injurious to InSite.
[177]       Also, InSite’s claimed remedy is for the deficiencies
and overruns and the difference between the contract price and Leblon Drywall’s
invoices. These claims were released.
[178]       For most of two years, Da Silva and Nicolini had the
makings of a fruitful business relationship. But, as sometimes happens, their
relationship broke down. Rather than resolving matters in a businesslike
manner, they went to war, resulting in multiple claims and counterclaims, and
dragging spouses, business partners, and former employees into their battle.
They used extreme litigation tactics to try to get leverage. Their dispute was
exacerbated by failing to write down the essential terms of their deals. And
all for what? As I have found, Da Silva owes around $240,000 to Nicolini, much
of which was conceded long ago.
[179]    
  Keeping that in mind, the parties will
engage in meaningful discussions and negotiations respecting the costs of this
trial. If they can’t resolve costs, any party seeking costs will serve, file,
and upload to Case Centre costs submissions (2500 words maximum), any relevant
offers to settle, and their bill of costs by January 17, 2025, 4pm. The other
party’s responding submissions (2500 words maximum) will be served, filed, and
uploaded to Case Centre by January 31, 2025, 4pm.