[1]                  
The applicant taxpayers ask the court to
exercise its equitable jurisdiction to rectify two corporate director’s resolutions
by which the corporate applicants declared dividends in the common stock in
June 2016. The applicants contend that the corporate director’s resolutions and
the related dividends declared and paid in June 2016 do not reflect their common
intention to utilize ss. 83(2) of the Income Tax Act, RSC 1985, c 1 (5th
Supp), as it was then in force[1]
(the “ITA”), to flow tax-free capital
dividends from Earswick Holdings Ltd. (“Earswick”) to its ultimate beneficial
shareholder, Thomas J. Feeney.
[2]                  
The respondent Attorney General of Canada
(“Canada”) opposes the relief sought. Canada submits that the applicants have
not demonstrated entitlement to rectification, or, in the alternative, that the
court ought to exercise its discretion against granting equitable relief in
light of the availability of adequate legal remedies.
[3]                  
There are few facts in dispute in this
application.[2]
[4]                  
Earswick is a private Ontario corporation that operated
as a wholesale hardware distribution company in Toronto, Ontario. Earswick’s
sole shareholder is 532069 Ontario Ltd. (“532”).
[5]                  
Thomas J. Feeney is the sole shareholder,
officer, and director of 532, and the sole director and officer of Earswick.
[6]                  
In the summer of 2015, Mr. Feeney received an offer
to purchase the assets of Earswick.
[7]                  
Mr. Feeney negotiated the terms of an asset purchase
agreement, by which the assets of Earswick were sold for $1,700,000. Of the
purchase price, $1,483,362 was allocated to Earswick’s goodwill. The sale
transaction was completed on May 9, 2016.
[8]                  
Following completion of the sale, Mr. Feeney asked
his accountant, Geoff Crewe, for an estimate of how much money would be left of
the sale proceeds after tax. Mr. Crewe advised Mr. Feeney that, because
goodwill was ‘eligible capital property,’ a part of the sale proceeds could be paid
out to him as tax-free capital dividends.
[9]                  
Capital dividends are special dividends that a
private corporation may pay to its Canadian-resident shareholders on a tax-free
basis. No part of a capital dividend is included in computing the shareholder’s
income.
[10]              
Capital dividends are paid from a private
corporation’s capital dividend account (“CDA”), a special but notional
corporate tax account that keeps track of various tax-free surpluses
accumulated by a Canadian private corporation over time: ITA, s. 89(1). Amounts
in a corporation’s CDA commonly include:
[11]              
The balance of a corporation’s CDA is eligible
to be paid out to qualified shareholders on a tax-free basis because
accumulated capital dividends are viewed as a return of capital.
[12]              
For a corporation to pay a capital dividend it must
declare the dividend and then make an election to designate the entire amount
of the dividend to be a capital divided. The election is made by the
corporation by completing and filing the required Form T2054 Election for a
Capital Dividend Under Subsection 83(2) with Canada Revenue Agency.
[13]              
A corporation’s CDA is calculated in accordance
with ss. 14, 83 and 89 of the ITA on a cumulative basis, for a particular
period. Absent special circumstances not relevant to this application, the
tax-free portion of capital gains realized by the corporation on the sale of
eligible capital property (including goodwill) are added to the CDA on the last
day of the fiscal year in which the sale is made. Practically speaking, this
means that a corporation cannot normally pay capital dividends arising from the
sale of eligible capital property (including goodwill) until the first day of
the fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the eligible capital
property was sold.
[14]              
Earswick and 532 share a fiscal year end of
December 31.
[15]              
Using the transaction figures provided to him by
Mr. Feeney, Mr. Crewe prepared a handwritten note setting out the rough cash
flows arising from the sale of the Earswick assets. At the bottom of Mr.
Crewe’s handwritten note is a chart showing anticipated payments of $740,000
first from Earswick to 532, and then from 532 to ‘Tom’ (being Mr. Feeney). To
the right of the chart is the date “June 17”.
[16]              
Mr. Feeney approved of Mr. Crewe’s distribution
plan.
[17]              
Mr. Crewe’s formal calculations arrived at a
capital dividend figure of $741,680.00, being the 50% non-taxable portion of the
proceeds of sale of Earswick’s goodwill.
[18]              
On May 30, 2016, Mr. Crewe sent Mr. Feeney a
letter enclosing the Director’s Resolution, Form T2054 Election for a
Capital Dividend Under Subsection 83(2) and supporting documentation for
each of Earswick and 532. The letter provided Mr. Feeney with the following directions:
[19]              
The Earswick Director’s Resolution dated May 27,
2016, prepared by Mr. Crewe, read as follows:
[20]              
The Director’s Resolution for 532 was identical
to the Earswick Director’s Resolution, except that the 532 dividend was
declared and made payable on June 20, 2016.
[21]              
Mr. Feeney signed the Director’s Resolutions and
Form T2054 Election for a Capital Dividend Under Subsection 83(2) for
each of Earswick and 532 and sent them to Canada Revenue Agency.
[22]              
On June 15, 2016, Earswick paid a dividend to 532
in the amount of $741,860.
[23]              
On June 24, 2016, 532 paid its sole shareholder,
Mr. Feeney, a dividend in the amount of $741,860.
[24]              
Canada Revenue Agency determined that the dividends
paid by Earswick to 532 and from 532 to Mr. Feeney were not tax-free capital dividends
because neither Earswick nor 532 had any amount available in its CDA when the
dividends were declared in June 2016. This is because the tax-free proceeds of
sale of Earswick’s goodwill had not been added to Earswick’s CDA when the
dividends were declared, and they would not be available until after Earswick’s
December 31, 2016 year end. Canada Revenue Agency took the position that the
dividends were excess capital dividends subject to Part III tax in the amount
of $445,008.
[25]              
Mr. Crewe candidly admits that, when he prepared
the Director’s Resolutions and Form T2054 Election for a Capital Dividend
Under Subsection 83(2) for Earswick and 532, he mistakenly believed that Earswick
could pay out a capital dividend any time following the completion of the asset
sale on May 9, 2016.
[26]              
Mr. Crewe says that he recognized his error in
July 2016 while reading a technical tax publication. Mr. Crewe wrote a letter
dated July 8, 2016 to Canada Revenue Agency asking to “withdraw/rescind/cancel”
the Form T2054 Election for a Capital Dividend Under Subsection 83(2) because
the CDA balances in Earswick and 532 did not permit them to pay capital
dividends on a tax-free basis. Mr. Crewe’s letter dated July 8, 2016 reads, in
part:
[27]              
The applicants seek rectification of the
Director’s Resolutions and related dividends to correct what they say is a case
of “right amount, wrong date.”  In particular, they seek:
[28]              
Rectification is an equitable remedy that permits
the correction of instruments that, by mistake, do not accurately reflect the
intention of the parties to the instrument. The Supreme Court of Canada
described the remedy of rectification in Canada (Attorney General) v.
Fairmont Hotels Inc., [2016] 2 S.C.R. 720, [2016] S.C.J. No. 56, 2016 SCC
56 (“Fairmont”) at para. 12 as follows:
[29]              
In Fairmont, the Supreme Court of Canada affirmed
that, where the error of the instrument results from a common mistake,
rectification of an agreement is available upon the court being satisfied on a
balance of probabilities that:
[30]              
In cases of unilateral mistake, the test in Fairmont
requires the applicant to further satisfy “demanding preconditions” that:
[31]              
The purpose of rectification is to restore the
parties to their original bargain, not to rectify a belatedly recognized error
of judgment by one party or the other, nor stand in substitute for due
diligence: Performance Industries Ltd. v. Sylvan Lake Golf & Tennis Club
Ltd., 2002 SCC 19, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 678 (“Performance Industries”),
para. 31. For this reason, “mere unilateral mistake alone is not sufficient to
support rectification”:  Performance Industries, para. 38. It is not, as
Justice Brown noted in Fairmont, at para. 39, “equity’s version of a
mulligan”.
[32]              
Even where the parties seeking rectification can
satisfy the Fairmont test, the remedy remains in the discretion of the
court. Relief may be denied where, for example, there is an adequate legal remedy
available to the parties, or where the conduct of the party seeking relief is
such that fairness does not demand intervention:  Performance Industries,
para. 66; Canson Enterprises Ltd. v. Boughton & Co., 1991 CanLII 52
(SCC), [1991] 3 S.C.R. 534, at p. 589; Canada Life Insurance Company of
Canada v. Canada (Attorney General), 2018 ONCA 562 (CanLII) (“Canada
Life”), para. 92.
[33]              
For the reasons below, I find that this is not
an appropriate case for rectification.
[34]              
The applicants are not entitled to rectification
under the Fairmont test. The applicants have failed to prove, on cogent
and compelling evidence, an antecedent plan to defer Earswick’s payment of the corporate
dividends until after the end of the corporate fiscal year rather than in June
2016 as recorded in the Director’s Resolutions.
[35]              
If I am wrong, and the applicants satisfy the Fairmont
test, I would nevertheless decline to exercise my equitable jurisdiction to
grant relief in the circumstances of this case due to the lack of diligence on
the part of the applicants and because there are adequate legal remedies
available to them.
[36]              
The first element of the Fairmont
analysis requires the court to determine the nature and particularity of the
terms which the taxpayer intended to record in the instrument sought to be
rectified:  Fairmont, para. 1. Recently, in 2484234 Ontario Inc. v.
Hanley Park Developments Inc., 2020 ONCA 273 (CanLII) (“Hanley Park”),
Justice Zarnett, writing for the court, expanded on the inquiry at the first
stage of the Fairmont analysis at para. 41:
[37]              
The applicants assert that they had a definite,
ascertainable, and continuing plan to utilize capital dividends declared under
ss. 83(2) of the ITA to achieve the specific fiscal objective of maximizing the
available after tax-proceeds of sale in Mr. Feeney’s hands.
[38]              
I do not agree. While the applicants had a general
plan to make use of ss. 83(2) of the ITA to declare capital dividends and
maximize after-tax proceeds in Mr. Feeney’s hands, the evidence is that the
applicants always intended to declare the dividends in June 2016. Mr. Crewe believed
that the tax-free proceeds of sale of Earswick’s goodwill were added to the CDA
immediately after the asset sale closed on May 9, 2016. Mr. Crewe’s handwritten
planning notes, which formed the basis for Mr. Feeney’s instructions, show the
distributions on “June 17”. Mr. Crewe advised Canada Revenue Agency in his
correspondence dated July 8, 2016 that the applicants intended to pay
the dividends on June 15 and June 20.
[39]              
Mr. Feeney’s subjective intention to receive
tax-free capital dividends in the amount of $741,680 is immaterial to
interpreting the antecedent agreement:  Hanley Park, paras. 53-54; Reddick
v. Robinson, 2024 ONCA 116 (CanLII) at para. 17.
[40]              
I find that the parties’ agreement to declare
dividends in June is accurately reflected in the Director’s Resolutions and
Form T2054 Election for a Capital Dividend Under Subsection 83(2). Accordingly,
there Director’s Resolutions signed by Mr. Feeney are consistent with the
antecedent agreement, and there is no error to rectify.
[41]              
In arriving at this conclusion, I have carefully
considered the clear statements of the Supreme Court in Fairmont that
taxpayers should be taxed based on what they actually agreed to do and did, and
not what they could have done or later wish they had done:  Fairmont,
para. 23-24. I have also carefully considered the direction of the Court of
Appeal in Canada Life at para. 69:
[42]              
The applicants rely on Pyxis Real Estate v
Attorney General of Canada, 2024 ONSC 2039, in which Koehnen J. granted
rectification. The tax plan in Pyxis involved paying tax-free capital
dividends up the corporate chain from “Old Pyxis” to Edgefund Equities to
Edgecombe to 2523183 to David Jubb. When the plan was initiated, Old Pyxis had
a capital dividend account of approximately $45 million. It declared a valid,
tax-free capital dividend of $1.4 million. However, unbeknownst to the
accountant, Edgecombe had a capital dividend account deficit. When Edgecombe
received its tax-free capital dividend of $1.4 million, its CDA balance was reduced
by the existing deficit. When Edgecombe paid the planned capital dividend of
$1.4 million up the corporate chain, to 2523183, CRA determined that
Edgecombe’s dividend payment exceeded its CDA and assessed Part III tax.  The
taxpayer sought rectification of the director’s resolutions to gross up the
dividend payment by the amount to Edgecombe’s deficit.
[43]              
CRA opposed rectification on the basis that terms
of the accountant’s written memorandum did not contain any mistake about the
amount of the dividend payment. CRA took the position that rectification was
not available to correct the accountant’s mistaken assumption about Edgecombe’s
CDA balance prior to the transactions. The accountant did not verify
Edgecombe’s CDA balance despite being specifically directed to do so.
[44]              
Koehnen J. granted rectification, finding that the
accountant’s written memorandum set out definite and ascertainable terms of an
agreement to pay tax-free capital dividends through the corporate chain. Old
Pyxis had $45 million available in its CDA when the transactions were initiated,
and it was immaterial to Old Pyxis whether it declared $1.4 million or a
grossed up number to address the deficit in Edgecombe’s CDA.
[45]              
Pyxis is
distinguishable on its facts. I infer from Koehnen J.’s reasons that he did not
consider the deficit in Edgecombe’s CDA to be a material term of the planned
transactions.  In contrast, I have found the timing of Earswick’s initial dividend
payment to be a material and settled term of the antecedent plan, and that the Director’s
Resolution accurately records the prior agreement to pay dividends in June
2016.
[46]              
In conclusion, I find that the applicants are
seeking an impermissible form of retroactive tax planning to achieve the tax
outcomes that they intended but were prevented by Mr. Crewe’s error in
judgment. The applicants have not satisfied the first element of the Fairmont
test and the application must be dismissed.
[47]              
If I am wrong, and the applicants meet the Fairmont
test applicable to cases of unilateral mistake, I would exercise my discretion
against granting rectification due to the applicant’s lack of due diligence and
because there are adequate legal remedies available.
[48]              
Rectification is not an
appropriate substitute for due diligence at the time a document is
signed: Fairmont at para. 13.
[49]              
I recognize that due diligence on the part of a
plaintiff is not a condition precedent to rectification, and a party’s
negligence is never an absolute bar to equitable relief. Most cases of
rectification involve a degree of carelessness on the part of the petitioner
party:  Performance Industries, para. 61. However, the conduct of the
applicant is relevant to the exercise of the court’s discretion in equity:  Performance
Industries, para. 36, 66.
[50]              
Mr. Crewe has candidly accepted responsibility
for his failure to review the requirements of ss. 83(2) of the ITA before
advising his clients. Mr. Crewe recognized his error after reviewing a
technical tax bulletin a few weeks after the Director’s Resolutions were
signed.  Had Mr. Crewe done his reading before advising his client and preparing
the Director’s Resolutions, the mistake would likely have been avoided. Mr.
Crewe made no inquiry of Canada Revenue Agency to confirm the balance of Earswick’s
CDA before preparing the Director’s Resolutions and related elections.
[51]              
Mr. Feeney takes no responsibility at all. Mr.
Feeney was the sole director and officer of Earswick and 532. He took no steps
to understand how capital dividends worked, despite his responsibilities of
office and his substantial personal interest in the transactions. While I
appreciate that Mr. Feeney was relying on his accountant’s professional advice,
Mr. Feeney apparently failed to review the Form T2054 Election for a Capital
Dividend Under Subsection 83(2) before signing them for each of
Earswick and 532.  The Form T2054 Election read, in part:
[52]              
The evidence is that neither Mr. Feeney nor Mr.
Crewe exercised even the most basic diligence in planning or implementing what ought
to have been a straight-forward tax election. The resulting tax liability is a
result of the want of care of Mr. Crewe, and of Mr. Feeney acting in his capacity
as director of the corporate applicants. Nothing in the circumstances of this
case evokes unconscionability or the kind of unfairness that invites equity to
intervene.
[53]              
In any event, I would decline to exercise my discretion
to grant equitable relief because there are adequate legal remedies available
to the applicants to address the unexpected tax consequences of the dividend
payments. In particular:
[54]              
The application is dismissed.
[55]              
The parties are urged to resolve the matter of
costs. If they are unable to do so, the respondent shall provide its costs
submissions, not exceeding five pages exclusive of its bill of costs and
caselaw, by not later than January 5, 2025.  The applicant shall provide its costs
submissions, also not to exceed five pages exclusive of its bill of costs and
caselaw, by not later than January 15, 2025. There shall be no reply costs
submissions without leave of the court in advance.
[56]              
I would like to thank counsel for their helpful
written and oral submissions in this matter.