[1]             
The appellant appealed his convictions by
Mathias J. in the OCJ.  The appeal is hereby dismissed for the following
reasons.
[2]             
Royce Bilusak was charged with seven counts
across two Informations.  The first Information contained five counts alleging
that he:
[3]             
The second Information contained two counts
alleging that he:
[4]             
The charges arose out of a dispute with a
neighbour, the complainant, Pierrette Levesque.  The Appellant resided at 662
Moffat Avenue in North Bay, Ontario, from 1989.  The complainant lived next
door at 678 Moffat Avenue from 1979.  Others involved were the Corkishes who
lived across the street at 669 Moffat Avenue from 1976.
[5]             
The Appellant was found guilty of all five
counts from the first Information and count 2 from the second one.  The trial
judge imposed a two-year period of probation.  In addition to the statutory
terms, he was required to report to a probation officer within two days and
thereafter as directed, to cooperate with the probation officer, not to have
contact or communication with Pierrette Levesque or Carol Corkish, to attend,
complete and provide proof thereof of all assessments, treatment, counselling
or rehabilitative programs directed by the probation officer, and not to attend
669 and 678 Moffat Avenue, North Bay.  He was also to make restitution to
Pierrette Leveque of $500 by February 1, 2023.
[6]             
The Appellant appealed his convictions.  The
grounds of the appeal stated in the Notice of Appeal were:
[7]             
The relief sought was an acquittal or, in the
alternative, a mistrial.
[8]             
 The leading case on the standard of review on appeal
is Housen v. Nikolaisen.[1]
It confirmed that an appeal is not a re-trial of a case.  Rather, the issue on
appeal is whether the trial judge made an appealable error, the test for which
depends on the type of issue in question.[2] 
“(T)he standard of review on a question of law is that of correctness”.[3] “The standard of review
for findings of fact is that such findings are not to be reversed unless it can
be established that the trial judge made a palpable and overriding error”.[4]  This is an error that is
plainly seen.[5] 
A high degree of deference is to be given to a trial judge’s findings of fact. [6]
[9]             
For the appeal hearing, the Appellant filed and
sought to rely on a three-page point form document organized by count (the
written summary) saying that a medical condition affected his ability to
speak.  The Crown said that that was fine.  Fortunately, the Appellant was able
to make oral submissions.  In those, he referred to this document and to his
factum.  All three sources have been taken into account in considering his
appeal.
[10]         
At the outset of the hearing, the Crown conceded
the appeal of the convictions on two counts of theft and two counts of mischief
related to the bricks and to the fence.  These are counts one through four of the
five count Information.  This was not a concession that the appeal of those
counts had any merit.  The Crown opined that it could have proceeded on the
merits.  Crown counsel observed that the defence was one of colour of right
based on a survey that had been filed at the trial, but that the Appellant had
not brought any expert evidence (e.g., from a surveyor) to explain what the
survey meant.  The Crown acknowledged that, to a lay person, the survey could
have given rise to a colour of right argument.  Given the lapse of time since
the convictions and the amount of resources already spent on the matter, the
Crown did not want to be asking the court to send the case back to the Ontario
Court of Justice to receive expert evidence on that issue.  It submitted that,
in the interests of efficiency and the proper use of judicial resources, it
would not be in the public interest to send the case back to the OCJ on the colour
of right issue.
[11]         
That left count five on the first Information,
being a count of mischief for preventing the complainant from enjoying her property,
and count two on the two-count Information, being a count of breach of
undertaking by going to 678 Moffat Avenue.
[12]         
The appellant’s contention that there was bias
or the appearance thereof on the part of the trial judge was not well founded.
[13]         
At the outset of the trial, the Appellant was
arraigned.  The seventh count alleged that he had failed to comply with the
condition of his undertaking that he not go to 669 or 678 Moffat Avenue, North
Bay.  Hearing that, the trial judge then had the Crown list its witnesses. 
There were two civilian witnesses other than the complainant, Carol Corkish and
her son, James Corkish.  The trial judge said that she had “lived at 677 Moffat
Avenue for a period of time” and had the Corkishes brought into the courtroom
to see if she was familiar with them.  She then stated that she did not know
either of them.  They did not say otherwise.
[14]         
When the trial judge confirmed to the Appellant
that she was not familiar with those two people, he responded that he “wouldn’t
object anyway”.
[15]         
The trial judge had wondered in particular if
the witnesses were ones that she had shared a driveway with and had conversed
with.  In that context, she explained to the Appellant that it would be
incorrect for her to hear the trial of the people she had spoken to.  The trial
judge was clearly trying to explain the concept of a conflict of interest to
the Appellant in a brief fashion.  She repeated that the witnesses were not the
people she had had conversation with.
[16]         
Then, in court on March 30, 2022, after being
found guilty of most counts, the Appellant moved for a mistrial on the grounds
that the trial judge had lived next door to Carol Corkish and directly opposite
to the complainant, Pierrette Levesque, and that Bill Corkish had shovelled the
trial judge’s shared driveway so that she was indebted to him.
[17]         
The trial judge referred back to the start of
the trial when she had addressed this issue on the record and said that the
witnesses were not familiar to her.  She added that she had never spoken with
Ms. Levesque, the complainant.
[18]         
I see nothing in the Appellant’s evidence nor in
his cross-examination at trial of the complainant or of Carol Corkish or James
Corkish with respect to their acquaintance with the trial judge. There is no
evidence at all on this point, let alone any that contradicts the trial judge’s
statement that she was not familiar with the Corkishes.
[19]         
Nonetheless, the Appellant attributed the trial
judge’s findings against him to bias and went as far as to accuse her of lying
about it.  As previously noted, the trial judge was careful at the outset of
the trial to address even the appearance of bias, and the Appellant appeared
then to accept that.  He raised it again only after the trial judge’s decision
went against him.  The trial judge responded with reference to the remarks
about this issue that she had made at the start of the trial.  That she did not
recall by memory and use the exact same words on March 30, 2022, the day she
gave her judgment, as she had on April 6, 2021, when the trial started, is
hardly evidence of her lying, as the Appellant contends.  A fair reading of
what she said on both occasions does not support the allegation that she was
lying.  However, the Appellant, when given the opportunity, was not even open
to the suggestion that any perceived inaccuracy might have been the result of
her being mistaken or forgetting.  This is but one example of the extreme
nature of some of the Appellant’s comments.
[20]         
The trial judge found the Appellant guilty of
count two of the second Information. That count alleged that he, on or about
September 3, 2020, had breached a condition of the undertaking that he not go
to 678 Moffat Avenue.  That was the complainant’s residence.  Proof of this
beyond a reasonable doubt was found in Exhibit 9 filed at the trial, being a
photograph of the Appellant in the complainant’s driveway, sweeping it.  James
Corkish had testified for the Crown that he took that photo.
[21]         
In finding so, the trial judge acknowledged the Appellant’s
argument that the part of the driveway that the photo showed him standing on
was city property, not the complainant’s.  This argument was based on a
survey.  However, the court found that there was nothing to identify where the
city property boundary was.
[22]         
The Appellant submitted that the trial judge had
erred in finding as a fact that he was on the complainant’s property in the
face of evidence that he was in fact on a portion of her driveway that was on
city property.
[23]         
The Crown’s first submission in response was
that the Appellant’s argument was based on evidence that was not before the
court.  That would be the evidence of a surveyor, such as the Crown had spoken
of at the outset of the hearing.
[24]         
In addition, the Crown submitted a second
point.  That was, even if the Appellant’s position that he was standing in a
portion of the complainant’s driveway that was city property was accepted, it
was still caught by the Undertaking which said that the Appellant was not to go
to “places which are related to” the complainant.  Consequently, he submitted,
there was no basis for overturning that conviction.
[25]         
The Undertaking stated that the Appellant “must
not go to (places which are related to the person(s) mentioned in the
conditions set out in paragraph (d)) 678 Moffat Avenue, North Bay, Ontario, and
669 Moffat Avenue, North Bay, Ontario, except in accordance with the following
conditions: Save and except through counsel.”
[26]         
Paragraph (d) had identified the complainant,
Pierrette Levesque.  The undertaking did not define 678 Moffat Avenue in terms
of a survey, and it did not say that the Appellant was not to go to the
complainant’s property at that address.  Nor would it be expected to.
[27]         
The Appellant might well be correct that the
road allowance, which is city property, not the homeowner’s, does extend
somewhat past the part of that allowance that is developed and travelled as a
public road, as the trial judge acknowledged.  However, I think that that
misses the point.
[28]         
The Undertaking’s wording has been noted above. 
If the wording is to be read as broadly as the Crown suggests, that would
completely negate the Appellant’s argument.  He was clearly on a place “related
to”.
[29]         
Even if the Undertaking is to be read more
narrowly, such that the Appellant was not to go to 678 Moffat Avenue, what does
that mean?  I would find that such wording was intended and would reasonably be
understood to encompass the complainant’s home and yards at 678 Moffat, without
any reference to surveys or city road allowances.  To find otherwise would
create an absurd situation in which technicality would triumph over common
sense and enforceability.  I would take judicial notice that, when property at
a municipal address is spoken of in circumstances such as those the Undertaking
was made in, the property is thought of as extending to points such as the
sidewalk or travelled portion of the road, as the case might be, not just to
the limit of the road allowance.
[30]         
It is clear that even the Appellant thought this
way as, in submissions at the appeal hearing, he said at various times that, “…
I am on (the complainant’s) driveway, but I am on the city portion”, “always
staying on my property, or, in this case, the city portion of my property”, and
“…Exhibit 10 shows me on the city portion of my driveway”.
[31]         
The Appellant relies to an extent on the
complainant’s acknowledgement that some of the area in front of her residence
was technically city property.  She had indicated that about the part of the
hedge that the Appellant had removed, which removal had resulted in a mischief
charge.  Her awareness that the hedge extended onto the city road allowance
appears to have been the basis for her indicating, according to the trial
judge’s reasons, that the hedge was ultimately not on her property, although
she had maintained it.  However, the trial judge noted with respect to this
count that there was no expert evidence to interpret the survey as to where the
boundary was.  Therefore, she found the complainant not guilty of that mischief
charge for removing the part of the hedge, not because of the Appellant’s
argument about the survey and boundary but, because the complainant had said
the hedge was not hers.  Consequently, I find that the acquittal on that count
does not, as the Appellant suggests, support his submission that he should be
acquitted of the fail to comply charge based on the survey.
[32]         
Early in the appeal hearing, the Appellant had
submitted that the trial judge had (quite correctly) emphasized that the onus
of proof rests with the Crown.  Therefore, the Appellant surmised, he did not
have to prove anything.  If he thinks that he should be acquitted of the fail
to comply charge because the Crown did not have a surveyor testify as to where
the property line was, with respect, that argument fails.  Once the evidence
showed that the Appellant was in the complainant’s driveway, without evidence
to the contrary, that would be sufficient to prove the charge beyond a
reasonable doubt.
[33]         
In view of the above, I do not find that the
trial judge erred as the Appellant alleged.
[34]         
I will deal quickly with the Appellant’s
submission, made in reply, that the Crown had no jurisdiction to bring the two
counts on the second Information because, he contended, they involve city
property and the Crown was representing Pierrette Levesque, not the city.  This
mistakes who the Crown represents, which is society at large, not an individual
complainant.  The police lay charges which the Crown carries on the prosecution
of, and the court decides the result based on the application of the law to the
facts found.
[35]         
I will repeat for convenience that count five on
the first Information charged that, between August 1, 2019, and August 19,
2020, the Appellant, without legal justification or excuse and without colour
of right, committed mischief by obstructing, interrupting or interfering with
the lawful use, enjoyment or operation of Pierrette Levesque’s property.
[36]         
The trial judge began her reasons by summarizing
the charges, the evidence, and the submissions of the Crown and the Appellant
before reviewing the evidence and stating her finding for each count.  In
finding the Appellant guilty of this mischief count, she summarized that she
had heard in evidence instances of how things had deteriorated between the
complainant and the Appellant such that the complainant felt that she could no
longer stay out in her yard.  The situation had created stress.  The
complainant had not been able to enjoy her property.  The court found that
there were many instances where the complainant’s enjoyment of her property was
obstructed and interfered with by the Appellant in that period.
[37]         
The Appellant submitted that the trial judge
erred in stating her reasons by referring to a “snow story” that preceded and
was outside of the timeframe of the mischief charge.
[38]         
This can be dealt with quickly.  As noted above,
the trial judge began her reasons by outlining the situation, including the
“snow story”, before dealing with the individual counts.  This gave context and
background.  However, when dealing with this specific charge, she began by
explicitly stating what the timeframe of it was.  There is nothing to show that
she took into account an event that fell outside the relevant timeframe in
finding the Appellant guilty of that charge.  This submission is, therefore,
rejected.
[39]         
The Appellant confirmed that his argument was
that the trial judge erred in her factual findings.  His submissions certainly
showed that he disagreed with those findings.  However, that does not make them
wrong.  I find that he has not demonstrated that the trial judge made a
palpable and overriding error in her findings of fact in convicting the
Appellant on this count.
[40]         
The Appellant submitted that the trial judge
misquoted and misapplied the (W.(D.) test.  The trial judge explicitly set out
the three commonly referred to parts of the (W.(D.) test.  Clearly, she was
aware of it.  The Appellant took issue with some of the words that she used in
setting out the test.  I note in this regard that it has been held that the
test is not some “magical incantation”.  It is the idea behind it, not the
exact wording, that is important.
[41]      Code J.’s often cited explanation of (W.(D.) in R. v. Thomas [7]
is of assistance.  He stated:
[42]         
It was open to the trial judge to accept the
Crown’s evidence and reject the Appellant’s, as the Appellant complains that
she did.
[43]         
The Appellant gave no oral submissions on the
topic of sufficiency of reasons, nor was it a discreet topic within his
factum.  However, it was touched on in his three-page written summary, so I
will address it.  Under this heading, there is only a quote from R. v.
Sheppard[8]
about the importance of sufficient reasons.  There is nothing further to
explain how this applies to this case.  Having said that, the Appellant
questioned the trial judge’s conduct and findings throughout his oral and
written submissions.  It appears not to be a situation of insufficient reasons
but, rather, one where no amount of explanation would satisfy the Appellant
that his conduct supported the convictions.
[44]         
The Appellant’s factum included excessive
punishment as a ground for appeal.  The Appellant claimed that two years of
probation and $500 in restitution, which the trial judge imposed as a global
sentence, was excessive punishment and clearly revealed bias against him. 
However, no authority was provided to support this submission.  In the
circumstances, there is nothing to persuade me that it is excessive.