[1]             
The Central West Region of the Ontario Superior
Court of Justice is at the epicentre of international migration into and out of
Canada. The A. Grenville and William Davis Courthouse, where this application
was heard, is about twenty kilometers west of Toronto Pearson International
Airport and serves a highly diverse immigrant population. Within this
community, it is common for parents to have ties to different countries, and
for their children to have family, cultural, and social connections that cut
across national boundaries. When a child’s diverse connections are nurtured, they
are more likely to grow up with a grounded sense of their identity. However, in
the face of marital breakdown and fluid migration, international child
abduction risks severing the child’s connection to their community, with long-term
negative impacts on their family relationships and their identity.
[2]             
This case revolves around five-year-old C.
(she/her) (“Child”). Her parents come from different countries and fundamentally
disagree on where she should be raised. The Applicant/Father, Shaun Ford Schweitzer
(he/him), is Canadian but wants to return to Brazil to
pursue economic opportunities there; he wants to take the Child with him. The Respondent/Mother,
Thais Quintino Da Silva (she/her), is Brazilian
and is living with her intimate partner in Canada; she wants to raise the Child
here. The Child has connections to both Brazil and Canada. She has spent most
of her life in Brazil but has been living in Canada and attending school here
since September 2023.
[3]             
The Father now brings this Hague Application asking
for an order that the Child be immediately returned to Brazil because the
Mother has wrongfully retained her in Canada contrary to the Convention on
the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction (“Hague Convention”).[1]
As
contracting parties to the Hague Convention, Canada and Brazil[2] have agreed
to give the child’s best interests paramountcy when determining parenting
matters, to respect the parenting rights granted in their respective
jurisdictions, and to require the prompt return of children wrongfully removed
from or retained[3]
in their respective jurisdictions.[4]
[4]             
I refuse to order the Child’s return to Brazil
because she was habitually resident in Canada immediately before the Mother’s
alleged abduction. In arriving at my conclusion, I interpret the Hague
Convention consistently with Canada’s international human rights
obligations under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of
the Child (“Child Rights Convention”).[5]
In my view, interpreting the Hague Convention consistently with
children’s rights is a practical antidote to the problems that arise when
courts are tasked with determining the child’s habitual residence on an
evidentiary record framed entirely by the parents.
[5]             
I
propose that courts stay laser focused on the child’s links and circumstances
in each country on the date of the alleged abduction when determining “habitual
residence.” Probative evidence of the child’s links and circumstances will
include evidence about: the child’s family history, the parent’s intentions
when migrating, the child’s cultural identity, the child’s education and social
connections, the child’s age and stage of development, and the child’s views
and preferences. On the other hand, a parent’s current preferences or parenting
abilities will generally not be relevant to determining the focal point of the
child’s life immediately before the alleged abduction. At a procedural level,
staying laser focused on the child also means affording children participatory
rights in Hague proceedings.
[6]             
The Mother is Brazilian and came to Canada as
an international student in February 2019. She met the Father and started living
with him in March, and soon learned she was pregnant. The parents were married
in Toronto on June 26, 2019, and had the Child five months later, on November
2, 2019. The Child was born in Canada, is a dual Canadian and Brazilian
citizen, and carries a Canadian passport.
[7]             
Before the parents separated, the family
travelled back and forth between Canada and Brazil regularly. When the Child
was one month old, the Mother returned with her to Brazil, while the Father
worked in the United States. During this time, the Mother was the Child’s
primary caregiver. When the Child was ten months old, the Mother and Child
reunited with the Father in Canada; he was visiting his family in Ontario at
the time. When the Child was 13 months old, on December 13, 2020, the family
returned to Brazil, where they remained throughout the pandemic.
[8]             
In 2021, when the Child was around two years
old, and while the family was still in Brazil, the parents separated. After
separation, the Child lived primarily with the Mother and her extended maternal
family in the maternal grandfather’s home. She attended a private,
English-language daycare. The Father remained in Brazil but did not have a
Brazilian work permit. At one point, the Father was evicted from his rental
housing and moved into the maternal grandfather’s home temporarily.
[9]             
After separating, the parents were in constant
conflict over parenting and financial issues. In February 2022, the Mother
brought an application before the Brazilian courts for custody and child
support.
[10]          
In May 2023, the Mother travelled with the
Child within Brazil without notifying the Father of her whereabouts. When he
did not see the Child for a few days, the Father involved the Canadian and Brazilian
Central Authorities to seek return of the Child to Canada pursuant to the Hague
Convention; he alleged that the Mother was wrongfully retaining the Child
in Brazil. He did not file a Hague application before the Brazilian courts,
presumably because the Mother returned with the Child a few days later.
[11]          
In August 2023, the Mother approached the
Father to settle the Brazilian litigation. On August 16, 2023, the parties
signed a Custody, Support, and Visitation Agreement, that was converted into a
final Brazilian court order on November 1, 2023 (“Brazilian Order”). The
Brazilian Order states that, ““The parties hereby agree that custody will be
exercised on a shared basis, from the moment the parties are on Canadian soil…”
It also states that:
[12]          
On September 3, 2023, the Brazilian authorities
issued an arrest warrant against the Father because he had not been paying
child support since June 2022. The warrant was vacated after he paid off the
arrears.
[13]          
Later in September 2023, when the Child was
just over three years old, the parents travelled separately to Canada. The Mother
paid for the flights, while the Father travelled with the Child. They bought
one-way tickets.
[14]          
Upon arriving in Canada, the parents immediately
enrolled the Child in school in Mississauga. The Mother and Child started
living with the Mother’s new intimate partner, Mr. Justin Derry, in his home in
Mississauga, while the Father moved into rental housing in the same
neighbourhood. Pursuant to the Brazilian Order, the Mother had primary
parenting time with the Child, while the Father had the Child on weekends. This
parenting schedule remains in place.
[15]          
In December 2023, the Father says that he asked
the Mother for her consent to return to Brazil with the Child at the end of
August 2024. The Mother refused. She brought an emergency ex parte motion
and Justice McGee made a non-removal order effective December 28, 2023.
[16]          
On April 22, 2024, the Mother brought an application
seeking sole decision-making authority, primary parenting time, and child
support (“Parenting Application”). The Father refused to attorn to the
jurisdiction of Canada and did not file an Answer; instead, he argued that
Brazil had jurisdiction because the Brazilian Order addressed identical issues.
On August 7, 2024, Justice André held that Canada had jurisdiction over the
Parenting Application. The Father did not appeal Justice André’s Jurisdiction
Decision and did not file an Answer to the Parenting Application.
[17]          
On September 5, 2024, the Father filed this
application seeking return of the child to Brazil pursuant to the Hague
Convention (“Hague Application”).
[6]
The Father says that the Mother has been wrongfully retaining the Child in
Canada since obtaining the ex-parte non-removal order on December 28,
2023. He says that the Child must be returned to Brazil immediately because the
parents always intended to return to Brazil permanently in September 2024. The
Father says that the Mother is wrongfully retaining the Child in Canada to further
her application to stay in the country.
[18]          
The
Mother says that I should dismiss the Hague Application. She says it is an
abuse of process because the Jurisdiction Decision addresses identical issues.
On the substance, she denies wrongfully retaining the Child in Canada and
resists any return of the Child to Brazil. She says the parties always intended
to stay in Canada, and that the Child is now settled here. She worries that the
Father is using the Child to gain legal status in Brazil, and that he cannot
provide for her there. While the Mother admits that she has no legal status in
Canada, she says that she is in a committed relationship, is working cash jobs,
and taking steps to regularize her status here.
[19]          
Because it is uncontroversial that both parents
have custodial rights over the Child in both Canada and Brazil, the only
questions that I must answer are:
[20]          
I would answer these questions as follows:
[21]          
At the hearing on the merits on November 15, I
refused the Father’s adjournment request and dismissed the Hague Application.
These are my reasons for doing so.
[22]          
In
1980, the Hague Convention offered a practical, private international
law solution to the emerging problem of children being taken across national
borders, and jurisdictional boundaries making it difficult for them to be
returned home. A decade later, the U.N. General Assembly adopted the Child
Rights Convention, ushering in a new era where children are recognized as
individual rights-holders rather than an extension of their parents.
[23]          
The
Child Rights Conventions starts from the presumption that child
abduction is harmful to children and requires States Parties to take measures
to combat it, including signing multi-lateral treaties.[7] The Child
Rights Convention also protects children’s substantive rights at the intersection
of international migration and family law, for example, by granting children
the right to maintain relationships with their parents across jurisdictional
boundaries,[8]
and the right to maintain their cultural identity.[9] The Child
Rights Convention also affords children the procedural right to
express their views and have them given due weight on all matters affecting
their interests.[10]
Together, these
rights implicitly recognize that a child is uniquely vulnerable and powerless
in the face of one parent’s unilateral decision to migrate from the child’s
habitual residence. Afterall, children generally cannot travel freely across national
boundaries themselves.
[24]          
With
the benefit of hindsight, the Hague Convention focuses on parents’
procedural and “custodial” rights to the near complete exclusion of children’s rights.
While the Hague Convention and Child Rights
Convention both reference the child’s best interests as paramount, they are
fundamentally different in how they conceive of the harm that flows from international
child abduction, and the importance they place on children’s substantive and procedural
rights.[11]
Moreover, while “habitual residence” is meant to be a child-focused
analysis, there are practical limitations to making this a reality. The
parent-centric approach persists because Hague applications proceed in a
summary fashion under strict timelines, because parents frame the issues in dispute,
because the child’s best interests are not relevant, and because there is no
meaningful opportunity to consider the child’s views and preferences. In the
end, the trier of fact is often tasked with making an extraordinary decision on
a distorted evidentiary record that effectively excludes the child from the
analysis.[12]
[25]          
Still,
in the face of ever-increasing global migration, the Hague Convention
and Child Rights Convention work hand in glove to protect children’s
rights.[13] While the Child
Rights Convention grants children the right to maintain regular contact
with each parent across jurisdictional boundaries, it is the Hague
Convention that practically deters one parent from unilaterally depriving
the child of that right through child abduction, and promotes resolving
parenting issues in the jurisdiction that is most central to the child’s
identity.[14]
[26]          
Because
the Hague Convention is one of the ways
Canada implements its binding human rights obligations to children, it follows
that the convention should be interpreted consistently with the Child Rights
Convention. I
propose that courts stay laser focused on the child’s links and circumstances
in each country when determining their “habitual residence” on the date of the
alleged abduction. Probative evidence of the child’s links and circumstances
will include evidence about: the child’s family history, the parent’s
intentions when migrating, the child’s cultural identity, the child’s education
and social connections, the child’s age and stage of development, and the
child’s views and preferences. On the other hand, a parent’s current
preferences or parenting abilities will generally not be relevant.
[27]          
At
a procedural level, staying laser focused on the child when determining
habitual residence means affording children participatory rights in
Hague proceedings.  While the Father took the
position that the Child in this case was too young to provide her views and
preferences, I disagree. Even pre-schoolers like the Child can answer simple
questions about their connections to family, friends, and community in both
countries. These are the kinds of questions children are asked everyday by
their parents, teachers, and community members. The Committee on the Rights of
the Child, which monitors compliance with the Child Rights Convention,
has discouraged States Parties from imposing arbitrary age limits on the right
of the child to be heard.[15]
[28]          
The Family Law Rules require that I
dispose of child abduction applications within six weeks.[16]
The Father’s Hague Application was filed on September 5 and I decided the
matter at the hearing on November 15, which amounts to a delay of ten weeks
from application to disposition. While the parties did not raise concerns about
the four-week delay beyond the presumptive ceiling, I offer some reasons
because I am mindful of my obligation under the Hague Convention to
proceed expeditiously.[17]
[29]          
The one-month delay was in the interests of
justice because it was necessary to put the Mother on notice and allow her to
participate in the hearing.[18]
The Mother had a clear interest in the outcome
of the Hague Application because of her outstanding Parenting Application.
[30]          
 While expediency is an
overarching principle when dealing with Hague applications, in this case
natural justice required a short delay to ensure that I could decide the Hague
Application based on a proper record and with the Mother’s full participation. I
would also add that, in appropriate cases, a court might be justified in
delaying the adjudication of a Hague Application for a few weeks to allow for
the child’s participation, for example, through appointment of the Office of
the Children’s Lawyer (“OCL”). Given the summary nature of the proceedings and
the expedited timelines, even a short letter from the
OCL would be helpful.
[31]          
At the outset of the
hearing on November 15, the Father asked for a week’s adjournment to review the
Mother’s immigration application, and to cross-examine her on it in court. The
Father says that the Mother’s immigration application is relevant to her
credibility and to ascertaining her intentions when she moved to Canada. The
Mother opposed adjourning the matter, arguing that the immigration application
was irrelevant.
[32]          
After hearing
submissions from both parties, I refused to grant the adjournment because it
was not in the interests of justice to further delay the hearing on the merits.
First, I would note that the Father’s proposal to return in one week for
cross-examination and a hearing was unrealistic given the lawyers’ respective
court schedules, and the overwhelming demand on the court’s resources. The
delay would have more likely approached a month.
[33]          
Second, while I recognize
that the Mother disclosed the immigration application to the Father the day
before the hearing, the Father’s own conduct contributed to her delay. The
Father filed his affidavit late, and both counsels conducted cross-examinations
one week after the court-ordered deadline. The Mother gave an undertaking at
her cross-examination to disclose the immigration application. Had the parties
followed the court-ordered timeline for cross-examinations, I am confident that
the immigration application would have been disclosed earlier.
[34]          
Third, I
have a duty to resolve Hague applications quickly and efficiently because
delays breach Canada’s international obligations, impose hardship on the child,
and frustrate appellate review.[19]
Because child abduction is harmful
to the child, time is of the essence. Even a few weeks delay can be significant
when it comes to repairing family and cultural ties severed through
international child abduction, this is especially the case where the Child is
young. If the Child is to be returned to another jurisdiction, justice favours
doing so quickly. This is precisely why Hague
applications proceed on a summary
record.
[35]          
Fourth, the Mother’s
immigration status application is only marginally relevant to my determination
of the Child’s habitual residence. While the application shows that the Mother
only attempted to regularize her status in Canada as of May 2024, the contents
of the application are less relevant because they are unlikely to shed further
light on the child’s links and circumstances in each jurisdiction. Finally,
quite apart from the contents of the immigration application, I am satisfied
that I have sufficient information to fairly decide the matter on the merits.
The record before me includes two affidavits from each party, the Brazilian
Order, text messages exchanged between the parties, photographs of the child,
school records, and cross-examination transcripts.
[36]          
The
Mother says that I should dismiss the Hague Application because it is an abuse
of process. She says that Justice André already found that the Child’s habitual
residence is Canada. She says that the Father is now trying to relitigate that
issue under the auspices of this application. She says that there is nothing
stopping the Father from seeking to relocate with the Child to Brazil in the
Parenting Application, such that this proceeding is duplicative.
[37]          
Justice André held that Canada had jurisdiction
over the Parenting Application. While he agreed that the Brazilian courts would
usually retain jurisdiction over the parenting dispute because of the Brazilian
Order, Justice André exercised his limited discretion to “supersede” the
Brazilian Order pursuant to s. 42(1) of the CLRA. In particular, he found that
there had been a material change in circumstances affecting the Child’s best
interests because the Mother was now in a committed relationship in Canada with
Mr. Derry. Justice André further found that the Child was “habitually resident”
in Ontario when the Mother commenced her Parenting Application on April 22,
2024, because she had been attending school here since September 2023.
[38]          
The
task before me is entirely different than the one before Justice André. His
sole task was to decide whether Brazil or Canada had jurisdiction over the
Parenting Application; my sole task is to decide whether the Child should be
returned to Brazil. In deciding that Canada had jurisdiction, Justice
André found that the Child was habitually resident in Canada as of the date of
the Parenting Application (i.e., March 2024). In contrast, I must consider
whether the Child was habitually resident in Canada as of the date of the
Mother’s alleged wrongful retention (i.e., August 2024). There is no risk of
inconsistent findings of fact between the Jurisdiction Decision and the Hague
Application because the relevant dates for determining “habitual residence” are
five months apart.
[39]          
Moreover,
the fact that the Father can seek to relocate with the Child to Brazil in the
Parenting Application does not make the Hague Application abusive. The only
order I can make on this Hague Application is return of the Child to Brazil.
That is because a Hague application is focused on preventing the harmful practice
of child abduction and defers determination of the child’s best interests to
the jurisdiction of the child’s habitual residence.[20] In practice,
Hague applications are backward looking, with a focus on the date of the
alleged abduction and the child’s habitual residence as of that date. That is
why a Hague application must be heard before a parenting application.[21] Parenting applications,
on the other hand, allow the court to make wide-ranging orders so long as such
orders are in the best interests of the child. This is because, in practice, parenting
applications involve a wide-ranging inquiry into the child’s current
circumstances and best interests, with a focus on what the child’s life should
look like in the future. In this regard, the Parenting Application and Hague
Application are not duplicative.
[40]          
Finally,
the Mother argues that the Hague application is vexatious because the Father
has a history of abusing child abduction procedures. The Father has previously
alleged that the Mother abducted the Child from Canada to Brazil. In May 2023,
the Mother traveled with the Child from Rio De Janeiro to Sao Paolo without
informing the Father, though her extended family knew her whereabouts. After a
few days, the Father contacted the Canadian and Brazilian Central Authorities
and alleged that the Mother had abducted the Child from Canada to Brazil. He
also created a website called “Save C.” seeking the public’s assistance with
finding her. Under cross-examination, the Father admitted that he knew that the
Child was not habitually resident in Canada in May 2023, but explained that he misled
the Central Authorities because he was more concerned about ascertaining the
Child’s whereabouts than being truthful. He never ended up filing a Hague
application with the Brazilian courts because the Mother returned with the
Child.
[41]          
Overall,
while I am not willing to dismiss the Hague Application as vexatious, I am
prepared to make a negative finding about the Father’s credibility because of
his shifting and inconsistent positions on the Child’s habitual residence, and
his willingness to lie to authorities when it suits his purposes and to get his
way.
[42]          
To
be entitled to a remedy under the Hague Convention, the Father must
establish that: (1) he has custody rights to the Child; (2) the Mother
wrongfully retained the Child in Canada; and (3) the Child was habitually
resident in Brazil immediately prior to the breach of his custody rights.
If these conditions are met, I am generally required to order the Child’s
return to their habitual residence.
[43]          
Hague
applications proceed in two steps: (1) determine the habitual
residence of the child; and (2) if the child is found to be habitually resident
in the state of the applicant, then determine if one of the exceptions to
ordering return applies.[22]
In terms
of determining “habitual residence,” again I am to take a two-step approach: (1)
determine the date of the alleged abduction; and (2) consider where the child
was habitually resident immediately before the date of the alleged abduction.[23]
[44]          
The
date of the alleged wrongful retention is August 2024 because that was the date
that the Father says that he meant to return with the Child to Brazil
permanently. The Father requested the Mother’s consent to travel back to Brazil
on December 9, 2023, but admits that he did not intend to travel back to Brazil
until August 2024. Despite the Mother obtaining a non-removal order on December
23, 2023, I refuse to find that this was the date of the alleged wrongful
removal. The Father did not intend to raise the Child in Brazil as of that
date, and he did not file this Hague application until September 2024. The
Father effectively admits that the Mother was not wrongfully retaining the
Child in Canada in December 2023.
[45]          
I
must determine “habitual residence” through a hybrid approach that considers
“all relevant circumstances,” including the parents’ intentions and the child’s
interests.[24]
I must determine the “focal point” of the child’s family and social environment
immediately prior to the alleged abduction, which requires an analysis of the
child’s links and circumstances in both countries and the circumstances of
their migration.[25]
I must consider the "entirety" of the child's situation to determine
their habitual residence.[26]
I may consider factors such as: nationality, duration and conditions of stay,
age of the child, parental intention, and so on.[27] Evidence about
the child’s views and preferences is admissible if it is relevant to assessing
the child’s links or circumstances in each jurisdiction.[28] That being
said, evidence that goes solely to the child’s best interests will not be
relevant because Hague proceedings start from the assumption that prompt return
of the child to their habitual residence is in their best interests, and
because a summary proceeding is not the proper forum for an individualized and detailed
assessment of the child’s overall circumstances and needs.
[46]          
Because
the child is the focus of the analysis, it makes sense to frame the inquiry
around the child’s links and circumstances in both countries on the date of the
alleged abduction. Probative evidence of the child’s links and circumstances in
each country will include information about:
[47]          
While
these factors may overlap with the statutory factors that Canadians court must
consider when deciding parenting, they do not mirror the “best interests of the
child” factors.[38] 
For example, I refuse to consider evidence about each parent’s plan for the
Child’s future care, their respective abilities to care for the Child, or their
inability to communicate and cooperate. This type of evidence tells me little
about the Child’s links and circumstances in each country on the date of the
alleged abduction: it is much more focused on parenting abilities into the
future.
[48]          
Parental
preferences are not generally relevant to determining the child’s links and
circumstances in each country. Such evidence can distract from the narrow task
at hand, bearing in mind the reality that each parent will have their own
motivations for abducting a child across international boundaries, whether
relational, economic, or otherwise. Here, for example, despite the parties’
extensive cross-examination on these topics, I find it largely irrelevant that
the Mother wishes to stay in Canada to pursue her relationship with Mr. Derry,
while the Father wishes to move to Brazil to pursue economic opportunities. I
also find it irrelevant that each parent’s immigration status in their
preferred country largely depends on who has primary parenting time with the
Child.
[49]          
Suffice
it to say, I must stay laser focused on the Child’s links and circumstances to
each jurisdiction. Bearing in mind the relevant factors, I now assess the
Child’s connection to Canada and Brazil as of August 2024. The Child was born
in Canada, is a Canadian and Brazilian national, has a Canadian passport, has
an Ontario Health Insurance Plan card, and speaks English. The Mother is
Brazilian, can speak English and Portuguese, and does not have immigration
status in Canada. The Father is Canadian, cannot speak Portuguese, and does not
have immigration status in Brazil.
[50]          
As
of August 2024, the Child was bonded with both of her parents because they were
both living in Canada and regularly caring for her here. They had an
established parenting routine here. The Child was also bonded with Mr. Derry
and his extended family in Canada. The Child also has contact with the paternal
grandmother, aunt, and cousin through her Mother. The Child had completed
junior kindergarten at a public school in Mississauga and was enrolled in
senior kindergarten. She had a regular school routine and a bond with her
schoolmates. She participated in extracurricular activities with both her
parents.
[51]          
As
of August 2024, the Child had not visited Brazil since immigrating to Canada
eleven months earlier. While the Child was likely quite bonded to her maternal
family because she lived in a multi-generational household with them in Brazil,
her only remaining connection to Brazil was phone or video calls with her
maternal relatives facilitated by the Mother. Given her age, I doubt she has
strong memories or friendships from her daycare in Brazil.
[52]          
The
record is conflicting in terms of the parent’s intentions regarding child’s
circumstances in the country. The Father says that the parents decided in
December 2020 that the Child would be raised in Brazil, that they travelled to
Canada in September 2023 so that the Child would have some “Canadian experience,”
and that they intended to return to Brazil permanently in September 2024. While
there are no written documents confirming these intentions, the Father points
out that he has never bought property in Canada, that he can obtain permanent
residency in Brazil based on family reunification with the Child, and that he
plans to pursue business opportunities there.
[53]          
The
Mother says that, despite separating while in Brazil, the parents made a joint
decision in August 2023 to move to Canada permanently and raise the Child here.
She points out that parties both travelled here in September 2023 on one-way
tickets, enrolled the Child in school here, and arranged their lives so that
they could abide by the parenting schedule outlined in the Brazil Order. This
included the Mother moving into Mr. Derry’s home and the Father renting housing
close to the Child’s school. The Mother says that nothing in the Brazil Order
establishes a timeline or framework for returning to Brazil. The Mother says
that she is currently regularizing her immigration status in Canada and is
working cash jobs to make ends meet.
[54]          
On
the date of migration, September 2023, I find that the parents both intended to
change the Child’s habitual residence from Brazil to Canada. I specifically
reject the Father’s evidence that the parents’ intention was always to return
to Brazil permanently in August 2024. As I discussed above, the Father was not
a credible witness, and I am reluctant to rely on his evidence without some
corroboration. Here, none of the documents that he proffered support his claim
about the parties’ intention was to return to Brazil. Indeed, given that both
parties were represented by lawyers at the time that the Brazil Order was negotiated,
I would have excepted it to reference a return to Brazil if that had been the
parties’ shared intention. Instead, the Brazil Order is ambiguous. In my view,
the parties never came to an agreement as to whether they would remain in
Canada or go back to Brazil. On the record, I find that the parties intended to
change the Child’s habitual residence to Canada when they immigrated, but that
they left open the possibility of returning to Brazil at some point. This is
consistent with Justice André’s finding that there was a material change of
circumstances after the Mother decided that she wanted to stay in Canada
permanently to pursue the relationship with Mr. Derry—thereby foreclosing any
possible return to Brazil.
[55]          
Unfortunately,
there was no direct evidence before me about the Child’s views and preferences,
despite my request that the parties to make submissions on them. In the absence
of such evidence, it is especially important for courts to consider the child’s
age and stage of development as part of the assessment of her connections to
each jurisdiction. In this regard, children ages three to five have a growing
sense of independence, and social networks that include other children,
teachers, and families, while finding security in their routines and requiring adult
guidance, supervision, and support.[39]
Preschoolers are concrete in their thinking and egocentric, often believing
that they are the “centre of the universe.”[40]
[56]          
Overall,
as of August 2024, I find that the “focal point” of the Child’s life was Canada.
First, the parents intended to change the Child’s habitual residence to Canada
when they migrated here in September 2023. Second, the Child was cared for by
both her parents in Canada, was going to school in Canada, had friends in
Canada, and is a Canadian citizen with a Canadian passport and OHIP card. Finally,
despite her experiences as an infant and toddler in Brazil, the Child had very
few remaining connections in Brazil as of August 2024, especially since
preschoolers view their connections through the lens of their day-to-day
routines, their experience with different caregivers, and their daily social
connections in the immediate community.
[57]          
The
Father has not satisfied me that the Child’s habitual residence as of the date
of the alleged wrongful retention in September 2024 was Brazil. As a result,
his Hague Application must fail.
[58]          
Given
my finding that the Child was not wrongfully retaining in Canada, I do not need
to consider whether any of the exceptions under the Hague Convention apply.
[59]          
The Father’s Hague
Application is dismissed.