[1]             
Ms. Shelley Hawke has pled guilty to one count
of obtaining a material benefit from the sale of sexual services, contrary to
s. 286.2(1) of the Criminal Code. Her involvement in her son’s human
trafficking activities spanned from September 1, 2018, through March 31, 2020. She
facilitated the transfer of tens of thousands of dollars in her banking
accounts from her son receiving some benefit from that, including gifts, dinning
and a new vehicle. She booked hotel rooms to facilitate the sale of sexual
services, shielding her son’s involvement from notice. And she transported the
victims to these arranged appointments on occasion.
[2]             
While she professes ignorance about any coercive
or exploitative relationships, she acknowledges that she knew her son was
profitably involved in this prostitution for which she was a material
beneficiary. However, she claims that she then mistakenly believed that prostitution
was legal.
[3]             
Jordan Hawke, the defendant’s son, has pled
guilty to human trafficking, procuring prostitution, obtaining a material
benefit from prostitution, forcible confinement, making child pornography,
assault and laundering proceeds of crime offences with respect to 7 female victims.
He is pending sentencing.
[4]             
Joel Ramocan, Jordan Hawke’s friend, pled guilty
to procuring offences with respect to two of Jordan Hawke’s female victims, as
a limited party to Jordan Hawke’s broader offences. On September 24, 2024, he
was sentenced to 30-months incarceration.
[5]             
Here, I must craft a proportional sentence that
is restricted to Ms. Hawke’s culpability. I must balance her degree of
blameworthiness against the seriousness of all prostitution related offences
and, in so doing, express the community’s revulsion at the commodification of
sexual services and the resulting harm that it causes victims and the community
at large.
[6]             
The parties filed an Agreed Statement of Facts,
Exhibit 1, outlining the global offence narrative, including Ms. Hawke’s
distinct involvement, as well as background information respecting the parties
involved and the scope of their criminal activity.
[7]             
For four years, between 2016 and 2020, Jordan
Hawke trafficked and/or ‘pimped’ five young female complainants, attempting to
and/or using for recruitment, and assaulting two other complainants. He has
pled guilty to 10 criminal offences respecting these seven victims, including
three counts of human trafficking, three counts of procuring prostitution, one global
count of receiving a material benefit from the sale of sexual services, one
count of distributing intimate imagery, one count of assault and one count of
money laundering. His activities were coercive, exploitative, parasitic and
prolonged. In general, he recruited victims, managed advertisements for their
services, dictated the schedule and services they would provide and
disproportionately profited from their sexual service returns.
[8]             
As noted, Ms. Hawke is Jordan Hawke’s mother. In
many respects she meaningfully enabled his offence cycle by shielding him from
exposure through the use of her own bank accounts, booking hotel accommodations
for the servicing of ‘Johns’ and often driving the victims to various hotels to
facilitate the sale of sexual services. In the process, she received a material
benefit from Jordan Hawke’s criminality.
[9]             
Ms. Hawke was involved in a variety of respects,
including booking hotel rooms for the purpose of facilitating the sale of
sexual services, driving the victims to “appointments” with ‘Johns’, and
fronting and managing monetary transfers through her bank accounts of tens of
thousands of dollars.
[10]         
Between June and December of 2016, Jordan Hawke trafficked
B.S. compelling the sale of sexual services. Ms. Hawke assisted her son by booking
hotel rooms and occasionally driving victim B.S., who was 17 years old, to
scheduled “appointments” with ‘Johns’. She had been groomed in this activity
believing she was Jordan Hawke’s girlfriend, only to find out otherwise and
that he was ‘pimping’ a number of women at the time. B.S.’s parents ultimately
filed a Missing Person’s report which complicated their arrangement and
prompted Ms. Hawke to continue driving her to designated hotels. Ultimately,
over the six-month arrangement, Jordan Hawke kept half of B.S.’s approximate
$30K in earnings.
[11]         
Between September 2018 and March 2020, Jordan
Hawke trafficked K.D. compelling the sale of sexual services. She was 18 years
of age when this activity commenced, having first met Jordan Hawke when she was
16 years of age and believing that she was his girlfriend. Over this period of
time, Ms. Hawke and her daughter, C.W., would drive K.D. to hotels for
scheduled “appointments”. C.W. often booked the hotel rooms for K.D. and would
be compensated by Ms. Hawke for the costs. During this timeframe, Jordan Hawke,
C.W., Ms. Hawke and K.D. would occasionally have expensive dinners paid for by
the proceedings of K.D.’s sale of sexual services. By March 2020, K.D. had
earned over $100K respecting the sale of her sexual services and turned over
approximately $75K to Jordan Hawke. Further, before and after K.D. left Jordan
Hawke, he profited from the sale of her intimate imagery on an ‘Only Fans’
account.
[12]         
Victims B.S., K.D. and R.R. reported to police
the Jordan Hawke used the proceeds of the sale of sexual services to purchase
various assets and cryptocurrency. He advised that he intended to purchase a condominium.
Police located electronic communications with Ms. Hawke confirming Jordan Hawke’s
plan to purchase real property.
[13]         
As part of his operation, Jordan Hawke deposited
or had deposited monies from the sale of sexual services into accounts held by
Ms. Hawke, either using cash or e-transfers. Both Jordan Hawke and Ms. Hawke
had access to these accounts. These monies were then spent, transferred to
third parties, or converted to cryptocurrency. In particular, Ms. Hawke’s
financial involvement included:
[14]         
When police executed a search warrant at Ms.
Hawke’s residence additional monies were found relative to this
trafficking/prostitution investigation, including:
[15]         
As part of this investigation, police seized and
searched various electronic devices revealing communications between Jordan
Hawke and Ms. Hawke, including:
[16]         
A warrant for Jordan Hawke’s arrest was issued
on June 11, 2020. A media release attempting to locate him was issued on July
13, 2020. On July 22, 2020, London police contacted Ms. Hawke and informed her
that her son was wanted. Ms. Hawke falsely denied knowing his whereabouts.
Thereafter, Jordan Hawke hid from police with the assistance of family members,
including Ms. Hawke. On September 8, 2021, police were conducting surveillance
upon Ms. Hawke’s residence when they observed Jordan Hawke and Ms. Hawke get
into a vehicle and leave the residence. They were then both arrested.
[17]         
Ms. Hawke is 56 years old. She is a first-time
offender having pled guilty to this offence. She is the mother of four
children, one being her co-accused Jordan Hawke and another co-accused, her
youngest daughter, C.W. Early in life, she commenced a relationship stemming
her teenage to mid-20s years, resulting in the birth of two daughters and a
son. When this relationship ended, she maintained custody over her children. In
her early 30s, she married for the first time and was divorced a few years
later. Her youngest daughter (C.W.) was born of this union. She reports that
this marriage ended as a result of intimate partner violence. She married a
second time in 2010 and that marriage also lasted a few years. She is separated
from that partner and has not become involved in any further relationships
since.
[18]         
Until this offence, Ms. Hawke had a stable
employment history, including 16 years as a “dietary aid” in a nursing home. She
enjoyed this work but lost it once she was charged and her employer learned of her
involvement through media coverage. She presently supports herself through
government assistance while she addresses her own rehabilitative needs. She is pessimistic
that she will be able to return to like employment given the necessity for
sensitive person criminal record check clearance.
[19]         
Ms. Hawke has a history of substance abuse. She
has struggled with alcohol abuse throughout her adult life. She advised the
Pre-Sentence Report author that she did not believe alcohol became a problem
for her until she was between the ages of 35 – 40. This, however, belies her
disclosure that the Children’s Aid Society had concerns about her alcohol abuse
while her children were young causing their temporary relocation to her
mother’s care when she attended for residential treatment. Again, after her
first marriage dissolved, she recognized she was still unhealthy and sought out
residential treatment. She eventually relapsed and continued to abuse alcohol
until approximately one year before she was charged. When she was released on
bail in 2021, she returned to daily alcohol abuse as a coping mechanism for her
heightened stress. In the summer of 2021, she fell down some stairs while
intoxicated and injured her shoulder requiring surgery. As part of her
rehabilitative efforts, she attended a four-week treatment program from October
8, 2023 through November 2, 2023 and, then, was referred for out-patient substance
abuse programming in December of 2023. She reports abstinence since September
2023.
[20]         
Beyond her substance abuse struggles, Ms. Hawke
is also being treated pharmacologically for depression and anxiety. She has
reportedly attended a few counseling sessions but did not find them helpful. Nevertheless,
she is presently focusing her efforts on self-care and resolution of these
issues pending the completion of the sentencing hearing. She has reportedly
isolated herself since being charged, attributing it to her shame and
embarrassment.
[21]         
Her relationships with her children are
strained. She reports that she does not have a positive relationship with her
two older daughters. One of these older daughters has not wanted any contact
with her for several years and the other has cut off contact since she was
charged. She has historically been close to her son, Jordan Hawke, and youngest
daughter, C.W., but since she was charged, I presume as a result of bail
restrictions, she has not been in contact and has missed out on meeting her new
granddaughter. She is hopeful that she can rebuild her relationship with her
children.
[22]         
Ms. Hawke spent five days in custody upon her
arrest. There have been no allegations of any breaches of her bail terms which
have been in effect for over three years.
[23]         
Ms. Hawke expressed a fear of returning to
custody to both counsel and the Pre-Sentence Report author. She worries about
her ability to cope with this potential outcome. Counsel describes her as “emotional
and terrified” at the prospect and that, as a result, she has been specifically
deterred by the five days she spent in pre-sentence custody.
[24]         
She maintains some support in the community.
Beyond her mother, her brother remains supportive and describes the offender,
however naively, as someone who is “easy going” who has always been a “rule
follower” and has been following the “straight and narrow” path. He believes
this conduct was entirely “out of character” for this offender.
[25]         
Ms. Hawke describes herself as a “good person”
who has “never been in any trouble” and would “never intentionally do anything
to bring harm to anyone.” With respect to this offending conduct, she expressed
to her Pre-Sentence Report author that she felt shame and remorse. She feels “a
lot of guilt and wishes she could take it all back and ask her son more
questions.” She does recognize that she made poor choices. She acknowledges
that she was aware that the victims were “escorts”, but she believed that they
were “willingly leading their chosen way of life.” She had never seen any of
the victims “in a bad way” and never “questioned the situation because she did
not feel it was any of her business.” Her son sent her money to her bank
account and would then transfer it out again.
[26]         
Contrary to her counsel’s submissions, Ms. Hawke
told the Pre-Sentence Report author that she “did not benefit from any of the
money and never spent any of the money that her son transferred into her
account. She did not believe her son was doing anything illegal and never
expected to be charged as a result of his actions.” She reports that she is no
longer able to hold a bank account at any financial institution in Ontario.
[27]         
Her perception of her moral culpability aside,
with respect to her background, I credit Ms. Hawke for her openness and candor.
[28]         
Victims have submitted Victim Impact Statements,
Exhibits 2 – 4, respecting the involved offenders’ sentencing hearings.
Relevant to Ms. Hawke, I have statements from both victims K.D. and R.R. as
well as comments they made to the Pre-Sentence Report author.
[29]         
While K.D. does not describe or comment upon her
interactions with Ms. Hawke as part of her Victim Impact Statement, the reality
of being trafficked and exploited has had a profound and lasting impact upon
her life. It has, not surprisingly, impacted her capacity for trust and future
intimacy with others. She lost a valued period of her life which would
otherwise have been focused upon completing her secondary school education and
furthering her bonds with her family. As she tries to heal from this 18-month
period of abuse, she reflects upon her suicidal ideation. Poignantly she
commented: “No matter how many times I tell myself I’m over it all, and I’m
healed, I’m not, I’ll never be, [it] left scars on me that only I can see and
feel.” In some way, she acknowledges pride that she was able to bring an end to
her abuse and prevent the offenders from harming others. She has every reason
to feel proud.
[30]         
K.D. described Ms. Hawke as an “awful woman”.
She reported to the Pre-Sentence Report author that Ms. Hawke would often drive
her to hotels and at times had dinner with her and Jordan Hawke at restaurants.
She is confident that Ms. Hawke was aware of her negative circumstances,
reporting that she and her son would “laugh during dinners about how many
clients K.D. would have to take so they could afford dinner.” This attribution,
it must be noted, is categorically denied by Ms. Hawke, and the Crown has not
sought to prove otherwise. I reference it merely to give voice to the victim’s
concerns which highlighted this exchange.
[31]         
Further, while victim R.R. did not specifically
address Ms. Hawke in her Victim Impact Statement, she made comments to the
Pre-Sentence Report author and, otherwise, her overall commentary in the VIS
remains relevant to the abuse she suffered. R.R. also believes that Ms. Hawke
was well aware of what the circumstances were while she was helping her son. She
reports never seeing any of the money she earned and was presented as Jordan
Hawke’s girlfriend for approximately 2 ½ years from 2015 to 2018.
[32]         
Both K.D. and R.R. expressed dismay that Ms.
Hawke did nothing to assist them in escaping this abuse.
[33]         
Section 286.2(1) of the Code provides
that everyone who receives a financial or other material benefit, knowing that
it is obtained by or derived directly or indirectly from the commission of an
offence under subsection 286.1(1) – which prohibits the sale of sexual services
– is guilty of, as here elected, an indictable offence and liable to
imprisonment for a term of not more than 10 years.
[34]         
Section 718 of the Code highlights that
“the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society…and to contribute
to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society
by imposing just sanctions.” To achieve this purpose, the following relevant
objectives and principles are noteworthy:
[35]         
The principle of proportionality is fundamental
and has been characterized as the cardinal principal of sentencing requiring
the court to consider the gravity of the offence and the moral blameworthiness
of the offender. As the Supreme Court said in R. v. Lacasse, “the more
serious the crime and its consequences, or the greater the offender’s degree of
responsibility, the heavier the sentence will be.”[1]  This fundamental
principle is central to the maintenance of public confidence in the criminal
justice system. It demands that the punishment “speaks out against the offence
and punishes the offender no more than is necessary.”[2]  In so doing, it seeks to
balance the principle of restraint with the importance of holding offenders
accountable for their actions. The moral blameworthiness of the offender is
important. Offenders who intentionally cause harm should be subjected to a
greater punishment than those who did not intend the harm that flowed from
their conduct.  Sentencing must remain, however, a highly individualized task.
[36]         
Further, section 718(d) of the Criminal Code
compels me to be mindful of the importance of rehabilitation. Restraint is
required, as noted in ss. 718.2(d) and (e), to ensure that an offender is not
deprived of liberty if less restrictive sanctions may be reasonable and
appropriate and, if custody is required, the least amount of custody necessary
to satisfy other principles of sentencing should be imposed.
[37]         
In response to the Supreme Court’s Attorney
General of Canada v. Bedford[3]
decision, Parliament enacted Bill C-36 as a significant paradigm shift away
from treating prostitution as a nuisance and towards an acknowledgement that it
is a form of sexual exploitation that disproportionately and negatively impacts
women and girls. In the Department of Justice Technical Paper, 2014, Parliament
acknowledged the objectives of Bill C-36:
[38]         
As is evident on this offence narrative and the
findings of this court, Jordan Hawke was minimally procuring and otherwise
exploiting through trafficking the victims in this matter. Ms. Hawke, however,
was more passively supporting his ventures and, in so doing, reaping financial
and other benefits for her efforts.
[39]         
In R. v. N.S.,[5] the Ontario Court of
Appeal found the new Bill C-36 prostitution regime constitutional noting that
Parliament had fundamentally changed the lens through which it views
prostitution – now, it is viewed as “inherently exploitative and something that
must be denounced and discouraged.”
[40]         
In Canadian Alliance for Sex Work Law Reform
v. Attorney General, Goldstein J. identified the third-party targets of the
new Bill C-36 legislative regime, “classic exploiters and/or traffickers.”[6] In defining the roles of
third parties, the court noted that some were “exploiters and/or traffickers”
capable of using “violence, manipulation, drugs, or intimidation (or a
combination), to control sex workers.” They can force those selling sexual
services to engage in sexual activities against their will, and can take “control
of the advertising, finances, housing, clothing, and other aspects of sex
work.”[7]
The seriousness of this form of abuse and exploitation, both inherent and very
real, has been expressed variously by courts in Ontario as a form of
“modern-day slavery”[8]
and “callous, cruel, and repulsive”[9]
acts.
[41]         
Of course, these findings are well founded in this
community and across the country. What was once a dirty secret has now become a
glaring public eyesore. With repetition, this community blight leads the news
in many urban communities, and London, in particular, is a focus of this concern.
The rise of human trafficking and prostitution related ‘pimping’ is well
documented. Statistics Canada has reported a “year-over-year increase in the
number of police-reported incidents of human trafficking from 2013 to 2023” and
more than half of those incidents remain unsolved. Ontario and Nova Scotia have
the highest average annual rates of police-reported human trafficking since
2013, acknowledging that this remains one of the most glaring underreported
crimes.[10]
Specifically, London’s police chief has acknowledged that the majority of cases
in Canada are happening in London and the GTA along the 401 corridor. Increasing
policing capacity to address this scourge is a priority. And, socially, a
recent screening of the documentary Dark Highway at the Forest City Film
Festival brings home the point.[11]
[42]         
I reference these reports because local
conditions matter and are relevant to any assessment of the gravity this
offence before this court. And, as here, receiving a material benefit from the
sale of sexual services is often directly related to human trafficking and
prostitution procuring offences. It motivates conduct which creates the harm.
[43]         
The primary sentencing principles for procuring
the sale of sexual services is denunciation and deterrence.[12] General deterrence seeks
to discourage like minded others from committing similar offences while
denunciation requires that a sentence communicate society’s condemnation of the
conduct.[13]
[44]         
While the sentencing common law for receiving a
material benefit from the sale of sexual services has burgeoned over the last
decade, there is far less established authority respecting cases isolated to
this offence alone. Generally, this offence is considered concurrently to other,
often more serious offending conduct which includes procuring and advertising
offences. As a result, it is often difficult to isolate the comparative import
of these cases on a general sentencing range because they are often imbued with
the aggravating features of the more serious misconduct.
[45]         
Keeping that in mind, the Ontario Court of Appeal
did offer some direction respecting an appropriate range of sentence for s.
286.2 offences in R. v. Joseph.[14]
There, while the offender was sentenced on multiple other offences, including
procuring, advertising and making child pornography, the court set a generic
baseline for material benefit offences as starting at 12 months as a low end
“guidepost”. The court did not comment upon the capacity of a conditional
sentence order to address the predominant sentencing principles of deterrence
and denunciation.
[46]         
While I was provided with considerable caselaw
from the parties, I will reference only the most compelling and relevant
decisions which assist me in the establishment of an appropriate range of
sentence for this conduct.
[47]         
In R. v. Bedard-Morin,[15] the offender pled guilty
to a count of receiving a material benefit from the sale of sexual services
from three victims. No outward violence or coercion was present, although “at
its core, this case involved an offence of exploitation.” The profiteering took
place over several months. The offender received “more than minimal amount” by
way of material benefit. He was the subject of a court order prohibition on
contact with one of the victims at the time of the offending conduct and had a
significant criminal record. The Ontario Court of Appeal endorsed the imposed
sentence of 22 months jail, less pre-sentence custody.
[48]         
In R. v. Beeransingh,[16] the offender, after
trial, was convicted of obtaining a material benefit from the sale of sexual
services of three victims over a period of ten years. He was a youthful first-time
offender. He was described as a “friend pimp” who split the earnings 50-50 but for
some he failed to pay any money. No overt violence or threats were involved. He
was sentenced to a maximum reformatory sentence, two years less a day, to be
served on a Conditional Sentence Order.
[49]         
In R. v. Morgan,[17] the offender was
convicted of receiving a material benefit from the sale of sexual services after
trial. The single victim was 18 years of age, had been working in prostitution,
met the offender at a strip club and began an intimate relationship with him.
Over the course of four months, the offender became controlling, aggressive and
kept the victim’s earnings amounting to approximately $5K per week. The
offender had no criminal record. He was sentenced to 18 months incarceration
followed by two years of probation and a DNA order.
[50]         
In R. v. Musara,[18] the offender, after a
“long trial”, was convicted of a single count of receiving a material benefit
from the sale of sexual services. There was no overt exploitation, acts of
violence or threats, nor any assistance offered respecting the sale of sexual
services. This was a scenario where the court found that the victim was not
controlled, directed or influenced by the offender. She was instead quite
independent and sold sexual services in connection with another individual, or
‘pimp’. However, he did knowingly receive a material benefit from her over the
course of 2 - 4 months by selling her illegal narcotics and encouraged her to
continue with prostitution to permit further sales. He had a minimal criminal
record. The court was satisfied that his rehabilitative prospects were good. While
denunciation and deterrence were important, this was not the “most serious end
of the spectrum for such an offence” allowing for a reformatory sentence.
Finally, the court concluded that permitting this offender to serve the
sentence within the community would not put at risk public safety and help
address the problem of over-incarceration of Black offenders. He was sentenced
to a conditional sentence of 17 months followed by 12 months probation.
[51]         
With the benefit of these authorities, I am
satisfied that receiving a material benefit from the sale of sexual services garners
a starting point range of 12 months, and in isolated scenarios divorced from
other more serious exploitative offences, can satisfy the principles of
denunciation and deterrence with sentences within the reformatory range.
[52]         
The defence seeks a 2 year less one day
conditional sentence order, followed by probation supervision. They argue that
the exercise of restraint is necessary based upon this offender’s limited moral
culpability. While she was a necessary cog in Jordan Hawke’s broad operation,
her lack of knowledge respecting his coercive and exploitative activities is
significant. She has pled guilty, accepted responsibility and has no criminal
history. She poses no threat to the community and she has strong prospects at
rehabilitation. As a result, deterrence and denunciation do not require a
traditional custodial sentence.
[53]         
The Crown is seeking a 2 year period of
traditional incarceration, minus enhanced credit for her limited pre-sentence
custody amounting to 8 days service. It is argued that only a jail sentence can
meaningfully address the aggravating features presented, particularly with
respect to the scope of Jordan Hawke’s operation which was meaningfully enabled
by this offender’s actions. The Crown points to offence and post offence
related conduct to suggest that this offender was fully aware of the
wrongfulness of her and her son’s actions, throughout, resting her liability
beyond wilful blindness.
[54]         
Both parties concede that a substantial
probation order will foster continued rehabilitative efforts. The Crown seeks
an ancillary DNA order which is conceded alongside a forfeiture order for
offence related property.
[55]         
Proportionality compels me to assess both the
aggravating and mitigating circumstances of each case to assist in fashioning a
truly individualized sentence. By way of aggravating features, I have
considered the following:
[56]         
The Crown encourages me to consider the fact
that Ms. Hawke’s children were involved as co-accuseds is aggravating. She
failed to set an example for them and, instead, encouraged and participated in
this common criminal venture. I disagree. I have little evidence of
encouragement on the part of this offender towards either her son or daughter.
Indeed, this narrative suggests, more than anything else, that Jordan Hawke was
the leading force behind this venture and that Ms. Hawke was largely enabling
and profiting variously as permitted.
[57]         
Beyond these considerations, the Crown goes further
by arguing that Ms. Hawke was engaged in assisting a “criminal organization” by
knowingly facilitating Jordan Hawke’s trafficking operation. The Crown relies
upon the analysis in R. v. Alexis-McLymont, Hird & Elgin,[19] whereby Leach J. found
that three offenders acted in concert to affect a prostitution operation as a
“Cash Gang” in an organized manner, dividing up respective tasks to enhance
profit beyond the commission of a single offence.
[58]         
Whether or not Parliament intended that all
parties receiving a material benefit, and assisting to some degree, a
prostitution ring to constitute the aggravating feature of benefiting a
“criminal organization”, as referenced in s. 718.2(a)(iv), I need determine. Here,
I find that Ms. Hawke’s isolated involvement in her son’s prostitution
activities does not satisfy me that these actions were for the “benefit of, at
the direction of or in association with a criminal organization.” Frankly, were
I to be concerned about the presence of a ‘criminal organization’, I would
describe this venture as a criminal organization of one. The evidence
overwhelmingly points to Jordan Hawke using his mother and sister as shields to
further protect his criminal venture, even though they willingly assisted him out
of loyalty and a desire for profit. The preponderance of evidence advanced on
this guilty plea divorces Ms. Hawke from knowledge respecting the scope and
exploitative nature of Jordan Hawke’s activities, and she has expressly denied knowledge
of the trafficking and even procuring elements that were present. The Crown has
not sought to prove otherwise, as would be required for any aggravating factor.
In the face of her expressed denials relating to this knowledge, I am not
prepared to infer otherwise. That she was aware that she was profiting and
otherwise benefiting from this, at best, prostitution ring, there is no doubt.
But I find that this does not invariably lead to knowingly benefiting, being
directed by or being in association with a criminal organization.
[59]         
However, Ms. Hawke’s assertions through counsel that
she believed prostitution was legal is patently absurd and rejected. The Crown
has amply satisfied me on this evidentiary record, beyond any doubt, that she
was fully aware that her son was engaged in illegality and that she was
assisting in those pursuits. As noted in Exhibit 1, Ms. Hawke was a party to
several text messages with Jordan Hawke wherein they discussed ways to
obfuscate the true origin of the profits, including a scheme to buy a rental
property as a front for legitimate income. That she blindly acted as her son’s
banker for receipts of cash and e-transfers from the victims, made hotel
reservations for him, and drove victims to hotel locations as innocent favours
is absurd. That she actively assisted with her son’s police evasion for over a
year, aware that he was wanted, is telling of not only her motivations but, on
this fulsome record, her overall knowledge that goes well beyond a failure, as
she suggested to the Pre-Sentence Report author, to ask her son enough
questions.
[60]         
I have also considered a number of mitigating
factors relevant to proportionality, including that:
[61]         
Which leaves the cumulative balancing of all
these factors to achieve sentencing proportionality. Ms. Hawke’s conduct must
be denounced and deterred while appreciating that, from a moral culpability perspective,
it is obviously distinguishable from that of her son.  Where Jordan Hawke was coercive
and exploitative, Ms. Hawke was enabling and, at least on her telling, willfully
blind. Ms. Hawke’s conduct must be assessed against a continuum of material
benefit wrongdoing, and not be consumed by her son’s aggravated conduct. The
seriousness of Ms. Hawke’s conduct is, nevertheless, noteworthy. While in a
very real sense Ms. Hawke’s conduct enabled her son’s activities which
facilitated vast profits at the expense of the harm caused to the victims, she
is not a party to his offences but is instead a principal to it’s profiteering.
As a result, overall, her comparative moral blameworthy is considerably lower.
[62]         
With the assistance of the context provided by the
discussed sentencing common law, I conclude that this offender’s conduct was on
the higher end of the seriousness scale for this form of offending but on the
moderate end of the moral culpability scale. Ms. Hawke is not the classic
landlord, seedy hotel or club owner or bouncer knowingly making a buck off their
associations with those selling sexual services. Instead, she actively profited,
financially and otherwise, from known ‘pimping’ activities. All prostitution
related offending causes harm to both the women and girls captured inside this
inherently volatile environment, but also to the communities that must endure this
disrespect to and blight on human dignity.  Profiting from this degradation is
particularly reprehensible.
[63]         
As a first-time offender who has pled guilty,
the range of sentence I believe is as suggested by both the Crown and the
defence – two years incarceration. How that incarceration should be served is
my next consideration.
[64]         
While I agree with the Crown that this offence
is inherently serious and merits both a deterrent and denunciatory sentence,
incarceration is not the only means to achieve these sentencing goals. If violent
crimes, even those causing death, do not, per se, exclude consideration
of a conditional sentence if the statutory pre-conditions are met, prostitution
related offences, as evident above, can and sometimes do qualify.
[65]         
A conditional sentence is a custodial sentence.
It is distinguishable based upon its service within the community – often
commonly referred to as ‘house arrest’. However, the imposition of a
conditional sentence will only inspire public confidence if it is punitive in a
real sense. As the Supreme Court of Canada stated in R. v. Proulx: “punitive
conditions such as house arrest should be the norm, not the exception.”[22] A conditional sentence
cannot become little more than a glorified probation order.
[66]         
Section 742.1 of the Code outlines the
statutory preconditions for conditional sentence consideration, including:
[67]         
Whether a conditional sentence is appropriate
often comes down to whether it can adequately reflect the gravity of the
offence and thereby provide sufficient denunciation and general deterrence and
whether it can fit under the two-year cap.
[68]         
As recently reminded by our Court of Appeal in R.
v. Ali, I must consider whether a conditional sentence is appropriate, even
with respect to serious offences. There, the offender was being sentenced for
aggravated assault. The court noted that considering whether a conditional
sentence is appropriate even in cases where the paramount sentencing principles
are denunciation and deterrence involves “considering, and weighing, the
ability of a conditional sentence to meet the deterrence and denunciation
objectives and other relevant sentencing objectives, including restraint and
rehabilitation.”[23]
 Of course, the Ali decision simply reiterated the Supreme Court’s
comments in Proulx, where Chief Justice Lamer noted, that a conditional
sentence is "a punitive sanction capable of achieving the objectives of
denunciation and deterrence."[24]
Punitive provisions, such as house arrest, carry a stigma that should not be
underestimated and can provide “a significant amount of denunciation” and
“significant deterrence”.
[69]         
In R. v. Sharma, though overturned by the
Supreme Court on procedural and interpretative grounds, Feldman J.A. noted that
“[e]ven in cases where deterrence and denunciation are the paramount sentencing
objectives, a conditional sentence may be appropriate, depending on the nature
of the conditions imposed, the duration of the conditional sentence, and the
circumstances of the offender and the community in which the conditional
sentence is to be served.”[25]
The implication is clear, the more serious the offending conduct, the more
pressing the need for a denunciatory and deterrent response and, therefore, the
more restrictive a conditional sentence must be.
[70]         
However, Chief Justice Lamer conceded in Proulx
that there will be cases “in which the need for denunciation is so pressing
that incarceration will be the only suitable way in which to express society’s
condemnation of the offender’s conduct.”[26]
[71]         
Finally, I consider the implication of
Parliament’s November 17, 2022, Bill C-5 response to the Supreme Court’s
decision in R. v. Sharma,[27]
from November 4, 2022. Instead of maintaining the existing sentencing regime,
which enumerated certain types or classes of offences which did not qualify for
a conditional sentence, and which the Supreme Court found constitutional, it
stripped away many of the existing restrictions allowing for a broader
sentencing assessment. This almost immediate statutory change, when it was not
compelled to do so, undoubtedly is a signal from Parliament that conditional
sentences remain an effective sentencing tool, even when faced with serious
offences. It is reasonable to expect that this legislative development will, as
intended, reinvigorate the usage of conditional sentences in appropriate cases.
[72]         
Here, there is no evidence that Ms. Hawke would
pose any risk to public safety if permitted to serve her custodial sentence
within the community. Her involvement in this repugnant offence narrative was
undoubtedly a function of opportunity and misplaced parental loyalty. She has
no criminal history and has been compliant with court orders to date.
[73]         
The more difficult question is whether the
imposition of a conditional sentence is otherwise consistent with the fundamental
purpose and principles of sentencing. As I have noted, even where both
deterrence and denunciation are paramount sentencing objectives, an
appropriately punitive conditional sentence can meet the ends of justice. I
believe this is such a case.
[74]         
Mindful of the scope and involvement of this offender,
who was not the principal influencer as was evident in Musara, and in a set
of circumstances where there is no connection between her and any coercive and/or
exploitative acts, as was the case in Beeransingh, both deterrence and
denunciation can be satisfied by the imposition of a restrictive conditional
sentence order.
[75]         
I believe that granting this alternative
custodial disposition also meaningfully addresses the sentencing principle of
restraint. Ultimately, the pressing aggravating features, including the number
of victims, the amount of harm caused (both emotional and financial), and the
duration of the misconduct can be addressed through the duration of the
sentence. However, that duration, as informed by relevant precedent and,
frankly, the Crown’s own position, does not have to be in the penitentiary
range.
[76]         
Based upon this reasoning, I conclude that the
appropriate duration of sentence for Ms. Hawke is a two years less one day
period of incarceration, to be served as part of a Conditional Sentence Order. As
Ms. Hawke has already served five days of pre-sentence custody, for which I will
grant her Summers credit at a ration of 1.5-1 days, totalling 8 days
credit, she will have to serve a total of 722 days on a conditional sentence
order.
[77]         
I will entertain submissions respecting the
terms of this order, mindful that for it to have the necessary deterrent and
denunciatory effect, it must be punitive in nature. That punitive element will
include a substantial period of house arrest in addition to the imposition of
GPS monitoring which I believe, on such a serious offence, helps to foster
public confidence in the efficacy of the conditional sentence regime.
[78]         
When that sentence has been completed, in an
effort to maintain a sense of security for the victims and foster continuing
opportunities for rehabilitative efforts, Ms. Hawke will serve a two year
probation term. Again, I will entertain submissions from counsel respecting
appropriate terms and conditions.
[79]         
As noted, the Crown seeks a DNA order. Given the
qualifying nature of this offending conduct as a “primary designated offence”,
under s. 487.04, pursuant to s. 487.051 of the Code Ms. Hawke will be
required to provide samples of bodily substances reasonably required for the
purpose of forensic DNA analysis to be used in accordance with the DNA
Identification Act.
[80]         
The Crown seeks a forfeiture order respecting
seized digital devices which constitute offence related property. I will grant
this request upon presentation of a draft Order identifying the items in
question assuming their nexus to the offence conduct is obvious.
[81]         
As a result, recognizing the predominate
sentencing principles of deterrence and denunciation, Ms. Hawke is sentenced to
two years less one day of custody, the maximum reformatory disposition, minus
her 8 days of credit for pre-sentence custody, to be served as part of a
Conditional Sentence Order. While she does not present a continuing threat to
the community, a punitive sentence which substantially restricts her liberty is
minimally required to address the gravity of her offending conduct.
[82]         
In addition, she will serve two years of
probation and must provide a sample of her DNA, pursuant to the DNA
Identification Act.