[1]              
At the opening of trial in this matter, the
plaintiff and self represented Third Party, Mr.Ng, sought leave under Rule
48.04 to bring this motion to permit late admission of evidence of an expert
pursuant to Rule 53.03(4) “with such other relief such as an adjournment of the
case as may be fair and reasonable in the circumstances”.
[2]              
For the reasons which follow, I will grant leave
to the plaintiff to file his expert’s report and I will adjourn the trial and
strike it from the trial list on terms outlined below.
[3]              
The plaintiff is pursuing a professional
negligence claim against the defendant, his former accountant, alleging his tax
returns were prepared improperly resulting in CRA audits and re-assessments and
resulting in him incurring fees and other costs to remedy the situation. The
plaintiff’s case has not been pursued diligently, dragging on for some 9 years
before the court and involving matters that transpired 15-25 years ago. Mr. Ng
has been represented by multiple lawyers, the last of whom was permitted to
withdraw from the file shortly before this trial. The plaintiff candidly
acknowledges he needs to retain a lawyer to properly present what is a
reasonably complex case. The defendant would prefer to proceed with the case at
this time without expert evidence but would file responding expert evidence if
the case is adjourned.
[4]              
The court is left with the difficult choice of
forcing on this complex professional negligence case (scheduled for a 2-3 week
trial) with a self represented plaintiff who advises the court he wants and
needs to retain a lawyer and who has proffered a Rule 53 experts report which
is of a preliminary overview nature and may not fully comply with the requirements
of Rule 53., weighed against the unacceptable delay visited on the defendant
who is a very senior retired gentleman who seeks closure in the matter. I would
add the observation that without expert evidence it would be very challenging
for the court to assess the true merits of this case. Also fairness to the
defendant requires that he have an opportunity to obtain a responding expert’s
report, if so advised.
[5]              
For the reasons noted above, the court orders as
follows: