[1]             
The plaintiff moves for summary judgment on a promissory note for
failure by the defendants to pay the amount owing. The
plaintiff has abandoned, for the purposes of this summary judgment motion, all
other causes of action in the statement of claim. The
defendants submit there are genuine issues requiring a trial.
[2]             
For the reasons that follow, I find that the summary
judgment process allows me to make the necessary findings of fact, to apply the
law to the facts, and is a proportionate, more expeditious and less expensive
means to achieve a just result in this case. I find that there is no genuine
issue requiring a trial with respect to the plaintiffs claim on the promissory
note and the defences raised by the defendants.
[3]             
The corporate defendant has been noted in default. The
five individual defendants (referred to herein simply as the “defendants”) responded
to the statement of claim and to the motion for summary judgment.
[4]             
The defendants admit that on or about March 30, 2022
they executed a promissory note of the same date. The promissory note was for a
term of three months in the principal amount of $75,000 with interest at the
rate of 14% per annum. The relevant terms of the promissory note include the
following:
[5]             
The defendants acknowledge that the promissory note was
secured by four properties in the Kitchener-Waterloo region. The properties are
listed in the promissory note. Further the promissory note provides:
[6]             
There is no evidence from the defendants that
they did not understand the terms of the promissory note or their obligations
under the promissory note. After signing the promissory note, the defendants
received $75,000 less agreed upon expenses.
[7]             
The promissory note is short and concise and easy to
understand. It required payment on June 30, 2022 of the principal together with
interest as one lump sum. No demand was required for payment to be made. The
obligations and liabilities of the defendants is joint and several. Any default
in any payment as required by the promissory note or in the performance of the
defendants’ obligations under the promissory note would result in the unpaid
principal balance and earned interest becoming immediately due along with any
collection and or legal costs incurred as a result of the default.
[8]             
The defendants admit that they were not able to make
the required payment at the end of June 2022. Instead, beginning August 1, 2022
through November 20, 2023 the defendants paid the monthly interest due on the
promissory note. The November 20, 2023 payment was for the interest accrued in
October 2023. The defendants have provided a summary of the payments of $875
per month which were made. This is the monthly amount due for interest at 14%
per annum on $75,000.
[9]             
The defendants have not made any payments on the
promissory note after November 20, 2023. The defendants have never repaid the
principal sum advanced of $75,000.
[10]         
The plaintiff seeks judgment for the amount
owing pursuant to the promissory note and three months interest to June 30,
2022 of $77,646.58. The plaintiff seeks judgment for $13,750.69 for outstanding
interest at the promissory note rate of 14% per annum. The amounts over and
above $75,000 correlates to the monthly amount of interest at 14% per annum
which remains unpaid. There is no evidence from the defendants disputing these
amounts. The defendants baldly assert that the plaintiff has not accounted for
the interest payments made. They provide no evidence of alternative
calculations as to the amounts outstanding.
[11]         
On November 14, 2023 the plaintiff registered a charge against
one of the properties securing the promissory note. On December 21, 2023, the
plaintiff registered a charge against an additional two properties securing the
promissory note.
[12]         
The plaintiff issued the statement of claim on April 17,
2024. On May 14, 2024 the plaintiff registered a caution against title to one
of the properties against which it had previously registered a charge. On or about
May 31, 2024 the defendants served a statement of defence. The plaintiff served
this motion for summary judgment on June 1, 2024.
[13]         
The defendants assert that the plaintiff has failed to
provide sufficient evidence as to why a charge was registered against three of
the properties. The registration of a charge in the plaintiff’s sole discretion
is provided for in the promissory note. No further explanation was required.
[14]         
The defendants assert that the promissory note lacks a
clear definition of default which creates ambiguity. I do not agree. The
circumstances giving rise to default and its consequences are clearly set out
in the promissory note.
[15]         
The defendants assert that the promissory note terms
were amended. They assert it was agreed that the defendants would provide
monthly installments of the amount outstanding. There is no evidence of an
agreement as to when the principal would become due and owing. The evidence
with respect to whether there was an agreement to amend the promissory note is
very thin and not compelling. Taken at its highest, the evidence could indicate
that the plaintiff was prepared to give the defendants time to pay the amount
outstanding under the promissory note as long as the defendants continued to
make monthly payments. Even if such an agreement were reached, the defendants
stopped making monthly payments after November 20th 2023 and were  in breach of
any such amendment to the promissory note.
[16]         
In December 2023 the plaintiff’s representative made
several requests for an update on the missing monthly payment. One of the
defendants, Santos Garcia responded on January 3, 2024. His e-mail clearly
acknowledges an outstanding payment is owed. He acknowledged that the
defendants did not have the funds to make the monthly payments. They asked for
additional time. He suggests putting the property up for sale to pay the
plaintiff.
[17]         
The plaintiff’s representative responded on January 7,
2024 that the plaintiff had instructed its lawyer to work on preparing notices
for power of sale but that in the meantime the defendants would either have to
sell property or find other lenders to pay out the loan. On January 10, 2024
Mr. Santos responded that he and his partners were looking for a solution to
find the funds to pay out the plaintiff. Further emails were exchanged about
refinancing and timing. By March 2024 the plaintiff was still looking for an
update and payment. Mr. Santos promised payment. None was made. Later in March,
the defendant Lara Duchesne began communicating with the plaintiff’s
representative by e-mail. The defendants were now attempting to sell a
property.
[18]         
On March 27, 2024 the plaintiff’s representative
advised the defendants that she was contacting a litigation lawyer to start a
claim against all defendants and the corporate defendant and commence power of
sale proceedings against the three properties. The plaintiff remained willing
to accept full payment of the amount outstanding. That same day, the defendant
Jesse Duchesne told the plaintiff they were attempting to refinance and
acknowledged that the plaintiff may no longer want to wait. Mr. Santos also
wrote to the plaintiff on March 27 saying that they would pay the plaintiff and
were working with a new mortgage broker so they could pay the plaintiff.
[19]         
On March 28, 2024 the plaintiff’s representative
reiterated to the defendants that the plaintiff was seeking payment of the full
amount owing, not monthly payments.
[20]         
After November 20, 2023 the parties never reached an
agreement to amend the promissory note or to enter into a schedule of payments.
They never reached an agreement on the timeline for deferring repayment. It is
clear from the emails between the parties that the plaintiff was seeking
payment and the defendants were trying to buy time. The defendants were unable
to point to any clear terms of any amendment of the promissory note or any
evidence of the amendment.
[21]         
The defendants assert that no demand was ever made on
the promissory note. The e-mails exchanged between the parties make it clear
that repayment was demanded by the plaintiff and promised by the defendants. In
any event, no demand for repayment was required by the terms of the promissory
note. There is no evidence that an amendment to the promissory note requiring a
demand for payment was ever agreed to by the parties.
[22]         
The defendants allege that granting summary judgment on
the promissory note will interfere with or prejudice other creditors. The
defendants could not explain how this was so. The interests of prior registered
encumbrancers are not impacted by a judgment on the promissory note. There is
no evidence before the court of any other creditors pursuing unsecured
judgments against the defendants.
[23]         
The defendants submit that the motion for summary
judgment should be dismissed because there may be other evidence that can be
uncovered with further examinations and productions that supports their
position. The defendants could not point to or suggest to the court what
further evidence might be available. The defendants had an opportunity to cross-examine
the plaintiff’s representative. They did not summons any additional witnesses
to be examined on a pending motion. The defendants are required to put their
best foot forward and to lead trump or risk losing when responding to a summary
judgment motion. Speculation as to evidence that might be available is not
sufficient.
[24]         
The defendants submit that a refusal given at the
plaintiff’s cross-examination or that  conduct of counsel for the plaintiff at
the cross-examination interfered with their ability to obtain evidence for this
motion. The defendants could not point to a single piece of evidence or
information they were unable to obtain. The defendants did not bring a refusals
or undertakings motions.
[25]         
The defendants submit that there were “concerns” about
the execution of the promissory note. The only concern the defendants could
point to was that the promissory note was not witnessed or commissioned by someone
in the defendants’ lawyer’s office. The defendants say that the plaintiff’s
lawyer required this, although this is not clear from the evidence. The
defendants could not point to a legal requirement or authority requiring a promissory
note to be commissioned or witnessed in such a fashion.
[26]         
The signature of the plaintiff’s lawyer appears on the
witness line in the promissory note. The defendants each signed the
promissory note. They admit doing so. They admit that they entered into the
promissory note. They made monthly payments on the promissory note. They sent
correspondence to the plaintiff acknowledging the debt. In the circumstances,
the fact that the promissory note was not witnessed or commissioned by someone
at the defendants’ lawyers’ office does not invalidate the promissory note.
[27]         
The defendants suggested that there was some confusion
as to who was representing them. They say they were never provided with a joint
retainer agreement. They submit that it is plausible that the plaintiff’s
lawyer was the lawyer for all the parties with respect to the promissory note. The
defendants allege conflict of interest, apparently with respect to the lawyer
acting for the plaintiff on the promissory note. The evidence in support of the
defendants assertions is not compelling. The parties both included emails
between their respective lawyers which clearly indicate that two different lawyers
or firms were communicating on behalf of the defendants and the plaintiff with
respect to the transaction.
[28]         
Even if there was some merit to the defendants’
allegations regarding representation on the promissory note, and I do not find
that there is, there is no evidence that the defendants did not understand the
promissory note or their obligations or did not receive legal advice they
needed to understand the promissory note and their obligations thereunder. The
defendants could not cogently tie this allegation regarding representation to
why the plaintiff would not be entitled to judgment on the promissory note.
[29]         
The defendants assert that concerns have been raised regarding: (1) whether the defendants were
fully aware and/or informed of the contents of the promissory note; (2) whether
the defendants had been purposefully led into contracting with the plaintiff
for reasons unknown; (3) whether the defendants may have been coerced into the
signing of the promissory note; and (4) whether all proper procedures were
followed in the execution of the promissory note, given the potential conflict
of interest taking place. There is no cogent evidence
supporting such assertions. For the reasons set out above, there is no merit to
the defendants’ position.
[30]         
Guided by the principles in the Supreme Court of Canada's
decision in Hryniak v Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7, I find that there is no
genuine issue for trial. The defendants signed the promissory note. They
understood their obligations under the promissory note. They failed to make the
payment when it was due under the promissory note. For a period of time, they
made monthly payments of interest only. Those payments stopped in November
2023. They have made no payment since that time. They acknowledged the debt. The
defendants have not raised any genuine issue requiring a trial.
[31]         
The plaintiff is entitled to judgment as follows:
[32]         
The plaintiff is entitled to costs of the motion and
the action. The plaintiff submitted a cost outline and the defendant submitted a
bill of costs. Both parties had two lawyers working on the file and two lawyers
who attended the motion. The plaintiff’s full indemnity costs totaled
$30,614.66 inclusive of HST and disbursements of $3,884.51. The defendants’
full indemnity costs are $44,575.17 inclusive of HST plus disbursements of $2,462.66.
[33]         
The plaintiff submits it is entitled to full indemnity
costs based on the terms of the promissory note which provides that the
defendants agree that they shall pay any and all fees, costs, expenses or liabilities
of any kind including legal fees relating to the promissory note on the same
terms and conditions as outlined in the promissory note.
[34]         
The defendants submit that the plaintiff is entitled to
costs of just under $20,000 if the plaintiff is successful on the motion, but
that if the motion for summary judgment was dismissed, the defendants should be
awarded costs of $24,000.
[35]         
Taking into account the factors in rule 57.01 of the Rules
of Civil Procedure, including but not limited to, the amount of the claim, the
complete success on the part of the plaintiff, the costs incurred by each of
the parties, the fact that the plaintiff typically incurs more costs than the
defendant in pursuing an action, what the parties might have expected to pay,
as well as the terms of the promissory note, I find that it is fair and
reasonable for the defendants to pay the plaintiffs costs fixed in the amount
of $27,950 inclusive of HST and disbursements. Interest on costs is payable at
the Courts of Justice Act rate.
[36]         
With the consent of the plaintiff, the balance of the
claims in the statement of claim are dismissed.