[1]              
Various intervenors seek to intervene in this proceeding which involves
migrant rights to health care in Canada. I am case managing this matter.
[2]              
Between 2010 and 2011, Nell Toussaint (the “Plaintiff”) brought judicial
review proceedings to the Federal Court regarding Canada’s failure to provide
her with healthcare funding as an irregular migrant worker. The Federal Court
dismissed her Application. She then brought a proceeding before the United
Nations Human Rights Committee (the “UN Human Rights Committee” or the “Committee”).
In 2018, the Committee concluded that Canada had violated her right to life and
her equality rights. It directed that Canada provide Ms. Toussaint compensation
and take steps so that other similarly situated migrants would have the right
to healthcare.
[3]              
Canada did not follow the direction of the Committee, and Ms. Toussaint
brought this proceeding. She sought a declaration that Canada’s failure to give
effect to the Views adopted by the Committee violates ss. 7 and 15 of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms (the “Charter”). Ms. Toussaint sought
an order under s. 24(1) of the Charter, requiring Canada to give
effect to the Views of the Human Rights Tribunal in a manner that complies with
the Charter.
[4]              
Finally, Ms. Toussaint pleaded that Canada is in violation of articles 6
and 26 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and
that Canada has a duty to ensure that there is an effective remedy for its
violations.
[5]              
After Ms. Toussaint commenced this proceeding, the Defendant, the
Attorney General of Canada (“Canada” or the “Defendant”), brought a motion to
strike this proceeding. Justice Perell dismissed the motion.
[6]              
Belobaba J. granted intervenor status as friends of the court in respect
of the motion before Perell J. to several of the intervenors who now seek to
intervene in this action. Those intervenors are as follows:
[7]              
Justice Belobaba found that these intervenors “[could] usefully assist
the court with the nuanced constitutional and international human rights issues
that arise [in this case].” Justice Belobaba ordered “that the Interveners
shall not be entitled to receive and shall not be liable for costs against any
party or intervener in the motion to strike.”
[8]              
There are a variety of issues before me.
[9]              
One of the issues relates to the nature of these parties’ proposed
intervention in the proceeding, going forwards.
[10]          
At a case conference in or around June 2024, the CCPI Coalition, Amnesty
International and ESCR-Net indicated they wished to intervene as friends of the
court with the right to review all productions and attend at discovery as
observers only. They did not seek any right to file pleadings, ask questions at
the discovery, introduce evidence, and indicated they would not object to
questions, or otherwise interfere with the proceeding. They agreed that they
will accept the record as filed by the Plaintiff and Canada and that they would
not seek a right of appeal. Further, they would be bound by the deemed
undertaking rule. They also sought an order at the outset that they would not
be liable for any costs.
[11]          
Canada took the position that they could not have the additional rights
they sought unless they sought to intervene as a party and not merely as a
friend of the court.
[12]          
As such, before me, the CCPI Coalition brought a motion to intervene as
a party pursuant to r. 13.01 of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O.
1990, Reg. 194, or alternatively as a friend of the court pursuant to r. 13.02.
In either case, it seeks the right to attend discovery and see productions as
set out above.
[13]          
Amnesty International and ESCR-Net seek only to intervene as friends of
the court pursuant to r. 13.02, but again, with the right to attend discovery
and see productions as set out above. They seek the exact same rights as the
CCPI Coalition.
[14]          
Notwithstanding its position at the case conference, Canada opposes that
the CCPI Coalition be permitted to intervene as a party. While it does not
oppose their intervention as friends of the court, it says that they must take
the record as it is at trial and cannot obtain the additional rights they seek
as friends of the court.
[15]          
There are also new proposed intervenors who bring motions:
[16]          
The Plaintiff supports all the intervention motions and corollary relief
sought. To the extent necessary, the Plaintiff seeks an order permitting her to
disclose productions and relieving her of the implied undertaking rule.
[17]          
She also seeks an order at the outset that she may disclose productions
and discovery information to academics, experts, and prospective experts to
assist her with the litigation. She is concerned that if she discloses
productions to any of these intervenors or experts, then Canada will argue that
she has breached the implied undertaking rule.
[18]          
At the outset, I note that the Plaintiff, Ms. Nell Toussaint, passed
away shortly after Perell J. dismissed the motion to strike. Her mother, Ann
Toussaint, became the representative of Ms. Toussaint’s Estate and has secured
funding from the Court Challenges Program of Canada to continue her daughter’s
claim.
[19]          
For the reasons that follow I add the CCPI Coalition, Amnesty
International and ESCR-Net as friends of the court with the rights they
requested. I am not adding the CCPI Coalition as a party because this request
was only driven by Canada’s position at the case conference. In my view, the
CCPI Coalition brought the request to added as a party out of an abundance of
caution given Canada’s position. Given that adding it as a friend of the court
will give it all the rights it seeks, there is no need to add it as a party.
[20]          
However, if I am wrong that these intervenors cannot have the rights
they seek as friends of the court as a matter of law, then I have conducted the
analysis and would add CCPI Coalition as a party in the alternative. It fully
satisfies the test for intervention as a party and I would exercise my
discretion to provide the CCPI Coalition with the corollary rights it seeks as
a party.
[21]          
In all cases, I also order that these intervenors are shall not receive
or be liable for costs.
[22]          
I also grant the intervention orders sought by Colour of Poverty
Coalition and the Migrant Worker Coalition, and also order that they shall not
receive or be liable for costs.
[23]          
I do not grant the Plaintiff’s motion to declare she may share all
discovery evidence and productions with proposed experts and academics, which
motion I adjourn to a future date. At this stage productions are not complete
and the nature of Canada’s concerns may not be fully apparent. If the parties
cannot resolve this, the Plaintiff may bring this motion back for consideration
after productions are complete.
[24]          
I conclude that these parties satisfy the test to
intervene as friends of the court at trial, pursuant to r. 13.02. The rule
states:
[25]          
In Bedford v. Canada (Attorney General), 2009 ONCA 669, 98 O.R.
(3d) 792, at para. 2, and Peel (Regional Municipality) v. Great Atlantic
& Pacific Co. of Canada Ltd. (1990), 1990 CanLII 6886 (ON CA), 74 O.R. (2d) 164, (Ont. C.A.), at
pp. 167-168, the court directed that in order to obtain an intervention order,
the proposed intervenor must: (i) “ha[ve] a real
substantial and identifiable interest in the subject matter of the
proceedings”; (ii) “ha[ve] an important perspective distinct from the immediate
parties”; or (iii) be “a well-recognized group with a special expertise and a
broadly identifiable membership base”: at para. 2.
[26]          
As noted, Canada raises no issue that these parties do not satisfy the
test for intervention as a friend of the court at trial, as long as they take
the record as it is.
[27]          
Justice Belobaba concluded that these parties met the required test in
respect of the r. 21 motion.
[28]          
The extensive motion materials before me provide considerable support
for the conclusion that all of these organizations have a real and substantial
identifiable interest in the subject matter of this proceeding, that they have
an important perspective distinct from the immediate parties, that they are
well-recognized groups with special expertise and a broadly based membership
base, and that they can make a useful contribution without causing injustice.
[29]          
In summary, these organizations:
[30]          
The moving parties argue that where a party intervenes as a friend of
the court, the court has discretion to impose terms and enhance the rights of
the intervenor beyond simply offering argument. They rely upon Perell J.’s
commentary in Paul M. Perell and John W. Morden, The Law of Civil Procedure
in Ontario, 5th ed. (LexisNexis Canada, 2024) at ¶4.443.
[31]          
Canada argues that the clear wording of r. 13.02 prohibits this
discretion. In that regard, it emphasizes the wording in r. 13.02 that the
court may grant intervenor’s status “for the purpose of rendering assistance to
the court by way of argument.” Canada says that in all cases of intervention as
a friend of the court, the intervenor must take the record as they find it.
[32]          
However, r. 13.02 has not been so narrowly confined. In CREES (EEYOU
ISTCHEE) et al v. Canada (Attorney General) et al, 2017 ONSC 3729, [2017] 4
C.N.L.R. 47, the court added an intervenor as a friend of the court and then
gave that intervenor the right to attend all examinations for discovery, receive
all documents filed by the parties, and obtain copies of transcripts to all
parties in like manner. In my view, the case before me is consistent with CREES.
[33]          
Canada also argues that the Orders sought as a matter of fact will
result in the intervenors doing significantly more than assisting the court. However,
it provided no evidence to support this, not even an affidavit setting out this
belief. It could have, but did not seek to cross examine any of the moving
parties or conduct a r. 39 examination of the Plaintiff on these issues.
[34]          
Given the complexity of the matter, giving the intervenors the requested
rights is in the service of their ability to render assistance for the
court’s benefit.
[35]          
Canada also argues that providing these intervenors with these rights will
increase the costs of this matter. However, if the intervenors will not file
pleadings, ask questions or make objections, I fail to see any significant
impact on the costs of the litigation. Canada could not persuasively articulate
any such prejudice or impact. Again, Canada did not provide any evidence or
conduct any cross examinations or r. 39 examinations that supported this
argument.
[36]          
Canada further says that this type of intervention should be curtailed
because the Plaintiff has asked for a wide range of documents, including public
inquiry documents, which is far-reaching. The far-reaching nature of the
requested documents is not relevant to the issue of the intervenor’s ability to
see productions; it is an issue of the scope of production which can be dealt
with by Canada as part of the production process, and also before me since this
matter is case managed.
[37]          
Canada also says that the deemed undertaking rule prevents the Plaintiff
from sharing productions with the intervenors. I disagree.
[38]          
Rule 30.1.01(3) provides as follows:
[39]          
The deemed undertaking rule “does not operate to prevent disclosure to
non-parties”: Seedling Life Science Ventures LLC v. Pfizer Canada Inc.,
2017 FC 826, 152 C.P.R. (4th) 319, at para. 32. It only prevents use of the
discovery information for reasons that are “collateral” or “ulterior” to the
action: Juman v. Doucette, 2008 SCC 8, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 157, at para. 26;
Power v. Parsons, 2018 NLCA 30, 25 C.P.C. (8th) 1, at paras. 15-21.
[40]          
Parties often share information obtained through discovery with experts,
potential witnesses, consultants, litigation funders, regulators, and “others
whose advice is relevant to the carriage of the litigation”: Seedling,
at para. 32; Winkler v. Lehndorff Management Ltd. (1998), 28 C.P.C.
(4th) 323 (Ont. C.J – Gen. Div.), at paras. 15-18; Lithwick (In Trust) v.
Hakim Optical Labroratory Ltd. (2007), CarswellOnt 7907 (Ont. S.C.J.), at
para. 20; Abou-Elmaati v. Canada (Attorney General), 2014 ONSC 6301, at
paras. 1-4, 25-27; Power, at paras. 17-18; and Sovani v Gray et al.;
Jampolsky v. Shattler et al., 2007 BCSC 403, at paras. 43-50, leave to
appeal denied, 2007 BCCA 439.
[41]          
Providing the desired information to friends of the court does not
undermine the purpose and integrity of the deemed undertaking rule because they
do not seek to use the material for “collateral” or “ulterior” purposes. When a
non-party receives information obtained through discovery, the non-party is
automatically bound by the deemed undertaking rule: Canadian National
Railway Company v. Holmes, 2014 ONSC 593, at paras. 26-33, 37; Winkler,
at paras. 15-18; and Live Face on Web, LLC v. Soldan Fence and Metals (2009)
Ltd., 2017 FC 858, 150 C.P.R. (4th) 368, at para. 14.
[42]          
In any event, as part of my order, I will expressly order that the
intervenors are bound by the deemed undertaking rule.
[43]          
Even if the deemed undertaking rule applied, the court has the
discretion, per r. 30.1.01(08), to order that the undertaking does not apply
where the interests of justice outweigh any prejudice that would result:
[44]          
An exemption from the deemed undertaking rule is only granted in
exceptional cases. When exercising its discretion under rule 30.1.01(8), the
court must weigh the public interest at stake or interests of justice against
the values protected by the deemed undertaking rule, namely privacy and the
efficient conduct of civil litigation: Juman, at para. 32; Kitchenham
v. AXA Insurance Canada, 2008 ONCA 877, 94 O.R. (3d) 276, at paras. 10, 57.
[45]          
Here, there is no meaningful countervailing privacy interest that should
prevent the Plaintiff from sharing productions with the intervenors.
[46]          
The cases cited by Canada are not analogous.
[47]          
Canada cites Livent Inc. v. Drabinsky (2001), 2001 CanLII 28039 (ON SC), 53 O.R. (3d) 126
(Ont. S.C.J.); however, it is not relevant. In Drabinsky, the non-party
sought to use discovery information for extraneous purposes in a separate, threatened
proceeding in the United States. In contrast, the intervenors here seek to use the
discovered documents solely within the four corners of the proceeding in which
they were obtained. I make a similar point with respect to the other cases
Canada cites, all of which involved disclosure for purposes collateral to the
litigation: Fibrogen, Inc. v. Akebia Therapeutics, Inc., 2022 FCA 135, 471
D.L.R. (4th) 746, at para. 53; N.M. Paterson & Sons Ltd. V. St. Lawrence
Seaway Management Corp., 2002 FCT 1247, at paras. 7-9, upheld on appeal,
2004 FCA 210; XY, LLC v. Canadian Topsires Selection Inc., 2012 BCSC
1797, 40 B.C.L.R. (5th) 325, at para. 175; Lac d’Amiante du Québec Ltée v.
2858-0702 Québec Inc., 2001 SCC 51, [2001]
2 S.C.R. 743; Invest Bank PSC c. Al-Husseini, 2022 QCCS 4031, at paras
31-36; and Ludmer c. Canada (Attorney General), 2014 QCCS 4853.
[48]          
In addition, these intervenors are not true non-parties or “strangers” to
the litigation; rather, the Plaintiff and Canada have agreed that they should
have court-approved status in the proceeding. While Drabinsky was about
preventing non-party strangers swooping into a proceeding, extracting discovery
information, and deploying it elsewhere for ulterior purposes, that is not the
case here.
[49]          
In my view, if it was required, the interests of justice would favour
ordering that the deemed undertaking rule does not apply to these intervenors.
[50]          
Finally, I note that the court has the discretion to permit non-parties
to attend discovery: Rikhye v. Rikhye, 2017 ONSC 4722.
[51]          
The Plaintiff also sought an Order that the deemed undertaking rule does
not prevent it from sharing productions and discovery transcripts with
academics, experts, and consultants.
[52]          
Canada’s position is that the Plaintiff would have to bring a motion
with respect to each and every document and each and every non-party that it
seeks to consult. This makes no sense. In litigation, parties routinely
communicate with such non-parties to obtain assistance with their litigation
and show such non-parties documents for the purpose of the litigation. The
reason why there is no precedent for such an order is that it is so obvious.
[53]          
I also disagree with Canada’s argument that there is “no problem” with
letting Canada know each time it proposes to communicate with non-parties to
obtain assistance with this proceeding. Requiring the Plaintiff to bring
motions with respect to each and every document and each and every non-party
expert or academic would effectively require the Plaintiff to disclose its
litigation strategy. It would be costly and extremely inefficient.
[54]          
However, I do not make this order at this time. The parties have not yet
completed productions and the nature of Canada’s concerns cannot be fully
understood in a vacuum. It is unknown whether some documents could be
confidential such that additional protections are required. The prudent course
is to proceed with the production phase. If the parties cannot resolve this
matter, the Plaintiff may bring the motion back on for consideration.
[55]          
I agree that the court should make an order now to apply to
unanticipated dispositive motions for the following reasons.
[56]          
In a case conference brief filed with the court, the Plaintiff alluded
to the fact that Canada may seek to bring a motion for summary judgment and or
a further motion to strike. All of the above intervenors want to intervene on such
motion if it is brought.
[57]          
This is now the second motion for intervention. If these parties have
already persuaded two courts that they should be entitled to intervene in
respect of a dispositive motion like a motion to strike and now at trial, then
in my view, they also have a basis to intervene as a friend of the court in
other motions that could dispose of this proceeding. It makes little sense to
require them to re-apply for intervention status. Indeed, that would waste
time, expenses, and the court’s scarce resources. It is unclear what objection
Canada could possibly raise given Belobaba J.’s previous order and the position
it took before me.
[58]          
Here, I reference r. 1.04(1), and the backlog in the civil justice
system.
[59]          
I note that the proposed Order preserves for the court ultimately
hearing the trial and any dispositive motions to set limits on the oral and
written submissions. If there is a dispositive motion planned, then as case
management judge, I can hear submissions and then impose limits for such a motion.
[60]          
The general rule is that a party who intervenes as a friend of the court
pursuant to r. 13.02 is neither liable for, nor entitled to, costs: Canadian
Union of Postal Workers, at para. 8; Ogichidaakwe (Grand Chief), et al.
v. Ontario Minister of Energy, et al., 2015 ONSC 7582, at para. 8; and see
also Keewatin v. Ontario (Natural Resources), 2012 ONCA 891, at para. 3.
[61]          
The general rule will “usually” apply when the intervention is in the
public interest: Canadian Union of Postal Workers, at para. 43. See Metropolitan
Stores (MTS) Ltd. v. Manitoba Food and Commercial Workers, Local 832 (1990),
1990 CanLII 11291 (MB KB), 70 Man R (2d) 59 (Man. Q.B.), at para. 11.
[62]          
Again, I see no basis to disturb the general rule in this case and
Canada could not persuasively articulate anything that should take this matter
outside the general rule. These intervenors are public interest intervenors
seeking to assist the court in unpacking a complex area.
[63]          
Canada has not been able to show how their intervention will appreciably
increase the time or expense of the proceeding, even if they have the right to
see productions and attend discovery.
[64]          
I consider this in the alternative in the event that I am wrong about my
conclusions that the CCPI Coalition can obtain the rights it seeks as a friend
of the court.
[65]          
Rule 13.01 provides as follows:
[66]          
A court should consider the following in the exercise of its discretion
[67]          
Notably, in Trempe, at para 21, Molloy J. noted the broad
judicial discretion and that the Court’s order could provide full rights of participation
or order that such rights be restricted.
[68]          
I find that the CCPI Coalition has satisfied all aspects of the test.
[69]          
The Fresh as Amended Statement of Claim sets out that the nature of this
case is both a personal claim brought by Nell Toussaint claiming that Canada
violated her rights, as well as a systemic claim related to other migrants who
do not receive healthcare in Canada.
[70]          
In Halpern, at paras. 13-21, Lang J. reviewed the caselaw and
concluded that “interest in the subject matter of the proceeding” has been
interpreted to include a public interest in the proceeding, to the extent that
the party’s interest is over and above that of the general public. She also
referenced the fact that greater latitude is given to intervenor motions in
cases involving Charter challenges because such challenges involve a
greater public interest.
[71]          
Notably, since Halpern, the Supreme Court has also recognized the
ability of nonprofit public organizations to bring claims related to Charter
breaches on the basis of public interest standing in appropriate cases.
[72]          
In British Columbia (Attorney General) v. Council of Canadians with
Disabilities, 2022 SCC 27, 62 B.C.L.R. (6th), a not-for-profit organization
working for the rights of people living with disabilities in Canada, together
with two individuals, filed a claim challenging the constitutionality of
certain provisions of British Columbia’s mental health legislation. They
asserted that the impugned provisions violated ss. 7 and 15 of the Charter,
which are the same provisions at issue here. The two individuals who had been
affected by the provisions withdrew from the litigation, leaving only the
not-for-profit organization as the plaintiff.
[73]          
The Supreme Court upheld the lower court’s decision to allow the
not-for-profit to continue the action on its own on the basis of it having
public interest standing. The Court stated that “public interest standing
provides an avenue to litigate the legality of government action in spite of
social, political or psychological barriers to access which may preclude
individuals from pursuing their legal rights”: at para. 36. In particular, the
Court stated at para. 33:
[74]          
The issue before me is not the same as that in B.C. v. Council of
Canadians with Disabilities. This is a motion to intervene as a party, with
far fewer requested participatory rights than a public interest litigant
granted standing would have. However, the overall finding that the
not-for-profit in B.C. v. Council of Canadians with Disabilities had a
sufficient interest to bring the case on its own as a public interest litigant
is important for the present motion. That finding may guide the court in its
exercise of its discretion in this case.
[75]          
In the present case, the CCPI Coalition seeks to advance the principle
of legality and access to justice as a party intervenor, which brings this
within the principle expressed in B.C. v. Council of Canadians with
Disabilities.
[76]          
The CCPI Coalition has also established that it has a substantial
interest in the subject matter of the proceeding. It has also established that
it is a well-recognized group with a special expertise and broad membership
base and that it will be able to make a distinct and useful contribution to the
resolution of the issues before the court. In that regard, it works with
regular migrants who have a direct interest in this proceeding and who will be
directly affected by the findings in this case. It has a broad membership base
and is a recognized expert in respect of the impact of barriers to health care.
[77]          
I highlight the following background information about the CCPI
Coalition from its materials in support.
[78]          
The CCPI Coalition is a national committee
founded in 1989 to bring together low-income representatives and experts in
human rights, constitutional law, and poverty law for the purpose of assisting
disadvantaged groups in Canada to secure and assert their rights under the Charter,
international law, domestic human rights law, and other laws in Canada.
[79]          
The CCPI Coalition has a recognized interest
and expertise in the application of the Charter to disadvantaged groups
and in the relationship between international human rights law and the Charter.
CCPI has intervened in 13 cases at the Supreme Court of Canada. In all these
interventions, CCPI has emphasized the importance of interpreting the Charter
to provide at least the same level of protection as is afforded by
international human rights treaties ratified by Canada, and in a manner that
ensures the equal benefit of the Charter for those experiencing poverty
or socio-economic disadvantage. Among others, CCPI has specifically intervened
in the following cases involving access to health care and/or Canada’s
international human rights obligations:
[80]          
The CCPI Coalition’s contributions to these cases and others have been
influential in the development of jurisprudence that has direct application in
the present case.
[81]          
As an organization
committed to ensuring access to effective remedies through consistent interpretations
of ss. 7 and 15 of the Charter, the CCPI Coalition has a significant
interest in the outcome of this action. It has worked to promote access to
justice for disadvantaged groups under the Charter for alleged
violations related to access to essential health care or other necessities. It
will be directly affected by the outcome of this case, as will its work
promoting the implementation of international human rights in Canada.
[82]          
The Canadian Health Coalition
(“CHC”), which is a part of the CCPI Coalition, was founded in 1979 and is
dedicated to preserving and enhancing Canada’s public health care system for
the benefit of all residents of Canada, regardless of economic, social,
citizenship, or other status. It includes organizations representing seniors,
women, faith groups, students, consumers, labour unions, recent immigrants, and
health care professionals from across Canada. CHC promotes informed discussion
and assessment of public policy and legislation linked to access to health
care, based on reliable evidence and full consideration of the interests and
needs of disadvantaged groups.
[83]          
In 2022, CHC hosted a webinar launch of a
report on the barriers to accessing health care based on immigration status. In
2024, CHC and the University of Ottawa’s Centre for Health Law, Policy and
Ethics organized the Canada Health Act at 40 Research Roundtable at the
University of Ottawa with 75 researchers. At the roundtable, the experts
addressed the relationship between the Canada Health Act, R.S.C., 1985,
c. C-6, and international law with regards to migrants’ health care in Canada.
In January 2024, CHC organized the sending of a letter signed by a number of
human rights and health care experts, and 500 supporting letters, to federal
ministers, calling on Canada to accept recommendations made at the UN Human
Rights Council that Canada ensure access to health care without discrimination
on the ground of irregular immigration status, and calling on Canada to implement
the UN Human Rights Committee’s decision in ICCPR, Communication No. 2348/2014, Nell Toussaint v. Canada, UN Doc. CCPR/C/123/D/2348/2014.
[84]          
CHC has also participated in litigation to promote the maintenance and
enhancement of the public health care system and protect universal access to
health care based on need. In particular, CHC was granted intervener before the
Supreme Court of Canada in Chaoulli, as described above, and in the
Motion to Strike in the present case.
[85]          
CHC has a direct interest
in the court’s determination in this case of whether the Charter is to
be interpreted as providing the same level of protection of the right to life and
non-discrimination in access to publicly funded health care as compared to access
to privately funded health care, and whether the protections accorded by these
rights under the Charter are of the same level as those found in the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (the “ICCPR”).
[86]          
The FCJ Refugee Centre (“the Centre”) is a non-profit,
grassroots organization in Toronto and a registered charity that has served
refugees and other vulnerable migrant populations for more than 30 years. The
Centre’s membership and clients include irregular migrants.
[87]          
The Centre provides support and services to migrants in
diverse circumstances in several areas, such as immigration and refugee
protection and one-on-one assistance for migrant youth, survivors of human
trafficking, and women and children fleeing violence and abuse.
[88]          
The Centre addresses systemic issues that migrants face
in Canada, including lack of resources, marginalization, discrimination, and
the lack of access to education, health care, and other critical services. It
has supported thousands of individuals and families, many in precarious
situations, to regularize their status.
[89]          
Many of the Centre’s clients are denied access to
provincial or federal health care due to their immigration status and are
unable to secure privately funded health care because of financial barriers.
The Centre has partnered with other organizations in campaigning for equal
access to publicly funded health care for uninsured migrants and advocated for
changes to Canadian legislation to ensure access to health care for irregular
migrants.
[90]          
In 2012, the Centre established their Primary Health
Care Clinic to assist uninsured individuals to access health care. With the
support of the Inner-City Health Association, it now operates a fully equipped
examination room for uninsured patients, staffed by primary physicians, a team
of internationally trained volunteer doctors and nurses, and one psychiatrist.
[91]          
In 2021, the Centre joined the City of Toronto in the
“Toronto for All Campaign” to advocate for the rights of migrants in Toronto to
access safe and secure housing, health care, and education for themselves and
their children. The Centre has worked with the City of Toronto to combat
stigmatization, prejudice, and systemic discrimination faced by migrants, and
to encourage equal treatment and respect for the human rights of irregular
migrants.
[92]          
Additionally, the Centre provides health care to
irregular migrants who have been denied access to publicly funded essential
health care. Therefore, it has a direct interest in the outcome of this action.
[93]          
The Madhu Verma Migrant Justice Centre (the “Madhu Centre”) is a non-profit organization
dedicated to advancing migrant justice and supporting the struggles of migrants
with precarious status in New Brunswick. The individuals it supports includes
migrant workers, underserved migrants, refugee claimants, international
students, people with undocumented or irregular immigration status, and
seasonal migrant workers who leave their workplaces due to abuse, illness, or
another reason and find themselves without any health care coverage.
[94]          
Since its founding, the Madhu Centre has
assisted over 100 individuals with applications like open work permits for
vulnerable workers, humanitarian and compassionate applications, temporary
resident permits, pre-removal risk assessments, and judicial reviews.
[95]          
The Madhu Centre operates the Migrant Worker
Legal Clinic (the “Clinic”), funded by the New Brunswick Law Foundation.
Launched in November 2023, the Clinic supports migrant workers and underserved
migrants, including those who are in the process of securing access to health
care and those excluded from public health care. It does so by helping clients
secure essential health care from service providers on a voluntary basis and
raise funds to cover necessary medical expenses.
[96]          
Therefore, it has a direct interest in the
outcome of this proceeding.
[97]          
The Madhu Centre also contributes to research
and raising awareness about the circumstances faced by vulnerable migrants. It
contributed to a report with researchers from Dalhousie University and St.
Thomas University on migrant workers in New Brunswick’s seafood industry, which
documented the unique challenges these migrants encountered when accessing
health care. In June 2023, the Madhu Centre was invited to appear before the
Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology to provide
testimony on the ways in which migrant workers face abuse and discrimination in
their workplaces. A few months later, it participated in and helped convene a
special visit by the Standing Senate Committee to New Brunswick to meet with
migrant workers in order to learn more about their experiences. The Madhu
Centre has also assisted Professor Tomoya Obokata, UN Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of slavery, to assess the situation with respect to closed
work permits in Canada in June 2023, including by convening a symposium for the
Rapporteur to meet migrant workers.
[98]          
The CCPI Coalition proposes to focus its intervention on one component
of the claim in this action. Its proposed intervention relates to the
Plaintiff’s request for a declaration that the Defendant’s decision not to give
effect to the Views adopted by the UN Human Rights Committee (the decision in Nell
Toussaint v. Canada), thus refusing to ensure that irregular migrants are
no longer denied access to essential health care when their lives are at risk,
violates ss. 7 and 15 of the Charter. The Plaintiff further seeks an
order under section 24(1) of the Charter, requiring Canada to give
effect to the Views in a manner that complies with the Charter. The CCPI
Coalition seeks leave to intervene to assist the court in assessing this
element.
[99]          
Specifically, the CCPI Coalition seeks to assist the court with the
following questions:
[100]       The
CCPI Coalition says that these issues are among the most critical, unresolved
questions in existing Charter jurisprudence, and they lie at the heart
of our Constitution’s promise of equal protection and benefit of its most
fundamental guarantees. The court's approach and answer to these questions will
have immense implications not only for irregular migrants requiring access to
essential health care for the protection of their lives, but also for the
constitutional rights of many of the most disadvantaged individuals and groups
in Canadian society, whose perspective the CCPI Coalition represents.
[101]       The
CCPI Coalition brings together the perspective of those who experience the same
harms as the Plaintiff did. The CCPI Coalition is uniquely positioned to assist
with the resolution of this matter and to ensure that the court has a full
record upon which to decide the issues, as it is fully attuned to the
perspective of those directly affected. It is uniquely positioned to address
systemic issues as well as the issues of legality, accountability, and access
to justice.
[102]       Its
perspective is different because unlike the Plaintiff, it will not be
addressing the issue of compensation for a past violation; rather, it will
address whether Canada’s ongoing failure to implement the Views of the
Committee violates the Charter rights which it says are essential to
protect migrant lives.
[103]       Notably,
there is no evidence before me that the Plaintiff is someone who has the
perspective of all migrants or those denied health care, on whom the CCPI
Coalition intends to focus. Nor do I have evidence before me that the Plaintiff
has available to her all of the research and expertise that the CCPI Coalition
has assembled over the years and which may be relevant to the wider issue of
alleged systemic discrimination.
[104]       The
decision in this matter will impact many individuals who are not immediate
parties to this proceeding. For this reason, it is critical that the court has
the benefit of various perspectives.
[105]       Perell
J.’s decision on the motion to strike also supports the conclusion that it has
a valuable and distinct perspective.
[106]       For
the same reasons set out above with respect to its intervention as a friend of
the court, there is no persuasive argument or evidence before me that the kind
of participation it seeks will cause undue delay or prejudice.
[107]       I
also exercise my discretion to relieve liability for the following reasons.
[108]       As
noted, pursuant to r. 13.02, immunity from costs is the norm.
[109]       Courts
have provided immunity from costs awards to public interest groups granted
intervenor status under r. 13.01 in some Charter cases, even when the
intervenors played a more active role than that proposed by the CCPI Coalition:
Affleck v. AGO, 2019 ONSC 1292, 49 C.P.C. (8th) 431, at para. 28; CanWest
Media Works Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General), 2006 CanLII 37258, at paras.
14-15.
[110]       Indeed,
the general rule is that a public interest intervenor is neither liable for nor
entitled to costs: North American Financial Group Inc, v. Ontario Securities
Commission, 2018 ONSC 1281, at para. 14; Canadian Union of Postal
Workers v. Her Majesty in Right of Canada, 2017 ONSC 6503, 19 C.P.C. (8th)
136, at para. 11.
[111]       In
Whirlpool Canada Co. v. Chavila Holdings Limited, 2015 ONSC 2080, Master
Short suggested that the approach to be taken to costs protections in Charter
cases is different from the approach in private disputes: at paras. 60-62. He
observed that protection from costs in a 13.01 intervention by EGALE in a Charter
case “reflects the role the court expects an intervenor to play”: at para. 61.
[112]       The
CCPI Coalition is a not-for-profit relying on pro bono counsel. It will not be
able to participate at all if it could be liable for costs. I accept the point
that groups like migrants, who are already economically challenged, would have
difficulty bringing forth this case and that they must rely upon
not-for-profits like the CCPI Coalition. The CCPI Coalition’s participation is
important for the proper adjudication of this matter, but it would not be able
to participate without an order that it not be liable for costs.
[113]       Given
the scope of this intervention, its involvement, even if as a party, will not
increase costs in any significant way beyond what would be incurred if it
merely intervened as a friend of the court without such rights.
[114]       I
reject Canada’s argument that the fact that Ann Toussaint is a non-resident
should somehow mean that the proposed intervenors should not be immune from
costs. Canada provided no evidence on this issue.
[115]       I
also reject its argument that this claim is so tenuous that there should not be
a no costs order so as to discourage the parties from pursuing this case where
public resources are expended. Canada raised that argument with Perell J. and
failed to persuade him that the claim was so tenuous that it should be
dismissed. I also do not see how the arguments that the Plaintiff should have
brought this action as a class proceeding are relevant to the issue of costs.
[116]       This
matter is going on consent. The Colour of Poverty Coalition was an intervenor
at the motion before Perell J. and it was determined that they satisfy the test
to intervene as a friend of the court. Canada raises no issues that their
intervention will increase the time and expense of the proceeding or will cause
it any prejudice. I agree that there is a sufficient basis for this
intervention.
[117]       The
Migrant Worker Coalition seeks to intervene as a friend of the court and file a
factum and present oral argument at the trial of this matter.
[118]       Canada’s
main arguments are that Nell Toussaint was not a migrant worker and that there
are already so many intervenors from interested parties that the court should
exercise its discretion to control the scope of this proceeding.
[119]       Here,
I return to the Bedford test.
[120]       The
Migrant Worker Coalition has a real substantial and identifiable interest in
the subject matter of this proceeding and is a well-recognized group with
special expertise and a broadly identifiable membership base. It consists of
public interest organizations working towards the fair and just treatment of
migrant agricultural workers in Ontario and throughout Canada. The outcome of
this case will have serious implications for its constituents’ rights to health
care.
[121]       The
Migrant Worker Coalition is composed of Justicia for Migrant Women (“J4MW”),
the Industrial Farmworker Clinic (“MWFC”), and the Industrial Accident Victims
Group of Ontario (“IAVGO”). They are reputable community-based organizations
with a long history of community service and advocacy, representing diverse
racialized and/or immigrant communities and workers in Ontario. Collectively,
they have developed specialized expertise on issues facing migrant agricultural
workers, and this expertise has been recognized by various levels of
government, the courts, and international bodies.
[122]       J4MW
is a non-profit, grassroots collective based in Toronto, Ontario, advocating
for the fair and just treatment of migrant agricultural workers in Ontario and
throughout Canada. J4MW creates inclusive spaces for marginalized agricultural
workers and community labour advocates to engage in anti-oppressive social,
political, and legal learning and action. J4MW works closely with migrant
workers who face both precarious immigration and employment status in Canada,
and who often have to work in hazardous workplaces, leading to serious
injuries, illness, or death. The majority of J4MW members are also racialized
persons.
[123]       MWFC
was established in 2020 by a joint collaboration between J4MW and the
University of Windsor, Faculty of Law, with funding from the Law Foundation of
Ontario. The MFWC has represented and given summary advice and public legal
education to hundreds of migrant farm workers in Southern Ontario since then.
The clinic is administered by a dedicated staff lawyer, Windsor Law academics,
J4MW organizers, and other lawyers and legal professionals on a pro bono basis.
It is also supported by the Transnational Law and Racial Justice Centre at
Windsor Law. The clinic provided extensive legal and other support during the
COVID-19 pandemic in the Windsor-Essex region and is especially attuned to the risk
of death, disease, and disability for racialized individuals due to the absence
of universal health care.
[124]        IAVGO
is a specialty community legal clinic funded pursuant to the Ontario Legal
Aid Services Act, 2020, S.O. 2020, c. 11, Sched. 15.
For 49 years, IAVGO has worked on behalf of injured workers and the surviving
family members of workers killed on the job. It has represented thousands of
injured workers in appeals before the Workplace Safety and Insurance Board and
Workplace Safety and Insurance Appeals Tribunal. IAVGO also conducts public
legal education about workers’ compensation law, trains hundreds of law
students, and engages in policy and law reform work. Most of its clients are
marginalized workers who were injured or sickened in the course of precarious
employment. Because of their exceptional vulnerability, IAVGO has chosen to
prioritize the issues facing migrant farmworkers and their families when they
are injured, sickened, or killed on the job. Many of IAVGO's clients,
especially those who are migrant workers, struggle to access health care
because of their precarious and fluctuating immigration status.
[125]       The
members of the Migrant Worker Coalition have extensive experience representing
migrant farmworkers in accessing their rights. Both collectively and
separately, they have also intervened in cases addressing racially
discriminatory legislation/policy, workplace safety, and immigrant rights at
various levels of court, including the Supreme Court of Canada. They have been
granted status to intervene in cases including, but not limited to, the
following: Ontario (Attorney General) v. Fraser, 2011 SCC 20, [2011] 2
S.C.R. 3; R v. Peart, 2017 ONSC 782 (Div. Ct.); Schuyler Farms
Limited v. Dr. Nesathurai, 2020 ONSC 4711; O.P.T. v. Presteve Foods Ltd
., 2015 HRTO 675; Quebec (Commission des normes, de l'équité, de la santé et
de la sécurité du travail) v. Caron, 2018 SCC 3, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 35.
[126]       In
Fraser, the Migrant Worker Coalition assisted the Court to
understand how its decision about agricultural workers’ ability to unionize
would affect racialized migrant agricultural workers. IAVGO and J4MW have also represented
farm workers in cases about their right to health care. For example, in OHIP
v. Clarke & Williams, 2014 ONSC 2009, 119 O.R. (3d) 782, they advocated
for two migrant farmworkers who were denied health care coverage because their
work permits had expired through the TFW program.
[127]       J4MW
and IAVGO also intervened at the Divisional Court in Schuyler Farms Limited to
advocate in favour of public health protections to reduce migrant workers’ risk
of getting infected with COVID- 19. In its decision, the court cited the
Migrant Worker Coalition’s submissions in observing that “MFWs are
exceptionally vulnerable to health risks because of their immigration status,
race and the precarious employment relationships imposed by the structure of
the programs under which they are employed”: at para. 86.
[128]       The
Migrant Worker Coalition seeks to intervene to make a useful and distinct
contribution based on its knowledge and expertise by showing how the denial of
access to essential federal health care violates the rights of migrant
farmworkers under the Charter and international human rights law. Their
expertise and direct experience in issues related to systemic barriers and
vulnerability faced by migrant workers places them in a unique position to
offer a useful contribution to the analysis in this case.
[129]       In
particular, the decision in this case will have a significant effect on the
legal rights of the injured and racialized migrant farmworkers they represent
and assist. Notably, this case will bring attention to the migrant farmworkers
who perform dangerous work on Canada’s farms and greenhouses, a particular
class of precarious migrants who are not otherwise being represented before the
court and highlight the impact of Canada’s determination on this particular
class of migrants.
[130]       The
Migrant Worker Coalition will provide the following arguments to assist the court,
which are distinct from the Plaintiff’s arguments and those of other
intervenors:
[131]       The
fact that Nell Toussaint was not a migrant farmworker or injured in an
industrial accident does not change the fact that the issues in this proceeding
will have an impact on such workers. Although Nell Toussaint came to Canada
pursuant to an authorized work permit, and not as a migrant farmworker, the
precarity of her access to health care is analogous to the situation of migrant
farmworkers. As such, it is crucial that the Migrant Workers Coalition’s perspective
be heard.
[132]       With
respect to Canada’s argument that there are already too many intervenors,
Canada indicated that it would consent to intervention of any intervenor
granted intervenor status for the r. 21 motion, as friends of the court at
trial. The following intervenors were granted status for that motion:
[133]       I
note that at the motion before Perell J., these parties all made submissions
and the matter was heard in one day, with the decision rendered approximately three
months later. Therefore, having this many intervenors did not appreciably
increase the scope of this matter or cause any delay. It was Canada’s argument
to make with evidence, if the number of intervenors was a big problem; however,
Canada failed to provide any evidence of any specific increase in costs
occasioned to it because of the number of intervenors at the r. 21 motion.
[134]       If
the Migrant Worker Coalition is added as an intervenor, it would mean that
there are six intervenors at trial, each making submissions to the court. The
court is able to limit both the length of their written and oral submissions.
[135]       I
am not persuaded that there are significant concerns about increased costs by
virtue of this one additional intervenor, particularly when compared to the
unique and important perspective that it will offer with respect to situated
parties. Indeed, the fact that this perspective is not yet before the court
supports permitting it to be an intervenor.
[136]       I
grant the Plaintiff’s motion to exempt the matter from mandatory mediation.
[137]       Pursuant
to r. 24.1, all matters must proceed to mandatory mediation within 180 days
after the first defence is filed. The court may exempt a matter pursuant to r.
24.1.05. It may also extend the time pursuant to r. 24.1.09(2).
[138]       As
set out in G.O. et al. v C.D.H (2000), 2000 CanLII 22691 (ON SC), 50 O.R. (3d) 82 (Ont.
S.C.J.), at pp. 86-87, the following criteria are relevant in this case to
determine whether an exemption should be made:
[139]       All
of these factors weigh in favour of the Plaintiff here.
[140]      
Canada’s argument that these matters require urgent mediation to assess
the Plaintiff’s chance of success and reduce costs is unpersuasive. The parties
have already obtained a detailed analysis and evaluation of the scope of the issues
in Perell J.’s decision on the motion to strike. Perell J. described Canada’s
motion to strike as a “land, sea, submarine, and celestial attack.”
[141]       Additionally,
this case is not merely about minor monetary compensation. As noted, the
Plaintiff seeks declarations relating to the constitutionality of Canada’s
conduct when it made an Order in Council in 2012, that it violated the Charter
protections, and that the interim Federal Health Plan be interpreted consistent
with ss. 7 and 15 of the Charter. It seeks a declaration that the rights
to life and the non-discrimination guarantee in the ICCPR has been violated. It
also seeks a declaration that Canada’s refusal to implement the views of the
Human Rights Committee violates the Charter, and is an unreasonable
decision not taken in good faith. These kinds of issues are not easily amenable
to settlement.
[142]       As
well, these are matters of public interest, the importance of which requires
adjudication to address longstanding concerns about access to justice for marginalized
groups, such as racialized women with irregular immigration status who are facing
serious health issues: see also Juanita Drodge et al. v. Jeffrey Martin et
al., 2005 NLTD 73, 247 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 223, at paras. 19-22. Perell J.
acknowledged that this case presented a complex legal and factual matrix that
may affect others.
[143]      
There have been significant attempts to resolve the dispute with Canada
over its failure to implement the Views of the Human Rights Committee since
2014. These efforts are also detailed in paragraph 5 of the Plaintiff’s factum
and its materials. On April 6, 2022, Canada replied to the Human Rights
Committee that “it would not be taking any further measures to give effect to
the Committee’s views” and Canada has maintained that position to date. It
advised that it was closing its file and asked that the Human Rights Committee
do so as well. I reject the argument that I cannot consider the evidence filed,
which sets out all of these efforts on the basis that this constitutes expert
evidence. While there may be opinions on some issues in these affidavits, the
description of the historical attempts to resolve this matter with Canada are
facts. Notably, Canada filed no evidence to dispute the factual assertions.
[144]      
Although the history set out is not mediation in the traditional sense,
it has been a forum in which the parties have been able to canvass their
positions. The parties are clearly entrenched in their positions. It is unclear
what the point of mediation would be, other than to delay this matter further.
[145]      
The action was commenced in 2020 and there is still no discovery plan.
Given the cost and delay, the parties should not be put to the time and expense
of a process that will add cost and delay without any chance of success. There
is a “real, human impact”: Bocchini v. Attorney General of Canada, 2024
ONSC 4181, at para 8; Allen v. Kumar, 2021 ONSC 5529, at paras. 10-12; Dunning
v. Colliers Macaulay Nicolls, 2023 ONSC 7115, at para. 7.
[146]      
I also reject the argument that Ann Toussaint, newly appointed as
representative, would be open to mediation and to settling Nell Toussaint’s
personal claim, absent Canada addressing similarly situated migrants. She has
counsel who argued this motion and requested this exemption. I have no reason
to conclude that counsel is not following her instructions.
[147]       Furthermore,
she stated that she wished to pursue her late daughter’s claim “as [her
daughter] did, in the public interest, to ensure that Canada protects the rights
to life and equality of those who find themselves in the circumstances of [her]
daughter” referencing what she faced “when she sought and was denied access to
essential healthcare.”
[148]      
Therefore,
[149]      
I grant leave to the CCPI Coalition, Amnesty International and ESCR-Net
to intervene as friends of the court are added as friends of the court with the
right to see documents produced by the parties, observe examinations for
discovery, file a factum and make argument at the trial of this matter.
[150]      
I grant leave to the CCPI Coalition, Amnesty International and ESCR-Net
to intervene in any pre-trial motions that could be dispositive of the
Plaintiff’s claims.
[151]      
I order that the CCPI Coalition, Amnesty International and ESCR-Net are
bound by the deemed undertaking rule.
[152]      
I grant leave to the Migrant Worker Coalition and the Colour of Poverty
Coalition to intervene as a friend of the court with the right to file a factum
and make argument at the trial of this matter.
[153]      
I order that the CCPI Coalition, Amnesty International, ESCR-Net, the
Migrant Worker Coalition and the Colour of Poverty Coalition shall not be
granted costs in this matter and that no costs shall be ordered against them.
[154]      
I order that this matter is exempt from the requirement for mandatory
mediation.
[155]      
I adjourn the plaintiff’s motion for a declaration that it may
communicate with third parties until after productions are complete.
[156]      
I order that there shall be no costs of this motion.