[1]              
This is an oppression remedy application under
s. 241 of the Canada Business Corporations Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-44 (“CBCA”).
The applicants, who are the minority shareholders of the respondent Xtreme
Trampoline Park Inc. (“Xtreme”), allege that the actions of the majority
shareholder, Sixin Wei, oppressed them.
[2]              
Xtreme is in the business of operating an indoor
trampoline park in Kanata, Ontario. Xtreme also owns 100 percent of the
respondent XTP Holdings Inc.
[3]              
XTP Holdings was incorporated for the purpose of
building an indoor trampoline park in Barrhaven, Ontario. The shareholders made
loans to Xtreme to fund the Barrhaven project. These loans were advanced to XTP
Holdings.
[4]              
XTP Holdings bought two properties in Barrhaven,
but ultimately could not obtain a rezoning of the properties to allow it to run
a trampoline park. Thus, the parties agreed to sell the properties and recoup
their loans through a share repurchase.
[5]              
The applicants argue that Mr. Wei has refused to
disburse to them their full share of the Barrhaven proceeds, contrary to a
supplementary shareholders’ agreement and unanimous shareholders’ resolution. They
also complain that Mr. Wei has denied them meaningful access to the accounting
records of the corporate respondents.
[6]              
The respondents deny that Mr. Wei’s conduct was
oppressive. They argue that the respondents cannot disburse the proceeds of
sale while Xtreme is facing liquidity concerns. They also say that the
applicants are not entitled to all of the proceeds of sale. Finally, they contend
that the applicant Dongtao Wang has access to the corporate bank accounts.
[7]              
I conclude that Mr. Wei’s conduct violated the
applicants’ reasonable expectations in three ways. First, I find that Mr. Wei denied Mr. Wang timely and meaningful access to the
accounting records of Xtreme and XTP Holdings. This conduct was unfairly prejudicial to the applicants’
interests as minority shareholders and unfairly disregarded those interests.
[8]              
Second, by the summer of 2023, Mr. Wei breached
the applicants’ reasonable expectations that the remaining proceeds of sale would
be returned to the shareholders in the form of a pro rata share repurchase,
after some of the proceeds were used to repay a contemplated loan for a project
in Kingston. This conduct was unfairly
prejudicial to and unfairly disregarded the applicants’ interests as minority
shareholders.
[9]              
Finally, Mr. Wei surreptitiously obtained funds
held in trust by the corporate respondents’ real estate solicitor, contrary to
the agreement of the shareholders and the reasonable expectations of the applicants.
Doing so was oppressive to the applicants’ interests.
[10]          
The applicants, Dongtao Wang, Yanyan Xu, Hongxia
Guo and Bin Chen, are minority shareholders in Xtreme. They hold, respectively,
17.5 percent, 15 percent, 10 percent and 7.5 percent of Xtreme’s shares. Collectively,
the applicants hold 50 percent of the company’s shares.
[11]          
The respondent Mr. Wei is the beneficial owner
of 50 percent of Xtreme’s shares, in his personal capacity and through a
holding company, 8932514 Canada Inc.
[12]          
The shareholders of Xtreme entered into a
Shareholders Agreement dated August 1, 2015.
[13]          
Mr. Wei and Mr. Wang are directors of the
corporate respondents. Mr. Wei is president and chief executive officer of the
corporations. Mr. Wang is the treasurer of Xtreme, but not of XTP Holdings.
[14]          
Xtreme and XTP Holdings are corporations duly
incorporated under the CBCA.
[15]          
The issues raised on this application are twofold:
[16]          
Section 241(2) of the CBCA provides that
a court may make an order to rectify the matters complained of where:
[17]          
Oppression is an equitable remedy. The court has
a broad equitable jurisdiction to enforce not only what is legal but also what is
fair. The court must therefore consider commercial reality in addition to the
law. This is a fact specific inquiry: BCE Inc. v. 1976 Debentureholders,
2008 SCC 69, [2008] 3 S.C.R. 560, at paras. 58-59.
[18]          
The oppression remedy seeks to uphold the
reasonable expectations of stakeholders: BCE, at para. 63. As the
Supreme Court of Canada put it, “Fair treatment… is most fundamentally what
stakeholders are entitled to ‘reasonably expect’”: BCE, at para. 64.
[19]          
In considering an oppression remedy application,
the court must ask two questions: (1) Does the evidence support the reasonable
expectations asserted by the applicants? and (2) Does the evidence establish
that their reasonable expectations were violated by conduct falling within the
terms “oppression”, “unfair prejudice” or “unfair disregard” of a relevant
interest? See BCE, at para. 95.
[20]          
Not every failure to meet a reasonable
expectation can properly ground an oppression application. The conduct must be “oppression”,
“unfair prejudice” or “unfair disregard” of the applicants’ interests, within
the meaning of s. 241 of the CBCA.
[21]          
Several classes of individuals qualify for
protection under the oppression remedy, including “a registered holder or
beneficial owner, and a former registered holder or beneficial owner, of a
security of a corporation or any of its affiliates”: s. 238 of the CBCA.
There is no question that the applicants as shareholders have standing under s.
241(1).
[22]          
The shareholders of Xtreme entered into a Supplementary
Shareholders’ Agreement on April 4, 2017. Among other things, this agreement
governed the financing and liquidation rules for the Barrhaven project.
[23]          
Mr. Wang, Mr. Xu, Mr. Y He, Mr. Wei and Mr.
Wei’s holding company advanced shareholder loans to Xtreme. (Mr. Y He is
the spouse of the applicant Ms. Guo. Mr. Y He later transferred his shares to
Ms. Guo.)
[24]          
These shareholder loans were converted into
equity by way of a share issuance, effective March 1, 2017. This is evidenced
by the Conversion Agreement dated March 1, 2017.
[25]          
Xtreme provided funding to XTP Holdings for the
purpose of developing the Barrhaven project.
[26]          
Two properties were purchased for the Barrhaven
trampoline park. Unfortunately, the project ran into trouble. XTP Holdings was
unable to obtain a rezoning of the properties which would allow XTP Holdings to
use the properties for the trampoline park.
[27]          
As a result, the applicants and Mr. Wei agreed in
July 2018 that the properties had to be sold.
[28]          
On July 23, 2018, all of the shareholders of
Xtreme met to discuss the Barrhaven project and a new project, located in
Kingston. Minutes of the shareholders’ meeting were made.
[29]          
Turning first to the Kingston project, the
minutes note that a property in Kingston had been purchased. The minutes also
note that suitable factory premises were found in Kingston, which Mr. Wei
purchased and owns personally. The minutes record that setting up a new company
for the Kingston project would require $2,000,000, but that the composition and
structure of the Kingston company was not finalized given uncertainty around
other investors.
[30]          
The minutes and evidence about the status of the
Kingston project is far from clear. Although the minutes speak of using an
approved loan from CIBC because of an urgent need for funds, I accept Mr.
Wang’s uncontradicted evidence that no loan was ultimately obtained from CIBC.
[31]          
In respect of Xtreme’s temporary need for
working capital, the minutes record that the shareholders agreed that Mr. Wang would
advance a shareholder’s loan of $70,000, Mr. He would advance a shareholder’s
loan of $20,000, and Mr. Wei would advance a shareholder’s loan of $140,000 –
all to Xtreme. The loans would be for a period of one year, and bear annual
interest of 6.5 percent. Xtreme could repay the loans in advance. It is unclear
whether these shareholders loans were made and if so, whether they were repaid.
[32]          
At the same shareholders’ meeting on July 23,
2018, although the shareholders did not strike a formal liquidation team, they unanimously
agreed that the Barrhaven properties would be sold. They agreed that once sold,
a portion of the funds would be used to repay the loan for the Kingston project,
and the shareholders unanimously agreed that the remaining funds will be
returned to the shareholders in the form of a pro rata share repurchase in
order to avoid the tax implications of a personal capital gain.
[33]          
Mr. Wang admitted on cross-examination that the
shareholders agreed that a portion of the proceeds from the sale of the Barrhaven
properties would be used to repay the loan for the Kingston project. Although
there was ultimately no loan from CIBC, it remains unclear on the record
whether the shareholders contemplated other loans being made to the Kingston
project and that a portion of the Barrhaven proceeds would be used to repay
those loans too.
[34]          
In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic struck. Xtreme’s
business operations as an indoor trampoline park had to be suspended. On June
10, 2020, Mr. Wei asked the shareholders to make a short-term emergency loan to
Xtreme. None of the applicants agreed to do so. Mr. Wei’s evidence is that he loaned
Xtreme $150,000 until it could resume business operations. No supporting
documentation was filed for the loan, and, in the absence of an accounting, the
court is unable to verify this.
[35]          
The Barrhaven properties were sold in 2021 and
closed on September 21, 2021. The sale included an eight-month vendor take back
mortgage.
[36]          
Shortly before the sale of the properties
closed, Mr. Wei advised the applicants that he opposed the distribution of all
of the proceeds to shareholders. He contended that Xtreme owed money to
shareholders – most significantly to himself – and that Xtreme had to meet its
commitment to the Kingston project.
[37]          
To avoid holding up the sale of the properties,
the parties agreed that half the proceeds of sale from the Barrhaven properties
– what the applicants claim is their portion – would be held in trust by the
real estate solicitor.
[38]          
The real estate solicitor provided an
undertaking to the applicants that he would hold the amount claimed by the
applicants in trust pending the agreement of all shareholders of Xtreme or
court order. The real estate solicitor paid out the balance of the proceeds
from the sale of the Barrhaven properties on September 21, 2021, apparently to XTP
Holdings. Because of the lack of an accounting, it is impossible to confirm
this.
[39]          
After the vendor take back mortgage was paid out,
the parties – including Mr. Wei – provided a direction to the real estate
solicitor to hold half of the mortgage payout in trust “until such time as the
parties agree or a court order directs otherwise”. The same direction
instructed the real estate solicitor to release the other half of the mortgage
payout to Mr. Wei. The parties to the direction described themselves as the “former
beneficial owners” of the Barrhaven properties.
[40]          
There having been no resolution of the
disagreement between the applicants and Mr. Wei, the applicants commenced this
application on October 11, 2022, seeking an oppression remedy.
[41]          
Mr. Wei acknowledged that the financial
performance of Xtreme had improved by the summer of 2023.
[42]          
As a result, on August 28, 2023, Mr. Wei
introduced a motion at Xtreme’s annual shareholders meeting. He proposed that
the shareholders “authorize the distribution by the Corporation to its
shareholders, proportionately with the number of shares held by them, of the
proceeds of sale of land obtained [by] the wholly owned subsidiary of the
Corporation, XTP Holdings Inc., including the funds held in the trust account
of the real estate [solicitor]”.
[43]          
The applicants opposed the motion because they
did not trust Mr. Wei. But as chairman of the meeting, Mr. Wei cast the
deciding vote and carried the motion for a resolution despite the applicants’
opposition.
[44]          
The applicants obtained an adjournment of the
application in November 2023 because the dispute over the distribution of the
proceeds from the sale of the Barrhaven properties appeared to have been
resolved, although details remained to be worked out.
[45]          
 The funds had not been distributed to the
applicants by January 2024. Counsel for the corporate respondents advised the
applicants’ counsel on January 4, 2024, that the delay was because the
respondents were planning a tax advantageous transfer of funds. The corporate
defendants shared the proposed plan – prepared by Turner Moore LLP – with the
applicants on January 10, 2024.
[46]          
On February 20, 2024, counsel for the applicants
wrote to counsel for the respondent corporations advising that the applicants
wished to proceed with the proposed distribution plan and asking for more
information about next steps.
[47]          
Unbeknownst to the applicants, Mr. Wei had
already written to the real estate solicitor and obtained the release of the
funds to XTP Holdings on January 19, 2024. It is Mr. Wei’s evidence that this
amount was then transferred from XTP Holdings to Xtreme.
[48]          
In February 2024, there was a partial
distribution of $1.2 million of the proceeds from the sale of the Barrhaven
properties (half of which was paid to the applicants). But then in March 2024, Mr.
Wei and Xtreme claimed that Xtreme could not distribute the balance of what is
owed to the applicants because of Xtreme’s liquidity concerns.
[49]          
The respondents argue that the balance of the
funds cannot be distributed to the shareholders until Xtreme’s dispute with its
landlord and the issue of the potential liquidation of Xtreme is resolved. I
will return to these issues below.
[50]          
Recall that in
assessing a claim of oppression, the court must ask two
questions: (1) Does the evidence support the reasonable expectations asserted
by the applicants? and (2) Does the evidence establish that their reasonable
expectations were violated by conduct falling within the terms “oppression”,
“unfair prejudice” or “unfair disregard” of a relevant interest?
[51]          
As president and CEO, Mr. Wei has control of the
day-to-day management of the corporate respondents. As such, there is little to
be gained by parsing whether the actions complained of by the applicants are
attributable to the corporate respondents versus Mr. Wei. I find that the
corporate acts and omissions at issue are attributable to Mr. Wei’s conduct.
[52]          
In effect, the applicants assert three reasonable
expectations:
[53]          
I will consider each in turn.
[54]          
Although the applicants’ written submissions focused
on Mr. Wei’s obligations as a director under s. 155(1) of the CBCA to
place before the shareholders at every annual meeting specific financial
documents, it became clear during argument that the applicants’ real complaint
is that Mr. Wei denied Mr. Wang timely and meaningful access to the accounting
records of Xtreme and XTP Holdings.
[55]          
I am satisfied that the evidence supports the applicants’ reasonable expectation
that Mr. Wang would have timely and meaningful access to the accounting
records of Xtreme and XTP Holdings. Mr. Wang is a director of both Xtreme and XTP
Holdings. This role and his access to the accounting records was intended to protect
the minority shareholders’ interests. This is evidenced by section 2.01 of the
Shareholders Agreement, which provides that Xtreme shall have two directors,
one nominated by Mr. Wei and the other by the minority shareholders.
[56]          
The record also shows that Mr. Wei occupied the
positions of CEO and president of Xtreme and one of the minority shareholders
held the position of treasurer. At first, it was the then-minority shareholder
Mr. Y He. Under the Supplementary Shareholders’ Agreement, Mr. Wang became
treasurer of Xtreme. At that time Mr. Wang was also added as a second director
of XTP Holdings.
[57]          
Under s. 20(4) of the CBCA, directors
have a right to inspect, among other things, the accounting records of a
corporation. The scope of documents that must be available to directors under
the CBCA or similar provincial legislation as “adequate accounting
records” is broad. Although not defined in the CBCA, comparable
provincial and United Kingdom statutory definitions support the view that adequate
accounting records should, at least, contain a record of the assets and
liabilities of the company, as well as entries from day-to-day of all monies
received and paid out and of the matters in respect of which these payments
occurred: Leggat v. Jennings, 2013 ONSC 903, at para. 17.
[58]          
The right of directors to inspect records is necessary
for them to discharge their responsibilities as directors: Sangha v. Sangha,
2002 BCSC 581. Directors must be able to do so to properly assess the financial
position of the corporation.
[59]          
I also find that the minority shareholders’
expectation reasonably extended to the accounting records of XTP Holdings. Mr.
Wang is a director of XTP Holdings.  As such, he is entitled to, and the
applicants reasonably expected that he would have, timely and meaningful access
to XTP Holdings’ accounting records.
[60]          
Mr. Wei unfairly
disregarded this reasonable expectation. Although it appears that Mr. Wang may
have been able to access one of Xtreme’s bank account statements through the
bank, this did not satisfy the minority shareholders’ reasonable expectations of
timely and meaningful access to the corporation’s accounting
records.
[61]          
Mr. Wei’s motives are unclear. I am,
however, satisfied that Mr. Wei’s conduct was deliberate and that it had the
effect of making Mr. Wang unable to properly fulfill his duties as director of
both companies and as treasurer of Xtreme. Mr. Wei’s conduct also meant that
Mr. Wang could not carry out the financial oversight reasonably expected by the
applicants as minority shareholders.
[62]          
I find that Mr. Wei denied Mr. Wang timely and meaningful access to the
accounting records of Xtreme and XTP Holdings. Doing so
was contrary to the applicants’ reasonable
expectations. This conduct was unfairly prejudicial to and unfairly disregarded
the applicants’ interests as minority shareholders: 1217174 Ontario Ltd. v.
141608 Canada Inc., 2017 ONSC 7698, 77 B.L.R. (5th) 10.
[63]          
The starting point in assessing the applicants’
reasonable expectations regarding the distribution of the proceeds of sale from
the Barrhaven properties is the Supplementary
Shareholders’ Agreement. Clause 3 of the agreement provides that “[i]f the
development of the Barrhaven project cannot proceed due to any uncontrollable circumstance,
all shareholders are required to vote to set up a liquidation team and
liquidate the project in proportion to their respective shares held at that
time.”
[64]          
The respondents argue that “liquidation” in this
context means the liquidation of XTP Holdings under s. 211 of the CBCA.
The respondents also contend that, since Xtreme is the sole shareholder of XTP
Holdings, any proceeds of dissolution through liquidation are distributed
directly to XTP Holdings and not to the applicants.
[65]          
I disagree with the respondents’ interpretation
that “liquidation” in clause 3 of the Supplementary Shareholders’ Agreement means
the liquidation of XTP Holdings under s. 211 of the CBCA.
[66]          
Unlike the Shareholders’ Agreement, the
Supplementary Shareholders’ Agreement was not drafted using technical legal
language. It was drafted using plain commercial language. It is a
businessperson’s document. One would expect that if the parties intended s. 211
of the CBCA to apply, “liquidation” would be defined by reference to it.
In fact, no reference to s. 211 of the CBCA is made anywhere in the
document.
[67]          
I find that in the context in which the
Supplementary Shareholders’ Agreement was made and in the context of the
surrounding language, “liquidation” does not mean the liquidation of XTP
Holdings under s. 211 of the CBCA. Rather, it refers to the termination
of the Barrhaven project itself and the ultimate distribution of the proceeds
from the sale of the Barrhaven properties to the shareholders of Xtreme, in
proportion to their respective shares (at the time the assets are sold).
[68]          
In this context, clause 3 simply provides a
roadmap as to what should happen if the Barrhaven project could not go ahead.
Nothing more and nothing less was intended by this provision. Clause 3 supports
the reasonable expectations of the applicants that they should receive the
proceeds of sale from the Barrhaven properties in proportion to their
respective shares at the time the Barrhaven properties.
[69]          
This is not the end of the analysis, however. The
applicants’ reasonable expectation must also
be considered in light of subsequent events.
[70]          
On July 23, 2018, the shareholders of Xtreme met
to discuss both the Kingston project and the Barrhaven project. The
shareholders unanimously agreed that the Barrhaven properties would be sold.
They agreed that once sold, a portion of the funds would be used to repay a
contemplated loan for the Kingston project. They also agreed that the remaining
funds would be returned to the shareholders in the form of a pro rata share
repurchase to avoid the tax implications of a personal capital gain.
[71]          
Mr. Wang admitted on cross-examination that the
shareholders agreed that a portion of the proceeds from the sale of the
Barrhaven properties would be used to repay the loan for the Kingston project.
[72]          
The respondents also argue that s. 2.07 of the
Shareholders’ Agreement provides that before distributions are made by Xtreme
to shareholders, the amount owing as shareholders loans be reduced
proportionately to their Class A Shares. Accordingly, the respondents contend
that any amount payable from the proceeds of the sale of Barrhaven properties
could be paid only after shareholders’ loans were repaid.
[73]          
I am not persuaded by this argument. The
shareholders were doubtless aware of s. 2.07 when they entered into the
Supplementary Shareholders’ Agreement and passed the unanimous agreement on
July 23, 2018. They chose to depart from s. 2.07.
[74]          
I therefore find that the reasonable expectation
of the minority shareholders was modified by the shareholders’ unanimous
agreement at the July 23, 2018 shareholders meeting. I return below to the lack
of evidence about the Kingston loan that the parties intended to repay using a
portion of the Barrhaven proceeds.
[75]          
I now consider whether Mr. Wei breached this
reasonable expectation.
[76]          
The respondents rely on the business judgment
rule. In the context of an oppression application, the rule may be simply
stated. Courts should give appropriate deference to the business judgment of
directors who take into account the best interests of the corporation, so long
as a business decision lies within a range of reasonable alternatives: BCE,
at para. 40; see also Maple Leaf Foods Inc. v. Schneider Corp. (1998),
1998 CanLII 5121 (ON CA), 42 O.R. (3d) 177 (C.A.); Kerr v. Danier Leather Inc., [2007] 3 S.C.R.
331, 2007 SCC 44.
[77]          
I am persuaded that Xtreme faced financial
difficulties because of the pandemic. Its financial statements reflect this. It
was therefore reasonable for Mr. Wei to oppose the distribution of the entire
proceeds from the sale of the Barrhaven properties until Xtreme returned to
financial health.
[78]          
But I find that Xtreme was returning to
financial health by the end of 2022. I am not persuaded that it was reasonable
for Mr. Wei to delay the distribution of the balance of the proceeds beyond the
summer of 2023. By that time, the funds ought to have been distributed
according to the reasonable expectations of the minority shareholders, as
reflected in the minutes of the July 23, 2018 shareholders meeting. (I will
return to the repayment of the Kingston loan below.)
[79]          
As discussed, in February 2024, there was a partial
distribution of $1.2 million of the proceeds from the sale of the Barrhaven
properties, half of which was paid to the applicants. But then in March 2024, Mr.
Wei and Xtreme claimed that Xtreme could not distribute the balance of what is
owed to the applicants because of Xtreme’s liquidity concerns.
[80]          
The respondents argue that Xtreme could not distribute
the balance of what is owed to the applicants because it cannot satisfy the
liquidity test under s. 34(2) of the CBCA. Section 34 provides:
[81]          
At the hearing of this application on September 16,
2024, Xtreme’s evidence supporting its liquidity concerns was scant. Mindful
about a potential impact on Xtreme’s creditors, I allowed the parties to
supplement this aspect of the record. They did so on November 1, 2024.
[82]          
A preliminary issue is whether the payment to the applicants is a share
repurchase. If it is, the liquidity test under s. 34(2) of the CBCA is
engaged. The applicants say that s. 34(2) is not engaged because it was a
shareholder loan repayment; the respondents dispute this, saying it was a share
repurchase.
[83]          
I find that the payment was intended to be a share repurchase, rather
than a shareholder loan repayment. I come to this conclusion for two reasons:
the unanimous agreement reached by the shareholders at their July 23, 2018
meeting and the agreement between the shareholders to the Turner Moore LLP tax
plan. Both point to the intention that it be a share repurchase.
[84]          
That said, no share purchase was made. There are no corporate documents authorizing
and recording a share repurchase. In other words, while the parties intended to
structure the payment this way for tax purposes, the first tranche of the
distribution was not executed as a share repurchase. But I accept the
respondents’ argument that the transaction was an anticipated share repurchase,
and that the first tranche of the funds were distributed on that basis.
[85]          
Thus, I will consider the liquidity test under s. 34(2) of the CBCA.
[86]          
Having considered the evidence, including the
supplementary records filed, I conclude that Xtreme satisfies the liquidity
test under s. 34(2). There are no reasonable grounds to believe that Xtreme is,
or would after the payment be, unable to pay its liabilities as they become due.
Nor are there reasonable grounds to believe that the realizable value of
Xtreme’s assets would, after the payment, be less than the aggregate of its
liabilities and stated capital of all classes.
[87]          
I come to this conclusion for two reasons.
First, the corporation’s financial statements reveal no liquidity issue. Xtreme’s
balance sheet shows assets of cash, GICs, and intercompany loans owed to Xtreme
in the amount of $3,310,000. The debts of Xtreme are loans from the government
in the amount of $240,000. This leaves $3,070,000, which is more than enough to
repay the amount owing to the shareholders (even assuming the full amount ought
to be distributed from the sale of the Barrhaven properties, and no deduction
is made for the contemplated Kingston loan).
[88]          
Xtreme’s profit and loss statements also show
that it is expected to make a profit, even as it pays a higher overhold rent to
its landlord.
[89]          
Second, the dispute between the Xtreme and its
landlord is not a liquidity issue within the meaning of s. 34(2).
[90]          
No liability arises for Xtreme from its dispute
with its landlord. Xtreme’s landlord has brought an application seeking declaratory
relief under the lease. Xtreme’s landlord alleges that Xtreme failed to renew
the lease and is out of time to do so, and is in default. Xtreme’s landlord
does not seek damages, it only seeks a declaration that overhold rent is
payable under the lease. Xtreme is already paying the landlord overhold rent at
a higher rate than its previous rent. I find that Xtreme has no difficulty
paying the overhold rent and remaining profitable. This is not a liquidity
issue within the meaning of s. 34(2).
[91]          
Further, I am satisfied that Xtreme could
satisfy an adverse cost award if necessary.
[92]          
And I find that the possibility that Xtreme
would have to move and potentially pay higher rent elsewhere is not an actual
or contingent liability within the meaning of s. 34(2). The possibility is a
business risk; it is not a liability or debt to a creditor. Mr. Wei admitted on
cross-examination that Xtreme could move locations and retain much of its
goodwill.
[93]          
Moreover, I find that the landlord dispute is a
pretext for holding back the funds owed to the applicants. The landlord stated
it would not renew Xtreme’s lease on December 5, 2023. Just over two months
later, on February 15, 2024, Mr. Wei delivered cheques with the first portion
of the repayment. The respondents’ position is not credible given the timeline
and the partial repayment.
[94]          
The real reason Mr. Wei withheld the funds is a disagreement
between him and the applicants over the future of Xtreme. In the context of Xtreme’s
dispute with its landlord, the applicants have questioned whether Xtreme ought
to remain a going concern or should be “liquidated”.
[95]          
Thus, I conclude that, by the summer of 2023, Mr.
Wei breached the applicants’ reasonable expectations about the distribution of
the proceeds from the sale of the Barrhaven properties.
[96]          
Because Mr. Wei denied
Mr. Wang timely and meaningful access to the accounting records of Xtreme
and XTP Holdings, there remain several questions over what happened to the partial
distribution of funds on September 21, 2021 from the real estate solicitor to,
apparently, XTP Holdings.
[97]          
According to Mr. Wei’s evidence, he used part of
the funds to repay shareholders’ loans, including his own. He also says he paid
money to the Kingston project and transferred money to Xtreme to enable ongoing
operations.
[98]          
While the respondents have provided a high-level
explanation of how the funds were distributed, it falls short of a proper
accounting.  It is impossible to scrutinize the explanation provided by Mr. Wei
because he has not provided any supporting documentation relating to these
purported transactions apart from the corporate respondents’ bank account
statements.
[99]          
Without a proper accounting, the court cannot
determine whether the use to which those funds were put was consistent with the
reasonable expectations of the minority shareholders, as reflected in the
minutes of the July 23, 2018 shareholders’ meeting. The same is true for the
disposition of the funds that the real estate solicitor paid out to Mr. Wei
from the vendor take back mortgage on or about April 28, 2022.
[100]      
There is also inadequate evidence to resolve what
loan to the Kingston project the shareholders had agreed to repay at their July
23, 2018 meeting. Was it only the contemplated CIBC loan, which was never
obtained? Or was another loan repayment contemplated? There is some evidence in
the record that there was a shareholders’ loan made through Xtreme when it
invested in the Kingston project, but the parties have not put sufficient
evidence before the court to resolve this issue.
[101]      
Finally, the respondents have not provided an
adequate accounting of the disposition of the funds that Mr. Wei caused to be
transferred out of the real estate solicitor’s trust account on January 19,
2024.
[102]      
The applicants had a reasonable expectation that
half the proceeds of sale from the Barrhaven properties would be held in trust
by the real estate solicitor until the parties agree or a court directs
otherwise.
[103]      
This reasonable expectation arose from the
agreement of the parties to deposit 50 percent of the Barrhaven proceeds into
the real estate solicitor’s trust account and from the direction provided by all
the shareholders to the real estate solicitor on April 28, 2022, to hold in
trust 50 percent of the vendor take-back mortgage payout for the applicants.
[104]      
Mr. Wei caused the real estate solicitor to release
those funds from his trust account on January 19, 2024. He claims that he was
unaware of the solicitor’s undertaking.
[105]      
I find that Mr. Wei’s explanation lacks
credibility for five reasons.
[106]      
First, the parties agreed in September 2021 that
50 percent of the proceeds from the sale of the Barrhaven properties would be
held in trust by the real estate solicitor so that the sale of the Barrhaven
properties would not be delayed. Mr. Wei expressly agreed to this. The email
from the lawyers for the applicants to the real estate solicitor – who was
taking instructions from Mr. Wei – made it clear that a solicitor’s undertaking
was required that the proceeds be held in trust “per agreement or a court
order”. The real estate solicitor was professionally required to put the
applicants’ terms to Mr. Wei. Both the solicitor’s response and Mr. Wei’s reply
(through the real estate solicitor) indicate that the terms were conveyed to Mr.
Wei.
[107]      
Second, Mr. Wei’s professed lack of awareness is
contradicted by the direction to the real estate solicitor, which Mr. Wei
signed along with the applicants, on April 28, 2022. This directed the real
estate lawyer to hold in trust 50 percent of the vendor take-back mortgage
payout for the applicants “until such time as the parties agree or a court
directs otherwise”, and to release the balance to Mr. Wei.
[108]      
Mr. Wei was plainly aware that the amounts were
being held in trust “until such time as the parties agree or a court directs otherwise”.
This language is strikingly similar to the language in the solicitor’s
undertaking of September 16, 2021, which provided that 50 percent of the
proceeds would be held in trust “pending the agreement of all shareholders of
[Xtreme] or court order”.  It is implausible that Mr. Wei did not understand
that the solicitor was holding the earlier proceeds received in trust on the
same terms as in the direction, even if he had not seen the undertaking itself.
[109]      
Third, Mr. Wei misled the real estate solicitor
into believing that the applicants were aware that he was directing that the
funds held in trust be transferred to XTP Holdings. In emails exchanged between
Mr. Wei and the real estate solicitor, the latter asked Mr. Wei to confirm when
Mr. Wei had a chance to review the solicitor’s record of the funds being held
in trust “with all of the shareholders”. Mr. Wei replied, “I checked the
numbers with your previous emails. It matches.” He initially met the
solicitor’s request to confirm with all the shareholders with silence. A few minutes
later, Mr. Wei wrote again to the solicitor to ask him to provide detailed
statements. Mr. Wei added, “I think it will be much easier for us to
review” (emphasis added).
[110]      
I find that Mr. Wei’s reply to the solicitor’s
request was calculated to mislead the real estate solicitor into believing that
Mr. Wei would review the solicitor’s record of the funds being held in trust
with all the shareholders. It also left the impression that Mr. Wei was acting
with the agreement of shareholders. Neither was true.
[111]      
Fourth, Mr. Wei caused the real estate solicitor
to release the funds from his trust account while the parties were negotiating over
the terms of the distribution. No agreement was yet reached. The August 28,
2023 shareholders’ resolution cannot constitute a genuine agreement by the
applicants to release the funds because it was opposed by the applicants. Mr.
Wei was only able to pass the resolution because he could, as chairman, overcome
a tie vote among the shareholders.
[112]      
Nor am I persuaded by the respondents’ argument
that the October 19 and December 20, 2023 correspondence from
the applicants’ lawyers implicitly authorized Mr. Wei to obtain the trust
funds. The applicants remained distrustful of Mr. Wei. The October 19, 2023 letter
shows that there were details be worked out. And on December 20, 2023, the
lawyers for the applicants wrote to the lawyers for Mr. Wei to propose that
they write jointly to the real estate solicitor to request the prompt and pro
rata release of the funds held in his trust account. Far from an implicit
authorization for Mr. Wei to do so unilaterally, the applicants proposed they
do so jointly, consistent with the parties’ earlier agreement and the solicitor’s
undertaking.
[113]      
Finally, Mr. Wei obtained the trust funds surreptitiously
without informing the applicants that he did so. This is not the action of
someone who acted honestly and in good faith. The applicants only learned that
he had obtained the trust funds after their lawyer contacted the real estate
solicitor. The respondents argue that the applicants ought to have known that he
had obtained the funds when they were paid a portion of the proceeds in February
2024. But this is no answer – the partial payment was after Mr. Wei had
improperly obtained the funds from the real estate solicitor.
[114]      
For all of these reasons, I find that Mr. Wei knowingly
caused the real estate solicitor to release those funds from his trust account
in breach of the parties’ agreement and the reasonable expectations of the
applicants.
[115]      
Mr. Wei’s conduct in surreptitiously obtaining
the money held in trust was abusive and demonstrated bad faith. It was a marked
departure from standards of fair dealing. Before Mr. Wei’s actions, the money
claimed by the applicants was preserved in the real estate solicitor’s trust
account and their interests were protected. After he obtained the money, Mr.
Wei had the upper hand. He did not implement what was intended, he only
directed a partial payment to the applicants and held back the balance while
the applicants disagreed over the future of Xtreme.
[116]      
In my endorsement making an interlocutory order,
I held that, at a minimum, Mr. Wei’s conduct was unfairly
prejudicial to or unfairly disregarded the interests of the applicants. Having
now more carefully considered the record, I conclude that Mr. Wei’s conduct in
obtaining proceeds held in trust was oppressive to the interests of the
applicants.
[117]      
I turn now to the appropriate remedies.
[118]      
Section 241(3) of the CBCA vests the court
with broad remedial authority. It provides that “the court may make any interim
or final order it thinks fit”, including a number of enumerated powers.
[119]      
The courts have repeatedly held that “the court
enjoys wide discretion under s. 241 to fashion such remedy as it thinks fit”: Catalyst
Fund General Partner I Inc. v. Hollinger Inc., (2006) 2006 CanLII 7392 (ON CA), 79 O.R. (3d) 288
(C.A.), at para. 49. But in fashioning a remedy, the court should only
interfere with the affairs of the affected corporation(s) to the extent
necessary to remedy the oppression in question: Hollinger, at para. 55. The
reasonable expectations of the applicants “have an important bearing on the
decision as to what is a just remedy in a particular case”: Naneff v.
Con-Crete Holdings Ltd. (1995), 1995 CanLII 959 (ON CA), 23 O.R. (3d) 481 at 490 (C.A.).
[120]      
With this guidance in mind, I make the following
remedial order:
[121]      
The application under s. 241(1) of the CBCA
is granted and the above order is made under s. 241(3).
[122]      
The applicants are presumptively entitled to
costs on the application. If the parties cannot agree on costs, they can each
make written submissions to me of no more than 1,000 words within two weeks of
the release of these reasons for judgment. These are to be sent to scj.assistants@ontario.ca to my attention.