[1]              
Mr. LeClair and Ms. Johnson began their
relationship in August 2020; the parties cohabited from November 2020 until
July 18, 2024.
[2]              
Mr. LeClair is 36 years old; Ms. Johnson is 35
years old.  Ms. Johnson has two children from a prior relationship (“the
boys”).  Mr. LeClair and Ms. Johnson have one child—a daughter, Saphira
Johnson-LeClair, born on June 3, 2022.
[3]              
Mr. LeClair submits, and Ms. Johnson
acknowledges, that she suffers from mental health issues, and that those mental
health issues contributed to the breakdown of the family unit.  Ms. Johnson
also acknowledges that a mental health crisis she experienced on July 18, 2024
led to 
(a) her removal from the parties’ home on that date; (b) the involvement of the
police and paramedics in her removal from the home; (c) her hospitalization
from July 18 to 22, 2024; and (d)  a diagnosis of bipolar disorder.
[4]              
I turn briefly to the parties’ respective
addresses as of the date on which the court heard Mr. LeClair’s motion. 
Exhibit ‘A’ to Mr. LeClair’s affidavit, sworn on November 29, 2024, is a
Release Order for Ms. Johnson.  That order was issued by the Ontario Court of
Justice in Brockville on August 21, 2024.  It relates to Ms. Johnson’s release
following the laying of five charges against her; two of the charges stem from
events alleged to have occurred on July 18, 2024, at the time of Ms. Johnson’s
removal from the parties’ home.
[5]              
Based on the contents of the Release Order, it
appears that Mr. LeClair continues to reside in the home the parties shared
with Saphira and the boys until July 18, 2024.
[6]              
The first condition imposed on Ms. Johnson in
the Release Order requires her to reside at a municipal address in Ottawa—namely,
her mother’s residence.  Ms. Johnson continues to live at that residence with
Saphira and the boys.
[7]              
The drive from Brockville to Ottawa (or in the
opposite direction) is estimated by Mr. LeClair’s counsel to be 1.25 hours.  A
drive of that duration is relevant to Saphira’s best interests when determining
an interim parenting schedule.
[8]              
The third condition imposed in the Release Order
is a no contact/no communication provision related to Mr. LeClair.  The
exceptions to that prohibition include that Ms. Johnson is permitted to
communicate with Mr. LeClair, (a) “pursuant to a family court order” made after
the date of the Release Order, and (b) in the presence of or through counsel.
[9]              
As of the date on which the court heard Mr.
LeClair’s motion, the parties did not have an order related to the parenting
schedule.  Having an order addressing Mr. LeClair’s parenting time will permit
the parties to communicate regarding Saphira, without risk to Ms. Johnson of
breaching the relevant term of the Release Order.
[10]          
It is undisputed that between July 22, 2024 and
August 4, 2024, the parenting schedule was as follows:
[11]          
On August 4, 2024, Mr. LeClair returned Saphira
to Ms. Johnson’s care.  When he did so, Mr. LeClair expected that, despite the
lack of any formal parenting schedule at the time, he would continue to have
parenting time with Saphira.  Mr. LeClair has not had any parenting time with
Saphira since August 4, 2024.
[12]          
Initially, Mr. LeClair communicated with Ms.
Johnson’s mother in an effort to arrange parenting time with Saphira. 
Thereafter, Mr. LeClair personally or through his counsel communicated with Ms.
Johnson’s counsel in an effort to secure parenting time for Mr. LeClair with
Saphira.  Those efforts proved fruitless, leading Mr. LeClair to bring the
motion now before the court.
[13]          
In his notice of motion, Mr. LeClair proposes a
schedule that would see his parenting time increase gradually over four weeks
and result in a 2/2/3 schedule.  In response, Ms. Johnson proposes a schedule
that would see Mr. LeClair’s parenting time increase gradually over eight weeks
and result in parenting time every second weekend, plus one night a week.
[14]          
In summary, the parties agree that it is in
Saphira’s best interests to have parenting time with Mr. LeClair on one or more
weekdays and on weekends.  The parties disagree about the pace at which Mr.
LeClair’s parenting time is to increase.
[15]          
The sole issue to be determined is an interim
parenting schedule for Mr. LeClair that is in Saphira’s best interests.
[16]          
With the parties not having married, “the best
interests of the child” are governed by s. 24 of the Children’s Law Reform Act, R.S.O. 1990,
c. C.12 (“CLRA”).  The
primary consideration is “the child’s physical, emotional and psychological
safety, security and well-being”: s. 24(2).  The factors the court must
consider regarding the circumstances of the child include those listed in 
s. 24(3)(a)-(k).  In addition, the court must take into account factors related
to family violence: 
s. 24(4)(a)-(h).
[17]          
In allocating parenting time, “the court shall
give effect to the principle that a child should have as much time with each
parent as is consistent with the best interests of the child”: s. 24(6).
[18]          
Ms. Johnson raises Saphira’s young age (now 2.5
years) and the extent to which Saphira continues to breast-feed.  In response,
Mr. LeClair relies on the decision of this court in 
Di Iorio v. Tropea, 2021
ONSC 8575.  At para. 21, Papageorgiou J. says, “the antiquated ‘tender years’
principle no longer applies to determining the [parenting time] schedule for a
young child” (citation omitted).
[19]          
In Di Iorio, the subject child was 17 months old.  Justice Papageorgiou
addresses the practicalities of breast-feeding.  At paras. 22-25, he emphasizes
that breast-feeding is only one factor amongst many factors for the court to
consider.  At para. 46, Papageorgiou J. notes that while the subject child
continued to breast-feed, the mother could pump milk and provide the pumped
milk for the father to use.
[20]          
How are these principles to be applied to the
circumstances in which Mr. LeClair, Ms. Johnson, and Saphira find themselves at
present?
[21]          
The current geographic separation between what
was the family’s home and the maternal grandmother’s home creates challenges in
determining a parenting schedule that is in Saphira’s best interests.
[22]          
Where Mr. LeClair works is also a factor. 
Neither party addresses that factor in their respective affidavits.  In her
submissions, Ms. Johnson’s counsel informed the court that Mr. LeClair
currently works in Gatineau and commutes two hours each way, Monday to Friday. 
In his reply submissions, Mr. LeClair’s counsel did not dispute the accuracy of
that submission.
[23]          
Rulings or endorsements on motions of this kind often
include a discussion of factors, taken from s. 24(3) of the CLRA, that apply to the matter before
the court (as in the Di Iorio decision).  It is also frequently the case that the affidavit
evidence on motions of this kind contains little, if any, evidence addressing
those factors.  The affidavits filed by both Mr. LeClair and Ms. Johnson fall
into that category.
[24]          
For example, neither party describes the home in
which Mr. LeClair resides (and in which Ms. LeClair resided, with Saphira and
the boys, as of the date of separation).  Neither party addresses whether Mr.
LeClair has a child seat for his vehicle or will be required to purchase one to
facilitate safe and efficient exchanges.  The order made at the conclusion of
this ruling requires Mr. LeClair to purchase a child seat for his vehicle
(i.e., if he has not already done so).
[25]          
Section 24(3)(c) of the CLRA requires the court to consider “each
parent’s willingness to support the development and maintenance of the child’s
relationship with the other parent”.  The court is concerned that Ms. Johnson
was obtuse when addressing her obligation to facilitate parenting time with Mr.
LeClair.  For example, Ms. Johnson relied on the terms of the Release Order as
a reason she was not prepared to arrange parenting time for Mr. LeClair without
first having an agreement in writing regarding a parenting schedule.
[26]          
Without making any finding, the court expresses
concern that, from August 4, 2024 to the date of the motion, Ms. Johnson,
personally, through her mother, or through her counsel, was disingenuous or
deliberately obtuse in her approach to facilitating Mr. LeClair’s parenting
time.  A more co-operative approach is required from Ms. Johnson in the future,
including to facilitate the parenting schedule ordered at the conclusion of
this ruling.
[27]          
Ms. Johnson’s unwillingness to facilitate Mr.
LeClair’s parenting time subsequent to August 4, 2024, is also relevant to her
“ability and willingness […] to communicate and co-operate, in particular with
[Mr. LeClair], on matters affecting the child”: s. 24(3)(i).
[28]          
Regarding “the history of the care of the child”
(i.e., s. 24(3)(d)), the court agrees with Ms. Johnson that the ‘status quo’ to
be considered is that which existed as of the date of separation.  Ms.
Johnson’s uncontradicted evidence is that prior to the date of separation, she
was working part-time (five to ten hours per week); Mr. LeClair was working
full-time and engaging in personal pursuits after-hours.  To the extent that
the court is in a position to assess the ‘status quo’ for the purpose of this
motion, the court finds that, prior to the date of separation, Ms. Johnson was
the primary caregiver to Saphira.
[29]          
Mr. LeClair asks the court to consider that as a
result of Ms. Johnson’s history with mental health challenges, “it is not
inconceivable that Mr. LeClair was sharing parenting equally” with Ms.
Johnson.  The burden of proof in matters of this kind is far above
consideration of what is “not inconceivable”.
[30]          
Both parties allege that the other has, at one
time or another, engaged in violence towards the opposite party, towards
Saphira, and towards third parties.  Neither party has been convicted of a
criminal offence.  The court does not consider family violence (ss. 24(3)(j), 24(3)(k)
and 24(6)) to be a significant factor for the purpose of the interim order made
at the conclusion of this ruling.
[31]          
There is some evidence of concern on Ms.
Johnson’s part that Mr. LeClair has, on at least one occasion, left Saphira
inside the family home without supervision.  Mr. LeClair did not file a reply
affidavit and Ms. Johnson has not been cross-examined on her affidavit. 
Leaving a two-year old unsupervised in a home is a matter of concern (see s.
24(3)(h): “the ability and
willingness of each person in respect of whom the order would apply to care for
and meet the needs of the child”).  For the purpose of
this motion, that concern does not rise to the level of impacting the court’s
decision regarding Mr. LeClair’s parenting time.
[32]          
There is no evidence that the Children’s Aid
Society (or its Brockville equivalent) has expressed any concern about Mr.
LeClair’s ability to care for and parent Saphira.
[33]          
I start with weeknight parenting time and then
address weekend parenting time.
[34]          
To the extent possible based on the available
evidence, I consider s. 24(3)(a): “the child’s needs, given the child’s age and
stage of development, such as the child’s need for stability”.
[35]          
It would not be in Saphira’s best interests to
be commuting with Mr. LeClair on a weeknight—regardless of the exchange
location (i.e., in Ottawa or at a midpoint between Ottawa and Brockville).  Requiring
Mr. LeClair to commute with Saphira on a weeknight would add at least an hour
to his total commuting time that day.  It is also not in Saphira’s best
interests for portions of the weeknight parenting time be spent commuting.  It
is more meaningful for Saphira to spend time with her father other than in a
car seat and driving on a highway.
[36]          
The court recognizes that Mr. LeClair did not choose
the current distance between his home and where Ms. Johnson is living.  The
latter location is dictated by the terms of the Release Order.  On an interim
basis, Mr. LeClair will have to put on his thinking cap and be creative to find
ways to make his weeknight parenting time with Saphira, in the Ottawa area, interesting
for her and meaningful for both of them.
[37]          
The parenting schedule ordered at the conclusion
of this ruling begins with two weeknights after work and is reduced to one
weeknight after work (the latter as the amount of the weekend parenting time
increases).
[38]          
In the parenting schedule ordered, the weeknight
parenting time is scheduled to commence “after work”.  The order requires Mr.
LeClair to identify a fixed time of day for the start of his weeknight
parenting time.  It is incumbent on Mr. LeClair to choose a time of day that he
knows he will be able to meet.
[39]          
It is incumbent on Ms. Johnson to remain
flexible and understand that there may occasionally be circumstances beyond Mr.
LeClair’s control that prevent him from arriving at the hour of day he
selects.  With Mr. LeClair working in Gatineau, he is likely to encounter
traffic jams and other unpredictable events that make travel from his place of
work to the pickup location problematic.
[40]          
The weekend parenting schedule proposed by Mr.
LeClair would see his parenting time rapidly increase; that proposed by Ms.
Johnson would see Mr. LeClair’s weekend parenting time increase very
gradually.
[41]          
The parenting schedule ordered provides for an
increase of Mr. LeClair’s parenting time at a reasonable pace, requires both
parties to facilitate exchanges (i.e., pick up and drop off, at times, at the
mid-point location of the Staples in Kemptville proposed by Ms. Johnson), and
avoids having Saphira travel to and from her father’s home on any two
consecutive weekend days (as was proposed by Mr. LeClair ).
[42]          
There is some evidence to assist the court
regarding the factor set out in s. 24(b): “the nature and strength of the
child’s relationship with each parent, each of the child’s siblings and
grandparents and any other person who plays an important role in the child’s
life”.  It is important that Saphira maintain her relationship with the boys
and with her maternal grandmother, with whom Saphira has been residing since
August 2024.  It would be disruptive to Saphira’s relationship with the boys
for her to transition to a 2/2/3 schedule as proposed by Mr. LeClair.
[43]          
The parenting scheduled ordered provides for Mr.
LeClair’s weekend parenting time to gradually increase to include every second
weekend from Friday after work until Sunday at 4:30 p.m.
[44]          
The parties must identify a method of
communication that is satisfactory to both of them for use regarding exchanges. 
One suggestion is the use of Family Wizard.  The court notes that Mr. LeClair
has, in the past, been able to communicate without incident with the maternal
grandmother.
[45]          
The order issued and entered pursuant to this
Ruling will create the type of order referred to in the third condition of the
Release Order.  As a result, communication between Ms. Johnson and Mr. LeClair
to facilitate Mr. LeClair’s parenting time and as may otherwise be required
related to Saphira should not be of concern to Ms. Johnson regarding the terms
of the Release Order.
[46]          
I have already addressed the lack of evidence
regarding the factors listed in s. 24 of the CLRA.  I have additional concerns about the quality of the evidence
before the court:
[47]          
The quality of the evidence before the court is
a factor in the court’s decision to adjourn Mr. LeClair’s motion and require
Mr. LeClair to continue the motion before the court on the earliest date
available in April or May 2025.
[48]          
By April or May, Mr. LeClair will have had
several full weekends with Saphira.  The parties will be in a position to
present the court with evidence as to how Saphira is faring with the parenting
schedule; whether the parties are able to communicate so as to facilitate Mr. LeClair’s
parenting time; and what changes, if any, may be required to the parenting
schedule.  The parties will also be in a position to look to the summer months
and any summer vacation plans that either of them wish to make with Saphira.
[49]          
For the reasons set out above, the court makes
the following order:
[50]          
Unless the parties agree upon costs for the
motion on December 10, 2024, those costs of are reserved to the judge presiding
when the motion continues on the April or May 2025 date described in paragraph
48, item (6).