[1]              
This simplified trial is about a dispute between
neighbouring commercial properties regarding a right-of-way of a laneway.
[2]              
In November 2007, the Plaintiff, Melynda Layton,
purchased with her husband, Sean Terris, a mixed commercial-residential
property known as 1110 – 1116 Wellington Street West (“Layton property”).  At
the rear of this property, there is an area being used as a parking lot by the
tenants of the Layton property.
[3]              
In January 2014, the Defendant, Canadian Dental
Hygienists Association (“CDHA”), a not-for-profit organization who represents
the interests of the dental hygienist profession, purchased a commercial
property known as 1122 Wellington Street West (“CDHA property”).
[4]              
The laneway in question runs perpendicular to
Rosemount Avenue for 61.97 feet to the property line between the CDHA property
and the Layton property.  The laneway is owned by the CDHA.
[5]              
Initially, the relationship between both parties
was cordial. By agreement, the CDHA allowed Ms. Layton to access the Layton
property via the laneway.  The CDHA would remove the snow in the rear of the
building and Ms. Layton would allow the CDHA employees to park three vehicles
behind the Layton property.  The tenants of the Layton property used the
laneway by car to access and park in the rear of the Layton property.
[6]              
Within a few years, the relationship between
both parties soured and turned extremely toxic. Access to the laneway was eventually
denied by the CDHA.
[7]              
Ms. Layton alleges that there is a right-of-way over
the laneway that allows her and her tenants to park their cars behind the
Layton property and allows contractors to access her building for repairs and
maintenance.
[8]              
The CDHA takes the position that they own the
laneway and that Ms. Layton’s right-of-way only extends partially over the
laneway.  In 2002, the Land Registrar issued an order making it clear that the
right-of-way does not extend all the way to the backyard of the Layton
property.  That said, the CDHA has no intention of preventing Ms. Layton from carrying
out necessary repairs or improvements to the Layton property.
[9]              
Both parties are seeking damages against one
another.
[10]          
The issue in this trial is very straightforward.
Is there a right-of-way, yes or no?
[11]          
I remind the parties that the simplified
procedure was created to foster access to justice for simple and modest claims.
Unfortunately, since the issuance of the Statement of Claim, the parties have
been embroiled in lengthy court proceedings, likely fueled by animosity and
hostility. It has become, for no reason, complex and cumbersome.
[12]          
In Case Centre, there were over 10,000 pages
filed by the parties: several affidavits of documents and supplementary affidavits
of documents, three affidavits of Mr. Sean Terris with duplicative evidence,
one affidavit from Ondina Love, one affidavit from Merredith MacLennan, and
over 250 videos of the laneway and the interaction between Ms. Layton and the CDHA.
This volume of evidence was entirely unnecessary.
[13]          
That leads me to the damage claims advanced by
both Ms. Layton and the CDHA.  Ms. Layton seeks the following damages:
[14]          
Conversely, the CDHA seeks the following
damages:
[15]          
It is clear to me that as tension rose between the
parties, Ms. Layton and some employees of the CDHA conducted themselves in a
very inappropriate manner, ranging from childish behaviour to egregious conduct
such as theft, damage to property and assault at varying degrees.  Both parties
disrupted the quiet enjoyment of each others’ properties.  It was entirely
unbecoming to professionals and business individuals. While it may be argued
that one person may have conducted herself in a more appalling way than others,
I am not going to entertain a measuring of fault. Both parties are responsible
for escalating this simple property dispute into an outright neighbourly war.
Cooler heads should have prevailed.
[16]          
I am therefore dismissing all damage claims for
Ms. Layton and the CDHA on the basis that both parties are equally at fault for
any breach of contract, damages and/or out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the
other party.  Also, I am not persuaded that either party suffered a financial
loss. Both parties failed to treat each other with respect and civility. Both
parties failed in their duty of good faith and fair dealing. And, although the
conduct of Ms. Layton and some employees of the CDHA was outrageous at times,
it is not, in my opinion, deserving of an award of punitive and/or exemplary
damages.
[17]          
Turning to the real issue at hand, namely the
property dispute, in addition to the affidavits filed, seven witnesses
testified at trial: Sean Terris (Ms. Layton’s husband), Angela Daoust (Director
of Marketing and Communication at CDHA), Emma Osgoode (tenant at 1114
Wellington Street West), John Corner (Administrative Assistant for the finance
and administrative team at CDHA), Michelle Charest (employee at CDHA responsible
for the cameras), Merredith MacLennan (partner at Merovitz Potechin LLP) and
Ondina Love (CEO of CDHA).  In my view, on the issue of the property dispute,
the evidence of Ms. Daoust, Ms. Osgoode, Mr. Corner and Ms. Charest was not
required, as it is not relevant to my determination of the right-of-way.
[18]          
Mr. Terris provided the evidence for Ms. Layton.
The cross-examination revealed that he did not have a complete understanding of
the contents of his three affidavits.  In his affidavits, Mr. Terris often uses
the pronoun “we”, referring to himself and Ms. Layton.  Many times, he was not
present for an event described in his affidavits but was told by Ms. Layton as
to what transpired. Some of the inconsistencies in his evidence, as set out in
detail at paragraphs 60 to 103 of Ms. Love’s affidavit dated September 6, 2024,
were uncovered during his cross-examination. I find that some of Mr. Terris’
evidence was not credible.
[19]          
Ms. MacLennan represented the prior owner of
1110-1116 Wellington Street West with respect to a Land Titles Hearing relating
to the properties at issue in this action.  While some parties attempted to
elicit an opinion from Ms. MacLennan, she was merely a fact witness. I found
her to be very credible.
[20]          
Ms. Love was cross-examined very briefly.  I do
not find that her affidavit evidence or her credibility was challenged
whatsoever.
[21]          
Based on the evidence that I have received, I
make the following findings of fact, which I believe are particularly important
to consider in deciding whether Ms. Layton has a right-of-way over the laneway:
[22]          
The only remaining issue in this action is
whether there is a right-of-way over the laneway in favour of the Layton
property.
[23]          
Ms. Layton provided detailed written and oral
submissions, which I have considered.  The arguments that are deserving of consideration
are summarized below.
[24]          
It is argued by Ms. Layton that she has the
right of reasonable access for maintenance and repair.  A “Right-of-Way
Agreement” was registered on title, and it is only conditional upon compliance
with the Planning Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.13. Also, the easement arises
because it is necessary for the use and enjoyment of the Layton property.
[25]          
The easement for maintenance and repair is a
prescriptive easement because it was enjoyed for over 20 years without
interruption or consent by the servient landowner and it arose under the
registry system.
[26]          
Despite that changes were made to the legal description
by way of the Land Titles Act Order OC427110, it is nonsensical that a
right-of-way is only over part of the laneway. The right-of-way was incorrectly
registered reflecting only the easterly 25.3 feet as opposed to the full length
of the driveway being 61.97 feet. The previous owners of the CDHA property and
Layton property chose not to correct the error on title, but rather they
entered into a second agreement with respect to parking.
[27]          
Zoning By-Law No.
2008-250 provides for land-use as described in the City of Ottawa’s Official
Plan. This by-law regulates Traditional Mainstreet properties. It applies to
the laneway and the parking lot behind the Layton property. The by-law
requires, amongst other things, the following:
[28]          
Property owners, operators and occupants are
required to comply with Property Maintenance By-Law No. 2004-208.  The CDHA’s
snow removal practices are contrary to this by-law.
[29]          
The CDHA’s obstruction to the laneway is a
nuisance and they have caused a substantial and unreasonable interference with
the Layton property.
[30]          
The CDHA’s interference with the use and
enjoyment of the Layton property is unreasonable when one considers the
following nine factors:
[31]          
The CDHA acknowledges that previous owners had
agreements on how to use their respective lands.  However, these agreements are
personal and do not run with the land.
[32]          
The land title documents clearly demonstrate the
parties’ ownership of the land and their respective rights and obligations. The
Land Titles Act Order OC427110 sets out the property rights of the
parties and Ms. Layton has failed to provide any evidence to support that these
property rights should be fundamentally changed.
[33]          
The CDHA relies upon the bulletins of the Government
of Ontario’s Title and Survey Services Office to say that private agreements,
such as the February 1994 “Right-of-Way Agreement”, are not binding on the
creation of easements. In other words, a private agreement can be registered
but it does not create an easement.
[34]          
In terms of Ms. Layton’s contention of the
existence of a prescriptive easement, CDHA submits that there were previous
agreements whereby permission was given to utilize the laneway.
[35]          
The CDHA denies that the City By-Laws are
applicable.
[36]          
The purpose of Zoning By-Law No. 2008-250
is to govern access to “parking, queuing and loading spaces and all driveways
and aisles leading to those spaces.” Considering this purpose and text of the
by-law, it is inapplicable in the circumstances.
[37]          
The Property Maintenance By-Law 2005-208
is equally inapplicable.  The purpose of this by-law is to establish a
regulatory scheme to be adhered by property owners, not a means to substantiate
private parties’ claims against each other.
[38]          
The CDHA denies that they have caused a
substantial and unreasonable interference with the Layton property.
[39]          
They submit that there is nothing unreasonable about
asserting and protecting their property rights.  The CDHA blocked the laneway
for the purpose of preventing any further trespass on their property.
[40]          
Ms. Layton seeks the following:
[41]          
For reasons set out below, I decline to grant a
permanent injunction or any orders that would prevent the CDHA from using their
laneway.
[42]          
It is undisputed that in March 1995, a
“Right-of-Way Agreement” was registered on title.  This agreement was entered
into between two parties, namely 1098 Wellington and BNS. The grant was personal,
and it was limited to using the laneway for the sole purpose of maintenance and
repairs.  The right-of-way is not described as providing egress or ingress from
and/to the lands.  Considering the nature of the agreement and the absence of
evidence to the contrary, I am of the view that it was not the intention of the
parties to make this right-of-way run with the land and be binding on all future
owners in title to the two properties owned by 1098 Wellington and BNS.
[43]          
Ms. Layton has not provided any compelling
evidence or reasons that the 1994 Right-of-Way Agreement as between two
previous property owners is binding upon the current or future owners of the
Layton property and the CDHA property.  I find that the evidence presented by
Ms. Layton falls short of creating a positive and perpetual right-of-way which runs
with the land.
[44]          
In any event, private agreements are not binding
on the creation of easements. On March 3, 2005, the Government of Ontario’s
Title and Survey Services Office published Bulletin 2005-02 which provides at ss.
1.0 and 2.0.1 the following restriction:
[45]          
The properties were converted from the Land Registry
System to the Land Titles System. In accordance with the Land Titles Act, R.S.O.
1990, c. L.5, a Director of Titles has the authority to deal with any matter
relating to titles of land by way of a hearing. In the case at bar, such a
hearing was held, resulting in the predecessor of the Layton property being
granted a partial right-of-way over only the southerly 11 feet of the westerly 25.3
feet of the laneway owned by CDHA.  This was done by way of Land Titles Act
Order OC427110 several years before the purchase of the Layton property. At the
time of the purchase of the Layton property, Ms. Layton knew that the
right-of-way was restricted to 25.3 feet, and it did not extend over the full
length of the laneway measuring 61.97 feet. During Mr. Terris’
cross-examination, he acknowledged that the title documents referred to a partial
right-of-way.
[46]          
In Mr. Terris’ affidavit dated February 23,
2023, he swears to the following:
[47]          
 During his cross-examination, Mr. Terris could
not recall if he was provided the “Right-of-Way Agreement” by Mr. Ionella.  He
maintained however that they had a right-of-way because this agreement was in
place.
[48]          
I do not find Mr. Terris’ evidence regarding his
exchange with Mr. Ionella to be credible. According to the evidence presented
at trial, Mr. Ionella was the owner of 1122 Wellington Street at the time of
the Land Titles hearing. It is reasonable to assume that Mr. Ionella was aware
that on July 16, 2003, Deputy Director Arki made an order regarding the
right-of-way of the laneway and that it was only limited to 25.3 feet of
access. Given the Land Titles Act Order OC427110, I find it highly unlikely
that Mr. Ionella would have confirmed to Mr. Terris that there was a
right-of-way in favour of the Layton property.
[49]          
Ms. Layton argues that it is nonsensical that she
only enjoys a right-of-way over part of the laneway. Also, Mr. Ferris testified
that there was no rhyme or reason why they only have a partial right-of-way on
the first part of the laneway and not the remaining part. While it might appear
illogical or an oddity to only have a partial right-of-way, the evidence nonetheless
reveals that the Land Titles Act Order OC427110 dated July 16, 2003 was issued
following a hearing involving the previous owners of both the Layton property
and the CDHA property. There is no evidence before me to know what type of
right-of-way that Deputy Director Arki wanted to grant or not grant in regard
to the laneway.  Any attempts to do so would be speculation on my part.  In the
absence of conclusive evidence, it would not be appropriate to grant more
rights to Ms. Layton on the only basis that the Land Titles Act Order
OC427110 may be an oddity. Ms. Layton has not presented any evidence to
persuade me that this limited right-of-way on title should be rectified or that
her rights should be expanded upon.  The Land Titles Act Order OC427110 is
clear, and it was not appealed. In my view, the existing right-of-way remains
valid and enforceable.
[50]          
Ms. Layton submits that she is not seeking to
gain an additional right, but rather maintain what she currently has, namely an
easement over the full length of the laneway, and that this easement cannot be
extinguished. I disagree. In my view, there is no easement to extinguish
because it does not exist. The evidence establishes that Ms. Layton does not
have a right-of-way that extends over the full length of the laneway to the
back to the Layton property.  It is limited to the first 25.3 feet of the
laneway.
[51]          
At best, the previous owners of the Layton
property previously enjoyed a right-of-way with the only permissible use of the
laneway being to gain access for the limited purpose of maintenance and
repairs. However, the “Right-of-way Agreement” was a private agreement, and
based on the evidentiary record before me, I am not satisfied that this private
agreement runs with the land.
[52]          
Given the express right-of-way described on
title, and my conclusion that the “Right-of-way Agreement” does not run with
the land, I find that it would be an injustice in ordering the rectification of
title in this case.
[53]          
Having concluded that there is no right-of-way granted
to Ms. Layton to traverse over the full length of the laneway, I must now
determine if there are any other reasons that would support the granting of a
right of-way over the full length of the laneway.  In the text that
follow, I explore four possible reasons: (a) prescriptive easement; (b) zoning
and property by-laws; (c) fire code violations and (d) nuisance.
[54]          
Ms. Layton argues that the Layton property
enjoys a prescriptive easement over the laneway.
[55]          
Ms. Layton submits that the laneway has provided
access to the parking lot in the rear of the Layton property since at least
1955.  In support of this assertion, she refers to a building permit for 1116
Wellington Street West when it became a restaurant and a take-out restaurant in
1957.  Ms. Layton says that there was a by-law requirement that this restaurant
have two parking spaces.
[56]          
Then, in 1989, the previous owner of 1110-1114 Wellington
Street West applied for and received permits to convert the property from a
single dwelling unit to multiple dwelling units.  Ms. Layton states that City
of Ottawa By-law AZ-64, which is a historical by-law that deals with
zoning, required that any dwelling of three units or more had a minimum
requirement for parking.  She submits that the owner of 1110-1114 Wellington
Street West was required to have four parking spaces.
[57]          
Ms. Layton argues that there is no reason to
believe that the owners of 1110-1114 Wellington Street West failed to comply
with the parking requirement set out in City of Ottawa By-law AZ-64, and
as such, they had uninterrupted use of the laneway since 1989 until at least
2014, when the CDHA purchased the property.
[58]          
As an aside, despite Ms. Layton’s argument
regarding the requirement for parking, the evidence establishes that on June
26, 2014, in an email exchange with Ms. Love, Ms. Layton stated unequivocally that
the back of her property was not intended to be used for parking and that none
of her tenants need access to parking. Ms. Layton is attempting to distance
herself from this statement and argues that the court should take a contextual
approach to this email, in that it was written in response to the CDHA’s
failure to remove the snow in accordance with their agreement.  A contextual
approach does not lead me to conclude any differently.  Ms. Layton’s belief
regarding the use of her backyard was clear. It was not meant to be used for
parking.
[59]          
In any event, Ms. Layton bears the burden of
establishing that the alleged prescriptive rights were acquired in the 20 years
prior to the date upon which the property was registered under the Land
Titles Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L.5: 1043 Bloor Inc. v. 1714104 Ontario Inc.,
2013 ONCA 91, at para. 91.
[60]          
The legal requirements of a prescriptive
easement are that the use must be continuous for the prescriptive period, and
it must be “as of right”, meaning that the use must be uninterrupted, open,
peaceful and without permission: 1043 Bloor Inc. v. 1714104 Ontario Inc., at
paras. 94 to 97.
[61]          
There is no clear convincing and non-speculative
evidence that the previous owners of 1110-1114 had uninterrupted, open, and
peaceful use of the laneway for 20 years since either 1957 or 1989.  Building
permits are insufficient evidence to make any findings of fact of uninterrupted
use of the laneway.
[62]          
More importantly, Ms. Layton does not meet the
burden that the previous owners of the Layton property were using the laneway
without permission. To the contrary, the “Right-of-way Agreement” is cogent
evidence that as of February 1994, permission was given to use the laneway for
the purposes of maintenance and repairs.  If the easement had been used for
several decades as alleged by Ms. Layton, there would not have been a need to
seek the owner’s permission and into the 1994 “Right-of-way Agreement”. Asking
for permission to use the laneway is inconsistent with using it “as of right”.
[63]          
The 1994 “Right-of-way Agreement” contains an
express acknowledgment that since 1947, the predecessor in title had
“permitted…the full right and liberty to use the easterly wall of the building…”. 
This is another clear indication that permission had been granted.
[64]          
Moreover, there is evidence that the previous
owners of the properties in this action had entered into an agreement giving
permission to each other to use their respective lands. At trial, Ms. Layton referred
to an email written by the CDHA lawyer dated January 2, 2014 in support of her
contention that there was an agreement with respect to parking and snow removal:
[65]          
The use of the laneway was at the will and
pleasure of the previous owner of the CDHA property.
[66]          
In my view, there is an absence of evidence to
establish that the Layton property enjoys a prescriptive easement over the
laneway. The use of the laneway does not meet the definition of “as of right”.
A prescriptive easement was therefore not acquired.
[67]          
Ms. Layton has not persuaded me that any of the
municipal by-laws have been contravened.  Also, I find that the by-laws
referred to by Ms. Layton are inapplicable in the circumstances of this case.
[68]          
First, regarding Zoning By-Law No.
2008-250, its purpose is set out in s. 100(1), namely, to govern access to
“parking, queuing and loading spaces and all driveways and aisles leading to those
spaces.”  By Ms. Layton’s own admission in an email to the CDHA, her backyard
is not intended to be used for parking. That said, I recognize that the parties
had an agreement between 2014 and 2021 to use the laneway to access the
backyard for parking purposes but the agreement was duly terminated by the CDHA.
As of September 1, 2021, no further permission has been given to Ms. Layton to
use the laneway for vehicular access for parking.  Even if the backyard had
been used in the past for parking, all rights have been revoked to access the
parking.
[69]          
The term “parking lot” is defined at s. 54 of the
by-law.  It reads, in part, as follows:
[70]          
The title, as it exists today, is clear. Ms.
Layton’s right-of-way is only limited to the first part of the laneway, meaning
that she has no vehicular access for parking. Also, the CDHA has revoked all
rights of vehicular access for parking.  The CDHA does not have to provide
access to Ms. Layton to park a vehicle in the backyard of the Layton property.
[71]          
As such, because there is no vehicular access
for parking, I find that Zoning By-Law No. 2008-250 is not applicable.
[72]          
Second, regarding Property Maintenance By-Law
No. 2004-208, part of its purpose is to avoid accident hazards because of snow
accumulation. Section 45 of the by-law reads “every owner or occupant of a
building shall keep roofs of the building and the surrounding lands free from accumulations
of snow or ice that might create an accident hazard”.
[73]          
Ms. Layton alleges that the CDHA is clearing snow
in a manner that it is creating an accumulation of snow and ice and committing trespass
to property contrary to the Trespass to Property Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. T.21.
Ms. Layton further says that the residents of the Layton property live under
the constant threat that they will not be able to remove their cars from
parking.  As noted above, Ms. Layton and her residents do not have vehicular
access for parking.  This by-law is therefore not applicable.
[74]          
In terms of the safety issue, I find that the CDHA
took all reasonable steps to avoid the risk of injury.  They hired a snow
removal contractor to properly clear the laneway, and they instructed the snow
removal contractor not to pile any snow on the Layton property. The CDHA also
attempted to erect a snow fence/barrier, but it was removed by Ms. Layton.  The
video surveillance evidence reveals that Ms. Layton acted in an obstructionist
manner when it came to the CDHA’s efforts to clear the snow.  In my view, the CDHA’s
actions were in full compliance with the by-law and not in contravention of the
Trespass to Property Act.
[75]          
Ms. Layton argues that in the event of an
emergency, the Fire Code, O. Reg. 213/07 requires two points of egress,
and the laneway would provide a path for travel and escape.
[76]          
On February 16, 2023, Fire Inspector Mario Cau
issued a Fire Inspection Order to the CDHA, which included, amongst other
things, the following:
[77]          
The enforcement of this Fire Inspection Order
was postponed pending the outcome of this action.
[78]          
The Fire Code issue was dealt with at the
interlocutory motion before Rees J. (Layton v. Canadian Dental Hygienists
Assn., 2024 ONSC 2627).  Ms. Layton was seeking an interlocutory injunction
under the Court’s equitable jurisdiction as well as statutory relief under the Fire
Code, amongst others.  In concluding that the Fire Code does not
provide the Court with the authority to issue an injunction at the request of a
private citizen, Rees J. writes, at paragraph 16: “The Fire Protection and
Prevention Act, 1997, S.O. 1997, c. 4 (the Fire Code’s enabling
statute) authorizes the relevant public authority to apply to the court for
injunctive relief to restrain a breach of the Fire Code, but it does not
authorize a private party to do so: s. 32”
[79]          
I agree with Rees J. that Ms. Layton lacks standing
to apply for injunctive relief.
[80]          
Regardless, s. 1.2.1.1 of the Fire Code states
that the owner is responsible for carrying out the provisions of the Fire
Code.  It is Ms. Layton and not the CDHA that is in contravention of the Fire
Code.
[81]          
Ms. Layton does not have a right-of-way providing
egress or ingress from and/to the Layton property.  It is not the
responsibility of the CDHA to provide egress to the Layton property.
[82]          
Ms. Layton can provide a second point of egress
to the Layton property. The evidence reveals that Ms. Layton and Mr. Terris own
Part 2 of 4R-22360 subject to an easement in favour of their neighbour to the
East.  This alleyway is over one meter wide and runs parallel to the Layton
property.  While there is currently a fence on the Layton property preventing
access, it could easily be removed to provide pedestrian access from the
backyard of the Layton property to Wellington Street West. Ms. Layton argues
that this alleyway is not compliant with the provisions of the Accessibility
for Ontarians with Disabilities Act, 2005, S.O. 2005, c. 11.  If that is
the case, then Ms. Layton must make modifications to the alleyway to ensure
compliance.
[83]          
Ms. Layton submits that even if I conclude that
there is no right-of-way over the full length of the laneway, access over the
laneway should not be prevented by virtue of nuisance.
[84]          
A nuisance is an interference with the plaintiff’s
use or enjoyment of land that is both substantial and unreasonable: Antrim
Truck Centre Ltd. v. Ontario (Ministry of Transportation), 2013 SCC 13, [2013]
1 S.C.R. 594, at para. 19.
[85]          
Ms. Layton argues that by examining nine factors
of the surrounding circumstances of this case, the Court should conclude that the
CDHA substantially and unreasonably interfered with her use and enjoyment of
the property.
[86]          
The CDHA submits that they substantially and
unreasonably interfered with Ms. Layton’s use and enjoyment of her property.
Rather, they say it was not unreasonable for the CDHA to assert their property
rights and use their land in a lawful manner.
[87]          
Ms. Layton says that the CDHA is attempting to
close all access to the Layton property through illegal means, it is preventing
reparation and regular maintenance to the Layton property and there is a risk
of death to her residents because of the obstruction to the laneway.
[88]          
First, as stated earlier, the CDHA has the right
to deny access to the full length of the laneway. Second, the CDHA has not and
does not intend on preventing Ms. Layton from carrying out necessary repairs or
improvement to her properties. The CDHA has previously allowed contractors to
traverse their land and will continue to do so in the future. Finally, there is
no evidence of risk of death of the residents at the Layton property. Ms.
Layton can provide a safe access and egress to the Layton property by way of
the alleyway to the east of her property.
[89]          
Ms. Layton says that in her neighborhood, it is
an expectation that laneways are shared.  Furthermore, it was part of the deed
and agreement of purchase of 1116 Wellington Street West that occupiers be
given access over the laneway, without any encumbrances.
[90]          
Even though at times, the previous and current
owners of the CDHA property and Layton property shared the laneway, permission
was required by the owner of the CDHA property. As proven by the CDHA, Ms.
Layton does not have legal access to the full length of the laneway.  Without
permission, there is no access.
[91]          
Ms. Layton submits that the access restriction
is intolerable.  The CDHA have escalated its conduct by physically and verbally
attacking residents of the Layton property.
[92]          
The interference was mutual.  Ms. Layton is
equally to blame.  She has also escalated her conduct by physically and verbally
attacking the employees of the CDHA.
[93]          
Ms. Layton claims that the CDHA delayed the
resolution of this matter over three years all the while breaking the
regulatory and statutory framework. She argues that the CDHA has interfered
with her property rights by refusing access over the laneway for maintenance
and repairs.
[94]          
The delay is not attributable to the CDHA.  Ms.
Layton refused to concede that access to the laneway could only be granted by
permission.  To repeat, Ms. Layton does not have access over the full length of
the laneway.
[95]          
The CDHA made efforts to work with Ms. Layton to
no avail.  When Ms. Layton asked for access to conduct maintenance and repairs
to the Layton property, the CDHA requested that she provide the following
information: (a) the repairs required; (b) the name of the contractor; (c)
dates and times that access was requested; and (d) correspondence from the
contractor indicating why access across the CDHA property was required. Ms.
Layton refused to provide this information, despite it being a reasonable
request.
[96]          
Ms. Layton states that the CDHA blocked access
during the day (7:00am to 6:00pm), Monday through Friday.
[97]          
The CDHA had the right to block access to their
laneway.  If access was required to carry out necessary repairs or improvements
to the Layton property, the CDHA was prepared to allow access.
[98]          
 Ms. Layton submits that the laneway cannot be
encumbered pursuant to Zoning By-Law No. 2008-250.
[99]          
As previously concluded, Zoning By-Law
No. 2008-250 is not applicable to the circumstances of this case.
[100]      
Ms. Layton says that the CDHA does not have
parking, while the tenants of the Layton property regularly and continuously use
the backyard for parking. The CDHA has personally benefitted by parking in the
laneway.
[101]      
During the agreement between the CDHA and Ms.
Layton, both parties mutually benefitted from the relationship. Once the
agreement ended, the CDHA rightfully and lawfully used their land.
[102]      
Ms. Layton asserts that the CDHA acted
unreasonably in that they had a desire to cause annoyance, discomfort, and
inconvenience to Ms. Layton. She says that the CDHA made inappropriate
complaints to the police, and they resorted to violence.
[103]      
The CDHA makes the same allegations against Ms.
Layton.
[104]      
The unreasonable nature of the conduct applies
to both parties.
[105]      
Ms. Layton indicates that the CDHA falsely
advised the City of Ottawa and a Counsellor that they had a legal right to park
in their laneway by omitting that there is a legal right-of-way over Part 3 of
the laneway.
[106]      
I disagree.  Ms. Layton’s right-of-way is
limited to the first 25.3 feet of the laneway.  The CDHA did not misrepresent their
ownership of the laneway or any right-of-way.
[107]      
Also, given Ms. Layton’s own explosive conduct
during this dispute, I do not find that there is evidence that she was an
unduly sensitive plaintiff.
[108]      
In summary, considering all the circumstances of
this case, I find that Ms. Layton has failed to prove that the CDHA has caused
substantial and unreasonable interference with the Layton property.
[109]      
For the foregoing reasons, Ms. Layton’s action
is dismissed, and the CDHA’s counterclaim for damages is dismissed.
[110]      
The only valid and existing right-of-way on the CDHA
property is the first 25.3 feet of the laneway over Part 3, Plan 4R-21093, as
properly described on title. The Land Titles Act Order OC427110 is valid
and binding.  Ms. Layton does not have a right-of-way over the full length of
the laneway, and she has no vehicular access to the rear of the Layton
property. Ms. Layton is prevented from trespassing across any of the CDHA
property, other than Part 3, Plan 4R-21093 or with permission of the CDHA.
[111]      
As mentioned a few times in this Judgment, the CDHA
has made it clear that they have no intention of preventing Ms. Layton from
conducting maintenance and repairs to the Layton property.  This is proper and
good neighbourly conduct.  While title will not be rectified to grant a
right-of-way to the full length of the laneway, I commend the CDHA’s intention to
provide reasonable access across their lands on a reasonable basis if and when
the need for maintenance and repairs arises to the Layton property. The CDHA’s
request that Ms. Layton provide the following information is appropriate and
will avoid that access to the laneway be used for improper purposes: (a) the
repairs required; (b) the name of the contractor; (c) dates and times that
access is requested; and (d) correspondence from the contractor indicating why
access across the CDHA property is required.
[112]      
The parties are encouraged to agree on the costs
of this trial and the motion before Rees J.  If they are unable to do so, the CDHA
may file and serve their costs submissions within 30 days of the date of this
Judgment, limited to ten pages, excluding their Bill of Costs and Offers to
Settle.  Ms. Layton shall file and serve her costs submissions, with the same
page restriction, within 30 days thereafter.