[1]              
The parties are siblings. Their father, Arturo
Perlini, died on March 4, 2021.  Their mother predeceased their father.  Prior
to his death, Arturo Perlini resided at the F.J. Davey Home, a 374-bed
long-term care nursing home, from April 2017 to the date of his death.
[2]              
The applicants are the estate trustees for the
estate of Arturo Perlini under the terms of his last will and testament.  The
applicant, Anne Marie Louise Perlini, managed the property of Arturo Perlini
under the terms of a power of attorney.
[3]              
The estate trustees have applied to parse the
accounts of the estate of Arturo Perlini so that his estate can be finalized. 
Sandra Martone objects to the amount claimed as compensation by the estate
trustee and the amount  claimed by Anne Marie Louise Perlini by way of a
management fee in her capacity as attorney for Arturo Perlini while he was
alive.
[4]              
The late Mr. Perlini left a sizeable estate
totalling $1,733,405.82.  This estate was composed essentially of two pieces of
real property, bank accounts and investments.
[5]              
The estate trustees are claiming 5% of the value
of the estate as executor fees for administrating the estate.  This totals
$86,670.30 or $43,335.15 for each estate trustee.  In addition to this amount,
Anne Marie Louise Perlini is claiming the sum of $52,754.75 as compensation for
a management fee for managing the late Mr. Perlini’s property for a four-year
period from April 2017 to his date of death on March 4, 2021.  The applicants
suggest that the amounts claimed are the prescribed amounts that are usually
awarded calculated on a percentage of the value of the estate.  Sandra Martone
claims that the amounts sought are unreasonable given what was required and how
the applicants carried out their functions as estate trustee and what Ms.
Perlini was required to do to manage the property of the late Mr. Perlini under
the power of attorney.
[6]              
Counsel for Ms. Martone referred the court to
the case of Poitras v.  Canadian Cancer Society, 2021 ONSC 406, a
decision of Justice Gomery of the Superior Court of Justice.  As noted in
paragraph 11 of that decision, “Under section 61(1) of the Trustee Act,
RSO 1990, c T. 23, a trustee is entitled to ‘such fair and reasonable allowance
for the care, pains and trouble and the time expended in and about the estate,
as may be allowed by a judge of the Superior Court of Justice’”.  As noted in
paragraph 12 of that decision, standard compensation is the sum of 2.5% of each
of capital receipts, capital disbursement, revenue receipts and revenue
disbursements with an additional management fee, generally calculated as 2/5 of
1% of the gross value of the estate, with this additional management fee to be
the exception rather than the rule.
[7]              
The Poitras decision confirms that these
calculations based on the value of the estate are a guide only and the ultimate
decision as to what is a fair and reasonable allowance in each case lies in the
discretion of the court based on the circumstances and facts involved in the
administration of the estate.
[8]              
In determining what compensation is “fair and
reasonable” the court should consider five factors as outlined in the Re
Toronto General Trusts and Central Ontario Railway (1905) 6 O.W.R. 350
(H.C.) as endorsed in Laing Estate v. Hines, 41 O.R. 571 (Ont. C.A.). 
These factors are as follows:
[9]              
I agree with the suggestion made by counsel for
Ms. Martone that this was not a complicated estate to administer.  It involved
a home, a cottage, and some money in the bank.  Both the cottage and the home
were ultimately sold as part of the estate administration.  The sale of the
home was delayed as a result of soil contamination, which ultimately involved
an engineer and some remedial work.  This delayed the sale of the home, but in
my view, not for an inordinate or unexplained amount of time.  The cottage was
sold in May 2022, so 14 months after the death of Mr. Perlini.  This, in my
view, is also not an inordinate delay given the fact that it is reasonable that
the property had to be readied for sale and sold in the summer months given it
is a recreational property.  Although Ms. Martone took issue with respect to
the sale of the properties, I can find no issue in when or how they were sold
in the circumstances.  I do find that Ms. Martone makes a valid point about how
the cash on hand was handled by the estate trustees.  A substantial sum was
left in a bank account and not invested in a higher interest earning investment
account while the estate was being administered.  In my view, the estate
trustees were derelict in their duties in this regard and the estate
undoubtedly suffered a financial loss as a result of it.
[10]          
It is also fair to say that the estate trustees
were not forthcoming in providing financial information to Ms. Martone,
financial records or in passing the accounts in a timely manner to wind up this
estate.  Ms. Martone had to bring the matter before the court to obtain this
information and numerous court attendances were required to have information
forthcoming to Ms. Martone.
[11]          
When the court considers the factors to be
assessed there is no skill displayed by the trustees or no unusual care or
responsibility assumed by the estate trustees that would entitle them to the
maximum compensation of 5% of the value of the estate.  The estate trustees
were at times uncooperative with the beneficiary Sandra Martone, the estate was
unnecessarily delayed in its administration and finalization and bad decisions
were made at times by the estate trustees, for example, leaving over $600,000.00
in a bank account rather than investing it at a higher yield while the estate
was being administered.  It is not reasonable for the estate trustees to charge
a “Cadillac” executors’ fee when “Cadillac” performance as estate trustees were
not exhibited.
[12]          
When the court exercises its discretion and
examines what was done in the administration of this estate to determine what
is a “fair and reasonable” allowance for the care, pains, trouble and time
expended by the estate trustees, a conclusion is reached that 5% of the value
of the estate is not an appropriate amount.  Given what was required in the
administration of this uncomplicated estate and considering the factors set out
in Re Toronto General Trustees and Central Ontario Railway, I am of the
view that a fair and reasonable amount for executors’ compensation is 3% of the
value of the estate, or $52,000.00 in total.  That amount would give each
estates trustee the sum of  $26,000.00 in compensation.
[13]          
As to the amount that should be received by Anne
Marie Louise Perlini as a management fee for her capacity as attorney under the
power of attorney of Arturo Perlini, I conclude that the amount claimed of
$52,754.75 is excessive and unreasonable in the circumstances.  The services
that Ms. Perlini had to perform were not complicated or onerous.  It involved
seeing that Mr. Perlini’s personal bills and bills associated with the cottage
and house were paid, ensuring that the cottage and house were being maintained,
and ensuring that his income tax returns were completed and filed on time with
the Canada Revenue Agency.  Ms. Perlini did this for her father for a period of
four years.  In my view, a reasonable fee for performing these services would
be  $2,500.00 yearly, for a total of $10,000 for the four years that Ms.
Perlini performed these services.
[14]          
In conclusion, the following order is made by
the court:
[15]          
With respect to the issue of costs, success has
been very much divided.  The estate trustees received compensation not in the
amount they requested, but more than that suggested by Ms. Martone.  Similarly,
Ms. Perlini received compensation for her services under the power of attorney
in an amount that was lower than she claimed, but more than was suggested by
Ms. Martone.  Given this divided success, the costs of the parties will be
payable out of the estate, fixed in the amount of $3,000.00 in favour of the
applicants Anne Marie Louise Perlini and Arthur H. Perlini, and in the amount
of $12,000.00 in favour of the respondent, Sandra Martone.