[1]             
The Applicant appears before this court seeking a
s. 520 Criminal Code bail review. On October 15, 2024, a reverse onus show
cause hearing was held and on October 17, 2024, the Applicant was detained in
custody on the secondary ground. He was before the Ontario Court of Justice
facing 5 Informations and 19 counts, for which due to subsequent disclosure and
Crown review, have been altered as will be noted. The original charges included:
[2]             
Obviously, even with the noted charge
withdrawals and amendments, the Applicant still faces serious charges. As I
understand it, he now presently faces 5 Informations and 15 charges, with one further
charge to be amended. He has been in custody since his arrest on October 10,
2024.
[3]             
The Applicant seeks his release arguing that it was
not justified within the meaning of s. 515(10) of the Code. He is suggesting
that a material change in circumstance has manifested given production of
intervening disclosure and as a result of a number of charges that have since
been or are anticipated to be withdrawn or amended. He further argues that the
presiding Justice of the Peace committed various errors of law which merit this
court’s assessment and release reconsideration, including:
[4]             
The present altered plan of release, which he
argues is more stringent, proposes a residential surety with a “friend” in
Grand Bend, away from the influences in Parkhill, Ontario. A strict curfew or
house arrest is invited, with the potential for GPS monitoring.
[5]             
While both the provincial and federal Crowns take
issue with the error of law complaints, they concede that a material change in
circumstance has occurred since his detention, caused primarily due to the disclosure
receipt and production and the further screening and reduction in outstanding
charges. This permits a reconsideration of his release. However, they argue
that the totality of present allegations, the Applicant’s history and conduct
while on judicial interim release and the absence of a convincing plan of
release to mitigate secondary ground concerns merits a continued detention
order.
[6]             
I will briefly summarize the allegations on this
evidentiary record, noting new evidence revealed since the Applicant’s show
cause hearing.
[7]             
At the time these circumstances began, the
Applicant was already bound by a release order dated June 6, 2023, related to
property offence allegations. The terms of his release included house arrest
for his Parkhill, Ontario, home and GPS monitoring terms.
[8]             
In the fall of 2023, police learned that the
Applicant was dealing drugs from his home in Parkhill, Ontario. An
investigation commenced culminating on March 7, 2024, when a s. 11 CDSA
search warrant was executed at the Applicant’s residence in Parkhill, Ontario. Both
he and his female co-accused were located inside the residence, in a bedroom. As
a result of the search, throughout the residence (including the bedroom) police
found 169 pills of hydromorphone, 53 pills of morphine, 9.43 grams of cocaine
and 3.53 grams of methamphetamine. Also seized were drug paraphernalia
including packaging materials, debt lists, a large quantity of Canadian
currency and digital scales. Police further located a Skidoo snowmobile which
had been reported stolen on November 27, 2019.
[9]             
Also at the residence, police seized what was
then believed to be a conductive energy weapon within the bedroom, within the
co-accused’s purse. The provincial Crown has since learned that upon analysis the
conductive energy weapon does not meet the definition of a prohibited device in
the Code. The Applicant was then the subject of a court ordered weapons
prohibition, a term of his release order prohibiting weapons possession and a
peace bond with a term prohibiting weapons possession. As noted, the weapon and
associated breach charges are to be withdrawn.
[10]         
On August 14, 2024, the Applicant was charged
with a single count of break and enter into a dwelling. On that date at 4:42pm,
police were dispatched to a break in report. Police reviewed surveillance video
footage and, based upon earlier dealing that day, were able to recognize and
identify the Applicant as the suspect.
[11]         
On August 25, 2024, police located and arrested the
Applicant at his residence in Parkhill with his surety, not where he was
required to reside at his surety’s residence in Ailsa Craig, Ontario. Regardless,
he was released on an inconsistent Undertaking to reside at his Parkhill
residence.
[12]         
The provincial Crown now intends to proceed with
an unlawfully in a dwelling charge respecting this matter, contrary to s.
349(1) of the Code.
[13]         
On August 16, 2024, police responded to an
impaired driving complaint at 8:53am in Parkhill, Ontario. Police found the
suspect vehicle in the driveway of the Applicant’s Parkhill residence. A female
co-accused was in the driver’s seat, the Applicant was in the front passenger
seat. Police learned that the driver was wanted in Sarnia, Ontario, for a
robbery. A search incident to arrest revealed a stolen watch, 52.6 grams of
suspected methamphetamine and 7.6 grams of suspected fentanyl. Also located was
a scale, baggies and several cell phones. Both were arrested for possession for
the purpose of trafficking in suspected methamphetamine and fentanyl. However,
upon Health Canada analysis, no fentanyl was detected and the total sum of methamphetamine
was found to be 7.6 grams. The federal Crown intends to withdraw the fentanyl
related s. 5(2) CDSA charge.
[14]         
Again, the Applicant was found at his associated
Parkhill, Ontario, residence. He was not at his release order residence in Ailsa
Craig, Ontario.
[15]         
On October 4, 2024, two complainants attended
the Main Street Motel in Parkhill, Ontario. They were seeking lodging but were
unable to secure a room. The Applicant approached them and offered them a place
to stay at a nearby trailer for a fee. Prior to attending at the trailer with
the complaints, the Applicant and one of the complainants attended at another
Parkhill residence. The Applicant entered this residence through the rear door
(apparently to use the washroom, uninvited) but causing damage to the door. He
was charged with both unlawfully in a dwelling (for whatever reason) and
mischief to property.
[16]         
Then, the Applicant took the complainants to the
mentioned trailer and introduced the complainants to his friend. The
complainants first went to the LCBO, then returned to the trailer and decide
not to stay for the night. By then, the Applicant had left. The complainants
texted him asking him to return their fee. They saw the Applicant’s friend
message the Applicant by social media on a computer. The friend was told by the
Applicant that he was back and to leave the trailer. The friend left the
trailer as directed. When the complainants then attempted to leave, they were
stopped at the door by two masked men holding box cutters and a firearm. The
firearm was described as a “sub machine gun” styled firearm. One of the
complainants immediately recognized the Applicant as one of the assailants
based upon the bottom half facial mask revealing his “upper face”. He also
recognized the Applicant’s voice and the footwear. One of the assailants fired
the gun “beside” the complainant and slashed at his crossbody bag – which had their
money, identification, bank cards and a small amount of marijuana inside –
after the bag was demanded from them. Fearing for their safety, the
complainants fled and contacted police. Police eventually located and arrested the
Applicant at a Lambton County address on October 10, 2024 – again, not the
Ailsa Craig residence wherein he was to be residing. Multiple weapons and
breach of court order related charges are alleged.
[17]         
As part of new disclosure, the Applicant asserts
that the identification evidence is weaker than originally reported for the
show causing hearing. In particular, references to eye colour from the
submitted Crown synopsis were not part of the complainants’ police statement. In
response, the Crown referenced the statement proper wherein the complainant
commented about the assailant’s eye colour: “I am pretty sure it was blue.” The
Crown submits that the comment respecting eye colour is far from the alleged
linchpin of the prosecution’s case. Given the proximity of dealings, he is
confident one of the assailant’s was the Applicant.
[18]         
Further, a canvass of the trailer area included
a statement from a witness who claims to have observed a black Toyota Corolla
hatchback parked in the area – a vehicle she had seen before that she suspected
of drug activity. On the evening of October 4th, she saw this
vehicle, a male running from the area of the trailer and then saw the vehicle
speed off. Police confirmed the Applicant has been associated to a 2019 black
Toyota Corolla. As a result, police attended the Applicant’s Parkhill
associated residence and found the black Toyota Corolla with its hood observed
to be warm to the touch. An unknown person fled the rear of the residence. The
Applicant alleges that recent disclosure references a truck, not a Corolla
hatchback. He questions the quality of this identification evidence. The Crown
responds that the witness statements do not reference seeing a truck, simply
that the vehicle sounded like a truck.
[19]         
As I commented to counsel, I am not sitting as a
trial court and the bail review is not intended to get granular into factual
inconsistencies. Suffice it to say, the identity issue respecting the second
October 4, 2024, allegations are a live and contested issue. Of course, I am always
mindful of the general frailties of eyewitness testimony, brought home by
numerous inquiry findings and the experiences of this court in general. They
are factored into my assessment of the strength of the Crown’s case in general.
[20]         
At the time, the Applicant was the subject of release
order, Criminal Code weapons prohibition and peace bond order
prohibiting his possession of any weapons or firearms.
[21]         
The Applicant’s criminal history commences in
August 2023 through February 2024, totalling 7 findings of guilt, including:
[22]         
The Applicant was detained in custody following
a show cause hearing on March 19, 2024. However, on May 21, 2024, he was
released on consent with his mother, Kristy Thompson, as surety. He was
required to reside with his surety in Ailsa Craig, Ontario.
[23]         
As noted, the Applicant was released on
Undertakings respecting the August 2024 allegations.
[24]         
When the Applicant was arrested on October 10,
2024, he was detained pending a reverse onus show cause hearing. The Crowns
applied under s. 524 and were granted the cancellation of previous releases as
part of his show cause hearing on October 15, 2024.
[25]         
Fortunately, the Applicant’s bail hearing was
heard relatively promptly after his arrest. The presiding Justice of the Peace
detained him on the secondary ground. Having made a detention order respecting
the secondary ground, he declined to consider the tertiary ground.
[26]         
As part of the secondary ground analysis, the
presiding Justice of the Peace concluded that the proposed release plan, inclusive
of a friend offered as a surety, was insufficient to mitigate his concerns on
the secondary ground. The proposed surety was found to have very little
knowledge about the Applicant’s day-to-day activities, work, or circumstances. He
did not even know if and/or where the Applicant worked for a living – he
believed it was none of his business. I note, as was suggested by the presiding
Justice of the Peace, that this was not a glowing reference for a proposed
civil jailer. The proposed surety resided at the Applicant’s associated
residence for about a month – a building owned by the Applicant’s mother, where
he rented a room. He expressed reluctance to check up on the Applicant re
indicia for drug activity concerns. So, at its essence, the plan involved the
Applicant moving right back to his status quo in Parkhill, with a fellow room
renter as surety, and an evening curfew.
[27]         
Therefore, that the presiding Justice of the
Peace concluded that this proposed release plan “has not presented a coherent,
cogent plan whatsoever…I don’t find him a satisfactory surety whatsoever” was,
by my reading of that proceeding, a self-evident and an entirely appropriate conclusion.
That release plan, with that proposed surety who was “not a foundation stone to
build a plan of supervision” upon could not reasonably have mitigated the
Applicant’s found secondary ground risk.
[28]         
The Applicant now proposes a “more stringent
supervisory plan” with the following features:
[29]         
The scope and purpose of a s. 520 bail review
was clarified by the Supreme Court in R v St-Cloud:
[30]         
In R v St-Cloud, the new evidence
admissibility standard for a “material change in circumstance” was defined as
including a minimal due diligence consideration respecting the first
proceeding, a relevancy assessment bearing on a decisive issue in the s.
515(10) analysis, that the proposed evidence is credible or reasonably capable
of belief, and that it must, if believed, be reasonably capable of affecting
the balancing exercise engaged in by the court.[2] 
Once a material change in circumstance has been established, the reviewing
judge can then re-engage in the balancing of the factors in s. 515(10) to determine
whether the detention of the applicant is “still justified”.
[31]         
As noted in R v Ferguson, Justice Hill
noted in the context of a s. 520 bail review that simply proposing a new surety(ies)
will not amount to a material change in circumstance. It is only where “it can
be said that the commitment and nature of the newly proffered suretyship
materially calls into question the continued validity of the reasons for
detention can it reasonably be said that the submitted material change in
circumstances is relevant to the existing cause for detention.”[3]
[32]         
The Crown has globally conceded that the terrain
has shifted since the bail hearing, and, as a result, they concede that a
material change in circumstance has occurred. Their concession is well founded.
[33]         
As was noted by Justice Trotter in The Law of
Bail in Canada, recognized examples of material changes in circumstances
that are relevant to this matter before me, include:
[34]         
Here, as noted, both the provincial and federal
prosecutors updated the court respecting the anticipated withdrawal of multiple
charges that were before the bail court at first instance. As noted by the Applicant,
disclosure since provided also identified more detail which was arguably
inconsistent with the factual synopses identification evidence provided to the
bail court relative to the robbery allegation. The Applicant also asserts that
the new proposed release plan itself represents a material change in
circumstance. These factors, individually and collectively, satisfy me that the
Applicant has met his burden in establishing a material change in circumstance.
[35]         
As a result of this material change in
circumstance, I will engage afresh with the balancing of factors in s. 515(10). 
Therefore, I do not need to scrutinize the various errors of law and principle raised
by the Applicant as acceptance of any of them would, in effect, circle me back
to this reconsideration starting point.
[36]         
The Applicant proposes a release plan that is,
in many respects, largely consistent with that which was proposed at his bail
hearing. The difference here, a suggested material change in circumstance, is
the availability of a new residential surety away from Parkhill, Ontario (or
his own home).
[37]         
I must now turn my attention to the secondary
ground for detention consideration – simply stated, is there a substantial
likelihood that the Applicant will commit a criminal offence or interfere with
the administration of justice if released such that the protection or safety of
the public, including the victim or any witness, would be put at risk? As noted
by the Supreme Court in R v Morales, detention must be necessary for
public safety, not merely convenient.[5]
[38]         
The Applicant was detained on the secondary
ground at his bail hearing. After a recitation of the factual allegations, and
commentary about their significance, the presiding Justice of the Peace
concluded, simply, “So, to be quite clear, nature of the record, nature of the
allegations, the court does have concerns on the secondary grounds.” While I
find that court’s conclusion, upon my review of the totality of the
circumstances, entirely reasonable, I concede that absent from that court’s
reasons was a determination respecting the extent and nature of the risk posed
by the Applicant. I will therefore address that issue.
[39]         
The evidentiary record makes plain that the
Applicant poses a substantial likelihood of re-offending, if released, to the
effect that the community’s safety would be adversely affected. Coming to this
conclusion, I have considered the following factors:
[40]         
I have also considered the overall viability of
this secondary ground concern measured against the relative strength of the
Crown’s case. While this consideration plays a role in the court’s assessment
at this stage, it cannot, as was observed by the presiding Justice of the
Peace, inspire me to, in effect, usurp the role of the trial court. A show
cause hearing, and a bail review for that matter, is not the appropriate forum
for an in-depth assessment of the evidence and its ultimately reliability. As I
have noted, I must and am alive to the recognized frailties of identification
evidence. Further, on drug related prosecutions, knowledge and control over the
suspect contraband is always a live issue when a co-accused is also present,
often informed largely by the search environment. All of this acknowledged, and
appreciating the Applicant’s identified issues, the evidentiary record before
me does not inspire reticence such that I must, to avoid obvious or apparent
injustice, release a defendant.
[41]         
Having identified the risk, can the Applicant
otherwise be released on the basis of a release plan that can mitigate these secondary
ground concerns? If so, the Applicant’s recent history, represented by multiple
sets of allegations, calls out for meaningfully and rigid community supervision
and intervention, to adequately mitigate a real and substantial secondary
ground concern. Having considered the plan proposed, mindful that the Applicant
bears the burden to justify his release, I find that the latest plan proposed
falls well short of that requirement for the following reasons:
[42]         
As a result, I find that the release plan
proffered cannot sufficiently mitigate the risk posed by the Applicant’s
release.
[43]         
On the Ferguson standard, I have concerns
about the Applicant’s new release plan and the extent to which it offers
meaningful improvement over the original plan proposed. While it offers the
prospect of a more “stringent” supervisory regime, that appearance may
realistically illusory. While the Applicant naturally has a constitutional
right to reasonable bail, I fear his recent history belies his capacity to
comply with community supervision, particularly from an acquaintance he has no
vested interest in respecting. The Applicant was residing with and under the
influence of a parent throughout this alleged offence cycle. I have no
confidence that this new plan will offer any greater reassurance then the
previous.
[44]         
I have also considered whether the imposition of
a house arrest plan with GPS monitoring could tip the balance towards release.
Unfortunately, I find that it cannot largely based upon the Applicant’s recent
disregard for prior forms of release. It is
important to acknowledge that electronic
monitoring is not a direct preventative measure. In United States of America v
Pannell,[6] an extradition case, Nordheimer
J. (as he then was), correctly observed that the system does not restrict the
subject from breaching, it merely alerts the service provider of a breach. The
Ontario Court of Appeal in R v JJ,[7] noted that GPS monitoring has been
described as a risk management tool, rather than crime prevention tool. 
Therefore, GPS monitoring provides some increased level of certainty as some
breaches will be detected relatively rapidly but does not prevent such
non-compliance. Realistically, it acts as a deterrent to noncompliance. So,
while electronic monitoring may assist the sureties, a plan of supervision is
only as good as the sureties who monitor it and a defendant sufficiently
deterred. Here, electronic monitoring will not replace the need for a good,
effective, and dependable surety and release plan that, itself, can effectively
inspire compliance. If the Applicant’s mother could not do so, I find Ms.
Haggarty’s chances are remote.
[45]         
As a result, I find that despite the material change
in circumstance, the Applicant’s ongoing detention from a secondary ground
perspective remains justified.
[46]         
With respect to the tertiary ground, the
presiding Justice of the Peace elected not to make any findings, citing R v
Kalashnikoff,[8]
as authority for the proposition that “if I’ve made a detention order on the
secondary grounds, I don’t need to do a tertiary grounds analysis.”[9] Unfortunately, that is
not what Justice Pierce said in Kalashnikoff.
[47]         
In Kalashnikoff, the court was sitting as
a bail review court. There, the presiding Justice of the Peace had detained the
Applicant on all three grounds. However, on bail review, the court, citing new
evidence, reconsidered the primary detention grounds but agreed with the
secondary ground detention finding. Then, turning to the tertiary ground analysis,
the court elected not to address its merits given the secondary ground
detention confirmation: “Given the finding I have made on the secondary ground,
it is not necessary to deal with the merits of the tertiary grounds.”[10] This is a common
appellate practice, addressing only that which is necessary to determine the
judicial review. However, a Justice of the Peace conducting a bail hearing is
not sitting in judicial review. The appellate standard does not apply to a
hearing at first instance. Regrettably, this misapprehension of Justice
Pierce’s reasons led the presiding Justice of the Peace to dispense with a
consideration of the tertiary ground.
[48]         
The Crown, here, also seeks the Applicant’s
detention on the tertiary ground. While I agree that the presiding Justice of
the Peace was in err by neglecting to conduct a tertiary ground analysis, the
fact that this ground was not considered leaves me with nothing to review. The
failure to address each detention ground advanced by the Crown frustrates the review
process – a process that is at the heart of bail and detention reviews in ss.
520, 521 and 525 of the Code. One of the purposes of a bail review is to
assess whether an err of law occurred within the presiding Justice’s analysis,
not the fact that none occurred. By not addressing the Crown’s tertiary ground
argument at first instance, when the evidence is best marshaled before the
court, a bail review court is put in the difficult position of having to engage,
independently, in a hearing de novo on the tertiary ground. That is
inconsistent with the purpose and intentions for a bail review[11] but this circumstance
leaves me with no other alternative.
[49]         
Here, without the benefit of a first instance
determination, I am left to simply assess the evidentiary record based upon the
record as it currently exists – its modification constituting an acknowledged
material change in circumstance. While the remaining and intended offences remain
serious, and conviction on them would result in a potentially lengthy term of
imprisonment, likely within the penitentiary range, the strength of the Crown’s
case is admittedly not what it was upon original bail hearing presentation.
[50]         
The contested issue, of course, is the “apparent
strength of the prosecution’s case”. When assessing any tertiary ground issue,
I must turn my attention to St-Cloud and the Supreme Court’s emphasis
upon a reasonable member of the community who is properly informed about the
philosophy of the legislative provisions, constitutional bail values, and the
actual circumstances of the case. Bail is not precluded simply because each
enumerated factor is met, let alone when three of four factors are satisfied.[12]
[51]         
Since the Applicant’s show cause detention, overall,
the Crown’s evidentiary record has not improved. With particular respect to the
most recent robbery allegation, beyond clear and highly suspicious opportunity,
the Crown’s case will rise and fall upon the quality of their witness
identification evidence. As I have noted, I am not in a reasonable position to
assess its strength. A trial court will be best positioned for that task. However,
appreciative of the general frailties of eyewitness identification, I am not prepared,
on the recent and most serious of allegations, to support an overall tertiary
ground detention premised, as it must be, upon a “strong” Crown case. Were it
therefore determinative, I would not detain the Applicant on the tertiary
ground.
[52]         
Having reconsidered the propriety of the
Applicant’s detention, I find that, based upon the totality of all the
allegations before me and the present circumstances, I am, pursuant to s. 520
of the Code, satisfied that the continued detention of the Applicant in
custody is justified within the meaning of subsection 515(10) of the Criminal
Code.
[53]         
On this enhanced evidentiary record, secondary
ground concerns remain which are not reasonably attenuated by the newly
proposed release plan. I believe that a reasonable, fair minded community
member, aware of all the circumstances, the Applicant’s criminal history, and yet
mindful of the presumption of innocence and the constitutional right to
reasonable bail, would not lose faith in the justice system faced with an
affirmation of the Applicant’s continued detention.
[54]         
As a result, the Applicant’s s. 520 bail review
application is dismissed.