[1]         
Tyler Leduc was severely injured during his
birth on November 22, 2009, as a result of which he is profoundly disabled.
[2]         
In 2015, his mother, Angele Vanier, retained Almeda
Wallbridge of the law firm of Wallbridge, Wallbridge (the “Wallbridge firm”),
to commence an action on behalf of Tyler and his family against the doctor who
delivered Tyler, the nurses who were assisting him, and the hospital at which Tyler
was born.
[3]         
In 2023, the action was settled for the
all-inclusive sum of $14 million.
[4]         
In this motion under r. 7 of the Rules of
Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194 (the “Rules”), Mrs. Wallbridge seeks
the court’s approval to charge a fee of approximately $4.1 million, in addition
to taxes and disbursements, under the terms of a Contingency Fee Agreement
(“CFA”) entered into between Ms. Vanier as Tyler’s litigation guardian and Mrs.
Wallbridge on May 3, 2018.
[5]         
For the following reasons, the fee is disallowed
as being neither fair when the CFA was entered into, nor reasonable at present.
Instead, the fee is set at $3,250,000, exclusive of HST and disbursements.
[6]         
During his birth, Tyler Leduc suffered what is
known medically as an “hypoxic ischemic” brain injury, meaning that his brain
did not get enough oxygen. As a result, he was diagnosed about one year later
with cerebral palsy.
[7]         
Tyler cannot stand on his own. He cannot walk. He
cannot talk. He cannot feed himself or relieve himself the way most people can.
Tyler has no purposeful movements and suffers from seizures. He is totally
dependent on his caregivers for survival.
[8]         
Since his birth, Tyler’s main caregiver has been
his mother, Ms. Vanier, a woman whose love for her son is matched only by her
ability to persevere through his many challenges.
[9]         
Tyler’s parents separated not long after he was
born and, for years, Tyler’s father, Jean Louis Leduc, also cared for Tyler. Unfortunately,
Mr. Leduc died in August 2020 at a young age, leaving Ms. Vanier alone to care
for Tyler.
[10]     
In January 2011, Ms. Vanier and Mr. Leduc met
with Mrs. Wallbridge about the possibility of suing those whom they believed
were responsible for what happened to Tyler. This included Dr. Dufour, the
doctor responsible for his delivery; the nurses who were assisting Dr. Dufour;
and the hospital in Sudbury where Tyler was born.
[11]     
Mrs. Wallbridge agreed to investigate the
possibility of a lawsuit and began to gather the records from the hospital and
elsewhere. In addition to gathering the records, Mrs. Wallbridge retained an
expert on the issue of nursing standards and eight or nine medical experts to
provide her with opinions on the issues of medical negligence and causation.
[12]     
No written agreement regarding Mrs. Wallbridge’s
fees was signed at that time.
[13]     
Approximately four years later, on August 5,
2015, once Mrs. Wallbridge had conducted her investigation, Ms. Vanier and Mr. Leduc
signed the first of three CFAs. Two of the CFAs were entitled “Contingency Fee
Agreement” and were identical. The first one was signed by Ms. Vanier on August
5, 2015, but not by Mr. Leduc. The second was signed on August 20, 2015, by
both Ms. Vanier and Mr. Leduc. However, their signatures were not witnessed in
the way that Ms. Vanier’s signature was witnessed on the earlier CFA. Although
nothing turns on it, it appears that Ms. Vanier intended to sign the September
CFA as a witness to Mr. Leduc’s signature, but signed in the wrong place. For
the purpose of these reasons, I will refer to the two CFAs signed in 2015
simply as the “2015 CFA”.
[14]     
On May 3, 2018, Ms. Vanier signed the third CFA,
this time entitled “Retainer Fee Agreement”. Although there was a place in the
document for Mr. Leduc to sign, it was never signed by him. This omission might
be explained by evidence that Mr. Leduc was absent from Tyler’s life for a
period of about two years before he died. For the sake of simplicity, I will
refer to the May 3, 2018, Retainer Fee Agreement as the “2018 CFA”.
[15]     
Under both the 2015 and 2018 CFAs, the
Wallbridge firm was to be paid one-third of the “compensation” received by the
client, defined as being the total amount of money received for the client’s
claim, excluding costs.[1] 
Both CFAs also provided that the Wallbridge firm would be paid nothing if the
client did not receive any compensation, subject to being paid on the basis of
a percentage of total work done in the event that the file was transferred to
other counsel for completion, or on the basis of payment of the Wallbridge
firm’s fees and disbursements by the opposing party, in the event that the
client decided to abandon the claim on that basis.
[16]     
Shortly after the 2015 CFA was signed, Mrs.
Wallbridge commenced the action in which this motion is brought. As is usual in
medical malpractice cases, the action was vigorously defended on behalf of the
defendants. It was complicated to some extent procedurally by the fact that Dr.
Dufour had already passed away at the time it was commenced. However, the last
of the statements of defence was eventually delivered on January 26, 2017. Examinations
for discovery of the defendant nurses were completed by the end of August 2017,
and of the representative for the doctor by December 4, 2017. The examinations
for discovery of the plaintiffs were completed by August 22, 2018.
[17]     
Following the examinations for discovery of the
defendants, Mrs. Wallbridge began to obtain expert reports on the issue of
damages. A judicial pre-trial conference (“JPT”) was scheduled for December 17,
2019. However, it had to be adjourned when counsel for the nurses and the
hospital moved for an order that testing be done to determine if the cause of
Tyler’s cerebral palsy was genetic. The plaintiffs undertook the testing, the
results of which were negative.
[18]     
In July 2020, the parties agreed to participate
in a mediation, which was arranged for November 23, 2020. However, before the
mediation took place, counsel for the nurses served a new expert report,
suggesting that Tyler’s injuries were caused by meconium-induced vascular
[19]     
The mediation proceeded as planned, but failed
to resolve the case.
[20]     
A second JPT was held on March 17, 2021, and
continued on December 2, 2021. Again, the case did not settle. At the end of
the JPT, however, the plaintiffs agreed to strike their jury notice in order to
have the matter proceed to trial as expeditiously as possible and the case was
placed on the January 5, 2022, assignment court list. On that date, the trial
was set for eight weeks, to commence on September 5, 2023.
[21]     
As the trial date began to approach, Mrs.
Wallbridge revisited the prospect of settlement. During the December 2021 JPT, defence
counsel had offered to settle the action for the all-inclusive sum of $13
million. The plaintiffs had countered with an offer of $15 million. The
settlements proposed included placing $6.5 million of the settlement funds into
a structure that would pay Tyler money monthly for a guaranteed period of 30
years. According to Mrs. Wallbridge, between the time that she had first
obtained a quote for the structured settlement in 2021 and February 2023, the
amount of the 30-year guaranteed monthly payments had increased by
approximately $4,600 tax-free dollars, making the $14 million settlement figure
considerably more attractive.
[22]     
And so it came to be that, on January 27, 2023,
the action was settled for the all-inclusive sum of $14 million.
[23]     
In late February 2023, Mrs. Wallbridge moved on
behalf of the plaintiffs for approval of the settlement and of the fee payable
under the 2018 CFA.
[24]     
As originally proposed, the settlement
contemplated that, in addition to the $6.5 million structure, approximately $1.5
million would be paid to Ms. Vanier in trust for Tyler, to be used to purchase
certain items, including upgrades to Ms. Vanier’s home designed to assist Tyler.
The sum of approximately $730,000 was to be held in trust by Ms. Vanier to be
used to pay for non-specified items, and Ms. Vanier was to receive the sum of
approximately $800,000 for her own damages.
[25]     
In an endorsement dated April 12, 2023, I
approved the overall settlement, but expressed concerns about a number of
things. These included the cost to the structure of the survivorship provisions
in favour of Ms. Vanier, the need to ensure that the funds paid on Tyler’s
behalf were used for that purpose even in the event of Ms. Vanier’s death, the
validity of the 2018 CFA, and the size of the fee contemplated by it. Given my
concerns, I ordered that the motion materials be served on the Office of the
Children’s Lawyer (the “OCL”).
[26]     
Although Mrs. Wallbridge objected to my order
that the OCL become involved, the OCL’s involvement proved to be very helpful. In
a report dated July 5, 2023, the OCL shared some of my concerns and raised
others. On behalf of Tyler, the OCL objected to the proposal that the costs of
the survivorship terms of the structure be paid from Tyler’s settlement funds. Importantly,
the OCL also pointed out that Ms. Vanier was not the legal guardian of her
son’s property and that, to
[27]     
Following my endorsement of April 12, 2023, Ms.
Vanier retained the law firm of Weaver, Simmons LLP to represent her. The
Wallbridge firm retained Adair Goldblatt Bieber LLP. With the help of the
Weaver, Simmons firm and the cooperation of the OCL, an application was made
under the CLRA, as a result of which I appointed Ms. Vanier and a semi-retired
lawyer from Sudbury as joint guardians of Tyler’s property and approved a
detailed plan to manage his money.
[28]     
The only issues remaining from the original
motion to approve the settlement are the validity of the 2018 CFA and the
quantity of the fees sought thereunder by Mrs. Wallbridge.
[29]     
As is common in cases where the damages are
significant, the settlement figure of $14 million is an all-inclusive number
and was not broken down. Therefore, Mrs. Wallbridge calculates the contribution
of the defendants towards the plaintiffs’ costs, the remaining “compensation”,
and the amount of the fees payable under the 2018 CFA as follows:
[30]      No
issue is taken with the way in which Mrs. Wallbridge calculated the defendants’
costs contribution, nor with the disbursements. The only issues are with
respect to the fee.
[31]     
To understand the issues, a brief discussion of
the statutory and regulatory governance of CFAs is necessary.
[32]     
“Compensation agreements” are governed by ss.
15-33 of the Solicitors Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S.15 (the “Act”). Under ss.
16(1) and (2) of the Act, a lawyer may make an agreement in writing with her
client, including a CFA, respecting the amount and manner of payment for the
whole or a part of any past or future services, including payment by way of a
percentage.
[33]     
Under ss. 23 and 24 of the Act, no action may be
brought to enforce a compensation agreement unless the court is satisfied “that
the agreement is in all respects fair and reasonable between the parties”. Where
it is not, the agreement may be declared void. The court may then order that
the fees and disbursements be assessed “in the ordinary manner.”
[34]     
As a subset of compensation agreements, CFAs are
dealt with specifically under s. 28.1 of the Act. Under s. 28.1(12) of the Act,
the Lieutenant Governor in Council may make regulations governing CFAs,
including setting the maximum percentage of the fee chargeable thereunder. No
such maximum has yet been prescribed. However, under both the current governing
regulation and the regulation that governed the 2015 and 2018 CFAs, a CFA is
required to state that the lawyer is not entitled to recover more in fees than
the client recovers in damages, which effectively caps the percentage
chargeable under a CFA at 50 percent:  Cogan (Re) (2007), 2007 CanLII 50281 (ON SC), 88 O.R. (3d)
38 (S.C.), at para. 64.
[35]     
At the time the 2015 and 2018 CFAs were entered
into, CFAs were governed by Contingency Fee Agreements, O. Reg. 195/04
(the “Regulation”). The Regulation set out the formal requirements for CFAs
under the Act. In addition to the requirement of s. 28.1 of the Act that CFAs
be in writing, the Regulation required, among other things:
[36]     
The 2018 CFA complied with none of these
requirements. The 2015 CFA complied only with the first.
[37]     
On behalf of the Wallbridge firm, Mr. Adair
submits that, although the 2018 CFA fails to comply fully with the requirements
of the Regulation, it complies “substantially” with them. He submits that Ms.
Vanier was informed verbally by Mrs. Wallbridge about those aspects of the Regulation
that were not set out in writing. He submits that the 2018 CFA was, therefore,
fair at the time it was entered into.
[38]     
Mr. Adair further submits that when one
considers the complexity of the case, the risk assumed by Mrs. Wallbridge, the
result obtained, the time spent, and the level of skill demonstrated, the fee
is reasonable now.
[39]     
On behalf of Ms. Vanier, Mr. Simmons submits
that the 2018 CFA was neither fair at the time it was made, nor is it
reasonable now. He submits that, at the time the 2018 CFA was signed, Mrs.
Wallbridge was aware that the risks associated with proceeding were
substantially less than they were when she was first retained in 2011 and when
the first CFA was signed in 2015.
[40]     
Mr. Simmons also submits that, at the time Mrs.
Wallbridge recommended that the plaintiff settle for $14 million, she was aware
that the defendants had unlimited financial resources such that recovery of any
award in favour of the plaintiffs at trial was assured. He submits that Mrs.
Wallbridge was also aware at the time the case was settled that the amount of
the settlement fell far short of the plaintiffs’ actual damages. As a result,
he submits that it would be unreasonable to permit Mrs. Wallbridge to charge a
fee that so vastly exceeds the time spent on the file and falls so severely short
of the damages that could have been obtained at trial.
[41]     
 There are two issues to be decided in this
motion:
[42]     
A CFA entered into by a litigation guardian on
behalf of a party under disability is not binding unless approved by a judge
under r. 7.08 of the Rules. However, such CFAs are not to be disregarded simply
on that basis: Henricks-Hunter v. 814888 Ontario Inc. (Phoenix Concert
Theatre), 2012 ONCA 496, 294 O.A.C. 333, at para. 17.
[43]     
In Raphael Partners v. Lam (2002), 2002 CanLII 45078 (ON CA), 61
O.R. (3d) 417 (C.A.), at para. 37, the Court of Appeal for Ontario held that,
to satisfy the requirements of s. 24 of the Act, the onus is on the solicitor to
show that the way in which a fee agreement was obtained was fair and that the
terms of the agreement are reasonable at the time of the hearing. With respect
to the fairness requirement, the court wrote, at para. 37:
[44]     
Nothing in the Regulation speaks to the
consequences of non-compliance with its provisions. A number of cases have held
that substantial compliance by lawyers with the law relating to CFAs is enough:
Du Vernet v. 1017682 Ontario Limited, 2009 CanLII 29191 (Ont. SC); Laushway
Law Office v. Simpson, 2011 ONSC 4155, 336 D.L.R. (4th) 632; Peter B.
Cozzi Professional Corporation v. Szot, 2019 ONSC 1274, aff’d 2020 ONCA 397;
and Shay v. Saron Legal Professional Corporation, 2022 ONSC 5557. I am
not inclined to be as forgiving as some of my colleagues.
[45]     
In one respect, the formation of a solicitor and
client relationship is like the formation of most other commercial
relationships: both sides are looking out for their own interests. However,
unlike the formation of most other commercial relationships, the formation of
the relationship between a lawyer and her client usually involves a serious
power imbalance. Lay people know little or nothing about the complexities of
the law, the practicalities of litigation, and the broad scope of arrangements
available to those who wish to retain a lawyer. Lay people, therefore, must
rely on the lawyer to inform them fully of their rights, their risks, and their
potential rewards.
[46]     
CFAs have been regulated since they were first
permitted in Ontario in 2002. On July 1, 2021, the Regulation that governed the
2015 and 2018 CFAs was replaced by the present Contingency Fee Agreements,
O. Reg. 563/20. Under s. 7(1) of the present regulation, a CFA for legal
services to be provided wholly or partly in exchange for a percentage or
proportion of the amount or the value of the property recovered under an award
or settlement must be in a form entitled “Standard Form Contingency Fee
Agreement”, published on the LSO’s website. In addition, the LSO requires that
lawyers and paralegals provide clients considering a contingency fee
arrangement with a copy of a guide published by the LSO: Law Society of
Ontario, “Contingency fees: What you need to know” (Apr 2021), online: <www.lso.ca
>.
[47]     
Collectively, the Act, the governing regulation,
the Standard Form CFA, and the guide now require lawyers to provide even more
information in writing than was required by the Regulation that governed the
2015 and 2018 CFAs. This additional information includes some of the different
ways contingency fees can be set up (such as staged or graduated contingency
fees) and the potential disadvantages of a CFA (such as the possibility that
the client may pay more under a CFA if the case settles early than she would if
she had been paying fixed fees).
[48]     
The Act and the regulations governing CFAs serve
as a form of consumer protection legislation: Law Society of Ontario,
“Contingency fee reform – enhancing consumer protection &
[49]     
 As evidenced by the way in which the
Legislature and the LSO have acted to increase the protection afforded to people
entering into CFAs with lawyers, I conclude that the requirements of the Regulation
that governed the CFAs in this case were not mere formalities. They were a
means of providing crucial pieces of information designed to ensure that the
lawyer-client imbalance was attenuated. For this reason, it seems to me that
the further a CFA strays from compliance with the governing legislation and
regulations, the more difficult it should be for the lawyer to satisfy her onus
that the CFA was entered into fairly.
[50]     
Compliance with the governing legislation was
particularly important in this case. Ms. Vanier was a vulnerable client. She
was born and raised on a farm in Espanola. She had only a high school
education, which she acquired in French. After high school, Ms. Vanier worked
as a heavy equipment operator for about six years. Prior to Tyler’s birth, she
was working at a gas bar. She had no experience dealing with lawyers outside of
a single real estate transaction.
[51]     
Mrs. Wallbridge concedes that Ms. Vanier’s life
changed dramatically after Tyler was born. Ms. Vanier and her husband were at a
loss as to how they would care for and raise Tyler on their modest incomes
given Tyler’s severe impairments. I have no difficulty concluding that, at the
time that Ms. Vanier first went to see Mrs. Wallbridge and throughout their
relationship thereafter, Ms. Vanier was in dire circumstances. I also have no difficulty
concluding that, when Ms. Vanier met with Mrs. Wallbridge to sign the 2015 CFA,
her hopes that Mrs. Wallbridge could help her had been raised because Mrs.
Wallbridge had concluded her investigation and recommended that the family sue
those whom they believed were responsible for Tyler's injuries.
[52]     
If Mrs. Wallbridge kept Ms. Vanier fully
informed of developments on the case, as she was required to do, then Ms.
Vanier’s hopes must have been raised even further when she signed the 2018 CFA,
three years after the lawsuit was commenced. As Ms. Vanier’s hopes grew, so did
the need for information to level the playing field between the lawyer and the
client. And yet, crucial information was missing from both the 2015 and 2018
CFAs, including the fact that there were other options available besides a fixed
percentage contingency fee, that Ms. Vanier had the right to make all critical
decisions regarding the conduct of the matter, and that the CFA must
(not “may”) be reviewed by a judge.
[53]     
One piece of missing information was
particularly important here. While the 2015 and 2018 CFAs provided for a
contingency fee of one-third of the compensation, that percentage only applied
if the action was settled before “trial preparation” (a term that was
not defined in either CFA). The CFAs provided that if, however, the action was
settled “during trial preparation, during trial or following judgment”,
the contingency fee changed. In almost every conceivable case, it went up.
[54]     
In the 2015 CFA, although the fee changed to 25
percent of the compensation (versus 30 percent), the client was also required
to assign the costs awarded at trial to the Wallbridge firm. An example of how
this might work was included in the CFA. In the example, the overall fee,
(including the costs award, but excluding the disbursements and taxes) was 45
percent of the damages awarded.
[55]     
According to Mrs. Wallbridge, the 2015 CFA was
amended because it had come to the Wallbridge firm’s attention that it might be
improper to require a client to assign her costs award to the firm: see Hodge
v. Neinstein, 2015 ONSC 7345, 129 O.R. (3d) 111, aff’d in part 2017 ONCA
494, 136 O.R. (3d) 81, leave to appeal to S.C.C. refused, 37739 (December 7,
2017). Thus, the 2018 CFA provided that, if the lawyer was required “to prepare
for trial and/or to conduct a trial” the legal fees would be 25 percent of the
settlement or judgment and “the total preparation and/or trial time of the
lawyers and support staff at the hourly rate set out [elsewhere in the
agreement] up to the amount paid by the defendant for trial preparation and
trial time”. Although the 2018 CFA provided that the client would receive the
costs, in my view, the amendment to the CFA really only converted those costs
into legal fees recoverable from the award, rather than by assignment.
[56]     
The 2018 CFA also included an example of the
calculation of the contingency fee in the event that the case was settled after
trial preparation began. Like the example in the 2015 CFA, the example in the
2018 CFA included a costs award of 20 percent of the damages, exclusive of HST
and disbursements. Also like the 2015 example, the overall percentage charged
equated to 45 percent. However, had the costs awarded at trial risen to 25, 30,
or even 50 percent, as they might have through the skillful use of a formal
offer to settle, the Wallbridge firm would have collected more in fees than the
client would have recovered in damages. Nowhere in either the 2015 or the 2018
CFA was it explained to the client that this was improper and that the lawyer
could not recover more in fees than the lawyer recovered in damages.
[57]     
Mrs. Wallbridge deposes that she discussed the
terms of both the 2015 and the 2018 CFAs with Ms. Vanier and that she explained
to Ms. Vanier the missing information, including the limit on counsel’s fee. I
have trouble with this evidence. I cannot understand why, if Mrs. Wallbridge
realized that she had to discuss these important features of a valid CFA with
Ms. Vanier, Mrs. Wallbridge would not have added the information to the 2015
CFA. This would have conclusively demonstrated that the information had been
conveyed to the client.
[58]     
I also have trouble understanding why, even if
it seemed unnecessary to amend the 2015 CFA to include these regulatory
requirements once she explained them to Ms. Vanier, Mrs. Wallbridge would not
have included them when she drew up the 2018 CFA. This would have ensured
compliance with the Regulation, which Mrs. Wallbridge deposes was the purpose
of amending the 2015 CFA to begin with.
[59]     
In these circumstances, I accept the evidence of
Ms. Vanier that she simply assumed that the CFAs she had been asked to sign
were “a standard agreement”, that they would be “fair and reasonable for Tyler
and for [herself]”, and that she was unaware at any time that the CFA required
court approval.
[60]     
For all the foregoing reasons, even if I
accepted the “significant compliance” test used by my colleagues in the cases I
mentioned earlier, I would not be satisfied that the 2018 CFA was entered into
fairly.
[61]     
I now turn to the reasonableness requirement.
[62]     
In Raphael, at para. 50, the Court of
Appeal referred to four “well[-]established” factors in assessing the
reasonableness of the CFA in question: the time expended by the solicitor, the
legal complexity of the matter at issue, the results achieved, and the risk
assumed by the solicitor: see also Henricks-Hunter, at para. 22.
[63]     
The Act requires that the CFA be both
fair and reasonable. Although the Court of Appeal in Raphael held that
reasonableness should be assessed as of the date of the hearing and fairness as
of the date of the agreement, it seems to me that the two requirements are very
closely related. I cannot see how an agreement that was unreasonable when it
was entered into could be fair, nor how an agreement that is unfair when the
fee is due could be reasonable.
[64]     
Nonetheless, I propose to assess the
reasonableness of the CFA in this case by considering the four factors listed
above only as of the date of the hearing.
[65]     
Mrs. Wallbridge deposes that she spent
approximately 3,189 hours working on this case and that her law clerk spent
approximately 130 hours. At the hourly rates set out in the 2015 and 2018 CFAs
of $650 for Mrs. Wallbridge and $150 for the clerk, Mrs. Wallbridge deposes
that the total fees on an hourly basis would be roughly $2,092,030, plus HST
and disbursements.
[66]     
The problem is that Mrs. Wallbridge did not keep
contemporaneous track of her time. There are no dockets. When Mrs. Wallbridge
was asked during cross-examination on her affidavit how she was able to
reconstruct more than 3,000 hours of work spread out over more than 12 years,
she responded that it was because she “recalls these things.” I have trouble
accepting that.
[67]     
Mrs. Wallbridge's estimate is based on what I expect
must have been a pain-staking reconstruction of the time she spent on this
file. However, any such reconstruction is bound to be subject to the kinds of
biases, including subconscious biases, inherent in every such effort. On the
evidence in this case, the opportunity for such bias to creep into the exercise
is high. I need only go to the second page of the 220 pages comprising the
reconstructed account to demonstrate my point.
[68]     
The reconstructed account states that Mrs.
Wallbridge spent 15 hours (exactly) on February 10 and 11, and another 15 hours
(exactly) on February 14, 15, and 16, 2011, reviewing, organizing, and making
notes from records obtained from the hospital. It also shows that Mrs.
Wallbridge spent 20 hours (exactly) over the weekend of February 26 and 27,
2011, “determining and directing” that records be organized in a certain
fashion. The same is true for entries throughout the account, such as the entry
on March 6, 2011, of 10 hours for time spent “reviewing the file and
determining course of action" and 5 hours for time spent on October 31,
2013, “to file review and notes”.
[69]     
Without some supporting documentation showing
when work began and when it finished over the course of these multi-day file
reviews, it is difficult to understand how the numbers could be so “round”.
[70]     
While I am prepared to accept that Mrs.
Wallbridge spent a lot of time working on this case, I am not persuaded that
her reconstructed accounts are accurate.
[71]     
Counsel for Ms. Vanier concedes that there is
“an inherent complexity in birth trauma cases”. This is certainly true.
Professional negligence, causation, and damages are almost always hard-fought
issues in these cases. This is because the damages are usually very high.
[72]     
The issue in this motion is whether the legal
complexity rose to a level beyond what is normal for this type of case. There
is competing evidence on that issue.
[73]     
Mrs. Wallbridge deposes that she and her partner
are two of only about 20 lawyers in Ontario who practice in the area of birth
trauma. On behalf of the Wallbridge firm, Mr. Adair has filed the affidavit of
Richard Halpern, a lawyer practicing in Toronto who specializes in prosecuting
birth trauma cases. Mr. Halpern deposes that the number of lawyers in Ontario
who could capably handle a case like this is even lower. He says that there are
no more than a dozen.
[74]     
Mr. Halpern deposes that this case was even more
difficult than many birth trauma cases because Tyler's SOGC score immediately
after birth appeared to deny a causal link between the substandard care he
received and the injury he suffered. The SOGC score is a guide devised by the Society
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Mr. Halpern deposes that many lawyers practicing
in the area of medical malpractice are not aware that there is competing
scientific data, including guidelines from the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), the American counterpart to the SOGC, that
undermines the validity of the SOGC guidelines, including the absence of
multi-organ injury. In Mr. Halpern's opinion, Mrs. Wallbridge prosecuted this
action “with consummate skill and experience”.
[75]     
On the other side of the issue, although he
agrees that Mrs. Wallbridge handled the case well, Lorenzo Girones, K.C.,
disagrees with Mrs. Wallbridge and Mr. Halpern about how complex the case was
and how many lawyers could also have competently handled it. Mr. Girones is
highly experienced in the area of birth trauma litigation, perhaps even more
experienced than Mr. Halpern. Whereas Mr. Halpern was called to the bar of
Ontario in 1984, Mr. Girones was called to the bar in 1970 and has practiced
mainly in the medical malpractice area since then. He has taken many birth
trauma cases to trial. In fact, Mrs. Wallbridge and her partner got their start
practicing in this area of the law while working for Mr. Girones in Timmins for
about 10 years.
[76]     
Mr. Girones deposes that he knows Mrs.
Wallbridge and respects her abilities. His evidence is that she is well
qualified to act as plaintiffs’ counsel on birth trauma cases of this nature. He
deposes that it would be unfortunate if, as Mrs. Wallbridge deposes, she would
not take on birth trauma cases in the future if she was unable to recover fees
like the ones sought in this case, as he believes she is competent, even if
neither she nor her partner have ever taken a birth trauma case to trial.
[77]     
Nonetheless, on behalf of the litigation
guardian, Mr. Girones deposes that this case was typical of birth trauma cases;
it was neither extraordinarily difficult, nor extraordinarily complex. In Mr.
Girones' opinion, in a case where the defendants paid $14 million to settle the
case before trial, “it is difficult to understand how the defence had any
merit” at all.
[78]     
Contrary to the views expressed by Mrs.
Wallbridge and Mr. Halpern, Mr. Girones deposes that there are more than only
12 or even 20 lawyers competent enough to have handled this case. During the
cross-examination on his affidavit, Mr. Girones provided the names of over 40
such lawyers, although not all of them were still practicing.
[79]     
Notwithstanding the conflict between the
evidence of Mr. Halpern and Mr. Girones, I accept that Mrs. Wallbridge
demonstrated skill and experience in investigating and preparing this case for
trial. I also accept that the number of lawyers in Ontario who could
competently do that is limited. The fact that Mrs. Wallbridge has never tried a
birth trauma case, however, remains an issue for reasons I will come to
shortly.
[80]     
At first blush, a settlement of $14 million
seems like an outstanding result. As Mr. Adair points out, Mr. Girones
testified during his cross-examination that the most he ever settled a birth
trauma case for was $12 million. However, the result must be assessed in light
of the damages suffered in the case and the degree to which it was possible to recover
those damages at trial. I propose to deal with the extent of the damages in
this part of my analysis. I will deal with the probability of recovering those
damages at trial when I address the degree of risk assumed by Mrs. Wallbridge,
below.
[81]     
Mrs. Wallbridge prepared two damages estimates
for use at the March 2021 JPT. In the first, she set out the plaintiffs’
position on damages; in the second, she set out that of the defendants. The
plaintiffs’ estimate totalled $32,250,468.12; the defendants’ estimate totalled
$19,539,829.67. When one “backs out” the costs portion of the settlement, the
damages recovered fall about $10 million dollars short of even the defendants’ figures
for the damages suffered. The only way in which the money the plaintiffs will
receive can hope to cover Tyler's damages is if Ms. Vanier continues to be
responsible for 100 percent of his care, an expense that the defendants
themselves estimated at over $15 million.
[82]     
On behalf of the Wallbridge firm, Mr. Adair
relies on the decision in Cogan in support of the amount of the fee
sought in this case. Cogan does, indeed, provide a useful comparison
when it comes to assessing the result achieved here. However, I do not see it
as being very helpful to the Wallbridge firm.
[83]     
There are a number of similarities between Cogan
and this case. In Cogan, as in this case, the child suffered from
cerebral palsy which was alleged to have been caused by the negligence of the
delivering doctor and attending nurses: at para. 1. The case was settled before
trial for payment of the sum of $12,543,750 in damages: Cogan, at para.
3. In Cogan, the lawyer acting for the plaintiffs sought approval of a
fee of roughly $4.2 million on the basis of a CFA in which the litigation
guardian and the lawyer had agreed upon a fee of one-third of the total amount
recovered: at paras. 2-3.[3]
In Cogan, as in this case, the lawyer agreed to recover nothing if he
was not successful: at para. 10. In Cogan, the fee was approved: at
para. 75.
[84]     
However, there are also a lot of distinguishing features
in Cogan. One of them is the fact that, as the motion judge in Cogan
held in his reasons, at para. 22, the amount available to meet the injured
child's needs was very close to the maximum amount claimed for the child's
possible future needs. Thus, in Cogan, the settlement funds were more
than what the defendants had estimated was necessary to pay for the costs of
future care. Indeed, the amount of the settlement was approximately three times
what the defendants had alleged were the plaintiffs’ overall damages: Cogan,
at para. 45. That is not the situation here. Here, the amount of the settlement
falls far short of the amount of the actual damages suffered, even as estimated
by the defendants.
[85]     
I will return to some of the other
distinguishing features of Cogan in the next part of my analysis.
[86]     
In Raphael, the Court of Appeal explained
that this factor includes the risk of non-payment “where there is a real risk
of an adverse finding on liability in the client's case”: Raphael, at
para. 50, citing Cohen v. Kealey & Blaney (1985), 10 O.A.C. 344
(C.A.); Desmoulin v. Blair (1994), 1994 CanLII 333 (ON CA), 21 O.R. (3d) 217 (C.A.).
[87]     
In my view, the risk that Mrs. Wallbridge would
not be paid was low at the time that this case was settled.
[88]     
At the time the 2015 CFA was entered into, Mrs.
Wallbridge believed that Tyler's case had potential. Notwithstanding Dr.
Dufour's notes that Tyler appeared normal at birth and that the Apgar scores
did not meet the SOGC guidelines for perinatal asphyxia, Mrs. Wallbridge
deposes that she felt from the beginning of her investigation that the nurses
were negligent in their administration of oxytocin and in their failure to
respond to the fetal heart rate in the latter part of the delivery.
[89]     
By the time Ms. Vanier was asked to sign the
2018 CFA, Mrs. Wallbridge was even more confident of the chances of success. As
she admits, she was satisfied following the completion of the examinations for
discovery of the defendants in 2017 that the nurses were liable. One of the
nurses had admitted that she was inexperienced at the time of Tyler's birth and
that she could not remember if she had called for the doctor at a time when she
admitted she should have. The lawyers for the doctor were also of the view that
the nurses were at fault. Thus, the chances were good that the nurses, or at
least one of them, would be found liable.
[90]     
By the time of the JPTs and the mediation, the
issue of causation had also become much less of a threat to success. As I explained
earlier, genetics had been eliminated as a potential cause. With respect to the
theory that Tyler's injuries were caused by meconium-induced vascular necrosis
and mild chorioamnionitis, the great weight of the medical evidence was against
it. Only one doctor, whose opinion had not been served on behalf of the nurses
until 2020, supported such
[91]     
In my opinion, therefore, the risk of
non-payment in this case was very different than the risk of non-payment in Cogan.
In Cogan, in order to succeed, the plaintiffs had to prove that the
injuries to the child occurred during a 15-minute period of time during which
the doctor was attending to another woman giving birth at the same time and
that the doctor was negligent for having done so: at para. 54.
[92]     
Of course, there is always some risk in
proceeding to trial. However, on behalf of Ms. Vanier, Mr. Simmons argues that
there was no risk at the time that this case was settled, because Mrs.
Wallbridge never intended to go to trial.
[93]     
It is true, as Mr. Simmons submits, that Mrs.
Wallbridge admitted during her cross-examination that neither she nor her
partner have ever taken a birth trauma case to trial. For that reason, I accept
Ms. Vanier's evidence given on cross-examination that Mrs. Wallbridge told her
that she never took her cases to trial and that she always settled out of
court, instead. I also accept the uncontroverted affidavit evidence of Ms.
Vanier that Mrs. Wallbridge told her that the $14 million settlement was
“better than a kick in the head”. However, in this case, Ms. Vanier has
candidly admitted that Mrs. Wallbridge also told her that she would likely
“have obtained a larger settlement at trial or closer to trial”, but that Ms.
Vanier did not want to wait and did not want to take the risk associated with a
trial or an appeal.
[94]     
On behalf of his clients, Mr. Adair points out,
quite rightly, that Ms. Vanier not only approved “wholeheartedly” of the
settlement of $14 million, but that she also went to see Mr. Girones himself to
obtain his advice about the proposed settlement and the legal fees involved in
that settlement.[4]
That does not end the matter, however.
[95]     
As R. Smith J. pointed out in Cogan, at
para. 20, the task of a court asked to approve a settlement, including the legal
fees agreed to by a litigation guardian on behalf of a party under a disability,
is to determine whether the disabled party needs to be protected from “any
mistakes which may have been made by the litigation guardian.” He concluded in
that case that the litigation guardian had not made a mistake: Cogan, at
para. 27. I reach the opposite conclusion in this one.
[96]     
In Cogan, the injured child's parents
were both accountants: at para. 8. The mother was acting as the litigation
guardian: Cogan, at para. 8. The parents had initially hired a lawyer on
an hourly basis. After five years, they had incurred legal fees of $168,000 and
were in default on five orders by virtue of which they had been ordered to
provide an expert report within a certain time period: Cogan, at para. 9.
The parents decided that they could not risk further eroding their ability to
pay
[97]     
Without meaning in any way to be disrespectful,
Ms. Vanier is not like the parents of the injured child in Cogan. She
has only a high school education. She and her late husband did not earn the
kind of income that the parents did in Cogan. Ms. Vanier had to quit her
job after having Tyler in order to take care of him. At the time the present
action was settled, she and Tyler were living in geared-to-income rental
housing.
[98]     
As Ms. Vanier deposed in her 2023 affidavit in
support of the settlement, the settlement will allow her to overcome these
challenges and to give Tyler a better life, but at a cost: she will have to
care for Tyler herself for the rest of her life. She was, and remains, willing
to do that. However, while Ms. Vanier may always be willing to care for Tyler,
she will not always be able to do so. At the time the action was settled, Ms.
Vanier could no longer lift Tyler alone from the ground. She had early-onset
arthritis. She could not push his wheelchair in the snow.
[99]     
With respect, I have concluded that Ms. Vanier
made a mistake in agreeing to the terms of the CFA. Because of the single
percentage applicable regardless of the amount of the settlement, it results in
an unreasonable fee in the context of this settlement. It over-compensates the
lawyer and under-compensates the clients. In fairness to Ms. Vanier, she did
realize after agreeing to settle the case for $14 million that there would not
be enough money to properly care for Tyler. For that reason, she asked Mrs.
Wallbridge if she would reduce her fees. However, Mrs. Wallbridge refused to do
so.
[100]  In these circumstances, I conclude that it would be unreasonable to
permit Mrs. Wallbridge to charge the fee she seeks.
[101]  As I mentioned earlier, under the Act, where the court concludes
that a CFA is not fair and reasonable, the court may order that the solicitor's
fees be assessed “in the ordinary manner”, which usually means that they are
referred to an assessment officer. However, neither party has suggested that
this be done in the event that the fee under the CFA is not approved in this
case.
[102]  On Ms. Vanier's behalf, Mr. Simmons submits, instead, that the fee
be set on the basis of a “staggered” scale, which I believe is a reference to
the type of CFA referred to in the affidavit evidence of Geoffrey Larmer, a
North Bay lawyer practicing in the personal injury field. In this type of
arrangement, the percentage fee goes down as the amount of the recovery
goes up. This is in contrast to other “staggered” arrangements, in which the percentage
fee goes up the closer the matter gets to trial. This latter arrangement
is the type contemplated by the 2015 and 2018 CFAs, as I have explained.
[103]  In his affidavit, Mr. Larmer deposes that he met with Ms. Vanier at
the request of Mr. Simmons to explain alternatives to a single fixed-percentage
CFA of the type at issue here. He provided her with a copy of a CFA that had
been approved by the court prior to settlement in a case involving an injured
infant, although not one who was injured at birth, and significant damages. The
case was settled for $15 million. The CFA in that case involved a percentage
fee that decreased as the amount recovered increased. The CFA provided that the
fee would be:
[104]  Ms. Vanier concedes that it is not appropriate for me to re-write
the CFA to accord with Mr. Larmer's precedent. Instead, my task it to determine
a fee that is reasonable in all of the circumstances, considering the time
spent by Mrs. Wallbridge and members of her firm, the legal complexity of the
matter, the result achieved, and the risk assumed.
[105]  Taking all of these things into account, I have concluded that a fee
of $3,250,000 is both fair and reasonable in the circumstances of this case.
Although I have not attempted to re-write the CFA, I have used the following
staggered percentages as a rough guide:
[106]  In my respectful view, this formula properly balances the factors
set out above with the fact that the recovery in this case is as high as it is because
of the devasting effect on the plaintiffs of the injuries suffered by Tyler. As
I will explain, in a case involving catastrophic damages, the formula I have
used as a rough guide results in what I believe is a fair and reasonable fee
regardless of the amount of damages recovered.
[107]  If, notwithstanding the actual damages suffered, it had been
reasonable to settle this case for $5 million (or less), there would
necessarily have been a more significant risk of non-recovery. In such a
situation, a fee of 33 percent of the damages ($1,650,000 on $5 million) would ensure
that Mrs. Wallbridge recovered roughly the value of the time I believe she
spent on the file.
[108]   If, however, it had been reasonable to settle the case for $5
million to $10 million in damages, this would necessarily have reflected a reduced
risk of non-recovery or greater skill on the part of Mrs. Wallbridge, or both.
In such a situation, a further fee of 25 percent on the amount of damages
recovered above $5 million ($1,250,000 on $5 million) would ensure that Mrs.
Wallbridge was rewarded for her skill and the risks she took in pursuing the
matter to a more successful conclusion.
[109]  Where the case results in damages recovered of more than $10
million, as it did here, a further fee of 15 percent on the amount recovered above
$10 million (roughly $350,000 on $2,325,785, in this case) ensures that Mrs.
Wallbridge is rewarded for securing an amount that more closely approximates
the damages actually suffered by her clients, while at the same time ensuring
that as much of the amount recovered as is reasonable is used to remedy those
damages.
[110]  I understand and accept that CFAs serve as a means of providing
access to justice for litigants like Ms. Vanier and her son who would not
otherwise be able to afford to retain a lawyer. I also understand and accept
that lawyers who do birth trauma litigation need to be well compensated because
they often risk their own resources investigating and prosecuting such cases.
However, CFAs must be fair and reasonable in the context of each and every
case, not in the context of the lawyer's practice as a whole.
[111]  For the reasons expressed above, I have concluded that the CFA in
this case was neither fair nor reasonable. Instead, I have allowed a fee that I
believe appropriately balances the interests of the lawyer with those of the clients
in the context of the settlement in this case. An order will issue allowing
legal fees in the amount of $3,250,000, plus HST and disbursements.
[112] 
I understand from the submissions made during
the hearing of the motion that the issue of costs may require a further hearing.
Unfortunately, there is no more court time available in 2025. For that reason,
the parties are encouraged to agree on costs. If that is not possible, the
parties are further encouraged to file written submissions, rather than waiting
for a hearing date, limited to 10 typewritten pages, exclusive of attachments,
as follows:
[113]  If counsel still believe a hearing date is required, one may be set
through the office of the trial coordinator in North Bay.
[114]  I would like to close by thanking Mr. Adair and Mr. Simmons for
their very helpful submissions and for the pleasure of having the assistance of
such experienced and capable counsel.