1                   
When it comes to deciding children’s lives, doing it cheap is no
substitute for doing it right.
2                   
Endless motions to re-argue temporary parenting orders – with no
apparent inclination to ever seek a final order at a trial – do a disservice to
children who deserve proper consideration of all the best interest
factors, based upon a thorough presentation and testing of all relevant
evidence at an oral hearing.
3                   
In the early stages of a family dispute, motions are often unavoidable.
4                   
Judges do the best they can with imperfect affidavit evidence on crowded
motions lists -- because something has to be done.  Quickly.
5                   
But once a temporary order is in place, that should be the end of the
“motion stage.”
6                   
Except an increasing number of litigants appear to have no interest in a
once and for all resolution.
7                   
So our court system gets bogged down with people engaging in
half-hearted litigation.
8                   
And then suddenly – often when they discover their case is about to
be dismissed -- one of the parties will bring an “urgent” motion seeking
yet another temporary order.  And so it starts again.
9                   
There is absolutely no excuse for this.
10               
A brief summary of the timelines on this file will explain why on a busy
November 22, 2024 motions list, I refused to hear complicated motions and
cross-motions primarily involving two children ages 12 and five; but also
involving financial and property issues.
11               
April 21, 2022:  The parties separated.  The children remained
with the mother.  The next day the father was charged with assaulting the
oldest child.
12               
November 29, 2022: The mother commenced an Application.
13               
February 7, 2023: The father filed his Answer:
14               
February 9, 2023: The mother filed an urgent motion, primarily in
relation to parenting and protection issues.
15               
February 13, 2023: I heard the mother’s urgent motion.
16               
March 6, 2023: The parties had a Case Conference.
17               
May 16, 2023:  The parties had a Settlement Conference.
18               
Then nothing.
19               
Sept 29, 2023: While the main application was in limbo, the
parties brought another motion.
20               
Then more months of no discernible effort by either party to advance the
resolution of this high conflict case.  No compliance with disclosure orders. 
No Questioning.  No effort to get a new court date.
21               
January 2024:  The parties had a disclosure meeting with the OCL
s.112 clinician.
22               
Then many more months of nothing.
23               
Nov 8, 2024: The father brought this current motion.
24               
The father filed a further affidavit dated November 19, 2024 in reply to
the mother’s materials.  He offered more denials and counter-allegations.  But
no explanation about why he had failed to pursue the claims in his Answer more
diligently.
25               
Nov 15, 2024: The mother brought her cross-motion.
26               
As stated, family court judges are used to dealing with conflicting,
untested and often incomplete affidavit evidence at motions brought at the
outset of a proceeding.
27               
In this case, so much time has elapsed that we should be well beyond the
“temporary reasonably acceptable short-term solution” stage.
28               
These parents never should have adjourned their case to the timelines
for a year and a half.  They shouldn’t have put the determination of their
children’s lives “on hold”.  And when they finally decided to do something,
they should have put more effort into getting to trial, rather than simply
typing up some affidavits and asking a motions judge to put another temporary
bandage on it.
29               
As much as we owe it to the parents to help them escape a litigation
morass of their own creation, we have an even greater legal and moral
obligation to their two young children.  They deserve better.  They deserve
adults who pay attention and act decisively.  They deserve to have their issues
and lives determined in a comprehensive, sensitive and timely manner.  They
deserve clarity and finality.
30               
When a highly contentious file is adjourned to the timelines following
an unproductive Settlement Conference, it is not an invitation for the parties
to go into hibernation.  The expectation is that the parties will immediately
correct any disclosure or other deficiencies, so the matter can quickly be
returned to the litigation stream in a “trial-ready” state.  The goal should be
to end the litigation, not paralyze it.
31               
Parties should not be permitted to eschew opportunities to go to trial,
and then attempt to litigate triable issues by way of complicated motions for
temporary relief.  It’s a lazy substitute for a proper determination.
32               
I expressed all of these concerns to the parties and their lawyers.  I
stood them down to talk.  For a long time.  Upon their return they advised me
that they were withdrawing their respective motions, and they wanted to
schedule a Trial Scheduling Conference.  (It’s amazing what can happen when
lawyers actually talk.)
33               
Today’s order: