[1]              
In the early morning hours of May 7, 2022, police received a 911 call
from a woman who said that she had been assaulted and robbed in the penthouse
unit at 15 Iceboat Terrace. She provided a description of the alleged
assailants, a group of five men, one of whom was Black, 26-30 years old and
wearing a brown sweater. The complainant told police that the men had left the
unit and made their way to the street.
[2]              
Approximately five minutes later, two officers of the Toronto Police
Service (TPS) arrived in the area. They observed a vehicle parked on a nearby
street with two Black men in the front seat. One officer arrested the passenger,
Robert Davis, in connection with the alleged robbery. The other officer detained
the Defendant, Evan Mitchell, who was in the driver’s seat of the vehicle.
[3]              
As a result of Mr. Davis’s arrest, the officers searched the vehicle and
located a loaded Glock firearm with a black magazine containing three rounds of
ammunition, a black balaclava face mask, pepper spray, and bundles of cash in
U.S. dollars.
[4]              
Both Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Davis were then arrested for possession of a
prohibited weapon and given their rights to counsel.
[5]              
The vehicle was sealed and later towed to 14 Division. Police
obtained a search warrant and executed the search warrant later that night. In the
trunk of the vehicle, police located 312.67 grams of cocaine, 2.67 grams of
fentanyl, and 0.25 grams of MDMA, among other
items.
[6]              
The Defendant is charged with multiple counts of possession for the
purpose of trafficking contrary to s. 5(2) of the Controlled Drugs and
Substances Act and firearm related charges under ss. 91(2), 95(1), 92(2), 94(1),
108(1)(b), and 117.01(1) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985 c. C-46 (the
“Code”). He is also charged with possession of proceeds of crime under
s. 355(b) of the Code.
[7]              
The Defendant brings an application under the Canadian Charter of
Rights and Freedoms (the “Charter”) to exclude from evidence the
items seized from his vehicle. Mr. Mitchell argues that the police lacked
reasonable and probable grounds to arrest Mr. Davis and that he (Mr. Mitchell)
was unlawfully detained. The Defendant further argues that because Mr. Davis
was unlawfully arrested, the search of the vehicle was not a lawful search incident
to arrest. The Defendant argues that as a result of the breaches of ss. 8 and 9
of the Charter, all the evidence found in the vehicle should be excluded
pursuant to s. 24(2) of the Charter.
[8]              
On the first day of the hearing, Mr. Mitchell re-elected to be tried by
judge-alone. The parties then agreed to have the Charter application and
trial proceed before me as a blended proceeding. The defence conceded that if
the Charter arguments were unsuccessful, Mr. Mitchell would be found guilty
of the substantive charges, with the exception of Count 7, possession for the
purposes of trafficking in fentanyl.
[9]              
The issues raised in this proceeding are as follows:
[10]          
The Crown does not challenge Mr. Mitchell’s standing to bring this
application because he had a reasonable expectation of privacy in the vehicle
that was searched, which was registered to him.
[11]          
On May 7, 2022, PC Brett Paquette and PC Lewis McVey were on general
patrol in the same scout car. PC Paquette was driving. At 5:09 a.m., they
received information from dispatch that a female had called 911 screaming and
crying. She said that she had been choked and that the assailant took her
diamond necklace and shoes. She told police that the incident took place in the
penthouse unit at 15 Iceboat Terrace and that no weapons were used. When asked
for a description of the assailant, the complainant advised the 911 operator
that five men were involved and that one was a Black man between 26-30 years
old, wearing a brown sweater.
[12]          
PC Paquette testified that he received information from dispatch that
the five men had left the unit and made their way down the stairs to the
street. PC Paquette also heard that the men were in an unknown vehicle on the
side of a one-way street. The complainant, who remained on the phone with the
911 operator as the officers asked questions, was unable to identify what type
of vehicle the men arrived in or where their vehicle was parked. The call was
given the highest priority, otherwise known as a “hot shot”.
[13]          
PC Paquette attempted to get to 15 Iceboat Terrace via Dan Leckie Way.
However, he was unable to get to the address because the street was blocked by
construction. He turned around and then proceeded east on Fort York Boulevard
and north on another street, Capreol Court, a short street running north-south
between Iceboat Terrace and Fort York Boulevard.
[14]          
PCs Paquette and McVey arrived in the area at approximately 5:12 a.m.
When they arrived, they sought more information from dispatch, asking whether
they should attend the east or west side of the building, and for further
descriptions of the suspects and vehicle. They did not receive further
information at that time.
[15]          
PC Paquette testified that while travelling northbound on Capreol Court,
PC McVey advised that he saw two men in a vehicle parked on the side of the
street. The vehicle was a silver Audi A7 with the licence plate CFEK 441 (the
“Audi”). Mr. Mitchell concedes that he was the registered owner of the Audi.
[16]          
PC Paquette testified that he then made a U-turn and pulled up beside
the vehicle at a slight angle so that they could see into the vehicle. PC
Paquette testified that the man in the passenger seat was wearing a brown sweater
and that the man in the driver’s seat was wearing a pink sweater. He believed
they were both around 30 years old. PC Paquette testified that he was not able
to see if anyone was in the back seat of the Audi.
[17]          
PC McVey testified that as they passed the Audi, he queried the licence
plate. After PC Paquette stopped the scout car on an angle, slightly in front
of the Audi, he was able to look into the vehicle to see the occupants. PC
McVey testified that he saw two Black males in the front seat, who he estimated
to be in their late 20s or early 30s. He saw that the passenger was wearing a
brown sweater. PC McVey could not see if anyone was sitting in the back seat.
PC McVey testified that PC Paquette then reversed the scout car to be
positioned side-by-side with the Audi.
[18]          
At 5:14 a.m., PC Paquette exited the scout car. He testified that he
formed the intention to arrest the passenger, Mr. Davis, after he observed him
but before he got out of his car. He estimated that it took him approximately
five seconds to make the decision. PC Paquette testified that he decided to
arrest Mr. Davis because he believed he matched the description of the
assailant in that he was a Black man, 26-30 years old, wearing a brown sweater,
and he was located near 15 Iceboat Terrace minutes after the incident.
[19]          
PC Paquette went to the front passenger door of the vehicle, which was
open. He told Mr. Davis to put his hands up and he assisted him out of the car.
He then handcuffed Mr. Davis. As PC Paquette was putting handcuffs on Mr.
Davis, another officer, PC Barbosa arrived on scene. PC Barbosa told Mr. Davis
that he was under arrest. PC Paquette told Mr. Davis that he was under arrest
for robbery. He then conducted a frisk search but did not locate anything of
significance.
[20]          
At 5:19 a.m., PC Paquette walked Mr. Davis to PC Barbosa’s scout car and
placed him in the backseat. He read his rights to counsel and Mr. Davis said
that he wanted to call his lawyer. PC Paquette described Mr. Davis as
cooperative, but that he smelled strongly of marijuana and was unsteady on his
feet. Mr. Davis asked multiple times why he was being arrested.
[21]          
On cross-examination, PC Paquette was asked about
whether he and PC McVey had a conversation about turning the car around to
observe the men in the Audi and about arresting Mr. Davis before they got out
of their vehicle. PC Paquette did not recall discussing either decision with PC
McVey, who was senior to him. PC McVey testified that he and PC Paquette may
have discussed turning the car around or arresting the passenger, but he did
not recall what either of them said.
[22]          
PC Paquette admitted that certain circumstances
differed from the information that had been relayed by dispatch. First, when he
shined his flashlight into the Audi, he saw that there were only two men, and
not five men. Second, Capreol Court, where the Audi was parked, was not a
one-way street.
[23]          
On the issue of the colour of Mr. Davis’s sweater, PC
Paquette refused to admit that his sweater was beige or tan, as opposed to
brown. PC Paquette admitted that he testified at the preliminary inquiry that
Mr. Davis was wearing a brown sweater. At trial, he testified that after
reviewing the body worn camera recording, he would describe the hoodie that Mr.
Davis was wearing as light brown. On cross-examination, PC Paquette admitted
that he would have arrested any Black male in the area who appeared to be 26-30
years old and was wearing a brown sweater. He denied that unconscious bias
played any role in his arrest of Mr. Davis.
[24]          
At approximately the same time as PC Paquette, PC McVey exited the scout
car and approached the driver side door of the Audi. PC McVey testified that he
intended to detain the driver, Mr. Mitchell, in respect of the robbery
investigation. The driver side door was also open. PC McVey issued commands to Mr.
Mitchell to get out of the car and show his hands. Mr. Mitchell came out of the
vehicle and faced away from PC McVey, who then handcuffed him. PC McVey advised
Mr. Mitchell that he was being detained in relation to a robbery investigation.
He described Mr. Mitchell as relatively cooperative.
[25]          
At 5:15 a.m., PC McVey conducted a protective pat-down search of Mr.
Mitchell. During the course of the pat-down search, he went into Mr. Mitchell’s
pockets. He located cards, cash and cigarettes, which he put back in Mr.
Mitchell’s pockets. A 5:17 a.m., PC McVey informed Mr. Mitchell of his rights
to counsel and placed him in the scout car.
[26]          
PC McVey testified that he decided to detain Mr. Mitchell in connection
with the robbery investigation because Mr. Mitchell was in the company of a
male who the matched the description provided by the complainant, he was
located in the area within minutes of the radio call in close proximity to the
location of the incident, and because until that point, no other pedestrians
had been observed. PC McVey also testified that he believed that Mr. Mitchell
matched the complainant’s description of the group, which he understood to be a
group of five Black men, between 26-30 years of age.
[27]          
On cross-examination, an audio-recording of the radio call was played,
and PC McVey admitted that the description of male, Black, 26-30, wearing a
brown sweater pertained to one of the men in the group and not to the entire
group. PC McVey further admitted that when dispatch confirmed that the group
consisted of five Black men, he did not receive that information because he had
already exited the scout car. He testified, however, that at the time, he had
understood the description, other than the reference to a brown sweater, to
apply to the whole group.
[28]          
PC McVey also admitted that because he had only detained Mr. Mitchell
and had not arrested him, searching his pockets went beyond the scope of his
legal authority. PC McVey testified that he had no explanation for exceeding
his authority because he had intended all along to detain Mr. Mitchell and he
knew that the was only entitled to conduct a pat-down search. PC McVey stated
that all he could say was that things happened very quickly and that by the
time he completed the search, he realized that he had gone beyond scope. He
denied that he was looking for the stolen necklace when he went into Mr.
Mitchell’s pockets.
[29]          
PC McVey was cross-examined about the “aggressive” manner in which Mr.
Mitchell was detained and the fact that it looked very much like an arrest. PC
McVey testified that the manner of detention depends on the circumstances and
available information. In this case, he had received information of a violent
offence, although there was no indication that weapons were involved. In
addition, at the time, there were two suspects and two officers, giving rise to
a risk to officer safety. PC McVey testified that there was a possibility that
the other three men were still in the area. PC McVey testified that when he
detained Mr. Mitchell, he did not know what, if any, his involvement was, so
the “fair thing” to do was to detain him.  On the body-worn camera recording,
PC McVey can be heard explaining to Mr. Mitchell that he was detained in
connection with a robbery investigation and if everything was cleared up, he
would be released.
[30]              
PC McVey testified that he returned to the Audi to look for evidence of
the robbery, specifically, the complainant’s necklace and shoes. PC McVey began
searching the vehicle at 5:21 a.m. PCs Paquette and Barbosa were also searching
the vehicle. PC Paquette located a black balaclava and documents in the glove
box of the Audi. In the backseat, PC Barbosa located a small pepper spray and
bundles of cash.
[31]              
PC McVey testified that he began by searching the driver’s side door and
did not locate anything. He then looked under the driver’s seat and observed a
firearm wedged between the driver’s seat and the floor of the vehicle. PC McVey
testified that he located the gun within one minute of starting the search and
did not have to move anything to see it. At 5:22 a.m., he retrieved the
firearm, determined that it was real and then proved it safe.
[32]              
At 5:23 a.m., PC McVey advised Mr. Mitchell that he was under arrest for
possession of a firearm in a motor vehicle and gave him his rights to counsel.
PC McVey testified that he initially had some difficulty verifying that Mr.
Mitchell understood. However, Mr. Mitchell provided his lawyer’s name. PC McVey
testified that he looked up the name that Mr. Mitchell gave him on the in-car
computer system. This is visible on the body-worn camera recording.
[33]              
PC McVey then cautioned Mr. Mitchell and took him out of the scout car
to search him again. PC McVey testified that because Mr. Mitchell was now under
arrest and would be going to the police station, he wanted to remove everything
from his pockets. PC McVey waited for back-up to arrive to secure the Audi and
then left to take Mr. Mitchell to 14 Division.
[34]              
PC Barbosa advised Mr. Davis that he was under arrest for possession of
a firearm and advised him of his rights to counsel.
[35]              
TPS officers remained on scene with the Audi until 7:27 a.m. when it was
towed to 14 Division. Detective Constable Greg Fraracci of the TPS applied for
a search warrant for the Audi, which was granted later that evening.
[36]              
The Information to Obtain the search warrant (“ITO”) included further
information obtained from interviewing the complainant, as well as from
Versadex and other database checks.[1]
The complainant provided a detailed description of the male who assaulted her,
as well as an image from her phone. The image appeared to match the booking photo
of Mr. Mitchell and his photo on his driver’s licence. The items to be searched
for included a silver necklace, documents relating to the ownership of the
vehicle, and firearms and ammunition.
[37]              
The search warrant was executed by TPS officers after 10 p.m. on May 7,
2022. In the Audi, police located vehicle insurance and various other documents
in the name of Evan Mitchell. They also located $1,600 in U.S. currency, sorted
into five stacks; a balaclava face mask; and a black iPhone. In the trunk of
the Audi, they found six balaclava face masks, a mask with a nun face and a
false-bottom can. There were two backpacks in the trunk containing the following
items:
[38]          
The Defendant argues that the police lacked reasonable and probable
grounds to arrest Mr. Davis because he did not match the description provided
by the complainant, which was vague and generic.
[39]          
The Crown takes the position that the arrest was lawful because, based
on the information available to him, PC Paquette had a subjective belief that
Mr. Davis had committed an offence and his belief was objectively reasonable.
[40]          
Section 9 of the Charter states that
“[e]veryone has the right not to be arbitrarily detained or imprisoned.” The
purpose of s. 9 is to protect the individual from unjustified state
interference. Section 9 limits the state’s ability to impose intimidating and
coercive pressure on citizens without justification: R. v. Le, 2019 SCC
34, at para. 25.
[41]          
Section 495(1)(a) of the Criminal Code allows
a peace officer to make an arrest without a warrant if they believe, on
reasonable grounds, that the person has committed or is about to commit an
indictable offence.
[42]          
In order for an arrest to be lawful,
police must have reasonable grounds to believe that an offence is being or has
been committed. The reasonable grounds inquiry has both a subjective and
objective component. The officer must hold an honest belief that the person
committed an offence. At the second step, it must be
objectively established that reasonable and probable grounds did in fact exist.
This is based on the totality of the circumstances reasonably known to the
arresting officer as seen from the perspective of a reasonable person with
comparable knowledge, training and experience: R. v. Tim, 2022 SCC 12,
at para. 24. “The standard is met at the point
where credibly-based probability replaces suspicion. Of course, the totality of
the circumstances is to be considered.”: R. v. Dhillon, 2016 ONCA 308,
at para. 25; R. v. Beaver, 2022 SCC 54, at
para. 72.
[43]          
“Reasonable and probable grounds” is a higher
standard than “reasonable suspicion”. It requires a reasonable belief that an
individual is connected to the offence, which exists when there is an objective
basis for the belief which is based on compelling and credible information: Beaver,
at para. 72.
[44]          
Where the defendant challenges a warrantless
search incident to arrest on the basis that the arrest was unlawful, the Crown
carries the burden on both of the overlapping ss. 8 and 9 claims and must prove
that the arrest was legal: R. v. Gerson-Foster, 2019 ONCA 405, at para.
75.
[45]          
The defence argues that the arrest of Mr. Davis was precipitous and
lacking grounds because the police had only a vague and generic description of the
perpetrator. In addition, the defence submits that none of the descriptors provided
by the complainant matched because: (i) Mr. Davis was wearing a beige hoodie,
as opposed to a brown sweater; (ii) there were only two people in the vehicle,
as opposed to five; and (iii) the street where the vehicle was parked was not a
one-way street.
[46]          
In my view, assessing the totality of the circumstances, PC Paquette had
reasonable and probable grounds to arrest Mr. Davis. He had an honest belief that Mr. Davis committed the robbery and, in
the circumstances known to him at the time, the belief was objectively
reasonable.
[47]          
I found PC Paquette to be a credible witness. He testified in a careful
and forthright manner. His evidence regarding his observations and belief that
he had reasonable grounds was not significantly undermined on
cross-examination. Where his testimony was inconsistent with his evidence at the
preliminary inquiry, it was on matters of limited relevance, for example, the
demographics of the area around Fort York Boulevard. In my view, PC Paquette
was being candid when he testified that he could not estimate the percentage of
young people living in the area around Iceboat Terrace. Moreover, at the
preliminary inquiry, PC Paquette had been asked about the demographics of Fort
York and Liberty Village, which is further to the west than 15 Iceboat Terrace.
[48]          
I accept PC Paquette’s testimony that he believed that Mr. Davis was involved
in the robbery because he matched the description provided by the complainant
and was in the immediate vicinity of the location of the incident, shortly
after the incident took place.
[49]          
The defence points to PC Paquette’s testimony that he
would have arrested any Black male between the ages of 26-30 wearing a brown
sweater in the area that night to argue that PC Paquette did not have an honest
belief that Mr. Davis was involved in the robbery but, rather, was operating under
an unconscious bias. However, a Charter breach is determined not on the
basis of what police officers intend to do or think they can do, but on what
they actually did at the time the arrest takes place: R. v. Fyfe, 2023
ONCA 715, at para. 54. When PC Paquette made the decision to arrest Mr.
Davis, he had the following information:
[50]          
PC Paquette testified that the Audi was stopped next to 18 Capreol
Court, around the corner and approximately 150-200 metres away from 15 Iceboat
Terrace. PC Paquette was aware that the 911 call was made to dispatch at 5:07
a.m. and that the five men took the stairs to the main floor, which meant that
it would take longer for them to exit the building than if they had taken an
elevator. PC Paquette pulled up next to the Audi at 5:14 a.m., just seven
minutes after the 911 call had been made and five minutes after the group of
men were reported to have left the building.
[51]          
In addition, while the description provided by the complainant was not
very specific, there were very few people on the street in the area at that
hour. PC Paquette testified that he did not recall seeing anyone on the street while
he was driving to 15 Iceboat Terrace and that at most, there was one or two
individuals. PC McVey also testified that he did not see anyone on the street while
they were driving to the location. On the body-worn camera footage, a couple of
pedestrians are observed walking by at 5:18 and 5:19 a.m., after Mr. Davis was
arrested. This does not mean that PC Paquette and PC McVey’s observations were
incorrect. Even after that time, only a handful of people are visible on the
street.
[52]          
I agree with the defence that the police and the courts must be alert to
the potential effect of unconscious bias or racial profiling, especially where
only a vague or general description of a suspect is given. Racial profiling is
relevant under s. 9 when determining whether the detention was arbitrary
because a detention based on racial profiling is not a detention based on
reasonable suspicion: R. v. Le, 2019 SCC 34, at para. 78.
[53]          
 In this case, however, there were very few people out at the
time, shortly after 5:00 a.m. on a Saturday morning. Although the description
provided by the complainant was not very detailed, within the range of people
who were in the area, it was not unreasonable for PC Paquette to believe that Mr.
Davis matched the complainant’s description. He was Black, around 26-30 years
old and wearing a top that could reasonably be described as a brown sweater. He
was in a vehicle that was on the side of the road, very near to where the
incident had occurred, minutes after the incident was reported. Timing was a
significant factor. The fact that the doors to the car were open supports that Mr.
Davis and Mr. Mitchell had left 15 Iceboat Terrace, come down the stairs and
just entered the Audi.
[54]          
In addition, it was not unreasonable to perceive Mr. Davis as wearing a brown
sweater. On the body worn camera footage, Mr. Davis’s hoodie appears to be tan
or light brown. The colour appears lighter on the booking hall video, where the
lighting was very bright. When the officers first approached the Audi, however,
it was dark outside, which would cause the colour to appear darker. Had Mr.
Davis been wearing an entirely different colour sweater, such as blue or green,
it would not have been reasonable to find that he matched the description
provided by the complainant. However, Mr. Davis was wearing a shade of brown.
[55]          
In addition, in my view, the fact that certain circumstances differed
from other information provided by the complainant did not substantially
undermine the grounds for arresting Mr. Davis. When PCs Paquette and McVey
first approached the Audi, they could only see the two men in the front seat.
Because the vehicle had heavily tinted windows, they did not know until they
exited the scout car and shone their flashlights into the Audi that there was
no one in the backseat. The officers did not have to confirm that there were
five men in the vehicle before proceeding to arrest Mr. Davis. In any event, as
PC Paquette testified, it would not have been unusual for some members of the
group to go their separate ways after the commission of an offence.
[56]          
Further, the fact that the Audi was not on a one-way street as described
by the complainant did not undermine the officers’ grounds. The complainant,
who was described as screaming and crying when she made the 911 call, could
easily have been mistaken when describing the street as a one-way street. Based
on the evidence of both officers, none of the nearby streets were one-way
streets. Fort York Boulevard runs in both directions, but the lanes are
separated by a boulevard. It would be unusual to describe it as a one-way
street. The officers were both familiar with the area. It was open to PC
Paquette to discount this detail when determining whether there were reasonable
and probable grounds to arrest Mr. Davis.
[57]          
Finally, as noted above, whether the police had reasonable grounds to
arrest is based on the totality of the circumstances
reasonably known to the arresting officer as seen from the perspective of a
reasonable person with comparable knowledge, training and experience. At the time of the arrest, PC Paquette had only been a
police officer for two years. Although PC McVey had significantly more
experience, both officers testified that PC Paquette made the decision to
arrest Mr. Davis. PC McVey did not direct him to do so.
[58]              
Based on the foregoing, I find that PC Paquette had an honest belief
that Mr. Davis had committed the robbery. Based on the totality of the circumstances,
his belief was objectively reasonable. The police therefore had reasonable and
probable grounds to arrest Mr. Davis.
[59]          
The Defendant also takes the position that his rights under s. 9 of the Charter
were breached when he was unlawfully detained at the roadside, handcuffed,
and placed in the rear of a police cruiser as a result of Mr. Davis’s arrest,
which they argue was unlawful. The defence further argues that the detention of
Mr. Mitchell was a de facto arrest because he was handcuffed, searched
and put into the scout car.
[60]          
As discussed above, I have found above that Mr. Davis’s arrest was
lawful. At the hearing, the defence conceded that if Mr. Davis was lawfully
arrested, it would be difficult to find that Mr. Mitchell was unlawfully
detained. For the reasons given below, I agree.
[61]          
Police are entitled to detain a person for investigative purposes where
they have reasonable grounds to suspect that the individual is connected to a particular
criminal activity and that such a detention is reasonably necessary in the
circumstances: R. v. Mann, 2004 SCC 52, at para. 45. In the context of
detention, “reasonable grounds” is synonymous with reasonable suspicion.
[62]          
Where a police officer has reasonable grounds to believe that his or her
safety or that of others is at risk, the officer may engage in a protective
pat-down search of the detained individual.  Both the detention and the
pat-down search must be conducted in a reasonable manner. An investigative
detention should be brief in duration and does not impose an obligation on the
detained individual to answer questions posed by the police: Mann, at
para. 45.
[63]          
As discussed above, PC Paquette had reasonable and probable grounds to arrest
Mr. Davis. As a result, PC McVey had reasonable grounds to suspect that Mr.
Mitchell was connected to the robbery. Mr. Mitchell was with Mr. Davis, who had
just been arrested in connection with the robbery that had taken place around
the corner, less than 10 minutes earlier. The complainant had advised police
that five men were involved. It was not unreasonable for PC McVey to suspect
that Mr. Mitchell was one of the other four men.
[64]          
In the context of reasonable and probable grounds for arrest, the Court
of Appeal has held that “facts” relied upon by the officer need not be true.
Reasonable grounds can be based on an officer’s reasonable belief in certain
facts even if it turns out that the belief is mistaken: R. v. Gerson-Foster,
2019 ONCA 405, at para. 79. While PC McVey’s interpretation of the information
received from dispatch was mistaken, in that he understood that all five men
were Black and between 26-30 years old, this interpretation was not
unreasonable, based on a review of the text of the ICAD transmissions, as
follows:
[65]          
Moreover, it was reasonably necessary to detain Mr. Mitchell. The
complainant reported that the perpetrator choked her. While there was no report
of any weapons, police were justified in exercising caution. There were also still
three individuals outstanding.
[66]          
While the defence argued that Mr. Mitchell’s detention was a de facto
arrest, this argument was made in the context of a s. 24(2) analysis
predicated on the unlawful arrest of Mr. Davis and, consequently, the unlawful
search of Mr. Mitchell’s vehicle. The defence conceded that a breach of Mr.
Mitchell’s s. 9 rights alone would not lead to the exclusion of evidence. In
any event, Mr. Mitchell was only briefly detained until the firearm was located
in the vehicle and he was arrested and given his rights to counsel. Mr.
Mitchell was detained and put in the scout car at 5:15 a.m. The firearm was
located at 5:21 a.m. and Mr. Mitchell was arrested and informed of his right to
counsel at 5:23 a.m.
[67]          
In arresting Mr. Davis and detaining Mr. Mitchell, the officers were
reasonably diligent in complying with their obligations under the Charter,
while investigating a violent offence that had been given the highest priority.
They sought more detailed descriptions of the perpetrators and vehicle
their way to the location of the incident but no further information was
forthcoming at the time. The individual who was believed to match the
description, Mr. Davis, was arrested, but the other individual, Mr. Mitchell,
was only detained because there were insufficient grounds to arrest him at the
time. On the body-worn camera recordings, both Mr. Davis and Mr. Mitchell asked
multiple times why they had been arrested or detained. The officers explained
the reason and informed both of their rights to counsel at the earliest
opportunity.
[68]          
The Defendant submits that the police breached his rights under s. 8 of
the Charter when they searched his vehicle incident to Mr. Davis’s
arrest.
[69]          
The Crown submits that the search of the vehicle was a lawful search
incident to arrest.
[70]          
Section 8 of the Charter states that “everyone has the right
against unlawful search and seizure.” The purpose of s. 8 is to "protect individuals from
unjustified state intrusions upon their privacy" which requires preventing
unjustified searches before they happen through pre-authorization: Hunter
v. Southam Inc., 1984 CanLII 33 (SCC), [1984] 2 S.C.R. 145 at p. 160
[71]          
A search will be reasonable if it is authorized by law, the law itself
is reasonable, and the manner in which the search was carried out is
reasonable: R. v. Collins, 1987 CanLII 84 (SCC), [1987] 1 S.C.R. 265, at p. 278.
[72]          
In respect of s. 8 of the Charter, once the Defendant establishes
that the search was without a warrant, the onus shifts to the Crown to
demonstrate that the search was reasonable and justified in the circumstances. A
warrantless search is presumptively unreasonable. As such, the Crown must rebut
the presumption by showing that the search was a valid search incident to
arrest, which requires that:
[73]          
The case law has identified three valid law enforcement purposes: (i)
police and public safety, (ii) preventing the destruction of evidence, and (iii)
the discovery of evidence that may be used at trial: R. v. Fearon, 2014
SCC 77, [2014] 3 S.C.R. 621, at para. 75. Those categories, however, are not
closed: R. v. Sureskumar, 2023 ONCA 705, at para. 11.
[74]          
The police’s law enforcement purpose must be subjectively connected to
the arrest, and the officer’s belief that the purpose will be served by the
search must be objectively reasonable: Stairs, at para. 37.
[75]          
For a search incident to arrest to be lawful, police need not have
reasonable and probable grounds. However, they “must have some reason related
to the arrest for conducting the search at the time the search was carried out,
and that reason must be objectively reasonable”: R. v. Caslake, 1998 CanLII 838 (SCC), [1998] 1
S.C.R. 51, at para. 25. The important consideration is the link between the
location and purpose of the search and the grounds for the arrest: R. v. Nolet,
2010 SCC 24, [2010] 1 S.C.R. 851, at para. 49.
[76]              
I have found above that the police had reasonable and probable grounds
to arrest Mr. Davis.
[77]              
In my view, the roadside search of the Audi was truly incidental to the
arrest in the sense that it was for a valid law enforcement purpose connected
to the arrest. PC McVey testified that he first searched the door of the
vehicle to see if he could find the stolen necklace and shoes. On the body-worn
camera recording, the officers can be heard searching for shoes and a necklace
with a letter “T” and a diamond. Soon after the search was initiated, he
located the firearm under the driver’s seat. Moreover, the search was conducted
reasonably. After PC McVey located the firearm, the officers sealed the vehicle
and sought a search warrant. They did not attempt to search the trunk of the
vehicle.
[78]              
Although the search was warrantless, the Crown has demonstrated that the
search was reasonable and justified in the circumstances. Accordingly, the
search was not in breach of Mr. Mitchell’s s. 8 rights.
[79]              
As noted above, PC McVey admitted that when he conducted the pat-down
search of Mr. Mitchell, he went into his pockets, which exceeded the scope of
his authority to conduct a search incident to an investigate detention. Upon
realizing his error, PC McVey returned the items to Mr. Mitchell’s pockets. This
search was a breach of Mr. Mitchell’s rights under s. 8 of the Charter. However,
no evidence was located pursuant to that search and the defence does not argue
that any evidence should be excluded on the basis of this breach. Mr. Mitchell
was arrested minutes later, after the firearm was located. PC McVey then
searched Mr. Mitchell’s pockets again and removed the items, because he would
be taken to the station. This was a lawful search incident to arrest.
[80]              
The defence argued that if the search of the vehicle was not a lawful
search incident to arrest, references to the firearm and vehicle would have to
be excised from the ITO, which would lead to a finding that the search warrant
could not have issued.
[81]              
Given that I have found that the search of the vehicle was lawful, no
excision is necessary. There is no question that the search warrant could have
issued.
[82]          
Based on my finding that the search of the
vehicle was not in breach of Mr. Mitchell’s Charter rights, it is
unnecessary to determine whether the evidence should be excluded pursuant to s.
24(2).
[83]          
For the foregoing reasons, the application is dismissed.
[84]          
The defence conceded that in the event that the Charter application
was unsuccessful and the evidence was not excluded, convictions would follow on
all of the charges with the exception of Count 7, possession of a controlled
substance for the purpose of trafficking (fentanyl) under s. 5(2) of the CDSA.
[85]          
The Defendant admitted the following facts, among others, in an Agreed
Statement of Facts: (i) the nature, quantity and location of the items seized;
(ii) that Mr. Mitchell was not the holder of an authorization or licence
permitting possession of the Glock handgun located in the Audi; (iii) that the
serial number on the Glock handgun was defaced, altered or removed; and (iv)
that at the time, Mr. Mitchell was bound by an order prohibiting him from
possessing any firearm, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon or prohibited
device. The admitted facts establish Mr. Mitchell’s guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt of the offences charged in Counts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 8.
[86]          
In respect of Count 7, the defence takes the position that the Crown has
failed to demonstrate beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Mitchell was in
possession of fentanyl for the purposes of trafficking, given the amount of
fentanyl seized (2.67 grams) and the absence of expert evidence.
[87]              
The Crown submits that the only reasonable inference is
that Mr. Mitchell was in possession of the fentanyl for the purposes of
trafficking because of: (i) the other items in the backpack; (ii) the lack of any
indica of personal use; and (iii) Mr. Mitchell’s concession that he possessed
the cocaine for the purposes of trafficking.
[88]              
To prove the offence of possession for the purposes of
trafficking, the Crown must prove each of the following essential elements of
the offence beyond a reasonable doubt:
[89]          
Only the last element is at issue in this case.
[90]              
The police found 2.67 grams of fentanyl in brown ripped
plastic in the internal front pocket of a backpack located in the trunk of the
Audi. Also in the backpack were a variety of dime bags and packaging.
[91]              
Where the Crown’s case rests on circumstantial
evidence, the question is whether the trier of fact could reasonably be
satisfied that the accused’s guilt is the only reasonable conclusion available
on the totality of the evidence: R. v. Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 1000, at para. 55.
Reasonable alternative inferences to guilt need not be
based on proven facts; they need only be plausible based on logic and
experience: Villaroman, at paras. 35-37.
[92]              
In my view, the evidence does not lead to the
conclusion that the only reasonable inference available was that Mr. Mitchell possessed
the fentanyl for the purposes of trafficking. The quantity of fentanyl was not
so large that personal use was not a reasonable alternative inference. Moreover,
the drug packaging, scales, and cash found in the backpack could relate to the
cocaine and not the fentanyl.
[93]              
The Crown has failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that Mr. Mitchell was in possession of the fentanyl for the purposes of
trafficking.
[94]              
Accordingly, the Defendant is found guilty of Counts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
8, and 9 on the indictment.
[95]              
The Defendant is found not guilty of Count 7 on the indictment. However,
the Defendant is found guilty of the lesser and included offence of simple possession
of a controlled substance (fentanyl), contrary to s. 4(1) of the CDSA.