[1]              
The major issue for determination at trial is
the Respondent husband’s obligation to pay spousal support to the Applicant
wife.
[2]              
The Applicant wife seeks an order for:
[3]              
The Respondent seeks an order that:
[4]              
A number of miscellaneous issues have been resolved on consent, and
will be included in the Final Order of this court.
[5]              
The following facts are not disputed:
[6]              
The parties were able to resolve all equalization and property
issues arising out of their relationship.  They agree that:
[7]              
With respect to support, the parties agree that the
‘un-equalized’ portion of the Respondent’s teacher’s pension (i.e. attributable
to time periods either pre-dating or post-dating the parties’ marriage) results
in the following income stream:
[8]              
The Applicant’s court Application was issued on January 28, 2021.
The Respondent filed an Answer within the prescribed timelines.
[9]              
On October 20, 2021 Brown J. made a Temporary Order which
provided for interim support, as follows:
[10]          
All payments ordered by Justice Brown were in good standing at
the time of trial.
[11]          
On June 21, 2024, at the conclusion of the evidence heard at
trial, this court made an order on consent which suspended the payment of child
support on behalf of the child Lorena, effective July 1, 2024, and granted a
Divorce.
[12]          
The Applicant’s request for spousal support was made as corollary
relief in the context of a Divorce claim.  Accordingly, the
court’s jurisdiction to order the payment of spousal support is found in s.
15.2 of the Divorce Act, R.S.C. 1985, c 3 (2nd Supp).
[13]          
Canadian jurisprudence recognizes three conceptual
grounds for entitlement to spousal support: (1) compensatory support; (2)
contractual support; and (3) non-compensatory support: Bracklow v. Bracklow,
1999 CanLII 715 (SCC), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 420, at para. 15.
[14]          
Under the Divorce Act, the purposes of an
order for spousal support should (a) recognize any economic advantages or
disadvantages to the spouses arising from the marriage or its breakdown, (b)
apportion between the spouses any financial consequences arising from the care
of any child of the marriage over and above any obligation for the support of
any child of the marriage, (c) relieve any economic hardship of the spouses
arising from the breakdown of the marriage, and (d) insofar as practicable,
promote the economic self-sufficiency of each spouse within a reasonable period
of time: s. 15.2(6), Moge v. Moge, 1992 CanLII 25 (SCC), [1992] 3 S.C.R. 813.
[15]          
In this case, the Applicant seeks spousal
support on both a compensatory and non-compensatory basis.  Although the
Applicant worked on a part-time basis for her family’s business and had
aspirations to become a teacher, during the early years of the relationship the
parties made a joint decision that the Applicant would remain home with the
children.  Lorena’s special needs were identified at an early age, and the
family recognized that she required a high level of care.  The Applicant was
the children’s primary caregiver.  She remained out of the workforce and the
Respondent husband continued to work as a teacher, then as a Vice Principal,
and ultimately as a Principal.
[16]          
The Respondent commenced teaching, as a high
school teacher, in September 1989. He became a Vice Principal in 2006, and
became a school Principal in September 2011. He took courses during the
parties’ marriage which allowed him to achieve these progressions. The
Respondent acknowledges that the Applicant was responsible for the children’s
morning routines, and had dinner ready every night. However, he testified that
he assisted with cleaning and home maintenance, that his family was a priority
for him whenever he was not working, and that he was very actively involved in
their daily lives.  He acknowledges that the Applicant was and remains “an
exceptional mom”.
[17]          
Both parties appear to have had strong support
from their extended families both during their marriage and following
separation.
[18]          
Although the parties do not agree to the level
of involvement of the husband in the day-to-day operation of the household, it
is evident to this court that the Applicant was the children’s primary
caregiver during the day, but that the Respondent father was an active and
involved parent after work, on weekends, and during the summer months if he was
not teaching summer school.  When the parties ultimately separated in 2016, the
Applicant wife was not employed outside of the home.  She remained in the
matrimonial home with the children, and as the younger two children went off to
post-secondary studies, they continued to use the Applicant mother’s home as
their home base.  The Respondent husband continued to be employed with the school
board.
[19]          
It is evident from the length of the marriage,
the roles assumed by both parties during the marriage, and the current
circumstances that the parties find themselves in today that entitlement to
spousal support is established on a both a strong compensatory and a
non-compensatory basis.
[20]          
The starting point for determining the
appropriate quantum of spousal support payable between the parties is a
determination of their respective incomes.  In considering each party’s income
for the purpose of spousal support, this court is asked to consider:
[21]          
It is common ground that the Respondent reached
eligibility for full retirement (at an unreduced pension) in October 2017.  He
retired in June 2022, at the age of 59.5, after 33 years of employment as a
teacher/vice-principal/principal.  I find that in September 2017, the
Respondent advised the Applicant, in writing, that he intended to retire in
June 2020.  The Applicant stated her objection to this plan.  The Respondent
continued to work.  In February 2020, the Respondent advised that he now
intended to retire in June 2022, and ultimately he did follow through with this
plan.  I am not satisfied that the parties ever reached a consensus, either
during the marriage or following separation, as to an agreed-upon anticipated
retirement date.
[22]          
The Applicant asks the court to impute an income
to the Respondent, commensurate with the level of income he was earning as a
full-time principal ($137,492.00) for the purpose of
determining his ongoing spousal support obligation to her.  The Applicant
argues that the Respondent’s retirement at 59.5 years of age was unreasonable
in the face of his obligation to contribute to her support and suggests that
his medical issues have been orchestrated or exaggerated in order to defeat her
spousal support claim.  I do not accept this position.
[23]          
Most of the caselaw provided to the court
regarding the reasonableness of a payor’s decision to retire is found in the context
of motion to change proceedings.  That is, in those cases the court was asked
to decide whether the payor’s voluntary decision to retire constituted a
material change in circumstances warranting a reduction or termination of
spousal support.  Although not a motion to change proceeding and this court is
tasked with determining the appropriate quantum of spousal support payable at
first instance rather than the materiality of a change in circumstances (i.e.
retirement), the following themes and principles identified within the caselaw
provided are of assistance to the court:
[24]          
The reasonableness of a payor’s retirement date
is a highly fact-specific inquiry.  Reliance upon caselaw for age-specific
determinations of reasonableness is of limited value.  Likewise, the average
age of retirees receiving benefits under the Ontario Teacher’s Pension Fund,
age 59 – as confirmed by Mr. Lum, manager of member experience, is also of
limited assistance.
[25]          
On the specific facts of this case, I accept
that the Respondent husband’s decision to retire at the age of 59.5, after 33
years of pensionable employment and almost five years after his eligibility to
retire at full pension, in the context of his mental health struggles and
caregiving role for Lorena, was reasonable.
[26]          
The Respondent, and his family physician, Dr.
Turner, testified as to the Respondent’s medical challenges.  The Respondent
husband was diagnosed with cancer in 1994.  He has had various treatments over
the years including surgery, radiation, and hormone treatment.  He sees a
specialist every six months for monitoring and although he is presently in good
physical health, the threat of this cancer is a source of ongoing anxiety for
the Respondent.
[27]          
In June 2020, the Respondent was formally
diagnosed with depression and anxiety, was put on medication, and began
engaging in cognitive behavioural therapy through a mental health counsellor.
The Respondent husband took a leave of absence from work in November 2020, at
that time projected by Dr. Turner to be for 4-6 months with a gradual return to
work. The Respondent was approved to return to work in May, 2021.  In February
2022 the Respondent had a significant relapse, and his physician formed the
medical opinion that the Respondent was ‘totally disabled’ from working on an
indefinite basis.  The Respondent was referred to a psychiatrist. The
likelihood of further relapses (i.e. serious episodes of depression) increased.
Dr. Turner endorsed the Respondent’s plan to retire.  Ultimately, after two
sick leaves, the Respondent retired, effective June 2022.  The Respondent
continues to be under Dr. Turner’s regular care and treatment, including
medication, for Major Depressive Disorder.
[28]          
I accept the Respondent’s evidence that he was
unable to meet the stresses and challenges as a full-time principal, while caring
equally for Lorena, navigating the emotional and financial pressures arising
from his separation and this litigation, and coping with serious depression.  I
reject the assertion that the Respondent’s mental health issues were
orchestrated or exaggerated to avoid payment of spousal support to the
Applicant.  The Respondent has borrowed funds from multiple sources to ensure
that his onerous support obligations to the Applicant remain in good standing. 
I do not find the timing of the Respondent’s mental health diagnoses to be
suspect. I find the concerns regarding the Respondent’s mental health to be
very real.  They have not been engineered to deprive the Applicant of spousal
support.  Whether Dr. Turner initiated the discussions and suggested that the Respondent
should retire, or supported and encouraged his stated desire to retire does not
detract from Dr. Turner’s medical opinion that the Respondent was totally
disabled from working on an indefinite basis at the time this plan
materialized.  I accept that the Respondent’s retirement at full pension was
the most reasonable option for the Respondent at the time.
[29]          
I decline to impute an annual income of
$137,492.00 to the Respondent, as requested by the Applicant.  I find that the
Respondent’s age and ongoing mental health vulnerabilities, in combination with
the rigours and stresses of his workplace and onerous responsibilities of
caring for a disabled adult child on an equal basis, prevented him from
maintaining his previous employment.  I accept that his retirement was both
necessary and reasonable in the particular circumstances of this case.
[30]          
It is generally accepted that the principles
that apply in determining whether to impute income are the same in both child
support and spousal support cases: Enyedy-Goldner v. Goldner, 2024 ONSC
1755, at para. 19; Rilli v. Rilli, 2006 CanLII 34451 (ON SC), [2006] O.J. No. 4142 (Ont. S.C.); Perino
v. Perino, 2007 CanLII 46919 (ON SC), [2007] O.J. No. 4298 (Ont. S.C.).
[31]          
The leading case on the issue of imputation of income
on the basis of intentional unemployment or underemployment is the case the Ontario
Court of Appeal case of Drygala v. Pauli, which provides the following
guidance:
[32]          
Both parties allege that the other could
supplement his or her income with part-time or other employment in order to
improve their financial circumstances.  However, Lorena has lived equally in
the homes of the Applicant and Respondent for the past 7 years.  The parties
agree that caring for Lorena is a 24/7 job when she is in their care.  The
family appears committed to keeping Lorena with her family, rather than in a
home for adults with special needs, for so long as this is possible.  By reason
of provision of care for Lorena, I find that, at most, each party could be
expected to hold down a part-time position of employment, limited to the hours
that they are not caring for Lorena.
[33]          
Both parties called their treating family
physicians as witnesses at trial.  With respect to their evidence I make the
following mutual findings:
[34]          
The Applicant testified that she has not applied
for any positions of employment since separation.  She and Dr. West both
described that she was diagnosed with cancer in 2005, which was successfully
treated.  She has arthritis and IBS, had hip replacements in 2017 and 2018, and
her gallbladder removed in 2020. She continues to struggle with fatigue,
stiffness and pain. In 2020, the Applicant was diagnosed with depression and
anxiety.  She has been seeing a counsellor since 2021. The emotional and
financial stresses of separation, the high level of care required by Lorena,
and the impact of the pandemic, were all noted as stressors.  The Applicant
continues to take her prescribed medication.  I accept this information to be
true.
[35]          
The Respondent testified that he has not applied
for any remunerative positions of employment since his retirement.  He now does
volunteer work for a charitable organization, repairing bicycles for use by
marginalized persons, from which he draws personal satisfaction.  He believes
that his volunteer work contributes to his positive mental health.  Mr. Lum,
from the Teacher’s Pension Fund confirmed that a retired member may work up to
50 days per school year (e.g. supply teaching, summer school, etc.) within the
education industry without impacting their ability to collect their pension. 
The Respondent has not pursued this option.
[36]          
It is evident to this court, that both parties
have survived potentially life-threatening medical issues, have shared the
burden of physically, emotionally, and financially supporting a high-needs
child for many years, and have experienced the stress and uncertainty of
separation and divorce.  It is not surprising that they are both burned out and
struggling with mental health challenges.
[37]          
I am satisfied that the Applicant’s physical and
mental health struggles at this time, in combination with the narrowness of her
work experience and time constraints arising from her equal care of Lorena,
prevent her from securing employment of any significance at this time.  It was
evident to the court, both by the content of the Applicant’s evidence and her
presentation at trial, that she continues to struggle significantly with the
loss of her marital union.   I accept the Applicant’s representation that she
has been unable to return to the workforce in meaningful way since separation
as genuine.   I decline to impute an employment income to the Applicant.
[38]          
At present, the Respondent perhaps enjoys better
physical health than the Applicant.  As noted above, his mental health is
fragile, and he too is limited in time by his equal care of Lorena.  However,
the Respondent enjoys good physical health, has an impressive resume, and
appears to have the option of supply teaching when he is not caring for
Lorena.  While no evidence was elicited as to the rate of pay for supply
teachers, I am prepared to estimate that given the Respondent’s qualifications,
the rate should not be less than $250.00 per day.  I acknowledge that the
Respondent’s return to teaching would have to be on a low-stress and flexible
basis so as not to jeopardize his mental stability.  Presuming a ‘light’ supply
teaching schedule of once or twice per week, on alternating weeks (when Lorena
is not in his care), when school is in session, I am prepared to impute a
part-time income of $10,500.00 per year to the Respondent. This is not an
amount, if earned through supply teaching, that would impact the Respondent’s
pension income. I am confident that the Respondent’s age and level of health
can manage this commitment.
[39]          
The Respondent asks the court to impute annual
investment income of $27,111.00 per year to the Applicant, based upon a 5% rate
of return on the funds she received by way of equalization payment
($542,301.00).
[40]          
When a pension is dealt with by lump sum, as is
the case before this court, the recipient can use the assets immediately. 
Under a compensatory spousal support order or agreement, the recipient has an
obligation to apply these assets in an income-producing way for use upon the
payor’s retirement: Boston v. Boston, 2001 SCC 43, at para. 54.  In Halliwell
the Ontario Court of Appeal held that a 3% rate investment return on the
equalization payment paid to the recipient was a reasonable rate of return to
be applied: Halliwell v. Halliwell, 2017 ONCA 349.
[41]          
The Applicant received the sum of $1,199,369.00
from the proceeds of sale of the matrimonial home, $542,301.00 of which
constituted the equalization payment owing to her by the Respondent.  This
court has found that the Respondent’s retirement was reasonable.  As such, the
court is bound by Boston to consider the Applicant’s obligation to
utilize the funds received in an income-producing way.
[42]          
The Applicant advises that following the sale of
the matrimonial home, she purchased a three-bedroom home for $1.1 million
dollars.  She testified that she did so at the height of the real estate
market, when options were limited. She believes that the home has decreased in
value.  A small mortgage was placed on the property which now totals
approximately $85,000.00.  The monthly payments are approximately $430.00 per
month.  The Applicant acknowledges that she did not attempt to utilize any
portion of the equalization payment owing to her to generate income. Although
the Applicant’s current residence is not the matrimonial home, she urges the
court to find that it would be unreasonable to expect her to generate
investment income from her residence.
[43]          
In this case, I did not get the sense that the
Applicant is a sophisticated investor.  She utilized her entire asset base to
purchase a home with a nominal mortgage.  I accept that the Applicant purchased
her home in an inflated market, however, I am not necessarily satisfied that
she considered more prudent and affordable accommodations, as did the
Respondent.  It remains open to the Applicant to downsize further in future. 
In these unique circumstances, I am prepared to attribute a more modest
investment return (approximately 2%) as an annual income attributable to the
Applicant on the equalization funds she received.  I have considered both her
desire to maintain a stable residence for Lorena and the change in real estate
market conditions in reaching this conclusion.  I conclude that it is
appropriate to attribute an income of only $10,500.00 per year to the Applicant
as an appropriate rate of return on her capital at this time.
[44]          
From a broader perspective, both parties have
asked the court to respect their own lifestyle choices and critique those of
the other side. I have respected the Respondent’s choice not to risk his mental
health by actively seeking out more onerous employment, to allow his health
stabilize, and to permit him to enjoy his retirement with Lorena.  Likewise, I
have given some measure of deference and respect to the Applicant’s decision to
own and reside in a more comfortable, albeit somewhat expensive home, with
Lorena.  I find that both parties could have more diligently pursued options
that put additional income in their hands, and both parties declined to do so,
based upon their individual lifestyle preferences. I have made income
adjustments which critically and equitably assess those choices.
[45]          
The leading case on the interplay between
equalized pensions and spousal support, i.e., ‘double-recovery’ remains the Supreme
Court of Canada’s decision in Boston v. Boston.  The term
double-recovery is used to describe the situation, evident in this case, where
a pension, once equalized as property, is also treated as income from which the
pension-holding spouse must make spousal support payment, thereby causing the
recipient of the equalization payment and spousal support to recover twice from
the payor, once as an asset and once again as an income stream: Boston, para.
34. Generally, such recovery is found to be inherently unfair: “the payee
spouse cannot save the assets that she receives on equalization and choose
instead to live on the liquidation of the payor spouse’s pension when he
retires: Boston, para. 56.  To avoid double recovery, the court should,
where practicable, focus on the portion of a support payor’s income that has
not been equalized, including the portion of a pension that was earned prior to
the date of marriage, or subsequent to the valuation date: Boston, para.
64.
[46]          
However, double recovery may be permitted in
circumstances where spousal support is based primarily on need, and in
particular where:
[47]          
In February 2022, the Respondent equalized the
family law value of his pension owing to the Applicant ‘in cash’ from the
proceeds of sale of the matrimonial home. He retired four months later and
started receiving his pension income at that time.  He testified that if he had
known that the Applicant would then ask for spousal support from his pension
income, he would not have agreed to settle equalization in that manner.  The
vast proportion of the Respondent’s net family property consisted of the value
of his pension. He has few other resources at his disposal. These factors would
have been relevant if the court had been asked to consider whether the
Respondent’s pension interests should be paid in lump sum fashion or divided at
source: see Family Law Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. F.3, s. 10.1(4).  I accept
the Respondent’s evidence that he would not have consented to a cash payment
had he believed that the Applicant would request double recovery in the form of
spousal support on the pension interest already equalized.
[48]          
I am satisfied that the Applicant has ‘need’ for
spousal support, even with an additional income of $10,500.00 per year
attributable to investment income that ought to be generated from the
equalization payment she received.  However, the Applicant’s need cannot be determined
in a vacuum without reference to the Respondent’s ability to pay.
[49]          
At the present time, I find that the Respondent
is suffering greater financial hardship than the Applicant.  In particular, I
find as follows:
[50]          
In these circumstances, it is the Respondent who
finds himself in a position of serious financial hardship.  I find that he does
not have the ability to pay support to the Applicant on the basis of his full
(equalized) pension.  He will never be able to recover financially if his
spousal support obligation is based upon this already-equalized source.
[51]          
This is not an appropriate case in which
double-recovery is warranted.
[52]          
In determining the amount and duration of
spousal support, if any, the court must consider the condition, means, needs
and other circumstances of each spouse, including
[53]          
When assessing the condition, means, needs and
other circumstances of each spouse, the word “means” includes consideration of
all pecuniary resources, capital assets, income from employment or earning
capacity, and any other sources from which the person receives gains or
benefits: Strang v. Strang, 1992 CanLII 55 (SCC), [1992] 2 SCR 112.  On the basis of the
above, I find that the Applicant’s income for the purposes of spousal support
is $10,500.00, attributed to her as income she ought to be generating from her
capital, and the Respondent’s income for purposes of spousal support is
$36,297.00, as per his un-equalized pension income and imputed part-time income
of $10,500.00 per year.
[54]          
The Spousal Support Advisory Guidelines are a
useful tool in the determination of spousal support.  They suggest a range of
both amount and duration of support that reflects the current law.  While
neither legislated nor binding, the use of SSAG calculations in family law
proceedings has evolved from a starting point to a range that should not be
deviated from lightly: Fisher v. Fisher, 2008 ONCA 11, at para. 98; Slongo
v. Slongo, 2017 ONCA 272, at para. 81.  On the basis of the parties’ incomes,
as determined by this court, the proposed ranges of spousal support prescribed
by the SSAGs are: (a) low: $774.00 per month; (b) mid: $903.00 per month; and
(c) $1,032.00 per month.  This was a long-term, traditional marriage.  The
Applicant has a strong compensatory claim and limited income and earning
capacity. The Respondent’s pension is a stable source of future income, which
is indexed and will increase annually.  I am satisfied that the quantum of
spousal support payable by the Respondent to the Applicant should fall at the
high end of the spousal support range ($1,032.00 per month) on the very
specific facts of this case, and that the amount should be indexed annually to
the cost of living.
[55]          
This adjustment will be effective July 1, 2024,
as at the date that the Respondent sought termination of his ongoing spousal
support obligation to the Applicant.
[56]          
The Applicant seeks retroactive spousal support fixed in the sum
of $44,583.03 for the period of September 1, 2019 to September 1, 2021.  There
appears to be some discrepancy in her position.
[57]          
The Applicant’s calculations reflect a position that $44, 583.00
is owing for the period of September 1, 2018 to September 1, 2021, based
upon the mid-range spousal support suggested payable under the SSAGs. 
If her claim for retroactive support dates back to September 1, 2019, as
per her draft order, the amount purportedly owing during this time period is
approximately $30,000.00.  The Applicant’s calculations reflect a tax discount
at a rate of 35% to reflect the income tax that would be deductible had such
payments been made in accordance with the terms of a court order.  For purposes
of this analysis, I will presume that there is typo in the draft order, and the
Applicant actually intended to seek retroactive support to September 1, 2018 at
this trial.
[58]          
The Respondent is opposed to a retroactive adjustment.  In
addition to the circumstances relating to the parties’ financial positions
discussed above, he further argues that:
[59]          
However, most compelling in this case is the
significant overpayment of both child and spousal support which occurred from
July 1, 2022 to June 30, 2024, at which time this court has found that the
Respondent’s retirement was reasonable.  Effective July 1, 2022, there ought to
have been a significant reduction of the child support and spousal support
payable by the Respondent.  The overpayment of support during this period of
time exceeds the total value of the Applicant’s retroactive claim by a vast
margin.  Even in the absence of the additional and important factors advanced
by the Respondent against retroactive adjustment, there is no additional
support owing.
[60]          
The Applicant’s request for a retroactive
adjustment of spousal support is dismissed.
[61]          
The Respondent has a life insurance policy on
his life with a face value of $50,000.00.  The Applicant is the beneficiary. 
It is appropriate that this life insurance designation remain in place as
security for spousal support, as permitted under s. 15.2(3) of the Divorce
Act.  It is also appropriate to order that the spousal support terms are
binding upon the Respondent’s estate, as there is no automatic provision for
same under the Divorce Act, by contrast to support orders made under the
Family Law Act.
[62]          
The parties’ three children appear to be named
as beneficiaries of the Respondent’s pension in equal parts.  As the pension is
in pay, it is this court’s understanding that there is no jurisdiction for the
court to order a change to the named beneficiaries. No evidence nor submissions
were made on this point.  I decline to make this order.
[63]          
The Applicant seeks one additional month of child support on
behalf of Adriana (i.e. the payment for July 2024) in the amount of $1,194.00. 
Adriana (age 24) was residing with the Applicant mother during this month.  She
graduated from Brock University in April 2024 and wrote her nursing licensing
exam in June 2024.  She had not yet secured employment at the time of trial. 
There is little to no evidence of Adriana’s expenses before the court.
[64]          
The Respondent’s child support obligation, as per the October 20,
2021 Temporary Order of Justice Brown, was based upon the Respondent’s previous
full-time earnings as a principal of $137,492.00.  This court has determined
that the Respondent’s June 2022 retirement date was reasonable. His  actual
income for purposes of child support would thereafter have been approximately
$93,000.00.  There has been a significant overpayment of child support, which
the Respondent father does not seek to recover. There is no basis for any
further payments.  Child support payable on behalf of Adriana shall be
terminated on a final basis, effective July 1, 2024.
[65]          
It was unclear to this court whether all of the miscellaneous
issues included within the Applicant’s draft order were being made on consent. 
Evidence was not led, and argument was not made on many of the topics.  In the
event that this court has inadvertently included terms within the “on consent”
portion of the Final Order below, which were not agreed to by both parties,
counsel may arrange a ‘to be spoken to’ date before me through the Office of
the Trial Coordinator, to address those errors.
[66]          
I recognize that this was a very difficult and
costly trial for both parties. These were difficult issues, without a perfect
solution.  The parties are strongly urged to make effort to resolve the issue
of costs on consent, so as not to incur further legal expense.
[67]          
I thank counsel for their professionalism at
trial and for their thorough legal argument.
[68]          
On the basis of the above, there shall be a Final Order to go on
the following terms: