[1]              
The plaintiff, Karen-Lee Miller (the “Plaintiff”) was in a car accident
with the defendant, Telisha Marion Marie Mullings, (the “Defendant”) on July
22, 2017. The Plaintiff commenced this claim and the Defendant filed her
defence on July 4, 2019.
[2]              
On April 14, 2018, the Plaintiff was in an incident in North Carolina
involving a van transfer from a hotel while on vacation. The Plaintiff was a
passenger and alleged that the driver of the vehicle swerved, such that she
spilled coffee on herself. The Plaintiff has never sued anyone in respect of
the incident in North Carolina, but she did write to the driver’s employer, who
was the owner of the vehicle she was in, to request reimbursement for medical
expenses. It is unclear on this record what the nature of her injuries was or
whether she was paid anything upon her request for reimbursement.
[3]              
When the Defendant examined the Plaintiff for discovery in 2020, the
Defendant learned of the 2018 incident in North Carolina. On September 20,
2020, the Defendant then issued a Third-Party claim against the driver of the
vehicle in North Carolina, Ural Robinson (the “Driver”), claiming contribution
and indemnity.
[4]              
Although the Driver was a resident of North Carolina, he filed his
defence in Ontario on April 7, 2021, attorning to Ontario court’s jurisdiction.
[5]              
As will become apparent, the Defendant made a few attempts to examine
the Driver without success. The Driver’s defence was eventually struck. On June
3, 2024, the Driver’s counsel obtained an Order removing itself from the
record.
[6]              
These events prompted the Defendant to become concerned and to seek to
add Shreeji Hospitality of University, LLC Ramada Clarion (the “Owner”), the owner
of the vehicle in the 2018 incident in North Carolina as a third party which is
the motion before me.
[7]              
The Owner opposes this on the basis of delay, non-compensable prejudice
and jurisdiction. If the Owner is added as a party, it will pursue a limitation
defence at trial.
[8]              
The trial is scheduled to commence on January 13, 2025.
[9]              
For the reasons that follow, I dismiss the motion.
[10]          
The Plaintiff set down this action for trial on September 22, 2022. The
Defendant has not set the Third-Party Claim down for trial.
[11]          
The Owner relies upon r. 48.04 of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O.
1990, Reg. 194, to assert that leave is required for the Defendant to bring
this motion on the basis that even if the Defendant did not set down the Third-Party
claim for trial, it nevertheless attended at Trial Scheduling Court and agreed
to the trial dates.
[12]          
I disagree.
[13]          
Up until 2021, r. 48.04(1) read as follows:
[14]          
In 2021, r. 48.04(1) was changed and now reads as follows:
[15]          
The legislature removed the wording whereby those who consented to an
action being placed on a trial list also had to obtain leave.
[16]          
Therefore, the Defendant does not require leave to bring this motion.
[17]          
There is no issue that the allegations as against the Owner arise out of
the same transaction or occurrence as the subject matter of the Third-Party
claim and that it would satisfy the test for joinder but for the issue of delay
and non-compensable prejudice: r. 5.04(2) and Steel Tree Structures Ltd. v.
Gemco Solar Inc., 2016 ONSC 955, 87 C.P.C. (7th) 422, at para. 27.
[18]          
In Mazzuca v. Silvercreek Pharmacy Ltd. (2001),
2001 CanLII 8620 (ON CA), 56 O.R. (3d) 768 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 30, the court indicated that even
where there is no non-compensable prejudice, pursuant to r. 5.04, the court
retains the discretion to refuse to add a party. The court referenced Derek
McKay and Garry Watson, Homlested and Watson: Ontario Civil Procedure, vol.
2 (Toronto: Carswell, 1993), at pp. 534-535, where the writers indicated that
the discretion is meant to ensure procedural fairness, and that consideration
should be given to matters such as the state of the action, whether the trial
is imminent, and whether examinations for discovery have already been had: at para.
25; see also Cook v. Toronto Police Service Board (2006), 30 C.P.C.
(6th) 183 (Ont. S.C.J.), per Master J.M. Haberman.
[19]          
It has been four years since the Third-Party Claim was issued in
September 2020, and two years since the main action was set down for trial.
Examinations have occurred and the trial is imminent.
[20]          
The Defendant says that she has behaved in a diligent manner at all
times to figure out who the owner of the vehicle was. She sought to examine the
Driver by delivering notices of examination on two occasions, August 24, 2022,
and December 9, 2022, but the Owner did not attend.
[21]          
The Defendant then brought a motion on November 16, 2023, where the
court ordered that the Driver provide a proper sworn affidavit of documents,
attend at discovery, and answer undertakings. The Driver failed to attend again
on January 15, 2024, and his counsel failed to provide an answer as to who the
Owner was in follow up correspondence.
[22]          
Afterwards, the Driver’s defence was struck and his lawyer moved to get
off the record which prompted the Defendant to bring a motion to add the Owner.
[23]          
The Defendant’s argument that she did not know the identity of the Owner
until she received the Owner’s responding record to this motion in September
2024, makes little sense since the Defendant served the motion to add the Owner
in June 2024, which was before she received the responding motion record.
[24]          
Clearly, the Defendant had some means of obtaining the information she
sought, which must have been Progressive Insurance’s Declaration, listed in an
unsworn affidavit of documents provided to the Defendant in October 2021. The Declaration
specifically identified the Owner as an owner of six vehicles. There would be
no reason for the Driver to list and produce this document if this was not the
relevant insurance policy.
[25]          
The Defendant said he took no steps to investigate who the Owner was
after he received the Declaration page.
[26]          
Thus, it has also been three years since the Defendant had the means of
knowing who the Owner was, even if she did not yet have evidentiary
confirmation. Pleadings are generally drafted before there is evidentiary
confirmation of the facts stated in them.
[27]          
If the Defendant had intended to sue the owner of the vehicle, but truly
did not know who that was, she could have also issued the claim as against John
Doe the owner, which is often done in litigation in such cases, but she did not
do this either.
[28]          
I infer from the sequence of events and the facts before me that the
Defendant did not move sooner because she felt she did not have to. That is, to
the extent there is an argument that the Plaintiff’s current medical condition
is in part due to the 2018 incident, the Defendant had issued a Third-Party
claim against the Driver and it had received a Declaration of insurance which suggested
there was available insurance.
[29]          
The Defendant was at liberty to pursue the case in this way, but this
approach carried with it the risk that there could be issues with insurance
coverage for the Driver. And then issues materialized after the Driver’s
defence was struck because there was a risk that the Driver’s insurer would
deny coverage. If that happened, the Defendant needed to also sue the owner of
the vehicle to be able to access the insurance coverage.
[30]          
The Defendant also caused delay by improperly scheduling this matter
before an Associate Judge such that it had to be adjourned to be heard by a
Judge. Regarding the fact that the Defendant could not obtain a motion date
before the Superior Court before November, it is well known that there are
delays in scheduling motions; the Defendant should have sought to schedule the
motion sooner and before the correct Judicial officer.
[31]          
There is a crisis in the civil justice system where significant delays
exist and court dates are lost because of adjournments. Failing to move to add
the Owner in a timely manner, before the correct court jeopardizes the trial
date. The other parties, and the civil justice system itself, should not bear
the cost of the Defendant’s delay and strategic decisions about who to sue at
the outset.
[32]          
Even if the Defendant had had no means of ascertaining the identity of
the owner of the vehicle, scheduling two examinations for discovery in 2022,
followed by a motion in November 2023, could hardly be considered “exhaustive
efforts,” as is alleged in the Defendant’s affidavit material.
[33]          
I find that there is an insufficient explanation for the delay in these
circumstances, that the delay was inordinate, and that this is a relevant
consideration for this motion.
[34]          
The inordinate delay results in a presumption of prejudice: Horani v.
Manulife Financial Corporation, 2023 ONCA 51, at paras. 25, 32.  The
Defendant has failed to rebut the presumption. Further, even if the onus had
been on the Owner to prove actual non-compensable prejudice, it has done so.
[35]          
The Defendant argues there is no non-compensable prejudice because:
[36]          
However, even if Progressive Insurance essentially ran the defence of
the Driver and will also be running the Owner’s defence if added, the Owner
would still be entitled to its own defence and procedural rights. This would
include review of any steps taken so far and consideration of whether
additional steps need to be taken in view of the allegations against it. Here,
it is highly relevant that the claim against the Driver is not the same as the
claim against the Owner.
[37]          
The claim against the Driver relates to his negligence as a driver. There
is a minor pleading related to mechanical failure of the vehicle.
[38]          
The proposed Third-Party Claim pleads that the Owner was responsible in
law for the alleged negligence of the Driver because it failed to maintain the
vehicle in a fit and proper condition that was suitable for operation, it permitted
an incompetent driver to operate the vehicle, it failed to provide the Driver
adequate training for the safe operation of the vehicle, and it consented to
the use of the vehicle when it knew or ought to have known that the Driver was
incapable of driving properly.[1]
[39]          
Mr. Sammet, the operations manager of the Owner, says that due to the
passage of time, the Owner does not have any records that would assist it in defending
these claims and in particular in determining which vehicle was involved in the
2018 incident.
[40]          
Further, the Driver left the Owner’s employ in 2022 when the Owner did
not know that any claim would be made against it in relation to the 2018
incident. While the Owner did do some sparse investigations in 2018, once it
appeared the Plaintiff was not pursuing any claim against it, it would have had
no reason to complete fulsome investigations to address the kinds of claims
asserted against it now. Although the Owner has the same insurer, the insurer
would also have had no reason to make the kinds of inquiries related to the
specific claims now advanced against the Owner.
[41]          
The Owner is now in the position where it has a significantly reduced
ability to obtain information from the Driver, who has stopped participating and
whose defence has been struck.
[42]          
If the Driver is subpoenaed, attends trial and gives damaging evidence
relating to his training or the condition of the vehicle, the Owner will be
compromised in its ability to contradict any such evidence because of the delay
and loss of records. If the Driver does not appear, then the Plaintiff’s
evidence as to the Driver’s conduct will be uncontradicted and the Defendant
asserts that the Owner is vicariously liable.
[43]          
Had the action been advanced against them both at the same time in 2020,
or even in 2021 when the Defendant received the Progressive Insurance
Declaration, the Owner could have used its status as employer to compel the Driver
to assist it with the necessary investigations, and even attend at discovery,
since employees must act in the best interests of their employer. This is no
longer possible.
[44]          
There is also the Plaintiff to consider. The accident, which is the
subject of the main claim, occurred seven years ago. The Owner will seek an
adjournment of that trial if added, and the Plaintiff opposes any delay for a
good reason.
[45]          
Pursuant to s. 267.5 of the Insurance Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. I.8, the
Plaintiff is limited to claiming 70 percent of her income loss up until the
trial, as opposed to 100 percent thereafter.  Therefore, there is real economic
prejudice caused by any delay.
[46]          
Pursuant to r. 29.08(2) of the  Rules of Civil Procedure, the
trial of a Third-Party claim shall occur at or immediately after the trial of
the main action unless the court orders otherwise. While the court could make
an order delaying the Third-Party Claim only, this would result in many of the
same witnesses having to attend, including the Plaintiff. This will be
inefficient and will result in additional court time for this matter, which is
not in the interest of the justice system as a whole.
[47]          
In order to assume jurisdiction over a defendant, this court must be
satisfied that the dispute as against a particular defendant has a real and
substantial connection to Ontario: Club Resorts Ltd. v. Van Breda,
2012 SCC 17, [2012] 1 S.C.R. 572, at para. 100.
[48]          
In Van Breda, the Supreme Court established the following
presumptive connecting factors that, prima facie, entitle a court to
assume jurisdiction in Ontario:
[49]          
The Defendant relies upon Thind v. Polycon Industries, 2022 ONSC
2322. The court concluded that it had jurisdiction over a foreign defendant
based upon the first presumptive connecting factor, that the defendant was
domiciled in Ontario because two of the other defendants were domiciled in
Ontario and there was an aspect of the tort that occurred in Ontario. In that
case, loaded cargo was loaded in Ontario and transported to Ohio. When the
plaintiff began unloading the cargo in Ohio, it fell and hit his back causing
an injury. The plaintiff alleged negligence with respect to the way in which
the cargo was loaded and secured in Ontario thereby creating a danger that
caused his injuries.
[50]          
The court in Thind reasoned that if there was a connection in
respect of the factual and legal situation, the court should assume
jurisdiction over all aspects of the case including over the foreign defendant.
[51]          
Thind is distinguishable because the court also found as a fact
that the tort itself was sufficiently presumptively connected to Ontario and
satisfied the second presumptive factor such that there was a real and
substantial connection between the subject matter of the dispute with Ontario.
Notably, the claim against the foreign defendant arose out of the same incident
that was substantially connected to Ontario. The negligence was pleaded to have
occurred in Ontario by virtue of the way the cargo was loaded in Ontario by all
three defendants in Ontario and this was not contested on the motion.
[52]          
This is not the case here. These are two separate incidents and the 2018
incident has no connection with Ontario.
[53]          
The recent decision Sinclair v. Amex Canada Inc., 2023 ONCA 142, 478
D.L.R. (4th) 683, leave to appeal granted, [2023] S.C.C.A. No. 154, is relevant
here.
[54]          
Sinclair was primarily concerned with the fourth presumptive
factor but in analyzing that issue, the Court explained that lower courts had
not been applying Van Breda with sufficient rigor. The Court further explained
that consideration of presumptive connecting factors should be viewed from the
perspective of the defendant disputing jurisdiction. A court cannot “bootstrap”
territorial jurisdiction against one defendant because it established
jurisdiction against another. There has to be a presumptive connecting factor
with respect to each defendant: at paras 18-19.
[55]          
From the Owner’s perspective, the 2018 incident is not connected to
Ontario, just because the Defendant claims that the Owner’s conduct caused or
contributed to the Plaintiff’s damages claimed in the Ontario proceeding. This
incident did not occur in Ontario. The injury did not occur in Ontario. The
Owner is not domiciled in Ontario and does no business in Ontario. The court in
Van Breda specifically noted that the fact that damages were sustained
in Ontario is not a presumptive connecting factor: para 89.
[56]          
Although there are concerns here with inconsistent verdicts and
multiplicity of proceedings, in Van Breda, the Court also stated, at
para 82, that “abstract concerns for order, efficiency or fairness in the
system are no substitute for connecting factors that give rise to a “real and
substantial” connection for the purpose of the law of conflicts.
[57]          
I also reject the Defendant’s argument that a Third-Party claim in
respect of an incident in a foreign jurisdiction, without more, is an analogous
connecting factor.
[58]          
The Defendant references the fact that Ontario law expressly permits claims
for contribution and indemnity in this case: Negligence Act, R.S.O.
1990, c. N.1, at s. 1.
[59]          
The Defendant also relies on r. 29.01 of the Rules of Civil Procedure
and s. 5 of the Negligence Act, that permit Third-Party claims where it
appears that a person not already a party to an action is or may be wholly or
partly responsible for the damages claimed.
[60]          
However, in Sinclair, the Court specifically addressed and
rejected this kind of argument:
[61]          
See also Export Packers Company Limited v. SPI International
Transportation, 2012 ONCA 481, at para. 20: where the court similarly stated
its stance on adding foreign parties to Third-Party claims:
[62]          
Additional considerations here relate to the Defendant’s argument that multiple
concurrent tortfeasors are 100 percent responsible for all indivisible damages
suffered by a plaintiff, which can be reduced via apportionment as between
them: Athey v. Leonati, 1996 CanLII 183 (SCC), [1996] 3 S.C.R. 458. The Defendant argues that
Ontario law will make it 100 percent liable unless it can seek contribution and
indemnity through a Third-Party claim.
[63]          
However, the Defendant has failed to plead or provide any evidence that
the alleged damages caused by the 2017 accident are indivisible from the alleged
damages caused by the 2018 incident. This is another distinction from Thind
where there was a finding that the damages were indivisible. I note here that
there are significant damages claimed in respect of the 2017 accident and the
most that is before me with respect to the 2018 incident is that the Driver
swerved and the Plaintiff spilled coffee on herself.
[64]          
The fact that the insurance policy is the same or that the Driver
attorned is not sufficient in and of itself to create a new presumptive
connecting factor. The Progressive insurance policy is written in North
Carolina and does not create any connection to Ontario. And as Sinclair
has held, jurisdiction over one defendant cannot be bootstrapped based on
jurisdiction over another.
[65]          
Additionally, the Driver attorned before Sinclair, which provided
clarification. The insurer is taking a different position because it asserts
that the law has changed and it is entitled to rely on new law.
[66]          
Furthermore, the Defendant has not addressed and provided persuasive
evidence and argument regarding the list of factors relevant to the recognition
of a new presumptive connecting factor set out in Van Breda: para 91. It
has not shown how the present fact pattern is similar to the presumptive
connecting factors. It has not shown how this proposed connecting factor is
treated in statute law, apart from the fact that Third-Party claims may be
asserted pursuant to Ontario law, which Export Packers has already
determined is not sufficient by itself. The Defendant has not provided any
evidence as to how this circumstance is treated internationally in the private
law of other legal systems.
[67]          
I leave it to another day, given Sinclair, as to whether the
circumstance that a Third-Party claim relates to damages that are indivisible
from the damages claimed in an Ontario proceeding, is sufficient to establish
an analogous presumptive circumstance, where the issue is properly pleaded
and/or sufficient evidence and analysis is provided as required by Van Breda.
[68]          
I would also not assume jurisdiction on the basis of necessity.
[69]          
This doctrine has not been applied by many courts and is reserved for
exceptional cases. A party seeking to invoke it must establish it cannot
reasonably seek relief in the foreign jurisdiction. For example, the Court of
Appeal, relying on Van Breda, identified that the doctrine of necessity applies
where there is a “breakdown of diplomatic or commercial relations with a
foreign State, the need to protect a political refugee, or the existence of a
serious physical threat if the debate were to be undertaken before a foreign
court”: West Van Inc. v. Daisley, 2014 ONCA 232,
119 O.R. (3d) 481, at para. 40.
[70]          
The Defendant references one similar case, Josephson v. Balfour
Recreation Commission 2010 BCSC 603, 10 B.C.L.R. (5th) 369, where the
doctrine was successfully invoked, although it was prior to Van Breda.
It involved a plaintiff resident in Idaho but injured in British Columbia. He
was treated in a hospital in British Columbia and then in a hospital in Idaho. He
sued the defendant in British Columbia. The plaintiff did not sue the hospital
in Idaho, but the defendant alleged that the plaintiff had received negligent
medical treatment in the Idaho hospital. The defendant brought a Third-Party
claim against the Idaho hospital in the British Columbia proceeding, seeking
contribution and indemnity.
[71]          
The court found the factual matrix of the Third-Party claim was very
closely connected to the claim initiated by Mr. Josephson. It concluded that
the only practical approach was for one court to hear all of the matters
relating to the cause of Mr. Josephson’s injuries. Because the party could not
obtain any relief elsewhere, the court found that the Court should assume
jurisdiction.
[72]          
In West Van Inc. v. Daisley, a party argued that Ontario was the
forum of necessity because it had been unable to retain counsel in the
jurisdiction which was connected to the matters at issue, and it felt that it
would not receive a fair trial in that jurisdiction. The court in West Van
distinguished Josephson and indicated that it was doing so without
endorsing or agreeing with the reasoning in Josephson, which does
suggest some skepticism over the result.
[73]          
In any event, in Josephson, there was an agreement among the
parties that a non-patient in Idaho could not bring a proceeding for
contribution and indemnity from a hospital or doctor, and that Idaho had
abolished joint and several liability in most actions. There was also expert
evidence that established that a proceeding could not reasonably be brought in
Idaho because of the law there.
[74]          
Here, the Defendant has provided no evidence relating to North Carolina
law to support its argument that it cannot bring its claim there. It relies
solely upon an affidavit from Ontario counsel who has not provided information nor
a belief as to the applicability of North Carolina law and whether it could
pursue a claim for contribution and indemnity as a standalone proceeding in
North Carolina.
[75]          
Given the extraordinary nature of the relief requested, there should
have been some expert evidence on North Carolina law to clarify precisely
whether the Defendant could sue the Owner in North Carolina in a separate
action. Again, there should have also been some evidence on, or at least
reference to pleadings that support the argument that the Plaintiff’s damages
are indivisible.
[76]          
The Defendant seeks orders that the non-party, Progressive Insurance,
provide information regarding the following:
[77]          
The Defendant relies upon the following rules from the Rules of Civil
Procedure:
[78]          
These rules relate to what the Driver, as a party, must disclose. They
do not provide for any orders to be made against a non-party.
[79]          
The Defendant also relies upon r. 30.10(1):
[80]          
Although Progressive Insurance is a foreign entity with no presence in
Ontario, it has been running the defence of the Driver who attorned, which must
have been with its consent. I am satisfied that it is appropriate that Progressive
Insurance provide the information sought in items a) through d) above as the
insurer for the Driver. I am not satisfied that the complete underwriting file
must be produced at this time. The Defendant provided no case law in support of
such a broad order, apart from Lica v. Dhaliwal, 2015 ONSC 3888,
which involved a situation where coverage had been denied and the plaintiff brought
a motion to obtain detailed information as to why coverage was denied. At this
stage coverage has not yet been denied.
[81]          
The Owner is the successful party in respect of the motion to add it as
a party and is presumptively entitled to costs. It seeks $9,661.50 on a partial
indemnity basis. This is comparable to the costs claimed in the Defendant’s
Bill of Costs. The time spent and rates charged are reasonable Thus the costs
claimed are within the reasonable contemplation of the Defendant: Boucher v.
Public Accountants Council for the Province of Ontario (2004), 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R. (3d)
291 (C.A.), at para. 26.
[82]          
However, the Bill of Costs for both parties did not separate out the
costs related to the production motion. I would award no costs in respect of
that motion because there was divided success.
[83]          
Thus, I deduct $1,000 from the partial indemnity costs claimed by the
Owner for a costs award in the amount of $8,661.50.
[84]          
Given the delay, the non-compensable prejudice and absence of
jurisdiction, I dismiss the motion to add the Owner as a party and award the
Owner $8,661.50 in costs.
[85]          
I make certain production orders but decline to order production of the
entire underwriting file. If Progressive Insurance denies coverage and brings a
motion to become a statutory fourth party, an urgent motion may be brought
before me regarding the request for production of the underwriting file with
materials that would permit the court to conduct the necessary analysis.