[1]              
The plaintiff, Ms. Castro, seeks damages for injuries she claims to have
sustained in a car accident on November 28, 2018. The parties have agreed that
the defendant was at fault. The simplified procedure trial proceeded on the
issue of whether Ms. Castro is entitled to damages, and if so, in what amount.
[2]              
Ms. Castro claims to have suffered non-pecuniary damages as well as loss
of income, loss of competitive advantage, housekeeping and future care costs.
[3]              
Mr. Chen argues that Ms. Castro does not meet the legislative threshold
of suffering a permanent serious impairment of an important physical mental or
psychological function that would permit her to claim non-pecuniary damages. He
denies she has suffered any pecuniary loss or has any housekeeping or care
needs resulting from the accident.
[4]              
I will consider the damages claims in the following order:
[5]              
Ms. Castro claims general damages based on impairments arising from pain
in her back, neck, hands, left foot and leg, shoulders, jaw and thigh, as well
as stiffness and tingling in her legs and hands, jaw clicking, and low mood and
anxiety.
[6]              
Assessing this claim requires a review of her health history and the
expert evidence, which I will undertake in chronological order.
[7]              
Ms. Castro moved to Canada in 2007. She has a business management degree
from her native Philippines, an ECE assistant diploma, and a diploma in
addictions recovery support for youth and families, which she received in 2023.
[8]              
The accident at the heart of the litigation occurred on November 28,
2018, when Ms. Castro was driving northbound through an intersection on a green
light. Her children were in the back seat. Mr. Chen’s vehicle, which was
travelling southbound in the opposite direction, made a left-hand turn and hit Ms.
Castro’s car on the front bumper side. Ms. Castro’s airbags deployed.
[9]              
Ms. Castro did not lose consciousness but described herself as dazed,
confused and in fear. She stayed in the vehicle until police and ambulance
arrived. A paramedic examined her, but she was not taken to the hospital. Ms.
Castro states that she was worried about her children who were in the back seat
and did not want to leave them. Her husband arrived and the four of them went
home together. Her vehicle was towed from the scene.
[10]          
Ms. Castro states that she experienced immediate pain in her hands and
tingling in her arms and neck. As well, she had a bump on her head and bruising
on her legs, and pain in her left foot, left shoulder and the left side of her
head. A few days after the accident, she saw her family physician who
prescribed naproxen, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug. About a week
later, she started attending for chiropractic treatment. She complained of neck
pain, back pain, bilateral shoulder pain, and arm pain.
[11]          
On cross-examination, after first denying it, Ms. Castro conceded that
she had attended at the emergency department of St. Michael’s Hospital five
days before the accident, complaining of sudden lower back pain and numbness in
her left foot.  She was unable to stand, and her back pain worsened when she
moved her hips. She was administered various medication, including morphine and
hydromorphone.
[12]          
Ms. Castro also acknowledged attending the emergency department at the
Toronto General Hospital in October 2019. She had lifted a heavy box for her employer
and experienced a sharp back pain that she described as excruciating. She was
taken by ambulance to TGH, where she was administered Percocet, Dilaudid,
Ativan and naproxen. A few days later, she attended at her family doctor’s
office to complete insurance forms arising from that incident.
[13]          
Ms. Castro received physiotherapy and acupuncture treatment as well as
massage therapy. Ms. Castro states that the treatment provided short-term
relief and she would have liked to continue, but funding was not approved.
[14]          
Ms. Castro described returning to her doctor at the beginning of 2019, as
she was having nightmares and difficulty sleeping, as well as numbness and
swelling. She was prescribed a refill of naproxen as well as Trintellix, an
anti-depressant. Ms. Castro describes starting to experience pain and numbness
in her fingers about six months after the accident. In about September 2019,
she was also prescribed Imovane for sleeping issues.
[15]          
Ms. Castro describes seeing a psychiatrist through the insurance company
in May 2019. On July 11, 2019, she was seen by Sandra Ramnaraine,
a psychotherapist and psychometrist, for a psychological assessment. Ms.
Ramnaraine interviewed Ms. Castro and administered psychological self-report
tests under the supervision of Dr. Shaul, a registered psychologist. Ms. Ramnaraine
provided Ms. Castro with 14 psychotherapy sessions, also under supervision,
between August 2019 and June 2020.
[16]          
Ms. Ramnaraine is not qualified to provide diagnoses. The diagnoses were
provided by Dr. Shaul, who was not called as a witness. I allowed part of the
defendant’s motion to strike portions of Ms. Ramnaraine’s affidavit and annexed
report, which was co-written with Dr. Shaul, for reasons given on September 11,
2024. My endorsement provided in part as follows:
[17]          
Ms. Ramnaraine testified that she worked with Ms. Castro on issues of
depression and anxiety. She administered tests to Ms. Castro, which she agreed
were based on Ms. Castro’s self-reports and had a self-rating tool. No validity
testing was incorporated.
[18]          
After the first 12 sessions, Ms. Ramnaraine and Dr. Shaul rerecommended
that Ms. Castro be provided with 10 additional sessions, and 10 sessions were
approved. However, Ms. Castro attended for only two further sessions, because
her accident benefits claim was settled. Once she received the funds, she did
not continue to attend counselling.
[19]          
Ms. Castro acknowledged that in order to be accepted into an ECE
assistant program in the fall of 2019, she had to have a doctor complete a
pre-admission medical report. On September 10, 2019, Dr. Goldberger, a
physician at the clinic where her family doctor worked, filled out the form as
follows:
[20]          
Ms. Castro testified that she provided Dr. Goldberger with the answers
in the checklist.
[21]          
Ms. Castro first saw Dr.  Rotundo, her current family physician, in
February 2020, although he did not become her regular family physician until
May 2021. Dr. Rotundo practices in a clinic with numerous other doctors and Ms.
Castro was treated by several of them. In February 2020, Dr. Rotundo continued
to prescribe Trintellix and extra strength Tylenol.  Ms. Castro continued to
complain of neck pain, low back pain, and tingling in her shoulders back and
leg.
[22]          
In February 2020, Dr. Rotundo also completed a medical certificate for
employment insurance sickness benefits, stating that Ms. Castro was off work
for medical reasons from August 23, 2019, and would be incapable of working
until August of 2020.
[23]          
Dr. Rotundo’s evidence is that Ms. Castro saw him for various
pain-related complaints, including back and neck pain, tingling, shoulder pain,
muscle pain, foot and ankle pain, and anxiety and depression between 2020 and
2024. She was diagnosed several times with musculoskeletal strain and
prescribed rest, physiotherapy, and analgesics. Dr. Rotundo did not agree with
the suggestion put to him in cross-examination that Ms. Castro was a patient
who thought there was something wrong, but nothing could be found. He felt she
had complex issues that they sorted through. Dr.
Rotundo agreed that as a family doctor, he generally accepts what his patient
tells him as true. He acknowledged the inconsistency between his form
seeking EI sickness benefits and Dr. Goldberger’s certificate of fitness for
the ECE assistant program, and acknowledged that the accuracy of the forms
depends on what the patient’s truthfulness.
[24]          
Dr. Rotundo was not aware of Ms. Castro’s attendance at St. Michael’s
Hospital for back pain five days before the accident.
[25]          
As stated, Ms. Castro’s family physicians arranged various tests,
including MRIs and X-rays, and referred her to specialists. Ms. Castro saw Dr.
Maria, a neurologist, in March 2021 for ongoing numbness and weakness in her
shoulders. Dr. Maria had nerve conduction tests performed. He ruled out carpal
tunnel syndrome and multiple sclerosis and advised that the studies did not
explain her symptoms.
[26]          
In May 2021 Ms. Castro attended at Sunnybrook complaining of headaches
and dizziness, after a garbage can fell on her nose.
[27]          
In 2021, Ms. Castro describes back pain, a fall on the stairs in the
subway causing ankle problems, issues with her jaw that were worsening, and a
December 2021 visit to Sunnybrook for headaches, jaw pain, and dizziness. She
acknowledged in cross-examination that the December 2021 visit and complaints
were not about the accident.
[28]          
Ms. Castro described that by the end of 2022, her situation continued to
deteriorate. She acknowledged that after the fall in the subway, she had more
pain in her legs.
[29]          
For reasons unrelated to the accident, Ms. Castro became depressed in
2023. She later returned to her family doctor complaining of pain in her back
and left foot.
[30]          
Several litigation experts testified.
[31]          
Dr. Chan is an orthopedic surgeon retained as a litigation expert by Ms.
Castro. His practice includes general assessments of musculoskeletal
conditions. He acknowledged that his major area of practice is hip and knee
replacements.  Dr. Chan interviewed and examined Ms. Castro in June 2021. Ms.
Castro advised him she had numbness and tingling in her arms, especially on her
right side. She also had intermittent neck pain, and low back pain that
radiated to her legs. Ms. Castro informed Dr. Chan she could only walk for
about 500 metres and could tolerate sitting for about ten minutes.
[32]          
Based on Dr. Chan’s interview and examination, he expressed the opinion
that as a direct result of the motor vehicle accident of November 28, 2018, Ms.
Castro suffered myofascial injuries to her neck, shoulder girdles and lower
back. She presented with ongoing soft tissue symptoms and complaints of
numbness. He opined that she had entered a chronic pain state, and the
prognosis was poor and unfavorable. He opined that at the time he saw her,
permanency had not been established. He stated he would be happy to see her
again but never did.
[33]          
In cross-examination Dr. Chan agreed that there was no objective sensory
loss to account for Ms. Castro’s nerve symptoms, that he did not have the opportunity
to reassess her after the nerve conduction studies, and that he did not know
those results were normal. Dr. Chan agreed that he accepted her complaints of
pain as genuine. He acknowledged that Ms. Castro did not tell him about the
incident that had occurred five days before the car accident when she went to
St. Michael’s Hospital emergency department for back pain, or the medications
she received then. Nor did she tell him about the October 19, 2019, visit to
the TGH emergency room after lifting a heavy box.
[34]          
The defence called Dr. Larouche as its litigation expert. Dr. Larouche
is an orthopedic surgeon who practices in the management of spinal injuries and
pain arising from such injuries. He interviewed and examined Ms. Castro on May
1, 2022. His opinion was that the musculoskeletal
injuries sustained from the November 28, 2018, accident were relatively minor,
would not warrant a significant impairment rating under the American Medical
Association Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, and would not be
expected to cause disability. Dr. Larouche’s opinion was that Ms. Castro’s
prognosis is excellent and her injuries should not interfere with her
pre-accident job duties or non-occupational activities.
[35]          
In Dr. Larouche’s opinion, Ms. Castro’s accident-related diagnoses had
resolved. Her non-accident-related diagnosis of degenerative changes in her
lumbar spine, in keeping with age-related changes, were not aggravated by the
accident. Nor did the accident aggravate her pre-accident low back pain with
subjective reporting of left foot numbness that was documented five days prior
to the accident. Her jaw and neurological symptoms are not causally
attributable to the November 28, 2018 event.
[36]          
Dr. Pilowski is a clinical and rehabilitation psychologist. She assessed
Ms. Castro on June 17, 2021, and prepared a psychological assessment report
dated July 14, 2021. Dr. Pilowski administered several tests and diagnosed Ms.
Castro with major depressive disorder, PTSD with vehicular and pedestrian
anxiety, and somatic symptom disorder with predominant pain. It was her opinion
that Ms. Castro was experiencing “ongoing and severe psychological distress
over the great losses and restrictions that are, on a balance of opportunities
(sic), the consequence of her involvement in the motor vehicle accident of
November 28, 2018.” She opined that long-term treatment was reasonable and
necessary, and Ms. Castro would benefit from chronic pain management treatment.
Dr. Pilowski opined that Ms. Castro’s prognosis was poor.
[37]          
Dr. Pilowski agreed that 6 of the 8 tests she administered to Ms. Castro
were largely subjective.
[38]          
As can be seen, this is a claim about soft tissue injuries and mental
health issues, aside from her jaw complaint which I will address first. Ms.
Castro has the burden of proving, on a balance of probabilities, that she
sustained these injuries, and that they were caused or aggravated, on the
“but-for” test, by the car accident.
[39]          
There is no evidence in the record, and no opinion evidence, connecting
Ms. Castro’s jaw pain to the accident. Her medical records indicate that she
had complained about these issues prior to the accident. I find she has not demonstrated
on a balance of probabilities that this injury was caused or contributed to by the
accident.
[40]          
Ms. Castro’s remaining complaints involve soft tissue injuries and complaints
of pain, anxiety, and depression. Such injuries and conditions are often real,
and serious. The absence of objective data makes them no less real and no less
serious. However, where there are no objective data, the issue of credibility
is of particular importance: Djermanovic v. Mckenzie, 2014 ONSC 1335 at
para. 40.
[41]          
Dr. Rotundo, Dr. Chan, Dr. Maria, Ms. Ramnaraine, and Dr. Pilowski all
relied to a significant degree on Ms. Castro’s self-reports in coming to their
assessments, conclusions, opinions, and treatment recommendations.  Unfortunately,
I find that Ms. Castro is not a credible witness for the following reasons.
[42]          
I did not find many of her answers to be forthright. For example, she
did not agree with basic questions on cross-examination, such as that she had
been seen at a hospital for back pain five days before the accident. When
confronted with the hospital records in the face of her denial, she explained
that she had said “no” because she thought it had been 10 days prior. She
disagreed with medical records that indicate she has had jaw pain since 2017 on
and off, and insisted that the jaw pain only started after the accident. She
claimed to always follow doctor’s recommendations, but ultimately conceded not
doing so with respect to the Trintellix prescriptions and the counselling
recommendations.
[43]          
Of great concern is that Ms. Castro revealed herself to be willing to
say whatever was necessary to help her in any particular situation.
[44]          
First, she was willing to advise a physician, Dr. Goldberger, that she
was fit and capable, in order to be admitted to the ECE program she wished to
attend. On the basis of her statements, Dr. Goldberger completed the answers on
the form as set out in paragraph 19 above. At the same time, Ms. Castro
collected EI sickness benefits by telling Service Canada she was too unwell to
work. She had Dr. Rotundo complete a form seeking further sickness benefits from
EI in February 2020, while she was engaged in the ECE assistant program for
which she had to affirm her health. I find that Ms. Castro is willing to over-
or under-state her symptoms to achieve whatever her immediate goals are.
[45]          
In addition, as will be explained below, Ms. Castro asked her employer
to under-report her income so she could obtain a child tax subsidy to which she
would not be entitled if her true income were known.
[46]          
Further, Ms. Castro did not provide complete information to the
physician witnesses. For example, she failed to tell Dr. Chan and Dr. Maria
about her attendances at St. Michael’s Hospital and TGH for back pain from
other incidents.
[47]          
In sum, I do not accept Ms. Castro’s evidence about her symptoms. I find
that she exaggerated her symptoms to Dr. Rotundo, Dr. Chan, Dr. Pilowski, Ms. Ramnarine,
and Dr. Maria. I find that she is willing to say whatever is necessary to
support her goals.
[48]          
All of Ms. Castro’s experts, both participant and litigation experts,
relied to a large extent on Ms. Castro’s self-reports.  Dr. Maria, for example,
indicated that he accepted her statements “at face value”. Dr. Rotundo agreed
that as a family doctor, he generally accepts what his patient tells him as
true.  Dr. Pilowski agreed that six of eight tests were based on self-reports,
although she noted she saw no signs of malingering in the two tests that look
for a malingering response. Ms. Ramnaraine’s administered tests were all based
on self-reports. Ms. Paolini testified that she believes her clients, although
she also looks at other indicators and diagnoses in the file.
[49]          
I give little weight to these witness’s evidence because they were based
to a very significant degree on information from Ms. Castro that I have
rejected as not credible. I therefore do not accept their opinions and I find
that Ms. Castro has not discharged her burden of proving that she has sustained
non-pecuniary losses.
[50]          
I reach this conclusion without the necessity of relying on Dr.
Larouche’s evidence. Having said that, I found Dr. Larouche to be credible and
found his opinion to attract more weight than did the opinions of the
plaintiff’s experts. This is because his opinion was based on a much more comprehensive
review of Ms. Castro’s contemporaneous medical records than were the other witness’s
evidence. He had the St. Michael’s and TGH records available to him. Although
plaintiff’s counsel criticized Dr. Larouche for not referring to Dr. Chan’s or
Ms. Paolini’s reports in his opinion, I accept Dr. Larouche’s explanation that
they were less helpful than contemporaneous treatment notes, and he did not
find them relevant to his assessment. Dr. Larouche acknowledged that patients
may suffer from chronic pain without there being any objective findings. However,
his opinion was that Ms. Castro’s impairments were not significant and should
not interfere with her job duties or non-occupational duties. He testified in a
straightforward manner and explained the reasons for his findings in a thorough
and reasoned way. The bases for his opinions were a thorough review of the
records and his own examination. His conclusions are also consistent with the
evidence about Ms. Castro’s employment and educational activities, which I will
discuss below. I accept his conclusions.
[51]          
 I find that Ms. Castro has not discharged her burden of proving on a
balance of probabilities that the accident caused or aggravated the injuries of
which she complains. I find she has not proven an entitlement to general
damages.
[52]          
Ms. Castro was employed as a caregiver at the time of the accident.
Following the accident, she took five days off and testified that she attempted
to return to work on modified duties. In cross-examination, she agreed that
after the accident, she still took the children she cared for to daycare,
sometimes dressed them, and prepared meals and snacks for them. Ms. Castro
continued to work for the same family until August of 2019, and swore in her
affidavit that she stopped due to pain and ongoing mental issues. In
cross-examination when asked why she left that job, she stated that she planned
to go to school for her ECE certificate.
[53]          
 Indeed, when Ms. Castro left that employment full-time, she went back
to school and enrolled in an ECE assistant course at Anderson college. That
course involved two six-week long practicums, where she worked eight hours per
day with children who were three to four years old. It was the course for which
she had to provide medical evidence of fitness, as referred to in paragraphs 19
and 20 above. Ms. Castro also continued to work some weekend days for her now
former employer.
[54]          
I pause to note that Ms. Castro was enrolled in the ECE assistant
program at the time she asked Dr. Rotundo to complete her form for Service
Canada indicating she could not work due to illness. While Ms. Castro advised
that she does not think the EI benefits were approved, she acknowledged submitting
the form. She also acknowledged receiving EI sick benefits from August 2019
until December 2019, while she was in the ECE program.
[55]          
Ms. Castro completed the ECE assistant course in November 2020, after
which she worked as a caregiver for a different family. There, she cared for a
young child, taking her to and engaging in activities with her, picked up the
other children from daycare, preparing simple meals, tidying up, taking out the
garbage and recycling, and doing the laundry. This employment lasted from January
2021 until September 2021 when the family’s youngest child was sent to daycare
and Ms. Castro’s services were no longer needed.
[56]          
 At this point, Ms. Castro attended CDI college until March of 2023 and
received a diploma in Addictions Recovery Support for Youth and Families. Ms.
Castro acknowledged excelling in this program, which required a 300-hour
community placement.
[57]          
After receiving that diploma, she started working at a nonprofit
organization called VHA, where she provided healthcare and support services.
She worked there from September 2023 until April 2024. Although she was hired
on a full-time basis, she did not work close to full-time hours. It was “on
call” work. Ms. Castro states that the most she ever worked was 12 hours per
week and she resigned because her niece was no longer able to help her with
driving her children to and from daycare, so she had to do the driving, and
this interfered with her job hours at VHA.
[58]          
In terms of her employment income, Ms. Castro swore in her affidavit that
she was earning $790.00 for 40 hours of work per week from her caregiving job at
the time of the accident. In fact, the payroll records indicate that starting
in June 2018, several months before the accident. Ms. Castro was earning $420.00
per week. She also testified that she received a raise after the accident. Ms.
Castro then testified that she earned some of her money “under the table”. She
asked her employer to lower the declared income so that Ms. Castro could still
be eligible for her child-care fee subsidy.
[59]          
Ms. Castro’s tax returns indicate that she earned more in 2021 than she
had before the accident. In 2020 she earned somewhat less but received a
substantial amount in social assistance while in school.
[60]          
Ms. Castro argues that I should assume she would have earned $35,000 per
year, and should subtract her reported income from this figure to determine her
loss. Counsel argued that, even though Ms. Castro earned cash income that was
unreported, I should base employment loss calculations on her reported income
figures and should ignore her cash income. The basis for this submission was
unclear.
[61]          
Dr. Chan and Dr. Pilowski both opined that Ms. Castro was competitively
disadvantaged in her chosen field of work and that she has not been able to
return to the full aspect of her normal activities of daily living. They opined
that this represented a serious impairment of an important physical function.
[62]          
I do not accept that Ms. Castro has lost income or lost a competitive
advantage from the accident.
[63]          
Ms. Castro was fully able to participate in activities she wished to
engage in. She went back to work as a caregiver after the accident. She left
that job because she wanted to go back to school, in a program that required
her to be physically fit. She then took another job as a caregiver. That job
ended because the child went to daycare, not because Ms. Castro was unable to
perform the required tasks. Ms. Castro then enrolled in another program that
involved a practicum, at which she excelled. She found a part-time job
following the program but left it because the hours were not convenient.
[64]          
I reject any suggestion that Ms. Castro resumed these activities despite
her ongoing pain. I find that she continued with her plans unaffected by the
accident.
[65]          
I do not find Ms. Castro has demonstrated, on a balance of
probabilities, that she has suffered past loss of income from the accident. Nor
do I find that she has demonstrated there is real and
substantial possibility or risk that she will suffer future loss of income
from the accident.
[66]          
Ms. Castro states that before the accident, she was an active individual,
but that since the accident she no longer goes for long walks, rarely sees
friends, and does not participate as much in church because she says she is
unable to kneel, clap and lift her arms. When confronted with a video of her
waving her arms and swaying side to side in church, she said she did her best,
but was struggling. She also testified that she drives but feels nervous and is
hypervigilant.
[67]          
With respect to housekeeping, Ms. Castro states that she was mainly
responsible for housekeeping before the accident but since then, her family has
taken over most of the tasks. In cross-examination, she agreed that after the
accident, when she went back to work a few days later, she drove her children
to daycare and picked them up, took care of them in the evening, and continued
to do some meal preparation at home. When her husband was ill for a period, she
performed all the housework.
[68]          
Ms. Castro called Ms. Paolini, an occupational therapist who is in the
process of becoming a certified life care planner. Future cost of care planning
is within the scope of practice of an occupational therapist. Certification as
a life care planner is recommended, but not required.
[69]          
Ms. Paolini conducted a telephone interview and observed and assessed
Ms. Castro in her home in May 2021. Ms. Paolini had Ms. Castro perform grip
strength tests, as well as functional tests. Ms. Paolini noted that Ms. Castro
had neuropathy in her hands and had to take breaks. She struggled to maintain
her level of activity. Ms. Paolini assessed Ms. Castro’s range of motion as
within normal limits. She noted some swelling in her right hand and some
restrictions in squatting, reaching, and lifting. She relied on Ms. Castro’s
self-report that she had pain and numbness. She performed other screens about
Ms. Castro’s mood and anxiety level, also based on Ms. Castro’s self-report.
Ms. Castro completed forms indicating she had severe symptoms.
[70]          
Ms. Paolini concluded that Ms. Castro has the following weekly attendant
care needs:  80 minutes for hair styling, 420 minutes for daily preparation of
dinner, 210 minutes for daily assistance for emotional support and comfort, 10
minutes for assistance and monitoring for co- ordination of appointments and 15
minutes for support supervision with medication management. The total attendant
care assistance recommended was 11.91 hours per week or 51.78 hours per month.
[71]          
Ms. Paolini assessed Ms. Castro’s weekly housekeeping and home
maintenance needs as: 60 minutes for assistance with dishwashing for
larger/heavier loads, 30 minutes for assistance with performing a more thorough
floor cleaning of the home including moving furniture, 60 minutes for
assistance in performing large loads of family laundry throughout the week, 15
minutes for performing thorough cleaning of the bathroom, 30 minutes for
assistance in performing thorough kitchen cleaning, 20 minutes of assistance
with performing large shopping trips. The total housekeeping and home
maintenance assistance recommended was 3.58 hours per week or 15.57 hours per
month.
[72]          
In addition, Ms. Paolini recommended one-time cost of a multidisciplinary
chronic pain program, lifetime of physiotherapy, chiropractic care, acupuncture
and massage therapy treatments, lifetime support for psychological treatment, a
neuropsychological assessment to investigate Ms. Castro's cognitive deficits,
prescription medications until the age of 65 when she would quality for the
Ontario Drug Benefit program, occupational therapy treatment for a year,
vocational rehabilitation and transportation costs.
[73]          
Ms. Paolini concluded that Ms. Castro requires funding for the following
one-time and recurring costs: physical and rehabilitation treatment fixed term
costs in the amount of $16,741.57 and the annual recurring costs until the end
of life in the amount of $6,968.00; psychological treatment costs up to one
year in the total amount of $6,140.64; one-time cost of a neuropsychologist assessment
in the amount of $6,000.00; pharmaceutical treatment costs for up to age 65 in
the total amount of $37,113.00; attendant care annual and lifetime recurring
cost in the amount of $23,611.68; assistive devices in the total lifetime
amount of $6,650.00; occupational therapy evaluation and treatment up to one
year in the total amount of $15,200.00; job site analysis and job coaching
sessions in total amount of $6,000.00; and lifetime transportation costs in the
amount of $2,206.00.
[74]          
I found Ms. Paolini to be a credible witness. She was forthright and
careful in her responses. I do not discount her evidence because she has not yet
attained her certification. However, Ms. Paolini’s evidence suffers from the
same weakness as that of the other experts called on behalf of Ms. Castro. The
basis of her opinion was, to a very significant extent, Ms. Castro’s self-described
situation and observation of Ms. Castro when Ms. Castro knew the results would
be important for her litigation. While there were a few objective elements to
her testing, such as the grip strength test (although Dr. Larouche considers
this test to be less than objective), most of the information on which Ms.
Paolini based her opinion came from Ms. Castro.
[75]          
Dr. Pilowski also expressed the view that Ms. Castro was restricted from
her prior capacities with housekeeping and home maintenance activities, based
on her discussions with Ms. Castro.
[76]          
I have found that Ms. Castro is not a credible witness. I have found
that she has a history of saying or doing whatever is needed in the moment to
achieve her ends. I therefore do not give weight to Ms. Paolini’s and Dr.
Pilowski’s evidence, as the evidence is based on information I do not accept.
[77]          
I find that Ms. Castro has not demonstrated on a balance of
probabilities that she has suffered a loss of past housekeeping. I find that
she has not demonstrated that there is a real and substantial possibility or
risk that she will suffer future loss of housekeeping, or that she requires
future costs for care, as a result of the accident.
[78]          
The defendant brought a motion seeking a declaration that Ms. Castro did
not sustain permanent serious disfigurements or permanent serious impairments
of an important physical, mental or psychological function within the meaning
of the Insurance Act, and a declaration that she is not entitled to
damages for non-pecuniary loss and health care expenses.
[79]          
The governing provision of the Insurance Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.I.8
provides as follows:
[80]          
In order to meet the definition of “permanent serious impairment of an
important physical, mental or psychological function” the impairment must meet
all of the criteria set out in s. 4.2(1)(2) and (3) of O.Reg. 461/96 as
amended. Section 4.3 of the regulation outlines the minimum evidence the
plaintiff shall adduce to establish the requisite impairment. The plaintiff
must provide evidence of a qualified physician or physicians that addresses
specific issues set out in s. 4.3.
[81]          
The burden of proof is on the plaintiff to establish that her
impairments meet the statutory exception set out in section 267.5(5)(b) of the Insurance
Act: Meyer v. Bright (1993), 1993 CanLII 3389 (ON CA), 15 O.R. (3d) 129 (C.A.), at para. 50.
[82]          
The trial judge must first answer whether the injured person sustained a
permanent impairment of a physical, mental, or psychological function? If yes,
the second question is whether the bodily function that is permanently impaired
important? If yes, is the impairment of the important function serious? Ahmed
v. Challenger, [2000] O.J. No.
4188, 100 A.C.W.S. (3d) 1065 at para. 17.
[83]          
Each element of the threshold test incorporates a causation element: Parmar
v. Beach, 2017 ONSC 7810 at para.14. The accident must be a cause, but does
not have to be the sole cause, of the impairment. Causation may be indirect.
The accident must be a necessary factor to bring about the injury: Clements
v. Clements, 2012 SCC 32 para. 8. Scientific evidence of causation is not
required.
[84]          
“Permanent” has been interpreted as meaning “indefinite”, as opposed to
“forever”: Parmar v. Beach, at para. 12. The symptoms may be
intermittent: Noori v. Liu, 2020 ONSC 3049 at para. 101. Chronic pain
has been found to be permanent for purposes of a threshold motion: Hartwick
v. Simswer, 2004 CANLII 34512 (ONSC) at para. 87.
[85]          
The importance of a function is related to whether the function is
necessary to perform the essential task of a person’s employment, care for his
wellbeing, or activities of daily living. Importance is subjective: Mann v.
Jefferson, 2019 ONSC 1107 at para. 151.
[86]          
To be serious, the impairment must substantially interfere with
employment, despite accommodation, or activities of daily leaving. It is also a
subjective assessment: Mamado v. Fridson, 2016 ONSC 4080 at para. 24.
The totality of circumstances and cumulative effect should be considered: Arteaga
v. Poirier, 2016 ONSC 3712 at para. 20. Ongoing and debilitating pain even
in the absence of objective findings by medical experts, will constitute
serious impairment : Hartwick at para. 89.
[87]          
Ms. Castro returned to the essential tasks of her usual employment. She
left her employment to pursue other opportunities, at least the first of which
required her to be physically fit. She was able to perform the essential tasks
of her employment. She continued to attend church services and participate. The
video evidence demonstrates that she was able to lift and hold her arm to the
same degree as were the other members of her church singing group.
[88]          
I find that Ms. Castro has not established that her impairments meet the
statutory exceptions. For the reasons above, I have not accepted Ms. Castro’s
evidence about her injuries. I have therefore found the medical evidence she
has adduced to be unworthy of weight, given that it is based largely on her statements.
I have found that Ms. Castro did not prove that she suffered injuries caused by
the accident.
[89]          
Further, I note that Dr. Chan was not prepared to state the impairment
was permanent. Dr. Pilowski is not a physician. Whether a psychologist can provide
the required evidence under s. 4.3 of the regulation, particularly where the
opposing party objects, is unclear: Mundinger v. Ashton, 2019 ONSC 7161
at para. 72; Rodrigues v.
Purtill (2019) ONCA 740 at paras. 9-13;
Sanson v. Paterson, 2022 ONSC 2972 at para. 443. Even if I accept that
Dr. Pilowksi’s opinion satisfies the requirements of s. 4.3, I have found that her
opinion is not worthy of weight, as it is based extensively on Ms. Castro’s
reports to her. I have found Ms. Castro’s evidence about her injuries not
credible. I therefore do not accept Dr. Pilowski’s conclusion that Ms. Castro
sustained a permanent and serious impairment of an important mental and
psychological function, secondary to the motor vehicle accident of November 28,
2018.
[90]          
I find that Ms. Castro has not established that she has impairments that
were caused by the accident; I find that she has not shown the impairments she
does have are permanent, in the sense meant by the regulation as defined above;
I find that she has not shown that important functions are impaired.
[91]          
Ordinarily the trial judge is considered to be in the best position to
quantify the plaintiff’s damages, even when the judge finds the plaintiff has
not met the statutory threshold. Given that I have determined that I do not
accept Ms. Castro’s, and therefore the experts’, evidence about her
impairments, I do not assess damages in the alternative.
[92]          
The action is dismissed.
[93]          
The parties are encouraged to agree on costs of the trial. Should they
be unable to do so, the defendant may provide costs submissions of no more than
five pages double spaced, along with a bill of costs and any offers to settle,
within 7 days. The plaintiff shall have 7 days to respond, with the same page
limits. There shall be no reply submissions without leave. These submissions
may be sent to my judicial assistant at linda.bunoza@ontario.ca.