[1]              
Mr. Daniel Paquin was declared a dangerous offender over
thirty years ago and is now serving his sentence at Bath Institution. In
January of this year, he filed a habeas corpus application seeking
various forms of relief, including relief under ss. 9 and 12 of the Charter.
Since filing his application, Mr. Paquin has advised by letter that he is not
relying on some of the grounds set out in his application.
[2]              
The Attorney General of Canada (“the AGC”) brings a
motion seeking to have Mr. Paquin’s habeas corpus application dismissed
because the application requests relief that does not involve a deprivation of
liberty. The law is clear that where there is no deprivation of liberty
involved, the remedy of habeas corpus does not apply. The AGC says there
is no factual or legal basis to grant any of the orders sought by Mr. Paquin
and his application is therefore “frivolous” or “vexatious” at law.
[3]              
The motion to dismiss the habeas corpus
application was heard a few weeks ago. Submissions were made on the motion by
counsel for the AGC and Mr. Paquin. Following the hearing, my decision was
reserved so that I might review some of the materials filed on the date of the
hearing.
[4]              
These are my reasons and conclusion on the motion to
dismiss brought by the AGC.
[5]              
In his submissions to the court, and by letter to
counsel for the AGC in response to the motion to dismiss, Mr. Paquin raised a
number of concerns about how his sentence was determined (and the evidence used
to do that), and how it has been administered.
[6]              
In oral submissions, Mr. Paquin advised the court that
he had appealed his sentence, but his appeal was denied. He further advised
that he was a survivor of a residential school.
[7]              
Mr. Paquin’s concerns about his sentence and its
administration are based on a number of circumstances, not all of which will be
reviewed here. In his oral submissions, he made the following assertions:
[8]              
Mr. Paquin relies on the case of R. v. Warren, 2024 ONSC 2785. He
says it applies to this case because it also involved an inmate who was denied
appropriate treatment. He says that if habeas corpus fits the
circumstances of another prisoner, why not him? He asks the court not to let
the AGC cloud or obstruct my decision-making. He is asking the court to ensure that
“things are done properly” by CSC, and for his human rights to be respected.
[9]              
Mr. Paquin’s position is summed up in this portion of his letter to the
court dated August 7, 2024, at p. 3:
[10]          
The AGC relies on Rule 6.11(2) of the Rules of
Criminal Procedure, which permits a judge to dismiss an application where
it is “frivolous” or “vexatious”. The AGC argues that Mr. Paquin’s application
meets the definition of “frivolous” because Mr. Paquin is incorrectly trying to
use the remedy of habeas corpus to address grievances unrelated to what
the remedy of habeas corpus is permitted to do at law.
[11]          
The AGC argues that Mr. Paquin’s complaints about
tainted evidence used in his sentencing hearing were issues to be addressed in
an appeal from his sentence. His complaints about living with other sex
offenders cannot be addressed by habeas corpus. Finally, counsel argues
that the case relied upon by Mr. Paquin does not apply to his circumstances.
[12]          
A judge may dismiss an application pursuant to subrule
6.11(2) of the Rules of Criminal Procedure where she finds that: 1) the
application is frivolous or vexatious; and 2) the application may be determined
without a full hearing.
[13]          
Case law has determined that an application may be
found “frivolous” where it has no reasonable prospect of success, even assuming
the applicant establishes the allegations being made.
[14]          
On an application for habeas corpus, the
applicant must establish a deprivation of their liberty and raise a
legitimate ground upon which to question the legality of the deprivation. In
that event, the respondent must show that the deprivation of liberty was
lawful.
[15]          
Various courts have considered the types of liberty
deprivation within penitentiaries that are capable of review using the remedy
of habeas corpus. The Supreme Court has held that in this context, there
are three significant deprivations of liberty: the initial deprivation of
liberty, a substantial change in conditions amounting to a further deprivation
of liberty and a continued deprivation of liberty. A continuation of an
initially valid deprivation of liberty can be challenged if it becomes unlawful:
Dumas v. Lecler Institute, 1986 CanLII 38 (SCC), [1986] 2 S.C.R. 459, at para. 11. This might
occur, for instance, where an inmate who has achieved the status of parolee
continues to be detained.
[16]          
Habeas corpus may not be
used to challenge all decisions relating to an inmate’s sentence. For
instance, it may not be used to challenge a decision not granting parole: Dumas,
at para. 12.
[17]          
Mr. Paquin’s Notice of Application frames the nature of
his application as a review of the lawfulness of the continuation of his
sentence (see para. 3 of the Notice of Application). There is no suggestion he
has been deprived of liberty because of a security classification or transfer
decision. As noted by the AGC, his application appears to primarily pertain to
his inadmissibility for parole.
[18]          
I agree with the AGC that inadmissibility for parole is
not an unlawful continued detention that can be challenged by way of a habeas
corpus application.
[19]          
Mr. Paquin’s arguments on the motion also appear to
raise issues with how his designation as a dangerous offender was arrived at. Habeas
corpus is not the correct tool to use in this instance. According to his
oral comments, Mr. Paquin did use the correct tool of an appeal of his sentence
within a year of its imposition. I have no power on a habeas corpus
application to revisit the issues that are properly dealt with by way of an
appeal.
[20]          
As for Mr. Paquin’s reliance on Warren, that
case did not involve a habeas corpus application.  The evidentiary record in
that case was also quite different than in this one. Given the evidence before
me, and the nature of the challenge posed by Mr. Paquin, I cannot rely upon Warren
to provide Mr. Paquin with the same remedy obtained by Mr. Warren in that case
(e.g. an order that notwithstanding his designation as a dangerous offender who
should serve an indeterminate sentence, he should be transferred to a
provincial psychiatric hospital).
[21]          
I am persuaded by the AGC that Mr. Paquin’s application
does not show any ground for the order sought as it fails to identify a
deprivation of liberty that is properly reviewable by using the remedy of habeas
corpus. Having made this finding, I conclude that the application is
“frivolous”, since it has no reasonable chance of success. I also find that the
issues may be determined without a hearing. Accordingly, the AGC has satisfied
me that the test under subrule 6.11(2) of the Rules of Criminal Procedure
is met, and Mr. Paquin’s habeas corpus application must accordingly be
dismissed.
[22]          
For these reasons, the motion brought by the AGC is
granted, and the habeas corpus application brought by Mr. Paquin is
dismissed.
[23]          
While I am sympathetic to Mr. Paquin’s concerns, and I
thank him for his courtesy toward the court and counsel during the hearing, I
cannot allow his habeas corpus application to continue given the
findings I have made on this motion.
[24]          
However, I encourage Mr. Paquin to seek legal
assistance in determining whether any remedy is available at this time to address
his concerns about his sentencing hearing and his continued detention. Mr.
Paquin seems likely to benefit from advice on how to proceed with future parole
hearings as well, and I encourage him to seek that advice.