[1]         
The
Plaintiff, RiverRock Mortgage Investment Corporation (“RiverRock”) brings this
motion for summary judgment relating to a mortgage registered against 2031
Eckland Court in Mississauga, Ontario (“the Property”) that went into default
on October 23, 2023. The Defendant mortgagors, Amadeus Blazys and Luisa Blazys,
reside at the property. RiverRock also requests an order for possession and for
leave to issue a Writ of Possession.
[2]         
RiverRock
argues that there is no genuine issue for trial as this is a simple mortgage
enforcement matter. The Blazys Defendants argue that the action ought to be
dismissed as RiverRock breached the terms of the Mortgages Act, R.S.O.
1990, c. M.40, and the Interest Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-15.
[3]         
For
the reasons that follow, I find that there is no genuine issue requiring a
trial of this action. RiverRock is granted judgment against the Defendants in
the amount of $1,529,444.92 as of November 15, 2024, using the mortgage loan
interest rate of 9.99% per annum.
[4]         
The
parties entered into a one-year mortgage for $1,360,000 on September 23, 2021.
The mortgage had an interest rate of 6.99% per annum.
[5]         
The
mortgage was renewed on September 23, 2022, for a one-year period at a rate of
8.75% per annum. The mortgage was again renewed on September 23, 2023, for a
one-year period, with an interest rate of 9.99% per annum. The agreement states
that the interest-only mortgage payments of $11,322 were owed each month. The
Defendants also agreed to pay a renewal fee of $14,750, which was to be paid in
equal monthly payments of $1,341.
[6]         
RiverRock
provides a copy of “Additional Provisions” included in the mortgage, including
the following:
[7]         
The
mortgage also provides that RiverRock may charge under the mortgage, and the mortgagor
agrees to pay, certain fees stated in the Additional Provisions appended to the
mortgage, which total $9,847.20. This total does not include a reinvestment
fee, which was originally claimed by RiverRock but later withdrawn at the
hearing of the motion.
[8]         
RiverRock
provides a copy of the Standard Charge Terms attached to the mortgage loan,
which states at paragraph 6 that RiverRock is entitled to ongoing interest
after the date of maturity, and after the time of default.
[9]         
RiverRock
provides a copy of the demand letter sent to the Defendants on December 12,
2023. It also provides confirmation that as of December 13, 2023, there were
tax arrears outstanding against the Property totaling $7,150.20.  RiverRock
provides affidavit evidence that it has now paid the realty taxes on behalf of
the Defendants.
[10]      
RiverRock
also provides affidavit evidence that it received a notice of cancelation of
property insurance for the Property from Wawanesa Insurance dated January 16,
2024, and that this failure to insure the Property constitutes a further
default under the mortgage.
[11]      
RiverRock
issued a Statement of Claim against the Defendants on January 8, 2024. A Notice
of Sale was issued on January 16, 2024.
[12]      
The
Defendants filed a Statement of Defence on February 16, 2024.
[13]      
The
motion materials were served on the Defendants in March 2024.
[14]      
The
Defendants have not made any mortgage payments since the mortgage went into
default on October 23, 2023. The Defendants do not dispute that the mortgage is
in default, or that that they failed to pay the property taxes.
[15]      
RiverRock
takes the position that the Statement of Defence of the Defendants discloses no
genuine issue for trial, and that it should be granted summary judgment against
the Defendants for the amount owed to it under the mortgage. It states that in
addition to their failure to make the mortgage payments due and owing, the
Defendants have also breached the terms of the mortgage by failing to pay the
property taxes owed, and by failing to pay the property insurance for the
Property. RiverRock submits that these breaches of the mortgage are very
serious, and that none of the breaches have been contested by the Defendants.
[16]      
RiverRock
takes the position that, in addition to a judgment for damages, it should be
granted an order for possession and leave to issue a Writ of Possession
directed to the Sheriff.
[17]      
As the
mortgage is now in arrears, RiverRock asks for the entirety of the mortgage
funds loaned to the Defendants be paid, along with all applicable fees and
costs as per the mortgage contract. RiverRock states that as of August 14,
2024, the Defendants owed $1,541,732.87, with an interest rate of 9.99% per
annum, which was agreed to by the Defendants when they signed the mortgage
renewal.
[18]      
RiverRock
acknowledges that the Statement of Claim against the Defendants was issued in
advance of the Notice of Sale being served on the Defendants, but argues that
the combined effect of s. 31 and s.42 of the Mortgages Act does not
prohibit this action. RiverRock does not dispute that the purpose of the Notice
of Sale is to provide the Defendants with an opportunity to redeem the mortgage
before a Statement of Claim is issued. However, it argues that these sections
only prevent it from obtaining a judgment against the Defendants prior to the
expiry of the notice period under s. 42 of the Mortgages Act. RiverRock
further argues that the Defendants have demonstrated no prejudice that would
cause the Statement of Claim to be dismissed.
[19]      
RiverRock
also takes the position that any deficiencies in the Notice of Sale do not
invalidate the Statement of Claim, as this action is based on the amounts owed
under the mortgage contract, and the evidence presented on this motion, rather
than the accuracy of the amounts listed in the Notice of Sale. It argues that
the fact that the amount claimed in the Notice of Sale is some $3,000 less than
the amount claimed in the Statement of Claim is not material to the issues in
dispute.
[20]      
RiverRock
disputes that the $14,750 renewal fee contained in the mortgage contract
offends s. 8 of the Interest Act, as it is a term of the mortgage that
was agreed to by the Defendants, and not a fine or a penalty. RiverRock further
argues that the Defendants could have gone elsewhere to renew their mortgage,
but instead chose to accept the terms offered by RiverRock. Further, they argue
that the renewal fee is reasonable, as it is just over 1% of the total mortgage
of $1,360,000.
[21]      
Similarly,
RiverRock takes the position that the provision under the mortgage that allows
it to charge three months’ interest totaling $33,144.58 in the event of default
is a contractual agreement made by the Defendants with RiverRock, which is
legally binding on the Defendants.
[22]      
RiverRock
submits that the additional fees triggered with the default of the mortgage do
not offend s. 8 of the Interest Act. It provides affidavit evidence that
for the balance of the charges claimed against the Defendants, the amount
claimed represents an accurate estimate of the value of the time and effort
spent by RiverRock staff to address the issues identified as set out below:
[23]      
The
Defendants did not file a factum despite the requirement to do so under Rule
20.03(1) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194. They
filed an affidavit and a Book of Authorities in support of their position. They
submit that there is a genuine issue in dispute between the parties that
requires a trial.
[24]      
The
Defendants take the position that RiverRock’s Statement of Claim should be
dismissed as a result of RiverRock having violated several sections of the Mortgages
Act, as follows:
[25]      
The
Defendants argue that s. 31(1) of the Mortgages Act cannot be ignored by
lenders, as the purpose of that section is to provide the defaulting mortgagor
with an opportunity to redeem the mortgage. They argue that statutory
provisions are to be followed and not minimized, and rely upon McKenna
Estate v. Marshall (2005), 30 R.P.R. (4th) 222 (Ont. S.C.), in which
Justice Sproat found at para. 11 that the purpose of s. 42 of the Mortgages
Act is to provide the "mortgagor in default with breathing space and
an opportunity to correct the default without having the additional concern or
requirement to retain counsel and prepare a Statement of Defence.”
[26]      
The
Defendants also submit that that Statement of Claim is void because the amount
claimed in the Statement of Claim is some $3,000 more than the amount listed in
the Notice of Sale. They argue that this difference is material, because if the
Defendants had paid the amount claimed, RiverRock would have been unjustly
enriched.
[27]      
The
Defendants also take the position that the amount of interest claimed by
RiverRock is illegal and unenforceable, as it is greater than the stated
interest charges in the mortgage, and therefore violates s. 8(1) of the Interest
Act. They also claim that that RiverRock’s claim for payment of three
months’ interest violates s. 17 of the Mortgages Act, as this provision
for payment of three months’ interest in the Act is intended to benefit the
mortgagor as a grace period in the event of default.
[28]      
The
Defendants also submit that the other claims being advanced by RiverRock are
not legitimate because it has failed to provide proof or evidence that the fees
and/or charges are either a genuine pre-estimate of damages suffered by it, or
the fees and/or charges in question reflect real costs legitimately incurred by
RiverRock for the recovery of the debt in the form of actual administrative
costs or otherwise, contrary to s. 8 of the Interest Act. In oral
submissions, counsel for the Defendants specifically identified that the
difference between the tax default fee of $350 and the tax payment
administration fee of $750 has not adequately been explained by RiverRock, and
that there is a duplication of the tax fee being charged to the Defendants.
[29]      
The
Defendants also argue that the $14,750 renewal fee is unlawful as it is not
clearly outlined in the mortgage contract. They claim in their Statement of
Defence that they did not agree to this renewal fee, and that it is
unenforceable due to s. 8 of the Interest Act, as they claim RiverRock
has not established that it legitimately incurred these costs in recovering its
debt.
[30]      
The
Defendants also dispute the prejudgment and post-judgment interest rate of
9.99% per annum being claimed by RiverRock, as Mr. Blazys states in his
affidavit that he and his wife did not agree to this interest rate, and that it
offends s. 8 of the Interest Act.
[31]       In addition, Mr. Blazys
provides affidavit evidence that he and his wife have hired a real estate
agent, along with a copy of the MLS listing for the Property. The Defendants
submit RiverRock is not entitled to summary judgment, and/or an order for
possession of the Property, and/or an order granting leave to issue a Writ of
Possession for the Property, as such an order would interfere with their
contract with the real estate agent and the sale of the Property to a good
faith purchaser.
[32]       Rule 20.04(2)(a) of the Rules
of Civil Procedure provides that:
[33]      
Rule
20.04(2.1) sets out the powers of the judge hearing the summary judgment
motion:
[34]      
Summary
judgment is available to the parties when the judge is able to reach a fair and
just determination on the merits on a motion for summary judgment. This will be
the case when the process (1) allows the judge to make the necessary findings
of fact, (2) allows the judge to apply the law to the facts, and (3) is a
proportionate, more expeditious and less expensive means to achieve a just result:
Hryniak v. Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 87, at para. 50.
[35]      
The
moving party seeking summary judgment has the burden of proof to establish that
there is no genuine issue for trial. However, “[a] responding party may not
rest on mere allegations or denials of the party’s pleadings, but must set out,
in affidavit material or other evidence, specific facts showing there is a
genuine issue requiring a trial”: Sweda Farms Ltd. v. L.H. Gray & Son
Limited et al., 2013 ONSC 4195, at para. 27.
[36]      
Each
party to a motion for summary judgment has an obligation to "... 'put its
best foot forward' with respect to the existence or non-existence of material
issues to be tried": Ramdial v. Davis (Litigation guardian of),
2015 ONCA 726, 341 O.A.C. 78, at para. 27, citing Papaschase Indian Band No.
136 v. Canada (A.G.), 2008 SCC 14, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 372, at para. 11.
[37]      
There
is no dispute that the Defendants defaulted on the mortgage after it was
renewed, and that no mortgage payments have been made since the default
occurred in October 2023.
[38]      
The
onus therefore shifts to the Defendants to establish a genuine issue for trial
relating to validity of the Statement of Claim, and the amounts claimed
pursuant to the Statement of Claim.
[39]      
There
are no credibility issues that must be determined to decide if the actions of
RiverRock have violated the Mortgages Act or the Interest Act. I
am satisfied that based on the record before me, I am able to find the
necessary facts and apply the relevant legal principles to resolve the issues
raised in the Statement of Claim. I need not resort to the enhanced
fact-finding powers granted pursuant to Rule 20.04(2.1) to fairly and justly
resolve the dispute.
[40]      
As set
out below, I find that the Defendants have failed to provide sufficient
evidence to establish that there is a genuine issue requiring a trial to
determine the validity of the mortgage, or the amounts owed by the Defendants
to RiverRock under the mortgage.
[41]      
There
is no dispute that RiverRock issued a Statement of Claim against the Defendants
on January 8, 2024, and that the Notice of Sale was issued eight days later on
January 16, 2024, contrary to the requirements under the Mortgages Act.
[42]      
Section
42(1) of the Mortgages Act states that a mortgagor may not take further
action or proceed to enforce a mortgage until after the expiry of the time
period during which payment must be made pursuant to the Notice of Sale, unless
an order permitting the same has been obtained from a judge of the Superior
Court.
[43]      
The
purpose of s. 42 of the Mortgages Act is to provide the mortgagor in
default with an opportunity to correct the default without the additional
concern or requirement of having to retain counsel. However, the combined
effect of s. 31 and s. 42 of the Mortgages Act is not that a Statement
of Claim cannot be issued before the notice period has expired, but rather, it
prohibits the enforcement of a judgment for possession of a property until
after the "breathing space" required by s. 42 of the Mortgages Act
has expired: Resco Mortgage Investment Corp v. Kaur, 2024 ONSC 3615,
61 R.P.R. (6th) 310, at para. 106.
[44]       Clearly, the practice of
issuing a Statement of Claim prior to serving a Notice of Sale is contrary to
the Mortgages Act and should not be encouraged. In Resco, Justice
Kurz found that a party’s failure to follow the statutory requirements may be
reflected in the costs awarded. He states at para. 111 in reference to Justice
Sproat’s decision in McKenna Estate:
[45]       The impact of the
Statement of Claim being issued before the notice of Power of Sale was served
was also considered by Justice Reid in New Haven Mortgage Corp. v. Codina,
2022 ONSC 7036, 51 R.P.R. (6th) 47, in which he described this type of
situation as a “technical” problem and found that there was no evidence of
prejudice to the Defendants. He stated at para. 37:
[46]      
There is
no evidence before me of any prejudice suffered by the Defendants as a result
of RiverRock issuing a Statement of Claim against them prior to providing them
with the Notice of Sale. A demand letter was sent by RiverRock to the
Defendants in December 2023. There is no evidence before me as to what efforts
the Defendants made to redeem the mortgage once they were served with the
Statement of Claim and received the Notice of Sale.
[47]      
Similarly,
the Defendants provide no evidence of prejudice that they have suffered as a
result of the amount claimed in the Notice of Sale being some $3,000 less than
the amount claimed in the Statement of Claim.
[48]       The Defendants have failed
to demonstrate prejudice or damages suffered by them as a result of the failure
of RiverRock to properly follow the statutory regime in the Mortgages Act.
RiverRock shall be granted leave Nunc pro Tunc permitting the Statement
of Claim to be issued in advance of expiry of the notice period under the
Notice of Sale. The failure of RiverRock to properly follow the statute will be
considered when costs for this motion are assessed.
[49]       Section 8 of the Interest
Act is legislation that protects mortgagees from abusive lending practices.
It states:
[50]      
Renewal
fees under a mortgage are not a fine or penalty. It is therefore not necessary
under s. 8(1) to prove that the renewal fee represented an actual cost which
the lender incurred in renewing the mortgage. The renewal fee is a contractual
term negotiated between the parties: Resco, at para. 90.
[51]       In Resco, Justice
Kurz found that a renewal fee of 4.5% of the total mortgage was not
improvident. He states at para. 90 of that decision:
[52]      
Although
Mr. Blazys provides affidavit evidence that he and his wife were unaware of the
renewal fee, RiverRock provides a copy of a renewal fee statement dated August
8, 2023, signed by both Mr. and Ms. Blazys, which clearly sets out a renewal
fee of $14,750.
[53]      
As in Resco,
the renewal fee in the present case was negotiated between the parties, as
opposed to a fine or penalty. The renewal fee is a contractual term reached between
the parties separate from any additional fees triggered by a default on the
mortgage. It is not necessary for RiverRock to prove that the renewal fee is an
actual cost which it incurred to renew the original mortgage.
[54]      
I also
note that in the present case the renewal fee of $14,750 on a mortgage of
$1,360,000 is just over 1%, which is significantly less than the fee in Resco.
I do not find the renewal fee to be unreasonable.
[55]       The mortgage agreement
sets out the following provision at page 6 of the “Additional Provisions”
portion of the mortgage document:
[56]      
RiverRock
relies upon the Court of Appeal decision in: Devi Financial Inc. v. Everwood
Place Ltd., 2022 ONCA 104, at paras. 17-19, to support its position that
the three-month interest provision upon default in the mortgage loan is
enforceable. However, the Devi decision did not address s. 8 of the Interest
Act, as it dealt with the extension of a mortgage.
[57]      
The
Supreme Court of Canada is clear that if a term in a mortgage agreement
increases the interest rate on arrears after a default, it contravenes s. 8 of
the Interest Act, as was discussed in Krayzel Corp. v. Equitable
Trust Co., 2016 SCC 18, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 273, at para. 25:
[58]       The Court of Appeal
addressed the situation where default occurs prior to the maturity of a
mortgage, and the mortgagee attempts to collect three months’ interest in
addition to the interest otherwise payable under the loan in Mastercraft
Properties Ltd. v. EL EF Investments Inc. (1993), 1993 CanLII 8545 (ON CA), 14 O.R. (3d) 519 (C.A.).
In finding that this situation would offend s. 8, Justice McKinlay stated at
para. 13:
[59]       The leading Ontario case
on the application of s. 8(1) is P.A.R.C.E.L. Inc. v. Acquaviva, 2015
ONCA 331, 126 O.R. (3d) 108. In that case, Justice Cronk writing for the Court
of Appeal states at para. 51:
[60]       P.A.R.C.E.L. sets out four
prerequisites for the court’s application of s. 8(1) to stop a mortgagee from
charging certain fees or other amounts to a mortgagor, at paras. 52-56:
[61]      
Section
8 is offended if an agreement provides for the payment of interest on all
amounts owed under the mortgage loan in the event of default, in addition to a
three-month interest payment. Justice Cronk confirms at para. 48 of P.A.R.C.E.L.
that in this scenario, the three-month interest penalty generates a higher
interest payment than what is specified under the mortgage loan:
[62]      
In
considering the test set out in P.A.R.C.E.L, I find that the three-month
interest provision in the mortgage contract offends s. 8 of the Interest Act,
and is unenforceable for the following reasons:
[63]      
It
should also be noted that s. 17 of the Mortgages Act does not apply
here.   Section 17 exists as a protection and benefit to mortgagors, in that it
“operates as a shield to the mortgagor to allow for payment of arrears without
imposition of three months' interest when three months' notice is provided":
58 Cardill Inc. v. Rathcliffe Holdings Limited, 2017 ONSC 6828, 84
R.P.R. (5th) 44, at para. 20, aff’d 2018 ONCA 672, 93 R.P.R. (5th) 1, at para.
6. The Defendants do not seek to rely on s. 17, as they have not paid any of
the arrears, nor have they given notice that they intend to pay the arrears.
RiverRock does not seek to rely upon this section to attempt to justify the
legitimacy of the three-month interest clause in the mortgage agreement.
[64]      
RiverRock
has the onus to establish that the fees that it is charging in addition to the
principal owed on the mortgage are legitimate expenses incurred by it in
addressing the default by the Defendants.
[65]       The right of mortgagees to
provide an advance estimate of their enforcement costs of a defaulted mortgage
is set out in BMMB Investments Ltd. v. Naimian, 2020 ONSC 7999, 30
R.P.R. (6th) 324, at para. 36:
[66]      
With
respect to the fees set out in paragraph 22 of this decision, I accept the
affidavit evidence of RiverRock as to the estimated costs it will incur in
addressing the Defendants’ default on the mortgage, with respect to the tax
default fee of $350, the tax payment fee of $750, the mortgage statement fee of
$650, and the discharge administration fee of $500. I also accept RiverRock’s
evidence that it was required to pay a property manager $497.20 to conduct two
occupancy and security checks at the property. These additional fees total
$2,747.20.
[67]      
RiverRock
does not attach copies of the insufficient cheques allegedly written. They therefore
have not proven entitlement to the two NSF fees, or to the $250 in NSF
processing fees.
[68]      
According
to its affidavit, the default proceedings fee of $3,750 being claimed by
RiverRock predominantly involves legal work that was required to bring the claim
forward, including email exchanges with the mortgagors regarding referral to
legal counsel; preparing the file for legal action; referring the file for
enforcement; instructing the law firm, requesting and reviewing regular reports
on the status of proceedings, and the review and swearing of affidavits. It is
more appropriate that these expenses be addressed when determining the costs
for this motion and the action.
[69]      
RiverRock
is therefore entitled to claim $2,747.20 in additional fees it incurred or
reasonably estimates that it will incur in addressing the Defendants’ default
on the mortgage. I find that payment of these fees does not offend s. 8 of the Interest
Act as they are not penalties or fines.
[70]      
In his
affidavit, Mr. Blazys submits that RiverRock is not entitled to summary
judgment or possession of the Property as such an order would interfere with
their contract with the real estate agent and the sale of the Property to a
good faith purchaser. However, counsel for Mr. Blazys did not address this
issue in his oral argument, nor did he provide a factum providing me with
authority for such a position.
[71]      
As I
have been provided with no legal authority to make this finding requested by
the Defendants, I make no such finding.
[72]      
RiverRock
has successfully established that there is no issue in dispute that requires a
trial. RiverRock is therefore granted summary judgment in the amount of
$1,529,444.92. I make the following orders:
[73]      
As per
the mortgage contract, this judgment carries a post-judgment interest rate of
9.99% per annum.
[74]      
In the
event that the parties are unable to agree upon costs, RiverRock may make cost
submissions recognizing that costs awarded will be reduced due to its failure
to follow the Mortgages Act requirements. RiverRock is to serve and file
its cost submission by November 28, 2024. The Blazys Defendants shall serve and
file a responding cost submission by December 12, 2024. Cost submissions are to
be no longer than three pages double spaced, not including any Bills of Costs
or Offers to Settle. No reply submission is to be prepared unless requested by
me. If I do not receive submissions by these deadlines I make no order as to
costs. All cost submissions must be emailed to my judicial assistant at
Bihara.wijewardena@ontario.ca.