[1]              
Dale
Bowen pleaded guilty before me to possession of a loaded restricted firearm,
possession of a firearm while prohibited, and possession for the purpose of
trafficking cocaine. These are my reasons for sentence.
[2]              
Mr.
Bowen had a loaded restricted firearm tucked into the waistband of his pants as
he was leaving Yorkdale mall, and a satchel containing ammunition and 23.25
grams of cocaine in his car, which was parked at that mall. He was under a
firearms prohibition order at the time. These are very serious offences.
[3]              
Mr.
Bowen has a lengthy criminal record, which includes several convictions for
drug offences.
[4]              
Social
context evidence filed before me reveals that Mr. Bowen, a Black man, grew up in
subsidized housing in a high-crime neighbourhood, in circumstances of
disadvantage. He was raised by a single mother without any male role models. He
was exposed to violence and drug trafficking from a young age. He was shot
twice, once causing serious injury. He has had many interactions with police,
including having been carded many times from a young age. Mr. Bowen became
fearful. He says that he obtained a gun for protection. He suffers from anxiety
and what doctors strongly suspect is post-traumatic stress disorder (“PTSD”).
Many of Mr. Bowen’s life experiences can be understood as effects of systemic
anti-Black racism. He has a supportive family and friends, has taken some steps
toward rehabilitation, accepts responsibility for his offences and has insight
into them, and expresses an intention to change his life.
[5]              
It
is always a challenge to craft proportionate sentences. It is especially so in
this case, where the offences are grave but there are significant mitigating
factors. The requirement of proportionality requires me to craft a sentence that
will adequately reflect the extreme gravity of Mr. Bowen’s offences and his
moral blameworthiness, accounting for both the factors that indicate high
blameworthiness and those, like the effects of systemic racism among others,
that mitigate it.
[6]              
The
Crown submits that a fit and proportionate sentence is five to six years’
incarceration, less credit for pre-sentence custody, as well as a number of
ancillary orders.
[7]              
The
defence submits that a fit and proportionate sentence is four years’
incarceration. In the defence submission, when credit is given for pre-sentence
custody and harsh conditions of incarceration, Mr. Bowen is in a time served
position. The defence consents to the ancillary orders sought by the Crown.
[8]              
I
have carefully considered what proportionality requires in all the
circumstances of this case. For the following reasons, I have determined that a
fit, fair, and proportionate sentence is four years and eight months or 56
months in custody, less 44 months’ credit for time served, for a net remaining
sentence to be served of 12 months in custody. There will also be a s.109 weapons
prohibition order for life, a DNA order, and a forfeiture order.
[9]              
Mr.
Bowen was arraigned and pleaded guilty to three counts in an indictment. These
were:
[10]          
The
facts underlying these offences read in by the Crown are as follows.
[11]          
On
Saturday June 11, 2022 at approximately 10:44 p.m., police received a radio
call from a witness who advised that they observed a male punching a female in
the face repeatedly while sitting in a grey BMW parked in the Yorkdale Mall parking
lot. The witness provided a description of the perpetrator as a Black male,
35-40 years old, with a slim build and wearing a white baseball cap. The
witness also provided a license plate number for the vehicle and said that it
was parked in an accessibility parking spot in front of the Joey’s restaurant.
[12]          
The
responding officers observed the vehicle in question. A woman was seated in the
front passenger seat. Officers spoke to the woman, who was uncooperative and
refused to provide any information. While speaking to the woman, the officers
noted she had swelling to her left eye, which was consistent with being
assaulted. Through investigative checks, police were able to confirm that the woman
was Shereza
Mohammed.
[13]          
Police
reviewed a security video from Yorkdale Mall in which they observed Mr. Bowen, who
matched the description provided by the witness, leaving the grey BMW and
heading towards the Joeys restaurant. Using the video, police were able to get
a better description of Mr. Bowen and the clothing he was wearing (white pants,
a white shirt, a black vest, and a white cap with a red bandana).
[14]          
A
short while later, officers located Mr. Bowen as he was walking out of the mall
in front of Joey’s restaurant towards the grey BMW. He was stopped and placed
under arrest for assault. During the arrest, officers located a black firearm
with a prohibited magazine concealed in Mr. Bowen’s waistband. The firearm was
a 9 mm Taurus loaded with 15 rounds of ammunition.
[15]          
Mr.
Bowen was provided his rights to counsel and transported to 32 Division where
it was discovered that he had five firearms prohibition orders. He was then
charged accordingly and held in custody pending a show cause hearing.
[16]          
A
search warrant was granted for the grey BMW. Upon execution of that search
warrant, police located a satchel containing 9 mm ammunition, a knife, Mr.
Bowen’s identification, and six clear baggies of cocaine (23.25 g), fentanyl
(6.35 g) and methamphetamine (7.94g). As a result, further charges were laid.
[17]          
Mr.
Bowen admitted the essential elements of the offences to which he pleaded
guilty. He  did not admit to having committed an assault or that he had knowledge
and control of the fentanyl or methamphetamine discovered by police. The Crown
did not seek to prove any of the facts that were not admitted. Accordingly, I
am not relying on those facts for the purposes of sentencing Mr. Bowen.
[18]          
There
was no Enhanced Pre-Sentence Report (“EPSR”) in this case. The defence had
sought one, but there were delays in its production. This was apparently caused
by inadequate resources to produce an EPSR in a timely manner. Mr. Bowen
pleaded guilty on December 20, 2023. A EPSR writer was not assigned to the case
until August 21, 2024. On September 3, 2024, defence counsel advised the court
that it was anticipated that the EPSR would not be completed until
mid-November. Mr. Bowen, who was detained on these charges, decided to proceed
to sentencing without it. The sentencing hearing was expected to proceed on
September 27, 2024. Unfortunately, it had to be adjourned twice. The sentencing
hearing ultimately proceeded on October 31, 2024. Mr. Bowen’s sentence is being
imposed on November 15, 2024. At the sentencing hearing, defence counsel filed
the following documents, with the agreement of Crown counsel: an affidavit from
Mr. Bowen; four letters from friends and family; certificates attesting to
programs Mr. Bowen has completed at the Toronto East Detention Centre (“TEDC”);
his TEDC healthcare and medication records; and his TEDC lockdown records. This
material provided me with a wealth of information about Mr. Bowen, his
antecedents, and his social context. The Crown did not take issue with the
content of any of the materials filed. I commend counsel for their collaboration
to ensure that the court had so much relevant and helpful information, even in
the absence of an EPSR.
[19]          
From
the materials filed, I learned that Mr. Bowen is presently 39 years of age. He
was 36 years old at the time of these offences. He was raised in a single
parent household by his mother, Sonia Sutherland. Letters authored by Ms.
Sutherland and Mr. Bowen’s older sister, Tanesia Sutherland, confirm that
theirs was and is a close and loving family.
[20]          
Mr.
Bowen’s father did not live with the family but would visit from time to time.
When Mr. Bowen was five or six years old, his father suddenly stopped visiting.
Mr. Bowen describes this as one of the worst times in his life. He would often
ask his mother when he would get to see his father, and according to Mr. Bowen,
she would always make up excuses as to why they could not see him. One day, Ms.
Sutherland took Mr. Bowen and his older sister to see their father at the
hospital. Mr. Bowen recalls walking into the hospital room and seeing his
father handcuffed to the bed. Mr. Bowen was happy to see his father but
subsequently realized that his father had been in jail.
[21]          
Mr.
Bowen’s father was eventually deported to Barbados. He still doesn’t know why.
He says his mother would never discuss his father with him. He recalls that his
father sent him a letter from Barbados, and that he wanted to write back, but
that his mother wouldn’t let him. He indicates that he resented his mother for
a long time as a result of this.
[22]          
Mr.
Bowen describes that he keenly felt his father’s absence throughout his
childhood, especially since his father disappeared suddenly. Mr. Bowen’s mother
tried to fill the void. She sent him to publicly funded summer camps and even
got him a Big Brother. Unfortunately, the Big Brother did not continue the relationship
with Mr. Bowen after seeing people smoking marijuana in a park near Mr. Bowen’s
home.
[23]          
Ms.
Sutherland confirms that her son grew up without a father figure in his life.
She says that this absence has made Mr. Bowen want to be present in his
children’s lives.
[24]          
Mr.
Bowen describes that when he was growing up, his mother was very strict,
resorting to physical discipline with a belt or her hand. He initially lived in
subsidized housing in Lawrence Heights with his mother, sisters, and extended
family. His mother was trying to get back on her feet because she had recently
been released from a two-year prison sentence for importing marijuana. When Mr.
Bowen was three years old, his mother was able to secure subsidized housing in
Morningside for his nuclear family of four.
[25]          
Mr.
Bowen says that growing up in subsidized housing was difficult. The heat never
worked well, so he was always cold in the winter. There was no air
conditioning. Appliances often needed repairs. Cockroaches were rampant. Bed
bugs and lice were common occurrences in the neighbourhood school.
[26]          
When
Mr. Bowen was in grade four, the family moved back to Lawrence Heights, where
they continued to live in subsidized housing. He described that there were a
lot of gangs in the neighbourhood. Gang members were identifiable. Their
members wore red, which indicated that they were affiliated with a gang called the
Bloods. Many of his friends’ older siblings were gang members. He recalled that
they would send him and his friends to the store to buy them snacks and would
let Mr. Bowen and his friends keep the change to buy candy. He looked up to
gang members. They were popular. He did not have any other male role models.
Mr. Bowen said that if you didn’t act like a gangster, you would get beat up
and bullied. When he was in grade four, he and his friends started a “gang.”
They carried cap guns and got into fights with other students in an attempt to
be perceived as “cool.”
[27]          
Mr.
Bowen said that drug trafficking was a daily occurrence in Lawrence Heights,
one he witnessed often throughout his upbringing. He was ten years old the
first time he witnessed a drug deal.
[28]          
Gunshots
were a familiar sound in Mr. Bowen’s neighbourhood. He would hear them when he
was playing outside during recess, at lunch time, or after school. When Mr.
Bowen was in grade five, someone got shot near his school. Mr. Bowen describes
that he was shot at several times through high school and his early twenties,
the first time when he was 16 years old. Mr. Bowen was actually shot on May 25,
2010, when he was 25 years old. He did not know the person who shot him, or why
he was shot. Three bullets entered and exited his body: one near his spine, one
in his buttocks, and one in his right leg. He was taken to Sunnybrook Hospital
where he was told he was lucky to be alive. He stayed at Sunnybrook for four to
eight weeks for physiotherapy before being sent home with a walker. He still
suffers from permanent nerve damage and has screws in his hip, which cause him
ongoing significant pain. Mr. Bowen was shot again in 2020 or 2021; fortunately
this was a less serious incident. The bullet grazed his head and he was subsequently
treated quickly at Humber River Hospital.
[29]          
Mr.
Bowen attended local public schools in Morningside and then Lawrence Heights. Until
grade 10, he attended most or all of his classes with a satisfactory performance
but did not excel academically. He competed in track and field. Mr. Bowen
describes that in grade 10, his attitude to school and life changed
dramatically. That year, he and two friends were arrested for a robbery. He was
immediately expelled from school. Mr. Bowen says that he and the two friends
had been walking home from school when one of them took a calculator from
another student. They went to trial. The judge found all three guilty. Mr.
Bowen did not think he had done anything wrong. He did not understand the
outcome and felt angry and frustrated about it.
[30]          
Mr.
Bowen reports that after his robbery conviction, he gave up on school and “everything.”
He couldn’t see the point of trying hard in school. He tried to complete high school
at two other schools but was no longer focused on his studies. He was skipping
class, fighting with other students, and getting into trouble with the law. To
his credit, Mr. Bowen finally obtained his high school diploma from Yorkdale
Secondary School in 2016. In 2017, he enrolled in the Audio Engineering Program
at the Trebas Institute. He wanted to become a music producer, work at a music
studio, and perhaps even own his own studio one day. However, Mr. Bowen did not
complete the program because he wanted to earn an income to help support his
children, rather than accumulate debt from paying tuition.
[31]          
As
a result of having been shot and shot at, Mr. Bowen thought he would die young.
He wanted to experience being a father and have children to carry on his name. For
this reason, he wanted to have children at a young age. Mr. Bowen has four
children, aged 19, 12, 12, and 11 years of age. None of these children live
with him. However, his mother indicates that Mr. Bowen is very present in his
children’s lives. His older sister notes that Mr. Bowen is a very loving and
hands-on father to his children. He talks to them regularly and keeps up with
all of their interests. He helps his children with homework and school
assignments, attends their sports games and tournaments, and is generally there
to support them.
[32]          
Shenelle
Bowen, Mr. Bowen’s younger sister, is the mother of four children, the youngest
of whom is autistic and requires special support. She says that Mr. Bowen is
always there for her and her kids. He helped her raise them. He reads to them,
helps them with school work, and watches them when she is busy. Ms. Bowen notes
that Mr. Bowen is an engaged father whose kids adore him and love to spend time
with him. By all accounts, he is respectful and helpful to his mother and his
grandmother. He often runs errands and buys groceries for his grandmother.
[33]          
Mr.
Bowen believes that he has experienced overt racism within the criminal justice
system. On one occasion, while in custody as a youth, 16 white inmates attacked
him and the only other Black inmate on their range. When the guards arrived to
break up the fight, Mr. Bowen and the other Black inmate were the only ones
transferred to lockdown as punishment. He reports that most of the inmates in
lockdown were Black. On another occasion, when he was driving to Thunder Bay, a
police officer pulled him over and asked what Mr. Bowen was doing in his
town and why Mr. Bowen was visiting his town.
[34]          
Mr
Bowen describes having constantly and repeatedly been stopped, questioned, and
searched by police officers for no reason, especially when police were still
engaging in the practice of carding.
[35]          
In
Mr. Bowen’s affidavit, he indicates that he has been told that he suffers from
anxiety, depression, and PTSD as a result of the violence and shootings he
experienced growing up. He suffers from nightmares, poor sleep, loss of
appetite, paranoia, bowel issues, occasional suicidal thoughts, and feelings of
hopelessness. He indicates that he is currently waiting to participate in
counselling for the first time in his life, which he hopes will help alleviate
his symptoms.
[36]          
The
healthcare records from the TEDC confirm that Mr. Bowen has sought medical
attention within the institution for many of these symptoms. He has seen health
professionals, including psychiatrists. The psychiatrist notes indicates that
Mr. Bowen suffers from anxiety and likely also PTSD. He has been prescribed
psychotropic medication for anxiety and PTSD and is compliant with it. The TEDC
health records confirm that Mr. Bowen has been referred for counselling in
relation to anxiety and depression, at his request. At the time of the sentencing
hearing, he was still waiting for counselling to commence.
[37]          
When
released from custody, Mr. Bowen plans to get a job with his friend, Rodney
Hudson, and to stop selling drugs. He indicates in his affidavit that he does
not foresee ever getting a gun again. He says he has now realized that having a
gun would not protect him from being shot at again, so he no longer thinks he
needs one to protect himself.
[38]          
Mr.
Bowen’s mother, sisters, and long-time friend Rodney Hudson describe him as a
kind and generous person. They say that Mr. Bowen is thoughtful and goes out of
his way to be helpful to others. Mr. Hudson says that when Mr. Bowen is focused
and staying out of trouble, he is a hardworking and reliable person. All of
them believe that Mr. Bowen is committed to turning his life around. They all
say, as Mr. Bowen did when he addressed the court at his sentencing hearing,
that he is committed to living a law-abiding life because he wants to set a
better example for his children and to be present, out of custody, to be
involved in their lives. They all believe that with the structure and stability
of legitimate employment and personal and familial supports, Mr. Bowen will
become a productive and prosocial member of society. They all commit to
providing him with the necessary supports. Mr. Hudson also confirms that he
will assist Mr. Bowen to seek and find employment at his place of work,
although Mr. Hudson is not in a position to offer Mr. Bowen a job himself.
[39]          
The
defence filed eight certificates attesting to the fact that Mr. Bowen has
completed educational programming within the TEDC. These programs provided
education about healthy relationships, substance use, managing stress, anger
management, goal-setting, and more.
[40]          
Mr.
Bowen has a lengthy criminal record. His youth court record spans from 2003 to
2005, and his adult record runs from 2005 to 2017. By my count, it contains
some 35 youth and adult convictions, for a wide array of offences. These include
robbery with violence, assault, possession of schedule I and schedule II
substances, and possession for the purpose of trafficking schedule I and
schedule II substances. He also has prior convictions involving weapons, namely
a conviction for assault with a weapon and one for carrying a concealed weapon,
but I have no information as to what those weapons were and no reason to
believe that they were firearms. Mr. Bowen has no prior firearms-related
convictions. He has served sentences ranging from suspended sentences plus
probation at the low end to 14 months in custody at the high end. Most of the
sentences imposed on Mr. Bowen have been in the range of one to five months. He
has never before served penitentiary time. His last conviction was in 2017, for
uttering threats. His last drug convictions were in 2014.
[41]          
The
fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society, contribute to respect
for the law, and help maintain a just, peaceful, and safe society by imposing
just sanctions with regard to one or more of the enumerated sentencing
objectives: s. 718 of the Criminal Code, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46. The
enumerated objectives include denunciation, specific and general deterrence,
separation of offenders from society, rehabilitation, and acknowledgement of
the harm done to victims or the community.
[42]          
The
fundamental principle of sentencing is that a sentence must be proportionate to
the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender: s.
718.1 of the Criminal Code. Proportionality is the alpha and omega of
sentencing. A just sanction “is guided by the loadstar of proportionality”: R.
v. Morris, 2021 ONCA 680, 159 O.R. (3d) 641, at para. 59.
[43]          
Proportionality
is determined with regard to the relevant aggravating and mitigating
circumstances related to both the offence and the offender: s. 718.2.
[44]          
The
objectives and principles of sentencing “must be taken into account and blended
in a manner which produces a sentence that is proportionate to the gravity of
the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender”: Morris,
at para. 61.
[45]          
In
addition to consideration of the relevant objectives of sentencing and the
aggravating and mitigating circumstances, sentencing judges must also consider
the following guiding principles, set out in ss. 718.2(b)-(e), as annotated in Morris,
at para. 60:
[46]          
Firearms
offences, like the offences at issue here, require sentences that emphasize
denunciation and deterrence: Morris, at paras. 68, 71; R. v. Nur,
2013 ONCA 677, 117 O.R. (3d) 401, at para. 206, aff’d 2015 SCC 15, 1 S.C.R. 773;
R. v. Smickle, 2014 ONCA 49, 317 O.A.C. 196, at para. 19. The inherent
dangerousness of firearms, and the extreme risk they pose to public safety, make
denunciation and deterrence of paramount importance. Given the emphasis on
sentences that prioritize denunciation and deterrence, proportionate sentences
will typically require imprisonment for firearms offences: Morris, at
para. 70.
[47]          
Proportionality
also requires that deterrence and denunciation be the primary sentencing
objectives for offences involving the trafficking of dangerous, addictive,
illegal substances like cocaine: R. v. Woolcock (2002), O.J. No. 4927
(C.A.), 2002 CarswellOnt 7683, at para. 8; R. v. Owusu, 2024 ONSC 671,
2024 W.C.B. 153, at para. 34. The policy reason for this is that “the
extraordinary harm associated with these drugs, the collateral crime associated
with them (including crimes of violence), and the premise that rationally
premeditated commercial crimes like drug trafficking by a non-addict are
particularly amenable to deterrence”: Owusu, at para. 34.
[48]          
Systemic
racism is to be factored into the sentencing analysis for Black offenders. The
starting point for such analysis must be the acceptance of the reality of
anti-Black racism: Morris, at para. 1. Social context evidence relating
to an offender’s life experiences, including experiences arising from
anti-Black racism, may be relied on where relevant to mitigate the offender’s
moral blameworthiness “and/or to assist in the blending of the principles and
objectives of sentencing to achieve a sentence which best serves the purposes
of sentencing as described in s. 718”: Morris, at para. 13, see also
paras. 42, 87, 123.
[49]          
The
Crown submitted that the appropriate sentence for these offences - unauthorized
possession of a loaded firearm, breach of a firearm prohibition order, and
possession for the purpose of trafficking of 23.25 grams of cocaine - is a
global sentence of five to six years. In the Crown submission, this is a
sentence at the low end of the applicable range for these offences, which is
appropriate given the particular mitigating factors that present in this case.
[50]          
The
defence submitted that the range of sentence is lower, even for this
combination of serious offences, when there are meaningful mitigating factors
including the effects of systemic racism. The defence seeks a sentence of four
years, time served, arguing that this is within the applicable range for
similar offences committed by similarly situated offenders in similar circumstances.
[51]          
Both
counsel filed a number of cases to assist me in the determination of the
appropriate range of sentence, and where within the range this offence and
offender fall. I have reviewed and carefully considered all of the case law
filed by counsel. It reveals that it is difficult to identify a hard and fast
range of sentence for offences involving the combination of firearms, drugs,
and breach of firearms prohibition convictions. These are offences that can be
committed in a myriad of ways by offenders in very different circumstances. But
there are some broad general guidelines that can be gleaned from the
jurisprudence.
[52]          
Cases
filed by the Crown include the following. In R. v. Robinson, 2023 ONCA
205, 2023 W.C.B. 458, the Court of Appeal allowed an appeal from a 10-year sentence
for convictions which included the three convictions faced by Mr. Bowen. The
Court of Appeal reduced the sentence by 18 months to give the appellant credit
for harsh conditions in pre-sentence custody arising from the COVID-19 pandemic
but did not otherwise consider the sentence unreasonable or unfit. The sentence
was reduced to eight and a half years. However, the facts in Robinson
are not completely aligned with those in with the present case. Mr. Robison was
involved in a motor vehicle incident because he had been driving while impaired.
He was found to be in possession of a larger quantity of cocaine than Mr. Bowen
was. Mr. Robinson had 105.5 grams of cocaine whereas Mr. Bowen had 23.25 grams.
Mr Robinson was also in possession for the purpose of trafficking of 16.5 grams
of crack cocaine, 35 grams of heroin, and 56 grams of powdered fentanyl. The
aggravating factor of a quantity of other drugs in Mr. Robinson’s case has not
been admitted or proven in this case.
[53]          
In
R. v. Smith, 2023 ONCA 500, 2023 W.C.B. 1132, the Court of Appeal
allowed an appeal from a seven-year global sentence for possession of a loaded
firearm, breach of a firearm prohibition order, and possession for the purpose
of trafficking fentanyl. However, the appeal was allowed because of an error by
the sentencing judge in apportioning credit for pre-sentence custody as well as
credit for harsh conditions of pre-sentence incarceration. The court did not
otherwise consider the seven-year sentence imposed by the trial judge to be unfit
or unreasonable. The appellant had pleaded guilty, had a prior criminal record
including prior convictions for similar offences, and had recognized prospects
for rehabilitation. This case is not strictly analogous to the one before me.
Mr. Bowen does not have prior convictions for firearms offences; Mr. Bowen’s
drug conviction relates to cocaine which is a less lethal and less dangerous
drug than the fentanyl at issue in Smith; and unlike the present case,
there was no evidence as to the mitigating effects of anti-Black racism in Smith.
[54]          
In
a different case also called R. v. Smith, this one reported at 2023 ONCA
620, 2023 W.C.B. 1554, the Crown successfully appealed a conditional sentence
of two years less a day for possession of a prohibited firearm with readily
accessible ammunition, breach of a weapons prohibition order, possession of a
firearm with the serial number removed, pointing a firearm, and possession for
the purpose of trafficking. The Court of Appeal held that the trial judge made
a number of errors in principle and proceeded to sentence the respondent to four
and a half years in custody, less credit for pre-sentence custody and time on
restrictive bail for a net sentence of three years to be served.
[55]          
In
R. v. Griffith, 2021 ONCA 302, 408 C.C.C. (3d) 244, the Court of Appeal
upheld a global sentence of six years less credit for pre-sentence custody for
possession of a loaded firearm, possession for the purpose of trafficking of 34.39
grams cocaine and crack cocaine, breach of a firearms prohibition, and breach
of probation. Mr. Griffith pleaded guilty and admitted that he had attended in
public spaces with the loaded firearm, had used the firearm as a tool of his
drug trade, and had a prior criminal record for similar offences. Mr. Griffith had
also demonstrated insight into his offending behaviour and had prospects for
rehabilitation. While in many respects Griffith bears similarities to the
present case, there is one important difference: In Mr. Griffith’s case, there
was no social context evidence of racism or its impact on the accused.
[56]          
In
R. v. Yasin Patel, 2019 ONSC 6302, 160 W.C.B. (2d) 408, a youthful
offender with a comparatively short criminal record, including one prior conviction
for trafficking, was convicted of a number of offences after trial. These
offences included the three offences at issue here. He was sentenced globally
to serve four years’ imprisonment. This case is similar to the one before me. However,
Mr. Yasin Patel was youthful whereas Mr. Bowen is not. Further, Mr. Yasin Patel
had a much less significant prior criminal record than Mr. Bowen.
[57]          
The
defence filed a number of cases in which social context evidence of anti-Black
racism was factored into sentencing for this combination of offences. In R.
v. Marfo, 2020 ONSC 5663, 167 W.C.B. (2d) 66, an adult first offender who
pleaded guilty was sentenced to two years’ imprisonment. The sentencing judge
considered that systemic anti-Black racism had diminished the defendant’s moral
blameworthiness. Mr. Marfo’s circumstances differed from those of Mr. Bowen
because he had no prior convictions. In R. v. Ahmed, 2021 ONSC 8157, [2021]
O.J. No. 6979, an adult who pleaded guilty was sentenced to three years and
four months in custody. The offender had a criminal record but had not had any
convictions for eight years. The sentencing judge considered the impact of
systemic anti-Black racism in determining that rehabilitation was an important
sentencing objective in this case. In many respects, the facts in Ahmed are
similar to those in this case. A distinguishing feature is that Mr. Ahmed had a
problem of binge drinking of alcohol, and that he committed the offences at
issue while intoxicated as a result of a binge. The sentencing judge found this
to be a factor that provided partial explanation for some of his offending
behaviour: Ahmed, at paras. 20,  29. In R. v. Goodridge, 2022
ONCJ 139, 2022 CarswellOnt 4012, an adult was found guilty after trial. He was
sentenced to a community sentence order of two years less a day. He had an
unrelated criminal record for assault causing bodily harm and mischief. The
sentencing judge considered social context evidence of anti-Black racism to be
relevant to Mr. Goodridge’s moral blameworthiness. Unlike Mr. Bowen, Mr.
Goodridge did not have a long and extensive criminal record and the convictions
he had were for unrelated offences.
[58]          
In
short, the sentences handed down in cases where offenders are convicted of the
same three offences as Mr. Bowen vary widely depending on case and offender-specific
factors. Broadly speaking, for this combination of offences, the range of
sentence is from two years, where there are extremely mitigating circumstances,
to eight years, where there are extremely aggravating ones. I will now consider
the aggravating and mitigating factors in Mr. Bowen’s case to determine where his
sentence should fall within this broad range.
[59]          
The
most serious aggravating factor in this case is the gravity of the offences.
Gun offences are serious crimes: Nur, at para. 6. So too are drug
trafficking-related offences: Woolcock, at para. 8. In Morris, at
para. 68, the Court of Appeal explained why the gravity of the firearms
offences like those committed by Mr. Bowen is significant:
[60]          
Mr.
Bowen was in possession of a loaded firearm, ready to be discharged, hidden in
the waistband of his pants as he moved about a mall. He would, no doubt, have
interacted with many members of the public as he did so, exposing them to
immediate and serious danger. Courts have repeatedly held that possession of a
firearm in public increases the gravity of the offence: Ahmed, at para.
25, citing R. v. Wright, 2018 ONSC 4209, 148 W.C.B. (2d) 532 at para.
39; R. v. Hayles-Wilson, 2018 ONSC 4337, 149 W.C.B. (2d) 281, at para. 15; R.
v. Brown, 2013 ONSC 4230, 107 W.C.B. (2d) 515, at para. 51; R. v.
Ferrigon, 2007 CanLII 16828 (ON SC), [2007] O.J. No. 1883 (S.C.J.), 73 W.C.B. (2d) 621, at para. 25.
[61]          
It
is also aggravating that Mr. Bowen possessed the firearm and illegal
drugs. In R. v. Wong, 2012 ONCA 767, 104 W.C.B. (2d) 421 at paras. 11
and 13, the Court of Appeal for Ontario held:
[62]          
The
presence of both a gun and drugs might suggest that Mr. Bowen was in possession
of the gun as a tool of his criminal drug trade. This, in turn, would suggest
that his offence of unauthorized possession of a loaded restricted weapon falls
toward the “true crime” end of the spectrum of firearms possession offences,
which is aggravating and attracts a higher sentence. There is a robust
jurisprudence suggesting that where the unauthorized possession of a gun is
associated with other criminal activity, such as drug trafficking, the
appropriate range of sentence is three to five years for the gun offence alone,
even on a first gun possession conviction: Owusu, at para. 29, citing R.
v. Graham, 2018 ONSC 6817, 152 W.C.B. (2d) 208 at paras. 36-42 citing a
body of case law on point, aff’d 2020 ONCA 692. In this case, I accept that Mr.
Bowen may have been, in part, motivated to illegally possess a loaded gun so as
to protect his drug stash. However, as I will discuss further, I accept that Mr.
Bowen’s primary motivations in carrying a loaded firearm were fear and
self-protection, not furthering his drug trafficking business. In a criminally
misguided way, he thought he could protect himself by possessing a loaded
firearm. For this reason, I do not consider it appropriate to give the
combination of a gun alongside drugs the full aggravating effect that
possessing a gun as a tool of the criminal drug trade would normally attract.
[63]          
It
is also aggravating that Mr. Bowen was in possession of a not insignificant
quantity of cocaine.
[64]          
Mr.
Bowen’s lengthy criminal record is a further aggravating factor. It suggests
that despite previous criminal trials, convictions, and sentences, he has
continued to offend and re-offend. His record includes convictions for related
drug offences: nine prior drug offences, five of which were for trafficking. Mr.
Bowen has lived a criminal lifestyle for a long time. There can be no doubt
that he has, over time, been a drug trafficker. This speaks to the need not
only for denunciation and general deterrence, but also for specific deterrence
here; to the need for a sentence that will be punitive enough to teach Mr.
Bowen that the price for continued criminal behaviour is not one worth paying. That
having been said, Mr. Bowen has accepted responsibility for his offences, and
intends to change his life. As I will discuss further below, I accept that Mr.
Bowen’s desire to rehabilitate himself is sincere, and that he has the capacity
to succeed in doing so. Moreover, there has been a gap in time since his last
conviction and an even longer gap since his last related conviction. In these
circumstances, the need to specifically deter Mr. Bowen is not as great as it
would otherwise be with a criminal record of this length, spanning this
duration.
[65]          
It
is also highly aggravating that Mr. Bowen was in possession of the gun in
breach of five previous s. 109 firearms prohibition orders. He was prepared to
arm himself with a gun notwithstanding multiple court orders prohibiting him
from doing so.
[66]          
Mr.
Bowen’s guilty plea is mitigating. In pleading guilty, he has accepted
responsibility for the offences he committed. In his affidavit and in his
statement to the court, Mr. Bowen acknowledged the seriousness of his offences,
accepted responsibility for his actions, and expressed remorse. I accept that
Mr. Bowen has insight into his criminal conduct and its inherent dangerousness,
and that he is genuinely remorseful. In addition, his guilty plea obviated the
need for a trial, which was scheduled for one week of Charter motions
and two weeks of trial. By pleading guilty, Mr. Bowen saved the justice system
resources that would have been required to bring him to trial, at a time when
these are scarce and in high demand.
[67]          
Mr.
Bowen indicates that he wants and intends to change his life. He wants to rehabilitate
himself and live a law-abiding life going forward. The evidence establishes
that he has already taken some steps in this direction. He has sought out
medical attention and treatment within the jail for his anxiety and probable
PTSD, has been compliant with psychiatric medication, and is awaiting
counselling which was initiated at his request. He has also completed a number
of educational programs within the TEDC to assist him with rehabilitation. He
plans, once released, to continue with treatment and to secure legitimate
employment. Mr. Bowen’s intentions, backed up by concrete steps he has
undertaken, auger well for his rehabilitative prospects. His family and
community believe that he can successfully change his life, and they pledge
their support to him on his journey to a prosocial and law-abiding life. The support
of the people closest to Mr. Bowen will be protective factors against
re-offending and will help him realize his current good intentions.
[68]          
The
road to full rehabilitation will not be an easy one for Mr. Bowen. He has lived
a criminal lifestyle for a long time. He has limited education and little employment
experience. He has four children to support. Nevertheless, I, like Mr. Bowen’s
family and friends, believe that he sincerely wants to change his life. His insight
into his criminal offending behaviour was evident when he addressed the court. He
said that, as someone who had been shot and shot at, he knows all too well the
negative impact of firearms on the community. He acknowledged that having a
firearm was a bad choice, as was selling drugs, particularly after what he
personally had lived through. He did not want to be the cause of more gun
violence in his community. He also had insight into how negatively the absence
of his father had impacted on him. He does not want to be absent for his
children as his father was for him. He expresses a desire not only to be
present but to set a good example for his children going forward.
[69]          
Mr.
Bowen’s desire to rehabilitate may well also be a product of the educative effect
of the time he has spent in custody on these charges. Mr. Bowen has been
detained in custody on these charges since his arrest on June 11, 2022, a
period of just over 29 months. The longest sentence he had ever served before
was 14 months. With statutory release, he would have served less than that.
This period of 29 months is the longest time Mr. Bowen has ever spent in jail.
He effectively acknowledged that this longest-ever detention has been educative
for him when he addressed the court. He said he has used his time in custody to
reflect on his choices and their impact on him and his family.
[70]          
In
addition to having a genuine desire to rehabilitate himself, and insights into
why he should, I believe that Mr. Bowen has the capacity and supports to do so.
He has demonstrated this by completing high school as an adult, and by taking
steps toward his rehabilitation while in custody. He has the support of his
family and community. I accept that Mr. Bowen has rehabilitative potential. Although
denunciation and deterrence are the primary sentencing objectives in this case,
I find that rehabilitation is also an important sentencing objective. The
evidence of Mr. Bowen’s life experiences, against the backdrop of the social
context of anti-Black racism to which Mr. Bowen has been subjected, help me to
conclude that the objective of rehabilitation has to be a focus in arriving at
a proportionate sentence.
[71]          
Although
there was no EPSR filed in this case, I am satisfied that Mr. Bowen’s life and
his criminal offending behaviours have been meaningfully affected by systemic
anti-Black racism. I am entitled, perhaps even required, to “take judicial
notice of the existence of anti-Black racism in Canada and its potential impact
on individual offenders”: Morris, at para. 123. I am also entitled to
consider the historical and social facts referred to in the “Expert Report on
Crime, Criminal Justice and the Experience of Black Canadians in Toronto,
Ontario” that was appended to the sentencing decision in Morris at first
instance: Morris, at paras. 42, 43; R. v. Morris, 2018 ONSC 5186,
422 C.R.R. (2d) 154, at Appendix A. In addition, the Crown accepts that Mr.
Bowen was impacted by systemic anti-Black racism.
[72]          
In
this case, I find that Mr. Bowen’s lived experiences as a Black man who was
affected by racism are relevant to his sentence in the following two ways:
first, they somewhat mitigate his moral blameworthiness, and second, they
highlight that rehabilitation needs to be an important sentencing objective: Morris,
at paras. 79, 81, 99-102.
[73]          
Mr.
Bowen was raised in circumstances of disadvantage, in subsidized housing, in high-crime
neighbourhoods. His mother had been incarcerated and struggled to get back on
her feet after being released from prison. She struggled to support her three
children. Mr. Bowen was expelled from school after a criminal conviction he
perceived as unjust, and this caused him to give up on school and, as he put
it, on everything. His father was incarcerated and then deported, disappearing
completely from Mr. Bowen’s life. Mr. Bowen had no adult male role models. He
was exposed to gang members in his community who were older, had social status,
and had access to money. Because he ran errands for them, he was given money to
buy candy. His role models were gang members and drug dealers. Being associated
with gangs and crime was a way of attaining status in Mr. Bowen’s community. He
was exposed to the drug trade throughout his life, from a very young age. He
was exposed to violence, including gun violence, throughout his life, from a
very young age. He was shot at, and actually shot, not once but twice. One of
these shootings was serious. He was told by medical professionals that he was
lucky to be alive. He still suffers from the physical effects of this gun shot.
He had many negative interactions with police and experienced overt racism from
police and in custodial settings.
[74]          
Many
of these life experiences are effects of systemic anti-Black racism:
[75]          
I
accept that anti-Black racism played a meaningful role in Mr. Bowen’s life and
in the choices he made. He grew up in poverty with no positive male role models
and was alienated from school. He had few legitimate employment opportunities.
He was surrounded by gang culture and criminality and was himself a victim of
serious gun violence. He became fearful, suffering from anxiety and likely
PTSD. He experienced racism. Mr. Bowen had negative interactions with police
and the criminal justice system. He feared for his own safety and did not trust
the police to keep him safe. His drug dealing and gun possession can be
understood as maladaptive coping mechanisms to deal with his dangerous life
circumstances, and the absence of opportunities to advance or even earn a
legitimate income.
[76]          
In
my view, anti-Black racism played a role in Mr. Bowen’s strong fear for his
safety in the community, and in the absence of legitimate sources of income
available to him. The evidence of Mr. Bowen’s experiences, in their social
context, help explain why he committed these offences. They offer mitigating
explanations for his possession of a loaded gun and for his possession of
cocaine for the purpose of trafficking. Mr. Bowen’s personal responsibility and
culpability for the offences are somewhat diminished by his social context. But
this is a limited mitigating factor: Morris, at para. 101.  Social
context helps explain why Mr. Bowen did what he did but does not excuse his
conduct. Mr. Bowen made the choice “to arm himself in public with a concealed,
loaded, deadly weapon,” and to traffic cocaine. This is conduct which put
members of the community, police officers, the passenger in his car, and Mr.
Bowen himself, at real risk: Morris, at para. 101. The offences he
committed remain grave, albeit with somewhat diminished moral blameworthiness.
[77]          
I
also consider the evidence of Mr. Bowen’s life experiences against the backdrop
of the social context of anti-Black racism, to be relevant to his
rehabilitative prospects. This, in turn, satisfies me that in addition to the
paramount objectives of denunciation and deterrence, I must consider the
objective of rehabilitation.
[78]          
Typically,
a prior criminal record “results in a lengthier sentence, not because the
offender is being punished again for the earlier offences, but because the
record suggests that he or she has diminished prospects for rehabilitation”: Ahmed,
at para. 31, citing R. v. Hicks, 2007 NLCA 41, 268 Nfld. & P.E.I.R.
125, at para. 14. Mr. Bowen’s lengthy criminal record suggests that he has lived
a criminal lifestyle for much of his life; that he is a committed recidivist.
With this kind of record, Mr. Bowen could easily be written off as someone who
has little to no chance of reforming his life.
[79]          
However,
like Schreck J. in Ahmed at para. 31, I find that Mr. Bowen’s prior
criminal record is “related to [his] association with negative peer influences
while residing in an impoverished area, both factors commonly seen in
sentencing cases involving Black Canadian men.” Unlike in Ahmed, there
is no evidence that the gap in Mr. Bowen’s criminal record occurred at a time
when Mr. Bowen left his neighbourhood and got away from his negative peer
influences. As a result, the straight line that Schreck J. was able to draw
between Mr. Ahmed’s criminal behaviour and his exposure to his impoverished
community and negative peer influences, is unavailable to me in this case: Ahmed,
at para. 31. However, as I have already found, Mr. Bowen’s life experiences
were impacted by systemic racism, and these influenced his disastrously
maladaptive decision-making and criminal conduct.
[80]          
Notwithstanding
his social context, Mr. Bowen was able to complete high school as an adult. Notwithstanding
his social context, he had no criminal convictions from 2017 to 2024, and no
drug-related convictions from 2014 to 2024. It is notable that the gap in Mr.
Bowen’s criminal record follows his completion of high school in 2016, and
enrollment in college in 2017. This suggests that, notwithstanding a history of
criminal behaviour affected by a negative environment that is linked to
systemic factors, Mr. Bowen has the capacity to do better. His history reveals
that he can overcome his difficult lived experiences and circumstances to make
better choices, to live a law-abiding life. This seems to be the case when he proactively
avails himself of educational resources. I infer accessing other resources and
supports could have the same effect.
[81]          
I
apply the gap principle, as informed by Mr. Bowen’s personal history, and by
the social context in which it unfolded. The rationales animating the gap
principle were described in R. v. Milani, 2021 ONCA 567, 157 O.R. (3d)
314, at para. 68 citing R. v. Singh, 2012 ONSC 30, 286 C.C.C. (3d) 204, at
para. 182, as follows:
[82]          
Mr.
Bowen has had no criminal convictions for seven years, and no related
convictions for 10 years. In my view, he is capable of rehabilitating himself.
Accordingly, I consider rehabilitation to be an important objective in
sentencing Mr. Bowen, alongside the paramount objectives of deterrence and
denunciation.
[83]          
Both
the Crown and the defence agree that Mr. Bowen should be given credit for the
time he has spent in pre-sentence custody at the Summers rate of 1.5:1: R.
v. Summers, 2014 SCC 26, 1 S.C.R. 575. The defence also submits that he
should be given credit for time spent in unusually harsh conditions of
pre-sentence custody, known as Duncan credit: R. v. Duncan, 2016
ONCA 754, 133 W.C.B. (2d) 367.
[84]          
I
accept that I am required to give Mr. Bowen credit for the time he has spent
detained in pre-sentence custody at the Summers rate of 1.5:1. The Summers
credit operates as a deduction from what I determine to be the appropriate
sentence for these offences: R. v. Marshall, 2021 ONCA 344, 174 W.C.B.
(2d) 88, at para. 51. Mr. Bowen has been detained in pre-sentence custody from
the date of his arrest on June 11, 2022 until the date of his sentencing on
November 15, 2024. This is a period of 29 months and five days of real jail
time. With Summers credit, Mr. Bowen has served the equivalent of just
under 44 months in jail. Accordingly, 44 months will be deducted from his
sentence. The remainder will be the net time he will still be required to
serve.
[85]          
By
contrast, Duncan credit “is not a deduction from the otherwise
appropriate sentence”: Marshall, at para. 52. Rather, as the Court of
Appeal held in Marshall, at para. 52:
[86]          
It
is not an error to specify a number of months or days given as Duncan
credit. However, when a sentencing judge specifically quantifies Duncan
credit, this can lead to improper treatment of Duncan credit as a
deduction from the appropriate sentence in the same way as Summers
credit is deducted. This, in turn, can lead to Duncan credit taking on
“an unwarranted significance in fixing the ultimate sentence imposed”: Marshall,
at para. 53. As a result, it is preferable for Duncan credit to be
treated as a mitigating “factor to be taken into account when determining the
fit sentence in all of the circumstances”: R. v. Smith, 2023 ONCA 500,
89 C.R. (7th) 297 at para. 37. A sentence must remain proportionate, even when Duncan
credit is given in mitigation.
[87]          
In
this case, the defence filed an Incarceration Summary from the TEDC in relation
to the conditions of Mr. Bowen’s incarceration there, covering the period of
July 16, 2022 to August 20, 2024. These records reveal that Mr. Bowen was
locked down for 166 days of partial or full lockdowns. Defence counsel advised,
and the Crown did not take issue with the fact, that Mr. Bowen spent an
additional eight days in lockdowns in September and October 2024, for a total
of 174 lockdown days. Defence counsel also advised, and the Crown did not take
issue with the fact, that Mr. Bowen was originally detained upon arrest at the
Toronto South Detention Centre (“TSDC”). Lockdown records were not filed for
the time Mr. Bowen spent at TSDC. However, counsel advised that Mr. Bowen spent
14 days on the COVID lockdown range when he was first admitted to TSDC, for a
total of at least 188 days on lockdown between the two jails. In total, Mr.
Bowen spent about one in every four and a half to five days in lockdown.
[88]          
The
TEDC records indicate that generally all programming is offered, even when
inmates are locked down. However, Mr. Bowen advised through counsel that this
was not the case. Rather, according to Mr. Bowen, programming is not offered
during full lockdowns, only during partial ones.
[89]          
The
records further indicate that access to the yard is only offered 27.7% of the
time. Mr. Bowen advised that the “yard” is not really outdoors. Instead, it is
a room with a mesh roof. Inmates are not given hats or gloves, so they do not
avail themselves of access to the yard in winter, even when it is offered.
[90]          
The
records also indicate that Mr. Bowen was triple bunked, in other words, housed with
two other people in a cell that was constructed and outfitted for two inmates,
for 50 days. Defence counsel advised that Mr. Bowen was triple bunked for more
than 50 days. I infer that this is because the TEDC records do not cover the
entire period from Mr. Bowen’s arrest to the date of imposition of sentence.
Indeed, Mr. Bowen was triple bunked and sleeping on a mattress on the floor of
his cell on the date of the sentencing hearing, a date which was not covered by
the TEDC records.
[91]          
Mr.
Bowen advises through counsel that while the quality of food at TEDC is
adequate, the quantities of food provided are not. He is often hungry. He seeks
to supplement with food from the canteen, to stave off hunger.
[92]          
On
this evidence, I am satisfied that Mr. Bowen has been subjected to particularly
harsh conditions in pre-sentence detention. This is a mitigating factor I have
considered in fashioning a proportionate sentence, but I decline to quantify
the exact amount of credit to be given or to deduct a specific amount from the
appropriate sentence.
[93]          
The
defence asked me to consider the post-conviction delays caused by efforts to
obtain an EPSR to be mitigating. In support of this request, the defence relied
on two decisions of Goldstein J. in which the lengthy delays caused by
production of EPSRs were considered to be mitigating on sentence: R. v.
Jones, 2024 ONSC 3181, 2024 W.C.B. 963, at para. 36; R. v. Harrison,
2024 ONSC 3272, 2024 W.C.B. 994 at paras. 7, 43.
[94]          
In
coming to the view that a lengthy delay occasioned by the production of an EPSR
was a mitigating factor, Goldstein J. relied on the Court of Appeal’s decision
in R. v. Hartling, 2020 ONCA 243, 456 C.R.R. (2d) 352. In Hartling,
the Indigenous appellant argued that 14-months of post-verdict delay violated
his rights under s. 11(b) of the Charter. The delay was caused by the lack
of institutional resources to obtain a Gladue report in the appellant’s district:
Hartling, at para. 96. The Court of Appeal held that the delay was
presumptively unreasonable because it exceeded the five-month presumptive
ceiling for post-verdict delay, and that it was neither a product of an
exceptional circumstances nor justified by the Crown: Hartling, at
paras. 98 – 103, citing R. v. Charley, 2019 ONCA 726, 147 O.R. (3d) 497,
at paras. 86, 87. The Hartling Court found that the appellant’s s. 11(b)
rights were violated and reduced his sentence by five months to remedy the
breach: Hartling, at paras. 110 – 123. Importantly, the Court noted that
“[d]elay in sentencing that does not rise to the level of a Charter
breach has long been considered a factor in mitigation of sentence”: Hartling,
at para. 118, citing R. v. Bosley, 1992 CanLII 2838 (ON CA), 18 W.C.B. (2d) 179, 59 O.A.C. 161
(C.A.); R. v. Cooper (No. 2) (1977), 1977 CanLII 2103 (ON CA), 35 C.C.C. (2d) 35 (C.A.), 4 C.R.
(3d) S-10.
[95]          
It
will be recalled that Mr. Bowen pleaded guilty on December 20, 2023. He is
being sentenced on November 15, 2024, almost 11 months after he was found
guilty. An EPSR writer was not assigned to his case until the third week of August
2023, a delay of some eight months. On September 3, 2024, Mr. Bowen’s lawyer
advised that the EPSR could not be completed until mid-November 2024. At that
time, he elected to proceed without it, and a sentencing hearing was scheduled
for September 27, 2024. Delays from that initial hearing date to the date of
imposition of sentence fall at the feet of the court.
[96]          
There
can be no doubt that delays in the production of the EPSR caused much of the
post-verdict delay in this case. Unfortunately, our courts are no strangers to
delay caused by inadequate resources to produce EPSRs in a timely manner: see R.
v. J.B., 2024 ONCJ 268, 2024 CarswellOnt 8203, at para. 32 for a list of
cases in which EPSRs were delayed. It seems counter-intuitive that these
reports, which can provide important, helpful, and mitigating information to
sentencing judges, are so difficult to obtain in a timely manner. Frequently,
the only way an EPSR can be produced expeditiously is for an offender to pay
for it privately. This is often not an option given the kinds of systemic
disadvantage, including financial, to which offenders who require these reports
are subject and to which the report would likely speak: R. v. McLarty-Mathieu,
2022 ONCJ 498, [2022] O.J. No. 4925, at paras. 11, 19 – 22.
[97]          
In
this case, it was reasonable for Mr. Bowen to request some delay to accommodate
his desire to put the most useful social context evidence before the court. He
did not bring a s. 11(b) challenge to the delays occasioned by the EPSR here. But
he was detained in custody pending sentencing. If the EPSR had been produced
more quickly, Mr. Bowen could have been sentenced sooner, begun serving his
sentence sooner, and sooner had access to services, resources and programming that
are only available to offenders once they begin serving their sentences.  In
the circumstances of this case, I am satisfied that the delay occasioned by the
EPSR is a factor for consideration in mitigation of sentence: Hartling,
at para. 118; Jones, at para. 36; Harrison, at paras. 7, 43. I
have considered it as such.
[98]          
I
have carefully considered all of the aggravating and mitigating factors in this
case, with a view to fashioning a sentence that will be adequately denunciatory
and deterrent, while also focusing on rehabilitation. The offences are very
grave, and Mr. Bowen has moral blameworthiness in respect of them. He has a
lengthy criminal record, which includes convictions for related drug offences.
He breached a court order prohibiting him from being in possession of firearms.
The gravity of the offences and the aggravating factors in this case satisfy me
that a sentence at the very lowest end of the range, the two-to-four-year end
of the range, would not adequately address the requirements of denunciation and
deterrence.
[99]          
However,
Mr. Bowen’s culpability is mitigated by the impacts of anti-Black racism on
him. He has a supportive family and community around him. He intends to
rehabilitate himself and has shown himself capable of doing so. He has already
taken meaningful steps toward his rehabilitation. He entered a guilty plea,
accepts responsibility for his offences, has insight into his offending
behaviour, and is remorseful. He has endured harsh conditions of incarceration,
and was detained in custody for a long time while awaiting an EPSR. For these
reasons, a sentence at the very highest end of the range, the six-to-eight-year
end of the range, would not be proportionate.
[100]       In my view, in
addition to credit for the equivalent of 44 months of pre-sentence custody Mr.
Bowen has already served, a fit sentence requires a further 12 months in
custody. This is required to achieve the requisite denunciatory and generally
and specifically deterrent effects of this sentence, even when the meaningful
mitigating factors and objective of rehabilitation is considered. I have
concluded that a further 12 months’ imprisonment would not be detrimental to
Mr. Bowen’s rehabilitation – and may well be beneficial to it. Mr. Bowen has
access to psychiatric care and medication within the jail and should soon also
be given access to counselling for the first time. These are treatments and services
that may be difficult to access in the community, and which I find may well
have salutary effects for Mr. Bowen as he continues on his challenging journey
to live a law-abiding and prosocial life.
[101]       I am further
bolstered in my conclusion that an additional period of incarceration is necessary
in this case by the requirement that each of the three offences be sentenced
consecutively. Each of the offences - unauthorized possession of a loaded
restricted firearm, breach of firearms prohibition order, and possession for
the purpose of trafficking cocaine - protects distinct legal interests. As a
result, each conviction requires a separate punishment: Owusu, at para.
25. Each sentence must be consecutive, not concurrent, to the others. A fit and
proportionate sentence for each of these convictions, served consecutively, results
in a total global sentence of four years and eight months or 56 months. I have
considered whether this total sentence offends the totality principle, and
concluded that it does not in all the circumstances of this case.
[102]       Mr. Bowen will be
sentenced to a global sentence of 56 months, less credit for the equivalent of
44 months of pre-sentence custody, for a total net sentence still to be served
of 12 months’ imprisonment.
[103]       The sentence will
be apportioned as follows:
[104]       In addition to the
custodial sentence, the following ancillary orders will issue.
[105]       There will be an
order for the taking of bodily substances for the DNA databank under s.
487.051(3) of the Code. Mr. Bowen has been convicted of secondary
designated offences as defined in s. 487.04 because they are offences that
carry a maximum penalty of five years or more and were prosecuted by
indictment. The Crown has applied for a DNA order. Mr. Bowen does not oppose
the order. I am satisfied that it is in the best interests of the
administration of justice for the order to issue given the gravity of the
offences, the risk to the public they posed, and the fact that the defence does
not oppose the order.
[106]       There will also be
an order under s. 109(2)(a) and (b) prohibiting Mr. Bowen from possessing any
firearm or weapon, ammunition, cross bow, prohibited device, or explosive
substance for life.
[107]       There will be an
order for the forfeiture of the items seized by police.
[108]       The victim fine
surcharge payable under s. 737(1) is waived pursuant to s. 737(2.1) (a). Mr.
Bowen has been detained in custody for a lengthy period of time, and as a
result has not been working. He does not have much in the way of legitimate
employment experience. When he is released from custody, he will need to secure
employment, which may take him some time. I am satisfied that he is unable to
pay the victim fine surcharge on account of precarious financial circumstances.