[1]         
Mr. Ali is charged with possession of
methamphetamine, cocaine, fentanyl, oxycodone, and benzodiazepine for the
purpose of trafficking. He is also charged with unsafe storage of, and unlawful
possession of, two .22 calibre rifles, and being in possession of those
firearms and ammunition while subject to a weapons prohibition.
[2]         
At the outset of the trial Ms. Shahabi, on
behalf of the accused, admitted the continuity of the items seized; that at the
relevant time the accused was subject to a s. 109(2) weapons prohibition; that
the firearms referred to in the indictment were functioning; and were firearms
as defined in the Criminal Code. It was also admitted that, given the
quantity of the drugs seized, they were clearly in the possession of some
person for the purpose of trafficking. The issue was, therefore, whether the
accused had knowledge of, and control over, the firearms and drugs that were
seized.
[3]         
In the course of reviewing the evidence, I will
make certain findings of fact. In all cases, however, these findings are based
upon the totality of the evidence relevant to the charge in question, and
taking into account findings of fact that may be made later in the reasons.
[4]         
In the course of giving their evidence, certain
of the officers gave evidence as to the fact that a location attended by the
accused was frequented by persons known to be part of the drug sub-culture or
linked by police occurrence reports to persons with drug convictions. While
this evidence was not objected to, I raised the issue of whether these types of
observations had any probative value. I conclude that this evidence lacks any
probative value, and I place no reliance on it in reaching my conclusion.
[5]         
A document seized in the course of the
investigation indicated that the accused was incarcerated in 2019. This was
only relevant to link him to the location where the document was found.
[6]         
I also recognize that any evidence of prior
discreditable conduct, or that suggests an association with disreputable
persons or places, cannot be relied upon to reason that the accused is more
likely to have committed the offence charged, or that he is a bad person
deserving of punishment.
[7]         
I also keep in mind that my verdict on each
charge must be based only on the evidence and the legal principles that apply
to that charge.
[8]         
In R. v. Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33, Justice
Cromwell stated:
[9]         
In R. v. Gagliardi, 2005 Carswell Ont
15431 (Ont. S.C.J.) (endorsement, January 12, 2006), I found the accused guilty
of possession of a loaded handgun found in the console of his vehicle. In my
reasons, I stated:
[10]       The Court of Appeal dismissed an appeal, stating simply:
[11]       In R. v. Emes, 2001 CanLII 3973 (ONCA), the court stated:
[12]       On March 24, 2022, the accused was stopped while driving a Ford Edge
vehicle and he was arrested. The police then executed search warrants at
various locations. There was also evidence linking the accused to a number of
vehicles.
[13]       I will, therefore, review the police investigation, the evidence
associated with the search of the Ford Edge, and the execution of search
warrants at various locations. I will review surveillance and other police
observations that connect the accused to various locations and vehicles. I will
also review evidence obtained pursuant to tracking warrants for cell phone
numbers and cell phone downloads.
[14]       The investigation of the accused began on August 21, 2021. Det.
Larson, the officer in charge of the investigation, obtained Transmission Data
Recorder (“TDR”) warrants for three cell phone numbers from December 7, 2021, until
the accused was arrested on March 24, 2022. The TDR data allowed the OPP to
receive reports, with a 15-minute delay, as to where the cell phones were
located. This was based on data as to the cell site being accessed by each
phone. While I refer, as the witness did, to the cell phones being tracked, it
was explained that it is actually the SIM card in the cell phone that is associated
with a particular phone number that is being tracked.
[15]       The TDR data indicates the radius within which the cell phone is
located. Over the period of December 14, 2021 to March 24, 2022, the police
observed the accused at various locations. Det. Larson would frequently review
the TDR data to see if the TDR reports placing the accused at a particular
location corresponded with the actual observations of the police. In all cases
they did. The only anomaly he noted was that, on occasion, the TDR data would
vary somewhat as to the radius within which each of the cell phones was
located. That difference is immaterial in all the circumstances.
[16]       Det Larson also noted that observations were made of the accused
driving and then arriving at a location. Det. Larson referred to the fact that
when the accused stopped, there would sometimes be a flurry of activity on the
cell phones. This too supports the conclusion that the phones being tracked
were in his possession.
[17]       On the March 24, 2022 arrest date, the TDR data for two of the cell
phones in the Ford Edge indicated that the phones were located within a radius
of 7 and 4 m of a spot marked on a map. This aligns with the police evidence as
to where the traffic stop occurred. The TDR data for the third cell phone in
the Ford Edge indicated it was located within a radius of 3,034 m. This radius
included the location of the other two cell phones. They were obviously all
within the Ford Edge. This is buttressed by the fact that two of the cell
phones in the Ford Edge had stickers with a telephone number which corresponded
to two of the cell phone numbers being tracked.
[18]       Det. Larson testified that, over the period of December 7, 2021 to
March 24, 2022, the TDR data demonstrated that the three cell phones
consistently moved together, consistent with them being in the possession of
one person.
[19]       Det. Larson’s evidence was not challenged to any significant extent,
and I accept it. This evidence satisfies me, to a very high degree of
probability, that the accused was in possession of, and utilizing, the three
cell phones that were being tracked.
[20]       Det. Larson testified that the TDR data also demonstrated that the
accused typically spent the night in the vicinity of 193 Edgehill Drive,
Barrie. Other evidence supports the conclusion that he lived in apartment 114
at this address. The TDR data further demonstrated that the accused typically
left Barrie mid-morning and travelled to Grey-Bruce, and was frequently at one
or more of the following locations:
[21]       An analyst downloaded TDR data on or about March 7, 2022 to support
the warrant applications. Exhibit 9 contains charts which mark with a red dot
any day on which the cell phones were in the vicinity of the Barrie apartment,
Grey Road 1 and the Kincardine property. The red dots overlap so one cannot
count the actual number of days, but it is obvious that the accused was
frequently attending these locations between December 7, 2021 and March 7, 2022.
[22]       TDR data continued to be obtained to and including the arrest date
of March 24, 2022. The data continued to indicate that the phones moved
together, and that the accused frequented these same locations.
[23]       Det. Auger was qualified to give expert evidence as to the use,
pricing, sale and distribution of fentanyl, methamphetamine, cocaine and
oxycodone, and the modus operandi of traffickers in these drugs. He has
15 years of experience working in an OPP drug enforcement unit.
[24]       Ms. Shahabi conceded Det. Auger’s qualifications to give expert
evidence. His opinions were not seriously challenged, and I accept them. I will
later refer to the value of the drugs found at various locations, and these
values are from Det. Auger’s report and testimony. The values are stated in a
range which depends upon the quantity being sold. Sales in larger quantity are
at a discounted price.
[25]       Exhibit 17 is an agreed statement of fact as to the quantity of
drugs found at each location. The amounts vary by an insignificant amount from
the weight Det. Auger was asked to assume. As such, the value of drugs I will
refer to vary slightly from his report, as he provided adjusted numbers in his
testimony.
[26]       The police attempted to download data from all of the cell phones
but were only able to do so for the LG1 phone seized from the Ford Edge, the
LG2 cell phone seized from the camping trailer at Grey Road 1, and the Alcatel
cell phone seized from the Mazda parked at Grey Road 1.
[27]       Det. Rupert is an OPP officer who is a forensic digital analyst,
specializing in cell phones. He testified that the SIM card in a cell phone has
a unique telephone number associated with it. The cell phone itself,
independent of the SIM card, stores data recording incoming and outgoing
communications such as telephone calls and messages.
[28]       He searched all of the downloaded data from the three cell phones
for the three phone numbers (for practical purposes, the SIM) being tracked.
These searches are in Exhibit 19.
[29]       The downloads for all three phones indicated numerous examples of
the phone recording that it made calls and sent messages to, and also received
calls and received messages from, one of the three phone numbers being tracked.
This means that the SIM card in the phone was periodically being moved to a
different phone.
[30]       Exhibit G is a summary of information from the cell phone downloads
prepared by Ms. Barefoot. The downloads provide compelling evidence supporting
the conclusion that the accused was the person using the cellphones, and that
drug trafficking was often the subject being discussed. I will indicate the
drug related meaning of certain words based on the evidence of Det. Auger.
[31]       The LG1 phone contained messages in February to March, 2022,
referring to soft [powdered cocaine], hard [crack cocaine], tina and crystal
[methamphetamine], “do you need 2 oz”, and “get pills please”.
[32]       The user account for LG1 was in the name of alexwilliamcbad911@gmail.com.
A March 15, 2022 message indicates the sender will be in Barrie at night. A
March 14, 2022 incoming message is “Ali can you send Brianne money” (Exhibit 9,
a document signed by the accused, stated his daughter’s name was Brianne Ali
Williams). A March 7, 2022 message lists by make, a number of vehicles the
accused drove, and states “Ford Edge mostly I drive”.
[33]       The user account for LG2 indicates the BRE phone number of
519-353-8520 and there are several references in the user accounts to alexwilliamcbad911@gmail.com.
The phone receives multiple messages addressed to the “alexwilliam” Gmail
account from Apple, TD Bank that the accused dealt with, and a financial
institution with messages beginning Tahir or Tahir Ali.
[34]       The Alcatel phone has references to tina, down [fentanyl]. A March
4, 2022 message from Briana states, “I have the money thank you dad”.
[35]       There was also evidence of the accused driving a number of vehicles,
as follows:
[36]       Surveillance teams observed the accused on March 9, 10 and 17 . Det.
Larson and other officers periodically observed the accused on other days. I
rely upon this evidence only for the following:
[37]       I place no reliance on the identity of the persons that the accused
interacted with, or the reputation of places he frequented.
[38]       Locations that the accused attended near Owen Sound and Wiarton had
signage for BRE Towing & Tire, as did the vehicles the accused used. It
will inform my reasoning to now state my finding that this was a sham business.
The apartment of the accused and locations associated with BRE were searched.
No business records of any sort were located. No point-of-sale equipment was
located. There was no inventory or supplies on the premises. Despite the
observations of the accused and the BRE properties, there never appeared to be
anyone who was an employee or customer. Further, the accused resided in Barrie
and typically left to drive to Grey County, a two-hour drive, in mid-morning.
It makes little sense that a small business owner would reside so far away from
his place of business. To falsely present as an active legitimate business
allows for an inference that something nefarious is being concealed.
[39]       The position of the Crown was that the drugs were all located in
places under the direct control of the accused, or closely associated with him.
The Crown also relies upon personal effects seized at the various locations,
TDR data, and cell phone downloads to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the
accused was in knowing possession of the drugs.
[40]       The position of the accused was that other persons were associated
with the locations where drugs were seized. In particular Brenda Kwan, a
partner or former partner of the accused, who was a convicted drug importer,
had connections to the places where drugs were located.
[41]       As I will explain, the evidence that the accused was in knowing
possession of the drugs seized is overwhelming. As I will explain on the
evidence, there is no reasonable inference, plausible theory or reasonable
possibility that the accused is not guilty of the drug offences charged.
[42]        Det. White testified that she conducted the initial search of the Ford
Edge that the accused was driving when he was arrested. In the console between
the driver and passenger seats, she found a blue scale with residue that tested
positive as cocaine, fentanyl, and methamphetamine, a clear plastic container
containing 75.6 g. of what tested as cocaine, and a bag containing 731 g. of
what tested to be methamphetamine. Underneath the bag of methamphetamine, Det.
White found a clear container which had 1.9 g. of a substance, which tested
positive for fentanyl and benzodiazepine.
[43]       The value of the methamphetamine found in the console was $30,768 to
$114,435, and the value of the cocaine found in the console was $7,168 to
$9,856.
[44]       On the passenger seat was what appeared to be a rectangular tan case
which zipped up. It looked like a shaving case and contained a number of
prescription pill bottles all in the name of the accused. A piece of paper near
the gearshift related to an e-transfer dated March 23, 2022 sent by the
accused.
[45]       $1,220 in Canadian currency was on the driver side floor. There were
six cell phones in the vehicle, one of which was described as broken.
[46]       Det. Sgt. Thompson conducted a further search of the vehicle at the
police station. A wallet on the front seat had a driver’s licence in the name
of the accused with an address at 4538 Bruce Road 3, Port Elgin. There was also
a vehicle licence plate document showing the accused as the owner of the Ford
Edge.
[47]       Taking into account the totality of the evidence and, in particular,
the following:
[48]       The TDR data shows that the cell phones, which I have found were in
the possession of the accused, were very frequently in the vicinity of the
Barrie apartment. Det. Larson testified that typically the phones being tracked
were in the immediate vicinity of the apartment overnight.
[49]       Officer Conroy was conducting surveillance and observed the accused
at 8:09 a.m. as he walked from the vicinity of the apartment building at 193
Edgehill Drive to the Ford Edge vehicle. Following the arrest of the accused,
the police executed a search warrant at apartment 114.
[50]       Officers Groh, Conroy, and Bromley searched apartment 114, and Officer
Breedon was the exhibits officer. All of the drugs seized and, with one
exception, all of the items seized, were found in what Officer Bromley
testified was the master bedroom. He testified that the door to the bedroom had
to be forced open, but it was flimsy, and a “body check” forced it to open.
Det. Bromley found 15 rounds of .22 calibre ammunition on the top shelf of the
closet.
[51]       Officer Conroy found, beside the bed on the floor, a stone bowl with
a spoon that tested positive for cocaine, fentanyl, and methamphetamine. Under
a side table he found three vials which tested positive for benzodiazepine. He
also found three prescription bottles in the name of the accused. One bottle was
dated March 11, 2022. On a table he found pills that tested as oxycodone.
[52]       From under the bed, Officer Conroy seized a bag containing 589 g. of
what tested to be Phenacetin, which is a pain killer which can be used to augment
the weight of powdered drugs. Residue of this drug were found with other drug
residue on the scale from the Ford Edge, and on the scale and a stone bowl
seized from the bedroom.
[53]       Officer Conroy also seized a red suitcase found between the bed and
the window. Det. Larson testified that it contained Ontario, Quebec, Canada and
Pakistan government documents dated from the 1980s to 2019. He also located a
July 19, 2012 notarized letter signed by the accused, to permit his children to
travel to Costa Rica. Det. Larson also found a correctional centre visitor
authorization dated January 26, 2019, signed by the accused.
[54]       Taking into account the following:
[55]       The TDR data shows the cell phones, which I have found to be in the
possession of the accused, to be at the shop location very frequently from
December 7, 2021 to March 7, 2022.
[56]       The shop has a sign “BRE Towing & Tire Shop”. The letters “BRE”
are closely associated with the accused. The Ford Edge he drove on March 24,
2022, the day he was arrested, had “BRE” in red letters on the front hood. When
the search warrant was executed, the F350, Honda Civic, the Mazda, and the HINO
truck, were parked and all had the letters “BRE” prominently displayed. Mr.
Ali’s driver’s licence and a traffic ticket issued to him were in the glove box
of the Mazda. The Mazda ownership was in the name of a person with the same
street address as the accused in Barrie, although a different apartment number.
[57]       In the shop, Det. Sgt. Thompson found an MTO document related to a
vehicle transfer, which indicated that the transferor was the accused; a
handwritten receipt to Alex Williams for $1,500 in rent dated December 8, 2021,
and a March 23, 2022 government printout of the three-year driving record of
the accused.
[58]       There was also a camper trailer on the premises. Inside the camper
trailer was a government of Ontario document indicated that Tahir Ali and
Brenda Kwan were the general partners of BRE Tire Repair. Det. Sgt. Thompson
seized a number of pill bottles that were in a red cooler inside the camper
van. One pill bottle contained 87 oxycodone pills. Two pills were tested and were
positive for oxycodone. Another pill bottle had 60 pills, and two pills were
tested and were positive for oxycodone. Another pill bottle contained 15 pills,
and two pills were tested and were positive for codeine.
[59]       Det. Sgt. Knoll searched the F350 which was parked outside the shop
building. In the centre console he located the following:
[60]       A search of the Mazda located in the trunk, inside a green bag, two
notebooks with names and amounts consistent with a debt list. In the drive door
compartment, the police seized 19 g. of a substance that tested as fentanyl and
benzodiazepine.
[61]       Taking into account all of the relevant evidence and, in particular,
the following:
[62]        This is a two-storey farmhouse with two residential units. When the
police arrived to search, Michael Phillips and Kailey Kwan were inside. On the
second floor, there were three bedrooms, one of which had a padlock on it.
There was a blue cooler in the locked room, and marked as exhibit five was a
black notebook with the name Alex, and exhibit six, which was four dime bags.
The cooler also had inside it an Ontario government document, Employment Training
Income Report, with the “member” being the accused. The report was for the
month of May, 2021. Another government form was dated June, 2021, and the “member”
was the accused.
[63]       On top of the bedside table, there was a pink insurance slip in the
name of the accused, a business card with the name Sasha Ali, with telephone
number 705-500-2180. There was also an invoice to BRE Tire and General Repair
at the Kincardine address. There was also an Elections Canada document in the
name of Kailey Kwan.
[64]       In a white laundry basket, Det. Hamilton found 11 g of what tested
as methamphetamine. In the plastic cooler, he found an orange prescription
bottle with capsules, which tested as morphine. He also found an orange zip top
bag with cocaine in the cooler.
[65]       A photo from the bedroom shows packaging for the type of shaving
case found on the passenger seat of the Ford Edge when the accused was arrested.
This case contained various medications prescribed to the accused.
[66]       Taking into account the the following:
[67]       On the main floor, the police seized a .22 calibre Lakefield
Mossberg rifle and a .22 Cooey rifle. They were found leaning against items in
the corner of the room. While the accused frequently came to the house, the
evidence indicates that Kailey Kwan and Michael Phillips lived there. The only
thing linking these rifles to the accused is that they are .22 calibre rifles,
and 15 .22 calibre rounds were found in the Barrie apartment of the accused.
[68]       Counts five-ten all relate to the firearms and require proof beyond
a reasonable doubt that the accused was knowingly in possession of the
firearms. Given that the rifles were located on the main floor and not in the
locked room and given that .22 calibre rifles are not uncommon in rural areas,
the mere fact of .22 calibre ammunition being found in Barrie is not enough to
satisfy me beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused was in possession, or
joint possession, of these rifles. As such, I find the accused not guilty on
counts five-ten in the indictment.
[69]       Having found the accused to be in the possession of these drugs, the
quantity and value of the drugs is such that the only reasonable inference is
that the accused possessed these drugs for the purpose of trafficking.
[70]       I find the accused guilty as charged:
[71]       I find the accused not guilty on counts five-ten which related to
the two rifles seized from the Kincardine house.