[1]                  
The Appellant, Jose Carlos Tavora, appeals his conviction for impaired
operation of a conveyance and driving with a blood alcohol level over 80 mgs/100
mL, contrary to ss. 320.14(1)(a) and (b) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C.
1985, c. C-46 (the “Criminal Code”).
[2]                  
At trial, the Appellant argued that his rights under ss. 7, 8, 9, 10(a),
10 (b) and 11(d) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (the “Charter”)
were breached. The Charter application was dismissed. The Appellant
does not appeal the dismissal of his claims under ss. 7 and 11(d) of the Charter.
[3]                  
The Crown conceded that Mr. Tavora’s rights under s. 8 of the Charter
were breached because the arresting officer did not have an approved screening
device (the “ASD”) on scene when he made the demand for a breath sample. The concession was based on the Supreme Court of Canada’s
decision in R. v. Breault, 2023 SCC 9, 481 D.L.R. (4th) 195, which was
decided after the Appellant’s arrest but before the trial. In Breault,
the Supreme Court held that because of the requirement to provide a breath
sample “forthwith” under s. 254(2)(b) (now 320.27(1)(b)) of the Criminal
Code, a demand for a sample made cannot be presumed to be valid in the
absence of an ASD on scene.
[4]                  
In his Reasons for Judgment dated January 25, 2024 (the “Reasons”), Javed
J. (the “trial judge”) found that the breach of Mr. Tavora’s s. 8 rights
resulted in further “consequential” breaches of his rights under ss. 9 and
10(b) of the Charter. However, the trial judge declined to exclude the
evidence under s. 24(2) because he found that the officer had made a “single
misstep premised on a good faith and reasonable error” based on a change in the
law after the investigation. The Appellant was convicted of both offences.
[5]                  
Mr. Tavora appeals on the basis that the trial judge committed the
following errors:
[6]                  
For the reasons that follow, I dismiss the appeal.
[7]                  
The parties agreed to a blended hearing of the evidence on the ss. 7 and
11(d) issues and trial. The Crown called as witnesses the arresting officer, Police
Constable Brian Porcel, and the civilian who called 911, Michael Trottier. Mr.
Tavora testified on the ss. 7 and 11(d) Charter issues but not on the
ss. 8, 9 and 10(b) issues.
[8]                  
In brief, the evidence was that at approximately 4:23 p.m. on March 3,
2023, Mr. Tavora was investigated by Police Constable Brian Porcel of the
Toronto Police Service (the “TPS”) after receiving a 911 call about a driver
slumped over the wheel in his vehicle in a live lane of traffic. When the
officer arrived, the individual, Mr. Tavora, was being attended to by
paramedics.
[9]                  
The ASD arrived at 4:42 p.m. At 4:47 p.m., Mr. Tavora provided a
suitable sample. A fail result was registered at 4:48 p.m.
[10]              
The trial judge found, based on the Crown’s concession,
that the arresting officer’s approved screening device demand pursuant to s.
320.27(1) Criminal
Code was unlawful and in violation of Mr. Tavora’s
rights under s. 8 of the Charter. The trial judge further found that the
s. 8 breach led to “consequential” breaches of ss. 9 and 10(b). In respect of
the s. 9 breach, the trial judge found that the Appellant was unlawfully
detained for approximately 10 minutes between 4:34 p.m. when PC Porcel directed
him to sit in the back of the cruiser and 4:44 p.m. when the ASD arrived. The
trial judge rejected the Appellant’s position that he was detained from the
moment he began to interact with PC Porcel.
[11]              
The trial judge rejected the defence’s argument that
Mr. Tavora’s rights under s. 10(a) were breached from 4:23 p.m. to 4:52 p.m.,
when he was advised of the reason for his arrest. The trial judge found that PC
Porcel promptly informed the Appellant of the reason for his arrest at 4:52
p.m., after he failed the ASD test at 4:48 p.m.
[12]              
The trial judge found a breach of s. 10(b) of the Charter
based on PC Porcel’s unexplained delay in advising Mr. Tavora of his right
to counsel between 4:34 p.m. and 4:42 p.m. The trial judge found that he should
have advised Mr. Tavora of his right to counsel at 4:34 p.m., when he placed
him in the rear of his cruiser.
[13]              
The issues on this appeal are as follows:
[14]              
The standard of review to be applied by an appellate court to the
factual findings of a trial judge is that of palpable and overriding error.
Palpable means that the error is plain to see on the face of the decision.
The standard of review for questions of law is that of correctness
and for findings of fact is that of palpable and overriding error, but there is
also a presumption of fitness in favour of the trial judge that gives rise to
deference: Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235.
[15]              
The Appellant submits that the trial judge erred in finding that the
Appellant was detained when PC Porcel formed the requisite grounds for an ASD
demand. The Appellant argues that the trial judge’s error is based on his
related finding about when PC Porcel formed a reasonable suspicion for the ASD
demand, which the Appellant argues was by 4:26 p.m., and not 4:34 p.m., as
found by the trial judge. The Appellant submits that he was psychologically
detained at 4:26 p.m. because he was surrounded by uniformed personnel,
including two police officers, and could not have left the scene.
[16]              
The trial judge found that the Appellant was arbitrarily detained for
approximately 10 minutes, between 4:34 p.m., when PC Porcel directed Mr. Tavora
to sit in the back of the cruiser, to 4:44 p.m. when the ASD arrived. The application of the law to the facts in conducting the
inquiry of whether a reasonable person would conclude that they w343 “not free
to leave and to comply with the police direction or demand” is a question of
law that is reviewable for correctness. Deference is owed to a trial judge’s
findings of fact: R. v. Grant, [2009] 2 S.C.R. 353, 2009
SCC 32, at para. 43.  In my view, the Appellant has failed to
demonstrate that the trial judge erred in finding that the Appellant was
detained at 4:34 p.m.
[17]              
The evidence amply supports the trial judge’s finding that the Appellant
was detained at 4:34 p.m., when PC Porcel brought him to the cruiser, and not
before that. At 4:29 p.m., PC Porcel stepped away from the interaction with the
Appellant and had a discussion with the paramedic about the fact that he could
not smell alcohol. At 4:30 p.m., the Appellant started to walk away from the
scene, however, the paramedic prevented him from leaving. This demonstrates
that: (i) Mr. Tavora felt he could leave, negating that he was psychologically
detained; and (ii) it was the paramedic, and not PC Porcel, who prevented Mr.
Tavora from leaving. At 4:31 p.m., PC Porcel asked whether the Appellant had
any medical condition that would explain his behaviour. The Appellant responded
that he did not. Those steps demonstrate that at that stage, the officer had
not yet formed a view as to whether he could arrest Mr. Tavora. At 4:32 p.m., the
officer directed Mr. Tavora to come with him to his cruiser. At 4:34 p.m., the
Appellant entered the cruiser and was told he could not leave.
[18]              
At trial, the defence did not cross-examine PC Porcel about whether he
had formed his suspicion earlier than 4:34 p.m. Moreover, the Appellant, who
did not testify on the ss. 8, 9 and 10(b) issues, did not give evidence that he
felt psychologically detained at any point prior to 4:34 p.m.
[19]              
The trial judge found that PC Porcel made the ASD demand at 4:36 p.m.,
or within four minutes of forming a reasonable suspicion. The Appellant submits
that the trial judge’s finding that PC Porcel formed a reasonable suspicion at
4:32 p.m. caused him to err in finding that the officer made the ASD demand
forthwith. Based on the Appellant’s position that PC Porcel had a reasonable
suspicion at 4:26 p.m., he argues that the officer did not make the ASD demand
until 10 minutes after forming a reasonable suspicion, which was not forthwith.
The Appellant submits that there was no justification for the delay.
[20]              
The Crown submits that this is a new argument raised by the Appellant on
appeal and ought not to be considered by this court absent exceptional
circumstances. The Crown notes that PC Porcel was not cross-examined as to what
time he formed a reasonable suspicion.
[21]              
The rationale for prohibiting parties from
raising new arguments on appeal is well-established and includes the following
considerations: (i) prejudice caused to the other side, which lacks the opportunity to respond
and adduce evidence at trial; (ii) the absence of a sufficient record from
which to make findings of fact essential to a proper determination of the
issue; (iii) the societal interest in finality and the expectation that
criminal cases will be disposed of fairly and fully at first instance; and (iv)
the important responsibility of defence counsel to make decisions that
represent a client's best interests and to advance all appropriate arguments
throughout the trial:  R. v. Reid, 2016 ONCA 524, 132 O.R. (3d) 26, at
paras. 39-40, leave to appeal dismissed, [2017] S.C.C.A. No. 37214.
[22]              
The Appellant has not shown any exceptional circumstances that would warrant
this court considering a new argument regarding the timeliness of the ASD
demand for the first time on appeal.
[23]              
Had I determined it appropriate to consider this issue on appeal, the
record amply supports that the officer made the ASD demand promptly upon his
forming a reasonable suspicion. As noted above, until 4:31 p.m., PC Porcel was
taking further investigatory steps. He made the demand one minute later when he
asked Mr. Tavora to accompany him to the cruiser to await the ASD. The trial
judge thus did not make a palpable and overriding error in finding that the
officer made the ASD demand forthwith.
[24]              
The Appellant submits that the trial judge erred in finding that PC
Porcel acted in good faith compliance with the pre-Breault law because
he failed to take into account that under the law before Breault, an
officer was required to give an individual his rights to counsel upon detention
and while waiting for the ASD to arrive. The Appellant submits that this breach
of s. 10(b) ought to have weighed into the trial judge’s consideration of the Grant
factors under s. 24(2) of the Charter.
[25]              
The Crown submits that while the trial judge did not explicitly advert
to a potential s. 10(b) breach under the pre-Breault law, he nonetheless
considered whether PC Porcel could have facilitated the Appellant’s right to
counsel at the roadside while they were waiting for the ASD to arrive and found
that it would have been impracticable.
[26]              
Under the pre-Breault law, police officers were required to
inform individuals of their right to counsel and to turn their minds to the
issue of whether a call to counsel could be facilitated before the arrival of
the ASD: R. v. Quansah, 2012 ONCA 123, 287 O.A.C. 383, at para. 34. At
trial, PC Porcel testified that he chose not to facilitate right to counsel
while waiting for the ASD because he did not think it was required. He admitted
that he was wrong in failing to do so. As a result, PC Porcel’s failure to
inform the Appellant of his right to counsel and to turn his mind to
facilitating a call to counsel before the ASD arrived was in breach of s. 10(b)
of the Charter.
[27]              
While the trial judge did not make a specific finding of a breach of Mr.
Tavora’s s. 10(b) rights under the pre-Breault law, he found a
consequential s. 10(b) breach of 8 minutes, resulting from the unexplained
delay from the time Mr. Tavora was put in the cruiser (4:34 p.m.) and the arrival
of the ASD (4:42 p.m.).
[28]              
In addition, the trial judge made findings of fact on the evidence
before him that it would have been impracticable for PC Porcel to facilitate a
call to counsel at the side of the road while waiting for the ASD. PC Porcel
had admitted that he knew that the Appellant had a cell phone available. However,
PC Porcel testified that he put Mr. Tavora in the back of the cruiser for his
own safety and that he could not afford him privacy in the vehicle. PC Porcel’s
evidence was that the Appellant was in a highly intoxicated state and at one
point had to be escorted out of a live lane of traffic. Moreover, PC Porcel
believed the ASD would arrive in 5-10 minutes.
[29]              
The trial judge also took into consideration the fact that Mr. Tavora
was promptly advised of his right to counsel after being arrested and chose not
to invoke his right at the roadside. Instead, he invoked the right to counsel
much later in the investigation. He declined once again at 6:02 p.m., after he
was booked at the station. A call to counsel was made promptly once the
Appellant asserted his right to counsel at 6:33 p.m.
[30]              
The trial judge was also entitled to take into consideration how long it
took to reach counsel in determining whether there was a reasonable opportunity
to consult counsel at the roadside: R. v. Torsney, 2007 ONCA 67, at
para. 12, leave to appeal dismissed, [2007] S.C.C.A. No. 31921. In this case,
it took 10 minutes for the ASD to arrive. Once a call to Mr. Tavora’s counsel
was made, it took 14 minutes for counsel to respond.
[31]              
While the trial judge did not explicitly advert to the question of
whether there was a breach of s. 10(b) under the pre-Breault law, his
reasons reflect an implicit consideration of the issue. As a result, it is
unlikely that the officer’s failure to advise the Appellant of his right to
counsel and to turn his mind to facilitating a call to counsel roadside would
have significantly affected the trial judge’s consideration of the Grant factors.
[32]              
The issue of what, if any, impact the failure to provide rights to
counsel ought to have impacted the trial judge’s Grant analysis is
considered below.
[33]              
The next two issues will be considered together. In his reasons, the
trial judge referenced the Supreme Court’s decision in R. v. Zacharias,
2023 SCC 30, 431 C.C.C. (3d) 421, and stated as follows (Reasons, at
para. 96):
[34]              
The Appellant’s argument on these issues is, in essence, that the trial
judge erred in his analysis under s. 24(2) of the Charter because he
failed to sufficiently take into consideration the additional Charter breaches
that flowed from the invalid ASD demand. The Appellant submits that although
the trial judge found, applying Breault, that the ASD demand was in
breach of s. 8 of the Charter, he failed to excise the result of the
ASD, as required under Zacharias. The Appellant argues that this
resulted in the trial judge understating both the seriousness of the state
conduct and the impact of the breaches on the Appellant when he conducted the Grant
analysis. Further, as a result of this error, the Appellant submits that no
deference is owed to the trial judge’s analysis under s. 24(2) of the Charter.
[35]              
The Crown acknowledges that while the trial judge referred to
“consequential breaches” and references the Supreme Court’s decision in Zacharias,
he did not explicitly state that the ASD result was excised or otherwise engage
in the process outlined by the Supreme Court in that case. Accordingly, the
Crown concedes that it is open to this court to conduct the s. 24(2) analysis
afresh. The Crown submits, however, that this would have no impact on the outcome.
[36]              
I agree that while the trial judge’s reasoning in relation to the s.
24(2) analysis was consistent with the Supreme Court’s analysis in Zacharias,
he did not explicitly follow the process articulated in that case.
[37]              
In Zacharias, at para. 41, Rowe and O’Bonsawin JJ., writing for
the majority, held that where the grounds for arrest are based on evidence that
is subsequently found to have been unlawfully obtained, in determining whether
the police had reasonable and probable grounds for arrest, the evidence must be
excised from the factual matrix. The majority went on to state as follows:
[38]              
The majority further held that where an arrest is unlawful because it is
premised on the results of a Charter breach, it is the initial Charter
breach that renders what follows unlawful. The majority referred to the
subsequent breaches, in the s. 24(2) analysis as “consequential” as distinguished
from additional or independent misconduct, which would be factored differently into
the s. 24(2) analysis: Zacharias, at paras. 47-48.
[39]              
Accordingly, given that the ASD demand was unlawful, under the Zacharias
analysis, the result of the ASD had to be excised. Because the trial judge
did not excise the ASD result, he did not engage in an analysis as to whether
the subsequent arrest, approved device demands, and detention at the station
were also in breach of the Appellant’s Charter rights. In my view, this
was the error committed by the trial judge, as opposed to finding that the Charter
breaches “ended” when the ASD arrived, as argued by the Appellant.
[40]              
The trial judge declined to determine whether the evidence was otherwise
discoverable despite the Breault breach because PC Porcel was not asked
what he would have done in the absence of the ASD procedure. He found that the
officer was diligent, mindful and acutely aware of his legal obligations. The
trial judge further found that there were ample grounds to arrest Mr. Tavora
for the offence of care and control of a motor vehicle given all the
circumstances known to him.
[41]              
Based on the record before me, I find that once the result of the ASD
test is excised, the officer lacked reasonable and probable grounds to arrest
Mr. Tavora, rendering the subsequent actions taken by police all in breach of
the Charter. Specifically, Mr. Tavora was unlawfully arrested and
detained, contrary to s. 9 of the Charter. Further, the subsequent breath
samples taken at the station were in breach of his s. 8 rights.
[42]              
In view of the trial judge’s error, I am required to conduct the s.
24(2) analysis afresh, with deference to the underlying findings of fact made
by the trial judge: R. v. Samuels, 2024 ONCA 786, at para. 49.
[43]              
The first line of inquiry under s. 24(2)
asks whether the Charter‑infringing state conduct is so
serious that the court must dissociate itself from it. In evaluating the
gravity of the state conduct at issue, the court must situate that conduct on a
scale of culpability: R. v. Paterson, 2017 SCC 15, [2017] 1 S.C.R. 202,
at para. 43. In Zacharias, at para. 53, the majority held that: “[w]here
the only connection to the initial Charter breach that is the source of
misconduct, and where the police honestly believe they are proceeding lawfully,
the subsequent state conduct is unlikely to meaningfully increase the
seriousness of the Charter-infringing state conduct.”
[44]              
 In Zacharias, at para. 52, the
majority held that an unlawful arrest that is a consequential breach is
unlikely to significantly impact the overall seriousness of the Charter-infringing
state conduct. In that case, an unlawful sniffer dog search led the police to arrest
the defendant for possession of a controlled substance and to detain him at the
police station for several hours. Even after excising the results of the search
of the defendant’s vehicle and finding consequential breaches of his s. 9, the
majority concluded that the Charter-infringing state conduct was
inadvertent and did not strongly favour exclusion.
[45]              
In R. v. McColman, 2023 SCC 8, 167 O.R.
(3d) 559, where the officers conducted a random sobriety stop on private
property, and the state of the law was uncertain, the Supreme Court found that
the breach was not so serious as to require the court to disassociate itself
from the police’s actions.
[46]              
In this case, once the ASD result is excised, as required under Zacharias,
it is necessary to take into consideration the subsequent Charter breaches
as follows: (i) the unlawful arrest; (ii) the subsequent approved instrument
demands; and (iii) the Appellant’s nine-hour detention at the station. As
explained above regarding the s. 10(b) violation under pre-Breault law,
it is also necessary to consider PC Porcel’s failure to advise Mr. Tavora of
his right to counsel at 4:34 p.m. when he was first detained, which was not in
accordance with the law at the time.
[47]              
In my view, as was the case in Zacharias, the subsequent Charter
breaches (with the exception of the s. 10(b) breach) were consequential to the
initial breach. It is the initial breach in making the ASD demand
without an approved device, which was lawful at the time but subsequently
became unlawful, that is the source of the misconduct. The subsequent breaches
were the “normal consequences of the arrest” and do not increase the
seriousness of the Charter-infringing state conduct: Zacharias,
at para. 53.
[48]              
Moreover, the trial judge found no evidence of bad faith or willful
misconduct on the part of the officer. At the time of the arrest, he could not
have known that it was unlawful to make the ASD demand, because the law changed
subsequently. While PC Porcel ought to have advised Mr. Tavora of his right to
counsel when he made the ASD demand, consistent with pre-Breault law, he
acknowledged that this was a mistake. He did take into consideration the length
of time it would take for the ASD to arrive and whether he could safely afford
Mr. Tavora the requisite degree of privacy to make a call to counsel in the
meantime. In any event, even after being advised of his right to counsel at the
roadside approximately 20 minutes later, the Appellant declined to invoke it.
[49]              
Accordingly, taking into consideration the initial breach of s. 8 in
making the ASD demand and the subsequent consequential breaches, as well as the
breach of s. 10(b) while waiting for the ASD to arrive, I nonetheless find the Charter-infringing
state conduct to be moderately serious. As was the case in Zacharias,
the first factor favours exclusion of the evidence, but only slightly.
[50]              
The second Grant factor relates to the seriousness of the impact
of the Charter breaches on the Charter-protected interests of the
accused. The court must situate the impact of the breaches on a spectrum
ranging from impacts that are fleeting, technical or trivial to those that are
profoundly intrusive or that seriously compromise the interests underlying the rights
infringed: R. v. Tim, 2022 SCC 12, [2022] 1 S.C.R. 234, at para. 90.
[51]              
In McColman, the Supreme Court found that the unlawful police
stop was a marked intrusion on the defendant’s Charter-protected
interests because he was stopped on private property where his privacy interest
was higher, arrested, brought to the station, and detained for several hours.
However, the court found that the second line of inquiry only moderately
favoured exclusion.
[52]              
In this case, the Appellant’s rights under ss. 8, 9, 10(a) and 10(b) were
infringed. Section 8 protects an individual’s expectation of privacy. Section 9
protects an individual’s liberty from unjustified state interference: Zacharias,
at para. 71. Section 10 protects the individual from self-incrimination and
their ability to consult with counsel who can assist with understanding the procedures
they will be subject to and the jeopardy they face:  R. v. Rover, 2018
ONCA 745, 143 O.R. (3d) 135, at para. 45.
[53]              
The taking of a breath sample has been found to be minimally intrusive to
a detainee’s right to privacy, especially when they are told what is happening:
R. v. Stillman, 1997 CanLII 384 (SCC), [1997] 1 S.C.R. 607, at para. 90. At the same time, Mr.
Tavora was unlawfully arrested and required to provide further breath samples.
He was then detained for approximately nine hours, albeit to some extent for
his own safety and the safety of others.
[54]              
Although I have found a breach of the Appellant’s s. 10(b) rights under
pre-Breault law, the delay in being informed of his right to counsel was
at most 20 minutes long. In any event, Mr. Tavora did not invoke his right to
counsel at the roadside, indicating, as the trial judge found, that he did not
feel the need to avail himself of this potential “lifeline.”
[55]              
As noted by the trial judge, Mr. Tavora did not testify as to the impact
that the ss. 8, 9 and 10(b) breaches had on him, resulting in an evidentiary
gap.
[56]              
In my view, the impact of the initial Charter-breach on the
Appellant’s Charter-protected interests was moderately serious. Accordingly,
this factor moderately favours exclusion of the evidence.
[57]              
The third line of inquiry asks whether the truth-seeking function of the
criminal trial process would be better served by admission of the evidence or
by its exclusion: McColman, at para. 69. The court must consider both
the negative impact of admission of the evidence and the impact of failing to
admit the evidence on the long-term repute of the administration of justice: Grant,
at para. 79, Harrison, at para. 36.
[58]              
The evidence is reliable and essential to the Crown’s case. Further, I agree
with the trial judge’s finding that society has a significant interest in
seeing a trial on the merits in cases of impaired driving given the serious toll
caused by drinking and driving. The third factor weighs strongly in favour of
inclusion.
[59]              
In R. v. Lafrance, 2022 SCC 32, 472 D.L.R. (4th) 1, at para. 90,
the Supreme Court held that “it is the cumulative weight of the first
two lines of inquiry that trial judges must consider and balance against the
third line of inquiry” (emphasis in original). The overriding consideration in
any s. 24(2) analysis is whether admitting the evidence would bring the
administration of justice into disrepute: R. v. Whittaker, 2024 ONCA
182, 435 C.C.C. (3d) 221, at para. 60.
[60]              
In my view, as was the case in Zacharias and McColman, the
first two Grant factors do not pull strongly enough toward exclusion to
outweigh the third.
[61]              
Based on my balancing of the Grant factors, this is not a case in
which the court should dissociate itself from evidence obtained in this manner.
In the circumstances of this case, a reasonable person informed of the relevant
circumstances and familiar with Charter values would conclude that the
exclusion of the evidence would bring the long-term reputation of the
administration of justice into disrepute. In the end, although by a different
route, I arrive at the same conclusion as the trial judge.
[62]              
Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.
[63]              
Pursuant to the parties’ joint request, two amendments are to be made to
the information: