[1]              
The plaintiff, Mr. Meffe, is a disappointed land developer.
[2]              
He brings this action against the City of Toronto (the “City”) seeking
costs and damages as a result of the denial of his application for site plan
approval with respect to 1982 Islington Avenue (the “Property”).
[3]              
The City brings a motion to strike the plaintiff’s claim pursuant to r.
21.01(1)(a), and 21.01(3)(b) and (d).
[4]              
For the reasons that follow, I dismiss this case as a collateral attack
on administrative decisions made in the context of the plaintiff’s application
for site plan approval.
[5]              
The moving party succeeds in this argument.
[6]              
Rule 21.01(3)(d) provides that a defendant may move before a judge to
have an action stayed or dismissed on the ground that it is “frivolous,
vexatious or an abuse of process.”
[7]              
The basic facts pleaded in the Statement of Claim are as follows:
[8]              
In 2017, the corporation Dixil Properties Inc., purchased the Property.
Dixil is 60 % owned by Domenic A. Meffe Inc. The plaintiff is the sole and
majority shareholder of Domenic. A. Meffe Inc. There is an existing heritage
building on the Property.
[9]              
In 2014 the plaintiff applied for a site plan approval to redevelop the
Property which included a request for minor variances. His application included
retention of the existing heritage building with a six-story addition to
include an office, institutional and restaurant uses.
[10]          
In 2017 the City’s planning department denied this application on the
basis that the proposed “office use for the new addition required a zoning and
Official Plan Amendment application.”
[11]          
The plaintiff then submitted two variance applications in respect of the
Property to the Committee of Adjustments (the “COA”), both of which were denied
in 2018.
[12]          
The plaintiff then submitted his appeal to the Toronto Land Appeal Board
(the “TLAB”).
[13]          
After a three-day hearing, on January 29, 2021, the TLAB issued a 30-page
decision upholding the decision of the COA. The plaintiff then requested a
review of the TLAB decision, which decision was then confirmed on April 29,
2021.
[14]          
The plaintiff then determined that he would revise his proposal and
remove the “office use” in the proposed addition and seek the City’s support
for this.
[15]          
The plaintiff then engaged in a Pre-Application Consultation process (“PAC”).
A PAC is contemplated in both the Planning Act and the City of
Toronto Act, 2006 and is for advising on what is required to submit a
complete application for redevelopment as prescribed under the Planning Act
and the City's Official Plan.
[16]          
The plaintiff attended a PAC meeting on September 23, 2021. Ten City
department officials attended.
[17]          
The plaintiff then brought this proceeding on January 18, 2023, against
the City of Toronto.
[18]          
The plaintiff’s claims can be grouped in the following categories.
[19]          
Throughout the Claim the plaintiff makes various allegations that the
TLAB and COA decision makers were “unfair”, “unreasonable”, that they
“frivolously and unjustly denied the appeal” and that they failed to consider
“merit, reasonableness, probability, or logic.” He also references the witness
and documentary evidence that was placed before these bodies. He provides
detailed reasons and analysis of why the COA and TLAB decision are wrong.
[20]          
He asked the PAC Committee whether the planning department supported the
parking and height variances he intended to request in a new application, and
whether previously submitted reports were acceptable to proceed with a new site
plan application process. The PAC breached its duty to him when it did not
respond.
[21]          
In rejecting his initial application and in its position in the
litigation that ensued, the City acted in bad faith and contrary to explicit
policies and intent of the Official Plan, the zoning By-Law and the applicable
legislation.
[22]          
The City provided deliberately misleading evidence and provided
contrived arguments at the hearing before the TLAB.
[23]          
 The City is the sole authority for all planning matters. The City is
responsible for City departments and tribunals that are under the City’s
control including the planning department, the COA, the TLAB and the PAC
committee. The City abused its power.  The City’s Planning Department and
various tribunals prejudiced the plaintiff’s right to a fair and reasonable process
which led to the denial of his application for redevelopment.
[24]          
Paragraph 1 of the Statement of Claim requests costs incurred in his
redevelopment applications including $450,000 to provide and submit materials
to the City, and the lost opportunity of having been able to develop the
Property.
[25]          
It states that “For clarity, this claim does not seek zoning or planning
approvals but only the costs, and damages as a result of the denial of process
resulting in the denials of the approvals sought.”
[26]          
There are many reasons why all claims that culminated in the TLAB review
decision dated April 21, 2021 are an abuse of process:
[27]          
With respect to events that took place after the TLAB dismissed the
plaintiff’s request for reconsideration, the plaintiff has not articulated a
viable cause of action.
[28]          
As noted, the particulars of this claim are that the PAC failed to
indicate whether the planning department supported the parking and height
variances he intended to request in a new application, and whether previously
submitted reports were acceptable to proceed with a new site plan application process.
[29]          
At the hearing before me, the plaintiff argued that the City had a duty
to provide him with this information. Therefore, it seems to me that the cause
of action alleged is negligence. It is trite that to establish negligence a
party must prove the existence of a duty of care, that the standard of care was
breached and that the breach of the duty caused him harm.
[30]          
However, the plaintiff provided no caselaw to support the existence of a
duty of care to him of this nature. In my view, it would be difficult to
establish the City owes a duty of care to a developer. The City is responsible
for approving or not approving applications as part of its municipal mandate
pursuant to legislation, where it acts in the public interest. A duty of care
to an applicant developer could place the City in a conflict of interest.
[31]          
As well, allegations of negligence must be pleaded with particularity
and there are insufficient particulars: Cerquiera v. Ontario, 2010 ONSC
3954 at para 111.
[32]          
Even if the PAC or City owed the plaintiff a duty of care to obtain this
information for him, the plaintiff’s own pleading says that he decided not to
exercise his right to continue with another land-use planning application.
[33]          
The City cannot be responsible in law for lost opportunities from a possible
land-use planning application that the plaintiff could have, but did not bring.
Launching a claim of this nature is an abuse of process because it seeks to
hold the City liable for an alleged harm that the plaintiff suffered due to his
own decision, in circumstances where it cannot be known what the outcome would
have been if he had simply proceeded with his revised application.
[34]          
Additionally, the Claim is filled with bald allegations of bad faith
which also supports the conclusion that this claim is an abuse of process: Kahn
v. LSO at para 35.
[35]          
Rule 21.01(3)(c) provides that a defendant may move before a judge to
have an action dismissed on the grounds that the plaintiff is without legal
capacity to commence or continue the action.
[36]          
As noted above, the plaintiff does not own the Property. It is owned by
a corporation Dixil who is not a plaintiff.
[37]          
Even if he is a shareholder, shareholders of a corporation do not have a
cause of action for alleged wrongs to the corporation: Hercules Management Ltd.
v. Ernst & young, 1997 CanLII 345 (SCC) at para 59; Grant v. Town of
Collingwood, 2013 ONSC 1720 at para 60 aff’d CA.
[38]          
I reject the plaintiff’s argument that because he is the alter ego
behind Dixil, he is in the best position to access and put forwards the facts
and evidence in this matter and that it would be in the interests of justice to
permit him to pursue this claim.
[39]          
I note that if this was the only problem with the Claim, the City of
Toronto agreed that Dixil could be substituted for the plaintiff.
[40]          
Under r. 21.01(1)(a) a party can seek a determination before trial of a
question of law raised by a pleading in an action where the determination of
the question may dispose of all or part of the action. No evidence is
admissible without leave of the court.
[41]          
The Court of Appeal has confirmed that where there are no material facts
in dispute, limitation period issues can be determined pursuant to this rule: Davidoff
v. Sobeys Ontario, 2019 ONCA 684 at para 14.
[42]          
However, given that this matter is already being struck as an abuse of
process, there is no need to consider this argument.
[43]          
Leave to amend will only be denied in the clearest of cases when it is
plain and obvious that no tenable cause of action is possible on the facts as
alleged and there is no reason to suppose that the party could improve his or
her case by any amendment: Mitchell v. Lewis, 2016 ONCA 903, 134 O.R.
(3d) 524, at para. 21; Conway v. Law Society of Upper Canada, 2016 ONCA
72, 395 D.L.R. (4th) 100, at para. 16; South Holly Holdings Ltd. v. The Toronto-Dominion
Bank, 2007 ONCA 456, at para. 6.
[44]          
There are a number of reasons why I would not grant leave to amend.
[45]          
In Kahn v. LSO at para 36, the court held that where a claim is a
collateral attack on prior administrative tribunal decisions, there is no
prospect that the pleading could be amended to cure the defect.
[46]          
The plaintiff says that in October 2023 he requested and obtained the
defendant’s consent to serve an amended claim. However, as of the date of this
motion, the plaintiff has not. Had there been amendments that could cure the
defects, the plaintiff had already received consent to amend and did not do so.
[47]          
Although the plaintiff would like to plead fraud, what he described as
the alleged fraudulent conduct was all of the same things related to the
various proceedings, already pleaded. Recasting this case as fraud is just
another attempt to get around the decisions of the COA and the TLAB by calling
the alleged conduct something different. Additionally, fraud must be pleaded
with particularity pursuant to r. 25.06(8) and the plaintiff could not provide
sufficient particulars of this alleged fraud.
[48]          
Although he would also like to recast his claim as one of principle in
order to hold City officials and personnel accountable, there is a specific
process established in the legislation relating to land use approval. The City
has a planning department that makes decisions to approve or not approve at
first instance. Those decisions can be appealed to the COA, whose decisions can
be appealed to the TLAB. Then, if a party is still unsatisfied, they can
proceed to the Divisional Court.
[49]          
All the things that the plaintiff wishes to argue regarding the failure
of the COA and the TLAB to provide a due fair process could have and should
have been raised before the Divisional Court. This is the way accountability is
achieved.
[50]          
The plaintiff had the opportunity and failed to persuade these expert
administrative bodies that the City was wrong in its assessment, or that it had
done anything wrong, notwithstanding all of the same submissions and arguments
made before me. In the circumstances, to the extent he is seeking to recast his
claim as involving alleged misfeasance in public office, that claim is also
bound to fail.
[51]          
This matter is res judicata no matter how the plaintiff tries to recast
it: Salasel v. Cuthbertson at para 22.
[52]          
Therefore, I do not grant leave to amend.
[53]          
The motion is granted and the action is dismissed.
[54]          
If the parties cannot resolve costs, they may make submissions as
follows: the City within 5 days and the plaintiff within 5 days thereafter no
longer than 5 pages each.