[1]              
The Plaintiffs have brought a motion seeking to correct misnomer. There
are essentially two motions before the court involving two classes of proposed
defendants.
[2]              
In Motion #1, the Plaintiffs seek relief against what will be referred
to as the Cooper Lighting Defendants:
[3]              
In Motion #2, the Plaintiffs seek to correct the misnomer with respect
to Defendants who will be referred to as the Koller Defendants. The Plaintiffs
seek to correct the misnomer of “John Doe Manufacturer” with SLP Lighting LLC,
Koller Enterprises and David Koller.
[4]              
There is also related relief relating to the amendments to the title of
proceedings, corresponding amendments to the Amended Statement of Claim and an
order for the new Defendants to file their defences.
[5]              
These motions arise from a fire which occurred on or about March 7, 2017,
in St. Eugene, Ontario. A Notice of Action was issued on
December 31, 2018, roughly 21 months after the fire. The Plaintiffs alleged that a fluorescent light
fixture or light bulb is the
origin and cause of the fire. The Statement of Claim was issued on
January 30, 2019. The action named 12 “John Doe” Defendants and seven named Defendants.
[6]              
On April 2, 2020, an exemplar light fixture, or luminaire, installed at the property and supplied to the Plaintiffs was found to have a label identifying “Cooper Lighting – Monterrey Mexico N.L.” and determined that
Philips Lighting Co and SLP Lighting LLC were involved as manufacturers.
[7]              
Following the discovery of the label identifying the
names Cooper Lighting – Monterrey Mexico N.L., the Plaintiffs have embarked on
numerous steps and proceedings in an attempt to serve all the Defendants it
seeks to include in the litigation. There have been numerous disputes
surrounding the service of the Amended Statement of Claim along with the
identification of whom should properly be named as a Defendant in this
litigation. At certain times during these proceedings, counsel for various
parties have been guilty of not being explicit as to the proper corporate names
of the various corporate entities and this has led to much confusion for the
court.
[8]              
In the end, the court is satisfied that the guiding
principles of the law of misnomer have been complied with by the Plaintiffs and
that there are not grounds upon which the court should exercise its discretion
and refuse the requested relief. The bottom line is that a generous reading of
the Statement of Claim would have allowed any of the proposed corporate defendants
to realize that the litigation finger was pointed at them and that the law of
misnomer allows the Plaintiffs to have them named as defendants.
[9]              
This action relates to a fire which occurred on March
7, 2017, in St. Eugene, Ontario.
[10]          
A Notice of Action was issued on December 31, 2018 and the
resulting Statement of Claim issued on January 30, 2019. It is alleged that the
fire was ignited by a failure of a light fixture in the subject premises. The
substantive paragraph of the claim relating to the light fixture is set out as
follows:
[11]          
The Statement of Claim included a number of pseudonyms related to the
said light fixture including: John Doe Ballast Manufacturer, John Doe Ballast
Distributor, John Doe Ballast Supplier, John Doe Light Manufacturer, John Doe
Light Distributor, John Doe Light Supplier, John Doe Manufacturer, John Doe
Distributor, John Doe Supplier, John Doe Contractor 1, John Doe Contractor 2,
and John Doe Contractor 3.
[12]          
On this motion, the respondents (the proposed
defendants to the action) advance that the presumptive limitation period ended on or about March 7, 2019. As of that date, the Plaintiffs had not
taken any steps to modify any of the “John Doe” pseudonyms in their original Statement of
Claim.
[13]          
On April 2, 2020, an investigation by the Plaintiffs
revealed an exemplar light fixture contained a label indicating the name “Cooper Lighting
– Monterrey, N.L., Mexico”
would have been at the cause of the fire. There was also a ULC file number on
the label associated with Cooper Lighting LLC.
[14]          
On April 22, 2021,
over two years after the original Statement
of Claim was issued,
the Plaintiffs brought
a motion returnable on August 6, 2021,
for an Order to correct
misnomers. The relief requested was as follows:
[15]          
The misnomer motion
proceeded on August 6, 2021. Justice
Williams ordered the style
of cause to be corrected and the Defendants, John Doe Ballast Manufacturer and John Doe Manufacturer, were substituted with Cooper Lighting
Internacional S. de R.L. de C.V. and Philips Lighting
Co.
[16]          
The Plaintiffs had sought relief against SLP Lighting,
LLC. There were communications between counsel for the Plaintiffs and counsel
for SLP Lighting and it was agreed amongst them that the motion to include SLP
Lighting, LLC would be withdrawn without costs. The wording of the order signed
stated that the motion as against SLP Lighting, LLC was dismissed without
costs. There is no evidence that the motion against SLP Lighting, LLC was
adjudicated on the merits. SLP Lighting, LLC is purported to be a related company
to Koller Enterprises and David Koller.
[17]          
An Amended Statement
of Claim was issued
on September 8, 2021, and served on
the Defendants on December 22, 2021,
at the place of business of Philips Lighting Co.
[18]          
There is a lengthy history concerning various corporate
entities which are related to Phillips Lighting and Cooper Lighting brand
names. The Plaintiffs allege that since May 2018, Philips Lighting was
recognized as Signify. Following the name change, Signify purchased and
acquired Cooper Lighting. As of December 22, 2021, Signify owned, operated and
had fully integrated Cooper Lighting.
[19]          
There is clearly a complex corporate structure to the
corporations who operate under the names Signify, Cooper Lighting, and Philips
Lighting. The Cooper Defendants have done little to clarify those relationships
for the court. The materials and submissions seem to almost use the various
entities associated to Signify, Cooper Lighting and Philips Lighting interchangeably
which is confusing at time.
[20]          
On November 16, 2021, the Defendant Philips Lighting
Co. retained counsel, Andrew Lee of Bell Temple LLP, to represent both Philips
Lighting Co. and Cooper Lighting Internacional S. de R.L. de C.V. (“Cooper Lighting Internacional”). Mr.
Lee advised that he prepared a Statement of Defence for his clients and would
serve and file them once his clients had been properly served with the Amended
Statement of Claim.
[21]          
On June 13, 2023, the Plaintiffs appointed Martin P.
Forget as solicitor of record.
[22]          
Over many months, there were numerous disputes between
the parties to ascertain if the Defendants had been properly served.
Specifically, Cooper Lighting Internacional took the position that service had
to be through the Hague Convention.
[23]          
The Plaintiffs took the position that they served
Cooper Lighting Internacional in the following ways:
[24]          
In or about April of 2024, the Plaintiffs became aware
that the entity Cooper Lighting Internacional S. de R.L. de C.V. had ceased to
exist in or about 2004 after being amalgamated into a subsidiary of Cooper
Lighting LLC known as Cooper Lighting de Mexico, S. de R.L. de C.V. (now
referred to as “Cooper Lighting Mexico”). In addition, it became known that
Cooper Lighting Canada Limited was a distributor for Cooper Lighting Mexico.
[25]          
As set out above, service of the Amended Statement of
Claim which included the corrected misnomers by Justice Williams was made
through the Hague Convention in early July 2024 in respect of Cooper Lighting
Internacional.
[26]          
Accordingly, and leading into this motion, the issue of
service or substituted service was resolved. With the service of Cooper
Lighting Internacional through the Hague Convention, the proposed
Cooper/Phillips/Signify Defendants have agreed with the Plaintiffs that if the court
grants the Plaintiffs’ motion
and permits their addition to the case, then the Plaintiffs can serve them through
Lerners LLP via an email to Steve Schenke at sschenke@lerners.c on a condition that by agreeing to accept service
in this alternative way, none of these proposed new Defendants will not be waiving any of its legal,
procedural, substantive, appellate or other rights by doing so.
[27]          
Accordingly, the court was only asked to deal with the
misnomer motions.
[28]          
The Plaintiffs advance that the law of misnomer has progressed beyond
the point of simply correcting spelling errors. The Plaintiffs state that it
was clear that the litigation finger was pointed towards the proposed defendants
and that the lack of due diligence raised by the proposed defendants is not a
reason to deny the misnomer.
[29]          
The Cooper Defendants claim that the proposed amendments sought by the
Plaintiffs are not the correction of misnomers as the Statement of Claim did
not provide sufficient information to allow for the litigation finger to be
pointed at these proposed defendants as the allegations were too vague. On a
fair reading of the Statement of Claim, the Cooper Defendants would not have known
that they were being sued.
[30]          
In addition, the Cooper Defendants state that the court should be
exercising its discretion to refuse the requested relief on the basis that the
Plaintiffs delayed bringing a motion to correct the misnomer and that they have
flouted the limitation period by doing so. In addition, there is nothing in the
motion record that provides any excuse or explanation for the delay in
presenting this motion.
[31]          
The Koller Defendants claim that the proposed
amendments are not merely correcting a misnomer. Rather, these amendments constitute the addition of new defendants
to the litigation. Neither the original
Statement of Claim nor the Amended
Statement of Claim point the litigating
finger at the Koller Defendants because none of the descriptions of the “John Doe”
defendants are consistent with their business. The description and the allegations in the initial and subsequent pleadings
issued by the Plaintiffs do not reasonably and objectively indicate the proposed defendants were ever intended as defendants.
[32]          
Further, the limitation period for the Plaintiffs to add the Koller Defendants as
defendants has long expired. Indeed,
more than two years ago, the Plaintiffs tried to add SLP
Lighting, LLC as a Defendant arguing a misnomer and that motion was dismissed.
[33]          
Rule 5.04(2) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg.
194, allows for an order to be made to add, delete or substitute a party or
correct the name of a party on such terms as are just, unless prejudice would
result that could not be compensated for by costs or an adjournment.
[34]          
All parties agree that the current Canadian law on misnomer stems from
the principles set out in Loy-English v. The Ottawa Hospital et al.,
2019 ONSC 6075, 149 O.R. (3d) 129, at para. 21:
[35]          
In addition, the Plaintiffs rely on additional principles of misnomer to
assist the court in analyzing the present case:
[36]          
Turning to the discretion of the court, the proposed defendants state
that this is the type of action where the court should exercise its discretion by
denying the amendments sought by the Plaintiffs.
[37]          
As a result of the law of misnomer having been broadened in recent
years, it is appropriate to take a wider view of the court’s discretion to
refuse the correction of a misnomer: see Ormerod v. Strathroy Middlesex
General Hospital, 2009 ONCA 697. 97 O.R. (3d) 321, at para. 31.
[38]          
Where the plaintiff fails to address, directly or indirectly the failure
to include a defendant within the applicable limitation period, this may
warrant a refusal to grant the request to add a defendant: see Montcalm v.
Trillium Health Care Centre, 2006 CanLII 32998 (Ont. S.C.).
[39]          
There is a presumption that the proposed defendants
will be prejudiced by a plaintiff’s inordinate delay. Where there is a
presumption of prejudice there is no onus on the defendant to prove
actual prejudice: see Al-Enzi (Litigation Guardian of) v. Gyurik, 2010
ONSC 3313, at para. 22, citing Woodheath Developments Ltd. v. Goldman (2001),
2001 CanLII 28019 (ON SC), 56 O.R. (3d) 658 at p. 665, aff’d (2003), 2003 CanLII 46735 (ON SCDC), 66 O.R. (3d) 731 (Div. Ct.).
[40]          
The first issue to be addressed is the change of name from Cooper Lighting
Internacional to Cooper Lighting Mexico, as per the Plaintiffs’ draft order.
While I appreciate that the appeal of Justice Williams’ endorsement has just
recently been made in reliance on the recent service of the claim through the
Hague Convention, it is difficult to understand how this change of name is not
a proper claim for misnomer.
[41]          
Although the endorsement of Justice Williams is now under appeal, I am
put in the position where I must deem that her order is correct until an appeal
court finds otherwise. As such, Cooper Lighting Internacional became a named
defendant following Justice Williams’ endorsement. Further, Cooper Lighting
Internacional was served through the Hague Convention in July 2024. However, the
evidence is that even council for Cooper Lighting Internacional was not aware
of the proper name for his own client and failed to properly refer to that
entity as “Cooper Lighting de Mexico S. De R.L. De C.V.”
[42]          
Although council for that entity took the position that proper service
had to be effected through the Hague Convention, it was incumbent upon that
lawyer to notify the Plaintiffs that his client’s purported name, Cooper Lighting
Internacional, had been discontinued since 2004 and was no longer the proper
corporate entity name for the related Cooper Lighting manufacturing company in
Mexico.
[43]          
If that entity’s own lawyer was not aware of the proper corporate name
or neglected to advise the Plaintiffs of it, how can the Plaintiffs be expected
to have known, back in 2021, that the corporate name used for the misnomer
motion was incorrect. I specifically disagree with counsel for the Cooper Lighting
Defendants who blamed the Plaintiffs for not figuring out the difference
between Cooper Lighting Internacional and Cooper Lighting Mexico.
[44]          
Consequently, the correction required to properly name Cooper Lighting
Mexico cannot be considered otherwise than a proper and even classic misnomer
which satisfies the principles set out Loy-English.
[45]          
Accordingly, leave is granted to correct the name of the Defendant
Cooper Lighting Internacional, S. de R.L. de C.V. with Cooper Lighting de
Mexico S. De R.L. de C.V.
[46]          
I now turn to the motions to add the remaining Cooper Lighting Defendants.
In terms of qualifying as a proper request for misnomer, the crux of the issue
comes down to if the defendants before the court would have known that the litigation
finger was pointing at them upon reading the Statement of Claim and
particularly at paragraph 39, which sets out that the cause of the fire was an
electrical short within a fluorescent fixture and or fluorescent light bulb.
There is also relevant reference in the Statement of Claim to high output
fluorescent fixtures and the location of the fire in Eastern Ontario along with
the timing of the fire and the Small Business Lighting Program.
[47]          
The fire happened on March 17, 2017, and it is argued that the
limitation period ended two years after that event. There was a further
one-year delay during which the Plaintiffs investigated the fire, which revealed
that a light fixture contained a label directing the fixture to the Cooper
Lighting brand. The evidence before this Court is that it was not until 2020
that this information became known to the Plaintiffs. The limitation period had
likely expired as discoverability has not been advanced. The misnomer motion
before Justice Williams was prepared in April 2021 and the motion was heard on
October 6, 2021.
[48]          
There is little to no evidence to explain the reason for the delay in
bringing the misnomer motion.
[49]          
However, by the latest in November 2021, Signify Canada was served with
a Statement of Defence and Cross-Claim of a co-defendant. Signify Canada then retained
Mr. Lee to represent both Philips Lighting and Cooper Lighting Internacional
even though that legal entity no longer existed.
[50]          
In what I refer to Motion #1, there is no evidence to suggest that the two
Cooper Lighting Defendants, Cooper Lighting LLC and Cooper Lighting Canada
Limited, would not have had access to the knowledge of this litigation through
its relationships with Signify Canada. The Cooper Defendants have not presented
evidence to suggest otherwise. I appreciate that corporate entities are deemed
to be distinct and that in this case, it appears that Signify Canada may have over
150 wholly owned subsidiaries. However, knowledge of the claim certainly
existed within some of those related corporate entities when Mr. Lee was
retained.
[51]          
I am satisfied that upon reading the Statement of Claim, representatives
for both Cooper Lighting LLC and Cooper Lighting Canada Limited would have identified
themselves as a manufacturer or distributor of the fluorescent light fixture
described in the Statement of Claim.
[52]          
The various relationships between the Cooper Lighting and Philips Lighting
entities make it clear that they had knowledge of the manufacturing role of
Cooper Lighting Mexico and that this would extend to Cooper Lighting LLC as one
of the possible manufacturers of the light fixture and Cooper Lighting Canada
limited as one of the possible distributors.
[53]          
In coming to this conclusion, I do not allow myself to get bogged down
with all of the complex corporate structures within the Signify Canada
umbrella. It is evident that even their corporate lawyer retained for this
litigation and their representative for cross-examination purposes did not
fully grasp the complicated structure and the various corporate entities
involved.
[54]          
In the present case, I am satisfied for the purposes of motion #1 that
when the proposed corporate entities became aware of the Statement of Claim and
the allegations in it, that they would have recognized that the litigation
finger was pointed at them as potential manufacturers or distributors of the
light fixture in question. There is also no evidence from the Cooper Defendants
that they were confused or mislead by the Statement of Claim.
[55]          
It is sufficient that the proposed defendants would have seen themselves
as manufacturers and distributors of fluorescent light bulbs and high output
fluorescent fixtures.
[56]          
Given the existing corporate structures within the Signify Canada
umbrella, it is almost impossible for the Plaintiffs to have been able to know
exactly which corporate entity needed to be involved when representatives and
lawyers of those entities themselves were not apparently aware that Cooper Lighting
Internacional had not been in existence since 2004. If their counsel was aware,
then his correspondence was misleading.
[57]          
In the end, the pleading that the fire caused in this case was as a
result of the failure of a fluorescent light fixture or fluorescent light bulb
(including a high output fixtures), manufactured or distributed in or about
2015 and distributed in Eastern Ontario is sufficient in my view to have pointed
the litigation finger at Cooper Lighting LLC and Cooper Lighting Canada Limited
and that these entities would have known upon reading the Statement of Claim
that they were one of the targets of this litigation.
[58]          
Turning now to Motion #2. I am of the view that in reading the Statement
of Claim which alleged that the fire was caused by a failure of a fluorescent light
fixture and points the finger to the manufacturer, distributor, and contractor
of that light fixture, that SLP Lighting LLC would have felt the litigation
finger pointed at them. This is due to their role as a manufacturer of plastic
components which they sell to manufacturers for use in luminaires or light
fixtures. Those components are significant components of fluorescent light
fixtures.
[59]          
I reject the position advanced by the Koller Defendants that it should
be seen as simply a designer or manufacture of the casing alone and not as a
manufacturer or part manufacturer of the light fixture. They advertise
themselves as manufacturers. It will be a question in this litigation as to
what component of the light fixture failed. If there is a separate manufacturer
for an important component of the light fixture, clearly that party is properly
named as a defendant to this claim. The Koller Defendants were aware that they
provided parts to fluorescent light fixtures and there is no evidence that the
Koller Defendants were confused by the claim but there is evidence of David Koller
that he did not see his companies as having a role in the fire.
[60]          
I agree with the position of the Plaintiffs who suggest that to conclude
otherwise would require the Plaintiffs to list a pseudonym for every part of
the light fixture and that it should foresee the role of each party who may
participate as a manufacturer of a separate part of the light fixture. This is
certainly not the status of the law since Loy-English which requires that
courts read the claim generously.
[61]          
Furthermore, this is not a situation where a new defendant is being
added to the claim beyond the limitation period. I am of the view that Koller
Lighting LLC properly formed part of the defendants which were included in the
original Statement of Claim as manufacturers of part of the light fixture. When
reading the claim generously, it must be found that if multiple parties are
involved in the manufacturing of the light fixture, those parties fall under
the description of John Doe Manufacturer.
[62]          
The law in terms of misnomer in Canada has evolved beyond the point of
restricting the analysis in the manner proposed by the Koller Defendants. It
would be inconsistent with the current law as set out in Loy-English to
distinguish between the manufacturer of the electrical or metal components of
the light fixture and the manufacturer of the plastic casing for the light
fixture or part of it. It would be unjust to find that a pleading is not
specific enough for having failed to make that distinction. In the end, the Koller
Defendants are part of the manufacturing process for the light fixture and
should be properly named as Defendants.
[63]          
With that said, the court distinguishes as to the personal role of David
Koller and the role of Koller Enterprises as the owner of SLP Lighting. The
Plaintiff’s factum makes no mention of Mr. Koller or Koller Enterprises either
as a manufacturer or distributor. The affidavit evidence states that Koller
Enterprises does not manufacture products of any kind. No proper submissions
were made to the court and no evidence was supplied which would suggest that either
Mr. Koller or Koller Enterprises is involved as a manufacturer and accordingly,
the request for their addition as Defendants in this claim is dismissed.
[64]          
Turning to the discretion of the court to refuse the relief requested,
the exercise of discretion turns on the delay issue and why it took two years
to issue the Statement of Claim, followed by another year to investigate the
light fixture and discover the reference to Cooper Lighting and then a further
one-year delay to bring the misnomer motion. The absence of evidence to explain
this delay militates in favour of the use of discretion to refuse to grant the
requested amendments.
[65]          
However, the court also looks at what has happened in this litigation
since 2021 when the Cooper Lighting Defendants, the Koller Defendants, and
their related entities became aware of the litigation.
[66]          
Since that date, the parties have largely argued over who should be a
named Defendant and service of the claim while being fully aware of the
allegations within the claim. If delay was such a significant issue for the proposed
defendants, then they had a prime opportunity to protect their rights by
seeking to move promptly within the litigation and avoid further delay. To the
contrary, these entities made a choice to challenge their status as Defendants
by looking to avoid the service of the claim and to avoid the misnomer motion
in 2021 in the hopes of not having to participate in the claim. This is
inconsistent with claimed prejudice caused by delay.
[67]          
It is also relevant that in December 2021, Signify Canada had been
served with the Statement of Claim and did not file its Statement of Defence
until February 8, 2023, which is inconsistent with concern about delay.
[68]          
Furthermore, much of the case law relied upon by the respondents to both
motions (as stated above, the proposed defendants to the action) predate the
direction found in Loy-English and one of the guiding principles that a
subsequent correction of a misnomer is not subject to a due diligence
requirement and will not be defeated by mere delay.
[69]          
If I were to exercise my discretion to refuse the requested relief, I
would be doing so solely as a result of the issue of the unexplained delay. While
I accept that there is no onus on the proposed defendants to prove prejudice,
there is still very little evidence of any actual prejudice and this is a
factor that the court can consider in exercising its discretion.
[70]          
I agree with the proposition that mere delay in itself should not form
the basis of a refusal to grant the correction of a misnomer. I come to this
conclusion cognizant of the fact that there can be a presumption of prejudice
as a result of the passage of time in this case. However, in looking at the
entire period, the respondents to this motion have contributed to this delay by
focusing on trying to avoid being included in the litigation. Overall, there is
an element of shared delay when considering the entire period.
[71]          
In the end, I cannot conclude that the respondents would suffer any non-compensable
prejudice if they are substituted as defendants. They have not testified to any
real prejudice and the litigation has not progressed to an extent that they
have been prevented from participating in any stage. There is no evidence as to
the unavailability of documents or the testimony of individuals and I conclude
that this is not a proper case to exercise my discretion to refuse the
requested relief.
[72]          
Furthermore, I do not agree with the position taken in Motion #2 by the
Koller Defendants that the 2021 withdrawal or dismissal of the misnomer motion
would impact the courts exercising of discretion in this case. The law is
fairly established that a consent order dismissing the claim does not suggest
any adjudication of the motion on the merits and the doctrine of res
judicata cannot flow from it.
[73]          
Finally, I do not purport to make any findings on the merits of the appeal
of Justice Williams’ endorsement.
[74]          
For these reasons, the relief requested by the
Plaintiffs an their Fresh as Amended Notice of Motion is granted.
[75]          
The parties are encouraged to resolve the issue of
costs and if unable to do so, may provide written submissions on costs. The
Plaintiffs will have 30 days from the date of this Endorsement to provide its
written submissions on costs and the Defendants will have 30 days to respond.
The Plaintiffs will then have 15 days for reply. These submissions on costs
should be no longer than five pages plus attachments and shall comply with Rule
4.01.