[1]              
Mr. Di Luciano is before the court to be
sentenced for two convictions: dangerous driving causing bodily harm and
refusing to provide a sample of his breath following a lawful demand by a
police officer. Mr. Di Luciano was convicted of the dangerous driving offence
by a jury on November 24, 2023. I subsequently convicted him of the refusal
offence on June 17, 2024 following a judge-alone trial that proceeded in April
2024.[2]
Sentencing submissions were delayed for some considerable period of time for
reasons that are reflected in the record. I need not go into them here. They
proceeded on October 11, 2024 and Mr. Di Luciano was remanded to today’s date
for judgment on sentence.
[2]              
The charges arise from a collision that occurred
at about 10:45 p.m. on Christmas night in 2019 at an intersection on Major MacKenzie
Drive in Vaughan, Ontario. There has never been any dispute that Mr. Di Luciano
caused the collision. He went through a red light at a high rate of speed and
“T-boned” another vehicle in the intersection.
[3]              
The jury concluded that Mr. Di Luciano’s driving
was a marked departure from the standard of care which a reasonable driver
would have exercised in the circumstances. Because juries do not give reasons
for their decisions, however, the factual findings that supported their
conclusion about the nature of Mr. Di Luciano’s driving are not clear. It is
left to the court to make those findings for sentencing purposes.[3]
[4]              
Seven eyewitnesses testified about the manner of
Mr. Di Luciano’s driving on the occasion in issue, including Mr. Di Luciano. In
addition, data downloaded from the Airbag Control Module (“ACM”) of his vehicle
was entered into evidence.
[5]              
The eyewitnesses were consistent that Mr. Di
Luciano’s vehicle was travelling at a high rate of speed prior to the impact.
Their estimates covered a range from about 90 km/hr up to about 120 km/hr. The
ACM data reflected that 4.4 seconds prior to impact, Mr. Di Luciano was
travelling at 118 km/h. At 3.4 seconds prior to impact, he appeared to take his
foot off the throttle. At 2.4 seconds prior to impact, he applied the brakes.
The vehicle had slowed to a speed of 68 km/hr at the time of impact. Mr. Di
Luciano did not dispute the accuracy of the ACM data.
[6]              
There was general agreement among the
eyewitnesses that Mr. Di Luciano entered the intersection where the collision
occurred against a red light. A videorecording of the intersection prior to the
collision indicates that the light had been red for 9 or 10 seconds prior to
the impact.
[7]              
Major MacKenzie Drive has three eastbound lanes
in the area where the collision occurred. There was also general agreement
among the eyewitnesses that Mr. Di Luciano’s vehicle swerved in and out of
those three lanes, moving around slower vehicles, as he approached the
intersection where the collision occurred. Mr. Di Luciano acknowledged in his
trial evidence that he was switching lanes as he drove.
[8]              
The one notable point on which there is an
inconsistency in the eyewitness testimony is whether Mr. Di Luciano at any time
crossed a median and drove eastbound for any distance in the westbound lanes.
Only one witness – Stefania Boyne – testified that she observed him proceeding
eastbound in the westbound lanes. Mr. Di Luciano denied doing so.
[9]              
I am not satisfied, on the evidentiary record
adduced at trial, that Mr. Di Luciano drove in the westbound lanes at any
point. The weight of the eyewitness evidence does not support such a
conclusion. Moreover, there is a substantial median between the eastbound and
westbound lanes of Major MacKenzie Drive in the area in question. It would have
been extremely difficult for Mr. Di Luciano to have crossed that median,
particularly given the speed at which he was driving. No physical evidence was
adduced to support the assertion that Mr. Di Luciano’s vehicle had at any time
crossed over that median.
[10]          
I am satisfied that Mr. Di Luciano was
driving at speeds up to 120 km/hr in an area with a posted limit of 60 km/hr,
weaving in and out of traffic, and that he entered the intersection in issue
against a light that had been red for at least 9 seconds prior to the
collision.
[11]          
The collision resulted in significant injuries
to Clarice Abdulla, an elderly woman who was one of occupants of the vehicle
Mr. Di Luciano struck.
[12]          
Ms. Abdulla suffered several broken ribs on her
left side, as well as bruising of her lungs. She was admitted to hospital
immediately after the collision. She died roughly a month later of a heart
attack while still in hospital.
[13]          
Ms. Abdulla had a number of underlying health
problems, including heart, kidney, and liver disease. The jury was unable to
conclude, to the reasonable doubt standard, that the collision caused her
death. It was conceded by Mr. Di Luciano, however, that it caused her bodily
harm.
[14]          
Mr. Di Luciano was arrested at the scene of the
collision and charged with impaired driving and driving with an unlawfully high
blood alcohol content – conventionally referred to as “Over 80”. A roadside breath
demand was made and he refused to comply. In the result, he was additionally
charged with refusing to provide a breath sample. I determined in a pre-trial
ruling that the roadside breath demand was unlawful. That said, I was satisfied
that a subsequent demand for a breath sample made at the police station was
lawful. It too was refused.
[15]          
Over time, the charges against Mr. Di Luciano
evolved. As his trial in this court approached, in the fall of 2023, he faced
three counts of impaired operation of a motor vehicle (impaired operation simpliciter,
impaired operation causing bodily harm, and impaired operation causing death),
three counts of dangerous operation of a motor vehicle (dangerous operation
simpliciter, dangerous operation causing bodily harm, and dangerous operation
causing death), and three refusal counts (refusal simpliciter, refusal causing
bodily harm, and refusal causing death).
[16]          
A number of applications proceeded prior to the
trial. In the course of those applications, I severed the refusal counts from
the balance of the charges. The impaired operation and dangerous operation
counts proceeded to trial before a jury. The jury acquitted Mr. Di Luciano of
all of the impaired operation charges and convicted him of two counts of
dangerous operation simpliciter and one count of dangerous operation causing
bodily harm. On the consent of counsel, I stayed the convictions for the two
dangerous operation simpliciter counts, given that all three of the dangerous
operation convictions arose from the same delict.
[17]          
As I noted, the refusal counts proceeded to
trial before me in April 2024. At that time, the Crown proceeded on only the
refusal simpliciter and refusal causing bodily harm counts, given the jury’s
finding in relation to whether the collision caused Clarice Abdulla’s death. I
acquitted Mr. Di Luciano of refusal causing bodily harm but convicted him of
refusal simpliciter, for having refused to comply with an approved instrument
demand made by a breath technician at the police station.
[18]          
Mr. Di Luciano is 41 years old. He has a
criminal record which reflects just one dated conviction for assault in March
2006, for which he was sentenced to two years probation.
[19]          
He has a somewhat unenviable driving record with
13 unique entries for convictions under the Highway Traffic Act between
May 2001 and June 2023. Eight of those convictions are for speeding, including
two entered at dates after the collision involved in this case.
[20]          
Subsequent to the events that gave rise to the
charges before the court, Mr. Di Luciano entered into a common law relationship
with J.M., with whom he has a child who is just under two years old. He and
J.M. subsequently separated. I am not clear on the date of the separation, but
it appears to have been in the spring of 2024.
[21]          
Mr. Di Luciano was criminally charged on May 22,
2024 with two counts of assault, which are domestic in nature. He was released
on an undertaking, which included a condition that he not have any contact with
JM or her two children from a prior relationship. He was also prohibited from
attending a residence in King Township where JM and the children were residing,
though the home has been owned by Mr. Di Luciano for some 13 years.
[22]          
It appears that, notwithstanding the terms of
the undertaking, Mr. Di Luciano moved back into the King Township home. I am
not clear on the circumstances under which he returned to the home. Whatever
they were, they quickly soured and Mr. Di Luciano was charged on August 11, 2024
with another count of domestic assault as well as uttering threats and four
counts of breaching his May 22, 2024 undertaking. He was again released, this
time on a release order that included a condition that he not be within 500
metres of the King Township home (though technically the condition was that he
not be within that proximity of one identified child of his ex-partner).
[23]          
On August 16, 2024 Mr. Di Luciano was again
arrested at the King Township property and charged with one count of breaching
the May 22, 2024 undertaking and one count of breaching the release order in
relation to the August 11, 2024 charges. He was ordered detained in custody on
these charges. I released him, however, after a bail review on August 30, 2024.
Since that time he has been on a house arrest provision, requiring him to
reside with his mother in Grimsby, Ontario, together with a number of other
conditions. To my knowledge, he has been compliant with those conditions.
[24]          
Despite the legal troubles Mr. Di Luciano has
found himself in, he has otherwise been a hardworking, pro-social, charitable
person, who is much loved by family, friends and those he has worked with over
the years.
[25]          
Mr. Di Luciano was born in Venezuela. He came to
Canada at eight years old. He obtained a diploma from Seneca College in
business administration in 2003. He has worked successfully as a general
contractor and property manager and continues to do so.
[26]          
His counsel filed some 20 letters of support
from family, friends and co-workers. They consistently describe Mr. Di Luciano
as hardworking, dependable, reliable, generous and compassionate. He is a
consummate family man. He works hard to maintain contacts with extended family.
He gives generously of his time to help family and friends alike. And he has
been a devoted son and caregiver to both his parents.
[27]          
Most of the authors of the reference letters
filed with the court speak to how devastated Mr. Di Luciano was as a result of
the collision and the injuries suffered by Ms. Abdulla. They describe him as
deeply remorseful.
[28]          
When given his right of allocution, Mr. Di
Luciano expressed that he was tormented by what happened to the Abdulla family.
He expressed the hope that they have found some peace and closure now that the
trial is over.
[29]          
I have already described the impact of the
collision on Clarice Abdulla. Though no victim impact statements were filed by
the Crown, I am able to assess at least some of the ways the collision impacted
on Ms. Abdulla’s husband, Yardali, and her son, Ian, who were both involved in
the collision and who both testified at trial.
[30]          
Yardali testified that he was shocked and
frightened by the impact of the collision. He suffered minor injuries including
soreness in his shoulder and neck. He was left in shock and unable to assist
his wife and son.
[31]          
Ian was similarly left in shock as a result of
the collision. He described suffering depression and anxiety since it occurred.
He has frequent nightmares about it. He has become socially withdrawn and has
found it difficult to cope in social settings and in life in general.
[32]          
Pursuant to s. 320.2 of the Criminal Code,
a person convicted of dangerous operation of a motor vehicle causing bodily
harm is liable to imprisonment for a maximum of 14 years and to a minimum
punishment of a fine of $1,000 for a first conviction.
[33]          
Pursuant to s. 320.24(4) a person convicted of
dangerous driving causing bodily harm is subject to a discretionary driving
prohibition. The length of the prohibition is provided for in subsection (5),
subsection (b) which provides that where, as here, the offender is liable to
imprisonment for between five years and life, the prohibition may not be more
than 10 years, plus the entire period to which the offender is sentenced to
imprisonment.
[34]          
Pursuant to s. 320.19(1) of the Criminal Code,
a person convicted of refusing to comply with a breath demand is liable to imprisonment
for a maximum of 10 years and to a minimum punishment of a fine of $1,000 for a
first conviction. Section 320.19(4) of the Criminal Code provides,
however, that despite what s. 320.19(1) says, everyone convicted of refusing to
provide a breath sample on demand is liable, for a first offence, to a fine of
not less than $2,000.
[35]          
Pursuant to s. 320.24(1) of the Criminal Code,
a person convicted of refusing to comply with a breath demand is liable to the
imposition of a mandatory driving prohibition. Pursuant to s. 320.24(2) the
prohibition period is, on a first conviction, to be not less than one year and
not more than three years, plus the entire period to which the offender is
sentenced to imprisonment.
[36]          
Crown and defence counsel are not close in terms
of their positions on sentencing.
[37]          
For the conviction for dangerous driving causing
bodily harm, the Crown seeks a prison sentence of three years, together with an
11-year driving prohibition (8 years, plus the 3 years in custody), a s. 109
weapons prohibition, and a DNA order.
[38]          
For the refusal simpliciter conviction, the Crown
seeks a 6-12 month jail sentence, consecutive to the sentence imposed for
dangerous driving causing bodily harm, plus a 2-year concurrent driving
prohibition.
[39]          
Defence counsel submits that a fit and just
sentence for the dangerous driving causing bodily harm conviction is a
conditional sentence of two years less one day, together with a period of
probation if the court considers it appropriate. In terms of the refusal
offence, defence counsel urges the court to impose the minimum sentence of a
$2,000 fine pursuant to s. 320.19(4). A driving prohibition in the range of 2-3
years is suggested as appropriate.
[40]          
Sentencing is an inherently individualized
exercise. There are certain principles, however, that guide sentencing judges.
They have long been known to the common law and are now codified in Part XXIII
of the Criminal Code.
[41]          
Section 718 of the Criminal Code provides
that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to
protect society and to contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to
respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by
imposing just sanctions that have one or more of the following objectives: the denunciation of unlawful conduct, deterrence - both general
and specific, the separation of the offender from society where necessary,
rehabilitation, reparation for harm done to the victims and the community, and
the promotion of a sense of responsibility in offenders and an acknowledgment
of the harm done.
[42]          
The importance of these
individual objectives, and how they interact, varies from case to case.  Counsel
are agreed that, given the nature of the offences here, the principal drivers
of any sentence imposed are denunciation and deterrence – both specific and
general. Section 320.12 of the Criminal Code underscores these
objectives by noting, at subsection (b) that “the protection of society is well
served by deterring persons from operating conveyances dangerously or while
their ability to operate them is impaired by alcohol or a drug, because that
conduct poses a threat to the life, health and safety of Canadians.”
[43]          
The central question is what
sentence is required to meet those objectives? In making that assessment the
court is guided by the overarching principle of proportionality.
Section 718.1 of the Criminal Code directs
that a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the
degree of responsibility of the offender.
[44]          
The principle of proportionality takes into
account and balances the concepts of censure and restraint. Any sentence
imposed must promote justice for victims and enhance public confidence in the
administration of justice. At the same time, it should not exceed what is
appropriate in light of the moral blameworthiness of the offender.[4] The
restraint principle directs the court to impose the least intrusive sentence
and the shortest duration necessary to achieve a just, fit and proportionate
sentence.[5]
[45]          
Landing on a proportionate sentence in any
serious criminal case is challenging. The Supreme Court recognized in R. v.
Lacasse[6]
that sentencing is one of the most delicate stages of the criminal justice
process.
[46]          
It is an acutely difficult exercise here. Mr. Di
Luciano is a very pro-social person. He works hard and has been successful in
business. He has many letters of support from family and friends who describe
him in glowing terms. He has been and continues to be a wonderful son, brother,
friend, father, and a charitable member of society. At the same time, the
offences he has been convicted of are quite serious. His driving on the
occasion in issue was egregious and it had very serious consequences. And he
refused to provide a sample of his breath when demanded to do so, which
deprived the police and the public at large of knowing for certain whether
alcohol consumption had any role to play in the collision he caused.
[47]          
Inherent in the concept of
proportionality is the principle of parity. Imposing sentences proportionate to
the gravity of offences and the moral blameworthiness of offenders requires the
court, on the one hand, to recognize where there are material differences
between different offenders and different offences. On the other hand, s.
718(2)(b) of the Criminal Code requires that any sentence imposed must
be similar to sentences imposed on offenders who have committed similar
offences with equivalent moral blameworthiness. Parity, in other words, is an
expression of, and gives meaning to, proportionality.[7] Sentencing
“judges calibrate the demands of proportionality by reference to the sentences
imposed in other cases.”[8]
[48]          
The search for a proportionate sentence,
therefore, frequently begins with an examination of sentences imposed in
similar cases, with a view to identifying the appropriate range of sentence
applicable in the circumstances. A subsequent examination of any aggravating
and mitigating circumstances aids in situating the sentence in issue within the
identified range, recognizing of course that ranges are not written in stone
and that any given sentence may, depending on the prevailing circumstances,
fall above or below the identified range.
[49]          
Identifying an applicable range is made
difficult in this instance because of two factors.
[50]          
First, the Crown’s submission that,
notwithstanding the jury’s verdict, this is “still a drinking and driving
case”. Crown counsel is not asking the court to find that Mr. Di Luciano was
impaired at the time of the collision. He accepts that he is bound by the
jury’s decision. He submits, however, that the refusal conviction is a drinking
and driving offence and that it is inextricably bound up with the dangerous driving
offence. He contends that Mr. Di Luciano should be sentenced as though equally
morally blameworthy to an offender who was impaired and driving dangerously.
[51]          
Second, the fact that recent amendments to the Criminal
Code have increased the maximum sentences for both dangerous driving and
refusing to comply with a breath demand.
[52]          
I will briefly consider each of these factors in
turn.
[53]          
Crown counsel made compelling submissions
regarding Parliament’s intent when it harmonized the offences for impaired
operation and refusal. Those offences now attract identical punishments. The
clear intent was to disincentivize refusals. As Crown counsel argued, it makes
no sense that a person who co-operates and provides a breath sample should be
punished more harshly than a person who refuses to comply with a lawful demand
for a sample and thereby deprives the police and the public with the most
reliable evidence of impairment, or the lack thereof.
[54]          
In my view, however, in the circumstances of
this case, it would be wrong to punish Mr. Di Luciano on the basis that his
moral blameworthiness is equivalent to a person who has driven dangerously
while impaired by alcohol.
[55]          
The jury was thoroughly instructed about the
issue of impairment, including the standard from R. v. Stellato[9] to the effect that the
offence is made out if the Crown establishes any degree of impairment
ranging from slight to great. The jury was clearly not satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that even slight impairment had been made out.
[56]          
To now punish Mr. Di Luciano as though he were
impaired while driving dangerously would fly in the face of the jury’s
decision. They clearly rejected that theory of the case.
[57]          
The hypothetical offered by the Crown is not an
exact fit. While I agree that a person who refuses to provide a breath sample
should not be treated more leniently than a person who provides a sample that
establishes impairment, that does not mean a person who refused a breath sample
should be punished as though impaired when a jury has rejected the assertion
that he was driving while impaired.
[58]          
While Crown counsel provided the court with a
number of sentencing cases involving a combination of dangerous and impaired
driving, no cases were provided where a refusal was used as a proxy for
impairment where a jury expressly rejected the assertion of impairment advanced
by the Crown.
[59]          
Crown counsel referred the court to the Supreme
Court’s decision in R. v. Suter[10]
for instruction on the interplay between refusal and impairment offences. What
I take from Suter is that Mr. Di Luciano should receive little
mitigation on any sentence imposed for the refusal conviction on the basis that
the jury acquitted him of all impaired operation offences.
[60]          
Mr. Di Luciano will yet be punished for the
refusal. And that punishment, as a first refusal conviction, will be the same
that would be imposed on a first conviction for impaired operation.
[61]          
I turn now to the amendments ushered in by Bill
C-46, which came into force on December 18, 2018.
[62]          
Prior to Bill C-46, the maximum sentence for
dangerous driving causing bodily harm was 10 years. The maximum sentence for
refusing a breath demand was 5 years. As a result of Bill C-46, those maximum
sentences were increased to 14 years and 10 years respectively.
[63]          
The Supreme Court instructed in R. v. Friesen[11] that the gravity of an
offence includes both subjective and objective elements. Subjective gravity is
a function of the circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence.
Objective gravity is reflected in the maximum sentence established by
Parliament for the offence in issue. Maximum sentences indicate the “relative
severity of each crime” and thereby aid in assessing the gravity of the offence
and the proportionate sentence to be imposed.
[64]          
A decision by Parliament to increase the maximum
sentence for an offence reflects the desire that offenders committing the
offence should be punished more harshly. The increase “should be understood as
shifting the distribution of proportionate sentences for [the] offence.”[12]
[65]          
The upshot of the amendments is that sentences
for dangerous driving causing bodily harm imposed for offences committed prior
to December 18, 2018 must be considered cautiously, and in light of the
increased maximums. The yardsticks, in other words, are moving.
[66]          
In 2007, in R. v. Van Puyenbroek[13] the Court of Appeal for
Ontario identified the range of sentence for impaired driving causing bodily
harm and dangerous driving causing bodily harm, with aggravating features, as
running from a conditional sentence to two years less a day in prison. That
range was re-affirmed by the Court of Appeal in 2012 in R. v. Rawn.[14] It is fair to say that
the impact of Bill C-46 is to push the range upwards, though the Court of
Appeal has yet to provide any direction on the issue.
[67]          
Crown counsel provided a sampling of trial-level
cases where sentences have been imposed for the offence of dangerous driving
causing bodily committed after Bill C-46 was enacted in December 2018. They
include R. v. Weir[15],
R. v. Refaeh[16],
R. v. Lindsay[17],
R. v. Bogacz[18],
R. v. Pollak[19].
[68]          
Weir is a 2024
decision of Justice Konyer of the Ontario Court of Justice.  Mr. Weir – a 19-year-old
first time offender – entered a guilty plea to 3 counts of dangerous driving
causing bodily harm. He rear-ended another vehicle while doing 137 km/hr in a
residential neighbourhood with a posted speed limit of 50 km/hr. The victims, a
mother and her two children, suffered serious injuries. The Crown sought a 30-month
jail sentence, while defence counsel urged the court to impose a conditional
sentence. The trial judge imposed a jail sentence of 12 months concurrent on
each count, together with 24 months probation and a 4-year driving prohibition.
[69]          
Refaeh is a 2024
decision of Justice Petersen of this court. Mr. Refaeh – a 19-year-old first
time offender – was convicted by a jury of dangerous driving causing bodily
harm and failing to remain at the scene. He engaged in a street race with
another vehicle over 20 blocks in downtown Guelph. The other vehicle struck an
oncoming car head-on, causing serious injuries to a 13-year-old passenger. Despite
having no criminal record, Mr. Refaeh had 6 prior speeding tickets and one
conviction for failure to stop at a stop sign. Since the charges were laid, he
was charged on two further occasions with breaching an undertaking not to
operate a motor vehicle. The Crown sought a 30- to 36-month jail sentence and a
3-year driving prohibition. Defence counsel urged the court to consider a
conditional sentence of 12 to 18 months. The trial judge imposed a sentence of
15-months, representing 12 months for the dangerous driving conviction and 3
months, consecutive, for failing to remain at the scene. A 3-year driving
prohibition was imposed.
[70]          
Justice Petersen rejected the request for a
conditional sentence given concerns about community safety and the need to
strongly denounce the offender’s conduct and deter others from engaging in
similar conduct.
[71]          
Lindsay is a 2020
decision of Justice March of the Ontario Court of Justice. Mr. Lindsay – a
27-year-old, first time offender with mental health issues – entered a guilty
plea to dangerous driving causing bodily harm. He turned his vehicle into the
path of an oncoming tractor-trailer in an attempt to commit suicide. The driver
of the truck suffered serious injuries. The Crown sought a 3-year penitentiary
sentence and a 10-year driving prohibition. The defence proposed a jail
sentence of 3 to 9 months. The trial judge imposed a sentence of 9 months in
custody, followed by 3 years of probation. A driving prohibition of 7 years was
also imposed.
[72]          
Bogacz is a 2023
decision of Justice Newton-Smith of the Ontario Court of Justice. Mr. Bogacz –
a 37-year-old, first time offender, entered a guilty plea to one count of
dangerous driving causing bodily harm. He drove at a high rate of speed on the
Gardiner Expressway, weaving in and out of traffic. He struck a taxi, which
lost control and flipped. The taxi driver and his passenger were both seriously
injured. Mr. Bogacz had three convictions for speeding on his driving record,
entered between 2006 and 2021. The Crown sought a sentence of 12 months in
jail, 18 months probation and a 5-year driving prohibition. Defence counsel
proposed a 12-month conditional sentence, with 3 years probation.  A sentence
of 9 months in custody was imposed, together with a 5-year driving prohibition.
[73]          
Pollak is a 2024
decision of Justice Rutherford in the Ontario Court of Justice. Mr. Pollak – a
20-year-old first offender was convicted, after a trial, of dangerous driving
causing bodily harm. He engaged in street racing with two other males along Don
Mills Road in Toronto. One vehicle lost control and smashed into a bus station,
catastrophically injuring a man. The Crown sought a 30-month penitentiary
sentence. The defence urged the court to impose a conditional sentence. The
trial judge imposed a sentence of 20 months. He rejected the suggestion that a
conditional sentence would be appropriate on the basis that it would not
adequately address the principles of general deterrence and denunciation.
[74]          
Interestingly, as Crown counsel pointed out,
none of the cases cited by him reference the impact of Bill C-46 on sentences
for dangerous driving causing bodily harm.
[75]          
Crown counsel cited a number of pre-Bill C-46
decisions where sentences were imposed on convictions for dangerous driving
causing death. He submitted that they are instructive because the maximum
sentence for that offence, prior to December 2018, was 14 years imprisonment –
the same maximum sentence now available for dangerous driving causing bodily
harm. The cases he referred to reflect sentences imposed in the range of 22
months to 3 years in custody.
[76]          
It is not possible, given the limited case law
available, to confidently reach any conclusion about what the appropriate range
of sentence is for dangerous driving causing bodily harm post-Bill C-46. As
Roberts J. recently observed in R. v. Kerr[20],
the range for this offence is “still being worked out”.
[77]          
I accept that, in light of Parliament’s decision
to increase the maximum penalty for the offence from 10 to 14 years, sentences
must increase. The range referred to in Van Puyenbroek is now likely too
low. My sense is that the penalty advocated by the defence – a conditional
sentence – remains the floor of the range, given that it remains a legally
available sentence. The sentence advocated by the Crown – 3 years in custody –
is probably near the upper end of the range, though again, the caselaw will
have to develop well beyond its current state before the applicable range may
be confidently proclaimed.
[78]          
Where Mr. Di Luciano falls within the range
advocated by the parties turns on the aggravating and mitigating circumstances
of the case.
[79]          
I consider the following features of the case to
be aggravating:
[80]          
There is some debate about whether alcohol
consumption – short of impairment – might constitute an aggravating
circumstance. Mr. Di Luciano admittedly consumed alcohol before driving. Doing
so demonstrates a willingness to take a certain level of risk. It may, in certain
cases, be an aggravating factor. But it is a factor the jury has already
considered in assessing whether Mr. Di Luciano had the mens rea for
dangerous driving. And the evidence of alcohol consumption in this case was not
such that I would consider it particularly aggravating, over and above any role
it may have played in establishing the offence of dangerous driving causing
bodily harm. This is not a case like R. v. Ferns[21], where
alcohol consumption was considered as part of the mens rea for dangerous
driving causing death, but also considered to be particularly aggravating
because the offender had only a G2 license and should have had no alcohol in
his system while driving.
[81]          
By way of mitigation, Mr. Di Luciano has been a
pro-social person who has substantial support from his extended family and
friends. And I am satisfied that he is deeply remorseful for the harm he caused
to the Abdulla family.
[82]          
Defence counsel urged the court to consider two
collateral consequences as mitigating. The first, he suggests, reflects a
certain level of punishment that Mr. Di Luciano has already suffered. The
second relates to the impact of any sentence imposed on Mr. Di Luciano’s infant
daughter.
[83]          
Defence counsel provided the court with a
sampling of media coverage about the collision. He decribed the coverage as
inaccurate because it characterized the incident as “another instance of drunk
driving in York Region.” Mr. Di Luciano was, counsel argued, stigmatized and
humiliated in an unwarranted manner, given that he was ultimately acquitted of
impaired driving.
[84]          
I am not persuaded that any mitigation should be
afforded to Mr. Di Luciano as a result of media coverage of his case. The fact
is, he was driving like a maniac and caused a significant collision that
resulted in serious personal injury. There was evidence to support the charge
of impaired operation, though it was ultimately found by the jury to be
insufficient. I note as well that the police and public were deprived of the
best evidence of Mr. Di Luciano’s level of impairment because he refused to
provide a sample of his breath on lawful demand.
[85]          
I am similarly not persuaded that any significant
mitigation should be afforded as a result of the fact that Mr. Di Luciano has a
young child. The child is in the care of his former partner. I am satisfied
that she will receive adequate care regardless of any sentence imposed on Mr.
Di Luciano. It is unfortunate that offenders’ family members tend to suffer as
a result of their actions. But where, as here, the principal sentencing
objectives are denunciation and deterrence, the fact that Mr. Di Luciano
fathered a child post-offence can have little impact on the length of the sentence
to be imposed. I accept that it remains a factor to be accounted for in the
overall context of the case when the court comes to consider whether a
conditional sentence would be appropriate.
[86]          
Fixing the appropriate length of sentence for
the driving offence in this case is very difficult. Mr. Di Luciano’s driving
was acutely dangerous. The gravity of the offence is significant and his moral
blameworthiness high. He had zero excuse for driving in the manner he did.
Moreover, his driving record suggests that he has historically not been a
particularly careful and prudent driver. On this occasion his risk-taking
resulted in tragic consequences for others. His behaviour must be strongly
denounced and any sentence imposed must send a clear message to other
like-minded drivers that they will pay a serious price for taking unacceptable
risks with the safety of other motorists using the roads.
[87]          
At the same time, Mr. Di Luciano has been a very
pro-social person. He has strong support in his family and in his community.
And he is deeply remorseful. While his driving was inexcusable, it was not at
the worst end of the spectrum. He was not street-racing, nor operating a large
commercial vehicle, nor was he driving dangerously in an area with high
pedestrian traffic.
[88]          
In all the circumstances, I believe an 18-month
custodial sentence will be sufficient to meet the applicable sentencing
objectives and at the same time give effect to the mitigating circumstances
here.
[89]          
In terms of the refusal conviction, given that
it is a first offence for refusal, it is, in my view, appropriate that the
minimum sentence be imposed, which is a $2,000 fine and a driving prohibition,
which I will return to in a moment.
[90]          
Because the custodial portion of the sentence is
below 2 years, it is necessary to consider whether it would be appropriate that
Mr. Di Luciano serve his sentence in the community under a Conditional Sentence
Order. In my view, it would not. I accept that there are numerous examples of
cases where conditional sentence orders were made in circumstances arguably
similar to those here. Indeed, defence counsel provided the court with a number
of cases where conditional sentences have been imposed in cases involving
convictions for dangerous driving causing death. At the same time there are
numerous examples of cases where conditional sentences have been rejected in
circumstances arguably similar to those here. Crown counsel cited a number of
such cases to the court. With each of the cases cited by counsel there are
similarities and there are differences. Each case must obviously turn on its
own facts.
[91]          
As Paccioco J.A. noted in R. v. R.S.[22], a conditional sentence
may be imposed where four factors are present: (1) no minimum period of
incarceration; (2) a sentence of less than 2 years less a day has been imposed;
(3) serving the sentence in the community would not endanger the safety of the
community; and (4) a conditional sentence would be consistent with the
fundamental principles and purposes of sentencing.
[92]          
In the circumstances here, the first two factors
are resolved in favour of a conditional sentence. The latter two are not.
[93]          
Mr. Di Luciano has incurred two further
convictions for driving infractions – both speeding – between the commission of
the index offences and the time of trial. One must seriously question whether a
conditional sentence order will be sufficient to deter Mr. Di Luciano from
speeding if the consequences of his driving on the occasion in issue were not
sufficient.
[94]          
I appreciate that there will be a driving
prohibition in place as a result of the sentence imposed today. That would
certainly go a long way to protecting the public. But I have concerns about Mr.
Di Luciano’s willingness to abide by court orders. He faces a number of charges
for breaching court orders made at a time when he was already facing sentencing
on serious criminal charges. I appreciate that he has not been convicted of
those charges, but given that, on at least one occasion he was arrested at the
very location he was ordered not to attend, the Crown appears to have a most
compelling case.
[95]          
Ultimately, however, I am not satisfied that a
conditional sentence would offer sufficient denunciation and deterrence in the
circumstances of this case. Mr. Di Luciano is not a youthful offender. He was
an experienced driver with a poor driving record. He chose to drive in a
reckless and highly dangerous manner, endangering not only himself but his
passenger and others using the road that night. His moral blameworthiness is
high.
[96]          
It almost goes without saying that roadways are
critically important to economic and social activity. Driving is a daily
activity for a great many Canadians, both for work and for personal endeavours.
The roadways around the GTA are particularly busy, as anyone who has driven
them knows. Driving carries with it certain inherent risks. Everyone knows
about and accepts those risks when they take to the roads. But people do not
accept – and should not have to accept – the risk of others driving in a
criminally reckless fashion. Parliament has recognized the gravity of the
offence, given the all-too-common consequences that dangerous driving leads to.
And Parliament has seen fit to signal that sentences for dangerous driving
causing bodily harm should increase to reflect the gravity of the offence and
the danger that it poses to everyday Canadians using the roads to go about
their daily activities.
[97]          
In my view, the circumstances here call for a
sentence that strongly denounces the conduct in question and provides a clear
message to others inclined to operate their vehicles in a similar manner.
[98]          
In the result, I reject the request that the
sentence be served in the community.
[99]          
I turn now to the question of the driving
prohibition. I confess that I do not find the jurisprudence particularly
helpful in assessing the length of the prohibition to be applied. The cases
tend to reflect the imposition of prohibitions with little explanation as to
how the length was arrived at.
[100]      
I must impose a prohibition of at least a year,
given the mandatory minimum for the refusal offence. And I may impose a
prohibition of up to 10 years, in relation to the conviction for dangerous
operation causing bodily harm. These time periods are on top of the 18-month
custodial sentence.
[101]      
The Crown seeks an 8-year prohibition, which
would be a total of 9 ½ years when the custodial sentence is factored in.  I
consider that request to be somewhat bloody-minded and befitting a case with
far more aggravating features.
[102]      
Mr. Di Luciano’s profession requires him to do a
great deal of driving. A driving prohibition will be particularly punitive on
him. In my view, a three-year prohibition, on top of his custodial sentence, is
more than sufficient to achieve all of the sentencing objectives in play here.
[103]      
In accordance with the principles enunciated by
the Supreme Court in R. v. Basque[23],
Mr. Di Luciano is entitled to a credit against that prohibition for the period
of time that he was subject to a driving prohibition as part of his release
conditions. He was initially released on an undertaking which included a
provision that he was not to be in the driver’s seat of a motor vehicle. That
provision remained in place from the date of his arrest on December 25, 2019 to
June 15, 2020 when it was varied to provide that he could operate a vehicle
between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., provided it was equipped with an Interlock
breathalyzer device.
[104]      
Mr. Di Luciano was subject, however, to a 90-day
suspension of his license under s. 48.3 of the Highway Traffic Act[24] as a
result of refusing to comply with a demand for a sample of his breath. Defence
counsel concedes he does not receive a credit for that period of time. The
credit sought, and granted, is 2 ½ months, for a net driving prohibition of 2
years, 9 ½ months plus the custodial period imposed.
[105]      
There was some suggestion that perhaps Mr. Di
Luciano ought to receive further mitigation against his sentence for the
restriction imposed on his ability to drive between June 15, 2020 and August
2024. I am not inclined to further mitigate his sentence for that reason. In my
view, the conditions were not sufficiently stringent or punitive to warrant any
further reduction in sentence.
[106]      
In summary, I sentence Mr. Di Luciano as
follows: