[1]              
The Defendants, Jonathan Rosenthal
and Benjamin Barrett, in their respective capacities as Estate Trustees (the
“Succeeding Estate Trustees”) of the Estate of Cyril Hirsch Rosenthal (“Cyril”),
seek an order:
[2]              
Defined terms in this Endorsement
have the meaning given to them in the motion materials unless otherwise stated.
Where appropriate, I refer to certain parties by their first name, given the
commonality of surname.
[3]              
For the reasons that follow, the
motion is granted.
[4]              
The deemed undertaking rule was
codified in Rule 30.1.01(3):
[5]              
An exception to the rule as
provided for in Rule 30.1.01(8) applies if the interests of justice outweigh
any prejudice:
[6]              
Finally, another exception to the
rule permits the use of evidence for impeachment. Rule 30.1.01(6) provides:
[7]              
I accept the position of the
moving parties that the absence of prejudice is usually dispositive of a motion
for relief from the deemed undertaking rule, if the material in respect of
which the relief is sought is relevant to the other proceeding. In Kitchenham
v. Axa Insurance Canada, 94 O.R. (3d) 276, 2008 ONCA 877 (“Kitchenham”)
expressed it as follows at para. 68:
[8]              
This action revolves around a
dispute concerning the nature and value of the interest in Paragon held by
Tamstu-Harjon Holdings of Canada Ltd. (“Tamstu”). That interest arises from a
1978 Consulting Agreement entered into among the parties that included Tamstu and
Paragon.
[9]              
At the time of the Consulting
Agreement, Cyril was the sole shareholder, officer and director of Tamstu.
Cyril was also the former accountant to Paragon.
[10]          
Pursuant to the Consulting
Agreement, Tamstu was entitled to the following interests:
[11]          
Cyril died on December 1, 2008,
with the result that his Estate became the sole shareholder in Tamstu. In turn,
Tamstu’s interest in Paragon is the sole significant asset of the Estate.
[12]          
Upon Cyril’s death, the original
estate trustees were Joe Rosenthal (“Joe”) and Syed Pervez (“Pervez”) (and
together, the “Former Estate Trustees”). Joe was Cyril’s brother. Syed is an
accountant and previously practised in partnership with Cyril.
[13]          
The Former Estate Trustees had the
fiduciary obligation to administer Cyril’s Estate which, in practical terms,
meant protecting the interest of the Estate in Paragon.
[14]          
The Succeeding Estate Trustees
submit that this included the consideration of documents relevant to:
[15]          
 In addition to acting as a Former
Estate Trustee, Pervez also provided professional accounting services to Paragon.
The Succeeding Estate Trustees submit that this was a clear conflict.
[16]          
It is in the capacity as
accountant to Paragon that Pervez asserts that he generated and/or obtained the
Pervez Productions that are the subject of this motion.
[17]          
The Former Estate Trustees
commenced the first of two applications to pass their accounts and be paid
compensation in 2016. The Office of the Children’s Lawyer filed notices of
objection.
[18]          
On November 26, 2020, the
Succeeding Estate Trustees applied to remove the Former Estate Trustees from
those roles. Ultimately, that application proceeded on consent, resulting in
the order of Cavanagh, J. dated December 17, 2020 made in the Estate Proceeding
pursuant to which three relevant things were ordered:
[19]          
Pervez refused to produce
accounting and related documents (the “Pervez Productions”) that were
acknowledged and admitted to be in his possession, power and control, and which
related to the interest held by Tamstu in Paragon, on the basis that he had acquired
and/or created those documents in his capacity as accountant for Paragon, and
not in his capacity as Former Estate Trustee.
[20]          
As a result, Pervez took the
position that the Pervez Productions are those of Paragon and could not be
released without its consent. The Succeeding Estate Trustees then moved for an
order finding Pervez to be in contempt of the order of Cavanagh, J. for
refusing to produce the Pervez Productions. That motion is pending.
[21]          
Meanwhile, and in this proceeding,
Paragon then delivered an affidavit of documents under cover of which it
produced several hundred documents described as “Documents Received from Syed
Pervez” which were in his possession, control or power.
[22]          
The Succeeding Estate Trustees
submit on this motion that those documents are documents that Pervez ought to
have produced to them pursuant to the order of Cavanagh, J. made in the Estate
Proceeding. They therefore seek relief from the deemed undertaking rule, to the
extent it is necessary. They submit that it ought not to be necessary since
Pervez has the Pervez Productions in his possession, control or power, but
nonetheless refuses to disclose or produce them.
[23]          
The Succeeding Estate Trustees
sought the consent of Paragon to the production of the documents and therefore
relief from the deemed undertaking rule, and Paragon refused.
[24]          
The Succeeding Estate Trustees
submit, and I agree, that this proceeding and the Estate Proceeding are closely
related and revolve around the same central issue: the interest of Tamstu in
Paragon. It follows that the conduct of Pervez during the period in which he
acted as both Former Estate Trustee and as accountant to Paragon is relevant
and indeed central to both this action and his applications to pass his
accounts in respect of Cyril’s Estate.
[25]          
The documents at issue are, on
their face, the subject of the order of Cavanagh, J., and as a result have
already been ordered to be produced. Moreover, they have already been produced
by Paragon in this action.
[26]          
No sealing order or other
protective relief has been sought, and none has been granted.
[27]          
The Succeeding Estate Trustees
want to rely on the Pervez Productions in the Estate Proceeding for two
purposes:
[28]          
In my view, they are entitled to
do that, and the interest of justice so requires and supports the granting of
leave in order that the documents can be used in the Estate Proceeding, as
contemplated by Rule 30.1.01(8), and by the Court of Appeal in Kitchenham.
In addition, the impeachment exception and Rule 30.1 .01(6) also apply.
[29]          
The ironic situation underlying
this motion is the fact that all of the interested parties here: the moving
parties - the Succeeding Estate Trustees; Paragon; and Pervez already have the
documents in their possession.
[30]          
Moreover, Pervez has already been
ordered by Cavanagh, J. to produce in the Estate Proceeding all documents
pertaining to Cyril’s Estate in his possession, control or power, as the
documents at issue here are. Pervez himself does not oppose the use or
production of the documents in the Estate Proceeding, and agreed to produce
them if Paragon would consent.
[31]          
As noted above, Paragon will not
consent, yet still has put forward no evidence of prejudice, and indeed I am
satisfied that there is no prejudice to Paragon. Moreover, the documents at
issue are sought to be used in the Estate Proceeding adverse to Pervez, not
Paragon.
[32]          
Paragon submits that the moving
parties have not particularized sufficiently which documents are the subject of
the relief sought or the purposes for which the relief is sought, all with the
result that leave granting relief from the deemed undertaking rule ought not to
be granted: Resolute Forest Products Inc. v. 2471256 Canada Inc., 2023
ONSC 1471 at para. 19.
[33]          
In my view, the documents have
been particularized sufficiently as set out above and I am satisfied that they
are relevant. I am also satisfied that, as set out above, the specific purposes
for which the relief is sought have been properly articulated. There is simply
no evidence of any prejudice to Paragon.
[34]          
Against all of this, I am
satisfied that significant prejudice will accrue to the Succeeding Estate
Trustees in the Estate Proceeding and on the pending contempt motion if they
are not permitted to use the documents. What the ultimate result may be in the
Estate Proceeding and on the contempt motion our matters about which I make no
determination here.
[35]          
For all of these reasons, the
motion is granted.
[36]          
Order to go in accordance with
these reasons.
[37]          
With respect to costs of this
motion, the parties advised at the conclusion of oral argument of the existence
of (undisclosed) offers to settle with the result that they submitted that the
issue of costs should be addressed in writing following the disposition of the
motion.
[38]          
I encourage the parties to agree
on costs. If they are unable to do so, both parties should exchange and file
with the Court to the attention of my judicial assistant, Ms. Mary Sibenik at mary.sibenik@ontario.ca, within 10 days, brief costs submissions not to
exceed two pages in length, to which may be appended any relevant offer(s) to
settle if any, together with a Costs Outline.