[1]              
The applicant, Johnson Bros. Corporation, A Southland Company
("JBros") brings an application for leave to appeal from the partial
award of Arbitrator Joel Richter (the "Arbitrator") dated February
12, 2024 and from the final arbitration award of the Arbitrator dated March 11,
2024 dealing with costs of the arbitration and interest.
[2]              
The respondent, Soletanche Bachy Canada Inc. ("SBC"), opposes
this application.
[3]              
For the following reasons, the application is dismissed.
[4]              
The Southland Group ("Southland") specializes in heavy civil
construction such as bridges, tunnels, marinas, peers, water facilities among
others. Southland formed a joint venture with an engineering and consulting
firm, Astaldi Canada Design & Construction Inc. ("SAJV") for
purposes of the project.
[5]              
SAJV responded to a call for tenders by City of Toronto
("City") to build a new outflow and water treatment plant near
Ashbridges Bay, Toronto (the "Project"). Following the closing of
bids, in November 2018, the Project was awarded to SAJV and it entered into a
contract with the City in January 2019.
[6]              
SAJV entered into a subcontract with JBros to perform the marine works
scope required for the Project. On February 15, 2019, JBros entered into a
subcontract (the "Subcontract") with SBC.
[7]              
The Subcontract is a standard construction document with supplementary
subcontract conditions. The Subcontract contains a dispute resolution clause in
the Subcontract Conditions at SCC 8.2 that provides for negotiation, mediation
and arbitration. Clause 8.2.5 reads:
[8]              
The 2005 version of the CCDC 40 rules provides:
[9]              
The 2018 version of the CCDC 40 rules provides:
[10]          
SBC commenced work on the Project in 2019.
[11]          
Disputes arose between the parties and, as a result of those disputes,
the parties held mediations with a mediator in 2020 which were unsuccessful.
[12]          
On October 28, 2020, JBros. took the position that it was terminating
SBC's right to continue the Subcontract work for cause. SBC took the position
that JBros did not properly carry out the termination of SBC's right to
continue. SBC took the position that it was entitled to terminate the
Subcontract and/or bring it to an end on the basis that JBros. had repudiated
the Subcontract.
[13]          
On December 24, 2020, SBC registered a Claim for Lien ("the
"SBC Lien") against the Project lands in the amount of
$16,269,890.23. On February 10, 2021, SBC perfected this lien by commencing an
action (the "Lien Action").
[14]          
There was correspondence between counsel for the parties in respect to
SBC's Lien including whether the parties were required to mediate the issues in
the SBC Lien.
[15]          
On March 17, 2021, counsel for JBros wrote to counsel for SBC advising
that JBros intended to proceed with "the dispute resolution process set
out in the Subcontract, namely, arbitration".
[16]          
On April 8, 2021, SBC also commenced an action against JBros, SAJV and
others for breach of trust under the Construction Act and payment under
a labour and material payment bond (the "Trust and Bond Action").
[17]          
On April 21, 2021, counsel for JBros wrote to counsel for SBC and stated
that "the binding dispute resolution process in the Subcontract remains
operative and that the path forward to adjudicating the disputes arising from
the Subcontract on their merits is to follow that contractual process".
[18]          
On July 15, 2021, counsel for SBC sent an email to counsel for JBros
attaching a draft letter setting out proposed terms for mediation and
arbitration (if necessary). The draft letter reads that SBC reserves the right
to argue that the matters before the mediator in respect of the Project in 2020
were not referred to arbitration pursuant to SCC 8.2.5 and are now properly
subject to litigation pursuant to SCC 8.2.6. The draft letter reads that SBC
has the right to pursue its claims in the Superior Court of Justice and SBC has
no obligation to agree to an arbitration.
[19]          
On August 25, 2021, the parties conducted a mediation which was
unsuccessful.
[20]          
JBros delivered a "Notice to Arbitrate Pursuant to the
Subcontract" dated September 2, 2021 in respect of its claims against SBC.
[21]          
On March 24, 2022, the parties entered into an agreement that provides
for "Terms for Arbitration" (the "March 2022 Agreement").
The March 2022 Agreement states that the parties agree that "they are
executing this agreement to simplify the disputes between them by avoiding
potential procedural disputes and legal arguments".
[22]          
On March 29, 2022, JBros executed an agreement with the Arbitrator
regarding his appointment ("Terms of Appointment"). On April 6, 2022,
SBC executed the Terms of Appointment.
[23]          
Following the arbitration hearing, the Arbitrator issued a Partial Award
dated February 12, 2024. In the Partial Award, the Arbitrator found that JBros
improperly terminated SBC and that SBC was entitled to payment of
$12,002,362.47. The Arbitrator dismissed JBros' counterclaim.
[24]          
The Arbitrator issued a Final Award dated March 11, 2024. In the Final
Award, the Arbitrator awarded costs of the arbitration to SBC in the amount of
$1,982,170.68.
[25]          
Section 45(1) of the Arbitration Act, 1991 (the "Arbitration
Act") provides:
[26]          
JBros submits that none of the pre-arbitration steps in the dispute
resolution clause in the Subcontract was followed by the parties and, therefore,
the parties were free to refer the matter to the courts or agree to arbitrate
under any rules they saw fit. JBros submits that the arbitration agreement that
governed the arbitration is the March 2022 Agreement.
[27]          
In support of this submission, JBros. cites SCC 8.2.6 of the Subcontract
which provides:
[28]          
JBros submits that the arbitration agreement under paragraph 8.2.5 was
not binding on the parties. JBros submits that the arbitration was not
conducted pursuant to the terms of the Subcontract, or CCDC 40, but was an ad
hoc arbitration under the March 2022 Agreement which does not provide that
the award is final and binding without any appeal.
[29]          
JBros submits that the July 15, 2021 email and attached draft letter
provides the context for the arbitration agreement that was signed the
following year. It submits that this shows that the parties did not agree that
the arbitration would proceed under CCDC 40 and that the arbitration proceeded
as an ad hoc arbitration.
[30]          
JBros submits that the original arbitration agreement in SCC 8.2 was no
longer binding on the parties and, therefore, they were free to resolve their
disputes in any way they chose, including by another agreement to arbitrate.
JBros submits that the parties chose this approach and signed a new agreement
to arbitrate which does not reference the CCDC 40 rules, does not state that
the award will be final and binding, and is silent as to appeals.
[31]          
JBros submits that, therefore, pursuant to s. 45 of the Arbitration
Act, it may appeal the awards to this court on a question of law, with
leave.
[32]          
SDC submits that the arbitration agreement was initially comprised of
the Subcontract (containing the dispute resolution clause) and the CCDC 40
Rules. SDC submits that the March 2022 Agreement was negotiated to avoid a
jurisdictional dispute and became the third part of the agreement to arbitrate
pursuant to s. 5(2) of the Arbitration Act which provides that if the
parties to an arbitration agreement make a further agreement in connection with
the arbitration, it shall be deemed to form part of the arbitration agreement.
[33]          
I disagree that the July 15, 2021 email sent by counsel for SBC to
counsel for JBros and attached draft letter agreement is evidence that provides
objective context for determining the terms of the arbitration agreement under
which the arbitration was conducted. This correspondence is evidence of the
negotiating position of SBC at the time and the proposed terms of the letter
agreement were not accepted.
[34]          
JBros delivered the Notice to Arbitrate on September 2, 2021. The Notice
to Arbitrate reads that it is "In the Matter of an Arbitration Under the
Ontario Arbitration Act Pursuant to Part 8 of a CCA 1 - 2008 Subcontract".
Part 8 of the Subcontract is headed "Dispute Resolution" and includes
the provision for arbitration in section 8.2.5.
[35]          
The Notice reads under the heading "Request to Refer Dispute to
Arbitration":
[36]          
As noted, the Subcontract conditions, in section 8.2.5, expressly
provide that either party may refer a dispute "to be finally resolved by
arbitration under the Rules of Arbitration of Construction Disputes as provided
in CCDC 40”. The CCDC Rules of Arbitration of Construction Disputes as provided
in CCDC 40, whichever version applies, provide that the award is "final
and binding".
[37]          
Whether or not SDC could have been compelled to accept arbitration as
the contractually agreed upon process for dispute resolution under the
Subcontract, the evidence is that it did so, and the Notice to Arbitrate, which
expressly references, in particular, the dispute resolution process in section
8.2.5 of the Subcontract, was accepted as a valid notice of arbitration. The
language of the Notice to Arbitrate, which was not challenged by SDC after it
was delivered, supports the conclusion that the parties intended the
arbitration to be conducted pursuant to the dispute resolution process in
section 8.2.5 of the Subcontract which provides for arbitration under the rules
of Arbitration of Construction Disputes as provided in CCDC 40.
[38]          
The March 2022 Agreement was made after JBros' Notice to Arbitrate was
delivered and expressly references the Notice to Arbitrate and the two legal
actions. In the March 2022 Agreement, at paragraph 5, the parties agreed that
"[t]he arbitration is intended to, and shall address, all matters pleaded
in the Lien Action pleadings, JBros' Notice of Arbitration and any other
disputes between the parties' (sic) arising under the Subcontract". This
provision, plainly read, shows that the parties agreed that the Notice to
Arbitrate is a valid pleading of matters to be arbitrated.
[39]          
I do not accept the submission by JBros that the arbitration was an ad
hoc arbitration without terms that the arbitration would finally resolve
the disputes and that an award would be final and binding. When I read the
March 2022 Agreement together with the Notice to Arbitrate, and give the words
used their plain and ordinary meaning having regard to objective evidence of
the surrounding circumstances, including the two legal actions, I conclude that
in addition to the March 2022 Agreement, the parties included as part of the
arbitration agreement the expressly referenced dispute resolution provisions in
Part 8 of the Subcontract including, in particular, section 8.2.5 which
provides for a dispute to be "finally resolved" by arbitration under
the Rules of Arbitration as provided in CCDC 40.
[40]          
In Baffinland Iron Mines LP v. Tower-EBC G.P./S.E.N.C., 2023 ONCA
245, the Court of Appeal addressed provisions in the Arbitration Act for
appeal of an arbitration award. The Court of Appeal, at para. 2, held that the Arbitration
Act contemplates three different scenarios regarding appeals to the court
on questions of law. The arbitration agreement may expressly provide for, be
silent on, or preclude such appeals. In the first scenario, there is an appeal
as of right; in the second, there is an opportunity to appeal but only with
leave; and in the third, there is no appeal or right to seek leave to appeal at
all. The application judge had held that the arbitration agreement precluded
appeals by saying that disputes would be "finally settled" by
arbitration and by incorporating rules waiving any form of recourse. The Court
of Appeal, at para. 35, observed that "final and binding" is
terminology which has been held to preclude appeals from an arbitration award.
The Court of Appeal held that the phrase "final and binding" in an
arbitration agreement precludes appeals because of the word "final".
The Court of Appeal held that when the word "settled" is used in the
context of a dispute being finally settled by arbitration, no further recourse
regarding the dispute, beyond the arbitration award, is available.
[41]          
I conclude that the arbitration agreement included terms that the
arbitration disputes would be "finally resolved" by arbitration and
that the arbitration award would be "final and binding". Given these
provisions, and on the authority of Baffinland, JBros has no right to
seek leave to appeal the Partial Award or the Final Award.
[42]          
If I have erred in concluding that JBros has no right to seek leave to
appeal, I go on to address the questions of law that, JBros submits, are raised
by the Partial Award and the Final Award and in respect of which it seeks leave
to appeal.
[43]          
JBros submits that four questions of law arise from the Partial Award
and the Final Award which justify an order granting leave to appeal.
[44]          
JBros submits that at paragraph 226 of the Partial Award, the Arbitrator
found that the existence of a change order between the City and the Applicant
absolved SBC from proving its claim. JBros submits that the Arbitrator erred in
law by shifting the legal burden from SBC being required to prove its claim to
imposing a burden on JBros to show that SBC was not entitled to its claims.
[45]          
This issue involves the Arbitrator's treatment of the onuses on the
parties having regard to evidence relating to Change Order 28. The Arbitrator
addressed claims made by SBC for certain work. He found that Change Order 28
was issued by the City on June 16, 2021 and provided for a payment of
$4,999,999 plus HST to SAJV and a 159 working day extension of time, stated to
be in full compensation for the 2019-2020 offshore claims. The claims included
claims that caused SAJV and "its subcontractors", which included SBC,
to incur additional cost and additional time to perform work.
[46]          
The Arbitrator found that the existence of Change Order 28 and the fact
that SAJV had settled these claims with the City for a substantial payment and
a significant extension of time were never disclosed to SBC or referenced in
JBros' pleadings. The Arbitrator found that JBros' failure to disclose the
Change Order when it was issued was a deliberate decision made to withhold
knowledge of the payment and time extension from SBC, and that JBros' was aware
that disclosure would buttress SBC's position on almost all of its claims.
[47]          
Paragraph 226 of the Partial Award reads:
[48]          
JBros submits that the Arbitrator shifted the legal burden which rested
on SBC to prove its claims to JBros to disprove the claims, and this is a
reversible error of law.
[49]          
The reasons given by the Arbitrator in paragraph 226 of the Partial
Award make it clear that the Arbitrator did not reverse the legal burden of
proof. The Arbitrator writes that "it is most certainly true that SBC has
the onus of proving its claims ...". The Arbitrator held that once Change
Order 28 became known, the "evidentiary burden on this issue shifted to
JBROS", and that it failed to adduce evidence to discharge this
evidentiary burden.
[50]          
It was open to the Arbitrator to give Change Order 28, and the
"deliberate decision" of JBros to withhold knowledge of the payment
extension and time extension from SBC, the weight that he did, and to draw the
inferences that he did. The question that arises from the Arbitrator's ruling
that the evidentiary burden shifted to JBros is not a question of law but one
of whether, given the facts as found by the Arbitrator, including that JBros
deliberately withheld Change Order 28, his ruling was justified.
[51]          
JBros has not shown that the Arbitrator's decision in this respect
raises a question of law in relation to whether the Arbitrator shifted to JBros
the legal burden which rested on SBC to prove its claims.
[52]          
JBros submits that the Arbitrator made a number of findings on SBC's
damages resulting from delay caused by weather. JBros refers to statements made
by the Arbitrator that SBC had not claimed damages resulting from delay caused
by weather and had simply raised the issue of weather in partial answer to JBros'
termination of the subcontract. JBros submits that the Arbitrator then awarded
SBC more than $2 million in damages for delay resulting from adverse weather
conditions. JBros submits that these are inconsistent findings that, in the
absence of an explanation justifying the conclusion, amount to an error in law.
[53]          
In support of this submission, JBros cites Trajkovich v. Ontario
(Minister of Natural Resources), 2009 ONCA 898, at para. 18, where the
Court of Appeal held that the trial judge had implicitly made inconsistent
findings on the central issue of factual causation which was an error of law
requiring appellate intervention.
[54]          
This issue relates to paragraph 319 of the Partial Award where the
Arbitrator awarded amounts in respect of "Extended 2019 Marine
Season" and "Extended 2020 Marine Season" of $2,195,625.10, and
$908,691.18, respectively.
[55]          
In the Partial Award beginning at para. 154, the Arbitrator addresses
whether JBros was entitled to direct SBC to work outside of the May 1 to
October 31 Marine Seasons at SBC's cost. The Arbitrator addressed the parties'
positions including by reference to the language of the Subcontract and noted
that the issue turns on contractual interpretation. The Arbitrator concluded
that "SBC was entitled to be compensated for its extra costs and expenses
associated with having to work off-season in 2019 and/or 2020, and SBC's
maintaining that position in its dealings with JBROS could not have constituted
a valid basis for SBC's termination".
[56]          
In the next section of the Partial Award beginning at para. 160, the
Arbitrator addressed issues under the heading "The Interpretation of the
Subcontract's Weather Provisions and How SBC Dealt with Adverse Weather".
In the Partial Award, at para. 167, the Arbitrator writes that "SBC has
clarified that the significance of adverse weather in this arbitration is
limited, as it seeks neither compensation nor an extension of time to perform
its Subcontract. Rather, weather is relevant only as one of several factors
that contributed to delay".
[57]          
The Arbitrator went on to consider the issue of "adverse
weather" in several paragraphs on the Partial Award as one of contractual
interpretation: see paragraphs 170, 177-179. The Arbitrator concluded at para.
182 that he was not called upon to quantify the impacts of any adverse weather
on SBC's performance, although he found that there was some impact and that
JBros had not satisfied him that SBC performed otherwise than reasonably and
competently in meeting adverse weather challenges. The Arbitrator found at
para. 182 that JBros' reliance on weather-related matters in support of its
decision to terminate SBC was unfounded.
[58]          
The Arbitrator's reasons in the Partial Award show that he addressed the
claim by SBC for compensation for extra costs and expenses associated with
having to work outside the Marine Season separately from the interpretation of
the Subcontract's weather provisions and how SBC dealt with adverse weather.
The Arbitrator expressly found that "weather is relevant as only one of
several factors that contributed to delay." The Arbitrator found that
delay was relevant to the claims by SBC for compensation for work done outside
of the Marine Seasons in 2019 and 2020.
[59]          
Determination of whether the Arbitrator made inconsistent findings with
respect to (i) compensation for work done by SDC after the end of the
"Marine Season" in 2019 and 2020, and (ii) how SBC dealt with
"adverse weather", requires interpretation of the terms of the
Subcontract, as was done by the Arbitrator in making these findings. The
separate findings are not, on their face, plainly inconsistent, as was the case
in Trajkovich. The question that arises from these findings is not one
of law, but, because it requires contractual interpretation, one of mixed fact
and law.
[60]          
JBros has failed to show that the Arbitrator's findings with respect to
the awards for compensation in respect of the Extended 2019 Marine Season and
the Extended 2020 Marine Season and his separate findings about the effect of
"adverse weather" are inconsistent and raise a question of law.
[61]          
JBros points out that the Arbitrator awarded damages related to COVID-10
impacts. JBros submits that he awarded $800,000 without, it submits, any basis
in the evidence. JBros submits that in making this finding without evidentiary
support, the Arbitrator erred in law.
[62]          
The Partial Award, at paras. 294-296, reads:
[63]          
JBros relies on legal authority standing for the principle that the
basis for an arbitrator's decision must be "intelligible", meaning
capable of being made out and logically connected to its basis. The reasons
must show, when read in the context of the record and the submissions, that the
trier has seized the substance of the matter. JBros relies on authority that
where an arbitrator's lack of reasons rises to the degree that the decision is
not sufficiently intelligible to permit appellate review, an error of law has
been committed.
[64]          
SBC submits that reasonableness of the Arbitrator's decision with
respect to COVID damages can be discerned from the record, and that JBros did
not put some parts of the evidentiary record before me on this application.
[65]          
SBC refers to paragraph 279 of the Partial Award where the Arbitrator
writes that in reviewing quantification of SBC's claims, he made reference to
its "Damages Workbook" that, he wrote, provides support for the discrete
claims that SBC makes. The Arbitrator noted that the evidence in support of the
claims was not, unless otherwise indicated, challenged by JBros' direct
evidence or by cross-examination. The Damages Workbook was not put into
evidence on this application by JBros.
[66]          
In paragraph 294 of the Partial Award, the Arbitrator referred to SBC's
claim of $1,052,664.18 for COVID-19 impacts, and he described how this amount
was calculated by SBC by reference to the evidence. The evidence cited by the
Arbitrator is not in the record before me.
[67]          
The Arbitrator wrote at para. 295 that JBros notes that HKA found no
support for that part of SBC's claim that related to "the delayed supply
of spherical grab" and, moreover, that equipment should have been procured
earlier, before the onset of the Pandemic. The Arbitrator referred to JBros’
argument as to the sanitization portion of the claim that it presumes that the
extra work was done during productive work time and that claims are made for
days on which no work was done. The Arbitrator concluded that "[b]ased on
the foregoing, I award $800,000 in respect of this claim".
[68]          
The Arbitrator's statements in Paragraph 295 of the Partial Award give
rise to a clear inference that he reduced SBC's claim to account for the
matters raised by JBros in relation to the "spherical grab" equipment
and the "sanitization portion" of the claim. The amounts for these
reductions are not reproduced in the Partial Award. They would be likely be
shown in the "Damages Workbook" that was before the Arbitrator but,
because JBros did not include this evidence, I am unable to make this
determination on the limited record before me.
[69]          
JBros accepts that the sufficiency of the Arbitrator's reasons must be
evaluated when read in the context of the record and the submissions. JBros
failed to provide necessary parts of the evidentiary record in its application
materials before me. As a result, I am unable to find that there is a basis for
JBros' submission that the Arbitrator's reasons with respect to this award of
damages are insufficiently unintelligible to permit appellate review such that
the decision raises a question of law.
[70]          
In JBros' Notice of Application, it pleads that in the Final Award, the
Arbitrator made errors of law including that he made an error in principle or
was plainly wrong by ordering JBros to pay SBC holdback "prior to
Substantial Performance of the Work" and by awarding interest on holdback.
[71]          
At paragraph 316 of the Partial Award, the Arbitrator awarded SBC
outstanding invoices and statutory holdback of $2,878,466.87. At paragraphs
8-11 of the Final Award, the Arbitrator awarded SBC interest on outstanding
invoices and holdback.
[72]          
JBros submits that in doing so, the Arbitrator erred in law because
basic holdback under the Construction Act was not due and owing to SBC
at the time of the awards. JBros submits that the Project had not reached
substantial performance at the time of the Arbitrator's awards and that JBros is
required to retain basic holdback from SBC and is prohibited by the Construction
Act from releasing it to one subcontractor when the time for liens to be
filed has not passed. JBros also submits that the absence of reasons by the
Arbitrator is an error of law.
[73]          
The Arbitrator recorded (in para. 9 of the Final Award) JBros'
submissions that "holdback only became due upon Substantial Performance of
the Work, an event that never occurred; ...". SBC notes that JBros did not
previously argue before the Arbitrator that release of the holdback was not yet
due, and that this issue was raised for the first time in the submissions by
JBros in relation to interest and costs. This is clear from the Partial Award
beginning at para. 311 (under the heading "Outstanding Invoices and
Holdback") where the Arbitrator refers to the arguments made by JBros in
opposition to this claim and he makes no mention of any opposition based on an
argument that release of the holdback was not yet due.
[74]          
The Arbitrator wrote at para. 7 of the Final Award that the only issue
left open regarding pre-Award interest was the calculation of interest on the
claims that the Arbitrator accepted. The Arbitrator, at para. 11 of the Final
Award, rejected the submission by JBros that SBC had used erroneous dates for
its interest calculations and that pre-Award interest should be modified
(based, in part, on the submission that the holdback is not yet due). The
Arbitrator did so by exercising his discretion not to revisit SBC's entitlement
to pre-Award interest because he accepted that JBros was improperly attempting
to relitigate SBC's entitlement to pre-Award interest under the guise of
submissions on "calculation".
[75]          
JBros does not challenge that the issue of whether the holdback should
be ordered to be released because the time of substantial performance had not
passed was not raised with the Arbitrator at the liability phase of the
arbitration and only in its submissions with respect to interest. JBros submits
that it was within the Arbitrator's authority to correct the Partial Award and
he did not do so. However, JBros never asked the Arbitrator to make such a
correction. I reject JBros' submission that the Arbitrator made an error of law
by failing to make a correction to the Partial Award based on an argument that
was not made (except in respect of pre-Award interest) and that he was not
asked to correct.
[76]          
The Arbitrator exercised his discretion in response to JBros' submission
that the holdback is not yet due and, therefore, SBC's interest claim should be
reduced. Whether the Arbitrator erred in so exercising his discretion does not
raise a question of law.
[77]          
For these reasons, I am not satisfied that JBros has shown that there
are questions of law raised by its proposed appeal. As a result, it is not
necessary for me to decide whether (i) the importance to the parties of the
matters at stake in the arbitration justifies an appeal, and (ii) determination
any one or more of the questions raised by JBros will significantly affect the
rights of the parties.
[78]          
If I had decided that JBros had a right to seek leave to appeal on a
question of law, I would decline to grant leave.
[79]          
For these reasons, JBros' application is dismissed.
[80]          
If the parties are unable to resolve costs, they may make written
submissions in accordance with a timetable to be agreed upon by counsel and
approved by me (with reasonable page limits).