[1]              
On this motion, the plaintiff seeks orders (i) approving the settlement
of this action and dismissing the action against the defendant; (ii) approving
the second notice and plan of notice, the distribution protocol, the form and
content of the claim for and claims process, and the appointment of RicePoint
Administration Inc., doing business as Verita Global (“Verita”) as the
administrator; and (iii) approving counsel fees and disbursements, an interim
payment of the funding commission to the litigation funder, the release to the
funder of security previously paid into court, and an honorarium for the
plaintiff.
[2]              
This action relates to the payment of trailing commissions to discount
brokers from mutual funds for which the defendant, TD Asset Management Inc.,
acted as trustee and manager. The proposed class consists of TD Mutual Fund
unitholders who held their units through discount brokers. The claim alleges
that the defendant improperly paid trailing commissions to discount brokers for
services and advice that were never provided, and thereby improperly dissipated
TD Mutual Fund assets, which diminished the value of the TD Mutual Fund units
held by the class members. The plaintiff also makes claims under s. 130 of the Securities
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S.5, alleging misrepresentations in the defendant’s
fund facts documents. The defendant denies all allegations.
[3]              
This proceeding was certified on February 27, 2020, after a contested
motion before Belobaba J. Justice Belobaba also approved the third-party
litigation funding agreement with Claims Funding International (the “funder”)
by way of order dated June 20, 2019, under which the funder posted security by
depositing $400,000 with the Accountant of the Superior Court of Justice.
[4]              
There is a parallel class action which has also been settled, subject to
court approval, in which the class members are those who held their units
through a full-service broker: Aggarwal v. TD Asset Management Inc.,
CV-22-00691344-00CP.
[5]              
I note that there are also related actions proceeding against other
defendants that, in many ways, have been case managed together with this action.
The first set of actions was commenced in 2018, including this one, on behalf
of those investors who purchased mutual fund units through discount brokers. I
sometimes refer to these actions as the 2018 actions. The second set of
actions, including the Aggarwal action, was commenced in 2022 on behalf
of investors who purchased mutual fund units through full-service brokers. I
sometimes refer to these actions as the 2020 actions. The actions against this
defendant are, at least as of now, the only actions to have been settled.
[6]              
In addition, there is another related action: Frayce v. BMO
InvestorLine Inc. et al., bearing court file no. CV-20-638868-CP, which
overlaps with this action in certain ways, and in which certification was
denied. One of the defendants in the Frayce action is TD Asset
Management Inc. The settlement negotiations were conducted between the parties
to this action, the parties to the Aggarwal action, and the plaintiff in
the Frayce action.
[7]              
Under the terms of the negotiated settlement, the Westwood class
will receive $70.25 million. The Aggrawal class will receive $8.5
million. The Frayce class will not receive anything.
[8]              
In these reasons, I am evaluating the settlement of the Westwood proceeding
only.
[9]              
The issues raised on this motion are:
[10]          
In this case, the settlement provides for the payment of $70.25 million
inclusive of all legal fees, disbursements, taxes, and administration expenses.
The settlement is without admission of liability. In exchange, the defendant
will obtain a full and final release of the claims of all class members and a
dismissal of the action without costs and with prejudice.
[11]          
Other key terms include that the settlement amount is non-reversionary.
Moreover, the funds were required to be paid into a trust under the control of
class counsel by November 8, 2024, and the amount has been invested in a
guaranteed investment product. Investment proceeds accrue to the benefit of
class members.
[12]          
Of note, the settlement agreement requires class counsel, who are
counsel in the other 2018 actions, to reasonably and in good faith, seek to
negotiate terms in any subsequent settlement that are at least as favourable to
class members in those actions as the terms are to class members in this
action. In this way, the settlement memorializes class counsel’s obligation to
class members in the other 2018 actions. The agreement provides that class
counsel shall advise the defendant in writing of any settlement in one of the
other actions, its amount, and other factors relating to the value of the
settlement. It also requires class counsel seeking approval of a settlement of
another 2018 action to include in its motion materials their opinion on whether
the settlement is at least as favourable to the class members in that action as
this settlement is to the class members in this action. The settlement
agreement does not grant the defendant in this action any standing with respect
to the other 2018 actions.
[13]          
Under s. 27.1(1) of the Class Proceedings Act, 1992, S.O. 192, c.
6, (“CPA”), a proceeding brought under the CPA may only be
settled with court approval. The court shall not approve a settlement unless it
determines that the settlement is fair, reasonable, and in the best interests
of the class: s. 27.1(5) CPA, at para. 7. The burden lies on the party
seeking approval: Robinson v. Medtronic, Inc., 2020 ONSC 1688, at para.
63; Nunes v. Air Transat A.T. Inc., 2005 CarswellOnt 2503 (S.C.J.), at
para. 7.
[14]          
Public policy favours the resolution of complex litigation: Nunes,
at para. 7.
[15]          
Settlements need not be perfect; they are compromises: Lozanski v.
The Home Depot, Inc., 2016 ONSC 5447, at para. 71. To find that a
settlement is not fair and reasonable, it must fall outside a range of
reasonable outcomes: Nunes, at para. 7. An objective and rational
assessment of the pros and cons of a settlement is required: Mancinelli v.
Royal Bank of Canada, 2017 ONSC 2324, at para. 38. There is a strong
presumption of fairness when a proposed class settlement, which was negotiated
at arms-length by counsel for the class, is presented for court approval: Nunes,
at para. 7.
[16]          
A court must be assured that the settlement secures appropriate
consideration for the class in return for the surrender of its litigation
rights against the defendants: Nunes, at para. 7. However, it is not the
court’s function to substitute its judgment for that of the parties or attempt
to renegotiate a proposed settlement. Nor is it the court’s function to
litigate the merits of the action, or, on the other hand, to rubber-stamp a
settlement: Nunes, at para. 7.
[17]          
When considering whether to approve a negotiated settlement, the court
may consider, among other things: (a) the likelihood of recovery or likelihood
of success; (b) the amount and nature of discovery, evidence or investigation;
(c) the proposed settlement terms and conditions; (d) the recommendation and
experience of counsel; (e) the future expense and likely duration of litigation
and risk; (f) the recommendation of neutral parties, if any; (g) the number of
objectors and nature of objections, if any; (h) the presence of good faith,
arm’s length bargaining and the absence of collusion; (i) the degree and nature
of communications by counsel and the representative parties with class members
during the litigation; and (j) information conveying to the court the dynamics
of and the positions taken by the parties during the negotiation: Lozanski,
at para. 73; Nunes, at para. 7; Robinson, at para. 65.
[18]          
Other relevant considerations include whether there are any structural
indicators that suggest collusion or conflict of interest: Leslie v.
Agnico-Eagles Mines, 2016 ONSC 532, at para. 8; Green v. CIBC, 2022
ONSC 373, at para. 17.
[19]          
Agreements that place a high value on non-monetary or conditional
compensation, contemplate a possible reversion of settlement funds to
defendants without a concomitant reduction in class counsel’s compensation,
make settlement approval contingent on fee approval and have optics that
suggest the settlement is more favourable to class counsel than class members
are the kinds of features which suggest collusion or conflict of interest: Smith
Estate v. National Money Mart Co., 2010 ONSC 1334, at paras. 33 and 95,
varied in part, 2011 ONCA 233; Leslie, at footnote 10, Brown v.
Canada (Attorney General), 2018 ONSC 3429, at paras. 85-86.
[20]          
Where counsel is in possession of significant facts and knowledge of
risks, the court is justified in assuming that counsel had a complete or almost
complete understanding of the risks and rewards of further litigation, and the
court will be more comfortable relying on class counsel’s recommendation that
the settlement is in the best interests of the class: Cannon v. Funds for
Canada Foundation, 2017 ONSC 2670, at paras. 5-10.
[21]          
I approve the settlement agreement in this case for the following
reasons:
[22]          
In view of these factors, I find that the settlement is within the zone
of reasonableness, and I approve it.
[23]          
The first notice regarding the settlement approval hearing was
disseminated in accordance with my order. The parties have agreed to the form
of the second notice, which addresses the settlement approval, counsel fees and
disbursements, the appointment of the administrator, the start of the claims
process, the deadline to file a claim, and the procedure for making a claim.
[24]          
The proposed notice plan requires dissemination of the short-form notice
as follows: (i) on class counsel’s webpage; (ii) provided to class members, by
email if possible, who have contacted class counsel for purposes of receiving
notice of developments in the action; (iii) in the form of a news release
across Canada News Wire, in English and in French; (iv) published once in the
business section of the national weekend edition of The Globe and Mail
in English; (v) published once in the business section of La Presse, in
French;  (vi) sent electronically and/or in paper form to discount brokers in
Canada under cover of a letter requesting that they distribute the notice
through their electronic message systems to clients who may be class members,
and post the notice on their news boards directed to the attention of their
clients who may be class members; and (vii) filed by the defendant as a news
release on SEDAR.
[25]          
The plan requires dissemination of the long-form notice by posting it on
class counsel’s webpage, in English and in French, and providing it, by email
if possible, by class counsel to any potential class member who has previously
contacted class counsel for the purposes of receiving notice of developments in
the action.
[26]          
The plan also calls for publication of a Google banner ad for
approximately 700,000 impressions across Canada to an investor-focused
audience, in English and French, for at least 30 but not more than 35 days, and
publication as a 12-day sponsored news link on Stockhouse.
[27]          
In addition, although not technically part of the notice plan, it is
worth noting that the streamlined claims process will bring the fact of the
settlement agreement and the claims process to the attention of many class
members.
[28]          
I am satisfied that the notice program is robust. Its costs are
proportionate in view of the size of the settlement. It will bring the
settlement to the attention of class members in both English and French, which
is appropriate in this case.
[29]          
Class counsel has made some minor changes to the forms of notice on my
direction. I am satisfied that the current notices set out the necessary
information in an appropriate manner.
[30]          
The stated objective of the distribution protocol is to equitably
distribute the net settlement amount among class members who submit a valid
claim while avoiding double compensation.
[31]          
The agreement requires the defendant to provide the administrator with
client information in respect of the TD mutual fund units held by class member
through its affiliated discount broker (“TDDI”) to determine the trailing
commissions paid by class members who were clients of the TDDI.
[32]          
Claimants will have 180 days after the second notice is disseminated to
make a claim. If the claim is denied, a claimant can request reconsideration of
their claim. In some circumstances, the decision of the administrator on a
reconsideration can be appealed to an arbitrator, whose decision will not be
subject to appeal.
[33]          
The net settlement amount will be distributed on a pro rata basis
to authorized claimants. The distribution protocol provides that a claimant who
has paid trailing commissions greater than zero will be eligible to receive a pro
rata share of the net settlement amount based on their trailing commissions
paid relative to the trailing commissions paid by all authorized claimants.
However, compensation will only be paid if the authorized claimant’s minimum pro
rata entitlement calculated under the distribution protocol is greater than
$25. There is a detailed formula set out in the motion materials for
determining the trailing commissions paid that requires the administrator to
use actual trailers paid when available, and estimated trailers paid based on
asset value when the actual figure is not available.
[34]          
If there are funds remaining six months after the initial distribution,
the administrator will make a second distribution to authorized claimants to
the extent it is economical to do so, or if it is not economical to do so, the
money will be distributed cy-prés. The
proposed cy-prés receipient is the Osgoode Hall Law School Investor
Protection Clinic, a pro bono clinic that provides free legal advice to
retail investors who cannot afford a lawyer. The clinic also undertakes
research to help regulators, policymakers and courts understand issues facing
retail investors and undertakes investor education initiatives.
[35]          
I note that no objections to, or comments on, the distribution protocol
were received.
[36]          
In my view, the distribution protocol and claims process are
appropriately designed to achieve the objective of an equitable distribution of
the net settlement fund to authorized claimants, because it divides
compensation between authorized claimants based on their relative alleged
losses while avoiding distinctions between class members that would be unduly
expensive, time-consuming, or confusing.
[37]          
Moreover, the claims process proposed is accessible and navigable for
claimants. The fact that data in the possession of the defendant will
streamline the claims process for many claimants, and will be used to assist in
bringing the settlement to the attention of many class members, is an
additional benefit to the class, and will result in an increased take-up rate.
[38]          
The proposed cy-prés recipient is appropriate in view of the
nature of the proceeding and the claims levied in it. Moreover, a cy-prés recipient
is appropriate in this case because it is consistent with the access to justice
and behaviour modification goals of the CPA to benefit a cy-prés
recipient that provides free legal advice to investors if it is not economical
to distribute any residual net settlement funds to the class members.
[39]          
Moreover, the proposed administrator, Verita, is also appropriate.
Counsel solicited bids from three experienced class action administrators and
has concluded that Verita is an appropriate choice. Verita has been appointed
as claims administrator by courts in Ontario and elsewhere in Canada many
times. It is an experienced administrator.
[40]          
Verita estimates its costs (based on the number of claims made) to range
between $165,966 to $1,159,045 plus notice costs and taxes. Verita estimates an
additional $25,000 in fees for processing and managing client information,
although the actual costs could vary depending on the information it receives.
[41]          
The costs of the administrator are proportionate having regard to the
size of the settlement. The evidence indicates the other bids projected similar
costs.
[42]          
I approve the distribution protocol, the claim form and process, and the
appointment of Verita as claims administrator.
[43]          
In this case, class counsel is made up of two firms, Siskinds LLP and
Bates Barristers. They seek approval of fees and disbursements plus applicable
taxes in accordance with an executed retainer agreement. Specifically, they
seek:
[44]          
The retainer agreement entered into between class counsel and the
representative plaintiff provides for a contingency fee of 28% of the amount
recovered, plus taxes. A reduction of 5% from the maximum contingency fee
percentage (33%) was built in, to account for the fact that third-party funding
was obtained.
[45]          
Under the terms of the retainer agreement, class counsel would be
entitled to a fee of $19,670,000, which is $1.75 million greater than the fee
being sought. The amount sought equates to approximately 25.51% of the
settlement amount. The reduction of the fee sought was agreed to by class
counsel to facilitate the settlement of the action. In effect, class counsel
agreed to allocate what would have been $1.75 million of its fee under the
retainer agreement to the Aggarwal action to enable the global
settlement of all matters, failing which the negotiations were in danger of
falling apart.
[46]          
Under the retainer agreement, class counsel was also entitled to charge
interest on disbursements incurred, but it is not seeking such interest on this
motion. In addition, costs awarded to the plaintiff for the certification
motion and motion for leave to appeal the certification order are also excluded
from the fee request on this motion, such that the entirety of those costs
awards benefit class members.
[47]          
The retainer agreement complies with the requirements set out in s. 33
of the CPA.
[48]          
As Morgan J. recetly noted in Austin v. Bell Canada, 2021 ONSC
5068, at para. 10, citing Commonwealth Investors Syndicate Ltd. v. Laxton, [1994]
O.J. No. 2922, at para. 63 (S.C.J.), generally speaking, when considering
whether to approve class counsel fees, “the amount payable under the contract
is the starting point for the application of the court’s judgment.”
[49]          
In MacDonald et al. v. BMO Trust Company et al., 2021 ONSC 3726,
at para. 21, Belobaba J. held that the approach that presumes valid the
percentage of recovery agreed to in the contingency fee retainer (up to
one-third) is appropriate in most class action settlements, but not in “mega
fund” settlements that are in the range of $100 million or higher. Class
counsel submits that this case is one where the contingency fee agreed upon is
presumptively valid.
[50]          
There is ample law explaining why contingency fees in class proceedings
advance the goal of access to justice: see, for example, Baker (Estate) v.
Sony BMG Music (Canada) Inc., 2011 ONSC 7105, at para. 64; Osmun v.
Cadbury Adams Canada Inc., 2010 ONSC 2752, at para. 21.
[51]          
Contingency fees also incentivize class counsel to maximize recovery for
the class, and promote judicial economy by encouraging efficiency in the
litigation and discouraging unnecessary work: Crown Bay Hotel Ltd.
Partnership v. Zurich Indemnity Co. of Canada, 1998 CanLII 14842; Osmun,
at para. 21
[52]          
The general principles to apply to the assessment of class counsel’s
fees were set out by Juriansz J.A., in Smith Estate v. National Money Mart
Co., 2011 ONCA 233, at para. 80:
[53]          
The court also considers the integrity of the profession as a relevant
factor: Fresco v. Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, 2023 ONSC 3335, at
paras. 127-133, aff’d 2024 ONCA 628, at paras. 101-102. It is important to
note, as the Court of Appeal did in Fresco, at para. 84, that the phrase
“integrity of the profession” is not meant to connote dishonesty in this
context, but rather, a fee that is not champertous.
[54]          
In McIntyre Estate v. Ontario (Attorney General), 2002 CanLII
45046, at para. 76, the Court of Appeal for Ontario found that a “fee agreement
that so over-compensates a lawyer such that it is unreasonable or
unfair to the client is an agreement with an improper purpose -- i.e.,
taking advantage of the client.”
[55]          
The risk class counsel took on must be measured from the outset of the
litigation, not with the benefit of hindsight: Gagne v. Silcorp Ltd.,
1998 CanLII 1584.
[56]          
Having regard to the factors above, I make the following observations.
[57]          
Class counsel assumed risks in this proceeding, as class counsel always
does. This action was complex, and the risk that class counsel would devote
significant resources to an action that might not succeed was not
insignificant. Complex securities litigation like this proceeding, here
complicated by the related 2022 and 2018 actions, and the Frayce action,
would require many contested motions, interlocutory steps and appeals. The time
needed to go from commencement of the action to a common issues trial can be considerable.
Counsel’s investment in this action was considerable.
[58]          
I accept that counsel risked investing enormous time in this action, and
foregoing other opportunities, with the prospect of no or little recovery, or
significant delay in obtaining any recovery.
[59]          
This action involved numerous steps. Class counsel investigated the
alleged misconduct, conducted research and analysis, and drafted the statement
of claim. Thereafter, there was a hotly-contested certification motion
requiring the drafting of motion materials, conducting cross-examinations,
drafting and making legal argument, and dealing with the appeal therefrom.
There was also a funding approval motion. Other steps included the plaintiff’s
motion to stay the Aggarwal action (which was part of a motion to stay
all the 2022 actions), a motion to substitute the representative plaintiff, Mr.
Westwood, for the previous representative plaintiff, and the negotiation of a
discovery plan, pursuant to which the defendant produced close to 3,000
documents. In addition, counsel obtained expert evidence and reviewed the
defendant’s expert evidence. And there were the settlement negotiations and
multiple attendances at mediation.
[60]          
Counsel has maintained records of the time spent by separately tracking
their work that was relevant to all 2018 actions, and the work relevant to this
action only. Siskinds’ docketed fees related to this action only total
$2,345,501, representing over 4,800 hours. Its docketed fees related to all the
2018 actions total $1,014,081, representing nearly 1,900 hours. If that time is
shared equally between the 2018 actions, the portion related to this action is
$144,868.71. Taxes are not included in these amounts.
[61]          
Siskinds has also incurred disbursements related to this action only in
the amount of $296,665.24 pre-tax. The most significant portion of these
disbursements relates to expert fees in the amount of $202,646.25. These fees
relate to two experts. Ermanno Pascutto is a senior securities regulator who
prepared an expert affidavit for the certification motion on the history and
rationale for the payment of trailing commissions to discount brokers. Mr.
Pascutto’s report was also used at mediation. Errol Soriano’s report was over
triple the cost of Mr. Pascutto’s report. Mr. Soriano is a chartered professional
accountant, chartered business valuator and certified fraud examiner. He
prepared an expert damages report for the mediation, and played an ongoing
consulting role throughout the mediation process.
[62]          
Mediation fees are just over $14,000, while notice fees are just over
$23,000. Research and resource material total over $17,000, while copying is
over $14,000 and mileage/travel/meals account for over $11,500.
[63]          
Siskinds incurred a further $5,256.75 pre-tax with respect to all the
2018 actions, of which $750.98 plus taxes is attributable to this action.
[64]          
In addition, Siskinds estimates it will incur an addition 350 to 500
hours to complete the administration of the settlement, including the approval
hearing, responding to enquiries from class members, and liaising with the
administrator as necessary.
[65]          
Bates Barristers has docketed fees of $1,041,360 on work related to this
action. Of that amount, $610,020 relates only to this action, while $431,340
relates to all the 2018 actions. If that amount is divided equally between the
2018 actions, $61,620 is the portion related to this action.
[66]          
Bates Barristers incurred disbursements of $2,211.79, plus taxes, mostly
for travel expenses.
[67]          
In addition to carrying fees and disbursements, between the commencement
of the litigation and June 20, 2019, when the third-party funding agreement was
approved, class counsel took on additional risk in the form of an
indemnification of the plaintiff against adverse costs awards.
[68]          
No objections to, or comments on, the counsel fee or disbursement
request were received.
[69]          
The result achieved for the class is excellent. For such complex
litigation, it has come relatively early in the process, as discoveries are not
yet complete. The settlement is a cash settlement.
[70]          
Counsel have provided me with examples of settlements in a similar range
where similar fees have been approved by the court: see, among other examples, Eidoo
v. Infineon Technologies AG, 2016 ONSC 3628; Canadian Imperial Bank of
Commerce v. Deloitte & Touche, 2017 ONSC 5000, at paras. 24, 34; and Ironworkers
Ontario Pension Fund v. Manulife Financial, 2017 ONSC 2669, at paras.
26-27, 29.
[71]          
Cross-checking the percentage fee against a multiplier of counsel’s
docketed time can be a useful exercise in evaluating the reasonableness of the
fee request. In this case, the fee request as compared to the docketed hours
(before the work that remains to be done) is 5.67. Class counsel argues that
the multiplier confirms the reasonableness of the fee requested because it is
consistent with past fee awards. The past fee awards offered up by counsel in
comparison reflect multipliers ranging between 3.7 to 5.5. The fees sought in
this case would thus exceed the multipliers applicable to past fee approvals.
[72]          
However, the multiplier is inflated, in that it does not account for (i)
the time that remains to be spent on the action; or (ii) the time spent that
applies to all 2018 actions of which only 1/7 has been allocated to this action
(notionally) although arguably most of the work done to advance all the actions
would have been undertaken in this action if it were the only one. I thus
conclude that the multiplier is reasonable.
[73]          
I am of the view that the result in this settlement justifies a
significant award of costs.
[74]          
I approve the fees sought of $17,920,000. I also approve payment of
applicable taxes from the settlement fund.
[75]          
The plaintiff also seeks approval of the agreement between Siskinds and
Bates Barristers. These firms worked together as co-counsel, and agreed, in
January 2018, to share the risk of the litigation and the fees awarded if it
were successful.
[76]          
Bates Barristers resigned as counsel for the class in April 2020, at
which time Siskinds served a Notice of Change of Lawyer. At the same time, the
two firms agreed on the allocation of any counsel fees that may be awarded in
the action.
[77]          
The evidence indicates that Bates Barristers played an important role in
advancing this action, including in developing the theory of the case,
preparing the pleading and certification motion materials, conducting
cross-examinations, and arguing the certification motion. This is not a case
where Bates Barristers has already been compensated, or that its compensation
is for an improper purpose.
[78]          
The agreement between the two firms was amended in March 2024. At that
time, Bates Barristers agreed to reduce its percentage entitlement to fees
compared to the earlier agreement. This change facilitated the settlement.
[79]          
Class counsel argues that, by the time they restated their agreement in
March 2024, six years into the litigation, they were well-placed to assess what
a fair and reasonable allocation of fees between them was to reflect their
respective efforts and risk.
[80]          
I see no reason not to approve the arrangement that Bates Barristers and
Siskinds entered into in March 2024.
[81]          
With respect to disbursements, the amount sought, much of which is for
expert fees, is not shocking in view of the amount of the settlement. I am
advised that all costs ordered on the certification motion are being held for
the benefit of the class in the settlement fund, and no amount has been recovered
by Siskinds for disbursements on the certification motion. As I have already
noted, Siskinds has waived its claim to interest on disbursements incurred.
[82]          
I approve the amount of disbursements sought, plus applicable taxes.
[83]          
The third-party funding agreement, approved by Belobaba J., sets out the
commission payable to the funder. That amount is 7% of the net resolution sum,
which is defined as the resolution sum less lawyers’ fees and disbursements,
including HST, and administration expenses.
[84]          
The administration expenses cannot be quantified with certainty until
the conclusion of the administration of the settlement agreement, so it is
impossible to determine with precision the amount of commission to which the
third-party will be entitled.
[85]          
The plaintiff requests that the funder be paid $3.25 million,
representing approximately 93.13% of what the plaintiff calculated would be the
funder’s full entitlement. The plaintiff proposes that the remainder of the
commission be paid at the conclusion of the administration when the final
administration expenses are known.
[86]          
Distribution may take more than a year; the plaintiff argues that an interim
payment to the funder is fair, because the funder has carried the risk of
adverse costs throughout most of the litigation, which financial support has
contributed to the successful resolution of the litigation. He argues that an
interim payment will encourage the participation of the third-party funders in
future cases which will, in turn, facilitate access to justice in class
proceedings.
[87]          
Similar orders have been made by other courts: Ironworkers Ontario
Pension Fund v. Manulife Financial, 2017 ONSC 2669, at paras. 26-28, Dyck
v. 0799714 B.C. Ltd. et a.l, Order dated October 3, 2023 at para. 4.
[88]          
I accept these arguments, and order that the funder be paid $3.25
million from the settlement funds as soon as practicable, with the remainder of
its entitlement to be paid at the conclusion of the administration of the
settlement.
[89]          
The plaintiff also seeks an order releasing the $400,000 in security the
funder paid to the Accountant of the Superior Court of Justice forthwith after
the effective date of the settlement agreement. I agree with the plaintiff that
at that time, the action will be at an end, and there will no longer be any
rationale for the funder posting security for costs. I thus grant the
plaintiff’s request.
[90]          
The plaintiff requests an honorarium for the representative plaintiff in
the amount of $10,000.
[91]          
In Doucet v. Royal Winnipeg Ballet Company, 2023 ONSC 2323, the
Divisional Court considered the circumstances under which a representative
plaintiff may be entitled to an honorarium. The Divisional Court found that a
modest payment to the representative plaintiff can be made in exceptional
circumstances. In considering whether to approve or disapprove a request for an
honorarium, the court should consider the following factors (Doucet, at
para. 92):
[92]          
The Divisional Court’s conclusion was cited with approval by the Court
of Appeal for Ontario in Fresco, at paras. 107-112.
[93]          
Mr. Westwood argues that his contribution warrants an honorarium. He is
described by experienced class counsel as a model representative plaintiff, who
stepped up to continue the case when the first representative plaintiff chose
to step aside. Mr. Westwood played an active role in the litigation and was an
engaged participant during settlement negotiations. He independently prepared a
financial evaluation of the monetary range for settlement negotiations to test and
challenge the analyses prepared by class counsel, and as such, brought an
objective eye to the assessment of the settlement value. The results of the
settlement are excellent.
[94]          
Mr. Westwood’s individual entitlement under the settlement agreement is
likely to be modest; counsel argues it is appropriate to recognize Mr.
Westwood’s contribution.
[95]          
In Fresco, at para. 112, the Court of Appeal referred with
approval to the Divisional Court’s conclusion in Doucet that a
representative plaintiff should be committed to fulfilling their
responsibilities, including active involvement in every step of the litigation
including settlement, without seeking added compensation.
[96]          
In this case, the evidence discloses that Mr. Westwood was an admirable
representative plaintiff. He was engaged, diligent, and committed to advancing
the interests of the class. Without Mr. Westwood agreeing to take on the role
of representative plaintiff on the decision of the prior representative plaintiff
to step aside, the action could not have continued. Mr. Westwood’s commitment
lead to a significant settlement for the class. The amount of the honorarium
sought is minimal in the context of the overall settlement award, and raises no
concerns about conflict of interest.
[97]          
In my view, Mr. Westwood’s extraordinary efforts for the class are part
of the reason that an excellent settlement has been reached in this case. On
the facts of this case, a $10,000 honorarium is consistent with the guidelines
set out in Doucet and Fresco.
[98]          
I approve the honorarium sought.
[99]          
In summary, I:
[100]       The
orders shall go in the form of the drafts I have signed.