[1]              
On October 5, 2021, just before 9:30 pm a shot
was fired in the stairwell of an apartment building located at 35 Trudelle
Street in Toronto.  Minutes later multiple shots were fired outside of the
building.
[2]              
Mr. Lowe lived in the building in apartment 107
with his mother.  Earlier that evening a group of four men had come to the
building looking for Mr. Lowe.  They encountered another tenant, Nina Hodder, in
the stairwell and asked her to call Mr. Lowe to come to the stairwell.  Ms.
Hodder did as requested and returned to her apartment.  Sometime later there
was a commotion and a shot was heard inside the building.  Shortly after Ms.
Hodder looked out of her window and saw someone she identified as Mr. Lowe standing
outside the main entrance to the building firing a handgun in the direction of
the parking lot.  She also heard the sound of shots in the distance that
sounded like return fire.
[3]              
Mr. Lowe is charged with discharging a handgun
with intent to endanger the life of unknown males, contrary to section 244(1)
of the Criminal Code, and possession of a handgun without a licence
contrary to section 91(1) of the Code.
[4]              
It is alleged that Mr. Lowe is the person who
stood outside of the building that evening and fired a series of shots.  The
identity of that person was the only issue at trial.  I will refer to that
person as the shooter.
[5]              
The Crown called two witnesses, Erskine Pierre,
the building superintendent and Nina Hodder.  An Agreed Statement of Fact was also
filed.
[6]              
35 Trudelle is a rectangular shaped apartment
building running east west.  The main entrance to the building is on the north
side.  There are also exit doors on the southwest end of the building, and the southeast
end.  On either end of the building, between the exit doors and the main
building, is a vestibule area containing stairwells.  The stairwell areas are
separated from the main building by a set of doors.
[7]              
Mr. Lowe lived with his mother in apartment 107
on the first floor.  The main entrance to the building was to the west of Mr.
Lowe’s apartment.  Apartment 106 was to the west of his apartment and closer to
the main entrance.  The door to Mr. Lowe’s apartment faced the doors to the
east stairwell and southeast exit.
[8]              
On October 5, 2021, at 9:29 pm the police
received a radio call for the sound of gunshots.  They arrived on scene at 9:37
pm and found a bullet and casing in the east stairwell.  There was a hole in
the wall where the bullet appeared to have hit.  No bullets or casings were
found outside of the building.  Inside the building a pair of black Nike shoes
were found scattered in the 1st floor hallway.  One shoe was found
near apartment 106 and the other was further down the hallway.
[9]              
There is a short video clip from outside of the
building.  It shows a person running in an easterly direction across the front
of the neighbouring building at 9:26 pm.  The quality of the video is poor.
[10]          
The person on the video has dark skin and is probably
male.  It is possible that the person has no shoes on.  The person is wearing
pants that look to be either blue or black, and possibly have a blue stripe
down the side.  The person has on a black t shirt with a white pattern on the front. 
The person has longish hair.  The video is too short, and the quality too poor,
to say any more than that.
[11]          
On October 6, 2021, a search warrant was
executed at Mr. Lowe’s apartment and a bag of .22 calibre bullets were found
inside of a shoe box.  The bullets are not the same calibre as the bullet that
was found in the stairwell of 35 Trudelle.
[12]          
On the evening of the shooting the building superintendent,
Mr. Erskine Pierre, was in his office with the door closed.  Mr. Pierre’s
office was on the east end of the first floor inside the main building.  It was
right next to the doors leading into the vestibule containing the east
stairwell and exit.
[13]          
Sometime that evening, Mr. Pierre thought it was
around 10 pm, he heard the sound of the buzzer to the interior door followed by
the sound of someone pushing the door heavily.  Within seconds Mr. Pierre heard
what he described as a loud “pop”.  The sound came from inside the building.  He
then heard the door slam and the sound of running followed by what he described
as a big commotion and more running.  Mr. Pierre got up to see what was going
on.  He opened the door to his office and looked out but all he saw was a pair
of shoes in the hallway close to apartment 106.  Mr. Pierre estimated that he
opened his door not more than 5-10 seconds after hearing the pop.
[14]          
Mr. Pierre described the running that he heard
as a heavier run, like someone running behind someone.  It sounded as though
the person was running towards the main entrance doors.
[15]          
When he closed his door again Mr. Pierre heard
“pop pop pop”.  It was then that he realised what he was hearing were gunshots
and called 911 immediately.
[16]          
After he called 911 Mr. Pierre went out to the
east exit vestibule and saw a bullet hole in the wall close to the door and a
casing on the ground.
[17]          
At the time of the shooting Nina Hodder lived on
the second floor in apartment 208.  She had been living there with her three
children for two and half years.  Her apartment overlooked the main entrance to
the building.
[18]          
Ms. Hodder was shown a photo of Mr. Lowe taken
on October 14, 2021.  She identified him as “D”.
[19]          
 Ms. Hodder knew D from the building.  She knew
that he lived on the first floor across from the stairwell.  She estimated that
she first met him six months prior to the shooting.  She did not know him by
any name other than D.
[20]          
Ms. Hodder saw D around the building and occasionally
bought marijuana from him.  She described him as her second source weed dealer.
 Ms. Hodder estimated that she probably spoke to him face to face once every
week or two when she saw him around the building.  She also communicated with
him by messaging but only to buy weed.
[21]          
She described her relationship with D as a
casual neighbourly relationship.  She only ever contacted him if she wanted to
buy weed and they did not otherwise hang out.
[22]          
On the evening of the shooting Ms. Hodder
messaged D at 8:36 pm looking for 4 grams of marijuana.  He responded telling
her yes, but she had to wait a bit.  After waiting a short time Ms. Hodder went
out to the east stairwell to see if his car was in the parking lot.
[23]          
When she opened the door to the east stairwell,
she was startled by a man in a ski mask and hat.  Except for his eyes, the
man’s face was completely covered.  Ms. Hodder described him as heavier set
wearing a black sweater and bright jogging pants.  He also had a sweater
wrapped around his waist.
[24]          
Ms. Hodder walked past him and down the stairs
where she saw two guys standing in the vestibule by the interior door.  D’s
unit was across from that door.  There was a fourth guy standing by the door to
the exterior blocking the exit.  The three guys that were on the ground floor
of the vestibule were wearing hats and dark clothing.  They asked Ms. Hodder if
she knew D.  She told them that she did.  They asked her if she knew where he
lived. When she told them that she did, they asked her to go and knock on his
door.  Ms. Hodder told them that she never went to his apartment, but she could
call or text him.
[25]          
Ms. Hodder testified that she felt like she did
not have a choice but to call D for them.  The guy at the top of the stairs was
blocking the door to the 2nd floor, another guy was blocking the
ground floor exit and the other two were standing by the door into the
building.  Ms. Hodder understood the situation to be such that she had to do as
they asked, or she wouldn’t be allowed to leave.
[26]          
She called D who told her to wait a bit and hung
up before she could say anything else.  Ms. Hodder then went back upstairs to
her apartment.  The guy on the second-floor landing nodded and let her pass.  She
testified that she felt very uncomfortable in the situation and wanted to
leave.  She was sweating and shaking and described her anxiety as being through
the roof.
[27]          
As soon as she got back to her apartment, she
“hit a popper” (marijuana and tobacco) which she smoked at the window.
[28]          
While she was at the window, she heard a bang
coming from the stairwell.  It sounded like something hit the wall.  Ms. Hodder
testified that a commotion followed the bang, and she went to her door to see
what was happening.  When she opened the door, she saw the man from the second-floor
landing running past.  He was running towards the west stairwell exit.  She
knew it was him because of the ski mask and sweater around his waist.  Ms.
Hodder testified that she saw him “book it out the exit door”.  She then ran
back inside her apartment and went back to the window.
[29]          
Ms. Hodder testified that she put her head out
the window and saw D coming out of the main entrance.  She yelled down at him
to tell his friends to keep the noise down.  Ms. Hodder testified in chief that
he looked at back at her and they made eye contact before he turned back to
face the parking lot.  He then proceeded to pull out a gun which he fired four
times in the direction of the parking lot.
[30]          
After he fired a fourth time Ms. Hodder heard
other gun shots going off as though people were shooting back in his
direction.  She closed the window and dropped to the floor with her daughter
who had come out of her room.
[31]          
When the firing stopped Ms. Hodder looked back
out of the window.  D was still there looking out in the direction of the
return fire.  He then turned around and walked back into the building. Ms.
Hodder described him as in a little bit of a rush to get inside but not
running.
[32]          
She estimated the distance from her window to
where the shooter was standing to be about 15-20 feet.  It was dark out, but
the area was lit by a bright light in the front of the lobby.
[33]          
Ms. Hodder testified that she could see the gun
when he pulled it out but not where he pulled it out from.  She described it as
a not very big black handgun with a small barrel and a large but end.  She
testified that it looked like a .44 calibre and every time he fired it she
could see a bluish white spark.
[34]          
When asked how quickly she determined it was D,
Ms. Hodder responded “right away”.  The Crown then asked how she knew it was
D.  Ms. Hodder testified that, “there is no one else that looks like D in my
neighbourhood…no one has short dreads like he did, no one else wore baggy track
pants all the time, usually in my neighbourhood people wear jeans”.
[35]          
When asked if she could see his facial features Ms.
Hodder responded yes.  She was asked how long his dreads were and she responded,
“just below his shoulder”.  When asked by the Crown how certain she was that it
was D, Ms. Hodder responded “100%”.
[36]          
When the Crown first asked Ms. Hodder what the
shooter was wearing, she testified that he had on “a white t-shirt and dark
grey track pants”.  After viewing her preliminary inquiry transcript, she
testified that he was wearing a white t-shirt, black jogging pants and slides. 
After reviewing her preliminary inquiry transcript a second time, she testified
that he was wearing a black t-shirt, black jogging pants and black and white
slides.
[37]          
When cross-examined with respect to her
recollection of what D was wearing, Ms. Hodder was asked why she had initially
testified that the shooter was wearing a white t shirt and grey joggers.  Ms.
Hodder responded that she had been sexually assaulted 6 weeks ago and was
having a flash back to the description from that case.
[38]          
Ms. Hodder was cross-examined with respect to
how she had contacted D that evening.  In chief Ms. Hodder had first testified
that she contacted D that evening through a messaging App called Discord.
[39]          
In cross examination a screen shot of a series
of text messages was put to Ms. Hodder. Ms. Hodder agreed that these were text
messages from her to D.
[40]          
There was a message from was from March 19, 2021,
which read, “Hey I need 6 grams” with a response, “Hey, I’m using
Telegram to chat.  Join me! Download it here:”.
[41]          
The next message was from October 5, 2021, at 8:36
pm.  It read “Hey you have 4 grams?” with no response.  A message
followed from the same date which read, “Sorry dude.  I didn’t think before speaking
when poking my head out.”
[42]          
Ms. Hodder testified that the message from
October 5, 2021, at 8:36 pm was the message that she sent to D that evening
looking for marijuana.  It was put to her that this was not a message through
Discord but rather was a text.  Ms. Hodder responded that she must have
misremembered about how she communicated with D that evening, and that in fact
she texted him instead of using Discord.
[43]          
She also agreed that her recollection with
respect to timing may have been incorrect and she wasn’t sure how much time
passed between her first messaging D and going out to the stairwell to look for
his car.
[44]          
When cross-examined with respect to her
interactions with D, Ms. Hodder agreed that she had not smoked weed for roughly
four months prior to the day of the shooting, and couldn’t remember when she
last bought from D.
[45]          
Ms. Hodder was cross-examined with respect to
how much marijuana she had consumed that evening.  In chief Ms. Hodder had
testified to only consuming one popper that evening.  In cross-examination Ms.
Hodder agreed that she had in fact smoked one before she heard the commotion,
and then when she went back to the window smoked two more before she saw D
outside.
[46]          
Ms. Hodder was cross-examined with respect to whether
she knew the four guys in the stairwell, her recollection of their appearance
and her state of mind following her encounter with them.
[47]          
She testified that she recognised two of the
four guys from the stairwell.  She had seen them at the 400 McGowan playground
and her younger son had shot balls with them.  Ms. Hodder agreed that she
hadn’t told the police that she recognised the two younger men in the
stairwell.
[48]          
It was put to Ms. Hodder that she had told the
police that the three guys who were not wearing the ski mask had medical
masks.  She agreed that they had covid masks but explained that the masks were
under their chins and not covering their faces.  This is why she had testified
at trial that the only person wearing a mask was the guy at the top of the
stairs who had the ski mask covering his face.
[49]          
In chief Ms. Hodder testified that she thought
that the two younger guys who were asking about D were wearing tight black
jeans and that the other two blocking the doors were wearing baggy clothes. In
cross examination it was put to her that she had testified at the preliminary
inquiry that they were all wearing baggy clothing, that it was all very vague
and that one of the four guys was wearing jeans and the others were wearing
jogging pants.  Ms. Hodder agreed that her memory was better then and that she
thought that three of the four were wearing jogging pants.
[50]          
She then agreed that the fact that D was wearing
joggers that evening was not actually distinctive.
[51]          
Ms. Hodder agreed that she had testified at the
preliminary inquiry that she thought the guys in the stairwell were just
chill.  It was suggested to her that this was inconsistent with her evidence
that she was terrified.  Ms. Hodder responded, “I think I was just saying it, I
don’t feel that way, I don’t think I was chill, I was on the spot my palms were
sweating and I was fearful for my life”.
[52]          
The cross-examination of Ms. Hodder took place
over two days.
[53]          
On several occasions it was suggested to her
that she had not in fact seen D’s face that evening.  Ms. Hodder repeatedly
affirmed that he had looked back at her when she called out to him to tell his
friends to keep quiet.
[54]          
When asked if she had identified D from the back,
Ms. Hodder responded that she knew what he looked like from behind because of
his distinctive dreadlocks but that it was when he turned back to her after she
yelled out to him that she knew it was him.
[55]          
A series of questions were then put to her about
what she had told the police and what she had testified to at the preliminary
inquiry.  It was suggested to her several times that the reason she had not
said to the police or at the preliminary inquiry that she saw his face was
because it didn’t occur.  Ms. Hodder responded that she couldn’t remember her statement,
but she knew that he looked back at her because she had shouted at him, and he
turned to look at her which is how she knew it was him.  She testified that she
may not have specifically told the police that she saw the shooters face, but
she did tell the police that she recognised the shooter as D.
[56]          
The last question of that day was “Is it
possible this didn’t occur because you didn’t mention it until today’s date?”. 
Ms. Hodder responded “yes”.
[57]          
The next day, towards the end of the lengthy
cross-examination, Ms. Hodder was asked if she remembered testifying that it
was possible that she hadn’t seen his face.  She answered yes.  It was then suggested
to her, “Is it not possible that if you are incorrect about so many points that
you are not 100% sure you know the identity of the shooter?”.  Ms. Hodder
responded, “No, I don’t 100% know”.
[58]          
In re-examination Ms. Hodder was asked if she
remembered seeing the shooters face and she answered that she did.  She was
asked why she had eventually answered in cross that she wasn’t sure. Ms. Hodder
responded, “the way that she puts it makes it feel like I said something wrong or
I am lying but what I seen is the gentleman sitting there I had a clear picture
of his face from the light of the building”.
[59]          
She was also asked in re-examination who had
sent the text “Sorry dude.  I didn’t think before speaking when poking my head
out.”  Ms. Hodder confirmed that she had.  The Crown then asked when she had
written that text and Ms. Hodder responded, “right after I seen him shooting
the gun”.
[60]          
Ms. Hodder testified that when she first spoke
to the police it was at her apartment right after the shooting.  All of her
children were with her and one was crying.  The statement that she gave that
evening was only eight minutes long and difficult to hear over the cries of her
child.  Ms. Hodder described herself as being distracted by her children who
were upset and scared, and she was concentrating on them rather than the
details of what she was telling the police.
[61]          
She also testified that as a mother of three
children, including one who was autistic, she had a lot going on and couldn’t
remember everything.
[62]          
The identification of the shooter was the only
issue at trial.
[63]          
It is agreed that if it is proven that Mr. Lowe
was the person who Ms. Hodder saw shooting that evening the offences before the
court have been made out.
[64]          
Ms. Hodder testified that she had seen D
standing outside of the building shooting.
[65]          
There is no issue that the person that Ms.
Hodder knew as D is Mr. Lowe.  Her identification of Mr. Lowe as D from the
photograph taken of Mr. Lowe on October 14, 2021, is not in issue.  What is in
issue is her identification of the shooter as being D.
[66]          
The inherent frailties and dangers of eyewitness
identification evidence have long been recognised.  It is effectively opinion
evidence based on a host of factors of which the witness is often not cognizant
and are difficult to assess: R. v. Miaponoose, 1996 CanLII 1268 (ON CA), [1996] O.J. No. 3216.
[67]          
The concerns arising from eyewitness
identification evidence are heightened in situations where the person
identified is a stranger to the witness, the circumstances of the
identification are not conducive to an accurate identification, the pretrial
identification processes are flawed and there is no other evidence tending to
confirm or support the identification evidence: R. v. Tat, 1997 CanLII 14495 (ON CA), [1997] O.J.
No.3597 (C.A.), at para. 101.
[68]          
Given the inherent frailties in identification
evidence it is often the case that the credibility of the witness is less
probative than the totality of the circumstances pertinent to the
identification.  Even the most honest witness can be mistaken when it comes to eyewitness
identification.  A witness’s certainty in the identification cannot be equated
with reliability: R. v. Biddle, 1993 CanLII 8506 (ON CA), [1993] O.J. No.1833 (C.A.)
[69]          
The weight to be given to eyewitness
identification depends greatly on the circumstances of the case.  In R. v.
Smerciak (1946), 87 C.C.C. 15, at p.177 Laidlaw J.A. set out a number of
relevant factors to consider in the assessment of identification evidence:
[70]          
Cross-racial identification is another factor
which can present difficulties for a witness and can erode the reliability of
the identification: R. v. McIntosh, 1997 CanLII 3862 (ON CA), [1997] O.J. No.3172 (C.A.); R. v.
Richards, 2004 CanLII 39047 (ON CA), [2004] O.J. No.2096 (C.A.) at para. 32.  When a witness from one
race identifies a suspect from another race solely based on features that are
uncommon to the witness’s race but common to the suspect’s race extra caution
is required.  A cross-racial identification based solely on a common
characteristic of one race is unreliable: R. v. Mathias, [2018] O.J.
No.752 (S.C.) at paras. 88-89.
[71]          
Recognition evidence is just another form of
identification evidence and carries with it the same concerns.  The level of
familiarity between the witness and the accused can enhance the reliability of
the identification but does not mean that the concerns with eyewitness identification
need not be addressed.  That being said, there is a critical difference between
a case of recognition and the identification by a witness of a complete
stranger.  When a witness makes an identification based on recognition the
timeline of the identification narrative is instructive with respect to the
reliability of the identification.  The immediacy of the recognition in
relation to the commission of the offence can enhance the reliability of the
identification: R. v. Charles, 2016 ONCA 892 (CanLII), [2016] O.J. No.6061 (C.A.) at paras. 50-51; Mathias, at para. 19.
[72]          
The credibility and reliability of Nina Hodder’s
identification of D was challenged.
[73]          
It is the position of the defence that there were
inconsistencies in her evidence with respect to what the shooter was wearing,
her recollection of how she contacted D that evening and whether she had seen
the face of the shooter.  The defence also pointed to inconsistencies in her
evidence with respect to what the men in the stairwell were wearing, what she
told the police about the men in the stairwell and her knowledge of who they
were.  Her recollection of the timing of the incidents that evening was also
challenged, as was her evidence with respect to how many “poppers” she had
consumed that evening.
[74]          
The defence also points to two answers that Ms.
Hodder gave in cross-examination and submits that they are devastating to her
identification of D.
[75]          
The first was Ms. Hodder’s answer “yes” to the
question, “is it possible that this didn’t occur because you didn’t mention it
until today’s date”.  This question came at the end of the day and was the last
in a series of questions in which Ms. Hodder had repeatedly maintained that she
saw the shooters face when he turned to look back at her.  The above answer
came after it was being suggested to her that if she had important information,
she would have told the police and the court at the preliminary inquiry about
it.  To which she agreed.  The suggestion was then made to her that “is it
possible that this didn’t occur because you didn’t mention it until today’s
date”.  It was at this point in her evidence that Ms. Hodder answered, “yes”.
[76]          
 The next day, at the end of her
cross-examination Ms. Hodder was asked, “is it not possible if you are
incorrect about so many points, that you are not 100% sure that you know the
identify of the shooter?”.  Ms. Hodder responded, “no, I don’t 100% know”.
[77]          
In re-examination Ms. Hodder was asked why she
had testified that she was certain about what she had seen but had then given
the above answers.  Ms. Hodder explained that she was made to feel like she was
saying something wrong or lying and re-iterated that what she knew was that she
had “a clear picture of the shooters face in the light from the building and it
was D.
[78]          
Her explanation is consistent with the manner in
which she testified.  When defence counsel put the above series of suggestions
to Ms. Hodder, she appeared exhausted, frustrated and confused. She had
otherwise been consistent in her evidence that the shooter had turned to face
her when she called out to him.  It was never suggested to Ms. Hodder that she
had not called out to him, the suggestion was only that he hadn’t turned to
face her.
[79]          
I consider the value of those answers given by
Ms. Hodder to be limited.
[80]          
When Ms. Hodder was confronted with
inconsistencies in her description of what the shooter was wearing and what the
four men were wearing as between what she had testified to at trial, what she
had said to the police, and what she said at the preliminary inquiry she
readily accepted her earlier descriptions.  She testified that she had a lot
going on in her life and it was hard for her to recall the details.  In the
circumstances of this case, for reasons that I explain when considering the
circumstantial evidence, little turns on Ms. Hodder’s recollection of what the
shooter was wearing.
[81]          
Ms. Hodder’s evidence at trial was more detailed
than her statement to the police.  When she spoke to the police that evening,
she told them that she knew the shooter as D.  There is no evidence that she
was asked by the police to explain how she knew that it was him.  She only
spoke to the police for 8 minutes and was simultaneously dealing with her
children who were audibly upset and demanding her attention.  The fact that she
gave more details with respect to the identification when she later testified
is not an inconsistency.  Her identification of D as the shooter was immediate
and consistent.
[82]          
The defence submits that these inconsistencies
in her evidence, the evidence she gave that she couldn’t be 100% sure, coupled
with the inherent frailties of eyewitness identification, render Ms. Hodder’s
identification of D as the shooter unreliable.
[83]          
Ms. Hodder was clearly an overwhelmed and
unsophisticated woman who was dealing with many challenges.  She was the single
parent of three children including a high needs child.  She was unemployed and
living on social assistance.  She had recently been the alleged victim of a
sexual assault.
[84]          
Her recollection of the events that evening was
not perfect, and she testified in a somewhat scattered manner.  It is clear
that she was consuming marijuana that evening and had initially downplayed how
much.
[85]          
Accordingly, I approach her evidence with some
caution.
[86]          
Unlike many identification cases, this was not a
case of stranger identification.
[87]          
Ms. Hodder and Mr. Lowe were known to each
other.  They lived in the same building.  Ms. Hodder often saw Mr. Lowe around
the building, and they exchanged pleasantries.  She had his cell phone number
and purchased marijuana from him on occasion.  It is clear from the text
messages in evidence that their relationship went back at least 7 months from
the day of the shooting.
[88]          
Ms. Hodder had a reasonable opportunity to observe
the shooter.
[89]          
When Ms. Hodder saw the shooter, she was looking
out of her second story window to the entrance of the building which was
directly below her.  The shooter was standing in front of the entrance.  It was
nighttime but there were bright lights lighting up the front of the building
and entryway.  Ms. Hodder called out to the shooter, and he turned to face her. 
They made eye contact, and she had what she described as a clear picture of his
face in the light from the building. While her opportunity to observe him was brief
it was more than fleeting.
[90]          
I accept her evidence that the shooter turned to
face her.  It makes sense given that she called out to him – a fact which was
not in dispute.
[91]          
Ms. Hodder identified the shooter as D
immediately.
[92]          
It was D that the four men were looking for. 
Ms. Hodder was concerned with the noise that they had made.  When she saw the
person standing out front of the building, she called out to him believing that
he was D and telling him to “tell his friends to keep the noise down”.
[93]          
Right after the shooting Ms. Hodder texted D,
“Sorry dude.  I didn’t think before speaking when poking my head out.”  It was
the shooter to whom she had spoken when she “poked her head out” of her window.
[94]          
When the police arrived shortly after the
shooting and spoke with Ms. Hodder, she identified the shooter as D.  Her
identification was entirely unprompted.  There is no suggestion that the police
had any information as to who the shooter was prior to speaking with Ms.
Hodder.
[95]          
Ms. Hodder gave only two “identifying features”.
[96]          
When asked in court how she knew “right away” when
she looked out the window that it was D standing outside, Ms. Hodder responded,
“there is no one else that looks like D in my neighbourhood, no one has short
dreads like he did, no one wore baggy track pants all the time, people in my
neighbourhood usually wear jeans”.
[97]          
Standing alone track pants and dreadlocks are
not particularly distinctive features.  Ms. Hodder herself agreed in
cross-examination that track pants were not so distinctive and that three of
the four men in the stairwell were also wearing track pants.
[98]          
Ms. Hodder is white and Mr. Lowe is black. 
Dreadlocks are more common on black people than white people.  Ms. Hodder
described D’s dreadlocks as being distinctive because they fell “just below his
shoulder”, which she described as short.
[99]          
If her identification of D was based solely on
the fact that he had what she described as “short” dreadlocks this would give
great cause for concern.  However, when her evidence is considered in its
totality it is clear that her identification of him was not based solely on the
dreadlocks.  When she first looked out the window the shooter had his back to
her.  Ms. Hodder testified that she was able to recognise him from behind
because of his dreadlocks.  When she called out to him, he turned to face her. 
It was then that she confirmed in her mind that it was D.
[100]      
This was recognition evidence in circumstances
where Ms. Hodder had an opportunity to see the shooter’s face when he looked up
at her.  He was standing in front of the building in an area which was well lit
and her identification of him was immediate.
[101]      
I consider the video of the person running
outside of the building proximate to the shooting to be of little to no
evidentiary value.  The quality of the video is so poor that it establishes
nothing other than that someone was running past the building shortly before
the police were called.  It could well be the shooter, one of the four men in
the stairwell, or someone else running at the sound of gunshots.
[102]      
Similarly, the shoes in the hallway are of
little value.  There is no evidence as to who they belong to.  They could
belong to anyone involved in the altercation in the stairwell who was running
away.
[103]      
There is no evidence as to where the bullets were
found in Mr. Lowe’s apartment, other than that they were found in a shoe box. There
is no evidence as to what kind of bullets were fired by the shooter as no
casings were found outside of 35 Trudelle.  The only evidentiary value to be
drawn from the bullets found in Mr. Lowe’s apartment is a finding that Mr. Lowe
may have had access to bullets.
[104]      
The credibility and reliability of Nina Hodder’s
evidence identifying D as the shooter was challenged, as was the evidence which
she gave with respect to the four men in the stairwell.  What was not
challenged was the sequence of events and how they unfolded.
[105]      
There was no issue that four men, strangers to
the building, appeared in the stairwell looking for D.  Nor was the fact that
they asked Ms. Hodder to summon D, and she did.
[106]      
Ms. Hodder encountered four young men in the
stairwell.  The men were not from the building.  They were looking for D and
asked Ms. Hodder to call him for them.  They intimidated Ms. Hodder, and their
intentions did not appear to be benign.  Ms. Hodder called D and asked him to
come out to the stairwell.  He responded “give me a bit” and hung up.  She then
left.  D’s apartment was on the ground floor across from the stairwell.
[107]      
Some time not long after the superintendent
heard the ground floor inner door to the stairwell open.   Almost immediately
after a shot was fired in the stairwell and there were the sounds of a
commotion.
[108]      
Someone ran back down the hallway in the
direction of Mr. Lowe’s apartment and the main door to the building.  It
sounded to the superintendent like a person being chased.  On the floor above
one of the four men who had been blocking the second-floor door to the
stairwell ran from the stairwell past Ms. Hodder’s apartment towards the exit
at the other end of the building.
[109]      
After the man ran past Ms. Hodder’s apartment
she went to her front window and saw a man standing in front of the building
looking out.  She called out to him, and he turned to look back at her before
turning back, taking out a gun and firing it.  There were sounds of return fire
from the direction in which he shot.  The man then turned and went back into
the building.
[110]      
These facts are all circumstantial evidence of
the identity of the shooter.
[111]      
It is reasonable to infer that the person who
went into the stairwell sometime not long after Ms. Hodder called D to the
stairwell was D.
[112]      
The men in the stairwell were looking for D. 
There were four of them and they had positioned themselves in the stairwell
such as to block the entrances.  They made it clear to Ms. Hodder that she
would not be allowed to leave until she summonsed D for them.  They did not ask
her to tell D that they were looking for him, they asked her to get him for
them.
[113]      
It is reasonable to infer that they wanted D for
the purposes of some kind of confrontation.
[114]      
There was a confrontation and a shot was fired. 
Someone ran away in the direction of D’s apartment.
[115]      
Shortly after a man stood outside of the
building looking out in the direction of the parking lot.  He fired out towards
the parking lot and someone returned fire.  The man then went back into the
building.
[116]      
It is reasonable to infer that the shooter resided
in the building.
[117]      
Ms. Hodder identified that shooter as D. The
circumstantial evidence supports her identification.
[118]      
The chain of events surrounding the shooting and
the timeline of Ms. Hodder’s identification point in one direction and one
direction only.  That the shooter was D.  There is no other inference that is
available on the evidence, or the absence of evidence.
[119]      
In considering all of the circumstances here,
the only available conclusion is that D was the shooter.
[120]      
There is no issue that D is Mr. Lowe.
[121]      
Accordingly, I find Mr. Lowe guilty of all
counts.