[1]              
On October 15, 2024, I issued an Endorsement in
this matter, quashing the Notice of Appeal filed by the Applicant, Johnathan
Kramshoj: Kramshoj v. Kramshoj, 2024 ONSC 5720.
[2]              
Briefly, on August 27, 2024, the Applicant filed
a Notice of Appeal in the Divisional Court to appeal the Costs Order of Smith
J. dated July 22, 2024, in which Smith J. ordered Mr. Kramshoj to pay $8,500
costs on a partial indemnity basis to the Respondent, Amanda Renaud, and $9,000
costs on a partial indemnity basis to the Respondent Roberta Kramshoj.
[3]              
Pursuant to s. 133(b) of the Courts of
Justice Act, “No appeal lies without leave of the court to which the appeal
is to be taken where the appeal is only as to costs that is in the discretion
of the court that made the order for costs”. The Proposed Appellant did not
serve a Notice of Motion for Leave to Appeal as required by Rules 61.03 and
62.02 and was never granted leave to appeal.
[4]              
In addition, motions for leave to appeal must be
served within 15 days after the making of the Order from which leave to appeal
is sought: Rule 61.03(b). The Proposed Appellant did not comply with this time
requirement.
[5]              
At paras. 17 and 19 of the Endorsement I gave
the following direction:
[6]              
In accordance with that Endorsement, on October
25, 2024 the Proposed Appellant served and filed a Notice of Motion for
Extension of Time to bring a motion for Leave to Appeal the Costs Order of
Smith J.
[7]              
The motion for an extension of time is supported
by the affidavit of Johnathan Kramshoj. In his affidavit, Mr. Kramshoj states
that he and his lawyer knew that leave to appeal was required to appeal from
the costs order of Smith J., but they thought that the Respondent in Appeal
(the Plaintiff Amanda Margaret Renaud) was going to hire a new lawyer, and Mr.
Kramshoj “wanted to allow time for the new lawyers to become involved so as to
not have to repeat efforts and incur more legal fees”.
[8]              
That explanation makes no sense. The 15 day time
limit in Rule 61.03(b) is very clear, and it makes no sense that the Proposed
Appellant was aware of that time limit but thought that it would be more
efficient and reduce legal fees to miss the time limit and attempt to file a
Notice of Appeal without first seeking leave to appeal. If the Proposed
Appellant wanted to seek leave to appeal Smith J.’s Costs Order, he should have
brought his motion for leave to appeal within 15 days. As matters stand, he did
not even meet the 30 day time limit for filing an appeal: Rule 61.04(1). If the
Respondent in Appeal required more time to respond to a motion for leave to
appeal because she was retaining new counsel, the onus would have been on her
to request an extension of time to respond. The Proposed Appellant cannot blame
his delay on the Respondent in Appeal.
[9]              
An extension of time to bring the motion will
prejudice the Respondents in this matter. The Costs Order provided that costs
were to be paid within 30 days, which made the costs payable on or before
August 21, 2024. They have still not been paid. This is a continuing
proceeding; Justice Smith established a timetable for the remaining steps in
the litigation, including the exchange of affidavits of documents and
examinations for discovery. The Respondents continue to incur legal fees. It is
highly prejudicial to the Respondents to deny them the costs ordered while this
litigation continues.
[10]          
It is significant that the Proposed Appellant
did not even file the Notice of Appeal until after the Respondents sent a
letter demanding that the costs be paid within 30 days as ordered by Smith J.
The Proposed Appellant then filed the Notice of Appeal and, wrongly, took the
position that the Notice of Appeal stayed the enforcement of Smith J.’s Costs
Order. Since the Notice of Appeal was invalid, it could not stay the Costs Order.
[11]          
The presence or absence of merits of an appeal
may be dispositive on a motion to extend time: MacMillan v. Klug, 2024
ONSC 1125, at para. 12. “It is well-established that leave to appeal costs is
granted sparingly and only where the order is tainted by palpable and
overriding error or error of law”: Carroll (Litigation Guardian of) v.
McEwen, 2018 ONCA 902, at para. 58; Shaulov v. Law Society of Ontario,
2023 ONCA 95, at para. 24.
[12]          
The Proposed Appellant’s proposed grounds for
appeal are very general and do not disclose anything that could be described as
a “palpable and overriding error or error of law”.
[13]          
For these reasons, the justice of the case does
not require granting an extension of time, and the motion to extend time is
dismissed.
[14]          
If the parties are not able to agree on costs,
the Responding parties may file costs submissions of not more than 3 pages plus
costs outline and any offers to settle, within 20 days of the release of this Endorsement,
and the Proposed Appellant may file responding submissions on the same basis
within a further 15 days.