[1]                    
The applicants are charged with eleven firearm
offences as a result of two
firearms and ammunition found following
a search of a vehicle in which they were
occupants. The search was conducted
pursuant to s. 12(3) of the Cannabis Control Act, 2017, S.O. 2017, c. 26, Sched. 1 (“CCA”).
[2]                    
The applicants
argue that the police did not have reasonable grounds to search them or the vehicle and therefore the search violated
their s. 8 Charter right to be free from unreasonable
search or seizure, and their s. 9 Charter right not to
[3]                    
As a result of
these breaches, the applicants argue that evidence seized from the vehicle
should be excluded pursuant to s. 24(2) of the Charter. The evidence
which they seek to exclude includes a Glock 26 firearm plus magazine and
bullets, a Glock 22 firearm plus magazine and bullets, a Rudsak side bag, a
Champion fanny pack, and cannabis
found in the vehicle. The applicants also seek
to exclude as evidence a stun gun, duct tape, ski mask, and zip ties found in
the trunk of the vehicle.
[4]                     
The Crown argues
that there were reasonable grounds to conduct the search and therefore
there was no breach of either s. 8 or 9 of the Charter. The Crown also argues that there were no
breaches of s. 10(a) and (b) as any delay in informing the applicants of the
reason for their detention was justifiable on the basis of officer safety and that the applicants were promptly informed
of their rights to counsel upon their arrest.
[5]                    
As a general
overview, the vehicle, driven by the applicant, Mr. Dlamini, was stopped by OPP officer PC Sultan
on August 10, 2022 on Highway 410 for a violation under the Highway
Traffic Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. H.8. As a result of detecting the smell of burnt cannabis
from the vehicle
and observations of what he described as cannabis residue in the
vehicle, PC Sultan called for officer assistance to conduct a search of the
applicants and the vehicle pursuant to the CCA. Following the arrival of
two other officers, the applicants were removed individually from the vehicle;
PC Sultan conducted a pat down search of each of them. A second officer,
PC Yeboah, searched
the vehicle and found a weapon in
[6]                    
The applicants
are three young Black men. While the application for Mr. Dlamini alleged racial
bias, no questions were asked of the officers in connection with that
allegation and counsel advised it was not being pursued.
[7]                     
The issues to be decided on this application are as follows:
[8]                    
The reliability
and credibility of the two officers who testified is central to this
application. These reasons will address why I have reliability concerns and
that, as a result, I find that the Crown has not satisfied its onus to prove, on a
[9]                    
I do not find a
breach of either ss. 10(a) or (b). The delay in informing the applicants of the
reason for their detention and then providing them with rights to counsel was
reasonably justifiable given the circumstances of the roadside stop.
[10]               
As a result of my findings, and analysis under
s. 24(2) of the Charter, while the ss. 8 and 9 breaches were serious, I am satisfied that
the evidence seized should not be excluded.
[11]               
PC Sultan was a relatively new and inexperienced officer at the time of this
traffic stop. He graduated from police college in December 2020 and the OPP
academy in March 2021. He was assigned
to a detachment where he worked with another officer who coached him for
four to six months. At the time of this traffic stop, he had been working on
his own for about one year. He has now been with the Ontario Provincial Police
for four years.
[12]               
PC Sultan
initiated a traffic stop of the applicants’ vehicle at 7:50 pm on August 10, 2022 as it travelled
north on Highway
410. The vehicle,
a 2021 Honda Civic, was driven by Mr. Dlamini. PC Sultan initiated the
stop as he could not see in the vehicle as the windows were tinted too dark in
violation of the HTA. Before he initiated the stop, he ran a query of
the vehicle’s licence plate to determine its ownership; it was a leased vehicle
registered to a numbered company.
PC Sultan activated the
exterior lights on his cruiser and the applicants’ vehicle came to a stop on the left shoulder of Highway 410, just south of Queen St. PC Sultan
[13]               
After the vehicle stopped,
PC Sultan exited his cruiser
and approached the driver side of the vehicle. Mr.
Dlamini partially rolled down the driver window. PC Sultan requested that he
fully roll all the windows down; Mr. Dlamini complied. At that time, PC Sultan
observed two other passengers in the vehicle whom he had not seen prior to the
stop. Mr. Wright was sitting in the front passenger seat and Mr. Virgo was in
the rear passenger seat.
[14]               
PC Sultan told
Mr. Dlamini the reason for the stop under the HTA and asked for his
licence and insurance. Mr. Dlamini complied and handed him the documentation.
PC Sultan confirmed that the photograph on the driver licence matched the
person driving. As this was occurring, PC Sultan smelled a strong odour of cannabis. PC Sultan testified on cross-examination that the odour
was of burnt cannabis. There
was no challenge to PC Sultan’s evidence about what he smelled.
[15]               
Although it was a clear and sunny day, PC Sultan
testified that he removed
his flashlight that was clipped
to his vest and used it to look inside
the vehicle while he stood at the driver’s door. He
did not record using his flashlight in his notes, which were very detailed. He testified that he observed
cannabis residue which
he described as a fine grain, green, leafy-like substance inside the driver door pocket,
where the handle is located to open the door. He also made observations of the
same substance in the gear shift area located between the driver and passenger seat.
[16]                    
As a result of
the smell of burnt cannabis and his observations of cannabis residue inside the
vehicle, PC Sultan believed that cannabis was being improperly stored in the vehicle, was accessible to the driver and had been smoked
[17]               
PC Sultan did not
have any other verbal exchanges with any of the applicants. He did
not ask them if they had recently
smoked cannabis. He had no
concerns that Mr. Dlamini was impaired. He agreed that his concern was that
cannabis was in the vehicle that was not properly stored.
[18]               
This initial
interaction with the applicants lasted approximately 20 seconds
before PC Sultan returned to his vehicle to run a query on Mr. Dlamini’s driver
licence. As a result of result of the query, PC Sultan learned that Mr.
Dlamini’s license was suspended.
[19]               
PC Sultan radioed
for officer assistance when he returned to his vehicle as he knew he was going
to conduct a search of the applicants and the vehicle pursuant to the CCA. For
officer safety reasons, he wanted other officers present as there were three
occupants in the vehicle and he did not want to search the occupants and
vehicle until the other officers arrived.
[20]               
PC Sultan also
testified that he did not want to tell the applicants that he intended to
search them and their vehicle until after backup officers arrived as he past
experiences where drivers fled. On
re-examination, he testified about a specific experience in January 2022 when
someone pulled a gun on him on the shoulder of highway
401 and then attempted to flee by running into traffic. He also
heard other officers speak of experiences with persons attempting to flee when
informed they were going to be searched. Since then, it had been his practice not to
inform drivers of his intent
to do a CCA search until backup officers
are present.
[21]               
PC Sultan waited
in his cruiser until the first officer, PC Amyotte, arrived approximately 10 minutes later. Officer Yeboah was the second to arrive. PC
[22]               
PC Sultan then
returned to the applicants’ vehicle and informed the applicants that they and
the vehicle were going to be searched pursuant to the CCA. He told the driver to get out of the car and the other two occupants
to remain and that they would
be searched one at a time.
[23]               
PC Sultan
did not advise
the applicants of their rights
to counsel or caution
before he commenced the search.
His evidence was that he was trained
that rights to counsel and
caution are not required to be read prior to searches conducted pursuant to the
CCA and in accordance with that training, he has never done so.
[24]               
PC Yeboah has
been with the OPP for six years. He arrived at the scene at 8:04 pm in response
to the call for assistance from PC Sultan at 7:52 pm. He was travelling in the
opposite direction and so parked his vehicle on the southbound shoulder of the
410, across the median from the applicants’ vehicle.
[25]               
When he arrived,
he observed PC Sultan and Amyotte standing between the Honda Civic and police
cruiser. They appeared to be speaking with the driver of the vehicle. Contrary
to PC Sultan’s evidence, PC Yeboah testified that he did not speak with either
officer but walked to the Honda Civic and stood beside the driver door as there
were two occupants in the vehicle. According to PC Yeboah, a briefing with PC
Sultan was not necessary as he knew that the occupants and the vehicle were
going to be searched pursuant to the CCA given the officer call for
assistance from PC Sultan.
[26]               
As PC Yeboah stood
beside the vehicle
waiting for PC Sultan to complete
the search of Mr. Dlamini,
he could smell cannabis. He also observed
the front
[27]               
PC Yeboah
testified that given Mr. Wright’s suspicious behaviour, he told him to exit the
car and walk to the rear. Around the same time, PC Sultan completed the search
of Mr. Dlamini. PC Yeboah remained standing beside the vehicle and then told
the rear passenger, Mr. Virgo, to exit the vehicle to be searched by PC Sultan.
Once Mr. Virgo left the car, PC Yeboah began a search of the vehicle.
[28]               
PC Yeboah described the applicants as compliant.
[29]               
PC Yeboah did not
inform the applicants of their right to counsel while he stood beside the vehicle.
Similar to PC Sultan’s evidence,
he testified that he was trained that rights to counsel are not
required prior to conducting searches under the CCA. He testified when
cross-examined that searches under the CCA are similar to searches under
the Liquor Licence Control Act, 2019, S.O. 2019, c. 15,
[30]                  
PC Sultan removed
Mr. Dlamini from the vehicle and escorted him to the front of his cruiser
where he conducted a pat down search. PC Sultan directed
Mr. Dlamini to place his hands on the cruiser to conduct the search.
When nothing of concern was found, including any firearms, Mr. Dlamini was directed to stand
[31]               
PC Sultan
described all three accused as understandably nervous but cooperative.
[32]               
As PC Sultan was
completing the pat down search of Mr. Wright, PC Yeboah, who had commenced
searching the vehicle,
yelled for everyone
to get on the ground as he found
a firearm in the vehicle.
PC Sultan grabbed
Mr. Wright and took
him to the ground. At 8:07 pm he told Mr. Wright
that he was under arrest
for possession of a firearm. PC Sultan escorted Mr. Wright to his
cruiser and at 8:10 pm read him his rights to counsel and caution.
[33]               
At 8:11 pm, PC Yeboah, who continued to search the vehicle, announced that a second firearm was
found. At 8:15 pm, PC Sultan re-arrested Mr. Wright and read him his rights to
counsel and caution for a second time.
[34]               
PC Sultan
took possession of the two firearms once they were made safe. He
called for the vehicle to be towed.
He left the scene at 8:23 pm with Mr. Wright
and arrived at the Mississauga detachment at 8:38 pm.
[35]               
The applicants do not argue
that there was any delay
with implementation of their
right to counsel.
[36]               
After the last
passenger left the vehicle, PC Yeboah began to search the interior of the car.
He entered through the driver’s door. He observed flakes of cannabis on the
driver and passenger floorboard areas and on both seats. PC Yeboah then leaned
over the driver’s seat to search the front passenger side of the vehicle.
[37]               
PC Yeboah
testified that from the driver’s’ side, he observed a black bag on the floor of
the front passenger seat. He reached for the bag and picked it up. The bag felt
very heavy, like there was a heavy metal object in it. Based on his experience,
he believed it was a firearm and so he opened the bag. Upon seeing a firearm in
the bag, he exited the car, announced he found a firearm and demanded the
applicants to get to the ground.
[38]               
PC Yeboah walked
to the back of the vehicle and placed Mr. Virgo under arrest for possession of a firearm.
At 8:08 pm, four minutes
after he arrived
on the scene, PC Yeboah read
Mr. Virgo his rights to counsel and caution from the card in his notebook. Mr.
Virgo said he understood and did not want to speak with a lawyer.
[39]               
PC Yeboah placed
Mr. Virgo in his cruiser and at 8:11 pm returned to the vehicle to continue the
search. When he searched the back seat area of the car, he saw a Champion
backpack on the floor where Mr. Virgo had been sitting. He picked it up and it
felt heavy. He opened the bag and found another firearm. He told PC Sultan to
rearrest the applicants.
[40]               
PC Yeboah
returned to his vehicle at 8:14 pm and read Mr. Virgo his rights to counsel in connection with the
second firearm. He asked if he understood, and Mr. Virgo said yes. He asked
if he wanted to call a lawyer now and Mr. Virgo said no. At 8:16 pm, he read the caution
and asked Mr. Virgo if he understood, and Mr. Virgo said
he did.
[41]               
PC Yeboah went
back to the applicants’ car at 8:18 pm to make the firearms safe. He removed
a bullet from the chamber
of the Glock 22 found on the floor of the front passenger seat. He
then gave the firearms to PC Sultan to bring to the station. PC Yeboah left the
scene at 8:26 pm with Mr. Virgo and arrived at the detachment at 8:37 pm.
[42]               
PC Sultan
testified that he took photographs of the vehicle at the scene after the
applicants were placed under arrest.
[43]               
He identified a
photograph of the front passenger seat showing a black bag or satchel on the
floor. This was the bag in which the first firearm was found by PC Yeboah.
[44]               
He took another
photograph that he identified as the centre cup holder area, between the driver
and passenger seats. He identified a burned cannabis joint in a cup. He did not
see this at the time he formed his belief that there were contraventions of the CCA.
In the top of the photograph, he identified a very small portion of the edge of the gear
shift area where he saw some cannabis residue.
[45]               
He identified two photographs he took of two of the door pockets. He could
not identify which of the two photographs was the driver door where he saw the
cannabis residue. He identified what he described as green leafy flakes in the door pocket area that he observed when he
first interacted with Mr. Dlamini.
[46]               
PC Yeboah took a
photograph of what he said was cannabis residue on the floorboard of the front
passenger seat and a photograph of what he said was green cannabis flakes on
the car seat.
[47]               
PC Yeboah also
took a photograph of the contents of the Champion backpack found on the rear
seat. The contents included the firearm and a sealed bag of cannabis.
[48]               
In addition to
taking these photographs, PC Sultan was present when the SOCO officer
photographed the vehicle and contents after it was towed to the detachment.
[49]               
At the conclusion of all the evidence, the Crown and defence advised
that it was an agreed fact that over 200 photographs were taken of the
Honda Civic between those taken by PC Sultan at the scene and the SOCO officer.
It was also an agreed fact that none of the photographs show the driver
door pocket or the centre gear shift area where
PC Sultan said he observed
cannabis residue during his initial interaction with Mr.
Dlamini that, together with the odour, formed his reasonable grounds to believe
that there were contraventions of the CCA.
[50]               
Pursuant to s. 8
of the Charter, every person has the right to be secure against unreasonable search and seizure.
As the applicants and the vehicle were searched by the police, s. 8 of the Charter
is engaged.
[51]               
Searches or
seizures conducted without a warrant are presumptively unreasonable: Hunter v. Southam Inc., 1984 CanLII 33 (SCC), [1984] 2 S.C.R.
145 at p. 161. For a search to be reasonable under s. 8 of the
Charter, it must be authorized by law, the law itself must be
reasonable, and the search must be carried out in a reasonable manner: R. v.
Nolet, 2010 SCC 24, [2010] 1 S.C.R. 851 at para. 21. Where the search is authorized by legislation, in this case the CCA, the Crown has the burden to demonstrate that the search was
reasonable.
[52]               
The search of the applicants and their vehicle
was conducted pursuant
to
[53]               
If an officer has reasonable grounds
to believe that cannabis is in a vehicle
but is not in its original packaging, is not packaged
in closed baggage,
or is readily available to a person in the vehicle, the warrantless
search would be lawful: R. v. McKenzie-Walcott, 2022 ONSC 1350, at para.
7.
[54]               
When assessing
reasonable grounds for a search, the court must determine whether
the officer had subjective reasonable and probable grounds
on which to base the search and whether those grounds are justifiable
from an objective point of view: R. v. Fyfe,
2023 ONCA 715, 432 C.C.C.
(3d) 145, at para.
52.
[55]               
The smell of
burnt cannabis, on its own, is not sufficient to provide reasonable grounds to
search: R. v. Polashek (1999), 1999 CanLII 3714 (ON CA), 134 C.C.C. (3d) 187 (Ont. C.A.), at
paras. 13-14. In Polashek, the Court of Appeal noted, at para. 13, that
“smells are transitory, and thus largely incapable of objective verification. A
smell will often leave no trace.” At paras. 14 - 15, the Court of Appeal found
that there may be some circumstances under which odour may provide
reasonable and
[56]               
I am satisfied
that there were no circumstances in this case for which the smell of burned
cannabis alone provided reasonable grounds to search the vehicle. There was nothing
unusual about the applicants’ behaviours, the location of the
arrest, or any comments they made which would provide a basis for the smell
alone to provide reasonable and probable grounds to search. Furthermore, PC
Sultan testified that it was his understanding that more than the smell of
cannabis was required to conduct a warrantless search under the CCA.
[57]               
Neither PC
Sultan’s nor PC Yeboah’s evidence of smelling burned cannabis was challenged. The critical issue
is whether I am satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that in
addition to smelling burnt cannabis, PC Sultan observed cannabis residue in the
vehicle. If I do not accept his evidence of what he saw, then the officers had no reasonable and probable grounds
to search the applicants’
and their vehicle, or detain
them, and their ss. 8 and 9 Charter rights were violated.
[58]                  
PC Sultan had a
professional demeanour when he testified. He was not argumentative or defensive
during vigorous cross-examination, even when accused of being untruthful about
what he observed in the vehicle. I am mindful, however, that while I can consider
the way a witness testifies in assessing that witness’s credibility and
reliability, I cannot overly rely on demeanour: R. v. D.P.,
2017 ONCA 263, at para. 26, leave to appeal refused, [2017] S.C.C.A. No. 261.
[59]               
PC Sultan did not
overstate his evidence. He agreed with many suggestions put to him on
cross-examination. For example, he agreed that the applicants were co-operative
when he interacted with them. He also agreed with
[60]               
The key challenge
to PC Sultan’s evidence are the photographs that he took of the vehicle at the
scene, after the applicants’ were arrested, and the photographs taken in his presence by the SOCO officer. Although
he testified that he
took photographs of the cannabis
residue he observed
in the driver door pocket and gear shift area, it is an
agreed fact that there are no such photographs.
[61]               
I
will review his evidence about the driver
door pocket area.
[62]                  
PC Sultan
testified that one of the two photographs he took of the door pocket area was
the driver’s door, where he observed cannabis residue, but he did not know
which one. He circled on the photographs what he said was the cannabis residue
he saw. Based on the photographs alone, it is difficult to see what he marked and that
it was green leafy-like substance. If it was, it was
a very tiny amount.
[63]               
PC Sultan agreed
that photographs of the cannabis residue he observed after smelling burned
cannabis were important evidence to document. He agreed he was present when the
SOCO officer took photographs as he wanted to make sure the evidence was
properly documented. He also agreed that he wanted the SOCO officer to take
photographs of the two areas where he saw the cannabis residue after he smelled
burnt cannabis.
[64]               
After agreeing
about the importance of documenting what he observed, PC Sultan was then confronted with the suggestion, based on the configuration of the door in the two photographs, that
neither photograph could be of the driver door pocket. After a series of
questions, PC Sultan agreed with that suggestion. He was not defensive or
argumentative when he agreed that neither photograph
[65]               
While insisting
that he took a photograph of the driver door pocket, PC Sultan also conceded
that it was possible he did not. He agreed that this was a significant
oversight on his part and agreed it was surprising that there was no photograph
of the driver door pocket where he saw the cannabis residue.
[66]               
On the second day of his cross-examination, PC Sultan again insisted that he
took a photograph of the
driver door pocket, but he did
not know where it was. I do not accept
that evidence. If there was such a photograph, it would have been
disclosed by the Crown. I find that PC Sultan was mistaken about there being a
photograph of the driver door pocket. That was critical evidence that he failed
to document despite his testimony that he intended to document
his observations of the cannabis.
[67]               
Accordingly, the two photographs he took at the scene of a door pocket
do not corroborate PC Sultan’s evidence of the cannabis residue he
observed in the driver door pocket.
[68]               
I
will now deal with the gear shift area.
[69]               
One of the photographs PC Sultan took was of the cupholder
area showing a burned
joint. In that photograph, there
is a very small area showing just the edge of
the gear shift. PC Sultan
circled that area and said it showed cannabis residue. Looking at the marked area, I do
not see green leafy-life substance as described by PC Sultan. The area he
circled looks like brown dirt.
[70]               
PC Sultan agreed
that he did not take a photograph of the gear shift area where he made his
observation. The photograph in which you can see the small edge of the gear shift area is actually
a photograph of the centre
cupholder area in
[71]               
Despite wanting
the SOCO officer to take photographs of the gear shift area and the driver door
pocket area, none were taken. When asked why, PC Sultan’s response was that
they were just not taken.
[72]               
On the second day of his cross-examination, PC Sultan appeared
to resile from his evidence
about being present with the SOCO officer to ensure that the evidence was
documented, including what he observed. He testified that he did not direct
the SOCO officer
about what photographs to take as that officer
was the specialist in
documenting evidence.
[73]               
By the time
the SOCO office was involved, the focus
would have been on the firearm investigation. As such,
documenting the cannabis found in
the vehicle was likely not the priority for that officer. While I accept that
PC Sultan would not have been directing the SOCO officer, his evidence was that
he wanted the cannabis residue he observed documented. At the very least, he
could have ensured that the SOCO
officer took photographs of the cannabis in the two areas of
the car which formed his grounds to believe that there was a contravention of
the CCA.
[74]               
I consider
the lack of photographic evidence
to be problematic particularly
given PC Sultan’s initial testimony that his observations of the cannabis he
observed were documented by himself and the SOCO officer. While PC Sultan was a
relatively inexperienced officer, he clearly recognized and appreciated the
importance of documenting the evidence
of cannabis residue
he saw in the vehicle given the photographs he took at
the scene. In addition to taking photographs of the interior pockets of two
other doors, he also took photographs of other areas where he said there was cannabis
residue including on the car seats and floor and
[75]               
The Crown argues
that the lack of photographs taken of the driver’s door pocket and gear shift
area was an oversight and that I should accept PC Sultan’s evidence of what he
observed. The difficulty with that is PC Yeboah, who commenced searching the vehicle pursuant
to the CCA, testified that while he did
see cannabis residue on the floorboards and on the car seats, he did not see any in the two areas where PC Sultan said
he observed the residue.
[76]               
PC Yeboah’s
role was to search the vehicle for cannabis. He testified that he had experience conducting such
searches. He made a mental note of where he
observed cannabis as he searched
the vehicle. He entered the car by the front driver door. He would have been
able to observe the driver door pocket area. He testified that from the front seat, he reached
over to pick up the black bag from the passenger floor. At that point, he would have been leaning
over the gear shift area and presumably be in the best
position to see the cannabis residue in that area, yet he did not. PC Yeboah’s
evidence does not corroborate PC Sultan’s evidence of where he saw the cannabis
residue.
[77]               
PC Sultan’s
insistence that there
were photographs of the areas where he made observations of the cannabis
residue to support his reasonable grounds to search the applicants and the
vehicle when none exist, is troubling. The fact that the SOCO officer also
failed to document those two areas is also troubling given PC Sultan’s
evidence that he wanted the officer to take photographs to document his
observations.
[78]               
This was a fluid
and dynamic situation unfolding on the side of a busy highway – moving from an HTA
stop to a CCA search to criminal charges when the firearms were
located. While the focus at that point would have been on the firearms found in the car, PC Sultan knew enough to photograph the cannabis he observed in the interior of the vehicle at the
scene. When he did so, the situation was under control as all three applicants,
who were compliant throughout, were arrested by that point. His attention was
not distracted by the discovery of two firearms in the vehicle as evidenced by
the photographs he took of cannabis observed in other areas of the vehicle.
[79]               
The lack of
photographic evidence is not necessarily fatal to a finding the cannabis was observed in a vehicle.
In R. v. Kanneh, 2022 ONSC 5413,
there was no physical
evidence introduced by the Crown of the cannabis shake that the officer
testified he observed in the stopped vehicle; the cannabis was not seized nor did the office
take photographs of it. Peterson
J found at paras. 29 and 30 that
the failure to gather this evidence was not best police practice, particularly
as the shake formed part of the officer’s grounds for conducting a CCA search,
and the officer ought to have done so. However,
based on the court’s finding
that the officer was a credible witness, Peterson J
was not prepared to infer from the lack of physical evidence that the officer was lying under oath about having seen cannabis
shake in the car.
[80]               
A similar
finding was made in R. v. Williams, 2021 ONCJ 630, at para. 68,
where the court found that the failure to seize the cannabis or photograph it
was explained by the turn of events that occurred – where an HTA stop
became a CCA search leading to serious
criminal charges.
[81]               
In my view, those cases are distinguishable from the facts in this case. This is
not a situation where no effort was made to document the evidence; the opposite
is true. PC Sultan testified that he wanted to take photographs to document
what
[82]               
The applicants
argue that I should find that PC Sultan was not being truthful and that there
were no photographs taken of the driver door pocket and gear shift area as
there was no cannabis residue in those two areas.
[83]               
The applicants
point to an internal inconsistency in PC Sultan’s evidence with respect
to the use of his flashlight to support their
assertion that he was not a
credible witness. In chief, PC Sultan testified that Mr. Dlamini rolled down
all the windows at his request. When he was cross-examined about why he used
his flashlight, he said that he believed the rear passenger window was still
rolled up, so he needed the flashlight to look for cannabis residue after he
smelled it.
[84]               
While PC Sultan
may have been trying to justify his evidence about why he needed to use a
flashlight to look in the vehicle on a clear and sunny day, this inconsistency
does not rise to the level of tainting all of PC Sultan’s evidence to the point
that I reject his evidence in its entirety.
[85]               
The applicants
also point to PC Sultan’s failure to describe the cannabis he observed in his
notes. In his notes he referred to cannabis residue. When he testified, he described it as a green leafy-like substance. He agreed that the
[86]               
PC Sultan’s notes
were very detailed. While I question why he did not include a more detailed
description of what he observed in his notes, it does not lead me to reject his
evidence in its entirety.
[87]               
I do not find
that PC Sultan deliberately attempted to mislead the court when he testified in chief that one of the photographs was of the driver door pocket.
Despite some inconsistencies in his evidence, I found that he was a credible
witness. However, given the totality of the evidence, I am unable to reconcile
PC Sultan’s evidence of what he observed, his intention to document it, and
then his failure to do so.
[88]               
I find that I
cannot rely on PC Sultan’s evidence given his insistence that there was a
photograph of the driver door pocket area when there was not. I also find his
evidence unreliable as he knew the importance of documenting the cannabis he
observed to support his grounds to search under the CCA, yet he failed
to do so.
[89]               
I also have
concerns with the reliability of his evidence given the brief period of time in
which he made the observation and the location of that observation.
[90]               
PC Sultan was
challenged about how he could see the contents of the driver door pocket from where he stood outside
the vehicle during the 20 seconds
that he interacted with Mr. Dlamini.
[91]               
In McKenzie-Walcott,
the officer was challenged about being able to see the area between the
drivers’ door armrest and the driver’s seat, Harris J concluded that while it would be possible to see that area,
it was unlikely. It is not
[92]               
PC Sultan made
his observation of what was in the driver pocket door in two to three seconds.
While he may have been able to see into the driver door pocket, I question the reliability of what he observed
in that door pocket based on the very brief time he made the
observation.
[93]               
The other photographs taken by PC Sultan appear to show what could be
cannabis residue in other
areas of the car, However,
evidence discovered after a
search cannot be used to justify the search after the fact. The evidence
to support a search must be
available to the police at the time of the search; R. v. Cornell, 2010 SCC 31, [2010]
2 S.C.R. 142, at para.
20. The Crown
cannot rely on “ex post facto justifications” of
searches by their results: R. v. Genest, 1989 CanLII 109 (SCC), [1989] 1 S.C.R. 59, at p. 89.
[94]               
While I cannot use the evidence
of what was discovered when the car was
searched to justify the search, I can consider that evidence in assessing PC
Sultan’s credibility and reliability. Those photographs appear to show a small
amount of something green and flaky that could be cannabis residue
that both PC Sultan and PC Yeboah testified they saw
in the vehicle. The burned joint in the cupholder could also be the source
of the odour of burned
cannabis that they both
smelled. This could support the credibility and reliability of PC Sultan’s
evidence of what he saw in the driver door pocket and gear shift area. However, when I consider the totality of
the evidence, and the absence of evidence, I am not satisfied on a balance
of probabilities that I can rely on PC Sultan’s
evidence of his observations of seeing cannabis
residue in the driver door pocket and gear shift area to justify his grounds to
conduct a search pursuant to the CCA.
[95]               
As a result, PC Sultan’s uncorroborated oral evidence of what he observed
is insufficient to discharge the Crown’s onus to prove, on a balance of probabilities,
that the warrantless CCA search was reasonable. There was therefore a
breach of the applicants’ s. 8 Charter rights to be secure
against unreasonable search
and seizure.
[96]               
Pursuant to s. 9 of
the Charter, everyone has the right not to be arbitrarily
detained. There is no dispute that the applicants were detained from the moment
their vehicle was stopped. Given my finding
that the search
was unreasonable, the detention that followed was unlawful and arbitrary. The police had no right to detain the applicants based on the smell
of burned cannabis alone.
[97]               
Given my finding
that there was a breach of s, 8 of the Charter, PC Yeboah’s search of
the satchel located on the front passenger seat of the vehicle would also be a
s. 8 breach. I will nonetheless address the issue separately as it has a
bearing on the s. 24(2) analysis.
[98]               
The applicants
argue that PC Yeboah’s search of the satchel was not reasonable on the basis
that PC Yeboah testified that he had a suspicion the satchel held a firearm
after he picked it up rather than having reasonable and probable grounds to
believe there was a firearm in it.
[99]               
The issue of
whether the search of a satchel found in a vehicle that was being searched
pursuant to the CCA was reasonable was canvassed in R. v. Moulton,
2023 ONCJ 140. In Moulton, Henschel J found that the police were
authorized to briefly detain the applicant to search him and his vehicle pursuant
to the CCA for further cannabis. The court then addressed the
search of the satchel in the vehicle in which a firearm was found.
[100]          
The police
officer in Moulton testified that when he began
his search of the
vehicle, he was searching for cannabis readily available. He picked up a
satchel he saw on front passenger
seat, that was fastened closed,
because it was the first thing within reach of the driver.
He testified that he believed, based on his experience, that males store
cannabis in satchels.
When he picked up the satchel,
it was heavy which caused
him concern as he believed
there was a firearm inside the satchel. He opened the bag and
saw a firearm.
[101]          
Justice Henschel
reviewed several authorities that dealt with the extent of the search authorized under s. 12(3)
of the CCA. She rejected
those decisions that found a search of a closed satchel
was not authorized under the CCA as those decisions were inconsistent with the public safety legislative intent of the CCA. She found that section 12(3) of the CCA
does not restrict the scope of the search and that searches of bags in a vehicle, whether
or not fastened closed were authorized:
Moulton, at paras. 232 - 251.
[102]          
While PC Yeboah
was not asked why he reached for the black satchel, I am satisfied that if an
officer has reasonable grounds to believe that cannabis is stored improperly,
the officer may search the entire vehicle and all occupants; independent grounds
for each aspect of the search is not required.
[103]          
I will comment on PC Yeboah’s
credibility as counsel
for Mr. Wright urged
me to reject his entire evidence based on his testimony of seeing Mr. Wright
kick or nudge the black bag at his feet. This observation was not in his notes.
[104]          
Before he was confronted about the missing
entry in his notes, PC Yeboah
was cross-examined about his notetaking
and the importance of keeping
detailed notes that are relevant to an investigation. He agreed that he
was not in a rush when he made his notes, one hour after the arrest, at the detachment. He agreed
[105]          
PC Yeboah became defensive when cross-examined about his note-taking practices and insisted that the reason he takes notes is to refresh
his memory. He was reluctant to agree with the
reasonable suggestion that his notes were important, not just to refresh his
memory, but also for use by Crown and defence counsel.
[106]          
PC Yeboah’s
evidence was that he might not include
an important detail in
his notes if he had a clear recollection of it. He seemed to be suggesting that
he did not need to make entries to refresh his memory if it was something he knew he would recall.
[107]          
I reject that
evidence. Officers do not make notes only about things they might not recall so
that their memory is refreshed. Their notes are important to disclose to the
Crown and defence. I find PC Yeboah’s evidence that he may not record an
important detail in his notes if it was something he would remember to be
perplexing and illogical.
[108]          
In PC Yeboah’s notes,
the only suspicious behaviour he described was Mr. Wright
covering his face with his sweater. He did not make a note of Mr. Wright asking for a taxi or his observation of Mr. Wright’s
attempt to kick or push the black bag, in which a firearm was
subsequently found, under the seat. He testified that it was only when he
prepared a typed copy of his notes in preparation for this hearing that he realized
this detail was not in his notes. He did not inform the Crown of this prior to the hearing. His
evidence was that he always remembered seeing Mr. Wright kick or nudge the bag
under the car seat.
[109]          
His explanation
for not including the detail of seeing Mr. Wright kick the bag at his feet was that at the time he made the observation, he did not think it was
[110]          
Based on this evidence, counsel for Mr. Wright urged
me to reject all of PC
Yeboah’s evidence. At the same time, all defence counsel
urged me to accept PC Yeboah’s evidence that he did not see cannabis
in the two areas where PC Sultan said he saw it.
[111]          
While I am troubled
by PC Yeboah’s explanation of why he did not record his observation of seeing Mr. Wright kick the black bag, the balance
of his evidence was relatively consistent with PC Sultan’s
evidence, other than whether or not the officers spoke after PC Yeboah
arrived on the scene.
[112]          
I am not prepared
to reject he entirety of PC Yeboah’s
evidence based on his failure to record in his notes all
his observations of Mr. Wright’s behaviour in the vehicle.
[113]          
Pursuant to ss. 10(a) and (b) of the Charter:
[114]          
Pursuant to s.
10(a), a detained person is entitled to be informed of the reason why they are
being restrained. This includes persons detained for investigative purposes: R.
v. Nguyen, 2008 ONCA 49, 55 C.R. (6th) 82, at paras. 16 and 19.
[115]          
Police may delay
telling detainees of the reason for their detention where there is valid
officer or public safety concerns: R. v. Gonzales, 2017 ONCA 543, 136
O.R. (3d) 225, at para. 128.
[116]          
In Gonzales, the Court of Appeal found that there was no breach of s. 10(a) while the officer waited in his
cruiser for seven minutes
for other officers to arrive. In that case, the applicant’s
vehicle was stopped to investigate residential break- ins in the area. When the
vehicle was stopped, the officer noticed the odour of cannabis and he saw
several sealed large cartons that the officer suspected was cannabis. The
driver of the vehicle failed to respond to direct questions and the officer
suspected that the applicant was in possession of cannabis. The officer asked the driver for his drivers’
license, insurance and ownership and told him that
he wanted to make sure the driver was entitled to operate the van, had a valid
licence, and was properly insured.
He did not tell the driver about the break-ins or his suspicions about cannabis. There
was a passenger in the car.
[117]          
The Court of
Appeal found that ideally, the officer should have informed the driver of the reason he was being detained without
delay, but as he was alone
with two occupants of a car that was fully operable, and as he was armed but
not protected and concerned with his safety, the delay was justifiable. The
Court of Appeal found that the seven minute delay did not amount to an
infringement of s. 10(a) in those circumstances: at para. 128.
[118]          
PC Sultan’s
uncontested evidence is that he informed the applicants of the
reason for the initial traffic
stop. It is not in dispute that the applicants were detained
[119]          
PC Sultan’s
explanation for not informing the applicants of the reason they
were being detained was a concern for officer safety, as he was on his own and
there were three occupants in the vehicle.
He was also concerned that they could flee, based on his past experience.
[120]          
In my view, given the totality
of the circumstances, it was not unreasonable for PC Sultan to delay
informing the applicants that they were being detained pursuant to the CCA until after the other officers arrived.
PC Sultan had valid officer safety concerns as he was outnumbered. Furthermore, the vehicles
were stopped on the side of a busy highway. For officer and public safety
reasons, even though the applicants were cooperative and gave PC Sultan no reason to think they would
flee, it is not unreasonable that PC Sultan
waited for other officers to arrive before informing the applicants of the
reason for their detention under the CCA.
[121]          
Defence counsel
argued that based on the evidence that the applicants were cooperative, there
was no basis to conclude that officer safety was a valid concern. I do not agree. Despite
the conduct of the applicants, there is a legitimate
concern for officer safety in a situation where a police officer is
outnumbered, as in this case. Furthermore, PC Sultan only had an initial 20 second interaction with the applicants. While they
may have been cooperative during
that brief time, that should
not form the basis for an officer at this sort of stop to conclude that officer
safety was not an issue when he was outnumbered.
[122]          
There was no
breach of s. 10(a). The delay
in informing the applicants of the reason for their detention under the CCA until
backup officers arrived was justifiable given the circumstances and context of
the traffic stop.
[123]          
The next issue is whether there was a breach of s. 10(b) for failing
to advise the applicants of their right
to counsel prior
to the searches, after being
told of the CCA investigation. The applicants argue that they
were entitled to be given their 10(b) rights to counsel as soon as the reasons
for their roadside
detention evolved from an HTA
stop to an investigation under the CCA.
[124]          
Section 10(b) has
both an informational and implementation component. The informational duty
requires police to inform the detained person of their right to retain and
instruct counsel without delay. The implementation duty requires police to
provide the detained person with a reasonable opportunity to retain and
instruct counsel. There was no argument about a delay in the implementation component.
[125]          
Based on PC Sultan’s
evidence, he informed
the applicants’ of the reason for their detention at approximately 8:00 pm. The firearm was found seven minutes
later at 8:07 pm. Rights to counsel were given to Mr. Virgo at 8:08 pm by PC
Yeboah. PC Sultan gave Mr. Wright his
rights to counsel at 8:10 pm. I heard no evidence about what time Mr. Dlamini
was given rights to counsel.
Although it was not raised as an issue, I presume
rights to counsel were given to him by PC Amyotte at around the same time.
[126]          
There are several decision
which have found
that rights to counsel can be
temporarily suspended during a CCA investigation: R. v.
Grant, 2021 ONCJ 90
at paras 127-131; Williams at para 75 and Kanneh at paras. 60-63.
[127]            
In Kanneh,
Peterson J addressed the issue of when and for how long a suspension of 10(b)
is justifiable at the roadside. In that case, the accused’s vehicle was pulled
over at 3:53 pm due to an apparent HTA infraction which became a CCA investigation.
The officer told the accused at 4:14 pm he smelled cannabis in the car and
could see pieces of cannabis inside the
vehicle. He told
[128]          
In Kanneh,
the accused was detained for 55 minutes before his rights to counsel were
administered. Peterson J found that his rights to counsel ought to have been given at 4:15 pm, 22 minutes
after the initial
HTA stop, when the officer informed the accused of his
intention to search the vehicle pursuant to the CCA. At that time, there was also a criminal investigation as the vehicle may have
been stolen. Peterson J found that the delay
went beyond the scope of reasonable and necessary measures for road safety
purposes, or for officer and public safety purposes: at paras. 67 – 69, 71.
[129]          
Justice Rahman relied on Kanneh in R. v. Morgan,
2023 ONSC 6855. In Morgan, two officers
pulled over a vehicle in which there
were two occupants. The initial stop was for a traffic stop but it then became a CCA
search during which a firearm was discovered. Both the driver
and occupant were handcuffed and
[130]          
In this case,
there was a brief passage of time from when the applicants were told of the
reason for their detention (at approximately 8:00 pm) and the discovery of the firearm
(at approximately 8:07 pm). Immediately after
the firearm was discovered, the applicants were arrested and given their rights to counsel and caution. There was not a lengthy
passage of time as in Kanneh nor were they placed in handcuffs as in Morgan
before being given their rights to counsel.
[131]          
In Moulton, the
applicant’s vehicle was stopped at a
RIDE stop at 12:19 am. That stop turned into a CCA search of the vehicle
during which a firearm was found. The applicant was arrested and
given his rights to counsel at 12:25 am, after the firearm was found. The
officer’s evidence was that he did not give the applicant his right to counsel
prior to his arrest as he did believe he was required to do so as it was a RIDE
stop and then a CCA investigation. He
expected that after a short detention, the applicant would be on his way.
[132]          
Henschel J. found
that the applicant’s 10(b) rights were suspended from the time of the stop until his arrest.
This 6 minute delay while
the CCA investigation took place fell within the scope of reasonable and
necessary measure for road safety purposes and was a justifiable limit on the
limit on the accused’s rights to counsel under s. 10(b).
[133]          
In my view,
the delay in giving rights to counsel
in this case was brief and
justifiable, as in Moulton. Where
an officer has reasonable grounds
to believe that
[134]          
In this case, the
applicants were detained for approximately 18 minutes. There was approximately
an eight minute delay in giving them rights to counsel after they were informed
of the CCA reason for their detention. Had the search of
the vehicle continued for a longer period and their rights to counsel suspended
for a longer period, I might have come to a different conclusion and
found the delay was not brief or justifiable.
[135]          
Having found that
the 10 minute delay in informing the applicants of the reason for their
detention for officer safety reasons, I find that the eight minute delay for
the search of themselves and the vehicle under the CCA prior to the
discovery of the firearm leading
to their immediate
arrest and their rights to counsel
was reasonable. There was no breach of s. 10(b).
[136]          
The onus is on
the applicants to prove, on a balance of probabilities, that the admission of evidence obtained
in manner that violates the Charter would
bring the administration of justice into disrepute.
[137]          
Section 24(2) of the Charter requires the court to consider the effect of the
admission of the evidence on the long-term
repute of the administration of justice.
An analysis must be conducted following the factors set out in R. v. Grant,
2009 SCC 32, [2009] 2 S.C.R. 353, at para. 71
(“Grant (SCC)”), being: a) the seriousness of the Charter-infringing
state conduct; b) the effect of the breach on the accused’s Charter-protected
interests; and c) society’s interest in the adjudication of the case on the
merits.
[138]          
The first
branch of the Grant test
requires consideration of the seriousness of the Charter-infringing
state conduct. This necessitates placing the police conduct along a spectrum
running from minor, inadvertent conduct at one end, through negligence, to
deliberate, wilful, or flagrant conduct at the other end. The more severe and
deliberate the state conduct, the more serious the breach and the more the
court will be required to distant itself from that conduct through the
exclusion of evidence linked to the conduct: R. v. Keshavarz, 2022 ONCA
312, 413 C.C.C. (3d) 263, at para. 105; and Grant (SCC), at para. 72.
[139]          
In R. v. Rover,
2018 ONCA 745, 143 O.R. (3d) 135, Doherty J. A. found,
[140]          
Conversely, inadvertent, or minor violations may only minimally
undermine public confidence in the rule of law. The court must therefore
assess the state’s misconduct and assess it along the continuum of misconduct: Grant
(SCC), at para. 74.
[141]             
While I have found a ss. 8 and 9 breach,
it is on the basis of the unreliability
of the evidence and the Crown’s failure
to discharge its onus to prove on a balance of probabilities that the search
was reasonable. This is not a
situation where I found there was a breach
based on the wilful and deliberate conduct
of the police. I do not find that PC Sultan was untruthful or
purposely misleading when he testified. I do not find that PC Sultan used the CCA as a ruse to conduct an illegal
detention and warrantless search of the applicants and the vehicle.
[142]          
Nonetheless, to
conduct a safety search of a person and to search a vehicle, without reasonable
cause to do so is a Charter breach. The broad rights
[143]          
I
therefore consider the breach to favour exclusion of the evidence.
[144]          
I want to comment
on the delay in providing rights to counsel if I am incorrect and there was a
delay and a breach of s. 10(b).
[145]          
Both PC Sultan
and PC Yeboah testified that regardless of the length of time of the detention, they have been trained that rights to counsel are not required prior to a CCA search. As reviewed above, that is not correct.
Brief delays may be
reasonable if there are concerns for officer or public safety or operational requirements. Thus, while there can be a temporary
suspension of right to counsel, it must be in circumstances
where such a delay is warranted. Officers
must turn their minds to the length of the delay and assess if it is
justifiable.
[146]          
Defence counsel argued that given this evidence, the breach
was serious as it was the result of
institutional police practices that render the police conduct more serious.
[147]          
The CCA came
into force in October 2018. At the
time of this stop on August 10, 2022, there was limited caselaw to guide
officers on CCA searches. Furthermore, there were decisions that found
that searches under the CCA were similar to searches under the LLCA,
as PC Yeboah testified.
[148]          
The officers
were incorrect about
how long s. 10(b) rights
can be delayed, which may be as a result of a lack of training
and the evolving
caselaw rather than a
more general cavalier
attitude towards providing
rights to counsel.
I am satisfied
[149]          
In my view, if
there was a breach of s. 10(b), I would not consider it to be serious.
[150]          
The second branch
of Grant considers the impact of the breach on the Charter-protected
interests of the accused. The court must assess “the extent to which the [Charter] breach actually undermined the interests protected
by the right infringed”: Grant (SCC), at para. 76. The more
serious the impact on the applicant’s Charter-protected interest, “the
greater the risk that admission of the evidence may signal to the public that Charter rights, however
high-sounding, are of little actual
avail to the citizen, breeding public cynicism and bringing the administration
of justice into disrepute”: Grant (SCC), at para. 76.
[151]          
I will start
first with the search of the vehicle. There is a diminished expectation of privacy in a vehicle
as opposed to a home: R. v. Belnavis, [1997]
3
[152]          
The Crown concedes that the pat-down
safety searches conducted
of each applicant was an
invasive search as the applicants had a high expectation of privacy in their
bodily integrity. This favours exclusion of the evidence.
[153]          
If there was a
breach of s. 10(b), there was minimal impact on their right against
self-incrimination as neither officer asked the applicants any questions before
they were arrested for firearms offences. There is no evidence of any
inculpatory statements being made prior to being given their rights to counsel.
[154]          
The third branch
of Grant is concerned with society’s interest in adjudication on the merits.
Where excluding highly reliable evidence
will effectively gut the
Crown’s case, a court may be more inclined to admit the evidence: Grant (SCC),
at para. 83
[155]          
Exclusion of the
reliable evidence in this case means the exclusion of the firearms. The Crown’s case will be gutted if the evidence
is excluded. The charges
before the court are very serious. These factors strongly weigh in favour of
the admission of the evidence.
[156]             
There is a very
strong societal interest in the adjudication of a case in which firearms are
discovered in an accused’s vehicle. The proliferation of illegal firearms and
gun violence is a significant concern as it impacts the safety of communities.
The public has an interest in curtailing gun violence.
[157]          
I agree with the
Henschel J’s finding at para. 298 in Moulton that the inherent dangerousness
of illegal firearms and society’s interest to be free of the threats they pose
should inform whether the exclusion of a firearm obtained in violation of the Charter
will undermine public confidence in the administration of justice.
[158]          
The societal
interest in a criminal trial on the merits in this case tilts strongly towards inclusion of the
evidence.
[159]          
In conducting the
balancing, the jurisprudence tells us that if the first and second branches of Grant
make a strong case for exclusion, the third branch will seldom, if ever,
tip the balance in favour of admissibility: R. v. McGuffie, 2016 ONCA
365, 131 O.R. (3d) 643, at para. 63; R. v. Dunkley, 2016 ONCA 597, 131
[160]          
While I have found the first two factors
favour exclusion of the evidence,
it is not a strong case whereas the third factor strongly favours
inclusion of the evidence.
[161]             
As I have already
stated, this was not a case where the police used the HTA and then CCA
stop as a ruse to search the
applicants and their vehicle. The officers did not act in a way that
demonstrated a deliberate and serious disregard for the applicants’ Charter rights.
When I consider the totality of the evidence and the conduct of the officers, I
am satisfied that the administration of justice will not be brought into
disrepute by the admission of the evidence at trial. The interest in seeing the case tried on its merits outweighs the first
two factors. In my view, the reputation of the administration of justice would suffer more if the evidence was to
be excluded.
[162]          
Furthermore, even
if there was a s. 10(b) breach, that did not lead to any evidence being
discovered in this case. If there was
a delay, it was brief, and no questions were asked.
[163]          
The evidence will therefore not be excluded.