[1]              
Mr. Pauze is guilty of possessing fentanyl for the
purposes of trafficking and being in the possession of crystal methamphetamine
(2024 ONSC 4540).
[2]              
At the sentencing hearing, the Crown sought a
penitentiary term of imprisonment in the 4-to-8-year range for the fentanyl and
a further 3 to 6-month sentence for the crystal methamphetamine (consecutive),
while Mr. Pauze sought a conditional sentence.
[3]              
Mr. Pauze comes before the court as a
68-year-old man in poor health.  He uses crystal methamphetamine.  He has had a
leg amputated and he clearly suffers from medical issues associated with his
lifestyle.
[4]              
I note that Mr. Pauze has a lengthy record that
includes eight convictions for simple possession of illegal substances, three
convictions for possession for the purposes of trafficking, and one conviction
for production of banned substances.  His longest sentence has been eight
months for production of a Schedule II substance in 2012.  After this sentence,
Mr. Pauze’s record shows a 10-year gap until 2022 when he received a 60-day
conditional sentence for assault causing bodily harm.
[5]              
Given the foregoing, it is abundantly clear that
Mr. Pauze has been involved in the criminal and drug subcultures for some time. 
His personal and health problems must be fueled by his own addictions.
[6]              
With that said, I know very little else about
Mr. Pauze.
[7]              
Fentanyl is an incredibly dangerous drug.  Its
impact upon communities is both powerful and tragic.
[8]              
As Moldaver J. stated at paras. 93 and 94 in R.
v. Parranto 2021 SCC 46:
[9]              
Locally, Sault Ste. Marie is in the midst of an
opioid crisis:  see R. v. Elie, 2019 ONSC 2248; R. v. Bernardi and
Nocioli, 2020 ONSC 7077.  The courts in this community are filled with
cases involving fentanyl and much has been written in the local media about the
impact that opioids have had.  Indeed, Sault Ste. Marie’s plight is such that
the community was featured on the national television program W5 as having a
particularly serious drug problem.
[10]          
I am firstly governed by the principles of
sentencing as described by s. 718 of the Criminal Code of Canada and
hereby instruct myself regarding same.
[11]          
The Crown provided me with R. v. Disher
2020 ONCA 710 wherein the Court of Appeal for Ontario stated at paras. 31 and 32:
[12]          
The court also examined cases where it
meaningful penitentiary sentences were imposed for trafficking in fentanyl at
paras. 33 to 35:
[13]          
While Disher predates Parranto, it
is important to note that the Supreme Court of Canada in Parranto effectively
agreed that sentences for mid-level and higher-level traffickers required meaningful
penitentiary terms in the normal course of affairs.  Indeed, I note that Code
J. recently imposed a double-digit penitentiary sentence for trafficking in
fentanyl:  R. v. Wisdom, 2024 ONSC 4047.[1]
[14]          
Mr. Pauze’s counsel provided me with two cases, R.
v. Gordon 2023 ONCJ 157 and R. v. Woods 2024 ONCA 664 wherein
conditional sentences were imposed and/or upheld for cases involving fentanyl
trafficking.  These cases contain meaningful mitigating circumstances that
involve either drug rehabilitation that was completed prior to sentencing,
youthful offenders, and/or a lack of a criminal record.  These factors are not
present in Mr. Pauze’s case.
[15]          
Recently, in R. v. Campbell 2024 ONSC
2220, Boswell J. canvassed the state of the sentencing jurisprudence.  At
paras. 37 to 51, Boswell J. described a number of cases and factors that
suggested that the range for mid-level trafficking fell between 5 and 8 years.
[16]          
At para. 42, Boswell J. laid out the “higher
end” of the cases he considered:
[17]          
At paras. 43 and 44 of his reasons, Boswell J.
stated:
[18]          
At para. 46, Boswell J. described another case (which
counsel also provided to me), R. v. Tonkin, 2023 ONSCC 2139:
[19]          
The Crown submitted that the following
constitute the aggravating features of Mr. Pauze’s case:
[20]          
Mr. Pauze’s counsel submitted that Mr. Pauze’s
situation contained meaningful pieces of mitigation including:
[21]          
I am uncertain as to where 20-odd grams of
fentanyl fits within the trafficking scheme.  I heard no expert evidence in
that regard.  That amount does not meet the level of 100+ grams of fentanyl
that were being considered in Wisdom, for example.  Nonetheless, this
quantity of narcotics does not appear to constitute “street level” trafficking,
given the fact that the amount of fentanyl seized represents “big bucks” as was
conceded by Mr. Pauze at trial.  Thus, I find beyond a reasonable doubt that
Mr. Pauze was involved in trafficking at a level beyond simple street level
trafficking.  As to Mr. Pauze’s specific role (whether he was a drug mule, or
performed some other function) and as to the actual level of trafficking, that
is something about which I can only speculate.
[22]          
Given the foregoing, and given the applicable
jurisprudence, the sentence suggested by Mr. Pauze’s counsel would seem to be possible
where weighty mitigating features are present and/or where smaller levels of
fentanyl were possessed.  While I accept counsel’s submission that Mr. Pauze
has mitigating aspects to his case, they are not particularly powerful
considerations.  Indeed, Mr. Pauze does not get the benefit of youth, nor does
he come to court with no (or even a short-ish) criminal record.  Rather, he has
an extensive record with relevant entries that include multiple convictions for
trafficking-related offences.  This is not a case where a person makes an error
(or a series thereof) and faces criminal sanction for the first time.  This is
the case of a veteran, albeit sympathetic, offender who is caught for offences similar
to those that have brought him to court in the past.  Rehabilitation is not a realistic
consideration.
[23]          
Denunciation, specific deterrence and general
deterrence must be the primary sentencing objectives in this case given Mr.
Pauze’s record and the amount of fentanyl seized.  The  weight to be accorded
to these sentencing principles is made more pronounced because, as was noted
above, this community is in the midst of a serious opioid crisis.
[24]          
Nothing short of a meaningful penitentiary
sentence would be adequate in the circumstances.  A clear message must be sent
to those who traffic in fentanyl: such behaviour will not be countenanced by
the courts and the penalties imposed by courts must serve as a deterrent.  While
the amount of fentanyl seized suggests that the sentence should be at the lower
end of the range, Mr. Pauze’s relevant record demands that the sentence be
higher than that.
[25]          
Therefore, when I consider the statutory
sentencing principles as described in s. 718 of the Criminal Code of Canada,
the governing jurisprudence, as well as the aggravating and mitigating features
of Mr. Pauze’s case, I hereby find that Mr. Pauze ought to be sentenced as
follows:
[26]          
I hereby order that Mr. Pauze forfeit the items
seized during the investigation pursuant to ss. 16 and 17 of the CDSA.
[27]          
I also order that Mr. Pauze be subject to a
lifetime weapons prohibition as per s. 109 of the Criminal Code of Canada.
[28]          
Finally, Mr. Pauze shall provide a sample of his
DNA to the authorities as per s. 487 of the Criminal Code of Canada.