[1]        These are Reasons for Decision, further to oral Reasons given,
on the Applicant/Mother’s motion seeking to find the Respondent/Father, in
contempt of various provisions of the temporary Order of myself, made on
consent, dated June 17, 2024.  In the alternative, mother seeks an Order that
father failed to obey the aforesaid Order pursuant to Rule 1(8) of the Family
Law Rules.  Upon finding of either Contempt or failure to obey the Order,
mother seeks the ‘children’ attend reconciliation/reunification counselling
with mother, costs be paid by father; or father pay for a parenting assessment
and/or the children reside exclusively with mother for at least 120 days,
during which the children attend reunification counselling.
[2]        I find the moving party, mother, has failed to prove contempt
beyond a reasonable doubt. Further, the Court is not satisfied the facts of
this high conflict case justify the use of the discretionary powers of
contempt. Contempt should be a remedy of last resort, not first resort.  This
is the first motion for contempt (at least the first time a motion has
proceeded).
[3]        In the alternative, I am not satisfied on the balance of
probability that the Order of June 17, 2024 was the result or even mostly the result
of the father’s conduct (although that is a possibility on the balance of
probability). Given the circumstances of the case, it is not necessary for the
just determination of the case to make a finding under Rule 1(8) and on the
balance of probability it is not in the best interest of 13 year old L. M-M (“L.”)
to make any of the Orders sought by mother.
[4]        Mother’s motion is therefore dismissed.  The Court does
exercise its overriding obligation to the child L. to make the following Order,
notwithstanding the finding that the motion is dismissed.
[5]        First, there is no motion to change the existing temporary
Order by the father.  The Order of June 17, 2024 shall continue in full force
and effect.  However, given the child’s views and preferences as expressed by
OCL, the high conflict nature of the case, the allegations by the child that
she feels unsafe with mother, the Order shall not be enforced by the police and
shall be subject to the wishes of the child.
[6]        Second, the parties shall continue the family counselling as
arranged and agreed upon now by mother.  The parents shall follow all
reasonable recommendations of the counsellor.
[7]        Third, neither party shall involve the child further in this
litigation and shall not speak negatively about the other parent to the child
L.
[8]        Four, mother and father shall encourage the child to have
meaningful contact with the other parent and use their best efforts to have the
children follow the existing Order.
[9]        The parties shall only contact one another about issues
directly related to the children, parenting time and/or fulfillment of the
Order. Unless the matter is urgent, neither party shall initiate contact with
the other more than one time per week and then, only for purpose as aforesaid. 
The parties may in writing mutually consent to other contact.
[10]      Father shall encourage the child L. to speak to mother via
telephone or social media, or facetime / zoom at least once per week.  Such
communications shall not be monitored by father.
[11]      The
Order of June 17, 2024, is a temporary Order.  It is largely clear and
unambiguous.
[12]      Payment of support and arrears is a money Order and not
properly the subject of contempt.  Further under Rule 1(8), while father has
not complied with the Order, he has at intervals since the Order made lump sum
payments.  Further, father alleges, and it has not been challenged he was
unemployed for a period of time since the Order.
[13]      It is accepted by all that mother has not, since August 12,
2024, had parenting time in accordance with the June 17, 2024 Order. The child
L. has resided with the father, has not been in the primary care of mother, nor
has mother had primary decision making authority over L.  The second child, D. M.
dob February 7, 2015 (“D.”) has been in mother’s primary care and she had
exercised primary decision making.  No breach of the Order is alleged with
respect to D.
[14]      The real issue in this motion is whether father has
intentionally undermined L.’s relationship with her mother, whether the child
has been alienated and even if the court answers negatively to both questions,
whether the father has done enough to encourage the child to comply with the
Order. Mother argues at the very least, father has inappropriately involved the
child in the litigation and improperly let the child decide whether or not she
needs to comply with the Order. Specifically, the father undermines mother’s
authority and the child’s trust in her mother.  The interference is to the
extent the wishes of L. cannot be relied on because they are not her true
expressions or her true view.  In the end, the best interest of the child
requires the court’s intervention now.  It will be too late to wait and if
found appropriate, intervene at trial which could be a year or more away.
[15]      The Court is not satisfied with the evidence presented that
father has willfully, intentionally attempted to interfere with mother’s
relationship with L.   The evidence is not sufficient, even on the balance of
probability, and certainly not beyond a reasonable doubt.
[16]      The views and preferences of the child are relevant to the
issues raised on the motion.  The Court considers the factors to consider when
determining the weight to accord to a child’s views and preferences as set out
by the Ontario Court of Appeal in Decaen v Decaen (2013) ONCA 218, 2013 ONCA 218 (CanLII), 303
OAC 261 at para 42.
[17]      The Court finds the wishes of L. are to remain in the care of
father. Her views are clear and unambivalent.  Her expressions are informed,
strong and relatively speaking, longer held. The child met with OCL worker on 5
occasions since August, 3 times alone, twice at father’s via zoom, but no one
else in the room.  She has been consistent through the visits.  She turned 13
years of age in October.  She detailed to the OCL the high conflict nature of
the parents’ relationship, the feeling of unease she has with mother, her
expression of fear of mother as opposed to her feeling of safety at father’s. 
The overall context of the case is the parties have been involved in litigation
involving the children over a prolonged period.
[18]      The child wishes to reside with father but leaves open the possibility
of on-going contact with mother, including dinners regularly, contact at other
times, such as both attending sporting events for D.  Longer term, she
expressed to OCL a belief she would be open to weekend parenting time with
mother, although not in the immediate future.  This suggests the child has
thought through her position, considered her options and recognizes the
importance of some type of relationship with mother.
[19]      The issue of father’s influence on L. is difficult to assess. 
On the evidence before the Court now, there is insufficient evidence to
establish L.’s wishes are overcome by father’s intention to denigrate the
relationship with mother.  Father has done some things that certainly raise
concern.  He has in the past said inappropriate things to mother and likely the
child.  On the other hand, father deposes in his affidavit, and it is not
challenged, that on August 31st he drove the child to the mother’s
in an effort to facilitate mother’s parenting time.  He claims the child simply
refused to get out of the car and go to the mother’s.
[20]      Mother acknowledges the child’s views and has not insisted the
police enforce the existing Order, notwithstanding the clause allowing for
police enforcement.  Mother in doing so acknowledges the child opposes going to
her and it would not be positive for the child to be dragged by the police away
from father and to mother.  This speaks to the practicalities of the
situation.  It is counterproductive to force the child to go with mother where
her views seem strong, consistent and honestly held.  In fact, involving the
police could cause more long term harm, than good.
[21]      Mother argues father cannot ‘get away’ with breaching an Order.
There will be no incentive to comply with orders in the future.  The Court in
part accepts the argument that Court Orders must be enforced, otherwise they
become meaningless.  However, the overriding concern must be the child’s best
interest.  Children ought to have meaningful relationships with both parents,
unless the best interest test, proves otherwise.  That said, the facts of each
case must be assessed on their own merit.
[22]      In this case, there are reasons to question the child’s motives
for refusing visitation.  But father has allowed D. to have parenting time in
accord with the Order.  While it is possible a parent interferes with parenting
of one child and not the other, it seems less likely in the case at bar. 
Father has done more than simply leave the final decision of contact with
mother to L. The evidence at this stage is inconclusive.
[23]      The positives in this case include the following:
[24]      The Court is of the opinion based on the evidence and more
specifically the lack of evidence on the balance of probability, the best
interest of the child can be achieved through professional assistance of a
counsellor.  The needs of this family and child in particular are beyond the
scope of what a Court can offer. The solution requires patience, understanding
of all sides and most importantly professional counselling and direction. The
problems presented are complex and likely multifaceted.
[25]      The powers of Contempt, or even the powers under Rule 1(8) of
the Family Law Rules are blunt instruments that often do not fashion
positive results.  The goal in the case at bar is for L. to have a meaningful
and productive relationship with both her mother and father.  The Orders sought
today will not advance the goal of meaningful relationships.
[26]      Neither party should be emboldened by the Court’s decision on
this motion.  The conduct of each parent raises issues and concerns.  Neither
should feel vindication.  L. is at risk by the on-going parenting conflict. 
Each parent can and must play a role in ‘lowering the temperature’ of the
conflict and seeking meaningful solutions.
[27]      It was not helpful to proceed with a contempt motion in the
face of Settlement Conference set for November 20, 2024. All of these issues
could have been addressed at the conference, if necessary, at the conclusion,
permission sought to proceed with motion.
[28]      Given
the result and the Court’s comments about both parents, there shall be no order
as to costs.