[1]         
The Respondent submits that the order under
appeal (granting partial summary judgment to terminate the parties’ lease,
ordering payment of arrears of rent, and declaring ownership of a bank account)
is an interlocutory order so that leave to appeal is required. Counsel agrees
that the issue can be dealt with efficiently at a case conference.
[2]         
The Respondent will deliver no more than five
pages of submissions on the issue of whether the order under appeal is
interlocutory or final for appeal purposes by November 29, 2024. The Appellants
may deliver no more than five pages of submissions in response by December 6,
2024.
[3]         
I will hear the parties at a case conference
on December 13, 2024 at 10:00 a.m. by Zoom.
[4]         
Counsel are requested to send a copy of the
material on which they rely to my Judicial Assistant at therese.navrotski@ontario.ca.
[5]         
The Respondent landlord evicted the tenant and
took possession of the premises in mid-September shortly after the order of
Hood J. was released. The Appellants propose to bring a motion to stay the
order. It is not clear to me that there is anything left to stay. In any event,
in this court, rather than consigning the parties to months of costs on stay
motions, the
[6]         
The Appellants will therefore perfect the appeal
by December 27, 2024. The Respondent will deliver its responding materials by
January 31, 2025.
[7]         
The appeal will be argued for no more than
two hours on an expedited basis. The Registrar is requested to schedule the
appeal as early in February as possible.
[8]         
The Appellants raise issues about chattels left on the
premises and the possibility that she will seek a Certificate of Pending
Litigation against the Respondent’s land. Issues concerning the execution fo
the judge’s order and ongoing steps in the remaining litigation are to be taken
before the Superior Court. Steps to deal with chattels or a CPL are not part of
the appeal in this court.
[9]         
I raised with the parties my own concern that an appeal
of an order for partial summary judgment terminating a lease that had more than
two years left to run and declaring ownership of a bank account may be within
the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal although the judge only ordered payment
of about $20,000 in arears up to the date of eviction. I leave it to the
parties to consider whether that is an issue for them to raise with the panel
that hears the appeal. But they are on notice that they may find that the panel
is interested in the issue in any event.