[1]              
The Moving Party, the Ontario Motor Vehicle Industry Council (“OMVIC”)
is the regulator of the motor vehicle sales industry in Ontario.  It has
delegated authority to administer the Motor Vehicle Dealers Act, 2002, S.O.
2002, c. 30, Sched. B (“MVDA”). In March 2019, an OMVIC investigator was of the
view that the Applicants/Responding Parties, Tracy Grey and Richard Grey (the
“Greys”) bought cars from dealerships and transferred them to another
dealership for a fee.  They are not registered OMVIC motor vehicle dealers and
were charged in September 2020 with four counts of acting as a motor vehicle
dealer contrary to s. 4(1)(a) of the MVDA.
[2]              
They do not dispute the sale and transfer to another dealership
for a fee.  Their defence to the charges is that the MVDA does not apply
to them because they acted as “an agent” for a licensed vehicle exporter.
[3]              
The Ontario Court of Justice (“OCJ”) trial for these charges was
scheduled for March 3 and 10 and April 17, 24, and 27, 2023.  On March 1, 2023,
the Greys brought an Application in the Superior Court of Justice for an order
of prohibition under section 140 of the Provincial Offences Act, R.S.O.
1990, c. P.33 (“POA”).  On March 3, 2023, the Applicants
requested an adjournment of the OCJ trial pending adjudication of the
Application in this court.  The Applicants submit that on April 6, 2023, the
OCJ granted the adjournment request and agreed that there was merit to the
Application and it should proceed in this Court. There is no evidence before
the Court regarding the OCJ’s reasons for the granting of the adjournment.  The
trial dates are set in the OCJ for December 9-16, 2024.
[4]              
The Moving Party OMVIC brings this motion seeking that the
Application be stayed, dismissed, or struck without leave to amend and that
costs be ordered against the Applicant.
[5]              
Issues of jurisdiction and forum are raised on this motion.  OMVIC’s
position is that the Applicants’ defence to the charges should be raised before
the OCJ at first instance. The Applicants will have an opportunity to present
relevant evidence and make their submissions in the OCJ.  They will have a
right of appeal from the OCJ decision to this Court.  To permit the Application
to proceed would allow the Applicants to proceed directly to a judicial review
before the OCJ has made a decision with respect to the charges.  OMVIC’s main
submission is that the Application is frivolous and an abuse of this Court’s
processes. It brought this motion pursuant to rr. 21.01 and 25.11 of the Rules
of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194.
[6]              
A frivolous proceeding is one that lacks a legal basis or merit.
The abuse of process doctrine provides courts with broad discretion to address
situations where the legal system is being used improperly, unfairly, or for a
purpose other than for what it is intended.  OMVIC submits that the Application
is frivolous because the OCJ (a Court with proper jurisdiction) has not considered
or rendered a decision on the Greys’ charges.  The Application is an abuse of
process because it is an attempt to circumvent and/or bypass the OCJ process. There
is no OCJ decision for this Court to review.
[7]              
Rule 21.01(3)(c) and (d) provide:
[8]              
Further, rule 25.11 provides:
[9]              
This relief applies to applications, pursuant to rr. 14.09 and
38.12.
[10]          
This Court also has the jurisdiction to stay a proceeding that is
an abuse of process pursuant to s. 106 of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O.
1990, c. C.43 (“CJA”). Section 106 of the CJA provides that “[a]
court, on its own initiative or on motion by any person, whether or not a
party, may stay any proceeding in the court on such terms as are considered
just.”
[11]          
The remedy of prohibition requested in the Application is an
extraordinary and discretionary remedy. It prohibits a decision-maker from
exceeding its powers or acting without jurisdiction.  The OCJ should be permitted
to decide whether it would be exceeding its jurisdiction by conducting a trial.
Notably, the Applicants do not plead that OMVIC does not have jurisdiction to
lay charges against them, or, that the OCJ does not have jurisdiction to adjudicate
these charges.  They allege that in laying the charges, the OMVIC acted
“capriciously, arbitrarily or in furtherance of private interests.”  The submission
that OMVIC abused their powers raises factual allegations rather than legal issues,
such as challenging jurisdiction and/or authority to lay charges.
[12]          
Further, it is submitted that even if it was alleged that OMVIC
did not have jurisdiction to lay the charges, the Application still ought to be
struck and the charges should be adjudicated before the OCJ at first instance. 
One of the most factually similar decisions of this court is Baron et al v. Halton
Region Conservation Authority, 2023 ONSC 5568.  The Applicant in Baron
sought an order of prohibition against the Halton Region Conservation Authority
on the basis that it did not have statutory authority to prosecute certain
offences. In dismissing the Application, the Court in Baron held, at
para. 33, that:
[13]          
As mentioned above, in this Application, there is no claim that
OMVIC had no jurisdiction to charge the Applicants or that the OCJ has no
jurisdiction to adjudicate the offences.
[14]          
In the Notice of Application it is alleged that there has been a
contravention of the Rule of Law.  The Applicants rely upon Trial Lawyers
Association of British Columbia v. British Columbia (Attorney General) 2014
SCC 59, [2014] 3 S.C.R. 31, where the Court stated, at para. 32, 39:
[15]          
Further, the Greys submit that section 96 of the Constitution
Act, 1867 vests in the Superior Courts of each province the jurisdiction to
maintain the Rule of Law. When a party seeks redress that transcends the
interests of the parties or impugns an institutional process based on a
violation of the Rule of Law, s. 96 of the Constitution Act, 1867 requires
that the matter be adjudicated in the Superior Court of Justice. This
interpretation is consistent with the scope of s. 140 of the Provincial
Offences Act. Section 140(2) of the POA imposes a procedural
requirement to serve the Attorney General with the notice of application. There
is also a procedure set out in rule 13 of the Rules of Civil Procedure that
allows non-parties to intervene in the case. These requirements ensure that
there is an opportunity for all affected interests to be represented before the
Court.  However, I am of the view that this is an issue for the OCJ to decide, with
a right of Appeal to our Court.
[16]          
There has been no trial or consideration of the charges on their
merits in the OCJ. The Application does not allege any jurisdictional error
that would entitle them to the remedy of prohibition. This is a relevant
concern in this Application.
[17]          
I agree that the Application has no legal merit and cannot
succeed. It therefore ought to be dismissed on this basis alone.
[18]          
The other ground for the relief sought on this motion is that the
Application is an abuse of process and should be dismissed. The OCJ has
jurisdiction to hear and consider the Applicants’ submissions.  This Court
ought not intervene in an ongoing proceeding in the OCJ where the Applicants’ defence
can be adjudicated with a full evidentiary record and where a full right of appeal
exists.
[19]          
In R. v. Duvivier, 1991 CanLII 7174, 3 O.R. (3d)
49 (C.A.), the Court of Appeal for Ontario set out
the policy concerns against granting applications for relief to the Superior
Court during ongoing proceedings in the criminal context. Doherty J.A.
stated in Duvivier, at p. 8:
[20]          
This principle was confirmed in R. v. Arcand, 2004 CanLII 46648, 73 O.R. (3d) 758, at para. 14, wherein
our Court of Appeal held that these policy concerns apply to proceedings under
the POA. The accused brought an application for prohibition after
the commencement of trial, seeking to prohibit his prosecution under the Ontario
Water Resources Act. The Court of Appeal sent the case back to the OCJ for
a new trial.  This Court is bound by this jurisprudence from the Ontario Court
of Appeal.
[21]          
Further, pursuant to r. 21.01(3)(d), a claim may also be found to
be an abuse of process where it is commenced for an extraneous or collateral
purpose.
[22]          
In this Application, the claims are that:
[23]          
The Applicants advise that it is the intention of the Canadian
Vehicle Exporters Association (“CVEA”) to seek Intervenor status in the
Application pursuant to rule 13.01(1).
[24]          
The Applicants submit that the Provincial Offences Act
contains no provisions allowing for intervenor status in proceedings before the
Ontario Courts of Justice. Section 109 of the Courts
of Justice Act confers intervenor status only upon the Attorneys General
and only for specific provisions as set out therein. The CJA contains no
provision authorizing the Ontario Courts of Justice to grant Intervenor status.
All parties who may be affected by a decision of the Court must have an
opportunity to appear before the Court. Failure to do so would amount to a
contravention of the Rule of Law, natural justice, and procedural fairness.  There
has been no ruling or consideration of this submission at the OCJ.
[25]          
The Application asks this Court to make findings for the purpose
of attacking the conduct of OMVIC and to invalidate the charges against the
Applicants before the charges are litigated in the OCJ. The Applicants
allege that OMVIC has acted in bad faith as its charges were “capricious,
arbitrary, or in furtherance of a private interest.”
[26]          
Our Court of Appeal in Birdseye Security Inc. v. Milosevic,
2020 ONCA 355, reviewed the analytical framework to be applied in the Court’s
exercise of its discretion when considering whether an action should be
dismissed or stayed under r. 21.01(3)(c) as an abuse of process.
[27]          
In the exercise of my discretion to determine whether a stay or
dismissal of proceedings should be granted, I must consider the circumstances
of this case. OMVIC must demonstrate that continuation of the Application would
cause it “substantial prejudice or injustice (beyond inconvenience and expense)
because it would be oppressive or vexatious or would otherwise be an abuse of
the process of the court”: Birdseye Security, at para. 15, citing Farris
v. Staubach Ontario Inc., 2004 CanLII 11325, 32 C.C.E.L. (3d) 265 (Ont.
S.C.), at para. 15. It must also persuade the court that the dismissal would
not cause an injustice to the Greys: Birdseye Security, at para. 15,
citing Farris, at para. 15.  When assessing prejudice, the relevant
factors include: “the likelihood and effect of the two matters proceeding in
tandem, the possibility and effect of different results, the potential for
double recovery, and the effect of possible delay”: Birdseye Security,
at para. 15, citing Farris, at para. 16.
[28]          
The fact there is another proceeding pending between the same
parties in the OCJ in respect of the same subject matter does not automatically
justify an order dismissing or staying the Application.
[29]          
In Wernikowski v. Firm of Kirkland, Murphy & Ain, 1999
CanLII 3822, 50 O.R. (3d) 124 (C.A.), at para. 12, the Court of Appeal cautioned
as follows:
[30]          
In the exercise of my discretion, I am guided by these principles,
but none of these considerations override my view that the Application is an
abuse of process, as it ought to be adjudicated in the OCJ. The Application
should be dismissed on that basis.
[31]          
The Applicants also allege that a combination of delay and the taking
of intermediary steps should lead to a dismissal of this Motion.  They rely on
the undisputed fact that before commencing this Motion, OMVIC agreed to a
timetable that included filing Responding Materials, examinations, and a hearing
date to Strike the Affidavit of Damon Lyons, but not the Application.  This was
later changed at a case conference when the parties agreed to argue this motion
on this hearing date.
[32]          
The Notice of Application was commenced on March 1, 2023.
[33]          
The Motion to Stay or Strike was delivered September 4, 2024 - but
not the Responding Materials as OMVIC had agreed upon.
[34]          
The Rules require leave to bring this Motion and OMVIC has failed
to make such a request. For the foregoing reasons, leave should not be granted.
[35]          
An initial Case Conference was set for July 4, 2024. A timetable
was set for a Hearing on the merits, delivery of responding materials, dates
for cross examinations and factums and setting a Hearing date of November 19,
2024.
[36]          
The Applicants emphasize that this Application explains the alleged,
potentially devastating effect on an entire motor vehicle export industry. This
would affect exporters and the agents and nominees that work with them, and constitutes
hardship, prejudice and irreparable harm.
[37]          
The main submission of the Applicants is that the Notice of
Application includes a lengthy and sufficient degree of particularity to set
out the basis for the Application itself. The relief sought, while possibly
novel, is plausible on the facts pleaded with respect to the issues relating to
the Rule of Law and ultra vires
[38]          
The relief requested on this motion should only be granted in the
clearest of cases: Khan v. Krylov & Company LLP, 2017 ONCA 625, 138
OR (3d) 581, at para. 6.  I find that this is one of the “clearest of
cases”.
[39]          
With respect to the considerations of the exercise of this Court’s
discretion under section 106 of the CJA, our court has held in Housser
v. Savin Canada Inc., 2005 CanLII 35779, 77 O.R. (3d) 251 (S.C.), at para.
43, that:
[40]          
In Schellenberg v. International Brotherhood, the Court
confirmed that a rule 21 Motion should be brought promptly and, if not, can
lead to a dismissal of the Motion, particularly where a Motion is brought close
to trial (or in this case, the Hearing date) in circumstances where the
pleadings were available a significant period of time prior to bringing the
Motion: 2014 ONSC 7305, at paras. 19-22, 26, citing Fleet Street Financial
Corp. v. Levinson, 2003 CanLII 21878 (Ont. S.C.) and Cetinalp v. Casino,
2009 CanLII 65384 (Ont. S.C.).  Further, the lack of promptness requires a justifiable
explanation to excuse the delay. There is no explanation for the delay.   The
Application was commenced on March 1, 2023. OMVIC did not serve its Motion to
Strike and/or Stay the Application until September 4, 2024, a period of
approximately 18 months from the commencement of the Application. In addition,
OMVIC did not, at all relevant times, indicate that they would bring this
Motion prior to the service of the Motion itself. Rather, OMVIC has proceeded
on the basis that there would be a hearing on the merits of the Application.
OMVIC’s failure to move promptly and bring its Motion to Strike the Application
resulted in significant time and expense for the Applicants to prepare the
supporting Affidavits of Richard Grey and Damon Lyons. The Damon Lyons
Affidavit was amended on two occasions and a Motion was heard to strike that
Affidavit. All of this work would not have been necessary if the Motion to
Strike had been brought at the outset of the commencement of the Application
and been successful.
[41]          
As well, it is the Applicants’ position that OMVIC has
effectively attorned to the hearing of the Application on its merits. As such,
OMVIC should be estopped from bringing the Motion to Strike.
[42]          
OMVIC relied on the recent case of The Dominion of Canada
General Insurance Company v. Nelson, 2023 ONSC 386 (Div. Ct.).  Although
the Applicants were not provided with any notice that this case would be relied
on, counsel advised the court that an adjournment of the motion was not
required and that no extra time was required to review the case.  The
Divisional Court held in Nelson, at paras. 26-27, 42-43 and 45-47, that:
[43]          
Although the above noted principles relied on by the Applicants must
be considered, I find that they do not alter my view that the Application is an
abuse of the Court’s process, and the lack of legal merit of the Application.
[44]          
I find that the principles set out in Nelson case
are applicable on this motion.
[45]          
The Applicants also rely on rule 187,
which provides that an application to set aside a proceeding for irregularity
shall not be allowed if the party applying has taken a fresh step. In Sharpe
v. Reingold, [1946] O.W.N. 730, on a motion to strike out a statement of
defence or a paragraph thereof, it was held that the plaintiff had taken a
fresh step that would prevent him from succeeding. There, appointments for
examination for discovery and a notice to produce had been served
simultaneously with the notice of motion of the application to strike out the
statement of defence. I also find that the reasoning of the court in Nelson
is applicable on this motion.
[46]          
Rule 2.02 states:
[47]          
A failure to comply with the Rules is an irregularity for the
purposes of rr. 2.1.01 and 2.02.
[48]          
Similarly, I do not accept the Greys’ position that OMVIC’s
failure to obtain leave to bring this Motion is sufficient to dismiss it, in
light of the guidance set out above in the Nelson case.
[49]          
As referred to above, in Baron v. Halton Region Conservation
Authority, the court held, at paras. 31, 33-34 and 36, that:
[50]          
In addition to the above noted findings, I must consider the
doctrine of prematurity. The trial has not commenced at the OCJ and the
Application is made on the basis of the principles of ultra vires and
Rule of Law.  Even if the doctrine of prematurity applies, the Greys submit
that “exceptional circumstances” exist to allow the Application to proceed.
[51]          
In Oberlander v. Canada (Public Safety and Emergency
Preparedness), 2021 FC 294 (CanLII), 2021 F.C. 294, the court held “exceptional circumstances”
include hardship, prejudice, and irreparable harm.  The Applicants submit that
their prosecution extends beyond the specific issues relating to them.  Any
decisions will have direct consequences to an entire industry; this includes
motor vehicle exporters, and agents and nominees that work with them.  I do not
agree that this consideration renders this case exceptional.  The charges in
the OCJ are against the Greys, not the potential intervenors, who can independently
seek their own appropriate remedies.
[52]          
To summarize, the Applicants submit that this motion should be
dismissed because:
[53]          
I am of the view that the Application should be dismissed as the
issues raised ought to be advanced at first instance before the OCJ.  There is
no possibility of success in the Application in this Court at first instance.  The
remedy sought in the Application is premature, and therefore not available. 
The Application is also a collateral attack on the OCJ’s adjudicative authority
and therefore an abuse of process.  The application should therefore be
dismissed.
[54]          
For the above noted reasons, I dismiss the Application on the
ground that it is an abuse of process.  The charges against the Greys should be
dealt with by the OCJ, which has jurisdiction to adjudicate their charges.  The
Application has no legal merit because the prohibition remedy cannot be
granted.
[55]          
The Moving Party Respondent is the successful party on this
motion and the costs submitted at the hearing of the motion, of $20,000 are
appropriate and reasonable.  I order that the Applicants pay costs on a partial
indemnity basis in the amount of $20,000.  However, if the parties are unable
to agree on costs that arise as any result of the rules of Offers to Settle,
the Moving Party Respondents may make submissions of no more than two pages,
double spaced sent to the Applicants. Written submissions must be uploaded to
Case Centers with a copy sent to my assistant Roxanne Johnson at
Roxanne.johnson@ontario.ca by 12 pm on December 16, 2024. The Applicants may
make submissions of no more than two pages, double spaced sent to the Moving
Party Respondents, uploaded to Case Centers with a copy sent to my assistant by
12 pm on January 2, 2025.  No reply submissions will be accepted.  If
submissions are not received in accordance with those terms, costs will be
deemed to be settled.