[1]              
In this application Dr. Paula Fisher asks for an
order requiring NVA Queen West Management (QWM) and National Veterinary
Associates Canada Inc. (NVA) to refer an earn-out calculation dispute to KPMG.
[2]              
The dispute arises in the context of a 2022
share purchase agreement (SPA) between Dr. Fisher and NVA. By virtue of this
agreement, and a series of other agreements, Dr. Fisher and her former business
partner, Dr. Mathison, sold their majority interest in Queen West Animal
Hospital to QWM. Dr. Mathison has since left the Hospital.
[3]              
The SPA provides for the calculation of an
annual earn-out statement for the first three years of the agreement. The first
earn-out statement for the 2022/2023 year was delivered in August 2023. Dr.
Fisher had 20 business days to review the earn out statement and to notify NVA if
she had any objections. The parties had another 20 business days to meet to try
to resolve the objections. Failing a resolution, any dispute over the earn out
statement had to be submitted for determination by an independent firm of
chartered professional accountants within a further five days. If the parties were
unable to agree on another firm, the dispute must be referred to KPMG.
[4]              
NVA has refused to refer Dr. Fisher’s earn-out
statement dispute to KPMG for two reasons. NVA submits:
[5]              
NVA’s two reasons for refusing to refer the
dispute to KPMG frame the issues for determination in this application:
[6]              
For reasons I will explain below, I conclude
that:
[7]              
Dr. Fisher is a veterinarian. She began working
at the Hospital in 2004. By 2012 she had become a half owner in the Hospital
along with Dr. Mathison. In 2021, Drs. Fisher and Mathison (I will refer to both
Drs. Fisher and Mathison collectively as the “co-owners” where appropriate in
the context) engaged sophisticated and specialized financial, tax, accounting
and legal advisors to consider a sale of their business.
[8]              
NVA is a national company which owns and
operates multiple veterinary practices. It provides operational support and
business services such as business operations, accounting, tax and human
resource support.
[9]              
In the latter part of 2021, the co-owners began
discussions with NVA about a possible transaction. In September 2021, they
signed a nonbinding letter of intent with NVA to sell their shares in the
Hospital.
[10]          
Between September 2021 and June 2022, NVA and
the co-owners engaged in extensive negotiations regarding the terms of the
sale. There was a great deal of evidence put forward by the parties about the
content and characterization of these negotiations. I regard this evidence as
essentially irrelevant to the issues in dispute. It is clear that both sides
were sophisticated players who had the benefit of competent legal, financial
and accounting advice.
[11]          
The final terms of the transaction were
negotiated in June 2022 which resulted in the execution of five agreements:
[12]          
In the course of argument of this application, two
basic terms from these agreements took on particular significance.
[13]          
Section 2.3 of the SPA sets out the basis upon
which the co-owners would receive additional compensation (earn out amount) if
the Hospital’s financial performance exceeded certain EBITDA (earnings before interest,
taxes, depreciation and amortization) targets in any one of the three years
following closing. Section 2.3 also sets out an expedited dispute resolution
procedure in the event of disputes about whether the EBITDA targets were
exceeded in any given year. The SPA stipulates tight, specific deadlines for
calculation of, and objection to, the earn out amount.
[14]          
Section 2.3(a) provides that no later than 120
days following the end of each earn out period (in this case, the end of the
first earn out period was June 30, 2023), NVA must prepare and deliver to the co-owners
a statement, defined as the “earn out statement”, showing (i) the Hospital’s
earnings before EBITDA in respect of each earn out period; and, (ii) the
calculation of the amount by which the EBITDA amount is greater than the EBITDA
growth target. This difference, if a positive number, is called the “excess EBITDA
growth amount”. The EBITDA growth target is a fixed amount defined for each of
the first three years. The earn-out amount is defined to mean 15.96 multiplied
by the excess EBITDA growth amount up to a maximum of $1,596,000. Each earn-out
statement “shall be prepared in accordance with GAAP consistently applied.”
[15]          
Section 2.3(b) provides that the co-owners shall
have 20 business days following receipt to review the earn out statement and
must notify NVA “if it has any objections to” the earn out statement “within
such” 20 business day period. If a notice of objection is delivered, the parties
shall promptly meet to try to resolve the objections within a further 20
business days following receipt of the notice. Failing resolution of any
objection, “only the amounts in dispute” will be submitted for determination to
the independent firm of chartered professional accountants. Failing agreement
to the contrary within a further five days, the independent firm of chartered
professional accountants “will be” submitted to KPMG.
[16]          
The independent accountant “shall determine the
procedures applicable to the resolution of the amounts in dispute with the
primary purposes of minimizing expenses of the parties and expediting the
accurate resolution of the dispute.” The independent account is “deemed to be
acting as” an expert and not as an arbitrator. The independent accountant’s
determination of the amount(s) in dispute and any corresponding changes flowing
from the resolution of such amounts “will be final and binding upon the parties
and will not be subject to appeal absent manifest error.”
[17]          
Section 2.3(b) imposes certain parameters on the
findings of the independent accountant. The result cannot be more favourable to
NVA that what was reflected in NVA’s earn out statement and cannot be more
favourable to the co-owners than what was reflected in their notice of
objection.
[18]          
Once under review by the independent accountant,
both parties must each make available any individuals and any information,
facilities, books, records and work papers as may be reasonably required by the
independent accountant to fulfill his or her obligations.
[19]          
If an earn out amount is determined by the
independent accountant to be payable, it must be paid within five business days.
[20]          
Section 2.3(c) ends with a proviso. NVA
has “sole discretion” regarding all matters relating to the operation of the
Hospital, although NVA may not, directly or indirectly, take any actions in bad
faith that would have the purpose of avoiding or reducing any earn out amount.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, NVA “has no obligation to operate” the business
to achieve or maximize any earn out amount during any earn out period.
[21]          
Section 10.13 of the USA and Article 6 of the
ASA provide that the Hospital shall be charged a monthly management fee equal
to 3% of gross monthly revenue.
[22]          
Section 10.13 of the SPA contemplates the ASA,
under which NVA, as manager, shall be entitled to receive from the Hospital a
monthly management fee in an amount equal to 3% of the Hospital’s monthly gross
revenue. The management fee is for the provision of management services
including, but not limited to, payroll, accounts payable, accounting, tax
preparation, certain legal services, vendor contracting, human resources
services, recruiting, certain information technology support, business
intelligence and marketing and other back office support services as may be
required by the Hospital from time to time.
[23]          
Article 6 of the ASA sets out in more detail the
obligations of the manager and of the Hospital. It stipulates that the Hospital
authorizes the manager to pay out to itself monthly the sum of the following
amounts: (i) 3% of the total revenue of the Hospital earned in the relevant
month and (ii) reimbursement for all direct expenses paid by the manager on
behalf of the Hospital. The Hospital specifically “acknowledges and agrees”
that, in consideration of the substantial commitment made by the manager, the management
fee “is fair and reasonable.”
[24]          
There is evidence, particularly from NVA, to the
effect that Dr. Fisher became unhappy with the ways things worked out after
closing. She and Dr. Mathison had a falling out. Dr. Mathison ultimately
resigned and left the Hospital. Among other things, Dr. Fisher complained about
the Hospital’s administration costs (i.e., the management fee) now being based
on a percentage of revenue, not actual or historical costs. Increased monthly
revenues served to increase the monthly amount the Hospital had to pay to NVA
by way of management fees. NVA took the firm position that it would not renegotiate
fundamental terms of the agreements.
[25]          
NVA prepared the year one earn out statement
after the first anniversary date and delivered it to Dr. Fisher on August 3,
2023. It is not in dispute that this was within 120 day window required under
the SPA. The earn out statement is effectively three lines: Total EBITDA of
535,556; EBITDA Goal of 546,857; and Amount needed to reach minimum goal --
11,301 (EO is not met). This result was consistent with the parties’ suspicions
that the Hospital would likely fail to meet or exceed the year one EDITDA
growth target. That target was $546,857. The year one earn out statement
calculated the EDITDA to be $535,556; this was $11,301 short
of the minimum target for a payout.
[26]          
Dr. Fisher’s complaints about the Hospital’s
operations and her frustration with some of the terms of the agreements
continued after NVA delivered the earn out statement on August 3, 2023. Dr.
Fisher’s counsel, in a letter of August 4, 2023, stated:
[27]          
NVA maintained its position that, while it was
willing to work with Dr. Fisher to improve performance, it would not
renegotiate fundamental terms of the agreements.
[28]          
It was not until the 19th business
day following receipt of the earn out statement that Dr. Fisher expressed any
concern about the accounting reflected in the earn out statement. On
August 30, 2023 Dr. Fisher submitted, through her counsel, a notice of
objection under section 2.3 of the SPA. The notice of objection simply states:
[29]          
Following delivery of the notice of objection,
there ensued protracted correspondence between counsel for Dr. Fisher and
counsel for NVA about the production of additional financial information
alleged to be necessary for Dr. Fisher to understand the earn out statement and
to formulate specific objections to the numbers reflected in the statement. For
example, on September 6, counsel for Dr. Fisher requested “a calculation of the
EBITDA reconciling to the final internal statements for the First Earn-Out
Period. We also require copies of the final monthly profit and loss statements
for the First Earn-Out Period.”
[30]          
Counsel for NVA responded by stating:
[31]          
Although NVA did ultimately provide additional
financial information in support of the earn out statement it did so expressly
under protest and without prejudice, stating that it was not providing Dr.
Fisher with any relevant financial information that she had not always had
access to.
[32]          
In one email chain, litigation counsel to NVA
reiterated that Dr. Fisher had failed to deliver a compliant notice of
objection and that she had, and continued to have, access to the necessary
financial information to do so. Nevertheless, he indicated that on October 25,
2023, and again on November 15, 2023, NVA provided additional information
requested by Dr. Fisher. By doing so, he said, NVA “continued to discharge its
obligations under the SPA”. In this November 15, 2023 email, however, NVA’s
counsel indicated that NVA was not prepared to provide any more information,
stating: “we do not see the utility of further discussions on this and both
parties can proceed as they see fit under the SPA.”
[33]          
Finally, on November 22, 2023, following receipt
of the additional information on November 15 and in light of NVA’s position
that Dr. Fisher’s EDITDA calculation was required, Dr. Fisher’s accountant, Mr.
Toner, provided his opinion concerning the earn out calculation. Mr. Toner
opined that the EBITDA calculation for the First Earnout Period was $754,179,
which would entitle the co-owners to the maximum earnout payment of $1,596,000.
The statement from Mr. Toner sets out ten adjustments to the NVA EDITDA
calculation which result in an adjusted difference of 218,622 above the EDITDA
target, producing the EDITDA calculation of 754,179. The largest of these
adjustments, 139,995, is for the “Management Fee”. The note states:
[34]          
On December 13, 2023, new litigation counsel for
NVA advised, in a lengthy letter, that NVA refused to submit the earn out
calculation issue to an independent accounting firm. In essence, NVA took the
position that Dr. Fisher failed to comply with the procedural requirements for
making an objection to NVA’s earn out statement and, in any event, that her
objections were manifestly not related to a bona fide EDITDA dispute but,
rather, reflected her dissatisfaction with (and desire to re-negotiate)
fundamental terms of the agreements, specifically section 2.3 of the SPA (the
earn out provision) and section 10.13 of the USA and Article 6 of the ASA (the
management fee provisions).
[35]          
This correspondence prompted Dr. Fisher’s
application to this court seeking an order requiring the earn out dispute raised
by the competing EBITDA calculations to be submitted to KPMG.
[36]          
There are several questions raised by the
parties’ competing views of the timing and content of the earn out statement
and the notice of objection. These include:
[37]          
It is clear from the provisions of the
agreements set out above that the drafters of section 2.3 of the SPA intended
there to be a simple, short and narrowly focused dispute resolution process for
the determine of EBITDA – earn out statement delivered 120 days after the first
anniversary of closing; notice of objection within 20 days business days; 20
days for attempts at resolution; and, if no resolution, five days for referral
to the expert.
[38]          
The SPA does not set out the form of the earn
out statement, other than to say it must conform to GAPP consistently applied.
The August 3, 2023 earn out statement itself gives no hint of what it is based
on, although the covering memo to Dr. Fisher states: “I know you have the
monthly EBITDA figures already, which were contained in the monthly Statements
of Operations (SOO) previously provided.”
[39]          
I agree with NVA’s submission that Dr. Fisher
used most of her 20 days seeking to re-negotiate fundamental terms of the
agreements. She was, in particular, unhappy about the basis upon which the
management fee was calculated – the more the revenues increased, the more the
management fee increased. It was NVA’s consistent refusal to engage in those
attempted re-negotiations that finally prompted Dr. Fisher to deliver a notice
of objection on August 30, 2023. The notice of objection merely stated that Dr.
Fisher “contests the calculation of the EBITDA”.
[40]          
The SPA does not stipulate the precise content
required for a notice of objection under section 2.3. I agree with NVA,
however, that, read as a whole, the provisions of the SPA make it clear that a
notice of objection is supposed to identify a specific amount or amounts which form
the basis of Dr. Fisher’s dispute.
[41]          
There are 20 business days for the parties to
meet to try to resolve the objections. Failing resolution “only the amounts
in dispute [emphasis added]” may be submitted to the expert. The role of the
expert is to determine the “amount in dispute [emphasis added]”. Section
2.3(b) provides that the expert’s determination of the “amount in
dispute [emphasis added]” cannot be more favourable to Dr. Fisher than what is
“shown in the proposed changes [emphasis added]” to the earn out statement
delivered “under [her] notice of objection”.
[42]          
Dr. Fisher argues that she is not required in
her notice of objection to identify a specific amount or amounts in issue. She
contrasts the generality of the language used in section 2.3 with the language
of section 2.5, dealing with post-closing adjustments to the purchase price.
Section 2.5(c) provides that any notice of objection to the purchase price
adjustment calculation prepared by NVA “must contain a statement of the basis
of each of the objections and each amount in dispute.” Dr. Fisher argues that
because section 2.3 does not use the same language, similar particularity under
section 2.3 is not required.
[43]          
I do not find this argument persuasive. Among
other things, section 2.5 deals with a much broader range of inputs and
possible adjustments than section 2.3, which only deals with one thing. In any
event, the entire point of the process laid out in section 2.3 is to join issue
over any “amount” in dispute in the calculation of EBITDA. In order for there to
be a “dispute” over an “amount” calculated by NVA, there must be an alternative
“amount” being sought by Dr. Fisher. How can the parties seek to resolve the
dispute without knowing what the competing “amounts” are? How can there be a
submission for determination to KPMG without competing “amounts”? And how can
KPMG determine the dispute without the presentation of competing “amounts”? The
language of section 2.3(b) simply makes common sense – Dr. Fisher’s notice of objection
to NVA’s EBITDA calculation is assumed to “show” the “proposed changes” to
NVA’s calculation being sought by Dr. Fisher in her objection.
[44]          
Dr. Fisher’s contrary interpretation is also
inconsistent with the 45-day timeframe for submission to the expert set out in
section 2.3. Under section 2.3, the notice of objection is meant to join issue
on the disputed amount at the outset; it is not merely a first step to some
other, undisclosed and unspecified process of discovery/document production and
further particulars.
[45]          
However, this determination of the intent of the
drafters does not fully resolve the issue. This is because of the third
question, which deals with access to the information on which both the earn out
statement and any notice of objection, are, or would be, based. In this case, Dr.
Fisher takes the position that she was unable to provide her own specific
calculation of what she says is the correct EBITDA number without first
obtaining the additional information requested from NVA.
[46]          
The ASA is clear that following NVA’s purchase
of the Hospital’s veterinary practice, NVA’s management company became
responsible for the provision of all financial and accounting services. This
included financial planning, the preparation of budgets, the preparation of annual
and periodic financial statements and the provision of all accounting and
clerical services generally, such as accounts receivable, accounts payable and
bookkeeping services.
[47]          
 Mr. Harju is the VP, Operations for NVA. In his
affidavit, he deposes that Dr. Fisher had access to EBITDA results and other
monthly financial reporting each month, without restriction, through an
intranet dashboard site referred to as “7123 Snapshot Dashboard”. Through the
Dashboard, Dr. Fisher was able to access NVA’s monthly financial reports and to
view details including all monthly earnings and expense line items. The
Dashboard, Mr. Harju says, was designed to present large volumes of financial
information in a concise and digestible way, and to allow users to quickly
drill down on underlying source data.
[48]          
The with prejudice communications from NVA’s
counsel sent at the time made this point repeatedly. Dr. Fisher, they say, had
ready access to all the information upon which the earn out statement was
based.
[49]          
These assertions are contradicted by the evidence
of Dr. Fisher, who says, in her own words and through her counsel, that she (as
well as her accountant) was not able to make specific objection to an “amount”
until she had the additional information requested. This information included:
a calculation of the EBITDA reconciling to the final internal statements for
the first earn out period; the final monthly profit and loss statements for the
financial statements; adjusting entries showing adjustments to convert the
aggregate of the monthly cash basis numbers to the financial statements; and a
balance sheet as at the end of the first earn out period.
[50]          
There is a dispute about whether Dr. Fisher had,
needed or was entitled to the additional information sought before providing a
detailed notice of objection. It is not clear from the record precisely what
information was ultimately provided, although it is clear that at least some of
it, including the balance sheet, was. There was at least one meeting between
the parties and, finally, on November 15, 2023, a “final” response to a series
of ten follow up questions posed to NVA by Mr. Toner. It was after the receipt
of these answers that Mr. Toner provided, on behalf of Dr. Fisher, his opinion
on the year one earn out period EBITDA.
[51]          
Part of the problem with the record on this
critical issue is that none of the people who performed the actual calculations
(that is, the responsible individual at NVA[1]
and Mr. Toner for Dr. Fisher) gave evidence on the issue.
[52]          
Now, with the benefit of hindsight, and through
new litigation counsel, NVA takes the position that its production of
additional information was all without prejudice to its essential position that
Dr. Fisher missed her opportunity by failing to deliver a compliant notice of
objection on a timely basis. I find this position difficult to reconcile with a
number of statements of NVA’s counsel along the way. For example, on September
6, 2023, Mr. Kirvan, who is in house counsel at NVA stated:
[53]          
There is a good deal of ambiguity in this
statement because, on NVA’s strict reading of the timelines, by September 6,
2023, Dr. Fisher was already out of time, having failed to file a “proper”
notice of objection within 20 business days of receiving the earn out statement.
Thus, on NVA’s reading of the SPA, Dr. Fisher no longer had the ability to
provide any notice of objection “within the applicable time periods”, since
they had expired.
[54]          
To similar effect is the communication of NVA’s earlier
litigation counsel on November 15, 2023. In this email, NVA’s counsel indicated
that:
[55]          
It is of course true that concessions made in an
effort to buy peace are not admissions of fault or wrongdoing and do not
constitute a waiver of positions previously taken. Apart from anything else, it
would be a mistake to conclude that just because NVA agreed to provide
additional information, it was conceding that Dr. Fisher was “entitled” to this
information or that she “required” it before her accountant could finalize a
specific response to the August 3, 2023 earn out statement. I make reference to
these statements only in connection with the point that this record does not
permit me to make a dispositive finding on whether the additional information
was, or was not, already known to Dr. Fisher or whether the provision of this
information was, or was not, a necessary precondition to the formulation of Dr.
Fisher’s disputed “amount” in the calculation of EBITDA.
[56]          
These communications also reinforce a more
fundamental point. Leaving aside the particular facts of this case, it seems to
me as a general principle within the duty of good faith performance of contract
that, faced with a provision like section 2.3, it is a requirement, and
assumed, that the counterparties will have access to the information necessary
to make informed, reasoned and logical judgments about the accuracy of the earn
out statement and the basis for any notice of objection. Acceptance of this
fundamental principle is clearly implicit in all the parties’ dealings with one
another. The disagreement in this case is over whether Dr. Fisher already had
all the necessary information (or access to that information) that enabled her
to meet the 20 day deadline for providing a notice of objection.
[57]          
The evidence in the record of the communications
between the parties shows that it was Mr. Toner who requested the additional
information because he felt he needed it to conduct his own independent
analysis of year one EBITDA. NVA provided the information. At that point, Mr.
Toner prepared and delivered his calculation of year one EDITDA within several
days.
[58]          
I would add one further point. There is evidence
that certain expenses (such as prepaid expenses) were sometimes later reversed,
based subsequent adjustments to those costs. This apparently arose from timing
differences between anticipated and actual expenses. The record does not make
clear whether all such reverse entries were cleared for purposes of year one
earnings before NVA delivered the year one earnout statement. Dr. Fisher makes
the point that the swing on such expenses, if even some of them were later
reversed, could exceed the $11,301 shortfall on the “growth target” earnings
shown in NVA’s earn out statement.
[59]          
It must also be remembered that this was the
first earn out statement and objection process under the SPA. The parties had
not been through this before. Implementation and interpretation issues were
bound to arise. It is no one’s “fault” that the process did not unfold
seamlessly the first time around.
[60]          
Given the uncertainty arising from the evidentiary
record, the fact that Mr. Toner, at least, felt he needed the information to
perform his task, and the absence of any evidence of prejudice to NVA, I am not
prepared to dispose of Dr. Fisher’s rights on the technical basis that the 20
day deadline for the delivery of a “proper” or detailed notice of objection was
not met. I find that Dr. Fisher’s November 22, 2023 calculations, while they
ought to have been submitted with the notice of objection, in the unique
circumstances outlined above provide qualifying particulars of an “amount” in
dispute under her notice of objection.
[61]          
This brings me to NVA’s second objection: that
Dr. Fisher’s complaint is not about any accounting issues with the calculation
of year one EDITDA but is, in substance, a complaint about the terms of the contract
she agreed into when she sold her shares in the Hospital. NVA says this is
clear from Mr. Toner’s deletion of $139,995 in administration costs (resulting
from the contractual management fee applicable in year one) and its replacement
with $25,000 (purportedly based on market rate accounting and HR support costs
consistent with prior years). NVA’s point is that, while the 3% management fee
may produce an administrative cost that is higher than prior years, this is
because Dr. Fisher entered into an agreement to pay these costs in 2022, not because
NVA has caused a deviation from GAAP.
[62]          
There is something to be said for NVA’s
argument. Section 2.3 contains an expedited dispute resolution procedure for
disputes about whether the EBITDA targets were exceeded in any given year. As
noted earlier, section 2.3(b) was intended to set up a simple, short and
narrowly focused dispute resolution process for the determine of EBITDA. The
independent accountant is acting an as expert, not an arbitrator. The
accountant must determine the procedures applicable to the resolution of the
amounts in dispute with the primary purposes of minimizing expenses of the
parties and expediting the accurate resolution of the dispute. Much of the
intended benefit of section 2.3(b) has already been eroded by the course events
have taken in this case.
[63]          
In addition, as a matter of substance, I agree
with NVA that the independent accountant’s role is not to assess the validity
of the management fee under section 10.13 of the SPA and Article 6 of the ASA.
If Dr. Fisher wanted to challenge the applicability or enforceability of those
provisions, she had to commence an action in the Superior Court of Justice for
that relief. The Hospital’s obligation to pay a 3% management fee to NVA in
year one post-transaction is not a GAAP issue; it is a contractual issue
between these parties. The 3% management fee does not show up in prior years
because there was no contract with NVA requiring the Hospital to pay that fee
in prior years. NVA’s earn out statement calculations, in this respect at
least, are not a deviation from, but consistent with, GAAP.
[64]          
That said, this is only one of nine overall
adjustments proposed by Mr. Toner. And, apart from the change in circumstance
resulting from Dr. Fisher’s agreement for the Hospital to pay the management
fee commencing in 2022, there may be other strictly accounting/GAAP issues
relating to how or when this change should be accounted for – that will be for
the expert accountant to decide.
[65]          
NVA argues that it ought not to have to take the
risk of the accountant potentially doing something prejudicial under the
expedited dispute resolution process, in part because the expert’s determination
is “final and binding upon the parties and will not be subject to appeal”.
However, there is an important qualification to that standard; the strict
standard of review only applies “absent manifest error.” In my view, reversing
the management fee for the year one EDITDA calculation under section 2.3 merely
because it was not paid in prior years would reveal “manifest error” and I am
confident no expert accountant (in this case KPMG) would yield to such a
suggestion.
[66]          
For these reasons, I find that the substance of
the notice of objection, properly interpreted, falls within the parameters of
the section 2.3(b) dispute resolution process.
[67]          
The NVA’s earn out statement and Dr. Fisher’s
notice of objection, with the November 22 particulars, shall, therefore, be
submitted to KPMG within five business days. That submission shall include a
copy of these reasons. The agreements make no provision for additional information
or submissions from the parties unless, and only to the extent, requested by
KPMG.
[68]          
For all these reasons the application is
allowed. The dispute over year one EBITDA shall be submitted to KPMG within
five business days.
[69]          
Although Dr. Fisher was successful in her
application, this application would almost certainly not have been necessary if
she had more faithfully sought to follow the strictures of the SPA. She was
largely the author of her own misfortune and was, in effect, seeking an
indulgence from the court. For this reason, I make no order as to costs.