[1]              
Counsel for the Respondents
(Moving Parties) moves, pursuant to Rule 15.04, for an order removing them as
counsel of record for the Respondents in this proceeding. This Application
seeks relief in the form of an order recognizing and enforcing a judgment of
the High Court of Zambia in Canada.
[2]              
Public and redacted versions of
the Motion Record and Supplementary Motion Record have been filed.
[3]              
The Applicants take no position on
the motion but submit that they will suffer real procedural and substantive
prejudice unless a term of any order granted authorizes substituted service in
respect of all future court documents and correspondence in this proceeding. In
particular, they seek an order authorizing service of all documents by
electronic mail, on both representatives of the Respondents and their US
counsel.
[4]              
In my view, both the order
removing counsel and the proposed conditions are appropriate here. I am
satisfied that is appropriate that counsel for the Respondents be removed from
the record on the basis of the materials filed.
[5]              
I am also satisfied that
substituted service on the Respondents, at least unless and until new counsel
are appointed, is appropriate. This matter has already had a lengthy history. I
observe, among other things, that Zimbabwe is not a signatory to the Hague
Convention. Without the proposed conditions being made in terms of the service
on the Respondents, and therefore the ability of the Applicants to continue to
prosecute this proceeding, this matter will inevitably be materially delayed.
[6]              
Counsel for the Respondents has
contact information for representatives of the Respondents, including and also
through US Counsel, who are acting for the Respondents in US proceedings in
which recognition and enforcement of the same Zambia judgment that is the
subject of this Application is being sought in the United States.
[7]              
For all of these reasons,
substituted service on the Respondents is authorized pursuant to Rules 16.01(4)
and 16.04(1) as such is appropriate in the circumstances of this case: Attorney
General of Ontario v. $7,950.50 in Canadian Currency, 2017 ONSC 5855 at
para. 14; and Chambers v. Muslim, 2007 CanLII 82791 (ONSC) at paras. 4
& 13.
[8]              
Substituted service on United
States-based counsel retained is also, in my view, a reasonable and efficacious
manner of substitution, the fundamental objective of which is to bring to the
attention of the Respondents notice of all steps in this matter: Del Giudice
v. Thompson, 2021 ONSC 903 at para. 13.
[9]              
Service on US counsel in these
circumstances would in my view not be contrary to the State Immunity Act,
since this order relates to service of non-originating processes: State
Immunity Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. S-18, ss. 9(2) & 17.
[10]          
Finally, and as noted, it is
appropriate that substituted service be effective unless and until counsel come
on the record for the Respondents or those parties provide alternate email
addresses for service: Costco Wholesale Corporation v. Hall, Order of
Associate Justice Jolley dated March 18, 2024, CV-23-00705970-0000.
[11]          
Counsel for the parties have
agreed on a form of order which is acceptable to the Court. Order to go in the
form signed by me which is effective immediately and without the necessity of
issuing and entering.