[1]              
The Plaintiffs allege breach of contract arising
from a renovation to their home. They seek three forms of relief. First, they
seek an amendment to their Statement of Claim to allow them to seek
Certificates of Pending Litigation (“CPLs”) on 38 Clonmore, which is owned by Mr.
Lux’s spouse, and 37 Anndale, which is owned and occupied by Mr. Lux and his
spouse. Second, they seek CPLs on both those properties. Third, they seek a
Mareva injunction order that $250,000.00 in proceeds from the sale of 12
Clondale, which was owned by Mr. Lux and his spouse until it was sold in August
2024, be held in trust by the solicitor for the Defendants pending an agreement
of the parties or a further court order.
[2]              
The Plaintiffs advise that they have adjourned
the portion of their motion seeking relief in respect of the Defendants’
outstanding answers to undertakings and questions taken under advisement. They
further advise that the motion to amend the damages sought in the Statement of
Claim from $250,000.00 to $300,000.00 is proceeding on consent.
[3]              
For the reasons below, I do not grant the CPLs
or Mareva injunction, but do so without prejudice to the Plaintiffs’ right to
renew their motion seeking this relief in the future. I make additional orders
as detailed below.
[4]              
I have significant concerns about the conduct of
the Defendants. These concerns underlie my decision on this motion.
[5]              
The Plaintiffs initially moved for a CPL on 12
Clonmore. They understood that 12 Clonmore was going to be sold on August 29,
2024. It was not until a case conference held before Justice Centa on August
28, 2024 that the Defendants advised the Plaintiffs, for the first time, that the
property had in fact been sold on August 14, 2024.
[6]              
In my view, the Defendants acted improperly in
withholding this information from the Plaintiffs. The Defendants were well
aware that the Plaintiffs were seeking a CPL on 12 Clonmore. They were aware
that their own real estate agent had communicated an August 29, 2024 date of
sale to the Plaintiffs. The change in the date of sale was clearly material. It
should have been communicated to the Plaintiffs. Instead, the Defendants told
the Plaintiffs only after the sale was a fait accompli. They told the
Plaintiffs at the case conference itself, and not any sooner.
[7]              
I am also gravely concerned that the Defendants
have not complied with the Endorsement of Justice Centa from that case
conference. The Endorsement required that the Defendants provide the Plaintiffs
with an account reconciliation in respect of the renovation project. In
ordering the account reconciliation, Justice Centa required the following:
[8]              
The Defendants have not produced this account
reconciliation. They offer no explanation for their failure to do so.
[9]              
The Plaintiffs voice concern that construction
materials and labour that they paid for may have been diverted to home
renovation projects being carried out by Homes by Lux on other properties in
the neighbourhood. They say, and I agree, that the account reconciliation may
indicate whether there was any such “cross-pollination” of labour and material,
and, in turn, may support a constructive trust claim on those other properties.
To the extent that those properties include 38 Clonmore and 37 Anndale, as the
Plaintiffs claim, this may support a request for a CPL against those two
properties.
[10]          
The Defendants assert that a CPL on 38 Clonmore
and 37 Anndale should not be granted because the Plaintiffs have not shown that
they have an interest in either property. In making this argument, they seek to
benefit from their failure to comply with the Endorsement of Justice Centa. The
account reconciliation may evidence the Plaintiffs’ interest in one or both of
these properties. The Defendants were required by court order to have produced
the account reconciliation by now. They have not done so. They now seek to benefit
from their improper conduct.
[11]          
Likewise, the Defendants state that the
Plaintiffs have not demonstrated a strong prima facie case that they
have been overcharged. However, the information contained in the account
reconciliation may be relevant to this allegation.
[12]          
Based on the record before me, however, which
does not contain the account reconciliation, I am unable to grant the relief
sought by the Plaintiffs.
[13]          
To obtain CPLs on 38 Clonmore and 37 Anndale,
the Plaintiffs must demonstrate a triable issue that they have an interest in
those properties. Based on the record before me, the Plaintiffs have not
demonstrated any such interest. However, if the account reconciliation owed to
them by the Defendants indicates that they funded labour or materials used on
construction at 38 Clonmore or 37 Anndale, then it may help to establish an
interest in those properties.
[14]          
To obtain the Mareva injunction holding
$250,000.00 in trust, the Plaintiffs must establish a strong prima facie case
against the Defendants. The core of their action is that the renovation work
was over budget and of poor quality. They state that they overpaid for the work
done by Homes by Lux and are out-of-pocket for expenses incurred to remedy the
deficiencies in the work.
[15]          
Based on the record before me, the Plaintiffs
have not made out a strong prima facie case in this regard. The record
does not enable me to identify the estimates provided by Homes by Lux for the
labour and material costs associated with the project, or the actual costs of
that labour and material. It does not enable me to compare those estimates
against those actual costs. Nor does it let me assess whether or how the
payments made by the Plaintiffs to Homes by Lux were applied against those
expenses.
[16]          
Some of the evidence I require may be contained
in the account reconciliation that the Defendants have failed to disclose. Of
particular relevance, I suspect, is the information in the account
reconciliation about precisely how the Plaintiffs’ payments were applied. In my
view, whether there is a strong prima facie case of overcharging and
breach of contract is best assessed holistically, with the benefit of a
complete record that contains the account reconciliation.
[17]          
The Defendants’ failure to provide the account
reconciliation has prejudiced the Plaintiffs’ ability to demonstrate their
entitlement to the relief they seek. It has deprived the court of the ability
to consider these issues with the benefit of a complete evidentiary record. Perhaps
most importantly, it reflects a disregard for orders of this court.
[18]          
The Defendants remain in breach of Justice
Centa’s order to provide the account reconciliation and are to remedy this by
December 19, 2024.
[19]          
The Plaintiffs are at liberty to renew their
motion seeking CPLs and a Mareva injunction in the future with the benefit of a
more complete evidentiary record. If they require assistance in scheduling a
renewed motion, they may contact my judicial assistant.
[20]          
The Plaintiffs seek their costs of this motion
and the two case conferences. Justice Centa ruled that there was to be no costs
award for the September 13, 2024 case conference, and accordingly I make no
costs order in respect of that case conference. However, he left costs for the
August 28, 2024 case conference to the judge hearing this motion.
[21]          
In exercising my discretion to fix costs under
section 131 of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c
C.43, I may consider the factors enumerated in rule 57.01 of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990,
Reg 194. These include the result achieved, the amounts claimed and recovered,
the complexity and importance of the issues in the proceeding, the principle of
indemnity, the reasonable expectations of the unsuccessful party, and any other
matter relevant to costs.
[22]          
In Apotex Inc. v. Eli Lilly Canada Inc.,
2022 ONCA 587, the Court of Appeal for Ontario restated the general principles
to be applied when courts exercise their discretion to award costs. The Court
held that, when assessing costs, a court is to undertake a critical examination
of the relevant factors, as applied to the costs claimed, and then “step back
and consider the result produced and question whether, in all the
circumstances, the result is fair and reasonable”.
[23]          
I grant the Plaintiffs costs from the August 28,
2024 case conference, fixed in the amount of $800.00. I consider this fair and
reasonable. It is at that case conference that the Defendants disclosed, for
the first time, that 12 Clonmore had been sold already. It was improper for the
Defendants to have waited until the eleventh hour, and well after the sale took
place, to disclose this information. Their conduct forced the Plaintiffs to revisit,
at the last minute, the relief sought in this motion and the topics to be discussed
at the case conference.
[24]          
Moreover, while the Plaintiffs were unsuccessful
on this motion, they were hindered in their ability to establish their case by the
Defendants’ failure to produce the account reconciliation. Because of the
Defendants’ conduct, the Plaintiffs did not have the benefit of a complete
record. Nor did the court. The result was a waste of time, effort, and judicial
resources. In these circumstances, I consider it appropriate to impose a costs
award against the Defendants of $5,000.00 in respect of the motion.  I am
hopeful that such a costs award will convey to the Defendants the need to
comply with orders of this court. These orders are not advisory. They are
mandatory. They should be treated as such.
[25]          
I grant the Plaintiffs’ request to amend the
Statement of Claim to allow them to seek CPLs on 38 Clonmore and 37 Anndale. I
also grant their consent motion to amend the damages sought in the Statement of
Claim to $300,000.00. The Plaintiffs are to provide the amended pleading and
form of Order via email to my judicial assistant.
[26]          
I order the Defendants to provide the account
reconciliation ordered by Justice Centa by no later than December 19, 2024.
[27]          
I order the Defendants to pay the Plaintiffs $5,800.00
in costs from the August 28, 2024 case conference and this motion, within 30
days of the date of this Endorsement.
[28]          
I decline to grant CPLs on 38 Clonmore and 37
Anndale or an order requiring that $250,000.00 in proceeds from the sale of 12
Clondale be held in trust by the solicitor for the Defendants. However, I do so
without prejudice to the Plaintiffs’ right to renew the motion seeking such
relief in the future.