[1]         
 Dalton
Lisso (“Lisso”) was charged that he, on or about April 29, 2023, at Mono,
Ontario, did operate a conveyance while his
ability to do so was impaired by alcohol, contrary to section 320.14(1)(a) of
the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, as amended (“Criminal Code”),
and further that he had a blood alcohol concentration above the legal limit
(“over 80”), contrary to section 320.14(1)(b) of the Criminal Code.
[2]         
After a very short trial, during
which only the Crown called evidence from Lisso’s partner (“Mangolt”) and from
the arresting police officer (“Mask”), in relatively brief written reasons for
judgment dated March 11, 2024, Lisso was convicted of over 80 and acquitted on
the other count.
[3]         
Lisso appeals against his
conviction.  There is no sentence appeal.
[4]         
For
the following reasons, despite the able
submissions of Mr. Sewrattan on behalf of the appellant, I would dismiss the
appeal.
[5]         
In
the context of drinking and driving cases, this was an unusual trial.  The
Crown called no witness who saw Lisso inside or
driving the motor vehicle.  The case for the prosecution was entirely
circumstantial.
[6]         
The
trial judge, in the reasons for judgment, properly recognized that (i) it was
an entirely circumstantial case, and that (ii)
the Crown’s theory of the case rested on a conclusion that the only reasonable
inference to be drawn from the facts was that Lisso was the driver of the Ford
pickup truck, and that (iii) the defence theory of the case (Mr. Sewrattan was
not trial counsel) was that there were other rational exculpatory inferences
available such that the Crown failed to prove the identity of the driver beyond
a reasonable doubt and, therefore, Lisso should be acquitted on both counts,
one such reasonable inference being that someone else had driven the truck
before Mask arrived at Lisso’s residence and then spoke with and ultimately
arrested Lisso (paras. 1-3 of the reasons for judgment).
[7]         
After
summarizing the evidence of the only two witnesses who testified at trial,
Mangolt and Mask, the trial judge, at page 3 of the reasons for judgment,
concluded that “the Crown has failed to prove the identity of Mr. Lisso as the
erratic driver reported to police and I find Mr. Lisso not guilty of the impaired
driving charge” (para. 14 of the reasons for judgment).
[8]         
Immediately
thereafter, the trial judge concluded that “the only reasonable inference to be
taken on all of the evidence is that [Lisso]
was in care and control of the white truck found in front of his residence and
that he had arrived at the residence in the truck very shortly before Ms.
Mangolt found him in the foyer of their residence”. In the next paragraph of
the reasons for judgment, the trial judge outlined eight items of
circumstantial evidence that he relied upon to draw that inference, including,
as one of the eight, that “Ms. Mangolt heard a knock on her door and observed
Officer Mask shortly after Mr. Lisso appeared in her foyer”.  That timing issue
was referred to again in the next paragraph of the reasons for judgment, where
the trial judge stated that “Mr. Lisso had just operated the vehicle and had
been in care and control of the motor vehicle in close proximity to the
officer’s arrival”. Finally, the trial judge concluded that the inference being
urged by defence counsel, that is that someone else had driven the truck to the
place where Mask found it, in front of Lisso’s residence, was “at best,
speculation” (paras. 15-18 of the reasons for judgment).
[9]         
This
Court’s jurisdiction to hear Lisso’s appeal derives from section 812(1)(a) of
the Criminal Code, under Part XVII,
which provides that the Superior Court of Justice is the “appeal court” for
summary conviction offences.
[10]       The
within appeal is brought under section 813(a) of the Criminal Code,
which provides, in part, that the defendant may appeal (i) from conviction
and/or (ii) against a sentence.
[11]       As stated
above, there is no sentence appeal in this case.  Against the conviction, Lisso
asks for an acquittal as the remedy and, in the alternative, the ordering of a
new trial.
[12]       It is
alleged that the conviction on the over 80 count was an unreasonable verdict
because (i) the alternate suspect
argument could not be disproven and was not speculative, and (ii) the trial
judge misapprehended the evidence, and (iii) the trial judge received much
inadmissible and prejudicial hearsay evidence.
[13]       There are three
possible bases upon which the within appeal may be allowed: (i) the verdict is
unreasonable or cannot be supported by the evidence; (ii) there was a wrong
decision made on a question of law; and/or (iii) there has been a miscarriage
of justice. R. v. Hunt, 2024 ONSC 5454 (CanLII), at paragraph 11; R.
v. McLean, 2021 ONSC 34 (CanLII), at paragraph 11.
[14]       Although
not clearly expressed in the submissions of counsel for the appellant, this
Court is of the view that the appellant is relying upon all three bases.  The
first, unreasonable verdict, was expressly relied upon in the written and oral
submissions of counsel for the appellant. The second, error in law, relates to
the alleged inadmissible and prejudicial hearsay evidence. The third,
miscarriage of justice, emanates from the alleged misapprehension of the
evidence argument.
[15]       Though
questions of law are generally reviewed on a standard of correctness, the
jurisdiction of this Court to review a finding of
fact made by the trial judge is limited.  I am not entitled to retry the case
or to substitute my own view of the evidence for that of the trial judge.  This
is not a retrial. This Court has no basis upon which to interfere with the
trial judge’s findings unless they are unreasonable or unsupported by the
evidence.  R. v. Smits, 2012 ONCA 524 (CanLII), at paragraph 67, 294
O.A.C. 355, 102 W.C.B. (2d) 316 (Ont. C.A.), [2012] CarswellOnt 9437 (C.A.),
[2012] O.J. No. 3629 (C.A.), 36 M.V.R. (6th) 217 (Ont. C.A.); R.
v. Grosse (1996), 1996 CanLII 6643 (ON CA), 29 O.R. (3d) 785 (C.A.), at
pages 791-792; R. v. Hunt, supra, at paragraph 12; R. v. McLean,
supra, at paragraph 13; R. v. Doyle, [2006] O.J. No. 315 (C.A.), at
paragraph 6.
[16]       Put
another way, the factual findings of a trial judge are entitled to deference,
and an appellate court may only interfere where there has been a palpable and
overriding error.  Findings of fact and factual inferences must be clearly
wrong, unsupported by the evidence, or otherwise unreasonable before an
appellate court can interfere.  R. v. Hunt, supra, at paragraph 13; R.
v. Clark, 2005 SCC 2, at paragraph 9, [2005] 1 S.C.R. 6 (S.C.C.), 249
D.L.R. (4th) 257 (S.C.C.), 193 C.C.C. (3d) 289 (S.C.C.), 25 C.R. (6th)
197 (S.C.C.), [2005] S.C.J. No. 4 (S.C.C.); R. v. Sheahan, 2017 ONCA
159, at paragraph 12, 8 M.V.R. (7th) 1 (Ont. C.A.); R. v. R.E.M.,
[2008] 3 S.C.R. 3 (S.C.C.), at paragraph 54, 2008 SCC 51 (CanLII); Housen v.
Nikolaisen, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235 (S.C.C.), at paragraphs 10 and 23, 2002 SCC
33 (CanLII).
[17]       I
would not give effect to this argument.
[18]       In
terms of the legal principles regarding circumstantial evidence, although in a
different context I outlined those in my decision
in R. v. Beharie, 2024 ONSC 370, at paragraphs 28-31, those clauses
reproduced below:
[19]       The
appellant submits that “the trial judge was compelled to acquit the appellant
if he accepted that the appellant’s parents often used the appellant’s
truck and, in so doing, returned it to the appellant’s residence with the keys
inside” (emphasis in the original), and, in fact, “the trial judge did not even
have to believe that the appellant’s parents drove the truck” in that “[t]he
trial judge was required to acquit the appellant if, after accepting that the
appellant’s parents often used his truck, he was unsure of who drove it on the
day in question” (para. 30 of the appellant’s factum).
[20]       With
respect, there was no error committed by the trial judge.  He simply did not
find as a fact that Lisso’s parents often used the truck,
and thus, the basis for the appellant’s argument does not exist.
[21]       The
trial judge, in summarizing the evidence of Mangolt, stated that,
according to her, “sometimes Mr. Lisso’s parents
borrow his pickup to move things but that she had not seen them that evening at
all nor had she spoken to them about doing so” (para. 7 of the reasons for
judgment).
[22]       We
cannot take from that a finding of fact made by the trial judge that Lisso’s
parents would often, or even sometimes, use Lisso’s truck.
[23]       Even
if the trial judge accepted that evidence of Mangolt, that is that Lisso’s
parents sometimes used the truck,
which acceptance or not is uncertain, it did not rise to the level of a
plausible theory or a reasonable possibility that Lisso’s parents had operated
the truck at the time in question.  I agree with the trial judge’s
conclusion that the inference urged by defence counsel at trial was, at best,
speculation.
[24]       I
would not give effect to this argument.
[25]       In R.
v. Doodnaught, 2017 ONCA 781 (CanLII), 358 C.C.C. (3d) 250 (Ont. C.A.),
Watt J.A. summarized the legal principles
applicable to an appeal that is grounded on an alleged misapprehension of the
evidence by the trial judge.  Paragraphs 71-75 of that decision are set out
below.
[26]       More
recently, Zarnett J.A., for the Court of Appeal for Ontario, stated the
following at paragraphs 53-55 of the decision in R. v. Kwok, 2023 ONCA
458 (CanLII), 427 C.C.C. (3d) 462.
[27]       First,
in summarizing the evidence of Mask, at paragraph 10 of the reasons for
judgment, the trial judge stated that, when Mask arrived at Lisso’s residence,
the “keys were in the ignition” of the pickup truck.
[28]       In
fact, Mask testified that the keys were inside the truck but not necessarily in
the ignition because he believed that it was a key fob (page 50 of the trial
transcript).
[29]       That
error by the trial judge in summarizing the evidence of Mask had nothing to do
with the route taken by the trial judge in finding Lisso guilty on the over
80.  It was not important.  It was not the subject of any finding of fact made
by the trial judge.  It was not the subject of any of the eight items pointed
to by the trial judge as being circumstantial evidence pointing to guilt. It
could not possibly have affected the outcome of the case, as it had nothing to
do with the reasons as to why the trial judge found that Lisso had just
operated the vehicle.
[30]       Second,
at paragraph 16 of the reasons for judgment, the second last bullet point, the
trial judge stated the following as being one of the eight pieces of
circumstantial evidence pointing to guilt – “Ms. Mangolt heard a knock on her
door and observed Officer Mask shortly after Mr. Lisso appeared in her foyer”.
[31]       It is
the reference to “shortly after” that is controversial.
[32]       I
agree with counsel for the appellant that Mangolt was not entirely consistent
on the evidence that she gave at trial on this point.  At page 5 of the trial
transcript, in direct examination by the Crown, Mangolt testified that it was
“shortly after” Lisso arrived home and greeted and hugged her that there was
someone (who turned out to be Mask) at the door.  On the next page of the trial
transcript, however, page 6, still in direct examination by the Crown, the
Crown asked “[a]nd how long had [Lisso] been home before police knocked on the
door?”, to which question Mangolt replied “I, I honestly don’t know.  I don’t
remember”.  She repeated that same answer when the Crown tried again to have
her confirm that it was “shortly after” she hugged Lisso that the police
knocked on the door.
[33]       A
misapprehension of the evidence may involve a trial judge failing to appreciate
an inconsistency in a witness’ evidence or failing to appreciate the effect of
the inconsistency.  R. v. Wright, 2019 BCCA 327, at para. 22.
[34]       The
reasons of the trial judge must be read as a whole, however.  Elsewhere in the
reasons for judgment, apart from paragraph 16, the second last bullet point,
the trial judge summarized the evidence of Mangolt.  The trial judge expressly
acknowledged that part of Mangolt’s evidence at trial was that she “had a poor
recollection” of several things, including “how long after Mr. Lisso got home
that the police arrived” (para. 6 of the reasons for judgment).
[35]       The trial
judge did not commit the error mentioned in the Wright, supra decision. 
He did not fail to appreciate the inconsistency in Mangolt’s evidence on the
timing issue, saying first “shortly after” and then saying she could not
remember how long.
[36]       Instead,
having acknowledged the inconsistency, the trial judge, being entitled to
accept all, some, or none of Mangolt’s evidence, accepted her evidence that she
heard the knock on the door and saw Mask shortly after Lisso came home.  That
is how I read the reasons for judgment on this point.  That finding of fact is
entitled to deference by this Court.  It is not the subject of palpable and
overriding error on the part of the trial judge, and it is not the product of
any material misapprehension of the trial evidence.
[37]       Besides,
this point was merely one of eight pieces of circumstantial evidence relied
upon by the trial judge to convict Lisso on the over 80 count.  If there was a
misapprehension of the evidence by the trial judge, which I find to not exist,
then it cannot be said that “striking the misapprehension leaves the verdict on
unsteady ground”.  R. v. B.W., 2024 ONCA 412, at para. 56, citing R.
v. Lohrer, 2004 SCC 80, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 732, at para. 2; R. v. Sinclair,
2011 SCC 40, [2011] 3 S.C.R. 3, at para. 56; and R. v. Gill, 2019 ONCA
902, at para. 10.
[38]       I
would not give effect to this argument.
[39]       The
appellant
focusses on paragraphs 8-10 of the reasons for judgment, which are not findings
of fact made by the trial judge but rather part of the trial judge’s summary of
the trial evidence of Mask. Those paragraphs are set out below.
[40]       I
agree
with counsel for the appellant that much of that information was inadmissible
hearsay evidence, and I agree further that the last sentence of paragraph 10 of
the reasons for judgment refers to an alleged admission made by Lisso to Mask,
which admission was inadmissible in the absence of any consideration of its
voluntariness.
[41]       But
there is no significance to these references by the trial judge to inadmissible
evidence.  They were not material to
the trial judge’s findings of fact.  They were not material to the eight items of
circumstantial evidence relied upon by the trial judge as pointing to guilt.
They were not at all essential to the trial judge’s reasoning process.  It
cannot at all be said that the outcome of the case depended to any degree on
any of these references to inadmissible evidence.
[42]       Most
important,
there was no error in law committed by the trial judge in “receiving”
inadmissible evidence when it is clear that he did not rely on it, which I find
to be the case.
[43]       In
fact, we
know that the trial judge was well aware of the dangers of inadmissible hearsay
evidence.  At paragraph 14 of the reasons for judgment, the trial judge
expressly acknowledged that some of the information known to Mask was provided
to him by other sources including witnesses who did not testify at trial and,
thus, that information was not admissible to prove identity.  The trial judge
made that comment in the context of the impaired operation count, but it
applied equally to the over 80 count, and there is nothing in the reasons to
suggest that the trial judge did not know that.
[44]       I
would accordingly dismiss the conviction appeal.