[1]              
This is a motion to compel answers to refusals
made at the examination for discovery of the Defendants’ witness, Charles
Perry, conducted on March 26, 2018 and May 14, 2018. By order of Regional
Senior Justice Edwards dated October 10, 2024, the Plaintiff was granted leave
to bring this motion on an expedited basis. The order also schedules the
Defendants’ summary judgment motion to be heard during the week of December 2,
2024. I conclude that it was the intention of the order to have a ruling on
this motion such that any information ordered would be available for use on the
summary judgment motion.
[2]              
This action is 12 years old. Discoveries were
completed in May 2018. The Defendants served answers to undertakings arising
from the examination of its representative in August 2018. By order of
Associate Justice Brott dated October 26, 2022, the Plaintiff was to deliver
his motion record on or before November 30, 2022 if he intended to proceed with
an undertakings and refusals motion.
[3]              
While submissions were made with respect to
legal wranglings between the parties thereafter, there is no evidence in the
record that a motion to compel answers to refusals was ever served before the
one now before the court dated September 5, 2024.
[4]              
In this action, the Plaintiff sues the
Defendants to recover funds in accounts that were placed on hold or suspended
by the Defendants in 2012. He also seeks damages in the amount of $2,000,000
and punitive damages in the amount of $500,000. The causes of action that he asserts
are breach of contract, the tort of unlawful means (formerly intentional
interference with economic relations) and conversion. The Plaintiff pleads that
the conduct of the Defendants in refusing to permit the Plaintiff to withdraw
funds from his accounts is “wrongful” and contrary to all banking and trading
agreements held with the Defendants.
[5]              
The Plaintiff has not pled breach of privacy as
a cause of action, nor has he alleged that the Defendants breached any banking
regulations or requirements, or any statutes governing financial institutions
such as the Defendants.
[6]              
The Defendants’ defence is simple: the terms of
the account agreements for the commercial and trading accounts opened by the
Plaintiff entirely govern the parties’ rights and obligations with respect to
the accounts. Accordingly, when the Defendants exercised their contractual
right to freeze the accounts on June 11, 2012 after the Plaintiff was charged
with several criminal offences including fraud, possession of the proceeds of
crime and money laundering, it did so in accordance with the terms of the agreements
that governed the parties’ banking relationship.
[7]              
In January 2016, the Plaintiff was acquitted of
all criminal charges related to the allegations of fraud and money laundering.
[8]              
Before the court are multiple refusals and
questions taken under advisement for which a refusal has been maintained.
[9]              
In deciding this motion, I have applied the law
regarding the scope of permissible questions on discovery as summarized by
Perell J. in CIBC v.  Deloitte & Touche, 2013 ONSC  917 (CanLII), at
paras.  65-69 and 81, and have adopted the definitions of the terms set out by
him in those paragraphs.
[10]          
The court’s decision on each refusal, containing
a brief explanation where warranted, is found on Schedule A to these Reasons. I
have used the Schedule found on Case Center uploaded by Mr. Basmadjian, which indicates
the Defendants’ position on each refusal. That Schedule, initially prepared by
Mr. Bakos, also contains undertakings that may be ignored as irrelevant to this
ruling.
[11]          
It is noted that Mr. Bakos did not complete his
submissions in the time permitted for this motion (2 hours) and asked to rely
on the written information contained in Schedule A. The court has acceded to
that request. Where the ruling indicates that the format is not compliant with
r. 37.10 (10)(a)(i), this is because the chart indicates that the entirety of
the refusals (and undertakings) are relevant to the issue of liability, and refers
the court to only one paragraph in the Statement of Defence.
[12]          
Where the Defendants have provided an answer to
an undertaking or a question taken under advisement, no ruling is appropriate
given the scope of this motion.
[13]          
Of the 79 refusals being maintained at the time
that this motion was argued, the Defendants are required to answer 6 of them as
indicated in Schedule A.
[14]          
The Defendants have been almost entirely successful in resisting
this motion, with only 8% of the refusals being ordered to be answered. They
are entitled to their costs, with some reduction to account for the Plaintiff’s
minor success.
[15]          
The Defendants’ counsel has provided the court with a
cost outline setting out partial indemnity costs in the amount of $10,012.36
and substantial indemnity costs of $15,018.54. The Plaintiff’s counsel has
submitted a bill of costs seeking partial indemnity costs in the amount of
$10,102.20 and substantial indemnity costs of $15,153.30.
[16]          
There is no basis on the evidence to award costs on a substantial
indemnity scale for this motion. While it was brought forward very late in the
litigation, Regional Senior Justice Edwards permitted it to be scheduled and
heard.
[17]          
This court orders that the Plaintiff shall pay costs of this motion to
the Defendants fixed in the amount of $9,211.37 on a partial indemnity basis and
payable within 30 days.