[1]         
There
are three motions before me. The Plaintiffs bring a motion for summary judgment
seeking repayment of $1,355,000 that they provided to the Defendant, Mr.
Boparai, to invest in a private mortgage on their behalf, through his company,
BLM Canada Corporation (“BLM”). When the private mortgage loan became due, the
Plaintiffs re-invested their funds through Mr. Boparai in a condominium
development in North Bay. The Plaintiffs also provided Mr. Boparai with
$400,000 that they believed was being placed in a family trust. Mr. Boparai
submits that the $400,000 payment was a loan to him. None of the invested funds
have been returned to the Plaintiffs. The Plaintiffs seek punitive damages in
addition the return of the investment/loan amounts provided to Mr. Boparai.
[2]         
The
Plaintiffs also bring a motion to amend the Statement of Claim to seek a
declaration that the second of the two investment/loan agreements between the
parties is rescinded on the basis of fraudulent misrepresentation and/or
material misrepresentation, and/or is unenforceable due to a lack of
consideration.
[3]         
The
Defendants bring a motion to remove the Mareva injunction previously
ordered by Daley J. on November 8, 2023, or alternatively, to lift the Mareva
injunction to permit them to sell the land at issue in this litigation located
at 744 Lakeshore Road in North Bay, Ontario (“the Lakeshore Property”).
[4]         
The
issues to be determined are:
[5]         
At the
time that this motion was argued on June 19, 2024, there was a sale for the Lakeshore
Property pending on June 21, 2024. In my Endorsement released on June 20, 2024,
the parties were advised that there was insufficient time prior to the
scheduled June 21, 2024 closing date for me to review the approximately 6000
pages that had been filed with respect to the three motions, and deliver a
judgment.
[6]         
Having
now considered the full motion record, for the reasons set out below I make the
following rulings:
[7]         
Two
issues shall proceed to trial:  a determination of the quantum owed to the
Plaintiffs for principal and interest beyond the amount contained in this
judgment for the North Bay project, and a determination as to the quantum of
punitive damages owed to the Plaintiffs.
[8]         
The
Plaintiff, Balwant Bhandal, is a 75 year-old man who is married to the
Plaintiff, Goginder Bhandal, also in her mid-seventies. Their daughter is the
Plaintiff, Naveet Bhandal, who owns the Plaintiff Corporation, Paradigm Change
Consulting Inc. (“Paradigm”).
[9]         
The
Defendant, Navdeep Singh Boparai, is the principal Defendant in this
litigation. He is also the sole owner and officer and/or director of the Defendant corporations, Lu Vesta Group of
Companies Limited (“Lu Vesta”), Verance Development Corporation (“Verance”),
Rhombi North Bay Development I LP. (“Rhombi I”), Rhombi North Bay Development
II LP. (“Rhombi II), Lotus North Bay General Partner I Inc. (“Lotus I”), and
Lotus North Bay General Partner II Inc. (“Lotus II). The primary purpose of
these companies is to purchase real estate holdings for Mr. Boparai.
[10]      
Balwant
and Goginder Bhandal first met Mr. Boparai at the wedding of their son to Mr.
Boparai’s niece. Mr. Boparai was introduced to them by his wife as a successful
mortgage agent who ran his own business. This meeting led to the Plaintiffs
making a series of investments and/or loans to Mr. Boparai.  The Plaintiffs
trusted Mr. Boparai, and they treated each other like family. The Plaintiffs provide text messages that demonstrate a close relationship
between the parties. In particular, Navneet Bhandal looked upon Mr. Boparai as
a father figure, and he frequently referred to her as “daughter”.
[11]       The Defendants oppose the
Plaintiffs being permitted to amend the Statement of Claim to seek a
declaration of rescission because they have not had the opportunity to conduct
cross-examinations of the Plaintiffs regarding the proposed amendments.
[12]       The Defendants also take
the position that given the factual issues in dispute in this litigation, the
Plaintiffs’ claims cannot be determined by way of a summary judgment motion. In
the alternative, the Defendants argue that as the North Bay investment in which
the Plaintiffs placed their funds failed, the Plaintiffs are not entitled to a
return of investment funds, nor any interest from the investment.
[13]      
Mr.
Boparai recommended that the Plaintiffs provide funds to his brokerage, BLM, to
invest in a private mortgage that would provide a 10% guaranteed return on
their investment.  The mortgage investment had a one-year term with the option
to renew, at which point the Plaintiffs were to receive their principal and all
interest payments owed to them.
[14]      
In
February 2017, Navneet Bhandal provided one cheque to Mr. Boparai from herself
for $100,000, and a second cheque for $200,000 from her company, Paradigm, for
a total contribution of $300,000. BLM entered into a Bare Trust Agreement with Paradigm
with respect to these funds. The agreement confirmed that the funds were to be
used to purchase a property located in Wellandport, and in exchange, Navneet
was to receive 26.5% of the net sale proceeds when the property was sold.
[15]      
Between
April 2017 and January 2018, Ms. Bhandal and her parents provided additional
funds totaling $765,000, which included a $200,000 withdrawal from the home
equity line of credit on her parents’ home. Mr. Boparai provided Balwant
Bhandal with a Promissory Note dated April 5, 2017, from BLM confirming that it
had borrowed $60,000 from Mr. Bhandal, for a one-year interest-only loan at 12%
per annum.
[16]      
The
title to the Wellandport property was transferred to Mr. Boparai and his wife
on May 8, 2017.
[17]      
The parties
have different version of their discussions prior to registering a mortgage on
the Wellandport property in 2018. Mr. Boparai claims that the Plaintiffs did
not want their funds returned to them at the end of the one-year private
mortgage investment. However, he provides two different reasons in two separate
affidavits to explain why the Plaintiffs wished to keep their funds invested:
[18]      
In the
spring of 2018, the Plaintiffs’ private mortgage loan was converted to a private
loan to Mr. Boparai that was secured against the Wellandport property.  Mr.
Boparai deposes that he arranged for a cheque for $670,000 of the Plaintiffs’
initial investment to be returned to them on March 7, 2018, payable to lawyer
Monu Bansal, which was then provided to Mr. Boparai as a loan. Mr. Boparai
provides a copy of this cheque, and a copy of the mortgage agreement showing a
mortgage for $1,031,800 registered against the Wellandport property on April
16, 2018 in favour of the Plaintiffs, with an interest rate payable to them of
9% per annum.
[19]      
Mr.
Boparai’s affidavits do not explain why there was a shortfall of $33,200 from
the $1,065,000 originally received by him from the Plaintiffs.
[20]      
Mr.
Boparai produces no letters or other documentation confirming the Plaintiffs’
investment instructions from 2018.
[21]      
Ms.
Bhandal denies that Mr. Boparai ever offered to return their investment funds
to them, and states that the Plaintiffs have no knowledge of a cheque for
$670,000. She does, however, agree that the Plaintiffs agreed to have their
invested funds converted to a loan to Mr. Boparai secured against the
Wellandport property. She states that the Plaintiffs trusted Mr. Boparai, and did
not question any of the documents they were signing.
[22]      
Ms.
Bhandal also deposes that the Plaintiffs have never been given an explanation
from Mr. Boparai as to why the amount of the charge on the property was
$1,031,800, which is $33,200 less than the $1,065,000 given to Mr. Boparai.
[23]      
Although
not known to the Plaintiffs, on May 18, 2018, the Financial Services Commission
of Ontario (“FSCO”) suspended Mr. Boparai’s mortgage agent license and prohibited
him from dealing or trading in mortgages in Ontario. The order included several
concerning findings, including:
[24]      
Mr.
Boparai’s mortgage broker license was revoked on September 28, 2018, and the
license of BLM was revoked on December 21, 2018.
[25]      
Mr.
Boparai states in his affidavit that he informed the Plaintiffs about the
revocation of the licenses in December 2018.  He produces no written
confirmation that he informed the Plaintiffs about his revoked license.
[26]      
Ms.
Bhandal denies that Mr. Boparai ever informed her or her parents that his
license was suspended.
[27]      
Mr.
Boparai sent a letter to the Plaintiffs by email on January 23, 2019, notifying
them that he had sold BLM. The letter also describes the money provided to him
by the Plaintiffs as loans for his personal benefit totaling $765,000, that had
generated interest of $72,900, resulting in $837,900 to be paid to the
Plaintiffs including principal and interest.
[28]      
The
letter also informed the Plaintiffs that the Wellandport property had been
sold, with a closing date of April 1, 2019.  The letter confirms that the 26.5%
interest in the Wellandport property and other interest owed to the Plaintiffs
for the monies advanced, resulted in an anticipated payment owed to them of
$1,272,221.50.  The letter also offered further investment options with respect
to the Wellandport property, including the Plaintiffs entering into a
co-ownership agreement with Mr. Boparai.
[29]       Mr. Boparai also offered
the Plaintiffs the option to invest their funds in a condominium opportunity in
North Bay, which involved the Lakeshore Property, and another property located
at 55 Thompson Ave., both of which had been previously purchased by the
Defendant companies Rhombi I and Lotus I. In addition, the Defendant companies
Lotus II and Rhombi II purchased lands located at 351 Birchs Road in North Bay.
[30]       There is no mention in the
letter of Mr. Boparai’s mortgage license being revoked.
[31]      
The
Plaintiffs informed Mr. Boparai that they were not willing to invest in the
North Bay project until their investment from the Wellandport property was
returned to them. Mr. Boparai then initiated an unusual method of distributing
the investment fund returns to the Plaintiffs.
[32]      
Mr.
Boparai sent payments to the Plaintiffs in four separate installments, and then
asked them to immediately send him funds in almost the same amount to be
invested in the North Bay project. The Plaintiffs provide documentation of the
funds being received from Mr. Boparai and then immediately returned to Mr.
Boparai on the same day to be re-invested in the North Bay project. The net
result is that Ms. Bhandal and Mr. Boparai were essentially sending the same
funds back and forth to each other.
[33]      
Ms.
Bhandal states in her affidavit that a payout statement provided to her by Ms.
Bansal’s law firm on June 12, 2019 confirmed that $1,354,101 in cheques had
been returned to the Plaintiffs from their original investment, broken down as
follows:
[34]      
Ms.
Bhandal provides affidavit evidence that she received telephone calls from Mr.
Boparai directing her to send him an email requesting that the investment funds
that she was to be receiving were to be invested in a property located at 351
Birch Road in North Bay (later discovered to be 351 Birchs Road). Ms.
Bhandal sent the email to Mr. Boparai as requested. Ms. Bhandal deposes that
the Plaintiffs believed at this point that their investment funds were being
invested in the Birchs Road property, but that they have never received
confirmation from Mr. Boparai as to the identity of the specific property in
which their funds are invested.
[35]      
In
total, the Plaintiffs sent Mr. Boparai $1,355,000 to be invested in the North
Bay property, which was $899 more than the $1,354,101 in cheques returned to
them. Ms. Bhandal states that the Plaintiffs were told that the North Bay
investment would provide a 10% guaranteed rate of return, with a two-year
investment term.
[36]      
The
parcel abstract for the Wellandport property shows that that Plaintiffs’ charge
on the property was discharged on July 4, 2019.
[37]      
As all
of their investments were rolled into the North Bay investment, Balwant and
Goginder Bhandal did not pay down any of the $200,000 home equity line that
they had taken out for the original investment.
[38]      
Mr.
Boparai admitted at his cross-examination that he did not actually have the
funds to return to the Plaintiffs from the Wellandport investment at the time
that their funds were invested in the North Bay project.
[39]      
After
the exchange of funds took place, Navneet Bhandal met with Mr. Boparai to sign
documents related to the North Bay project. The parties do not agree as to when
this meeting took place, or the content of the agreement that was signed.
[40]      
Ms.
Bhandal deposes that she met with Mr. Boparai on August 6, 2019 at her
condominium. She also provides copies of WhatsApp messages between herself and
Mr. Boparai confirming that the meeting was to place at her condominium. Ms.
Bhandal states that the investment agreement that she signed that day confirmed
that her company, Paradigm, was the lender, and Mr. Boparai was the borrower,
and Paradigm was guaranteed a 10% rate of return on the investment over a
two-year term. Ms. Bhandal deposes that she requested from Mr. Boparai, but
never received, a copy of the agreement signed on August 6, 2019.
[41]      
Mr.
Boparai disagrees that the meeting with Ms. Bhandal took place on August 6,
2019. He states that the meeting took place on June 24, 2019. He produces four
different documents that he says were signed by the parties on that date: a
Loan Termination Agreement for the $1,231,000 previously given to him signed by
all three Plaintiffs, a Termination of Trust Agreement with respect to the Bare
Trust Agreement for $300,000 for the Wellandport property signed by Navneet
Bhandal, a Satisfaction Piece for the $60,000 loan from Balwant Bhandal
identified in the Promissory Note, and loan agreement between Mr. Boparai and
Paradigm allegedly signed by Ms. Bhandal. The June 24, 2019 loan agreement had
several significant differences from the agreement that Ms. Bhandal believed
that she had signed, none of which were favourable to the Plaintiffs.
[42]      
In July
2019 Mr. Boparai began paying Balwant and Goginder Bhandal monthly interest
payments to assist them with the interest payments that they were making on
their home equity line of credit. The agreement between the parties was that the
monthly payments were to be paid by Mr. Boparai until such time as they
received the return on their investment from the North Bay project. Ms. Bhandal
states in her affidavit that Mr. Boparai has paid $95,200 in interest payments
to date.
[43]      
Mr.
Boparai states that he has made payments to the Plaintiffs totalling $90,600,
which reduces the principal amount owing under the loan agreement to
$1,540,400. He disputes that these were interest only payments.
[44]       In addition to all the
other monies advanced to the Defendants, Balwant Bhandal provided an additional
$400,000 from his home equity line of credit for Mr. Boparai to invest in a
“family trust” in November 2019. At the time, Mr. Boparai’s niece was still
married to Balwant and Goginder’s son, and was living with the family in the
Bhandals’ home. The young couple had been experiencing marital difficulties.
Mr. Bhandal deposes that Mr. Boparai encouraged him to immediately create a
family trust to protect the family home from his niece if the marriage of the
young couple should fail. Mr. Bhandal states he quickly followed the advice,
and withdrew $400,000 from his home line of credit that same day and sent it to
Mr. Boparai to create a family trust.
[45]       Upon learning later that
day that her father had withdrawn $400,000 from his home equity line, Ms.
Bhandal immediately contacted Mr. Boparai, and asked for the funds to be
returned to Mr. Bhandal, which is evidenced in the WhatsApp messages provided
by Ms. Bhandal. Ms. Bhandal and Mr. Bhandal provide affidavit evidence that
they have contacted Mr. Boparai numerous times about the status of the family
trust agreement. To date, the Plaintiffs have received no paperwork from Mr.
Boparai confirming that a family trust agreement has been established, nor has
the $400,000 been returned to the Plaintiffs.
[46]       Mr. Boparai does not
dispute that Balwant Bhandal provided $400,000 to him, but he does not agree
that it was for a family trust. His evidence is that the $400,000 was a
personal loan offered to him by Balwant, which included interest owed at 10% per
annum. Mr. Boparai states that this was a verbal agreement. He denies
recommending the creation of a family trust to the Plaintiffs. He deposes that
he directed the Plaintiffs to consult with a lawyer to set up a trust. However,
this evidence is challenged by a WhatsApp text from him to Ms. Bhandal dated
July 2, 2019, in which he references a family trust, and specifically states
that he would not be involving lawyer Ms. Bansal in the family trust.
[47]       Mr. Boparai states in his
affidavit that after he met with the Plaintiffs in November 2019, the
Plaintiffs agreed that they did not require a repayment of the loan at that
time. There are no texts from Mr. Boparai or the Plaintiffs confirming that the
Plaintiffs no longer wished the $400,000 to be repaid.
[48]       The Plaintiffs deny that
Mr. Boparai offered them a repayment of the $400,000. Ms. Bhandal stated at her
cross-examination that she then began making Google inquiries about Mr.
Boparai, and discovered the FSCO orders in December 2019, including a further
order from FSCO dated December 12, 2019, in which FSCO issued a $50,000 penalty
against Mr. Boparai for trading in mortgages while his license was under
suspension.
[49]       Ms. Bhandal states that
the June 24, 2019 North Bay loan agreement was not produced to her until August
31, 2022, after Balwant Bhandal confronted Mr. Boparai about the suspension of
his license by FSCO. No explanation has been provided by Mr. Boparai to explain
the delay in producing copies of 2019 loan agreement to Ms. Bhandal.
[50]       Ms. Bhandal states that the
North Bay loan agreement given to her by Mr. Boparai in August 2022 contained
several key differences from the agreement she says she signed on August 6,
2019:
[51]       Mr. Boparai stopped making
the monthly interest payments to the Plaintiffs after he was confronted by
Balwant about the FSCO orders.
[52]       The Plaintiff, Paradigm,
initially filed a Statement of Claim against only Mr. Boparai in court file
CV-22-3718. No other Plaintiffs or Defendants were listed in the claim. Mr.
Boparai filed a Statement of Defence in response to the Statement of Claim. The
Plaintiffs subsequently issued and served the Statement of Claim in the present
action, without dismissing the previously filed Statement of Claim.
[53]      
The
Plaintiffs learned from Mr. Boparai that an Agreement of Purchase and Sale for
the North Bay investment property was entered into in May 2023, with a
scheduled closing date of December 1, 2023.
[54]      
The
Plaintiffs obtained an interim Mareva injunction on November 8, 2023
preventing the sale of the North Bay investment project. The Plaintiffs did not
disclose the existence of the first Statement of Claim to Daley J. at their ex
parte motion. Mr. Boparai argues that the failure of the Plaintiffs to
disclose the existence of the first Statement of Claim at the ex parte
hearing is an abuse of process.
[55]      
On
November 17, 2023, Doi J. issued an order extending the interim injunction until
the final determination of the action.
[56]      
Mr.
Boparai states in his affidavit that the intended purchaser of the Lakeshore
Property in North Bay agreed to extend the closing date from December 1, 2023
to June 21, 2024. The Defendants proposed that the sale be permitted to
proceed, with the net sale proceeds held in trust pending the resolution of
this action. The Defendants also advise that power of sale proceedings have
been commenced by the first and second mortgagees on the property. The
Defendants state that if the property is sold through a power of sale, it will
likely be sold at a lower price than could have been achieved on the open
market.
[57]      
The
Plaintiffs do not agree with this course of action, as they are concerned that
the value of the net proceeds of sale may be less than the value of the money
owed to them. The Plaintiffs seek an order by way of summary judgment for the
full value of funds owed to them, noting that even if the June 24, 2019 North
Bay investment agreement was accurate, the return of their investment was due in
any event on June 24, 2024, which is the end of the five-year term for the loan
set out in that agreement.
[58]      
Mr.
Boparai states in his affidavit that a downturn in the real estate market and
increasing mortgage interest rates did not produce the results he had hoped for
in the North Bay project, and that he is selling it so that he could repay the
money owed to the Plaintiffs. He provides a copy of an Agreement of Purchase
and Sale dated May 16, 2023, in which the Defendants Rhombi I and Lotus I agreed to sell the Lakeshore Property for a
purchase price of $10,000,000. He also provides a copy of a deposit cheque in
the amount of $50,000 from the purchaser, Bridgmount Development and
Construction Ltd. The original closing date was December 1, 2023. Mr. Boparai
also states in his affidavit that the purchaser requested an extension of the closing
date, which resulted in the June 21, 2024 closing date.
[59]      
At his
cross-examination Mr. Boparai admitted that he never publicly listed the
Lakeshore Property for sale.
[60]      
Mr. Boparai’s
admitted at his cross-examination that he did not have the funds to return the
Plaintiffs’ investment to them at the time that he was exchanging funds with
them prior to the North Bay investment. The Plaintiffs now seek to amend their
Statement of Claim to plead that the loan agreement that formed the basis of
the North Bay investment is rescinded on the basis of fraudulent
misrepresentation and/or material misrepresentation. They alternatively wish to
plead that the loan agreement is invalid or unenforceable due to lack of
consideration.
[61]      
The
Plaintiffs rely on the mandatory language in r. 26.02(c) of the Rules of
Civil Procedure, R.R.O. Reg. 194, that a motion to amend the Statement of
Claim can be made at any stage of the proceeding, and that the court shall
grant leave unless prejudice will result that cannot be compensated by way of
courts or an adjournment.
[62]      
The
Plaintiffs submit that the proposed amendment is not pleading a new cause of
action, as fraudulent misrepresentation was already pleaded in the Statement of
Claim. They therefore submit that the Defendants will not be prejudiced if the
amendment to the Statement of Claim is permitted to proceed.  Conversely, they
submit that they will be prejudiced if they are not permitted to seek relief
that stems from an admission made by the Defendant during his
cross-examination.
[63]      
The
Defendants oppose the Plaintiffs’ request to amend the Statement of Claim. They
submit that the Plaintiffs refused to answer questions at their
cross-examinations that relate to their allegations of fraudulent
misrepresentation.
[64]      
Ricchetti
J. previously made an order on April 23, 2024,
that did not allow motions to be brought regarding refusals, but that refusals
may be the subject of an adverse inference if the motions judge considers the
refusals to have been improper. The Defendants argue that the refusal of the
Plaintiffs to answer questions has caused them prejudice that cannot be
compensated for by way of a costs or an adjournment, as they have lost the opportunity
to challenge the credibility of the Plaintiffs at this motion.
[65]      
The
amendments to the Statement of Claim are permitted. I have reviewed the
portions of the transcript of the cross-examination of the Plaintiff, Navneet
Bhandal, referred to by counsel for the Defendants in his submissions. The
refusals were appropriate, as the questions involved legal opinions. I find
that Ms. Bhandal’s knowledge of legal issues is not relevant to the issues that
I must decide on the motions before me, and that additional cross-examination
regarding this issue would not produce relevant information to consider on a
summary judgment motion. The inclusion of a new declaratory ground of relief as
set out in the Amended Statement of Claim does not prejudice the Defendants, as
the allegation of fraudulent misrepresentation was already pleaded. Mr.
Boparai’s counsel was given a full opportunity to explore the Plaintiffs’ claim
of negligent misrepresentation at the cross-examination that was conducted.
[66]      
The
Defendants submit that the Mareva injunction should be removed from the
Defendants’ properties. Their primary argument in support of this position is
their assertion that the Plaintiffs did not provide Daley J. with full and
frank disclosure at the time that they argued the motion for the injunction
without notice to the Defendants.
[67]      
In
particular, the Defendants argue that the Plaintiffs should have disclosed the
existence of the first Statement of Claim that was filed against Mr. Boparai which
only sought repayment of an amount loaned to him. The Defendants argue that the
claims against Mr. Boparai in the first Statement of Claim differ from the
allegations in the second Statement of Claim, as the monies advanced to Mr.
Boparai are described as investments instead of loans, and that no explanation
has been provided for the Plaintiffs’ change in position.
[68]      
The
Defendants also argue that the Plaintiffs failed to put relevant evidence
before Daley J., which includes the following advanced by Mr. Boparai:
[69]      
The
Defendants take the further position that the Plaintiffs have failed to
demonstrate a strong prima facie case in their favour, as they submit
the Plaintiffs made contradictions during their cross-examinations.
[70]      
The
Defendants also submit that as the properties in issue in this litigation are
already under power of sale proceedings, there are no assets that can be
removed or dissipated by the Defendants.
[71]      
In the
alternative, the Defendants propose that the Mareva injunction be lifted
to permit the proposed sale to proceed, and that the proceeds of sale be held
in trust pending the outcome of the litigation.
[72]      
The Plaintiffs
oppose the Defendants’ request to set aside the injunction. They dispute the
Defendants’ assertion that they did not provide full and frank disclosure of
the issues in dispute when the original injunction motion was argued before
Daley J.  They state that they were either not aware of the evidentiary issues
that the Defendants are now putting before the court, or the factual issues the
Defendants are now putting before the court were not material facts that were
required to be disclosed.
[73]      
The
Plaintiffs further submit that in the context of the FSCO fraud findings and
the revocation of Mr. Boparai’s mortgage broker license, there are valid
questions surrounding the legitimacy of the proposed sale of the Lakeshore
Property for $10,000,000. They identify the following aspects to the sale that
they say demonstrate that the sale has the hallmarks of fraud:
[74]      
The
Plaintiffs also reject the Defendants’ assertion that the proceeds of sale will
not be dissipated if they are held in a trust account by the lawyer
representing the Defendants on the sale of the property. The Plaintiffs point
to the mortgage amounts owed under the two Notices of Sale dated August 2,
2023, and December 21, 2023, which have a combined total owing of $9,209,999.89.
In addition, there is a third mortgage registered on the property in favour of
Olympia Trust Company for $150,000. The total amount of mortgages owed that
must be paid out of the proceeds of sale is therefore $9,359,999.89.
[75]      
The
Plaintiffs also note that the listing broker’s commission is stated to be 2.5%
plus HST, which is $282,500. If the sale of the Property were to proceed, once
the mortgages and broker’s commission is paid, there would only be $357,500.11
to pay towards the more than $1,700,000 the Plaintiffs claim that they are owed.
[76]      
The
Plaintiffs also submit that the Defendants have not produced adequate
documentation to establish that the mortgages that they claim are on the property
are legitimate, including the interest rates, penalties, and fees that the
Notices of Sale state are owing to the mortgagees. The Plaintiffs are concerned
that the registered encumbrances on the land are not legitimate, and that they
will be paid off before the net sale proceeds will ever make their way to a
trust account for the benefit of the Plaintiffs.
[77]      
The
Plaintiffs also submit that there has not been satisfactory evidence put
forward that $10,000,000 is a reasonable price for the Lakeshore Property as
the Defendants do not provide an independent valuation for the property.
[78]      
The
Plaintiffs submit that the Defendants have not produced any evidence at this
motion to displace any of the findings and conclusions of Daley J. regarding
his reasons for granting a Mareva order.
[79]      
Navneet
Bhandal provides an undertaking in her affidavit that she will abide by any
order of the court concerning damages if it is ultimately determined that the
granting of the injunction has caused damages to the Defendants.
[80]       A party seeking an interlocutory Mareva
injunction that restrains a Defendant from dissipating assets, or from
conveying away his or her own property pending the court's determination in the
proceedings, must satisfy the following requirements:
[81]       A strong prima
facie case is one that will probably prevail at trial, or is likely to
succeed at trial. Upon a
preliminary review of the case, the judge must be satisfied that there is a
strong likelihood on the law and the evidence presented that, at trial, the
applicant will be ultimately successful in proving the allegations set out in
the originating
notice: Wang, at para. 127.
[82]       The risk of removal or dissipation of
assets can be established by inference.  The Defendant's prior fraudulent
activities and improper conduct including concealment, deception, evasion, and
clandestine behavior may support an inference that the Defendant will remove or
dissipate property: Wang, at para. 128.
[83]       Where the evidence discloses a strong
prima facie case that a Defendant has perpetrated a premeditated and
substantial fraudulent scheme against innocent parties, "the law's reluctance
to allow prejudgment execution yields to the more important goal of ensuring
that the civil justice system provides a just and enforceable remedy against
such serious misconduct": Wang at para. 129.
[84]       On a motion
for an interlocutory injunction made without notice, there must be full and
fair disclosure of all material facts, including the reasons for moving without
notice. The moving party must state his or her case fairly, and must make a
balanced presentation of the facts and law including any points of fact or law
that favour the opposing party: Wang, at para. 130.
[85]       Rule 39.01(6) states that
a failure to provide full and frank disclosure of all material facts is in
itself a sufficient ground for setting aside any order obtained on the motion
or application.
[86]       The reason for requiring
such disclosure is based on the recognition that the judicial officer hearing a
motion has only the moving party or their counsel before them. There is
therefore a heavy burden on a moving party to put all relevant facts before the
judge to allow the judge to obtain a reasonably balanced view of the facts that
might reasonably affect the outcome of the motion. This burden includes
providing the judge with relevant evidence that may not be supportive of the
position of the moving party: R.A. Fox v. R.S. Fox, 2014 ONSC 1135 (Div.
Ct.), at paras. 11-13.
[87]       The Plaintiffs ought to
have disclosed the existence of the first Statement of Claim to Daley J., as it
is a relevant factor the judge hearing the motion should have known. However, a
Statement of Claim is a pleading. It contains allegations.  It is not evidence,
and cannot prove facts. Parties may choose to withdraw or modify their
allegations as the evidence in a case develops. There was nothing improper in
the Plaintiffs’ decision to issue a new Statement of Claim, and only deal with
the allegations in the second Statement of Claim at their ex parte
motion.  The failure of the Plaintiffs to disclose the existence of the first
Statement of Claim is therefore not a sufficient reason to set aside the
injunction granted by Daley J.
[88]       I disagree with the
Defendants that the Plaintiffs should have advised Daley J. about the $670,000
that Mr. Boparai claims he was authorized by Mr. Bhandal to send to lawyer Monu
Bansal. There is no evidence before me to suggest that the Plaintiffs had received
a copy of the $670,000 cheque at the time that the first injunction motion was
argued, or that they were aware that Mr. Boparai was alleging they had
instructed Ms. Bansal to send him that cheque.
[89]       Similarly, there is no
evidence before me that the Plaintiffs were aware that Mr. Boparai was claiming
that the $400,000 payment to him was a loan rather than an investment in a
family trust at the time that the injunction was argued. Mr. Boparai confirmed
in his affidavit that there was no written agreement between him and Mr.
Bhandal regarding the $400,000 payment by Mr. Bhandal. The Plaintiffs cannot inform
a judge about evidence of which they are unaware.
[90]       The fact that the
Plaintiffs did not issue their Statement of Claim for three years after learning
about the FSCO orders is relevant to the credibility issue to be determined on
the summary judgment motion. However, I do not find that this piece of evidence
is a material fact that was critical to be presented to Daley J. on the
injunction motion in light of the overwhelming evidence that none of the
Plaintiffs’ investments had been returned to them by Mr. Boparai.
[91]       Even after Ms. Bhandal was
aware of the FSCO orders, she provides texts from Mr. Boparai that demonstrate
that he continued to assure her that the North Bay condominium development was
proceeding. Her knowledge of the FSCO orders is therefore not necessarily
inconsistent with the Plaintiffs’ belief that the North Bay investment was
continuing, and their decision to hold off on commencing litigation against Mr.
Boparai.
[92]       The Defendants have therefore
not established that the Plaintiffs failed to make full and frank disclosure of
the issues and material facts involved in this litigation at the time that
Daley J. issued the injunction.
[93]      
Even
if it was found that the Plaintiffs had failed to make full and frank
disclosure of the issues before Daley J., I find on the record before me that
the Plaintiffs have established a strong prima facie case against the
Defendants.
[94]       I note that in his
decision in which he granted the Mareva injunction on an interim basis,
Daley J. stated at para. 31:
[95]       He also stated at para.
32:
[96]       And at para. 35, Daley J. stated:
[97]       The additional evidence
presented to me that was not before Daley J. does not materially assist the
Defendants in their efforts to set aside the injunction. Mr. Boparai produces
no documentation confirming the instructions that he claims came from Mr.
Bhandal to prepare a cheque for $670,000 made out to Ms. Bansal in trust. As
the Plaintiffs’ mortgage broker, it was his responsibility to confirm in
writing the instructions he received from his clients. His failure to do so
casts a great deal of doubt as to whether these instructions were ever given to
him. I prefer the evidence of the Plaintiffs that these instructions were not
given to Mr. Boparai.
[98]       It is also noteworthy that
Mr. Boparai does not dispute that he did not provide a copy of the North Bay loan
document to the Plaintiffs until more than three years after he claimed they
were signed, and he offers no explanation for the delay in providing copies of
the documents to the Plaintiffs.
[99]       The Defendants have not
produced any other new evidence to address any of the concerns raised by Daley
J. The evidence before me establishes that the Plaintiffs have collectively
provided over $1,700,000 to Mr. Boparai, and have had none of their investment
returned to them. Mr. Boparai does not dispute that the Plaintiffs have not
received the funds he owes to them, and admits that he owes them $1,272,222 for
the North Bay investment, and $400,000 for the monies advanced to him in
November 2019.
[100]    The Defendants submit that
the Plaintiffs have not established a strong prima facie case against
them as they claim Ms. Bhandal has made contradictory statements. They point to
text messages between the parties in 2019 and 2020 which indicate the parties
were still communicating at that time about the investments, and suggest these
texts contradict a rescinding of the North Bay investment project. I do not
agree. The content of the text messages is consistent with the Plaintiffs’
evidence that they were anxious about their investments, and were seeking
reassurance from Mr. Boparai that the investments were sound.
[101]    The Defendants also referred
me to various passages in the cross-examination of Navneet Bhandal, and
suggested that the transcript discloses contradictions in her evidence. They
present their argument in a chart, which also contains information not related
to potential contradictions. It is therefore somewhat challenging to locate and
identify the suggested contradictions.  However, having reviewed Ms. Bhandal’s
evidence given at her cross-examination, I am unable to identify any key
contradictions in her evidence that affect the issues that I must determine.
[102]    In finding that the
Plaintiffs have established a strong prima facie case against the
Defendants, I rely upon the following:
[103]   A pattern of prior
fraudulent conduct can support a reasonable inference that there is a real risk
that the conduct will continue: Sibley & Associates LP v. Ross, 2011
ONSC 2951, 106 O.R. (3d) 494, at para. 64.
[104]   I find that if the
injunction is lifted, there is a real risk that Mr. Boparai’s fraudulent
conduct will continue, and that the proposed sale of the Lakeshore Property may
not benefit the Plaintiffs. Should the Plaintiffs’ interests not be properly
protected when the subject lands are sold, they will suffer irreparable harm.
[105]   The balance of convenience
favours the Plaintiffs, as they risk losing their life savings if the
injunction is lifted and the sale of the Property proceeds.  In addition, the
Defendants provide no documentation or submissions as to any negative
consequence if the Mareva injunction remains in place, other than the
potential for the property to be sold at a reduced value through a power of
sale.  The balance of convenience therefore favours the Plaintiffs to keep the Mareva
injunction in place.
[106]   As noted by Daley J. at
para. 35 of his decision, the record prima facie indicates that the
Defendants have assets within the jurisdiction, particularly given Mr.
Boparai's role in the Defendant corporations.
[107]   Mr. Boparai’s past
fraudulent conduct as evidenced by the loss of his mortgage broker license
supports drawing a reasonable inference that the Plaintiffs will be at risk of
losing any reasonable opportunity to recover their investment if the injunction
is lifted. They would also not be protected from further fraudulent conduct by
Mr. Boparai and/or the Defendant corporations if the injunction is lifted.
[108]   The Plaintiffs have
established that the facts in their case meet the test in RJR-McDonald and Wang. It is appropriate that the
Mareva injunction remain in place with respect to the Lakeshore
Property.
[109]   The Defendants argue that both
parties will be harmed if the sale does not proceed. The Plaintiffs submit that
I must be convinced that the sale of the Lakeshore Property is legitimate, and
in the ordinary course of business before I should lift the injunction to
permit the sale to proceed. The Plaintiffs submit that the Defendants have not met
their onus to establish that the sale is a provident one, and in the best
interest of the Plaintiffs. I agree.
[110]   The Defendants do not
provide sufficient evidence to establish the reasonableness of the proposed
$10,000,000 purchase price. The Plaintiffs have successfully established that
the proposed sale is suspicious, and may result in the Plaintiffs receiving
substantially less than the amounts they are owed.
[111]   If the sale is legitimate then it may
well be true that the Plaintiffs will financially benefit from the sale
proceeding, as opposed to the property being sold through a power of sale. However,
given Mr. Boparai’s history of deceit and dishonesty as evidenced in the FSCO
rulings, it is reasonable for the Plaintiffs to have concerns regarding the
legitimacy of the proposed sale, particularly given the lack of evidence from
the Defendants to demonstrate the reasonableness of the sale. It is appropriate
that the injunction remain in place until such time as it can be established
that the sale is a legitimate sale, conducted in the ordinary course of
business.
[112]   The Plaintiffs move for an
order granting them summary judgment in accordance with Rule 20.01(1) as
against the Defendants. They argue that there are no factual issues in dispute
that require a trial. The Plaintiffs present three possible scenarios to be
considered in this case, all of which they submit establish that there is no
genuine issue requiring a trial regarding the amounts owed to them by Mr.
Boparai.
[113]   The Plaintiffs first submit that any agreement signed by the
Plaintiffs with respect to the North Bay project is invalid due to Mr.
Boparai’s fraudulent misrepresentation. More specifically, they submit that Mr.
Boparai has admitted that he did not have the funds from the Plaintiffs’ first
investment at the time that the Plaintiffs invested in the North Bay project,
and that they relied on his misrepresentation when they agreed to roll their
investment funds from the Wellandport investment into the North Bay project. If
the North Bay agreement is deemed to be rescinded the Plaintiffs claim that
their investment funds of $1,355,000 should be returned to them, plus interest
at 10% per annum as per the terms of the original investment.
[114]   The Plaintiffs emphasize
that given Mr. Boparai’s admissions, there is sufficient evidence in the
substantive motion record before me to allow me to make the necessary findings
of fact without the need for additional cross-examinations to determine that
recission is an appropriate remedy under the circumstances.
[115]   Alternatively, the
Plaintiffs argue that even if the agreement is not rescinded, the Plaintiffs
submit that their evidence should be preferred over the Defendants’ evidence
regarding the terms of the North Bay loan agreement.
[116]   In the further
alternative, the Plaintiffs submit that Mr. Boparai has already admitted that he
owes the Plaintiffs $1,272,222, and also $400,000 plus interest.  The
Plaintiffs argue that the discrete issue of whether the $1,272,222 includes
interest, or whether Mr. Boparai owes additional money to the Plaintiffs for
the North Bay loan beyond this amount is a matter than can proceed to trial,
but should not stop the Plaintiffs from being granted partial summary judgment.
[117]   The Plaintiffs also argue
that the Defendants have offered no evidence to establish that the North Bay
investment failed, and accordingly, they cannot now take the position that the
Plaintiffs are not entitled to collect on a failed investment.
[118]   The Plaintiffs further argue
that the main issues in dispute including the terms of the North Bay loan
agreement, and whether the funds advanced to Mr. Boparai by the Plaintiffs were
a loan or an investment, do not change the fact that the funds were advanced to
Mr. Boparai, and never repaid. They argue the label that attaches to the
contract does not need to be determined to make a finding that Mr. Boparai owes
the Plaintiffs a significant sum of money.
[119]   The Plaintiffs also submit
that they are entitled to punitive damages, and that the Defendants provide no
argument as to why they should not receive punitive damages.
[120]   The Defendants argue that
rescission of the loan agreement should not be permitted as they have not been
given an opportunity to cross-examine the Plaintiffs with respect to the newly added
pleading.
[121]   The Defendants submit that
there is a genuine issue requiring a trial. They take the position that there
are credibility issues between the parties which cannot be determined on a
summary judgment motion. The Defendants also submit that a finding has to be
made if the payments advanced by the Plaintiffs to Mr. Boparai were investment
or loans.
[122]   Rule 20.04(2)(a) of the Rules
of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, provides that, “[t]he court
shall grant summary judgment if … the court is satisfied that there is no
genuine issue requiring a trial with respect to a claim or defence”.
[123]   Rule 20.04 (2.1) sets out
the powers of the judge hearing the summary judgment motion:
[124]   Summary judgment is available to the parties when the judge
is able to reach a fair and just determination on the merits on a motion for
summary judgment. This will be the case when the process (1) allows the judge
to make the necessary findings of fact, (2) allows the judge to apply the law
to the facts, and (3) is a proportionate, more expeditious and less expensive
means to achieve a just result: Hryniak v. Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7, [2014] 1
S.C.R. 87, at para. 50.
[125]   The moving party seeking
summary judgment has the burden of proof to establish that there is no genuine
issue for trial: Botnick et al. v. The Samuel and Bessie Orfus Family
Foundation et al., 2011 ONSC 3043, 71 E.T.R. (3d) 210, at para. 10.
[126]   On a motion for summary judgment, “[a] responding party may
not rest on mere allegations or denials of the party’s pleadings, but must set
out, in affidavit material or other evidence, specific facts showing that there
is a genuine issue requiring a trial”: Sweda Farms Ltd. v. L.H. Gray &
Son Limited et al., 2013 ONSC 4195, at para. 27.
[127]   Each party to a motion for
summary judgment has an obligation to "... 'put its best foot forward'
with respect to the existence or non-existence of material issues to be
tried": Ramdial v. Davis (Litigation guardian of), 2015 ONCA 726,
341 O.A.C. 78, at para. 27, citing Papaschase Indian Band No. 136 v. Canada
(A.G.), 2008 SCC 14, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 372, at para. 11.
[128]   Partial summary judgment is appropriate where issues “may
be readily bifurcated from those in the main action and that may be dealt with
expeditiously and in a cost effective manner”: Butera v. Chown, Cairns LLP,
2017 ONCA 783, 137 O.R. (3d) 561, at para. 34.
[129]   In Malik v. Attia, 2020 ONCA 787, 29 R.P.R. (6th)
215, at para. 62, the Ontario Court of Appeal discussed the criteria that must
be addressed by the moving party in a partial summary judgment motion. The
parties must:
[130]   Rule
51.06 of the Rules of Civil Procedure states:
[131]   The
Court of Appeal dealt with the interaction of Rules 20 and 51.06 in Ford
Motor Co. of Canada v. Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement Board (1997), 1997 CanLII 1302 (ON CA), 36 O.R.
(3d) 384 (C.A.), where Osborne J.A. stated, at para. 50:
[132]   In the case of P.P. v.
D.D., 2017 ONCA 180, 137 O.R. (3d) 138, the
Ontario Court of Appeal set out a four part test for fraudulent
misrepresentation, at para. 41:
[133]    A contract that results from a
fraudulent misrepresentation may be avoided or rescinded by the victim of the fraud: 10443204 Canada Inc. v. 2701835 Ontario Inc., 2022 ONCA 745, 164 O.R. (3d) 334, at para. 20.
[134]    In a case of fraudulent
misrepresentation, the discretionary remedy of recission of the contract is
available "where a person would not have entered into a transaction but
for the fraud, that person should be put back into the position he or she was
in prior to the fraudulent inducement”: Panapers Inc.v. 1260539  Ontario
Ltd., 2004 CanLII 48875, (Ont. S.C.), at para. 53, (rev’d on other grounds,
2007 ONCA 3, 219 O.A.C.338), citing Doyle v. Olby (Ironmongers) Ltd., [1962]
2 Q.B. 158 (Eng. C.A.).
[135]    Rescission is an equitable
remedy for which the courts exercise a high degree of flexibility in cases of
fraud: Urban Mechanical Contracting Ltd. v. Zurich Insurance Company Ltd.,
2022 ONCA 589, 163 O.R. (3d) 652, at para. 6.
[136]   I find that there is sufficient information before me to
make findings of fact and apply the law to the facts to reach a fair and just
determination on the merits of this motion for summary judgment. This summary
process is a proportionate, more expeditious, and less expensive means for the
parties to address the issues in dispute, which would otherwise likely be a
lengthy trial.
[137]   The evidence demonstrates
that Mr. Boparai engaged in fraudulent misrepresentation in his dealings with
the Plaintiffs. He admitted at his cross-examination that he did not have the
Plaintiffs’ original investment funds owed to them at the time that the
Plaintiffs invested in the North Bay project.  The exchange of funds that Mr.
Boparai orchestrated made it appear that the Plaintiffs were receiving and then
re-investing their funds in the North Bay project, when in fact they never
actually received the funds.
[138]   I find that Mr. Boparai
knew that the representation to the Plaintiffs that he was returning $1,354,101
to them in June 2019 was false. He knew he did not have their funds available
to return to them at that time. The Plaintiffs relied upon Mr. Boparai’s
assurances that he was returning their investment funds to them when they made
the decision to immediately re-invest the same funds with Mr. Boparai in the
North Bay project.
[139]   The Plaintiffs have suffered
damages as a result of the false assurances and promises that Mr. Boparai made
to defraud them. Balwant and Goginder Bhandal have not had their life savings
returns to them, nor has Ms. Bhandal received any of her invested funds
returned to her.
[140]   Mr. Boparai engaged in fraudulent
misrepresentation in his dealings with the Plaintiffs. The Plaintiffs suffered
damages as a result of his actions. There is a high degree of flexibility for
the equitable remedy of recission in cases of fraud. For all these reasons, the
North Bay contract is rescinded.
[141]   Although there are
numerous disputed pieces of evidence in the record before me, Mr. Boparai
admits that he owes the Plaintiff $1,272,222. Given this admission, it is
appropriate that the Plaintiffs receive judgment for this amount.  However, I
am unable to determine the exact quantum of funds owed by Mr. Boparai to the
Plaintiffs regarding the Wellandport investment over and above the amounts
admitted by Mr. Boparai to be owed.  I find that a trial is required to
determine this amount, and in addition, a trial is required to determine the
interest rate that will apply to any amounts owed to the Plaintiffs from the
Wellandport investment.
[142]   Mr. Boparai also admits
that he owes $400,000 to the Plaintiffs.  Although Mr. Boparai describes the
money advanced to him as a loan attracting interest at 10%, the Plaintiffs do
not agree that the $400,000 was a loan to Mr. Boparai. To their credit, they submit
that it is appropriate to limit the interest owed on the $400,000 amount to 2%
as set out in the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, reflecting
the interest rate in the third quarter of 2019 when the money was advanced.
[143]   Given the admission of Mr.
Boparai, I do not find that there is a genuine issue requiring a trial
regarding the $400,000 payment made by the Plaintiffs. It is appropriate that
the Plaintiffs receive interest on the loan at 2%, retroactive to November 18,
2019.
[144]   Ms. Bhandal states in her
affidavit that Mr. Boparai has paid $95,200 in interest payments. Mr. Boparai
states in his affidavit that he has only paid $90,600.  I accept the evidence
of Ms. Bhandal that Mr. Boparai told Mr. Bhandal that he was using the $400,000
payment to set up a family trust agreement. I also accept Ms. Bhandal’s evidence
that Mr. Boparai has paid $95,200 in interest payments on the $400,000. Using
2% as the interest rate, Mr. Boparai owes the Plaintiffs interest of $40,657.53
as of December 16, 2024. The total amount owed to the Plaintiffs to reimburse
them for the family trust advance to Mr. Boparai is therefore $400,000 + $40,657.53
= $440,657.53. As Mr. Boparai has already paid $95,200 interest to Mr. Bhandal,
the net amount to be returned to the Plaintiffs by Mr. Boparai regarding the
family trust agreement is $440,657.53 - $95,200 = $345,457.53.
[145]   Partial summary judgment
is appropriate in this circumstance as it reduces the quantum of the issues in
dispute between the parties, and reduces the evidence that will need to be
presented at the trial of this action to establish what additional funds, if
any, are owed by the Defendants to the Plaintiffs. This partial summary
judgment award will not result in inconsistent findings at the trial, as Mr.
Boparai has already admitted that he owes to the Plaintiffs the amounts awarded
in this judgment.
[146]   The Plaintiffs are therefore
awarded partial summary judgment against the Defendants for the amount of $1,272,222
plus $345,457.53 = $1,617,679.53 as of December 16, 2024. There is a genuine
issue requiring a trial with respect to the quantum that the Defendants owe the
Plaintiffs over and above $1,272,222 with respect to the Wellandport investment,
and the quantum of interest owed by Mr. Boparai.
[147]   If I am incorrect, and the
North Bay agreement ought not to be rescinded, I find that there is a genuine
issue requiring a trial with respect to which version of the North Bay loan
agreement binds the parties. I find, however, that a trial can be avoided in
this case by relying upon my enhanced fact-finding powers under Rule 20.04(2.1)
of weighing the evidence, evaluating the credibility of the deponents, and
drawing reasonable inferences from the evidence.
[148]   Having reviewed the
affidavits of the parties and also their transcripts from cross-examination, I
find that Mr. Boparai’s version of the agreement signed on June 24, 2019 is unreliable
and unenforceable.
[149]   I prefer the evidence of
Ms. Bhandal over Mr. Boparai that the June 24, 2019 North Bay investment agreement
before the court has been altered. I make this finding for the following
reasons:
[150]   As I have found that the
evidence of Ms. Bhandal is preferred over the evidence of Mr. Boparai, if the North Bay contract was not rescinded Mr.
Boparai would owe the Plaintiffs $1,272,222, plus 10% interest per annum from April
1, 2019 when the Wellandport sale closed to the present, in addition to
$400,000 plus interest at 2% retroactive to November 18, 2019.
[151]   Even if the content of the
June 24, 2019 agreement were accepted by me, the agreement provides for the
repayment of the funds within five years, which became due on June 24, 2024.
Therefore, even if I had accepted Mr. Boparai’s evidence that the June 24, 2019
loan agreement was the correct agreement governing the contract between the
parties, the investment funds of $1,631,000 ought to have been returned to the
Plaintiffs by June 24, 2024. This did not happen.
[152]   Both parties have a
responsibility to put their best foot forward on this summary judgment motion. The
Defendants argue that the monies advanced by the Plaintiffs to the Defendants
were investment funds, as opposed to a loan, and that they accordingly are not
required to return the funds to the Plaintiffs as the investment failed. The
Defendants made no oral submissions addressing the specifics of the alleged
failure of the investment, and do not provide sufficient evidence to establish
that the investment has failed.
[153]   The Defendants also point
to the flexible use of the term “loan” vs. “investment” in the Plaintiffs’
motion materials to suggest that the Plaintiffs’ evidence is unreliable with
respect to the nature of the financial agreements between the parties. As the
Defendants have not established that the investment failed, I find that it
makes no difference if the monies advanced by the Plaintiffs to the Defendants
were in the form of a loan or an investment that had a guaranteed rate of
return. The Defendants owe the same amount of money to the Plaintiffs no matter
what label is attached to the monies that were advanced.
[154]   The Defendants have failed
to establish that there is a genuine issue requiring a trial regarding the $1,272,222
that Mr. Boparai admits that he owes the Plaintiffs, plus the $400,000 advanced
to Mr. Boparai on November 18, 2019.
[155]   Punitive damages are awarded in cases
where a Defendant is guilty of oppressive and high-handed conduct that offends
the court’s sense of decency.   Mr. Boparai’s behaviour is deserving of
condemnation from this court. Mr. Boparai engaged in arranging a loan agreement and/or
investment agreement with the Plaintiffs in the summer of 2019 when his
mortgage broker license had already been revoked by FSCO. He used his close
familial relationship with the Plaintiffs to entice them into investing their
life savings with him.
[156]   The governing rule in
determining the quantum of punitive damages is proportionality: Whiten v. Pilot Insurance Co., 2002 SCC 18, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 595, at para. 74. I therefore decline to fix a quantum
for punitive damages until the full amount owed by the Defendants to the
Plaintiffs has been determined at the trial of this action.
[157]   The Mareva
injunction registered against the Lakeshore Property shall remain in place.
[158]   The Plaintiffs are
permitted to amend their Statement of Claim to plead fraudulent
misrepresentation against Mr. Boparai.
[159]   The North Bay loan
agreement between the parties is deemed rescinded due to Mr. Boparai’s
admission that he did not have the Plaintiffs’ funds to invest in the project
at the time that he told the Plaintiffs the funds were being invested,
resulting in a fraudulent misrepresentation to the Plaintiffs by Mr. Boparai.
[160]   In the event that I am incorrect
regarding the rescission of the North Bay agreement, I find that there is a
genuine issue requiring a trial as to which version of the North Bay loan
agreement binds the parties. However, I rely upon my enhanced fact-finding
powers under Rule 20.04(2.1) to find that the evidence of the Plaintiffs is
more credible on a balance of probabilities than the evidence of Mr. Boparai,
and that Ms. Bhandal’s version of the North Bay investment agreement is in fact
the loan agreement that was agreed to between the parties, which involved a
two-year term at 10% interest.
[161]   The Plaintiffs shall have partial
summary judgment against the Defendants for $1,617,679.53.
[162]   The issues that remain in
dispute that will be determined at the trial of this action before me are as
follows:
[163]   The parties are to contact
the trial office to schedule a case conference before me to determine the next
steps and to address costs.