[1]         
The Appellant was a residential tenant of the
Respondent. She appealed a decision of the Landlord and Tenant Board. She
abandoned the appeal before taking any steps to perfect it.
[2]         
The Respondent landlord seeks costs of the
abandoned appeal. The parties were on notice that the issue of costs would be
considered and resolved at a case conference today. Both sides delivered brief
written submissions in advance.
[3]         
Rule 61.14 (4) provides:
[4]         
The Respondent says that she delivered a
responding Certificate Respecting Evidence and therefore she has filed a “response”
so as to entitle her to costs under the rule.
[5]         
Counsel for the Appellant submits that the
Respondent’s Certificate Respecting Evidence simply accepted that all evidence
was required as set out in the Appellant’s Certificate Respecting Evidence.
Therefore, the Respondent was not even required to file a responding
Certificate as she would have been deemed to have confirmed the Appellant’s
Certificate under Rule 61.05 (3). However, Rule 61.05 (2) requires a respondent
to an appeal to deliver a Certificate Respecting Evidence even to confirm the
appellant’s certificate. I am not sure that relying on a provision deeming an
outcome where a party violates a mandatory rule is especially cogent.
[6]         
The Appellant submits that delivering a
“response” so as to become entitled to costs of an abandoned appeal must
contemplate the perfection of the appeal and the delivery of a responding
factum by the Respondent. The factum is the only substantive step required of
the Respondent in an appeal process.
[7]         
I do not decide whether a Certificate Respecting
Evidence is a sufficient response to meet the threshold in Rule 61.14 (4). Even
if it is sufficient, I would not exercise the discretion under s. 131 of the Courts
of Justice Act. RSO 1990 c C.43, to order costs in this appeal.
[8]         
The tenant was required to commence the appeal
to meet a short limitation period. Once she obtained the transcript of the
hearing before the Board, she made a responsible decision that she would not go
ahead. She did not, as so many do, hold out artificially to take advantage of
the automatic stay of proceedings or to force the landlord to incur costs on
interlocutory stay issues.
[9]         
I agree with Ms. Doe that a significant award of
costs would deter or impede access to justice by forcing people to refrain from
even preserving their rights while they obtain a thoughtful opinion concerning
an appeal. Boucher et al v. Public Accountants Council for the Province of
Ontario et al., 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA).
[10]      
The appeal is abandoned with no order as to
costs.