[1]              
This is the costs
endorsement in the above proceeding. An endorsement was issued on August 26,
2024 dismissing the requested injunction (the “Reasons”). The defined terms in
the Reasons apply to this costs endorsement.
[2]              
The urgent injunction Application
addressed a commercial tenancy. The Application was brought in the name of the
tenant which, as Applicant, sought to set aside the termination of a Sublease
by the Respondent landlord. The Application took place within the context of a
dispute between the three shareholders of the Applicant. Saeedbhai Patel
(“Saeed”) and Akhtar Ada (“Akhtar”), two of the three shareholders, authorized the
retaining of counsel and the bringing of the injunction Application. The
remaining shareholder, Tahir Majeed (“Tahir”) who also had a financial interest
in the Respondent, was not consulted on the bringing of the Application and opposed
the Application as a principal for the Respondent.
[3]              
The Respondent requests
that Akhtar and Saeed, along with the Applicant, be responsible for the costs
and that those costs should be fixed on a full or substantial indemnity scale.
[4]              
Given the Respondent’s request
for costs against Akhtar and Saeed personally, I invited both to make
submissions. One set of submissions were filed for both. In addition to
submissions, Saeed filed an affidavit. Saeed did not file an affidavit on the Application.
[5]              
The affidavit from Saeed
appears to seek to bolster the record on the Application. I will admit the
affidavit for the limited purpose of the costs request only. Saeed’s conduct
was in issue on the Application. Along with Akhtar, he was a promoter of the Application,
he instructed the Applicant’s counsel, and he had every opportunity to file an
affidavit to address the allegations raised. He chose not to file an affidavit
for the Application proper and he cannot now ask this Court to revisit the
findings in the Reasons based on his affidavit filed on the issue of costs. As
evident from the Reasons , the absence of direct evidence from Saeed resulted
in hearsay assertions in Akhtar’s evidence being excluded, resulting in certain
findings in the Reasons being made against Akhtar and Saeed. To the extent Saeed’s
affidavit takes issue with the findings addressed in the Reasons, the findings
in the Reasons shall be determinative.
[6]              
In the ordinary course,
non-parties are not responsible for costs. There are two exceptions. There is
the “person of straw” exception where the litigation was promoted by a party
without financial resources to protect the true promoters of the litigation who
have financial resources. The second exception is where the court feels
compelled to rely on its inherent jurisdiction to prevent an abuse of the
court’s process.
[7]              
The “person of straw’
test derives from section 131(1) of the Courts of Justice Act, RSO 1990,
c C.43 (the “CJA”) which leaves costs in the discretion of the court, including
“by whom and to what extent the costs shall be paid”. The test was set out in 1318847 Ontario Limited v. Laval Tool & Mould Ltd.,
2017 ONCA 184 (CanLII), at paras. 59 and 61 as follows:
[8]              
The Court of Appeal
went on to comment that the test is a factual test, not evaluative. Either the
three criteria are met or not. At para. 64, the Court said:
[9]              
The first and second
elements of the test ask whether the non-party ought to have been the litigant
and conversely, whether the party to the proceeding was not a true litigant. In
this case, the dispute was whether the Sublease had been terminated. The
Applicant was the tenant and the contracting party to the Sublease. The
Applicant was a proper party to the Application given the relief being sought.
The non-party shareholders would not have been the proper parties. The
shareholders did not have the contractual right to challenge the termination of
the Sublease. The Applicant is the only party who had the right to the
requested relief, being the affirmation of the Sublease. Accordingly, the
“person of straw” test is not met in this case.
[10]          
In my view, the conduct
of Akhtar and Saeed is better addressed utilizing the second test regarding
abuse of process.
[11]          
Aside from the
jurisdiction under section 131(1) of the CJA to assess costs against
non-parties, which gives rise to the “person of straw” test, the court has the
inherent jurisdiction to address abuses of process. The Court of Appeal in
Laval Tool provided the following guidance on the use of inherent
jurisdiction in awarding costs against non-parties:
[12]          
In Davies v.
Clarington (Municipality), 2023 ONCA 376 (CanLII), Justice Zarnett reviewed
Laval Tool and made the following observations:
[13]          
As confirmed in
Davies, the court has jurisdiction to award costs against a non-party in
the circumstances where the process in being abused. Whether the process is
being abused is a contextual question, dependent on the facts. The focus is on
the non-party’s conduct in instigating or controlling the litigation. It is a
flexible doctrine that has its aim to prevent the misuse of the court procedure,
in a way that would be manifestly unfair to a party to the litigation: Behn
v. Moulton Contracting Ltd., 2013 SCC 26 (CanLII), [2013] 2 SCR 227, at
para. 40.
[14]          
Here the Respondent argues
that Akhtar and Saeed did not have authority under the Unanimous Shareholders
Agreement (“USA”) to commence the Application as it needed unanimous consent of
all three shareholders to retain counsel. In this case, Akhtar and Saeed
deliberately excluded Tahir. Akhtar and Saeed state that they were justified in
retaining counsel and it is not a breach of the USA. The importance of this
fact is that it was Akhtar and Saeed who authorized this Application. Whether
it was a breach or not of the USA is not particularly germane to whether costs
ought to be paid to the Respondent. First, this is a request for costs, not by Tahir,
but the Respondent which was put to the expense of this Application. Second, the
resolution of this costs award is not a forum to debate or determine the rights
and obligations of  the shareholders under the USA.
[15]          
As mentioned, the
important fact is that Akhtar and Saeed authorised the commencement of this Application.
They were the sole instigators and instructors of counsel for the Applicant. At
the hearing, counsel for the Applicant on behalf of Akhtar and Saeed stated
that they would provide the undertaking as to damages if the injunction was
granted. This reflected the reality of the two of them being the promoters of
the litigation. As noted in the Reasons, they did so in circumstances where
they retained money owed to the Applicant, where it was conceded that the
Applicant had no money and where the Applicant could not pay not only the
Respondent but trade creditors. Akhtar and Saeed were clearly funding this
litigation by retaining and paying counsel. Moreover, had they not withheld the
Applicants’ funds, the Applicant would have had funds to pay the rent, making this
Application unnecessary. Indeed, the testimony from Akhtar was that he and Saeed
would remit the money back to the Applicant if the Applicant won the Application.
I note that Saeed, having lost the Application, makes no mention in his affidavit
whether he and Akhtar have returned or will return the funds owed to the
Applicant. I can only conclude that the Applicant’s funds are being retained by
Akhtar and Saeed. In doing so, Akhtar and Saeed not only deprived the Applicant
of the funds to pay the rent but have also deprived the Applicant of the ability
to pay any cost award to the Respondent.
[16]          
In the circumstances, I
conclude that Akhtar and Saeed authorized and funded the commencement of this Application
knowing the Applicant was insolvent while they retained the Applicant’s funds. In
essence, they brought this Application in the name of the Applicant while
depriving the Applicant of the means to either pay the rent or pay an award of
costs. They retained unto themselves the right to repay the funds but only if
the Application was a success. As stated in the Reasons, “they will only return
the money to its rightful owner if they get their way on this Application”. In
the circumstances of this case, the conduct of Akhtar and Saeed in commencing
this litigation while withholding the funds from the Applicant amounts to gross
misconduct .In my view, it is manifestly unfair and contrary to the interest of
justice to allow Akhtar and Saeed to authorize an urgent Application while
withholding money from the Applicant that either could have been used to make
the Application unnecessary or could be used to pay a cost award.
[17]          
Accordingly, I find
that the cost award shall be borne jointly and severely by the Applicant, Akhtar,
and Saeed.
[18]          
In my view the costs
should be assessed on a partial indemnity scale.
[19]          
The respondent seeks a
higher scale. To achieve a higher award of costs there needs to be “  a clear
finding of reprehensible conduct on the part of the party against which the
cost award is being made”: Davies v. Clarington (Municipality) et al., 2009
ONCA 722 (CanLII), at para. 40.
[20]          
An increased cost award
is one way a court sanctions egregious behaviour in the conduct of litigation. An
award of increased cost is entirely discretionary, and it is highly dependent
of the facts in each case. In my view, like an award of punitive of damages,
the court should look to whether the conduct at issue has been otherwise
sanctioned.  In this case, I am satisfied that the conduct of Akhtar and Saeed in
commencing the Application is sufficiently addressed by my order that they be
responsible for the costs. I do not think that a further sanction is warranted
by way of an increased cost award. Moreover, as it relates to the Applicant, it
was a proper party and no sanction is deserving against it.
[21]          
Accordingly, I award
costs on a partial indemnity scale.
[22]          
As to the amount, I
have examined the hourly rate of the Respondent’s counsel billed to the client.
While I find the rates reasonable, the respondent seeks a 65% recovery of the
costs billed by counsel. Partial indemnity hourly rates are generally in the
range of 55-60% of the client hourly rate, assuming the client hourly rate is
reasonable: Inter-Leasing Inc. v. Ontario, 2014 ONCA 683, at para. 5. In
this case, I accept the hourly rate by the lawyer is reasonable but would
reduce the partial indemnity rate claimed to meet the mid-point of the rate approved
in Inter-Leasing.
[23]          
The Respondent points
out that due to the speed of this Application, senior counsel did more work
than perhaps he would do otherwise. I accept that the speed of the litigation
meant the file was top heavy. However, some modest adjustment is appropriate.
Therefore, I set the fee at $25,000 plus HST of $3,250 and $1,155 for
disbursements for a total of $29,405.
[24]          
I must now consider if
this amount is reasonable in all the circumstances of the case. For its own
reasons, the Applicant suggested the Respondent should be entitled to costs of $25,000.
While I come at the calculation differently than the Applicant, the  Applicant’s
proposed amount confirms that the awarded amount is within the range of what an
unsuccessful party in an Application such as this should reasonably expect to
pay: see Boucher v. Public Accountants Council for the Province of Ontario,
2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA).
[25]          
The Applicant, Akhtar
and Saeed will be jointly and severely responsible to the Respondent for costs
of $29,405 plus post-judgment interest in accordance with the Courts of
Justice Act.