[1]              
On May 5, 2019, Augustus Kenrick Forde (“Augustus” or “the deceased”)
died, at the age 84. He was predeceased by his wife, Rotha Forde (“Rotha),
who died on December 15, 2018, as well as by one of their children, Frederick
Forde (“Frederick”), who died in 2002.
[2]        The deceased was survived by his children
with his wife Rotha, namely, the applicant, Roxanne Forde (“Roxanne”), the
respondents Denise Dockery (“Denise”), Earle Forde (“Earle”), Cedrick Forde
(“Steve”) as well as by his grandchildren. The respondents Tenisha Forde,
Chyvonne Forde, Keisha Robertson-Forde and Tevin Forde are Frederick’s children.
Each of the deceased’s surviving children also have children. The deceased was
also survived by William Forde (“William”), a son from an earlier
relationship, who resides in Guyana.
[3]              
Augustus was
born in Guyana. Augustus, Rotha and their children immigrated to Canada in 1974.
Augustus was employed by the Toronto Transit Commission as a maintenance worker
for about 28 years before his retirement.
[4]              
Earle states
that his parents and all of the children, except Roxanne, eventually moved to a
home on Topcliff Avenue, Toronto (“the Home”). Earle states that Roxanne had a
strained relationship with Augustus as she was pregnant at the time which led
to a “huge” fight with him. Earle states that after Roxanne moved out, she would
call and/or visit about once a month.
[5]              
Both Earle and Denise
state that, in about 1991, Augustus and Rotha gave Roxanne, at her request,
$25,000 to purchase a home in Mississauga, Ontario. Earle states his parents
did not have the available cash to help Roxanne purchase a home. Both Earle and
Denise state that Augustus and Rotha took equity from their own home to do so. On
cross-examination, Roxanne acknowledged that her downpayment for this house was
$25,000.00.
[6]              
Denise states
that she and her siblings were aware of this gift as it caused a “major rift”
between her parents and was the basis for many of their arguments for many
years that followed as Augustus had been opposed to making this gift but
eventually relented. Earle recalls Augustus being opposed to extending their
mortgage.
[7]              
Earle states
that after Roxanne purchased her house, she stopped coming to the Home as much,
however, Roxanne would still come around when she needed something such as to
borrow the lawn mower, garden hose or to get groceries.
[8]              
Although he
acknowledged that he had never seen documentation, when asked how he knew that
his parents gave Roxanne $25,000.00, Earle stated:
[9]              
In a statutory
declaration dated May 16, 2007, Roxanne states that title to the Mississauga
home was acquired and registered in her parents’ names as “… she was in the
process of a divorce …” even though she was the sole beneficial owner of that
home. Title to this home was transferred to Roxanne by her parents in May 2007
for no consideration.
[10]          
Roxanne states
that her parents gave her $10,000 rather than $25,000, about 30 years to help
her purchase a home.
[11]          
Denise states that
Roxanne had acknowledged to her siblings that she had received $25,000 from her
parents and that it is only now, in this proceeding, does allege having
received only $10,000.00.
[12]          
On examination,
Roxanne adamantly rejected the suggestion that her parents gave her $25,000
towards the purchase of her house, however she opined that her parents gave her
$15,000.00 and later stated she could not remember whether she received
$10,000.00 or $15,000.00.
[13]          
I prefer the
evidence of Denise, Earle, and the statement made by Augustus to his lawyer,
Ms. Modupe Ehinlaiye, that he and Rotha gave her $25,000.00, to Roxanne’s inconsistent
and uncertain evidence on this point. I find that Augustus and Rotha gave
Roxanne the sum of $25,000 towards her purchase of a home in 1991.
[14]          
Denise states
that she was the only sibling that went with her parents to all hospital and
doctor appointments. Earle states that he recalls that about seven or eight
years ago, Denise asked Roxanne to let their parents stay with her while some
of the siblings went on a cruise. He states that Roxanne said “I will take mom
but I won’t take dad”. As a result, Rotha refused to stay with Roxanne which
resulted in Denise’s daughter cancelling her trip so that she could stay at home
with Augustus and Rotha.
[15]          
Earle states:
[16]          
When asked on
his examination how he knew Denise would not use their father’s money, Earle
stated that Augustus told him:
[17]          
Denise states
that in 2012, Augustus made her his sole attorney under a Power of Attorney for
banking matters at the CIBC.
[18]          
Earle also
stated that Augustus wanted Denise to be power of attorney because: 1) she was
able to be at Home with Augustus a lot more than anyone else; and, 2) he
trusted her. When asked whether Denise’s opinion would have influenced her
parents, Earle stated that his parents were very head strong, and if they
wanted anything a certain way, it would be done that way.
[19]          
Earle is 54
years old and is the youngest sibling. He states that he lived with his parents
until about 20 years ago.
[20]          
Earle states
that he would go to his parents’ home whenever his parents called to get
something done and, in any event,  about two or three times a week. He would mow
the lawn at the Home. He states that he did not buy them groceries or take them
to medical appointments as Denise did those things.
[21]          
Denise states
that in 2017, she and her siblings, other than Roxanne, contributed their work
or money to renovate their parent’s home to make it more comfortable. The
renovations took four months.
[22]          
On October 29,
2018, and about six weeks before Rotha’s death, the deceased signed a power
of attorney for personal care and a continuing power of attorney for property
that appointed Denise as his attorney. These documents were prepared by Paul
Crum-Ewing (“Mr. Crum-Ewing”).
[23]          
Mr. Crum-Ewing
and Augustus knew each other for many years. Denise states that Mr. Crum-Ewing
told Augustus that he was retiring, and that Augustus should find another
lawyer to prepare a Will for him as soon as possible. Mr. Crum-Ewing also stated
that knowing the family’s dynamics, it would not be wise for Mr. Crum-Ewing to
prepare the Will as he would not be able to defend Denise should anything arise.
[24]          
Denise states that
her mother became ill shortly after the October 29, 2018 meeting, and that she
put aside the search for a lawyer to prepare a Will for Augustus. Rotha died several
weeks later. An application for the appointment of an estate trustee was not
filed as Rotha’s estate held no assets of any significance. Earle states that
as a result of being unable to find a Will for Rotha and Augustus after Rotha
died, he told Denise to ensure that Augustus had a Will.
[25]          
In her affidavit, Roxanne states that she and her parents were “always
close”. On examination, Roxanne states that after Rotha died
in October 2018, she called Augustus every day to see how he was doing. Roxanne
states that after Rotha died, she visited Augustus twice a week and sometimes
brought him food. There is no evidence that she took care of Augustus whether
before or after Rotha died. On
examination, Earle stated that he did not remember Roxanne dropping by the Home
to help their parents but that she did keep in contact with them, at least by
telephone.
[26]          
Denise states
that Roxanne did not have a close relationship with her parents and that she
was insensitive, inconsiderate and had no compassion towards them until their
deaths. Denise give three examples of such behaviour:
[27]          
Earle states
that after Rotha’s death, and after Roxanne lost her job at a travel agency,
Roxanne asked him and Augustus to take $4,999 in cash and to obtain a cashier’s
cheque in that amount from a bank for her. He stated that Roxanne kept the
amount below $5,000 in order to avoid the transaction being flagged by the bank.
Earle stated that Roxanne needed this money as she was involved in a real
estate venture. Augustus called Denise who told him that he not participate in
this transaction as the situation seemed “shady”. Augustus told Roxanne that he
would not be participating for the reasons given by Denise. Roxanne got upset
and said that Denise should mind her own business.
[28]          
Denise testified
that Mr. Crum-Ewing prepared a Will for Augustus many years before his second Will
was made in January 2019. She states that the first Will also excluded Roxanne
as a beneficiary. Her evidence was as follows:
[29]          
In his affidavit,
Earle stated:
[30]          
On examination,
Earle stated:
[31]          
In
her affidavit, Roxanne stated that Augustus’ first Will treated all children
equally. On examination, she admitted that she did not know what was in the
first Will and had never read it.
[32]          
Roxanne
provided an unclear answer when asked to explain how she knew that her father’s
first Will was “misplaced”:
[33]          
Following his
death, the deceased’s family doctor, Dr. Rajendra Beharry, provided the
following letter dated October 18, 2019:
[34]          
However, Dr.
Beharry’s assertion that he has no reason to believe that Augustus had
cognitive impairments should be viewed in the following context:
[35]          
On January 14,
2019, Augustus saw Dr. Beharry for a bladder issue. His notes state “… Patient
just lost wife, he does not feel that he is eating or sleeping as normal …”
[36]          
About two weeks
after Rotha’s death, Roxanne states that she requested a family meeting with
her siblings and father. Her letter dated January 10, 2019 to Denise with a
copy of Steve and Earle states:
[37]          
Roxanne states
that Steve’s daughter, Jameelah Henry, helped her draft this letter.
[38]          
As will be
described below, this meeting was held on February 3, 2019.
[39]          
On Thursday, January
10, 2019, being the same day that Roxanne sent the above letter requesting a
family meeting to her siblings, Steve’s daughter, Jameelah Henry, contacted the
Toronto Police Service to report that:
[40]          
Roxanne states
that she did not ask Jameelah Henry to call the police, nor did she tell
Roxanne that she was going to call the police.
[41]          
A few hours
later, the police spoke with Augustus in home. Their report states:
[42]          
 The police
officer’s notes also state that the allegation of elder abuse was unfounded.
[43]          
Denise states
that Roxanne and Jameelah were “always acting together when it came to my
father”.
[44]          
Denise states
that the deceased ask her in January 2019 to find a lawyer. Denise stated in
cross-examination that she spoke with Earle and Steve about the need for
Augustus to get a Will done but did not speak with Roxanne because she was not
going to be a beneficiary.
[45]          
Denise also stated
that her father made the decision not to have Roxanne included in the
discussions regarding his Will because she would not be a beneficiary.
[46]          
Denise stated that
she was referred to Ms. Ehinlaiye by her real estate lawyer who happened to be Ms.
Ehinlaiye’s spouse. Denise contacted Ms. Ehinlaiye to arrange a meeting. Denise
was provided with a Will Intake Form which she completed and returned by email
on January 2, 2019. She asked Augustus for information, such as a description
of his assets, that was needed to complete this form. The Intake Form states
that Augustus would like his assets to be distributed in the following shares:
[47]          
Denise states
that she and Augustus arranged the meeting to attend Ms. Ehinlaiye’s office. In
response to a request from Ms. Ehinlaiye, on January 7, 2019, Denise sent Ms. Ehinlaiye
an email describing the names of Frederick’s children.
[48]          
The first of two
meetings was held on January 8, 2019. Augustus, Denise and Steve attended. Before
taking Augustus into the conference room, Ms. Ehinlaiye told them that she needed
the children to be out of the room so that she could receive Augustus’s
instructions. Denise states that neither she nor Steve were present when Ms.
Ehinlaiye reviewed the Intake Form with Augustus.
[49]          
On January 15,
2019, Denise and Augustus returned to Ms. Ehinlaiye’s office.
[50]          
Ms. Ehinlaiye prepared
the deceased’s Will. She had no prior dealings with him. Her evidence is as
follows:
[51]          
Ms. Ehinlaiye made
the following notes to her file:
[52]          
On
cross-examination, Ms. Ehinlaiye stated:
[53]          
The evidence of
Chinaza Akobi, the law clerk who witnessed the execution of the Will, is as
follows:
[54]          
On January 15,
2019, Augustus signed his Last Will and Testament (the “Will”). In his Will,
the Augustus designates his children Denise, Earle, Steve, and Frederick’s
children as the beneficiaries of various assets and the residuary of the estate
in the following proportions:
[55]          
When compared to
the instructions in the Will Intake Form, it is apparent that Augustus changed
his instructions when he met with Ms. Ehinlaiye in private by:
[56]          
The Will makes
no provision for neither Roxanne nor William.
[57]          
In respect of
Roxanne’s exclusion, the Will states:
[58]          
On examination, Ms.
Ehinlaiye’s evidence was:
[59]          
Unlike the above
provision relating to Roxanne, the Will does not contain a provision that explains
William’s exclusion as beneficiary. Ms. Ehinlaiye’s notes explain the reasons given
for William’s exclusion as follows: “Son in Guyana. Never been to Canada. First
child before his marriage. Promised wife that child would not be part of Will.
Have done everything he can for him. He’s an adult. He’s ok.”
[60]          
On February 20,
2019, the deceased went to a hospital due to significant abdominal pain. He was
diagnosed with metastatic cancer. In an emergency room consultation note, dated
February 21, 2019, Dr. Jamie Speigelman described his observations one day
earlier. His impression was as follows:
[61]          
On February 21,
2019, a palliative consultation note prepared by Dr. Steven Rubenzahl, states:
[62]          
In a note dated
February 21, 2024, Dr. Jamie Speigelman, on February 24, 2019, Dr. Punam
Rana, an oncologist, recommended starting treatment for this cancer. However, her
notes indicate that: 1) “… the patient is not able to provide me with consent,
as he is not able to recognize his diagnosis and the implications due to
significant dementia”; and, 2) “patient admits he is not aware of why he is
admitted to hospital. He states that I can call his daughter. He states that
his wife recently died in December”.
[63]          
At Roxanne’s
request, a family meeting held on February 3, 2019 at her parents’ home. Roxanne,
Denise, Steve and Augustus attended. Earle joined by telephone. Denise refused
to provide any of the requested documents. Using her cell phone, Roxanne made a
surreptitious audio recording of the meeting which was transcribed into a 29-page
document.
[64]          
Roxanne asked
Augustus to decide whether she could see Rotha’s Will as well as his Will. She
stated:
[65]          
A largely unintelligible
discussion ensues, much of which relates to the suggestion by Steve that Rotha
wanted her home to be given to him on their death. Roxanne further states:
[66]          
When asked by
Earle who he would like to be his power of attorney, and after being told by
Roxanne that it could not be one person, Augustus said “Who would I like to be
the power of attorney? All of you”.
[67]          
On February 26,
2024, after his cancer diagnosis, Roxanne met with her father’s social worker
at the hospital, Rita Wilder-Craig, to express her concern about Denise’s care
of Augustus. Ms. Wilder-Craig’s notes state:
[68]          
A further note
by Rita Wilder-Craig later on February 26, 2019 states:
[69]          
When asked on
cross-examination, Denise stated that hospital staff never recommended that
Augustus undergo a capacity assessment.
[70]          
On March 5, 2019,
a hospital social worker, Christine Mitchell, learned that Augustus had told
staff that he was concerned that his daughter would bring a lawyer to the
hospital to have him sign a document. Her notes state:
[71]          
On March 8,
2019, a lawyer and a financial planner visited Augustus while he was in the
hospital at Roxanne’s direction. Augustus was “visibly upset” by their presence
and did not want to speak with them. Augustus was found by the social
worker lying flat in his bed holding his sheets when the two men were in
his room. Augustus thanked the social worker for “getting them out of
here”. Roxanne was under the mistaken belief that her father had one week to
live and told him so. In fact, the doctors believed that Augustus had up to three
months to live. A further note by Victoria Goldson, on March 8, 2019, which is
disturbing to read, states:
[72]          
On examination,
Roxanne denied telling Augustus that he had one week to live.
[73]          
She also denied
that Augustus had pulled his sheets up to his chin when the lawyer and
financial planner attended his room. When asked whether she agreed that the
social worker had no reason to fabricate this statement, Roxanne stated “No, I
would not agree with you” without explanation.
[74]          
On examination, Roxanne
stated that she invited Mr. Thomas, her friend and financial planner to go to
the hospital and meet with Augustus because he told Roxanne while he was in the
hospital that he repeatedly told her that he wanted his son William Forde, who
resides in Guyana, to receive something on his death. She stated:
[75]          
I do not accept
Roxanne’s evidence that Augustus told her that he did not know what was in the Will
but on the other hand he wanted another Will prepared to include his son
William as a beneficiary. Those are inconsistent assertions. I do not accept
her evidence that he told her that he wanted to make another Will to make a
bequest to his son William Forde given that he had already told Ms. Ehinlaiye
less than two months earlier that he had promised his wife that William
would not be included in his Will. Further, had he wished to change his Will it
is my view that he would have told Denise, whom he trusted, rather Roxanne.
Further, had Augustus wanted to make another Will, he would not have been visibly
upset by the presence of Messrs. Thornhill and Thomas.
[76]          
Subsequently, Mr.
Thomas provided Roxanne with a letter dated December 31, 2019, which states:
[77]          
This letter was
not in affidavit form, and I decline to give it any weight. The statement that
Augustus told them that he was unaware of the contents of the Will should, in
these circumstances, be viewed as the refusal of a terminally ill gentlemen to
discuss the contents of his Will with two uninvited and unknown strangers. It’s
difficult to fathom why either Mr. Thomas or Mr. Thornhill would have
attended at Augustus’s bedside to discuss his personal affairs without having
been requested (whether by telephone or other electronic means) to do so by him.
Their presence caused Augustus much unnecessary grief in his final days and
there is no evidence that either of these two men apologized to Augustus for their
actions.
[78]          
Further, the
submission of Roxanne’s counsel in closing argument that Mr. Thornhill attended
the hospital not at her request, but at the request of Mr. Thomas, is neither
credible nor supported by the evidence. Roxanne did not tender any evidence from
either Mr. Thomas or Mr. Thornhill to support this assertion. I find that
Roxanne requested that Mr. Thomas bring a lawyer to the hospital for the
purpose of having a new Will prepared for Augustus.
[79]          
On March 13,
2019, Augustus was transferred to the Baycrest Palliative Care Unit where he
died about two months later on May 5, 2019.
[80]          
On March 23,
2019, Denise told Roxanne that Augustus had made the Will but refused to
provide her with a copy of the Will.
[81]          
On or about June
24, 2019, Denise filed an application for a Certificate of Appointment as
Estate Trustee for Augustus’ Estate which estimated value of the Estate to be
about $408,000.00.
[82]          
On July 2, 2019,
Roxanne filed a Notice of Objection which questions the authenticity of the
Will but does not allege that Augustus lacked capacity or that he made the Will
under undue influence. The Notice of Objection states:
[83]          
This objection
did not get resolved.
[84]          
Denise entered
an agreement to sell the Home in the Fall of 2019 for $747,000 despite the fact
that a Certificate of Appointment had not been issued. Pursuant to an Order
granted by Justice Dietrich on October 23, 2019, a Certificate of Appointment
was issued to Denise for the sole purpose of selling the home with the net
proceeds of sale to be deposited into the trust account of her real estate
solicitor, Mr. Olutoyin Ehinlaiye, subject to further order of the court. Denise
was also ordered to return the original Certificate of Appointment of Estate
Trustee with a Will to the Court, pending the resolution of this litigation. The
sale was completed in November 2019.
[85]          
About four years
later, on July 19, 2023, Roxanne commenced this application for, amongst other
things, a declaration that the deceased’s Will was invalid for the following
reasons:
[86]          
This application
raises the following issues:
[87]         
To prove a Will in Ontario, its propounder has the legal burden to
establish that: (a) it was duly executed; (b) the testator had the requisite
testamentary capacity, and (c) the testator knew and approved of its contents: Neuberger
v. York, 2016 ONCA 191, at para. 77. A Will may be challenged on the grounds
of undue influence, forgery and fraud: See Roe v. Roe, 2024 ONCA 179 (undue
influence); Smith v. Nevins, 1924 CanLII 70 (SCC), [1925] S.C.R. 619 (forgery); Mayrand v. Dussault (1907), 1907 CanLII 94 (SCC), 38 S.C.R. 460 (fraud).
[88]          
The legal burden
of proof on the propounder of a Will can shift more than once. In Vout v.
Hay, 1995 CanLII 105 (SCC), [1995] 2 S.C.R. 876, Sopinka J. stated:
[89]          
As noted above,
if the Will was duly executed, after having been read over to or by a testator
who appeared to understand it, then it will be presumed that the testator knew
and approved of the contents and had the necessary testamentary capacity.
[90]          
The requirements
for the due execution of a Will were described by Harvison Young, J.A., in Bayford
v. Boes, 2021 ONCA 442, as follows:
[91]          
There is no
dispute that the Will was duly executed.
[92]          
Further, the evidence
of Ms. Ehinlaiye is that she read the Will to the deceased and that he asked
questions which she answered.
[93]          
Given that the
above requirements have been satisfied, I find that the court should presume
that Augustus knew and approved of the Will and that he had testamentary
capacity.
[94]          
In Vout,
Sopinka J. stated, at para. 25, that:
[95]          
In my view, the
Will was made under suspicious circumstances given:
[96]          
As a result, I
find that the onus rests with Denise to establish that Augustus knew and
approved of the Will and that he had testamentary capacity at the time that he gave
instructions and signed the Will.
[97]          
The test for whether
a testator knew and approved of the contents of their Will is as follows:
[98]          
At the first
meeting with Ms. Ehinlaiye, the lawyer who prepared his Will, asked Augustus if
he knew why he was at her office and he responded that he was there to make a Will.
He confirmed that he was not forced to come to her office nor to prepare a Will.
When she showed him the instructions in the Will Intake Form that Denise had
sent to her and asked him whether he wanted those terms reflected in his Will,
Augustus went into a discussion about the specific percentage to be left to
some of his children and grandchildren. Ultimately, Augustus decided to slightly
modify the percentage of assets that would be gifted to certain of his children
under the Will from the percentages shown in the Will Intake Form. He also
explained why he did not wish to leave a bequest to his children Roxanne and
Steven.
[99]          
At their second
meeting, Ms. Ehinlaiye’s evidence is that she read the Will over to Augustus
and when requested she provided clarification. This evidence corroborated by
her law clerk, Ms. Akobi, who states that she was present on the day that
Augustus reviewed the draft Will and that she observed: 1) Ms. Ehinlaiye
explaining a legal term at the request of Augustus; 2) Ms. Ehinlaiye asking
Augustus if he had any other questions and he responded that he did not; 3) Augustus
sign the Will.
[100]     
Given their
discussions, and particularly the detailed nature of those discussions, I find
that Augustus knew and approved of the contents of the Will and that the Will,
as written, represented his intentions.
[101]     
In Hall v.
Bennett Estate, 2003 CanLII 7157 (ON CA), [2003] O.J. No. 1827(C.A.), Charron J.A. stated, at paras. 14‑15:
[102]     
This test for
testamentary capacity was re-stated in Stekar v. Wilcox, 2017 ONCA 1010,
at para. 14:
[103]     
A diagnosis of
dementia or cognitive impairment does not necessarily mean that a person lacks
testamentary capacity. I adopt the views expressed by Goss, J. in From
Estate, 2019 ABQB 988, at paras.121-124:
[104]     
I now turn to
consider the requirements for testamentary capacity, described above, as they
apply in this case.
[105]     
I find that
Augustus understood the nature and effect of the will. He sought to make a Will
given that his first Will had been lost. He understood that this Will would
dispose of his assets on his death. Augustus attended Ms. Ehinlaiye’s office, twice,
for the purpose of having his Will prepared. He gave considerable thought to
what amounts he should bequest to various beneficiaries. Augustus also gave
rational and responsive answers to questions asked about his instructions for
the preparation of his Will. When Ms. Ehinlaiye read his draft Will to him,
Augustus would ask questions for clarification.
[106]     
I find that
Augustus understood the nature and extent of his property. His most valuable
asset was his Home. He also identified his accounts with the CIBC as well as
jewelry and household items. Perfection is not required identifying one’s
assets. However, from a value perspective, he identified almost all his assets.
[107]     
I find that
Augustus understood the extent of what he was giving under his Will. Roxanne stated
that Augustus, under his first Will, had treated all his children equally. There
is no other evidence to support this submission. On examination, Roxanne admitted
that she had never read the first Will which is now lost. In fact, the Earle’s
evidence suggests that Roxanne was also excluded as a beneficiary in that Will.
Further, there is no evidence that Augustus and Rotha treated their children
equally during their lifetime. Roxanne was the only child to receive a sum of
money to help her with the purchase of her first home. Neither Earle nor Denise
received money to support the purchase of their first home. Augustus put a
great deal of thought towards the extent of the bequest that he would make under
his Will to each of his children and grandchildren. Rather than divide his
estate into equal shares, he chose to exclude two children and to divide his estate
in varying percentages to the remaining children and to the children of his
deceased son, Frederick. At his first interview with Ms. Ehinlaiye, Augustus gave
rational and clear reasons for excluding Roxanne and William. As noted, he also
discussed and considered varying the percentages that were identified in his
Will Intake Form. Ultimately, he decided not to reduce the percentage that
would be received by Frederick’s children, but he did decide to reduce the
percentage that would be received by Denise and increase the percentage that
would be received by Steve.
[108]     
I find that
Augustus remembered the persons that he might be expected to benefit under his Will
as he identified his children from his marriage with Rotha and child from a
previous relationship. Augustus also remembered his grandchildren and in
particular his desire to make a bequest in favour of the children of his
deceased son, Frederick. He also provide cogent explanations as to why his
children Roxanne and William were to be excluded.
[109]     
While Augustus
had been diagnosed with dementia and mild cognitive impairment, I find that he
had a sound disposing mind at the time he provided instructions for his Will
and made his Will.
[110]     
I also note that
a few days before he signed the Will, the police met with Augustus and the
police officer’s notes indicate that Augustus “… was rational and appeared to
be in control of his faculties”. Roxanne’s reliance on the letter from his pharmacist
dated November 18, 2018, is misplaced. Although he states that Augustus was
incapable of managing his 14 prescription medications it was not because of
dementia or cognitive impairment but rather as a result of the medication
regime being “complex”.
[111]     
An allegation that
a testator made a Will under undue influence requires “… proof that the
testator's assent to the Will was obtained by influence such that instead of
representing what the testator wanted, the Will is a product of coercion”: Vout,
para. 21. The person alleging undue influence bears the onus of proving it: Vout,
para. 28.
[112]     
Pressure is not
undue influence unless it amounts to coercion. In Hall v. Hall (1868),
L.R. 1 P. & D. 481, at page 482x, Sir J.P. Wilde, explained the difference
between permissible and impermissible pressure as follows:
[113]     
In Banton
v. Banton, 1998 CanLII 14926 (ON SC), [1998] O.J. No. 3528, Cullity J., stated at para. 59:
[114]     
Undue influence
is inferred from the facts of a case. In Roe v. Roe, 2024 ONCA 179, the
Ontario Court of Appeal stated, at para. 18:
[115]     
Relevant
considerations in respect of whether a testator has been unduly influenced in
making their Will may include:
[116]     
Roxanne submits
that the Will was procured by undue influence for the following reasons:
[117]     
Augustus did
rely on Denise’s assistance for management of his personal care and financial
affairs. Denise arranged for Augustus to meet Ms. Ehinlaiye in order to prepare
a Will.
[118]     
I do not accept
the submission that Denise, Earle and Steve alienated Roxanne from Augustus. Roxanne’s
assertion of alienation is inconsistent with her evidence that she spoke to
Augustus every day by telephone after Rotha died. Roxanne was not prevented by
Denise or any other sibling from visiting Augustus at his home. Further, the
allegation of elder abuse was dismissed by the police following their meeting
with Augustus on January 10, 2019. In any event, it appears from the evidence
that Augustus’s view of Roxanne, according to the statements that he made in
January 2019 to Ms. Ehinlaiye, resulted from his reaction to Roxanne’s
behaviour over the years.
[119]     
The assertion
that the Will was inconsistent with any of his prior Wills is not established
on the evidence. There is only one other Will that was known. Neither Roxanne
nor Denise have read it or know its contents. It appears that the only evidence
on this point, from Earle, suggests that Roxanne’s exclusion was consistent
with the first (and now lost) Will.
[120]     
The evidence
falls far short of establishing that Denise or any other sibling coerced or
even pressured Augustus to prepare a Will that excluded Roxanne as a
beneficiary. To the contrary, the explanation given Augustus to Ms. Ehinlaiye
for excluding Roxanne indicates that that he had good reason for making that
choice and that he was “emphatic” about doing so.
[121]     
I find that Augustus knew and
approved of the Will and that he had testamentary capacity at the relevant
times. I also dismiss the submission that the Will was the product of undue
influence.  Accordingly, I find that the Will is valid. This application is
dismissed.
[122]     
Denise shall deliver her costs
submissions within ten days. Roxanne shall deliver her responding costs
submissions within twenty days. Denise may deliver reply submissions within thirty
days. Costs submissions shall be no more than three pages each exclusive of any
offers to settle and a bill of costs.