[1]              
The plaintiff, BizTech Institute Inc.
(hereinafter “BizTech” or “the plaintiff”) brings this action for damages as
against the defendant, Star Medical Equipment Ltd. (“Star Medical”), arising
from the purchase of ultrasound equipment from the defendant on January 12,
2017.
[2]              
It is the position of the plaintiff that the two
pieces of ultrasound equipment were defective from the time of purchase and
installation, required numerous attendances by the defendant service
technicians regarding various problems, but never functioned properly for
purposes of use in its sonography training programs.
[3]              
It is the position of the defendant that the
plaintiff College began to fail to meet its accreditation requirements, and enrolled
more students than it was capable of handling, failed to hire competent staff
and attempted to mitigate its loss and shift the blame away from administrative
and program deficiencies by alleging that the equipment was defective.
[4]              
Based on the evidence adduced at trial, both viva
voce and documentary, the submissions of counsel, and the applicable law, I
find the plaintiff to have established its case, for the reasons enumerated
below.
[5]              
BizTech is a private career college registered
under the Private Career Colleges Act, S. O. 2005, c. 28, Sched. L. As a
private college, BizTech offered several educational, vocational and training
programs to the public. One of those programs was the Cardiovascular Sonography
Technologist Program (“CST Program”), which focused on training students to
become Registered and Licensed sonographers in Ontario. The CST program at BizTech
was approved by the Superintendent under the Private Career Colleges Act and
was accredited by the Canadian Medical Association from November 2, 2016 until
November 26, 2018. The plaintiff lost accreditation on December 5, 2018, when
the decision to remove accreditation was communicated by the accreditation body
to the plaintiff. The plaintiff is again accredited and continues to offer two
approved and accredited sonography programs today.
[6]              
For purposes of the CST program, the plaintiff
sought to purchase ultrasound equipment to supplement the one used and that it
owned, a Philips ultrasound machine.
[7]              
The sonography program involves three parts: the
theoretical portion; the functional portion; and a clinical placement which is
akin to an apprenticeship in an actual ultrasound clinic with patients.
[8]              
The owner and principal of the plaintiff, Harpal
Dharna, spoke, inter alia, with the principle of Star Medical Equipment
Ltd., Hamoon Choheili, regarding purchase of ultrasound equipment for the CST
program. Star Medical specializes in the sale of new, used and
manufacturer-refurbished diagnostic imaging equipment, including ultrasound
equipment. The principals of the plaintiff and defendant had previously
transacted business, the defendant having sold to the plaintiff, BizTech, the used
Philips ultrasound machine mentioned above. Mr. Dharna made it known to Mr. Choheili
that the ultrasound equipment he sought to purchase would be used for
educational and training purposes for the CST program at BizTech.
[9]              
The plaintiff maintains that they relied upon
the defendant with respect to the choice of ultrasound equipment. The plaintiff
CEO, Mr. Dharna, relied on the defendant, Mr. Choheili, to recommend the best
equipment for the educational institution, given Mr. Choheili’s familiarity
with various brands of ultrasound equipment.
[10]          
The defendant distributed and serviced a number
of ultrasound machines, inter alia, from GE, Philips, and also Alpinion,
a Korean manufactured ultrasound machine, for which the defendant was the sole
distributor in Canada. The principal of the defendant, Mr. Choheili, provided
the principal of the plaintiff, Mr. Dharna, with quotes for a number of
ultrasound machines. He advised Mr. Dharna that with the Alpinion, he could
obtain a 25 % to 30% discount for the equipment as it was to be used for
educational purposes. He also advised that others of his clients had used the
Alpinion equipment successfully for educational as well as clinical purposes. The
plaintiff had made it known that they wanted to obtain the best possible price
for the equipment and, as a result, chose the Alpinion ultrasound equipment with
the educational discount.
[11]          
On January 12, 2017, BizTech and Star Medical
entered into a purchase agreement for two Alpinion machines: the ultrasound F01337,
a cardiac system and F01588, a general ultrasound system. The Purchase
Agreement stated that the ultrasound equipment was sold with a two-year full
standard warranty from the date of installation for all non-accidental damage.
[12]          
It now appears that the two ultrasound machines
had been in the defendant’s inventory, the F01337 from its shipping date on February
21, 2016 and the FO1558 from its shipping date on March 27, 2016.
[13]          
The equipment was delivered to BizTech on
February 24, 2017. The equipment cost $58,647 and, with leasing by a financing
company, the plaintiff also paid $10,273 in financing costs and interest.
[14]          
It is the position of the plaintiff that there
were issues with the Alpinion ultrasound equipment from shortly after the time
that it was delivered and installed, through November 2018 when the plaintiff
ultimately removed the equipment from the laboratory to a storage area due to
its faulty functioning. It is the position of the plaintiff that the issues
with the equipment, noticed immediately after installation included software
and hardware issues, noise production, which interfered with the consistency
and the accuracy of diagnostic information, overheating, poor spatial contrast
and temporal resolution for diagnostic images, and arbitrary shut-downs and
restarts of the equipment. It is the position of the plaintiff that the source
of the defects was the equipment itself and Star Medical’s response to the
issues. The plaintiff maintains that Star Medical was never able to correct the
issues.
[15]          
As a result of the defective equipment, several
of the BizTech students from the March 2017 cohort required additional training
on ultrasound equipment given that the equipment purchased by the plaintiff
from the defendant was continually having issues with functioning and therefore
was not usable for its intended purpose, ie. training students, and the plaintiff
only had the one other used Philips machine. As a result, Mr. Dharna arranged
to have these students trained at two operating clinics for the functional part
of the program, for which he paid the operating clinics for their training the
total amount of $40,450. This training was part of the functional portion of
learning to use and manipulate the ultrasound machines, and not the third,
clinical placement portion of the program.
[16]          
To mitigate its damages, the plaintiff purchased
replacement ultrasound machines from another medical equipment provider, CCE Medical
Equipment, on July 9, 2018 for a total of $97,745.
[17]          
In this lawsuit, BizTech alleges breach of the
implied condition of fitness for purpose and merchantability under the Sale of
Goods Act. The plaintiff submits that the Purchase Agreement’s warranty
does not displace or exclude the implied conditions that are provided for in s.
15 of the Sale of Goods Act. Under the purchase agreement, BizTech
submits that defects with the equipment fell under the scope of the warranty,
and given Star Medical’s failure to honour the warranty, BizTech is equally
entitled to its damages for breach of that contract in the total amount of $109,370,
comprising the cost of the equipment purchased from the defendant, leasing and
financing fees and the cost of retraining the students on properly functioning
machines.
[18]          
The plaintiff lost accreditation on December 5,
2018, when the decision to remove accreditation was communicated by the
accreditation body to the plaintiff. The plaintiff is again accredited and continues
to offer two approved and accredited sonography programs today.
[19]          
It is the position of the defendant that the
ultrasound equipment purchased by the plaintiff from the defendant was not
defective and was fit for its purpose. It is the position of the defendant that
technicians from the defendant, as well as a technician from Korea, where the
Alpinion ultrasound equipment is manufactured, all came to service the
equipment, but found nothing wrong with its functionality.
[20]          
The defendant maintains that the plaintiff did
its own due diligence in terms of selection of ultrasound equipment and did not
rely on the defendant.
[21]          
The defendant further maintains that there were
no complaints from the plaintiff about the machines until one year after they
were sold to the plaintiff. However, the Service Reports produced by the
defendant indicate that they attended at the plaintiff College at numerous
times within the first few months for purposes of servicing and upgrading the
equipment.
[22]          
It was the position of the defendant that the
issues arose due to the plaintiff’s failure to properly use and maintain the
ultrasound equipment, which had damaged the equipment by accident such that the
defendant would not honour the warranty under the Purchase Agreement.
[23]          
It is further the position of the defendant that
the plaintiff knew that it would lose its accreditation and would no longer
need the equipment, so attempted to obtain a full refund. However, the
plaintiff has made it clear that the action is not about accreditation or the
loss thereof. The plaintiff does not seek damages for the loss of accreditation
for the sonography program. Indeed, the plaintiff purchased replacement
equipment from another equipment provider well before it lost its
accreditation, and there was no evidence to establish that the accreditation
was lost solely as a result of poor equipment.
[24]          
The following witnesses testified on behalf of
the plaintiff.
[25]          
Mr. Dharna owns the plaintiff private college, BizTech,
which offers numerous programs, including business, accounting, information
technology and health sciences, including sonography training.
[26]          
All instructors at BizTech were licensed
sonographers.
[27]          
Mr. Dharna is a chartered professional
accountant with a BSc and MA in electrical engineering. He majored in computer
software controls and communications. He also worked for 15 years as an IT
consultant.
[28]          
BizTech purchased ultrasound sonography
equipment from Star Medical in 2017. In February 2017, Mr. Dharna began to
receive complaints from the plaintiff's instructors and students regarding
problems with the equipment. BizTech called on numerous occasions in the first
few months to have the defendant service the equipment. While the defendant
contends that there were no service calls between March 2017 and March 2018,
Mr. Dharna disagrees, even if there are no service records that were produced,
other than the six in evidence.
[29]          
As of March 2018, the equipment was no longer
being used to train students, and was put in storage. The ultrasound cardiac
system ceased functioning completely.
[30]          
While he stated that the only service people who
he was aware of who serviced the equipment were Mr. Tarmohamed and Mr. Choheili,
he stated that a third person, whose name he did not know, had attended on one
occasion. Mr. Harito in his testimony stated that he had attended BizTech on
one occasion in 2018, but only to observe and not to service the equipment.
[31]          
Zafar Bajwa was an ultrasound sonographer for 24
years. He was also a licensed physician in Pakistan. He was employed with the
plaintiff as Program Director for Sonography Programs and the Director of the
Diagnostic Cardiac Sonography Program.
[32]          
He had experience working with Toshiba, GE,
Samsung, Philips and Alpinion ultrasound equipment.
[33]          
BizTech purchased two Alpinion ultrasound
machines from the defendant in January 2017, while Mr. Bajwa was employed at BizTech.
He was trained on the Alpinion equipment by the defendant Star Medical
technicians. The equipment was not used by the BizTech instructors or students
until all instructors were trained on it.
[34]          
After the equipment was installed, the defendant
came on numerous occasions to address issues that arose with its functioning.
He would report problems experienced by his instructors and students to the
director of the program at that time, Bhupinder Singh, who would report the
issues to Mr. Dharna. He stated that there were no written records of
complaints, but that the plaintiff was a small organization and reporting was
verbal to his director and on up to the CEO.
[35]          
He stated that there were issues with resolution
and quality of images, among other things.
[36]          
The ultrasound equipment purchased from the
defendant was finally removed from the laboratory and put into storage, after they
experienced continual issues with proper functioning of the equipment.
[37]          
Atif Moin is a licensed sonographer who owns a
number of diagnostic clinics.
[38]          
He explained that sonography training at the College
involves two parts, theoretical and functional, after which the students would
complete clinical placement at an actual sonography clinic, somewhat like an
apprenticeship.
[39]          
He stated that he was involved with the
plaintiff in conducting functional training as the students had not been
properly trained on ultrasound machines and were not ready for clinical
placement. He advised Mr. Dharna that he would do this training for a fee. He
charged $18,700 for training and assessment.
[40]          
Ishaq Bukhri is an ultrasound sonographer who
does ultrasound and cardiac diagnostics and owns several cardiac labs. He also
provided placements for the plaintiff’s students in 2018. He trained nine
students and charged $21,750. The fee also included rental of machines to the
plaintiff, because they only had one proper, functioning ultrasound machine,
the used Philips.
[41]          
Hon Lam Choi, the plaintiff’s expert, was a
licensed sonography professional who had worked, inter alia, as an
application specialist for GE. In the context of his work, he had also worked
on Canon, Philips, Siemens, Samsung and Alpinion ultrasound machines. He
explained that the Alpinion, which is the subject of this action, has controls
and nuances very similar to GE and other manufacturers, as Alpinion had hired
engineers from Samsung who used to work for GE. Thus, the Alpinion controls and
terminology are very similar.
[42]          
He confirmed that from the time of delivery of
the subject Alpinion machines in January 2017 and his inspection and report
dated March 21, 2021, there were several Service Reports. He stated that his
inspection was consistent with the issues that he was advised had existed prior
to the equipment being put out of service.
[43]          
He fully tested and inspected the equipment and
assessed it for suitability for general and cardiac training. From his analysis
of the machines, he concluded that the Service Reports from 2017 and 2018 and
the accounts of the issues experienced by the plaintiff exactly matched the
results of the inspection that he did.
[44]          
He concluded that the initial installation
process was not completed properly by Star Medical. Based on his inspection, he
concluded that the Alpinion ultrasound machines were deficient and not properly
functioning. The Alpinion ultrasound system FO1337 was unable to load software,
while the Alpinion ultrasound system FO1588 would freeze intermittently during
his inspection and produced multiple error messages. The quality of the imaging
produced by ultrasound FO1588 vary between different applications from poor
quality images to high quality. Based on the errors and issues experienced
during his inspection, he concluded that while the air filters on the Alpinion
ultrasound machines were not well maintained, the problems were related to
outdated windows, hard drive and driver settings. Because the ultrasound
machines were deficient and had improper settings, he concluded that the Alpinion
ultrasound machines were not suitable for training and educational purposes for
a diagnostic medical sonography program.
[45]          
The following witnesses testified on behalf of
the defendant.
[46]          
Mr. Choheili is the owner of the defendant, Star
Medical.
[47]          
He is not a sonographer and does not train
students in sonography. He is a Field Service Engineer.
[48]          
It is the position of Mr. Choheili that Mr. Dharna
of BizTech approached him to purchase two ultrasound machines in the summer of
2016. He gave Mr. Dharna information regarding the ultrasound machines and Mr.
Dharna returned in January 2017 to purchase the subject ultrasound equipment.
It is the position of Mr. Choheili that BizTech knew what they wanted and had
done their due diligence. The defendant just sold the plaintiff the equipment
and installed it.
[49]          
He stated that the defendant does two
inspections after receipt of the equipment by them, including a regular
manufacturer’s inspection to confirm that the equipment has not been damaged
and is working properly when it is received, and a second inspection prior to
delivery to the purchaser. There were no records prepared for these
inspections.
[50]          
Mr. Choheili maintained that the equipment sold
to the plaintiff was not defective, and that each time he sent a service
technician to look at the equipment after complaints from the plaintiff, they
found no issues or errors in the equipment. He stated that if they had been
satisfied that there were issues with the system or that it was defective, they
would have replaced it.
[51]          
Mr. Choheili stated that, in his opinion, the
plaintiff’s instructors were inexperienced and unable to teach students, which
likely led to the problems it claimed to be experiencing with the equipment.
[52]          
Mr. Choheili stated that he believed that the
plaintiff had continued to use the equipment after March 2018 because it did
not have other equipment and did not purchase other equipment until July 2018.
He conceded in cross-examination that he was guessing that it continued to use
the equipment, but did not know this for a fact.
[53]          
While Mr. Choheili maintained that the plaintiff
had submitted retraining invoices from Messrs. Moin and Bukhri under false
pretenses, conducted unlawful and improper training not permitted by Accreditation
Canada and/or that the invoices were not real, in cross-examination, he
admitted that the invoices were real and were not submitted under false pretenses.
[54]          
While Mr. Choheili maintained that Mr. Harito had
been detained against his will by the plaintiff when Mr. Harito went to the
plaintiff’s facility, he admitted in cross-examination that Mr. Harito, in his
affidavit, did not say anything about being detained or forced to sign
something by the plaintiff, and that he was not there with Mr. Harito at the
time.
[55]          
While Mr. Choheili stated that the ultrasound equipment
had a resale value when the plaintiff abandoned it, he adduced no evidence to
provide such a value at trial.
[56]          
From 2014 to 2018, Bhupinder Singh was the Program
Director of the Cardiovascular Sonography Technologist Program at BizTech. He
was responsible for designing and implementing the program to meet the
requirements of the Ministry of Training for Colleges and Universities and the
accreditation body. He stated that it usually takes one and one-half years to
obtain accreditation.
[57]          
He assisted Mr. Choheili in obtaining ultrasound
equipment for use in the laboratories. They purchased two Alpinion ultrasound
machines, which were delivered to BizTech on February 24, 2017. He arranged for
the defendant to attend at BizTech for installation and training on the
machines, and sometimes signed the service reports when the defendant came,
although this was usually done by instructors.
[58]          
Despite the email which he sent to Mr. Dharna on
October 5, 2018, which listed the problems that he had observed with the
equipment, at trial, he denied that he wrote the email and disagreed with its
contents. He denied that there were any problems with the Alpinion equipment He
further disagreed that the defendant continually gave excuses regarding the
problems, although he does recall that a technology specialist came from Alpinion
in Korea, but states that this was for specialized training, software updates
and to determine whether the Alpinion was appropriate for use in educational
institutions.
[59]          
In his affidavit, Mr. Choheili stated that he
left BizTech in October 2018. In testimony, he stated that he could not
remember if he left in October or November 2018. He stated that he became Program
Director of the Diagnostic Medical Sonography Program at Canadian All Care
College the following year.
[60]          
Mr. Faundez was retained as an expert on behalf
of the defendant, to review and critique the report of Mr. Choi.
[61]          
As regards the report of Mr. Choi, he was of the
opinion that Mr. Choi made improper assumptions, could not comment on the
functioning of the machines in 2017 and 2018, as Mr. Choi was not there for
their installation in 2017 and was not provided with service logs thereafter.
Further, the machines had not been used for four years and “it did not make
sense” to perform assessments after four years of non-use.
[62]          
 He commented that Mr. Choi did not use the
standard assessment with phantom or test objects. He was of the opinion that
the Choi assessment was incomplete as Mr. Choi had scanned himself rather than
using test phantoms, although he agreed that test phantoms can be unreliable
and that other test objects can also be unreliable. He stated that he did not
take issue with Mr. Choi scanning himself, but that would only be part of a
proper assessment.
[63]          
He stated that he believed dust in the filters
may have come from use between 2018 and 2021, but also agreed that it could
come from the fact that dust was never cleaned out of the filters when the
machines stopped being used in 2018.
[64]          
He did not know if noise from the ultrasound
machines may have affected presets differently and stated that if he had been
present to examine the machines, he may have come to a different conclusion.
[65]          
He stated that it was possible that a machine
would turn on one day and load certain presets, but, in an assessment or
training demonstration, that things may not operate properly.
[66]          
He took issue with the fact that one would be
able to assess machines in 2021 and assuming the machines had not been used
between 2018 and 2021, that one could attribute problems to the time of
installation and first use.
[67]          
In cross-examination, he admitted that he was
not a service engineer or application specialist for Alpinion. He did not know
whether Alpinion’s engineers came from Samsung and GE, but did admit that its
basic controls on the keyboard are the same as or similar to Samsung, GE and
Philips, and that the controls for spatial, contrast and temporal resolution
were also similar.
[68]          
He did not view, inspect or evaluate either of
the subject ultrasound machines and never saw them. He was instructed to base
his report on the Choi Report and to challenge Mr. Choi’s assessment of the
machines. He did not conduct his own assessment on the machines.
[69]          
Shahbakram Mavandadi is a sonographer. He is not
a service engineer nor an application specialist.
[70]          
He was asked to review and critique the report
of Mr. Choi and to determine whether it was possible for Mr. Choi to assess if
the software and hardware were functioning properly. He opined that this was
not possible. He further stated that from pictures he saw, he concluded that
the machines were not well maintained or properly serviced.
[71]          
After reviewing the Choi report, he stated that
there were concerns about the assumptions made by Mr. Choi in preparing his
report. Also based on his expertise as a sonographer, he disagreed with the
quality and reliability of Mr. Choi’s analysis and most of his conclusions.
[72]          
He criticized Mr. Choi’s use of self scanning,
stating that it is extremely difficult to self scan while adjusting the image
on a machine with one hand. However, in cross-examination, he conceded that a
sonographer routinely takes images by manipulating controls with one hand and
scanning with the other.
[73]          
He stated that in his opinion it was difficult
to assess equipment in 2021 that was installed in 2017.
[74]          
He did not see or examine the ultrasound
machines in issue, and did not ask to see them. He admitted in
cross-examination that if he had had the opportunity to see the equipment, he
may have come to a different conclusion regarding the functioning of the
equipment. He stated that had he gone to see the machines and produce his own
images, he would have been in a better position to determine the ability of the
machines to get better spatial, contrast and temporal resolutions.
[75]          
Arben Harito is an application specialist for
Alpinion. He is not a service engineer. He stated that application specialists
do not perform service on the equipment.
[76]          
Mr. Harito first attended at BizTech to observe
the subject equipment on April 8, 2018. He watched the plaintiff’s instructors
and students use the equipment. He did not use the equipment himself and does
not recall if he did any diagnostic testing. He did not do any troubleshooting.
He stated that based on his observations, he did not find anything wrong with
the machines. He did not observe the machines on any other day in 2017 or 2018.
He does not know one way or the other whether there may have been problems on
any other day.
[77]          
He did not prepare a service report and did not
perform any service.
[78]          
At the material time, Mr. Tarmohamed was service
manager and a senior service engineer for Alpinion with the defendant. He was
not a sonographer.
[79]          
He explained that a sonographer uses ultrasound
machines to prepare images that can be used to diagnose conditions in the body.
He further stated that sonographers use education and training to determine
whether an image is of sufficient quality to be used for purposes of diagnosis.
He explained in cross-examination that while he stated in his affidavit that
the equipment was functioning as expected and producing acceptable quality
images, he was speaking from an engineering standpoint and was basing his
statements on what plaintiff sonographers had said to him.
[80]          
The subject equipment was shipped to the
defendant from the manufacturer, Alpinion, as follows: F01337 - February 21,
2016; F01588 - March 27, 2016, and was in the defendant’s inventory prior to
being sold to the plaintiff.
[81]          
There were no records of internal servicing on
arrival from the manufacturer and pre-sale to the plaintiff. He stated that the
practice of Star Medical was to inspect all equipment upon receipt and to report
any non-conformities. He would have checked, serviced, updated and inspected
the machines when they arrived, and prior to delivery to the plaintiff one year
later. There are no records of servicing or inspection or of any re-inspection
before delivery of the equipment to the plaintiff one year later.
[82]          
He stated that at delivery, he would turn the
machines on and make sure they were working. The service report is prepared as
a record of what the defendant did at a service visit. In this case, there are
six reports from time of delivery to the plaintiff through 2018.
[83]          
He stated that Alpinion has nothing to do with
the machines after delivery, other than if there is a problem.
[84]          
He reviewed all of the service reports that had
been produced at trial. The service reports are as follows:
[85]          
There was also a visit on April 8, 2018 by Mr. Harito,
but no Service Report was produced for this visit.
[86]          
As can be seen from the Service Reports that are
available, within three weeks of delivery and installation of the equipment,
the defendant had to return to perform a functionality check and upgrade the
equipment.
[87]          
In general, I found the
witnesses to be fairly straightforward in giving their testimony.
[88]          
However, I found Mr. Choheili to be very
defensive and argumentative. He would attempt to avoid answering
questions that would hurt his case or put his case in an unfavourable light. I found
his testimony to be problematic. I do not find him to be credible and find his
testimony to be unreliable.
[89]          
I also found Bhupinder Singh to be evasive. He
denied having authored the October 5 email, although it came from the same
email address as the others which he admitted were authored by him. Mr. Singh
became defensive in response to questions about the email. I do not accept the
defendant’s theory that the plaintiff accessed Mr. Singh’s emails and drafted
the October 5 email themselves. I do not find Mr. Singh’s testimony at trial to
be credible or reliable and do not accept it.
[90]          
I found Mr. Tarmohamed’s evidence to be
problematic. Based on his own testimony that he did not accurately indicate the
Codes on his Service Reports, I do not find them to be
reliable as evidence.
[91]          
Moreover, only six service reports are produced
at trial. No service report was prepared or produced with respect to Mr. Harito’s
attendance on April 8, 2018. It is not clear whether others may also have been
omitted or simply not prepared. As already indicated,
the parties’ record-keeping was poor and not reliable.
[92]          
I have taken the foregoing into account in
rendering this decision.
[93]          
The relationship between the parties
deteriorated to the extent that by April 11, 2018, the defendant purported to
terminate the Warranty contained in the Purchase
Agreement. Mr. Choheili advised Mr. Dharna that he would no longer honour the
two-year warranty in the Purchase Agreement which was, at that time, still in
force.
[94]          
It appears from the testimony of the plaintiff that
BizTech provided information regarding various machines and sought suggestions and
advice regarding comparable ultrasound machines for educational use from the
defendant.
[95]          
I accept the plaintiff’s evidence that he was
not a sonographer and had no medical training, such that he always took
Bhupinder Singh, the Sonography Program Director at BizTech, with him when he
met with the defendant and discussed the purchase of equipment for the
sonography programs.
[96]          
While the defendant argues that the plaintiff
did not rely on the defendant with respect to advice regarding ultrasound
machines or the college program, I find that the plaintiff did rely on the
defendant’s knowledge and expertise, even if it did some due diligence or
research itself.
[97]          
While the defendant argues that there were no
written complaints regarding the two subject Alpinion machines, I accept the
plaintiff’s evidence in this regard. The plaintiff has not produced written
complaints from its instructors and students regarding the issues experienced
with the sonography machines. The complaints were oral and were communicated to
the defendant orally through the plaintiff’s reporting channels at the
institution, namely students to instructors to program director, who
communicated with the CEO, Mr. Dharna. The plaintiff is a small institution and
such communication is understandable.
[98]          
It is of note that neither party had any
significant records. Their record-keeping seemed, on both sides, to be lacking,
unprofessional and not businesslike.
[99]          
While the defendant states that there are no
issues with the equipment and no internal error logs, which are only available to
the defendant with special access codes, the plaintiff failed to produce any
documentation to establish this or any screenshots showing the absence of
internal error logs. I reject the defendant’s allegations regarding the
plaintiff’s failure to produce the internal error logs for the sonography
equipment. I find that the internal error logs or internal diagnostic tests
within the equipment are only accessible by the defendant service team, and are
not accessible by the plaintiff. Moreover, the defendant has never produced any
such error logs themselves. While the defendant maintains that there were never
any such error logs, it has not produced any screenshots that would indicate
whether there were or were not error logs generated in the equipment when it
serviced the equipment. The defendant did admit that this would be possible to
do, but did not do so.
[100]      
 I am satisfied that the equipment was not
functioning properly. Had it been functioning properly, the plaintiff would not
have ordered new ultrasound equipment in July 2018 and would not have expended
money in the interim to lease equipment. Further, it would not have requested
that Messrs. Moin and Bukhari train its students on ultrasound equipment and
paid them for said training.
[101]      
BizTech incurred additional costs to send its
sonography students to other facilities to complete their functional training
on properly functioning sonography machines. This aspect of their training has
nothing to do with the clinical placements with actual diagnostic clinics open
to the public, which was a separate requirement for sonography students after
having completed their theoretical training and the functional training on
sonography machines. As part of its accreditation requirements, BizTech is
required to partner with diagnostic sonography clinics to provide students with
clinical training in an actual clinical setting with patients.
[102]      
The BizTech instructors held the required
professional certifications in cardiac and vascular sonography to train their
students. The instructors were able to properly use ultrasound equipment. They
received training on the Alpinion equipment from the defendant. However, I am
satisfied that the equipment in question in this action was defective and was
never properly corrected such that the problems persisted.
[103]      
The plaintiff sonography program was still
accredited as of March 2018; it lost accreditation in November 2018. It has
again received accreditation for its program. The issue of accreditation or the
reason it was lost is not an issue to be determined in this action and,
therefore, I will not deal with it further herein.
[104]      
The plaintiff’s expert, Mr. Choi, reported that
the complaints about the equipment made by the plaintiff matched what he found
on inspection of the equipment. The independent evidence came from his
inspection and was consistent with the service reports from 2017 and 2018
regarding driver/software errors.
[105]      
The plaintiff’s expert had experience with sonography
equipment manufactured by GE, Siemens, Philips and, to a lesser extent, with
Alpinion. He indicated that a number of engineers from GE had gone to Alpinion,
and had taken their knowledge of the GE equipment to Alpinion, such that the
equipment and controls for the Alpinion was very similar to GE and other
machines manufactured by other manufacturers. He first tested the subject
equipment in 2021.
[106]      
The defendant’s expert never tested the
equipment, never saw the equipment and only commented on the plaintiff expert’s
report. They were retained to challenge the plaintiff’s expert’s report and assessment,
as admitted by Mr. Faundez.
[107]      
I have read the expert reports and the
transcripts of various experts’ testimony. Based on the plaintiff’s expert’s
report, his qualifications and experience, and his responses to
cross-examination questions at trial, I find his expert report to be more
reliable and persuasive than the reports of the defendant’s expert witnesses.
[108]      
The basic principles of contractual interpretation
include, inter alia, the following:
[109]      
I am satisfied that this was a contract for sale
of goods to which the Sale of Goods Act is applicable. The subject goods,
namely the ultrasound machines, were sold by the defendant to the plaintiff for
money consideration, as defined in the Act.
[110]      
The defendant raised the argument that the
plaintiff is not the owner of the equipment, but rather the leasing/financing
company, National Leasing, is the owner pursuant to the Financing Agreement,
and leases the equipment to the plaintiff. The defendant argues that because
the plaintiff was not the “buyer” of the equipment under the SGA, there are and
can be no implied terms.
[111]      
This issue was never addressed at trial or in
closing arguments by the plaintiff in argument by the plaintiff. It is
addressed by the defendant in one paragraph of the defendant’s 97-page Written
Closing Submissions. I do not consider this argument to be significant or
determinative.
[112]      
While the Sale of Goods Act permits
parties to contract out of the implied provisions of the Act, this must be done
by express agreement. In this case, the parties did not contract out of the
provisions and protections of the Sale of Goods Act including implied
conditions as to the quality or fitness in sections 14 or 15 of the Act:
see Hunter Engineering Co v Syncrude Canada, 1989 CanLII 129 (SCC), [1989] 1 SCR 426.
[113]      
In order to contract out of the implied
provisions of the Act, including both implied warranties and conditions,
this must be done explicitly: Gregorio v Instras-Corp (1994), 1994 CanLII 2241 (ON CA), 18 OR (3d)
527 (CA).
[114]      
In this case, the Purchase Agreement contained
the following warranty:
[115]      
The warranty contained in the Purchase Agreement
does not expressly exclude the statutorily implied conditions in section 15 of
the Sale of Goods Act, which thus continued to apply to the transaction.
Further, there is no evidence that the issues experienced with the equipment
were caused accidentally by the buyer and thus the standard warranty is
applicable.
[116]      
This interpretation gives the words of the
agreement their ordinary and grammatical meaning, furthers the commercial
purpose of the parties’ transaction and honours their intentions. There is no
ambiguity, and the defendant led no evidence of a contrary intention as regards
the form of warranty.
[117]      
In determining whether there is an implied
condition as to fitness for a particular purpose, three factors must be
considered, as follows: the course of the seller’s business; knowledge on the
part of the seller of the purpose of the goods; and reliance on the seller’s
skill or judgement.
[118]      
In this case, it was in the course of the
seller’s business to supply ultrasound equipment, and the defendant had sold
ultrasound equipment to the plaintiff previously. The defendant was aware of
the use to be put to the ultrasound equipment and was told by the plaintiff
that it was for educational purposes. Indeed, the defendant offered the
plaintiff an educational discount, available to educational institutions
purchasing the Alpinion ultrasound equipment.
[119]      
While the defendant spent significant time
arguing that the plaintiff did not rely on the defendant, and did its own due
diligence as regards the various brands of equipment, I do not accept the
defendant’s arguments in this regard. Reliance on the defendant’s skill need
not be exclusive or total. By selecting a seller whose business is to supply
goods of the same description as that which are the subject matter of the
contract, the buyer shows his reliance on the skill and judgment of the seller
to supply goods that are reasonably fit for the purpose disclosed by the
description: Muskoka Fuels v Hassan Steel Fabricators Limited, 2009
CanLII 78887.
[120]      
I accept the evidence of the plaintiff that it
did rely on the defendant as regards the best equipment for the sonography
program. Indeed, the plaintiff would not likely have been well-versed on the
equipment purchased, namely the Alpinion ultrasound equipment, as the defendant
was the only distributor of Alpinion equipment in Canada, such that it was not
as widespread as other brands of equipment in Canada. The defendant, as the
sole distributor in Canada, would likely have had the best information
regarding the product.
[121]      
With respect to the Alpinion equipment purchased,
I find that the goods were bought by description from the seller, Star Medical,
who deals in goods of said description, and were, therefore, a sale by
description pursuant to section 14 of the Sale of Goods Act.
[122]      
An examination of the equipment upon receipt by
the plaintiff would not have revealed the defects which are the subject of this
action. Merchantable means that the article sold is fit for the purpose
intended. In this case, the equipment was not fit for its educational purpose
given the excessive repairs and interruptions in business and educational operations
experienced by the purchaser, BizTech, and therefore was not merchantable
within the meaning of the Act.
[123]      
As regards damages for the breach of the implied
conditions of fitness and merchantability, the defendant adduced no evidence to
establish that the equipment retained any remaining value. Accordingly, the
plaintiff is minimally entitled to the purchase price pursuant to the agreement
for the breach of both implied conditions.
[124]      
As regards the defectiveness of a product,
section 15(2) of the Act may apply in circumstances where the cause of
the defects cannot be established. The actual cause of the defect need not be
proven. Once other probable causes have been excluded and the buyer proves that
the defect was not attributable to anything that he did or failed to do, an
inference can be drawn from the evidence that the defect existed at the time
the product was delivered: Muskoka Fuels v Hassan Steel Fabricators Limited,
2009 CanLII 78887, citing Schreiber Brothers Ltd. v Currie Products Ltd.,
1980 CanLII (SCC), 1980 CanLII 11 (SCC), [1980] 2 S. C.R. 78.
[125]      
In this case, the defendant did not establish
other probable causes that I accepted.
[126]      
Based on the evidence, I am satisfied that the
defects and deficiencies lay with the equipment and not otherwise.
[127]      
It would further appear from the evidence that
the plaintiff acted upon the defects and deficiencies, expending money to train
its students on other equipment, leasing equipment and purchasing new equipment
in July 2018. The plaintiff would not have expended these monies had there not
been defects and deficiencies in the equipment. This would not have made
business sense.
[128]      
It is of further note that Mr. Choi, in examining
the equipment for purposes of his expert report, confirmed that the defects
complained of by the plaintiff are the same that he found on examining the
equipment.
[129]      
I find that the defendant has breached the
implied conditions of fitness for purpose and merchantability in the Act, thus entitling
the plaintiff to damages.
[130]      
Under the Sale of Goods Act, the breach
of any condition by the defendant can only be treated as a breach of warranty.
The defendant breached the implied conditions under the Sale of Goods Act.
The defendant further breached the terms of the Warranty and Purchase Agreement
by failing to adequately install and/or repair the equipment, by refusing to
perform further diagnostics or repairs to the equipment and by unilaterally
terminating the Warranty, prior to expiry of the two-year warranty term set
forth in the Purchase Agreement.
[131]      
Damages for the breach of the implied conditions
under the Act are assessed as damages for breach of warranty. Pursuant
to the legislation, the measure of damages for breach of warranty is the
estimated loss directly and naturally resulting in the ordinary course of events
from the breach.
[132]      
In this case, I am satisfied that the plaintiff
is entitled to the costs of the two pieces of Alpinion ultrasound equipment in
the amount of $58,647, the costs of financing the equipment in the amount of
$10,273, and the costs of training the students on properly functioning
equipment in 2018 in the amount of $40,450, for a total amount of $109,370,
payable by the defendant, Star Medical, to the plaintiff, BizTech.
[133]      
I strongly urge the parties to cooperate in
agreeing upon costs payable in this matter. In the event that they are unable
to do so, I would request that they provide me with their bills of costs of no
more than three pages in length within 30 days of the rendering of this
decision.