[1]              
The ongoing political and military conflict in
the Middle East is and has been the source of diverse and passionately held
views. These views have been expressed in many different ways, including demonstrations,
campus occupations, resolutions, social media discourse, boycotts and reports
and commentary in mainstream media.
[2]              
This case arises from a demonstration that
occurred in Ottawa on 22 July 2014. The demonstration was in support of the
Palestinian cause and in opposition to certain policies of the government of
Israel, as well as in opposition to the Canadian government’s support of those
policies (the “Demonstration”). Two representatives of the Canadian Union of
Postal Workers (“CUPW” or the “Union”) were present at the Demonstration. Each
of them carried a CUPW flag.
[3]              
Video footage and photographs taken at the
Demonstration showed that another individual attending the Demonstration was
carrying a flag that has been identified as the flag of Hamas. Hamas is
designated as a terrorist organisation by the Canadian government. Hamas has
controlled the territory known as the Gaza Strip since 2006.
[4]              
Statements published by the defendants in
subsequent print and broadcast media relating to CUPW’s participation in the
Demonstration are alleged to have been defamatory. In general terms, the gist
of the plaintiff’s claims is that the impugned statements meant, and were
understood to mean, that the Union and its members are terrorist sympathisers,
that CUPW supports Hamas, and that the Union’s representatives did not attend
the Demonstration to show their concern and support for ordinary Palestinians.
[5]              
CUPW is a trade union. Over 99% of the workers
it represents are employed by Canada Post Corporation (“Canada Post”), which is
a federal Crown corporation. The Canada Labour Code, R.S.C., 1985, c.
L-2 governs workplace relations and collective bargaining between unions and federally
regulated employers such as Canada Post. However, CUPW also represents three
Private Sector Bargaining Units in Ontario whose collective agreements fall under
the jurisdiction of  Ontario labour-relations law, including the Ontario
Labour Relations Act, 1995, S.O. 1995, c. 1, Sched. A (“OLRA”) and the Rights
of Labour Act, R.S.O, 1990, c. R. 33 (“ROLA”).
[6]              
In addition to its “fundamental objective” of “promoting
and defending the interests of its members against all attacks of the employer
and government”, the Union “actively commits itself to the objective of
transforming the present social and economic order to make it consistent with
the interests and aspirations of workers”. In that regard, the Union has a wide
range of policies, including polices on “Peace and Disarmament” (Policy D-24)
and Palestine (Policy D-36). The Palestine policy, inter alia, declares
that CUPW “supports the rights of the Palestinian people for respect, justice
and peace”.
[7]              
Quebecor Media Inc. was, at all times material
to this action, the parent company of the Sun Media Corporation (“Sun Media”)
and Group TVA Inc. (“TVA”). Sun Media published a number of daily and weekly
newspapers throughout Canada, including the Toronto Sun. In April 2015,
Sun Media sold most of its print operations, including the Toronto Sun,
to Postmedia, which today owns the Toronto Sun. TVA was and is a
broadcasting company operating primarily in the province of Quebec. At the
material times, Sun Media and TVA were the two partners of the Sun News Network
(“Sun News”), a cable TV news channel based in Toronto. Sun News ceased
operations in or around February 2015. I will refer to the corporate defendants
as the “Sun Media” defendants.
[8]              
Jerry Agar was at all material times a freelance
host of a current affairs television show on Sun News called “The Source”.  He
was also a freelance contributor to the Toronto Sun. He was not an
employee of any of the corporate defendants.
[9]              
Avi Benlolo is a human-rights activist who at all
material times was the president and CEO of an organisation called the Friends
of the Simon Wiesenthal Center for Holocaust Studies (“FSWC”) and, as such,
frequently spoke to the media. His involvement in this litigation arises from
an interview which he gave to Mr. Agar on an episode of “The Source”.
[10]          
On Tuesday 22 July 2014, what was described by
its organisers, the Association of Palestinian Canadians (“APAC”) as a “Protest
in Solidarity with Gaza”, took place in Ottawa. An email originating from APAC,
and received by CUPW, invited recipients to “join us to protest” what was
described as Israel’s ongoing Gaza “massacre” and “to raise awareness about the
atrocities being committed to our brothers and sisters in Palestine which are not
being covered by the biased media”.
[11]          
Tyler Levitan was one of the organisers of the
Demonstration. At the time, he was the campaigns co-ordinator for a national
organisation called Independent Jewish Voices (“IJF”). He testified that this
organisation advocates for a just and peaceful resolution to the
Israel-Palestine conflict. Its members and supporters are predominantly Jewish.
The Demonstration was one of around five protests organised over the course of
what Mr. Levitan described as an “assault on Gaza” by the Israeli army in July
and August of 2014. There were around 1,000 people present at each protest.
[12]          
Mr. Levitan testified that the IJF would
strongly oppose any demonstrations of support for terrorism. He testified that
he had no reason to believe that APAC supported Hamas, and added that if APAC
expressed support for Hamas, the IJF would not work with it.
[13]          
Peter Denley and Mike
Evard were at the Demonstration representing CUPW. They took CUPW flags
with them to the Demonstration. Mr. Denley testified that many organisations
and individuals take banners and flags to demonstrations. He recognised some,
but not all, of the flags at the Demonstration. His evidence was that he did
not see, or become aware, of any representation of Hamas while he was at the
Demonstration. There were no speeches in favour of Hamas. He testified that he
would not have recognised a Hamas flag if he had seen one.
[14]          
On 23 July 2014, the Ottawa Citizen
carried a story with the headline “Hamas flag causes social media stir”. A
photograph immediately underneath showed a number of protesters, one of whom
was carrying a flag which was described in the article as “a flag associated
with Hamas”. After pointing out that Hamas, “the militant Palestinian group
that has been negotiating the failed ceasefire with Israel” had been designated
as a terrorist organisation in 2002, the article reported that:
[15]          
Mr. Denley said that he did not know who Adam
John was and did not recall seeing him at the Demonstration. He acknowledged
that one of the CUPW flags could also be seen in the photograph contained in
the Ottawa Citizen report.
[16]          
On 23 July 2014, Jerry Agar was to host “The Source”
broadcast in place of the regular host, Ezra Levant. John Egier was filling in
for the senior producer role that day. The associate producer was Sarah
Ramsaram and the chase producer was Kate Boivin. Mr. Egier had circulated a
list of possible topics for the programme, one of which was described as “CUPW
Parliament Hill protest”.
[17]          
Mr. Agar recalled having received an email from
Mr. Egier on the afternoon of 22 July 2014, indicating “we have been asked to
cover the Anti-Israel protests…on Parliament Hill”. Mr. Agar responded the next
morning:
[18]          
Mr. Agar acknowledged that Mr. Egier’s initial
email had said nothing about either CUPW or Hamas and that those features of
the subsequent coverage had apparently been his, that is, Mr. Agar’s, idea.  He
testified that he knew from the news that there had been a pro-Palestinian
protest, that varieties of people had shown up, and that what stood out to him
were two sets of flags. He also acknowledged being aware of what he described
as CUPW’s “track record” which, he said, included sending delegates to a World
Social Forum – Free Palestine conference in Brazil, CUPW’s support for breaking
an Israeli blockade of Gaza, which Mr. Agar said he saw as supporting Hamas, as
well as CUPW support of Cuba, which Mr. Agar described as a “terrorist
country”. Mr. Agar added that CUPW’s activities were of interest to him
personally, as his father had worked for Canada Post.
[19]          
Mr. Agar testified that at an editorial meeting,
a decision was made to contact CUPW to ask them about their participation at
the Demonstration. He cannot recall specifically who had suggested, “Call CUPW.
Ask them if they support terrorism?”
[20]          
Kate Boivin was tasked with contacting CUPW. She
succeeded in making contact with Aalya Ahmad, a communications specialist at
CUPW. Ms. Boivin does not recall the specifics of her conversation with Ms.
Ahmad. She knows that she was asking if it would be possible to get someone
from CUPW onto Mr. Agar’s show. She said that she wanted to be as upfront as
possible about what Sun Media was trying to get them to talk about.
[21]          
On behalf of CUPW, Ms. Ahmad declined the
interview request, but did provide a statement on CUPW’s position. Ms. Ahmad
subsequently complained that Ms. Boivin had requested an interview with a CUPW
representative to discuss the “union’s support for the terrorist organization
Hamas” and that because of the “aggressive, misinformed and provocative way in
which Ms. Boivin addressed the issue”, Ms. Ahmad was instructed to tell her
that the Union would decline the interview request.
[22]          
Ms. Ahmad was not called as a witness at trial.
[23]          
Ms. Boivin testified that she did not recall her
conversation with Ms. Ahmad being aggressive, misinformed or provocative. She
also denied having been told by Ms. Ahmad that Ms. Ahmad had expressly
requested that she not be identified as the author of the Union’s statement. Ms.
Boivin’s evidence was that if such a request had been made by Ms. Ahmad, she
would have communicated it to the entire production team.
[24]          
CUPW’s statement on Gaza was sent by Ms. Ahmad
to Ms. Boivin at 3:23 p.m. on 23 July 2014. It read:
[25]          
Ms. Boivin testified that someone at the
editorial meeting had suggested inviting Mr. Benlolo to be a guest for the
show. She therefore emailed Mr. Benlolo’s representative, and arrangements were
made for him to participate in the show via Skype.
[26]          
In July 2014, Mr. Agar had a regular talk show
on NewsTalk 1010 Radio, and wrote a column for the Toronto Sun. From
time to time, he also filled in as the host on “The Source” show on the Sun
News Network if the regular host, Ezra Levant, was not available.  He described
the show as consisting of a guest-oriented current affairs programme in which
the host also had an opportunity to provide commentary. Mr. Agar was not a
decision-maker on what would be included in the programme, but would be
consulted.
[27]          
On 23 July 2014, after doing his regular radio
show, Mr. Agar went to the television studio. He was told that the segment on
the Demonstration would be going ahead, but that CUPW was not sending a
representative. He was provided with Ms. Ahmad’s email and CUPW’s statement. Mr.
Agar said that when he read the text of the email he was “gobsmacked” by the
response. He said that he expected that if he was asked, “Do you support
terrorism?”, he would lead with a “no” answer. Instead, what CUPW had provided
was a condemnation of Israel and Prime Minister Harper, and a link to the
adoption by CUPW of its anti-Israel policy. There was nothing about an
anti-Hamas policy. He said that he was “shocked” that CUPW did not provide a
response that included a full and complete denial of supporting Hamas.
[28]          
The producers told Mr. Agar that they had booked
Mr. Benlolo to appear on the show. Mr. Agar did not know Mr. Benlolo.
[29]          
Other than Mr. Agar’s opening statement, the
show was free-form and unscripted.
[30]          
Mr. Benlolo confirmed that he had been
requested, through his communications director, to be a guest on “The Source”.
He was unable to attend in person so it was agreed that he would participate by
Skype. He knew that the topic was the involvement of the postal workers at the Demonstration.
However, he was not sent any questions in advance, nor did he speak to either
Mr. Agar or Ms. Boivin before the programme was recorded and broadcast.
[31]          
On 28 July 2014, the Toronto Sun carried
what was described as an “opinion” piece by Mr. Agar, titled “Hamas goes
postal? Only in Canada”. The first sentence of the article, which appeared in
both the print and online versions, asked “Would you want a terrorist
sympathizer coming to your door every day?”
[32]          
The plaintiff asserts that the following
statements were defamatory:
[33]          
In relation to the “The Source”, the plaintiff
also alleges that the Sun Media defendants, including Mr. Agar, made a number
of inferences, which, taken on their own, might not have been defamatory, but
which were defamatory of CUPW taken in the context of the broadcast as a whole:
[34]          
CUPW alleges that these words meant, and were
understood to mean, that CUPW and its members were terrorist sympathisers, that
CUPW supports Hamas, and that CUPW was not attending the rally to demonstrate
concern and support for ordinary Palestinians.
[35]          
CUPW also alleges that other statements made by
Mr. Benlolo, while perhaps not defamatory on their own, taken in the context of
the broadcast as a whole, wrongly inferred that CUPW supports and even partners
with terrorists, including Hamas, that CUPW was not attending the rally to
demonstrate concern and support for ordinary Palestinians, that CUPW supports
the actions of Hamas in crowding public spaces with rocket launchers with
children in order to inflict civilian casualties on its own population, and that
CUPW supports the destruction of the state of Israel.
[36]          
Specifically, the plaintiff alleges that in
response to the question “Don’t we have to differentiate between supporting
ordinary Palestinians and supporting Hamas?”, Mr. Benlolo stated:
[37]          
Then, in response to Mr. Agar’s question, “I’ve
talked to people from Israel and they recognize how this current situation is
for ordinary people on the street in Palestine.  I don’t think it’s a tough
differentiation to make, but I would ask you:  do you believe that Israel is
engaged in human rights abuses at the moment?”, Mr. Benlolo stated:
[38]          
CUPW asserts that these alleged defamatory
statements made by Mr. Benlolo were particularly damaging given that he is a
well-known public figure, serving as President and CEO of the Friends of Simon
Wiesenthal Center for Holocaust Studies, with over 30,000 members.
[39]          
In respect of the article by Mr. Agar, CUPW
asserts that the article was a republication of the libel contained in the
broadcast, noting that on the same page of the printed edition of the Toronto
Sun that Mr. Agar’s article appeared in, there were adjacent articles titled,
“Israel must defend itself” and “Will Trudeau’s stand woo Jewish voters”.
[40]          
CUPW alleges that the following statement is
defamatory:
[41]          
CUPW also alleges that the article by Mr. Agar
contained a number of inferences, which on their own would not be defamatory,
but which are defamatory of CUPW in the context of the article as a whole, and
its juxtaposition on the page with other articles that compare Hamas to Nazi
Germany. Noting that there was a photograph published with the article depicting
a Canada Post delivery truck and a “STOP” traffic sign, the following
statements were alleged to contain false innuendos or inferences that are
libelous of CUPW:
[42]          
CUPW’s allegations are that the words were used,
were meant, and were understood to be, that CUPW and its members were terrorist
sympathisers, that CUPW was not attending the rally to demonstrate concern and
support for the ordinary Palestinians, and that CUPW supports Hamas and its
objectives, which includes the genocide of the Jewish people. CUPW adds that
the articles, both the online and print versions, combined with the photograph
that accompanies the online version, and the juxtaposition of the print article
on the page with the other articles mentioned, give rise to many innuendos that
are false, including that postal workers are terrorist sympathisers, that CUPW
supports a campaign to wipe the Jews from the face of the earth, that CUPW
supports genocide, that CUPW supports the destruction of the state of Israel,
and that CUPW would support the building of concentration camps or
Auschwitz-style ovens to burn Jews as the Nazis did.
[43]          
CUPW’s notice of libel with respect to the print
and online articles, and its request for a retraction and the removal of the
online articles, was rejected. However, the Sun Media defendants did accede to
a request that references to Ms. Ahmad be removed from the online publications.
[44]          
A threshold issue which arises is whether CUPW,
as an unincorporated association, has the legal capacity or standing to bring
an action in its own name for defamation.
[45]          
Assuming that the plaintiff succeeds on the
standing issue, the next issue is whether the plaintiff has proved the
threshold issues of the tort of defamation, namely that:
[46]          
A corollary consideration is that of causation,
namely whether the plaintiff’s reputation was actually threatened by the
impugned statements.
[47]          
If the tort of defamation is made out and the
requirement of causation satisfied, the next issue is whether one or more of
the defences to the tort of defamation are available. The principal defences
available to the defendants are those of justification (truth) and fair comment.
However, the Sun Media defendants also raise the defences of responsible
communication and statutory privilege.
[48]          
Finally, if some or all of the defendants fail
to make out any of the defences available to them, or if those defences are
negated by the existence of malice on the part of the defendants, the court
must consider the issue of damages.
[49]          
A union is an unincorporated association. As
such, the traditional position has been that the union has no legal personality,
and, in the absence of an express enactment to the contrary, cannot sue in its
own name for defamation: Taff Vale Railway Co v. Amalgamated Society of
Railway Servants, [1901] A.C. 426 (H.L.)
[50]          
Over time, the law has evolved. The Supreme
Court of Canada recognised this in Berry v. Pulley, [2002] S.C.R. 40, 2002
SCC 40, at para. 46. Observing that there is now a sophisticated statutory
regime under which trade unions are recognised as entities with significant
rights and obligations, the Court held that “unions
are legal entities at least for the purpose of discharging their function and
performing their role in the field of labour relations”.
[51]          
If one takes the position
that CUPW’s commitment “to the objective of transforming the present social and
economic order to make it consistent with the interests and aspirations of
workers” falls outside the “field of labour relations”, the issue of whether
CUPW can sue for defamation in relation to its activities in pursuit of that
commitment remains unsettled. This was recognised by Pelletier J. in a motion
brought in this proceeding under Rule 21 of the Rules of Civil Procedure for
determination of an issue of law before trial: Canadian Union of Postal
Workers v. Quebecor Media Inc., 2015 ONSC 4511, at para. 64. On an appeal
from that decision, the Court of Appeal held that the issue of whether an
unincorporated trade union has standing to bring an action for defamation was,
as Pelletier J. had determined, best left for trial on a full record:  Canadian
Union of Postal Workers v. Quebecor Media Inc., 2016 ONCA 206, at para. 17.
[52]          
More recently, in CUPW v.
B’nai Brith Canada, 2020 ONSC 323, where the issue of the union’s standing
to sue in order to defend its reputation was raised in a motion under the
anti-SLAPP legislation, MacLeod J. expressed the “preliminary view” (at para.
23) that “the law has evolved to the point that a union may now sue to defend
its reputation and its right to do so is not dependent on any statute”. He
added:
[53]          
 MacLeod J. explained that
he had declined to answer the question concerning the union’s standing because
of, inter alia, the Court of Appeal’s pronouncement in this case that
the question is not to be decided on a preliminary motion. In an appeal taken
from Justice MacLeod’s decision, the Court of Appeal made no comment on the
issue of CUPW’s standing to sue for defamation:  Canadian Union of Postal
Workers v. B’nai Brith Canada, 2021 ONCA 529.
[54]          
A review of jurisprudence in
a number of jurisdictions and levels of court underscores the broadening of the
legal status accorded to trade unions.
[55]          
In Public Service
Alliance of Canada v. Canada (Attorney General) (2002), 62 O.R. (3d) 682, 2002
CanLII 19258 (C.A.) (“PSAC”), Goudge J.A. reviewed the Supreme Court of
Canada’s decision in Berry v. Pulley, concluding that the case stood for
three propositions, namely:
[56]          
In Fullowka v.
Pinkerton's of Canada Ltd, [2010] 1 S.C.R. 132, 2010 SCC 5, an action was
brought against, inter alia, the union of which a fired striker at a
mine had been a member. The striker had set an explosive device which, when
detonated, killed nine replacement workers. While the union was not ultimately
held liable, the Supreme Court of Canada agreed with the submission that one of
the purposes of recognising unions as legal entities is to allow victims of a
group action to recover from the union’s assets.
[57]          
To similar effect, in Kiewning
v. Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union of Canada, 2011 ONSC 712,
Shaw J. held that he could see no sound policy reasons why a union should have
immunity from being sued by the plaintiff for damages alleged to have been
sustained by her as a result of systematic campaign of harassment and bullying
on the part of the union local’s president, “even if those claims do not
directly deal with the union’s role in labour relations”.
[58]          
In Ironworkers Local 97
of The International Assn. of Bridge, Structural and Ornamental and Reinforcing
Ironworkers v. Campbell, 1997 CanLII 1379 (BC SC), the Supreme Court of
British Columbia rejected an argument that a union did not have the right to
seek damages for defamation against the Liberal Party of British Columbia and
its leaders as a consequence of a news release alleging involvement by the
union in a kickback scheme. Macdonald J., at para. 14,  cited with approval the
opinion of the Court of Appeal of England and Wales in National Union of
General and Municipal Works v. Gillian, [1946] 1 K.B. 81 (C.A.), which held
that a trade union can sue in tort and maintain an action for defamation:
[59]          
In Labourers’
International Union of North America, Local 183 v. Castellano, 2019 ONSC
506 (varied on appeal, 2020 ONCA 71), B. Dietrich J. observed, at para. 78,
that as with many organisations, a union’s reputation “is critical to its brand
as well as its ability to successfully bargain on behalf of its members and
lobby all levels of government”.
[60]          
The need for CUPW to be able
to protect its general reputation in discharging its labour relations function
was spoken to by Mr. Denley during the course of his evidence at trial. He
referred to previous campaigns by CUPW to save Canada Post from privatisation
and limit the use of community mailboxes. He explained that CUPW regularly has
to interact with governments and with citizens’ committees. As a result, he
asserts the importance to CUPW of being able to defend its reputation by being
able to sue for defamation, even if the genesis of the defamatory comments is
the Union’s advancement of social policies as opposed to more directly in
relation to its labour relations role.
[61]          
The High Court of England
and Wales recently dealt with the question of whether a trade union has the
right to sue in defamation: Prospect v. Evans, [2024] EWHC 1533 (KB).
While that decision deals with British legislation, the Court made references
to secondary sources and comments which are consistent with the trends that
have been recognised by courts in this country. At para. 36, Steyn J. referred to a passage from Carter-Ruck
on Libel and Privacy (6th ed., 2010), at §8.41:
[62]          
The second submission made
in the extract from Carter-Ruck on Libel and Privacy, after noting an
English authority interpreting the specific legislation existing in that
jurisdiction, which held that a union could not maintain a claim for defamation,
refers to "dicta" in “several decisions which assumes or
states directly that trade unions can sue in defamation”. The extract concludes
that although the point remains “arguable”, “it is submitted that the better
view today is therefore that a trade union can sue for defamation”.
[63]          
Steyn J., again commenting on the ambit of the
British legislation, concludes, at para. 52, that the finding that a trade
union is entitled to bring a claim for libel is consistent with “the fact
that a trade union has a distinct reputation, separate from its members…”
[64]          
A small fraction of the
plaintiff’s members – three bargaining units, to be precise – work for a
cleaning company which cleans Canada Post’s plants in Windsor, Hamilton and Kitchener,
Ontario. Approximately 50 employees are members of these bargaining units,
which are provincially regulated, compared to the 55,000 employees covered by
certificates under the Canada Labour Code.
[65]          
Section 3(2) of the Rights
of Labour Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. R.33, provides:
[66]          
The effect of the Court of
Appeal’s decision in PSAC is that s. 3(2) of the Rights of Labour Act
does not act as a bar to unions governed by federal legislation from commencing
proceedings in their own name. However, Goudge J.A. commented, at para. 45 of PSAC:
[67]          
In Windsor Salt Ltd./Sel Windsor Ltée., 2023
ONSC 1431, Justice Leach declined to make a definitive finding that s. 3(2) of
the Rights of Labour Act should still be construed (to the extent that
it had been in the past) as preventing unions from being named as defendants in
litigation relating to labour disputes. He noted, in particular, the
observation of Goudge J.A. at paras. 15-16 of PSAC that in 1944, when
the Rights of Labour Act was originally passed, trade unions had only
begun to emerge as important institutions in Ontario, and provincial
legislation providing such unions with rights to compulsory collective bargaining
was relatively new. Since then, the “enormous revolution” which Goudge J.A.
described in PSAC had occurred. Importantly, Leach J. also observed, at
para. 16(b)(ii) of his decision in Windsor Salt that s. 3(2)
requires only that the ability of unions to be made a party to any action “not
depend on the Rights of Labour Act or the Ontario Labour Relations
Act”, and that “nothing in s. 3(2) demands an express grant of standing
from the legislature” (quoting from para. 38 of PSAC).
[68]          
As Goudge J.A. observed in the PSAC case,
the role of unions and the labour relations regimes in which they operate has
undergone an “extraordinary evolution”. Part of that evolution has been an
increased role played by some unions in a broader national and international
political discourse which goes beyond the strict boundaries of labour
relations.
[69]          
It logically follows that, with the recognition
of expanded rights on the part of unions to engage in litigation, both rights
and responsibilities are conferred. Indeed, in Berry, Iacobucci J., in
holding that unions are legal entities, at least for the purpose of discharging
their function and performing their role in the field of labour relations, also
found that when claims are brought against unions, they can be held liable to
the extent of their own assets.
[70]          
I conclude that, subject to comments which
follow concerning the application of Ontario legislation governing provincially
regulated unions, the plaintiff has standing to bring an action in its own name
for defamation.
[71]          
Given the finding in PSAC that a
federally regulated trade union may sue in its own name, and the
ever-broadening legal status accorded to trade unions which has led me to
conclude that the right of the union to sue and be sued includes defamation
litigation, it would be an absurd outcome if the plaintiff was precluded from
suing to protect its reputation as a result of its representation of just 50
employees out of over 55,000 employees being provincially, rather than
federally, regulated.
[72]          
Aside from that absurdity, the ability of CUPW
to be made a party to an action is not dependent on the Rights of
Labour Act or the Ontario Labour Relations Act because, as a
federally regulated union, it is, by virtue of the Court of Appeal’s decision
in PSAC and the subsequent evolution of the common law since that case,
entitled to be a party to an action. The fact that three of its locals are
provincially regulated should not, and, in my view, does not, undermine that
standing. As a consequence, it is not necessary for me to find that s. 3(2) of
the Rights of Labour Act has ceased to be an “express legislative
provision” precluding an Ontario trade union from being named as a party in an
Ontario proceeding,
[73]          
It is conceded that the words complained of were
published or communicated to at least one person other than the plaintiff.
[74]          
A classic explanation of the requirement that
the words complained of were defamatory, or would tend to lower the plaintiff’s
reputation in the eyes of a reasonable person, was provided by Abella J.A. in Color
Your World Corp. v. Canadian Broadcasting Corp. (1998), 1998 CanLII 1983 (ON CA), 38 O.R. (3d) 97,
156 D.L.R. (4th) 27 (C.A.), at 36 (D.L.R.)
[75]          
Abella J.A. took as her starting point the
following definition of defamation:
[76]          
She continued:
[77]          
The natural and ordinary meaning of words
includes any inferences or implications that they may reasonably bear. As Lord
Reid explained in Lewis v. Daily Telegraph Ltd., [1964] A.C. 234 (H.L.),
at 258:
[78]          
The evaluation of defamatory meaning necessarily
requires account to be taken of the context in which the impugned statements
were made. This includes consideration of the publication as a whole, not just
isolated passages. Furthermore, the prominence which is given to the impugned
words by their position in the publication, or by the emphasis which is
provided by the type and heading employed, may be relevant. See, generally,
Linden, Feldthusen, Hall, Knutsen and Young, Canadian Tort Law, 11th ed.
(Toronto: LexisNexis Canada, 2018) at § 16.22-16.24.
[79]          
With one caveat, the defendants do not take
serious issue with the defamatory character of the statements, made during the
broadcast by Mr. Benlolo and Mr. Agar, as set out in paragraph 32 above.  The
caveat, which applies equally to the impugned statements that may not be
defamatory when taken alone, but are alleged to be when considered in the
context of the broadcast as a whole, arises from the observation by LeBel J. in
WIC Radio Ltd. v. Simpson, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 420, 2008 SCC 40, at para.
75:
[80]          
Mr. Agar and the Sun Media defendants question
whether the impugned words actually threatened the plaintiff’s reputation. As
will be discussed below, the plaintiff has been extensively criticised over a
number of years for the positions it has taken supporting the Palestinian cause
and the Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions (“BDS”) movement against Israel. Some of
that criticism has come from within CUPW itself.
[81]          
While it is likely that a well-timed and
appropriately worded denial by the plaintiff of any knowledge that a Hamas
flag, or overt supporters of Hamas, were participating in the Demonstration,
would have blunted the criticism that followed CUPW’s participation in the
Demonstration, there is, as Mr. Benlolo stated, a difference between supporting
ordinary Palestinians and supporting a terrorist organisation like Hamas. The
sting of the defamatory words used is the association with terrorism. Even for
a union as politically active, and vocal about its activism, as CUPW, I find
that words associating the plaintiff with a terrorist organisation and
supporters of terrorism are capable of being injurious to the Union’s
reputation and, hence, defamatory.
[82]          
With respect to the inferences allegedly made by
the Sun Media defendants and Mr. Agar, as set out in paragraph 33 (above), to
the extent that these statements were made in the context of supporting the
central allegation that CUPW was supporting or associating itself with a
terrorist organisation, the statements are also capable of being defamatory in
character. Nevertheless, as will be discussed below, several of the statements
are, by CUPW’s own admission, factually accurate.
[83]          
Mr. Benlolo’s comment that “to support a
designated terrorist organisation is shocking and bewildering to us”, is a
clear assertion that the plaintiff supports a terrorist organisation and,
hence, defamatory.
[84]          
By contrast, the answer given by Mr. Benlolo set
out in paragraph 37 (above), while strong in its condemnation of Hamas, does
not, in my view, amplify Mr. Benlolo’s defamatory statements. I therefore do
not find that part of the impugned narrative to be defamatory.
[85]          
With respect to the inferences raised in article
by Mr. Agar which appeared online and in print, when considered in the context
of the article as a whole, as well as its juxtaposition with other articles, I
find that the inferences, as set out in paragraph 41 (above), were capable of
being understood as saying that CUPW and its members were terrorist sympathisers,
and, hence, defamatory.
[86]          
Mr. Benlolo argues that his comments were
expressly directed at CUPW’s leadership, rather than the Union as a whole.
[87]          
In my view, Mr. Benlolo makes a distinction
without a difference. The Union’s constitution provides a mechanism whereby the
leadership of the Union is elected by its members. In effect, the members at
large of the Union delegate to the Union’s leadership the authority to act on
the Union’s behalf. Mr. Benlolo may well have a quarrel with the Union’s
leadership (and would likely not have a quarrel with individual members of the Union
who opposed the Union’s adopted policies on Israel and Palestine), but his
quarrel with the Union’s leadership is a quarrel with those who the Union
membership as a whole has chosen to represent them. Accordingly, I am satisfied
that the Union has established that the words complained of were about the Union.
[88]          
Once the plaintiff has established, on a balance
of probabilities, that the words complained of are defamatory, the defendants
bear the onus of establishing that there are one or more defences available to
them.
[89]          
The analysis of those defences is informed by
the recent history of CUPW’s political activism.
[90]          
To provide context for the defences raised by
the defendants, it is appropriate to review the Union’s political activism and,
in particular, its policies on “peace and disarmament” and Palestine.
[91]          
The Union’s policies are adopted at its national
conventions. The policies are published in section D of the Union’s national
constitution. The Peace and Disarmament policy states, inter alia:
[92]          
The Union’s policy on Palestine states:
[93]          
The plaintiff’s policy on Palestine was passed
at its 23rd Triannual National Convention in April 2008.
[94]          
At the 2008 Convention, there was opposition to
the proposed Palestine policy from within the Union’s membership. One speaker
said that the labour movement “is rapidly descending into anti-Semitism” and
referred to the “absurd apartheid myth”. Another delegate asked, “Have we lost
our collective minds?”, describing the proposed policy as anti-Semitic and
adding, “Let us be very careful who we line ourselves up with. Hamas,
democratically elected, but unwilling to denounce violence though they have
been asked many times” and, “Do we really, really, really want to align
ourselves by enshrining this in our Constitution with organizations who have
made it clear they intend to eradicate another race of human beings off the
face of this planet?”. Another delegate said, “Our union talks about peace. Our
union talks about how we are opposed to genocide and things like that. Yet,
this is exactly what Hamas represents the opposite of. I have no trouble
supporting the Palestinians and their rights”.
[95]          
For a long time, a transcript of the debate at
the 2008 Convention was accessible online. Indeed, Ms. Ahmad put a link to the
transcript in her email to Ms. Boivin. Commenting on that, one of CUPW’s
witnesses at trial, Peter Denley, said, “We put it out there for the world to
see”, adding that CUPW’s concerns about its own reputation did not stop it from
taking positions, even positions which many Canadians might disagree with.
[96]          
CUPW’s policies and activism in relation to
Palestine have also attracted comment and criticism from others.
[97]          
In 2012, CUPW sent delegates to Brazil to attend
a “World Social Forum – Free Palestine” conference. This attracted criticism
not only because of the use of Union funds, but also because, following the
event, the General Secretary of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine (a designated terrorist organisation) wrote an open letter thanking
people who had attended the World Social Forum. The issue was raised in the
House of Commons by Pierre Poilievre MP. CUPW subsequently put out a bulletin
which included the following statement:
[98]          
The Union’s support of the BDS movement has been
another source of commentary and criticism. Indeed, in 2008, Mr. Benlolo wrote
a letter to Denis Lemelin, the President of CUPW, commenting on a published
letter from Mr. Lemelin which had described Israel as an “apartheid state as
part of an anti-Semitic smear campaign to target the Jewish State”.
[99]          
A variety of newspaper columns and articles have
criticized CUPW. A column in the National Post in 2010 was entitled “CUPW’s
radical policies and anti-Israel bigotry are a disgrace to letter carriers”.
[100]      
As already referred to, an article by Jessica
Murphy in the Toronto Sun, following the World Social Forum’s “Free
Palestine” conference, spoke of the opportunity for postal union members to rub
elbows with supporters of a listed terror group. The article was entitled
“Postal union takes heat over conference”.
[101]      
A 2013 article in the National Post was titled
“Beyond its mandate: Canada’s ‘radical’ postal workers’ union helps fund litany
of controversial causes”. The article quoted Bob Rae, at that time a Liberal
MP, as saying, “I continue to be astonished by the extent to which ideas which
should be on the ‘loony tunes’ margins of politics have now been adopted by a
union which represents thousands of members”.
[102]      
In 2010, CUPW lent its support to a “Canadian
Boat to Gaza”, which one of CUPW’s witnesses, Mr. Denley, described as a boat
organised to break Israel’s blockade of Gaza, thereby enabling the delivery of
mail to people in Gaza.
[103]      
In 2013, Mark Adler MP wrote a letter to Mr.
Lemelin, commenting on a recent CUPW newsletter which had criticised Canada for
allowing Israel to “terrorize occupied people” as well as CUPW’s attendance at
the World Social Forum, which he described as an attempt “to send union members
to an anti-Israel conference…at which participants called for the release of a
convicted terrorist”.
[104]      
While the main thrust of the defences raised is
fair comment, Mr. Benlolo argues that the words spoken by him are substantially
true. Truth is a complete defence to defamation with respect to factual
statements. While the defendant bears the burden of proving the truth of the
words, the defendant need not prove every detail of the factual statements
made. It is sufficient for the defendant to demonstrate that the factual
statements are substantially correct: Libel and Slander Act, R.S.O.
1990, c. L.12, s. 22; Sidorsky v. CFCN Communications Ltd., [1994] A.J.
No. 718 (Q.B.), at para. 185, aff’d 1997 ABCA 280 (CanLII), [1997] A.J. No. 880 (C.A.)
[105]      
If a defendant can demonstrate that the words
are substantially true, those words are not actionable, even if they were
spoken with malice.
[106]      
Mr. Benlolo argues that the evidence establishes
the following true (or substantially true) facts:
[107]      
A number of these “true facts” are not
challenged by CUPW. In respect of others, I make the following observations and
findings based on the evidence.
[108]      
To start with, all of the parties acknowledge
that Hamas is a terrorist organisation.
[109]      
The evidence of the CUPW witnesses is that they
were unaware that a Hamas flag was being carried at a demonstration in close
proximity to CUPW’s flag and that they would not, in any event, have recognised
the Hamas flag as such.
[110]      
Jessica Hume, a Sun Media journalist who wrote
for the Sun Newspapers and did TV work for Sun News, was covering the Demonstration.
She had previously lived and worked in the Middle East for three years. She
remembered seeing Hamas flags and Palestinian flags at the Demonstration. She
believes that there was more than one Hamas flag, but acknowledged that there
were no photographs showing more than one such flag (and did not have any
photos in her possession showing more than one flag).
[111]      
I accept Mr. Denley’s evidence that at the time
of the Demonstration, he was unaware that there was another demonstrator
carrying a Hamas flag. I also accept CUPW’s evidence that none of its
participants or officials associated with the Demonstration were familiar with
the Hamas flag. Indeed, Ms. Hume noted that the Hamas flag is, in many
respects, similar to the flag of Saudi Arabia.
[112]      
That having been said, the fact remains, and I
so find, that the Hamas flag was flown at the Demonstration, that the CUPW and
Hamas flags were carried in close proximity to each other, and that the CUPW
and Hamas flags could be seen in the same photographs taken at the
Demonstration.
[113]      
I also find that Mr. Denley and Mr. Evard were
in attendance at the Demonstration and carried CUPW flags. Although Mr. Denley initially
had no recollection of having been at the Demonstration, his memory was
refreshed when shown a photograph from the Demonstration showing both himself
and Mr. Evard each carrying a CUPW flag.
[114]      
CUPW did not take the opportunity to distance
itself from any actual or implied association with the Hamas flag flown at the Demonstration.
According to Ms. Ahmad, Kate Boivin had contacted her requesting an interview
with a CUPW representative on the Jerry Agar show to discuss the “union’s
support for the terrorist organization Hamas”.  These are the words which Ms.
Ahmad used in an email that she sent to Glenn Garnett at Sun Media on 30 July
2014 to describe Ms. Boivin’s request. Ms. Boivin has no independent
recollection of that conversation but offered no reason to believe that the
words attributed to her were inaccurate. She denied that her conversation with
Ms. Ahmad was aggressive on either side, or that she was rude to Ms. Ahmad or
provocative. It is uncertain whether specific reference was made to the
presence of a Hamas flag. In the absence of contradictory evidence from Ms.
Ahmad, I accept Ms. Boivin’s testimony.
[115]      
The subsequent statement which Ms. Ahmad
provided to Ms. Boivin made no reference to Hamas or to any assertion, express
or implied, that the Union had somehow associated itself with Hamas at the Demonstration.
Rather, the statement spoke to the rights of working people to hold and express
opinions on international issues, and the support of CUPW members for the human
rights of the Palestinian people and the desire to end the violence and the
killing.
[116]      
The evidence at trial clearly supports the
assertion that CUPW supported the Canadian Boat to Gaza. The Canadian Union of
Postal Workers was listed as one of the organisations endorsing the Canadian Boat
to Gaza initiative.
[117]      
Similarly, CUPW clearly associated itself with a
speaking tour by George Galloway. An article in the Dalhousie Gazette on
26 November 2010 described CUPW as one of the sponsors of the Halifax stop on
Mr. Galloway’s Canadian speaking tour in November 2010 called “Free
Afghanistan. Free Palestine. Free Speech”. The same article made reference to
Mr. Galloway’s alleged support of Hamas.
[118]      
CUPW agrees that it has never passed a
resolution criticising Hamas by name for its role in fomenting violence in the
Middle East, or for any other reason. However, CUPW asserts, and I accept, that
it has repeatedly criticised violence, terrorism, war, and suicide bombings.
[119]      
There is also no dispute that Mr. Lemelin
attended and spoke at the BDS conference in Montreal in October 2010, or that a
CUPW delegation attended the World Social Forum – Free Palestine conference in
Brazil. However, I accept the Union’s evidence that none of the CUPW delegates
attended the meeting which discussed the detention of Mr. Sa’adat, the General
Secretary of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. I also accept
Mr. Lemelin’s evidence that, to the best of his knowledge, no CUPW delegates
met with any representatives of Hamas or participated in any support for Hamas or
other terrorist groups while at the World Social Forum.
[120]      
By contrast, the evidence does not establish as
true that CUPW knowingly marched with Hamas supporters, that CUPW
supports Hamas, that mail carriers could be terrorist sympathisers, or that
CUPW willingly flew its flag next to that of Hamas.
[121]      
The defence of justification requires a
defendant to prove the substantial truth of the “sting” or main thrust of the
defamation: Bent v. Platnick, [2020] 2 S.C.R. 645, 2020 SCC 23, at
paras. 107-108. Those statements relied upon by Mr. Benlolo which I find to be
true do not demonstrate the truth of, or otherwise justify, his assertions that
CUPW supports a designated terrorist organisation.
[122]      
The defence of justification therefore fails.
[123]      
The defence of fair comment requires a defendant
to establish four elements:
[124]      
While fair comment may be defeated if the person
making the comment is proved to have acted with malice, there is no requirement
that a comment must be correct, or reasonable, or balanced, or respectful of
those who hold differing opinions. In WIC Radio, at para. 4, Mr. Justice
Binnie observed that “we live in a free country where people have as much right
to express outrageous and ridiculous opinions as moderate ones”.
[125]      
Although dissenting in part, the following
observation by LeBel J. in WIC Radio, at para. 75, is apt:
[126]      
A matter of public interest is “one which
invites public attention or about which the public has some substantial
concern”: Grant v. Torstar Corp., 2009 SCC 61, at para. 105.  It is not
disputed that the defendants’ comments, if that is what they were, were made on
a matter of public interest.
[127]      
A defamatory imputation can only be protected as
fair comment if it is a comment upon given facts rather than a statement of
facts. It is whether the matter would be recognisable to the ordinary
reasonable person as a comment upon true facts, and not as a bare statement of
fact: Ross v. Beutel (2001), 201 D.L.R. (4th) 75, 2001 NBCA 62 (CanLII),
at paras. 55 and 57 (quoting, at para. 57, from Brown, The Law of Defamation
in Canada).
[128]      
In analysing whether the words used are
statements of comment or opinion, rather than fact, the court is required to
examine whether the words used may, in pith and substance, be properly
construed as comment (WIC Radio, at para. 26). In Ross v. New
Brunswick Teachers’ Assn. (2001), 201 D.L.R. (4th) 75, 2001 NBCA 62, at
para. 56, the Court stated that “comment” includes a “deduction, inference,
conclusion, criticism, judgment, remark or observation which is generally
incapable of proof”. After referring to this passage in WIC Radio, at
para. 26, Binnie J. comments that:
[129]      
The fact that an article is positioned or
described as an opinion or a column is not automatically determinative of
whether the words are, in fact, opinion rather than fact: Kent v. Martin,
2016 ABQB 314, at para. 114.
[130]      
Relying on Lascaris v. B’nai Brith Canada (2019),
144 O.R. (3d) 211, 2019 ONCA 163, the plaintiff argues that the defendants have
falsely stated that CUPW has a history of partnering with hate groups and that
it supports terrorists, and have presented this as a statement of fact, and not
as a comment.
[131]      
In Lascaris, the plaintiff, a lawyer, had
spoken out on behalf of a man who had told him that his son had been killed
extrajudicially by the Israeli authorities. The lawyer wrote that whatever the
son may or may not have done, the Israeli government’s treatment of the father
was an outrage. The defendant then published articles claiming that the
plaintiff supported terrorists. The plaintiff sued for defamation. The
defendant pleaded a number of defences, including fair comment. The defendant
moved, initially successfully, under s. 137.1 of the Courts of Justice Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, for summary dismissal of the action on the basis that it
was a SLAPP action. That decision was set aside by the Court of Appeal. At
para. 34, Nordheimer J.A. wrote:
[132]      
Mr. Agar’s evidence was that CUPW’s support for
the Gaza boat to break the Israeli blockade, its support for the government of
Cuba, and its attendance at the World Social Forum – Free Palestine conference,
were all facts that led him to hold the opinion that CUPW supported terrorism. The
Sun Media defendants argue that the concept of “support” for terrorism is
“essentially contestable”, thereby indicating that the nature of the statement
is that of comment incapable of proof, rather than a fact capable of proof.
They add, quoting Binnie J. at para. 30 of WIC Radio, that “[t]he cases
establish that the notion of comment is generously interpreted”.
[133]      
The Sun Media defendants continue that it is not
as if similar opinions to those expressed by Mr. Agar have not previously been expressed
by others. When Mr. Denley was asked, during the course of cross-examination at
trial, about the comment made by a Union member at the 2008 Convention to the
effect that passage of the BDS resolution would amount to CUPW lining itself up
with Hamas, Mr. Denley’s response was “that’s his opinion”.
[134]      
While Ms. Boivin did not recall the details of
her conversation with Ms. Ahmad (and Ms. Ahmad did not testify), implicit from
Ms. Ahmad’s subsequent complaint that Ms. Boivin had asked for CUPW to discuss
the “union support for the terrorist organization Hamas” was that some basis
for asking that question existed. CUPW did itself no favours by declining the
opportunity to say at that time, as has been subsequently said in these
proceedings, that it does not support terrorists, and never has. A plausible
interpretation of CUPW’s unwillingness to address the question, instead making
a statement about the right of working people to hold and express opinions in
support of the human rights of the Palestinian people, is that CUPW wanted to
avoid directly answering the question. While I am not suggesting that CUPW’s
failure to take the opportunity to deny its support for Hamas could reasonably be
construed as an acknowledgment that it did, in fact, support Hamas, it
nevertheless left the door open for Mr. Agar and Mr. Benlolo to make the
comments that are the subject of this action.
[135]      
Lawrence Goldstein was the Acting Comment Editor
at the Toronto Sun in 2014. He edited Mr. Agar’s article and put in the
headline. Three days previously, his own article “Hamas is Insane: Anyone who
thinks peace is possible between Israel and the Islamic Resistance Movement
hasn’t read its Charter” had run in the Toronto Sun.
[136]      
When he reviewed Mr. Agar’s article, Mr.
Goldstein saw that Mr. Agar was suggesting there may be terrorist supporters in
CUPW. Mr. Goldstein testified that he regarded that to be a matter of public
interest and debate. He reasoned that the facts in the article disclosed that
CUPW flags and a Hamas flag had flown together at a demonstration, that Hamas
was a terrorist organisation, and that CUPW had been asked for a response. The
question was “do you support Hamas?”. The answer did not talk about Hamas; it
criticised Israel and the Canadian Government. The response from CUPW was
quoted in the column. CUPW had also provided information about its support for
the BDS resolution. Mr. Goldstein checked it. Information sent with the
response also referred to the debate at the 2008 CUPW Convention. Mr. Goldstein
checked that too. Israel was mentioned 120 times; Hamas was mentioned just twelve
times, and then only by people opposed to resolution. There was no mention of
Hamas having to do anything to achieve peace. Mr. Goldstein concluded that Mr.
Agar’s column was fair comment and that Mr. Agar honestly believed there were
terrorist sympathisers within CUPW.
[137]      
In my view, the comments made by Mr. Agar and
Mr. Benlolo concerning CUPW’s support for terrorist groups, its siding and
partnering up with a hate group like Hamas, and questioning whether to
differentiate between supporting ordinary Palestinians and supporting Hamas,
were statements of opinion. In the case of the broadcast, this was underscored
by the fact that throughout the broadcast, a banner ran which said, “Supporting
terrorists?” - i.e., not a statement of fact, but a question.
[138]      
The facts must be sufficiently stated in the
comment or otherwise known to the audience. However, there is no requirement
that the stated or known facts must objectively justify the comment. This was
explained by Binnie J. in WIC Radio, at para. 31:
[139]      
At para. 38 of WIC Radio, Justice Binnie
continued his examination of the defence of fair comment, quoting, with approval,
the opinion of Justice Gaynor in Howarth v. Barlow, 99 N.Y.S. 457 (N.Y.
App. Div. 1906), at p. 459:
[140]      
A similar point was made by the Supreme Court of
Canada in Hansman v. Neufeld, 2023 SCC 14, at para. 100, where it was
stated that there is no requirement that the facts support the comment,
in the sense of confirming its truth.  Rather, “[t]he expression must relate to
the facts on which it is based, but the comment need not be a reasonable or
proportionate response”.
[141]      
CUPW argues that at best, the facts upon which
the defendants’ “opinions” are based are that CUPW supports Palestine (along
with the United Nations and Nobel Prize winners), that it supports BDS, and
that it attended an event in support of Palestine where there happened to be a
Hamas flag that CUPW did not know about. CUPW was then invited to come to an
interview – a potentially hostile request – following which it made a
statement. All of these facts being set alongside a background, which the
defendants ignored, of CUPW having repeatedly denounced violence, terrorism,
racism, and all that Hamas stands for (albeit without specifically mentioning
Hamas).
[142]      
CUPW argues that these facts are incapable of
forming a factual basis for the assertion that the Union knowingly associated
itself with a Hamas supporter at the Demonstration, or that it supports
terrorists.
[143]      
In response, the Sun Media defendants repeat the
facts that they viewed as supporting Mr. Agar’s position that CUPW supported
terrorism:
[144]      
Mr. Agar’s article, “Hamas Goes Postal? Only in
Canada” (the title of which was Mr. Goldstein’s contribution, inspired, he
said, by an old advertising slogan for a brand of tea) recites some of the
facts forming the basis for his comments. After referring to the CUPW statement
provided by Ms. Ahmad, he writes:
[145]      
Mr. Benlolo, referencing para. 59 of WIC
Radio, notes that the law requires the comment to be based on “a sufficient
substratum of facts to anchor the defamatory comment”.  That factual substratum
includes CUPW’s longstanding and very public history of activism in relation to
Gaza and the Palestinian cause – press releases, verbatim transcript of
proceedings, attendance at the Montreal conference on BDS, and attendance at
the World Social Forum in Brazil. Mr. Benlolo’s own experience was that letters
of complaint to the Union (and others) about its activism had got nowhere.
[146]      
Comment does not have to be reasonable. It can
even be farfetched or extreme. So long as facts are sufficiently stated or
otherwise known, the defence of fair comment will avail. I find that, to use
the terminology adopted in WIC Radio, the necessary factual substratum
for the opinions expressed by the defendants has been adequately demonstrated.
[147]      
In WIC Radio (at para. 49), Binnie J.
explained that the honest belief requirement does not require that the
defendant itself have an honest belief in the comment based on the proven
facts, but that any person could have such an honest belief, based on
the proven facts. The test is an objective one. Once it has been proved that
any person could hold such an honest belief, the fair comment defence is
available, whether or not the defendant itself had an honest belief in the
comment. As the Sun Media defendants observed, this is an important
qualification because it protects publishers who might publish opinions that
they themselves do not share.
[148]      
Both Mr. Benlolo and Mr. Agar have a history of
being critical of CUPW’s activism, including aspects of its policies and its activities
in support of Palestine. They contrast CUPW’s clear and oft-repeated criticisms
of Israel, with its lack of direct criticism of Hamas. Their belief that CUPW
supports Hamas, a terrorist organisation, is, in my view, honestly held based
on proven facts. It does not have to be a reasonable belief. But it must be an
honest one. The evidence of both Mr. Agar and Mr. Benlolo established that they
had an honest belief in their comments on CUPW. Indeed, Mr. Benlolo was never
cross-examined on his evidence in chief that the words that he spoke during the
broadcast were his honestly held opinions.
[149]      
In WIC Radio, Sopinka J. observed that
testifying as to honest belief in the words spoken remains one of the most
effective ways of satisfying the test that somebody could honestly express the
view: WIC Radio, at para. 44.
[150]      
I find that the defendants have met their burden
of establishing the defence of fair comment. As Mr. Benlolo submitted in
closing argument, there may be a range of views within Canadian society about
the conflict in the Middle East. That is as true today as it was in 2014. Those
views may at times be expressed in colourful terms.
[151]      
Mr. Agar and Mr. Benlolo are seasoned observers
of and commentators on issues relating to conflict in the Middle East. They
each have their angle. It is an angle which stands in stark contrast to the
policies and activities of CUPW.
[152]      
As I will briefly discuss below, my finding of a
subjective honest belief on the part of Mr. Agar and Mr. Benlolo eliminates the
possibility of a finding of malice that would negate the defence of fair
comment.
[153]      
Because of my conclusions on the issue of fair
comment, I will make only brief reference to the two other defences raised by
the Sun Media defendants, the first of which is responsible communication.
[154]      
In Grant v. Torstar, the Supreme Court of
Canada concluded that the common law should be modified to recognise a defence
of responsible communication on matters of public interest. McLachlin C.J.
explained the rationale for the law at para. 65:
[155]      
For the defence of responsible communication to
avail a publisher, the publisher must act responsibly. A publisher who fails to
take appropriate steps, having regard to all of the circumstances, will be
liable. At para. 62 of Grant, McLachlin C.J. wrote:
[156]      
It was presumably with this responsibility in
mind that the Sun Media defendants asked CUPW to either comment on what had
been observed at the Demonstration or to participate in “The Source” broadcast.
At the risk of repeating what has already been said in these reasons in other
contexts, CUPW’s communications specialist knew that the request for an
interview was to discuss the “union’s support for the terrorist organization
Hamas”. The statement that was produced by CUPW in response to that request did
not address the premise of the request, namely, the Union’s alleged support for
the terrorist organisation Hamas. CUPW had the opportunity to challenge that
premise and any factual basis for it, but did not take it.
[157]      
Mr. Goldstein also checked the information
provided by CUPW concerning its support for BDS and the proceedings at the 2008
Convention, before publishing the article.
[158]      
In my view, the Sun Media defendants discharged
their duty of responsible communication.
[159]      
The defence of statutory privilege was pleaded
but not extensively argued.
[160]      
In its written submissions, the Sun Media
defendants argue that insofar as the broadcast reported fairly and accurately
on the fact that the Demonstration had taken place, that the CUPW banner had
been displayed at the demonstration, and that the Hamas flag had been displayed
in proximity to the CUPW banner, the broadcast is protected by the statutory
privilege provided by s. 3(2) of the Libel and Slander Act, which
provides:
[161]      
I accept that submission.
[162]      
Malice defeats the defences of qualified
privilege, fair comment, and responsible communication.
[163]      
In Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto,
1995 CanLII 59 (SCC), [1995] 2 S.C.R. 1130, at para. 145, the Supreme Court of Canada stated:
[164]      
My finding of honest belief in their comments on
the part of both Mr. Agar and Mr. Benlolo is a sufficient response to the
plaintiff’s allegation of malice. This was confirmed by the Supreme Court in Hansman,
at para. 115, where Karakatsanis J. wrote that a “finding of a subjective
honest belief negates the possibility of finding malice”.
[165]      
Even if I am found to be wrong in my conclusion
on the issue of honest belief, the plaintiff has not, in my view, met its
burden of establishing malice or reckless disregard for the truth.  CUPW raises
valid criticisms of the accuracy of facts presented by the defendants. For
example, Ms. Hume made reference to Hamas “flags” (plural), when all of the
evidence suggests that there was only one Hamas flag being flown in the
Demonstration.
[166]      
CUPW also argues that Sun Media’s failure to
make any real effort to find out what the Demonstration was about reflected a
mindset that was bound and determined to link CUPW with Hamas and terrorism.
[167]      
I agree that both Mr. Benlolo and Mr. Agar had
an angle. Mr. Agar seemingly reacted with a degree of relish when told that
“The Source” programme that he was to present would deal with the
Demonstration. In an email response, he said “Good one”, adding that CUPW had
sent someone to the Brazil conference. And, as already discussed, Mr. Agar and
Mr. Benlolo were longtime critics of CUPW’s political activities in relation to
the conflict in the Middle East. But malice is a high bar. It requires a degree
of spite or ill-will that I find not to have been established on the evidence.
[168]      
Both Mr. Agar and Mr. Benlolo acknowledged in
the broadcast, and in Mr. Agar’s case, the article, that if you want to support
the Palestinian cause, so be it, it is your right to do so.
[169]      
The converse is also true.
[170]      
It is arguable that if Mr. Agar and Mr. Benlolo
had pursued their comments about CUPW’s support of terrorism in the face of an
express disavowal by CUPW of any knowledge of the presence of the Hamas flag or
the involvement of a Hamas supporter at the Demonstration, the dial could have
been shifted in the direction of a finding of malice. But that is not what
happened.
[171]      
In light of my findings on the issue of
liability, I make no assessment of what damages would have been awarded had the
plaintiff succeeded.
[172]      
The conflict in the Middle East is a subject
that generates passionate views, not all of which are expressed respectfully or
in temperate language. Sadly, that remains the case over ten years after the
words that are the subject of this case were spoken or written. It is a debate
which the plaintiff and the individual defendants have engaged in from very
different perspectives. On the one hand, CUPW is a harsh critic of the media and
its representation of events in the Middle East. On the other, Mr. Agar and Mr.
Benlolo deplore aspects of the Union’s activism.
[173]      
Nevertheless, the debate of these issues is what
a free and democratic society does. The law of defamation places limits on free
speech, but only when, to use the nineteenth century terminology of Baron Parke,
it takes the form of an imputation calculated to bring the plaintiff into
“hatred, contempt or ridicule” (see Parmiter v. Coupland (1840), 6 M.
& W. 105 at 108, 151 E.R. 340, at 341); or, to use the more contemporary
language of Abella J., when it tends to lower the plaintiff in the estimation
of right-thinking members of society generally and in particular to cause the
plaintiff to be regarded with feelings of hatred, contempt, ridicule, fear,
dislike or disesteem. And then only if the defences of truth, fair comment, privilege,
or responsible communication are not established by the defendant.
[174]      
As Professor Fleming has explained, (John G.
Fleming, The Law of Torts, 8th ed. (Sydney: The Law Book
Company, 1992), at p. 524):
[175]      
It should be no surprise to CUPW that its active
engagement in the charged debate about events in the Middle East provokes
discussion that at times has become heated. When CUPW failed to respond to the
opportunity the defendants provided to disavow any implied support for Hamas or
terrorists, the reaction that followed afforded the defendants protection from
their defamatory comments that might otherwise have been harder for them to
establish. In those circumstances, CUPW, was, as LeBel J. might have said, too
quick to cry foul.
[176]      
For the foregoing reasons, the action is
dismissed with costs.
[177]      
If the parties are unable to agree on costs, I
may be spoken to for the purpose of providing directions on costs submissions.
[178]      
I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge the
skill, expertise and civility of counsel throughout the trial. The presentation
of the case, the organisation of the materials, and the smooth running of the
trial, reflected a commendable level of co-operation and communication between
counsel.