[1]              
Randall Hillier stands charged with two counts of mischief, three counts
of counselling to commit an indictable offence, three counts of obstructing a
peace officer, and one count of assaulting a peace officer. Police swore the
Information on March 28, 2022. The charges emanate from Mr. Hillier’s alleged
participation in the “Freedom Convoy” that took place in Ottawa’s downtown core
during January and February of 2022. A four-week judge and jury trial is
scheduled to commence on January 27, 2025. The total delay is just shy of
thirty-five months.
[2]              
Mr. Hillier seeks a stay of proceedings on the basis that his right to be
tried within a reasonable time has been violated, contrary to section 11(b) of
the Charter.
[3]              
For reasons given below, the application is granted.
[4]              
Mr. Hillier was charged on March 28, 2022. His matter remained in the
Ontario Court of Justice until December 2, 2022, at which time Mr. Hillier elected
to stand trial before a judge and jury in the Superior Court of Justice. The
applicable provisions of the Criminal Code did not entitle Mr. Hillier
to a preliminary inquiry. Between March 28, 2022, and late October 2022, Mr.
Hillier did not move his matter forward because he was waiting on video disclosure
that he argues was crucial to his election.
[5]              
After Mr. Hillier’s election in early December 2022, on January 19,
2023, the parties appeared for their first pretrial conference in the Superior
Court. The Crown filed its pretrial conference report the day before the pretrial
conference. Counsel for Mr. Hillier did not file a responding report at that
time. Counsel for Mr. Hillier advised the pretrial judge that he had not
completed a pretrial conference report because he had only received the Crown
report the day before, and he had not yet had a chance to review it. Mr.
Hillier did advise the Court, however, that he wished to be tried in a
different jurisdiction in the East Region. Mr. Hillier’s change of venue motion
was scheduled for April 27-28, 2023.
[6]              
On April 26, 2023, the first motion judge summarily dismissed Mr.
Hiller’s motion. Two days later, the Supreme Court of Canada released its
decision in R v Haevischer, 2023 SCC 11, where the Court addressed the
applicable test for summary dismissal. On June 7, 2023, the motion judge set
aside his original ruling and ordered that the change of venue motion be re-heard
before a new justice. The parties secured September 18, 2023, as a date for the
hearing.
[7]              
While the change of venue motion remained outstanding in the spring, summer,
and early fall of 2023, the Crown repeatedly asked counsel for Mr. Hillier to
1) schedule a second pretrial conference to discuss a trial estimate; and 2) set
provisional trial dates in Ottawa. Counsel for Mr. Hillier declined to do either.
[8]              
On September 25, 2023, after a full hearing, the second motion judge
dismissed Mr. Hillier’s motion. After receiving the decision, the parties
scheduled a second pretrial conference on November 30, 2023. In the interim, on
November 17, 2023, Mr. Hillier discharged his counsel. Mr. Hillier represented
himself at the pretrial conference on November 30.
[9]              
 Shortly after the November 30 pretrial conference, the parties secured
a four-week judge and jury trial commencing January 27, 2025. Crown pretrial
motions were scheduled for September 3-6, 2024. A follow-up pretrial was
scheduled for February 12, 2024, to discuss whether Mr. Hillier wished to bring
any pretrial motions.
[10]          
Mr. Hillier remains self-represented for trial though he retained
counsel to argue his s. 11(b) application. On July 24, 2024, counsel for Mr.
Hillier advised the Crown that Mr. Hillier intended to seek a stay of
proceedings. The application proceeded before me on October 3, 2024.
[11]          
Mr. Hillier argues that he neither waived nor caused any delay in his
matter, and no exceptional circumstances arose that justify his trial being
heard outside the presumptive Jordan ceiling.
[12]          
The Crown contends that the defence caused significant delay, and that the
net delay is well below the presumptive ceiling. In the alternative, the Crown
argues that exceptional circumstances arose with respect to Mr. Hillier’s
change of venue motion that justify any delay exceeding the 30-month
presumptive ceiling.
[13]          
The issues I must decide in this application are:
[14]          
The first step of the Jordan analysis requires me to ascertain
the total delay. The total delay is the period between the swearing of the
Information and the anticipated end of trial. Mr. Hillier was charged on March
28, 2022, and the anticipated end of trial is February 25, 2025. The total
delay is therefore 1061 days or approximately thirty-four months and twenty-eight
days: see R v Shaikh, 2019 ONCA 895.
[15]          
The second step of the analysis is determining what delay, if any, is deductible
from the total as defence-caused delay. Net delay exceeding the Jordan
ceiling of 30 months is presumptively unreasonable. To rebut this presumption,
the Crown must establish the presence of exceptional circumstances. If it
cannot, a stay of proceedings must follow.
[16]          
Defence delay can arise in two circumstances: 1) where the defence implicitly
or explicitly waives a period of delay; or 2) where the conduct of the defence is
the sole cause of the delay: R v Jordan, 2016 SCC 27, at paras.
61, 63-64; R v Cody, 2017 SCC 31, at para. 26. The Crown concedes
that Mr. Hillier did not explicitly waive any period of delay.
[17]          
However, not all delay solely caused by the defence should be deducted
from the total delay in the Jordan analysis because the presumptive
ceilings contemplate the time required for the defence to properly prepare and
present its case. Therefore, delay associated with legitimate defence
actions, such as pretrial motions with arguable merit, is generally included in
the 30-month ceiling and not deducted as defence delay. Defence actions “legitimately
taken to respond to the charges fall outside the ambit of defence delay”: Cody,
at para. 29. In summary, to be deducted as defence-caused delay, the delay must
be 1) solely or directly caused by the defence; and 2) flow from illegitimate
defence action: Cody, at para. 30.
[18]          
In its written and oral submissions, the Crown focuses on five distinct areas
where it says Mr. Hillier unilaterally and illegitimately caused delay. First,
the Crown argues that counsel for Mr. Hillier unreasonably refused to schedule
a judicial pretrial in the Ontario Court of Justice until certain video footage
was disclosed. Second, once the matter was before the Superior Court, the Crown
maintains that Mr. Hillier should have accepted the first date offered for his
change of venue motion. Third, the Crown contends that Mr. Hillier should have
agreed to schedule provisional trial dates pending the outcome of his change of
venue motion. Fourth, the Crown similarly argues that counsel for Mr. Hillier should
have attended a second judicial pretrial conference pending the outcome of his
change of venue motion so that the parties could immediately set trial dates
once in receipt of the Court’s ruling. Finally, the Crown argues that because Mr.
Hillier did not provide timely notice of his s. 11(b) application, some portion
of the delay between the set date appearance and the trial date should be
characterized as defence delay. I address each argument below.
[19]          
Among other things, Mr. Hillier is charged with assaulting a peace
officer and counselling others to commit the indictable offence of mischief. Counsel
for Mr. Hillier refused to schedule a judicial pretrial conference in the
Ontario Court of Justice until he received video footage of the alleged assault
taken by video cameras installed at Parliament Hill. Though other disclosure in
Mr. Hillier’s case also remained outstanding, counsel advised the Crown that he
was prepared to conduct a pretrial conference and make an election before
receiving the other material. The Crown disclosed the video footage on October
26, 2022, and Mr. Hillier elected to be tried in the Superior Court
approximately five weeks later.
[20]          
The Crown argues that Mr. Hillier acted unreasonably when refusing to attend
a judicial pretrial or make his election without first obtaining the video
footage because the Crown had already provided video disclosure of the alleged
assault from other sources. In those circumstances, the Crown maintains that
the Parliament Hill video was not fundamental to Mr. Hillier’s decision-making.
In addition, the Crown contends that the video footage from Parliament Hill was
ultimately of poor quality; therefore, the footage had little, if any,
legitimate impact on Mr. Hillier’s election.
[21]          
In my view, the real issue on this point is not whether counsel for Mr.
Hillier should have agreed to schedule a judicial pretrial pending disclosure
of the Parliament Hill video, but whether it was reasonable for Mr. Hillier to
wait for the video before making his election. I say this because Mr. Hillier
ultimately elected to be tried in the Superior Court. If Mr. Hillier was
entitled to wait for the video disclosure before making his election, then
whether a judicial pretrial in the Ontario Court of Justice took place in the
interim becomes neither here nor there in terms of delay. In other words, Mr.
Hillier’s matter would have remained in the Ontario Court of Justice for the
same duration regardless of whether his counsel attended for a judicial
pretrial. The delay would be the same either way.
[22]          
When determining whether waiting for the video was a legitimate response
to the charges, I may consider all the surrounding circumstances, including Mr.
Hillier’s overall conduct, and how long his matter had been in the system at
the time: Cody, at para. 32. Even defence action or inaction that has
merit can still be deemed illegitimate for s. 11(b) purposes if 1) it was designed
to delay the proceedings; or 2) defence exhibited a “marked inefficiency” or “marked
indifference” towards delay: Cody, at para. 32. To characterize certain
defence steps in the proceeding as illegitimate, I need not find that counsel engaged
in professional misconduct: Cody, at para 35. In the end, determining
whether defence conduct was illegitimate is not an “exact science” and is
assessed on a case-by-case basis: Cody, at para. 31.
[23]          
I appreciate that an accused person must move their matter along before
receiving “every piece of evidence”: R v Hanan, 2022 ONCA 229, at para.
44, rev’d on other grounds 2023 SCC 12; R v Allison, 2022 ONCA 329, at
para. 46; R. v. N.N.M. (2006), 2006 CanLII 14957 (ON CA), 209 C.C.C. (3d) 436 (Ont. C.A.), at
para. 37; R. v. Kovacs-Tatar (2004), 2004 CanLII 42923 (ON CA), 73
O.R. (3d) 161 (C.A.), at para. 47; and R. v. Carbone, 2020 ONCA 394, at paras. 51-53.
[24]          
Nonetheless, for the following five reasons, I find that Mr. Hillier’s
decision to wait for the Parliament Hill video before making his election was a
legitimate response to the charges. As a result, I decline to apportion any of
the associated delay to defence.
[25]          
First, while in the Ontario Court of Justice, I find that Mr. Hillier’s
approach to disclosure was responsive and reasonable. On June 8, 2022, after
counsel followed up with the Crown about a lengthy disclosure request made on
March 30, 2022, and again on May 4, 2022, the Crown asked Mr. Hillier to
schedule a counsel pretrial and a judicial pretrial. Counsel responded
immediately and advised the Crown that he first wished to receive a written
response from the Crown on his disclosure request so that their CPT could
proceed in a focused fashion. Counsel wrote, “…once I have that response we can
book some time to drill down on any issues which require a more in depth
discussion”. I see nothing wrong with this approach.
[26]          
Counsel did not receive a written response from the Crown until two and
a half months later, on August 23, 2022, a day before the matter next appeared
in remand court. As requested, the Crown set out its position on each piece of
disclosure sought by counsel. The Crown again asked counsel to schedule a counsel
pretrial and judicial pretrial.
[27]          
Counsel responded on August 28, 2022, and advised the Crown that the
Parliament Hill video was “crucial” disclosure to Mr. Hillier’s election and
needed to be received before next steps were taken. With respect to the other
items of outstanding disclosure, counsel fairly conceded that they were not
critical, and that the matter could proceed without them. Counsel consistently
maintained his position that Mr. Hillier could not make an election without viewing
the Parliament Hill video.
[28]          
Counsel received disclosure of the video on October 26, 2022. At that
time, despite other disclosure remaining outstanding, counsel obtained
instructions and Mr. Hillier formally made his election on December 2, 2022.
Given that counsel had many months to discuss the state of the case with Mr.
Hillier before receiving the video, in my view, Mr. Hillier’s election could
have been made even earlier. However, I am not prepared to find that five weeks
in the circumstances was necessarily unreasonable.
[29]          
Second, when I consider the surrounding circumstances, counsel’s
decision to wait for this specific video was justified. The Crown argues
that other videos of the alleged offence had already been disclosed therefore
it was unnecessary for Mr. Hillier to wait for the Parliament Hill video before
making his election. The Crown’s position has much merit and would likely
prevail in many other contexts. However, the videos already disclosed to Mr.
Hillier in the summer and fall of 2023 all emanated from open-source searches.
In other words, the makers of the videos were unknown. Unlike those videos, the
video footage from Parliament Hill could easily be authenticated by the Crown
and would arguably constitute the most reliable form of video evidence at trial.
[30]          
Third, I am not satisfied that the poor quality of the video undermines
my findings on this issue. On August 23, 2022, the Crown advised counsel that he
“[understood] this video to be taken from a significant distance and to be of
poor quality.” However, there is no evidence before me that the Crown disclosed
the source of his belief or whether that source had viewed the video footage or
simply drew an inference of poor quality based on the location of the video
cameras. There was little information given to counsel upon which he could have
satisfied himself that the video was unlikely to impact Mr. Hillier’s election.
[31]          
Fourth, I am also permitted to consider the overall conduct of the
defence when considering the legitimacy of a particular action: Cody, at
para. 32. Counsel took the position that he could not properly advise his
client without first seeing the video. Given that he was prepared to move the
matter along – and ultimately did move the matter along – without other pieces
of outstanding disclosure, including audio recordings of the nefarious 911
calls purportedly placed at Mr. Hillier’s behest, I am satisfied that counsel
was not intentionally delaying the proceedings and that his conduct did not
reflect a “marked indifference” towards delay.
[32]          
Finally, the analysis of defence conduct surrounding the setting of judicial
pretrials and trial dates may be different where the Crown has elected by
summary conviction rendering election as to mode of trial irrelevant. In those
circumstances, many appellate cases have held that the defence must proceed to
a judicial pretrial and set trial dates without full disclosure. But, in my
view, more caution is required when reviewing the legitimacy of decision-making
surrounding an accused’s election. This distinction is acknowledged in Kovacs-Tatar:
[33]          
Similarly, in R v Lahiry (2011), 2011 ONSC 6780 (CanLII), 283 C.C.C. (3d) 525, at para.
114, the Court distinguished between defence refusing to attend a pretrial or
set a trial date without full disclosure, and waiting for “material” disclosure
before electing mode of trial:
[34]          
For the reasons set out above, I am satisfied that the Parliament Hill
video was “truly material” to Mr. Hillier’s election and, therefore, waiting
for it was legitimate defence conduct. In my view, in these specific
circumstances, to find otherwise would constitute an unwarranted “second
guessing” of how counsel conducted Mr. Hillier’s defence: see Cody, at
para. 31
[35]          
I make one final comment on this issue. In oral submissions, the Crown stressed
that the Parliament Hill video took time to obtain because of various
Parliamentary rules. It may be in some cases that delay in disclosure could
constitute an exceptional circumstance if the circumstances are truly outside
the control of the Crown and the Crown has taken reasonable steps to address them.
I make no finding on this issue as the Crown did not argue that the time taken
to secure the video constituted an exceptional circumstance. But, in my view,
where the Crown has advised the defence that it has taken steps to obtain video
disclosure that is truly material to an accused’s election, defence-caused
delay does not arise simply because the Crown faces challenges in obtaining it.
[36]          
As noted above, at the first Superior Court pretrial conference on
January 19, 2023, Mr. Hillier advised the Court of his intention to bring a
change of venue motion. The parties estimated that the motion required two
days. The Court offered time between February 21-23, 2023, and February 27-28,
2023. Counsel for Mr. Hillier declined to accept those dates because they would
not permit him the time required to prepare a proper motion record. The Criminal
Proceedings Rules for the Superior Court required Mr. Hillier to provide
his materials to the Crown within 30 days of the hearing. Accepting the
February dates would have obligated Mr. Hillier to prepare and file his
materials within days of the pretrial conference.
[37]          
After Mr. Hillier declined the February dates, the Court offered a
single day on March 3, 2023. Mr. Hillier declined that date as well for the
same reasons. In any event, the time estimate for the motion was two days and
the Court only offered one day in March. The first two-day period offered by
the Court after February commenced on April 27, 2023. Mr. Hillier accepted
these dates as did the Crown.
[38]          
The Crown argues that the delay between the first motion date offered in
February and April 27, 2023, is defence-caused delay because the court and the
Crown were ready to proceed, but the defence was not: see Cody, at para.
30. The Crown contends that Mr. Hillier should have had his motion materials
ready in advance of the pretrial such that he could accept an early date. The
Crown maintains that this is a reasonable expectation because Mr. Hillier elected
to be tried in the Superior Court in early December 2022; therefore, he had
sufficient time before the pretrial conference to contemplate his change of
venue motion.
[39]          
I cannot accept this argument. There is no expectation on either party
to have anticipated pretrial motion materials completed by the first pretrial
conference in the Superior Court. The first pretrial conference is a venue
where anticipated motions are discussed. There is also a hope that certain
concessions will be made at a pretrial conference that may obviate the need for
certain pretrial motions. For example, in its pretrial conference report, the
Crown advised that it intended to bring a voluntariness application respecting
Mr. Hillier’s statement to the police. I highly doubt that the Crown had its application
materials prepared by the January 19 pretrial. Indeed, the Crown did not file its
pretrial conference report until the day before the conference.
[40]          
As noted, the Rules would have required Mr. Hillier to produce
his motion record and related materials within days of the first pretrial had
he accepted the February dates. The materials required for a change of venue
motion are often extensive. Indeed, ultimately, Mr. Hillier produced a 939-page
motion record and an 18-page factum in support of his motion.
[41]          
Expecting counsel to prepare and file these materials in such a short
timeframe is not reasonable. Even had the Crown been willing to waive some
portion of the 30-day notice, Mr. Hillier would still have had to prepare his
materials within two to three weeks because the Crown would have needed a
reasonable amount of time to prepare a response. In my view, Mr. Hillier
accepted the first reasonable date that trial coordination offered to
argue his two-day motion, and the Jordan presumptive ceilings
contemplate the time reasonably required by the defence to prepare and
present its case: Cody, at para. 20.
[42]          
In conclusion, I find there was no defence-caused delay in the setting
of the original motion date. The question that remains on the issue of defence-caused
delay is what steps or actions could reasonably have been expected of Mr.
Hillier pending the outcome of his motion. I address those issues next.
[43]          
After the initial pretrial conference in the Superior Court, through the
spring, summer and early fall of 2023, the Crown repeatedly asked counsel for
Mr. Hillier to schedule a second pretrial so that the parties could discuss a
trial estimate and secure provisional trial dates in Ottawa. The Crown argues
that setting provisional dates was a prudent request because trial time would
then have been in place for Mr. Hillier were his request for exceptional relief
denied. Counsel for Mr. Hillier declined to schedule a judicial pretrial or set
provisional dates.
[44]          
The Crown contends that because counsel refused to set provisional trial
dates, I should characterize the delay associated with the change of venue motion
as defence-caused delay. In effect, the Crown maintains that unless an accused and
their lawyer are prepared to set provisional trial dates pending the outcome of
a change of venue motion, the delay associated with even a legitimate motion becomes
defence-caused delay in a section 11(b) analysis. For reasons given below, I do
not accept this argument.
[45]          
Though frivolous defence applications undoubtedly give rise to defence-caused
delay, I cannot find that Mr. Hillier’s change of venue motion was meritless:
see Jordan, at para. 63. The decision to summarily dismiss Mr. Hillier’s
motion was set aside, and the motion judge who ultimately heard Mr. Hillier’s
motion implicitly found that it had some degree of merit. With that said, the manner
in which Mr. Hillier proceeded with his motion can still amount to illegitimate
conduct, giving rise to defence-caused delay. Indeed, that is the thrust of the
Crown’s argument.
[46]          
I am not persuaded, however, that Mr. Hillier’s refusal to set
provisional trial dates constituted a marked indifference or marked
inefficiency towards delay. First, there is no evidence before me that the
Superior Court was even prepared to set provisional trial dates. This practice
is not commonplace, and for good reason. The Court is responsible for ensuring
timely access to justice for all litigants. This is no easy task and requires
the Court to ensure that trial time is used efficiently. Offering multi-week
trial dates on a provisional basis could easily result in trial time not being
effectively re-purposed should matters not proceed.
[47]          
To be clear, I certainly do not fault the Crown for canvassing provisional
trial dates with Mr. Hillier. The Crown was appropriately thinking outside the
box and being proactive about delay. It should not be criticized for doing so. Another
accused in a future case may very well wish to avail themselves of provisional
dates in these circumstances should the Court agree to offer them. I simply
make the point that the Court’s endorsement of such a practice should not be
presumed, and I see nothing in the record before me that the Crown raised the
idea of provisional trial dates with the Court during the spring, summer, and
fall of 2023.
[48]          
Second, requiring an accused person to accept provisional trial
dates to avoid delay flowing from otherwise legitimate action being attributed
to them is potentially unfair both to the accused and their counsel. For
example, in the present matter, Mr. Hillier’s counsel was asked to provisionally
reserve a four-week block of time in his schedule along with an adequate amount
of preparation time without knowing whether his services would be required on
those dates. In my view, doing so would have unfairly exposed him financially, and
by extension, Mr. Hillier, who may have had to bear a portion of any financial loss
that materialized.
[49]          
In response to that concern, the Crown argues that counsel for Mr.
Hillier could easily have re-purposed the lost time should Mr. Hillier have
been successful with his motion. In my view, this position is speculative at
best. For example, if trial time had been reserved in March 2023, as requested
by the Crown, the trial could easily have been scheduled by April 2024. Yet,
Mr. Hillier’s change of venue motion was not ultimately disposed of until the
end of September 2023, approximately six months before that hypothetical April trial
date.  In those circumstances, it is entirely foreseeable that counsel for Mr.
Hillier would not have been able to backfill that time with other matters.
The delay to trial in the Ontario Court of Justice in Ottawa often well exceeds
ten months. Therefore, the Ontario Court of Justice would likely not have
offered counsel for Mr. Hillier trial time for his other clients during that
period. Further, counsel for Mr. Hillier may not have had other clients
proceeding in the Superior Court seeking a trial, nor would there be any
guarantee that the court time rendered available would be offered to his
clients versus other accused persons in the system.
[50]          
In some circumstances, an accused and their counsel may wish to avail themselves
of provisional trial dates if the Court is prepared to endorse it. But I am not
prepared to require it of accused persons for s. 11(b) purposes. With
that said, as I address in more detail below, though not resulting in defence-caused
delay, Mr. Hillier’s change of venue motion having to be re-argued may still
constitute an exceptional circumstance: see Gandhi, 2016 ONSC 5612 (CanLII), [2016] O.J. No.
4638, at para. 23.
[51]          
In summary, I decline to characterize the delay associated with the
change of venue motion as defence-caused delay because Mr. Hillier refused to
set provisional dates. There was nothing illegitimate about Mr. Hillier
launching a change of venue motion, and he accepted the first reasonable date
offered to have it heard. The original motion judge summarily dismissed Mr.
Hillier’s motion and then set his decision aside shortly thereafter once the
Supreme Court released a ruling that the motion judge felt called into question
the correctness of his decision. Mr. Hillier then accepted all dates that were
subsequently offered by trial coordination to have his motion re-heard. Mr.
Hillier’s conduct regarding the scheduling of his motion is unimpeachable, except
for whether his counsel should have attended a second pretrial conference pending
the outcome. I turn to that issue now.
[52]          
As noted above, while Mr. Hillier’s change of venue motion was pending,
the Crown repeatedly asked counsel for Mr. Hillier, who is not Mr.
Hillier’s counsel on this application, to attend a second judicial pretrial
conference for the purpose of discussing pretrial motions and trial estimates.
Counsel for Mr. Hillier declined. In my view, his refusal constituted a “marked
indifference” towards delay and ran counter to his obligation to work collaboratively
with the Crown and the Court to address his client’s s. 11(b) interests.
[53]          
Because counsel for Mr. Hillier refused to act proactively, on September
25, 2023, after the motion judge dismissed Mr. Hillier’s motion, the parties could
not immediately set trial dates since they had not yet secured judicial
approval for trial and pretrial motion dates. Instead, the parties had to schedule
a pretrial conference on November 30, 2023, over two months later, for that
purpose. In my view, the 65-day delay between September 25, 2023, and November
30, 2023, lies at the feet of the defence. It was the direct result of
counsel’s unjustified refusal to participate in a pretrial conference despite
being asked to do so repeatedly by the Crown.
[54]          
Further, the record before me discloses that counsel for Mr. Hillier
initially understood the value of acting proactively while the change of venue motion
was pending. On January 26, 2023, counsel advised the Crown via email that he
was “doing a bit of preliminary prep so that once the venue issue is resolved,
we are ready to move forward”. He posed numerous questions to the Crown,
including asking it for a tentative batting order of witnesses so he could turn
his mind to a trial estimate. Evidently, at that time, counsel felt that those proactive
discussions could take place while the motion was pending. As I set out
below, counsel’s mentality inexplicably and unjustifiably changed some months
later.
[55]          
The Crown first suggested a second pretrial conference for the purpose
of discussing trial estimates via an email sent to counsel on February 13,
2023. Counsel for Mr. Hillier did not respond.
[56]          
On May 3, 2023, the Crown again wrote to counsel stating the following:
[57]          
Counsel for Mr. Hillier again did not respond.
[58]          
On June 13, 2023, the Crown asked counsel for a third time to attend a
pretrial conference pending the outcome of the motion, again citing concerns
about delay and efficiency. Counsel for Mr. Hillier responded that, while he
too was concerned about delay, “potentially duplicating JPTs is not in the
interests of the justice system either.” He further wrote that, “scheduling a
JPT without knowing which jurisdiction the matter is proceeding in is putting
the cart before the horse.”
[59]          
I disagree that conducting a pretrial was “putting the cart before the
horse.” A pretrial discussion regarding trial estimates, admissions,
anticipated pretrial motions, challenges for cause, etc., would have had significant
value regardless of the ultimate venue in which the trial proceeded. The
parties could easily have reached an agreement on what additional time may be
required were the matter to proceed in Ottawa, given the more extensive juror
screening required, such that one estimate could have been agreed upon for
Ottawa and a slightly different estimate were the trial to proceed elsewhere. The
value of having these discussions pending the change of venue motion is
self-evident. Indeed, it appears to have been obvious to counsel for Mr.
Hillier in January 2023.
[60]          
Had counsel for Mr. Hillier attended a pretrial conference before
September 25, 2023, the parties would have been able to immediately set trial
and pretrial motion dates after the release of the motion judge’s decision. Had
Mr. Hillier’s motion been granted, the parties could have arrived in another
jurisdiction ready to set dates. I do not accept that, in those circumstances,
the parties would have had to “duplicate” the pretrial conference. At worst,
perhaps a brief judicial pretrial conference in the neighbouring jurisdiction
would have been appropriate to inform the Court of the results of the prior
pretrial and address any jurisdiction-specific issues.
[61]          
Finally, I have also considered the matter’s proximity to the applicable
Jordan ceiling when counsel refused to participate in a judicial pretrial:
see Cody, at para. 32. By the spring and summer of 2023, Mr. Hillier’s
matter had been in the system for over 15 months. Trial dates had not yet been
set, and the change of venue motion was not being heard until September 18, 2023.
In the circumstances, counsel should have been willing to take all reasonable
and collaborative steps to mitigate delay.
[62]          
For reasons already given, Mr. Hillier was not required to reserve
provisional trial dates pending the outcome of his change of venue motion.
However, I find it entirely reasonable to have expected his counsel to attend a
relatively brief pretrial conference to discuss trial and pretrial motion
estimates, a discussion that could easily have been re-purposed in large part
in another jurisdiction if the change of venue motion were successful. This is
precisely the type of proactive step envisioned by the Court in Jordan. As
a result, I find that the delay between September 25, 2023, and November 30,
2023, is defence-caused delay.
[63]          
I make one final comment before addressing the final area where the
Crown alleges defence-caused delay. I appreciate that on January 26, 2023,
counsel for Mr. Hillier asked the Crown to provide an anticipated list of witnesses
before a potential pretrial conference. The Crown declined to provide that
information. The Crown’s refusal to provide a tentative witness list does not
impact my analysis. First, it did not justify counsel refusing to attend a
pretrial conference. Counsel could easily have sought assistance from the Court
regarding a witness list if he felt it necessary. Second, counsel for Mr.
Hillier on this application fairly conceded in oral submissions that prior
counsel refused to attend a pretrial conference because of the outstanding
change of venue motion, not because the Crown refused to provide him with a
witness list. Therefore, there is no nexus between the witness list dispute and
the delay that transpired in this case.
[64]          
The parties reserved the existing trial dates shortly after a pretrial conference
that took place on November 30, 2023. Mr. Hillier was self-represented when the
parties secured the trial dates. He remains self-represented for trial though he
did retain counsel to argue this application. On July 24, 2024, almost eight
months after the set date appearance, Mr. Hillier’s counsel provided the Crown
informal notice of Mr. Hillier’s intention to seek a stay of proceedings
pursuant to s. 11(b) of the Charter.
[65]          
The Crown argues that Mr. Hillier did not provide timely notice of his
application; consequently, it was deprived of the opportunity to mitigate the
impugned delay. As a result, though the Crown did not forcefully advance this argument,
the Crown maintains that a portion of the delay between the set date appearance
and the trial dates should be attributed to the defence.
[66]          
Mr. Hillier contends that his s. 11(b) notice was timely when one
considers that he is self-represented. He argues that whatever expectations are
typically placed on counsel in these circumstances should be relaxed. Further,
Mr. Hillier maintains that the Crown did not adduce evidence of what steps it
would have taken had he provided earlier notice.
[67]          
In Jordan, the Court delivered a clear message that all
participants in the criminal justice system must take proactive measures to
prevent delay. The Court adopted a prospective approach by defining set
ceilings, beyond which net delay is presumptively unreasonable. This approach
gives all parties the ability to identify with increased predictability when
delay is becoming a live issue and imposes a corollary duty on all parties
to act with dispatch when raising the issue.
[68]          
Later, in R v J.F., 2022 SCC 17, the Supreme Court specifically
addressed the accused’s obligation to raise delay in a timely manner.
The issue before the Court was whether the Jordan framework permitted an
accused, in the context of a retrial, to challenge delay from their first
trial. The Court held that, absent exceptional circumstances, only retrial
delay is counted towards the total when s. 11(b) is raised during a retrial: J.F.,
at para. 60.
[69]          
In so holding, however, the Court made general comments about an
accused’s duty to act proactively with respect to delay. Once again, the Court stressed
that all participants in the criminal justice system, at all
stages of the trial process, must take proactive measures to remedy delay,
including acting diligently and expeditiously when launching s. 11(b) applications:
J.F., at paras. 3, 30, and 34.
[70]          
Though the Court’s comments must be viewed in light of the context in
which they were made, i.e., whether delay from a first trial can be
raised during a re-trial, I find that the Court’s dicta apply outside that
limited context. As noted above, requiring accused persons to act promptly when
raising s. 11(b) issues is not unreasonable because the Jordan framework
now allows them to identify with greater predictability when their rights have
been presumptively infringed: J.F., at para. 31. An accused must “be an
active part of the solution to the problem of delay in criminal cases”: J.F.,
at para. 31.
[71]          
The Court found that an accused who raises delay for the first time after
conviction is generally not acting in a timely manner: J.F., at para.
35.  And though the Court did not specifically address what constitutes “timely
action” within the context of a single trial, in my view, whether delay is
raised after conviction or so close to trial that the delay cannot conceivably
be remedied is a distinction without a difference in terms of how the
associated delay should be allocated in the s. 11(b) analysis. Such inaction
should be deterred and, where appropriate, called out as contrary to the
Supreme Court’s clear direction in Jordan that all parties adopt a
collaborative and proactive approach to delay.
[72]          
Failing to promptly launch a s. 11(b) application, though not amounting
to a waiver, can deprive the parties of the opportunity to address the
impugned delay, a result that runs counter to the collaborative approach
espoused in Jordan. Late action on the part of an accused also
undermines the purpose of s. 11(b) which is to ensure that accused persons are
tried within a reasonable time, not to avoid trials on the merits: see J.F.,
at para. 32.
[73]          
Numerous trial courts have recently relied on J.F. to apportion
some of the delay between the set date appearance and the trial date to defence
where it fails to launch a s. 11(b) application in a timely manner. The
emerging trend is for the Court to extend a 30-day grace period to the defence
following the setting of trial dates, during which time the defence can contemplate
a s. 11(b) application. Thereafter, if s. 11(b) is not raised promptly, the
delay to trial is shared equally or near-equally between the parties.
[74]          
Based on my review of this developing jurisprudence, the theory
underpinning this approach is that 1) the accused is generally aware by the
time trial dates are set of whether their rights have been presumptively
infringed and, therefore, their duty to act arises at or near the set date
appearance: J.F., at para. 31; 2) the late filing of a section 11(b) motion
will often deprive the parties of the ability to collaborate and satisfactorily
mitigate the delay, likely through seeking earlier dates through trial
coordination, if appropriate: see e.g., R v Nigro, 2023 ONCJ 41, R v
Wright, 2024 ONSC 1893; R v Osei-Bekoe, 2024 ONSC 3490; and 3) where
delay is raised close to the anticipated trial date, the Court may be unable to
re-purpose the court time should the matter be stayed, resulting in a waste of
limited court resources: R v Vallotton, 2024 ONCA 492, at para. 30; R
v C.M., 2024 ONSC 4777, at para. 51.
[75]          
In R v Mengistu, 2024 ONCA 575, the Court of Appeal for Ontario recently
held that if the Crown seeks to apportion some of the trial delay to the defence
due to an untimely s. 11(b) application, the Crown must establish 1) that the defence
failed to raise s. 11(b) concerns in a timely way; and 2) that the failure
contributed to the delay in bringing the matter to trial within the presumptive
Jordan ceilings: para. 40. In Mengistu, the Court declined to
determine the second of these issues because the argument had not been raised
in the court below, resulting in an insufficient appeal record.
[76]          
Other than the two-part test set out above, there is currently no
appellate guidance on what type of evidence may be required of the Crown to
establish the impact of late s. 11(b) applications, what factors may be
relevant to the analysis, or how to quantify defence delay where a court
is satisfied that untimely action on the part of the defence contributed to the
delay.
[77]          
Defence-caused delay arises where the defence waives a period of delay,
or where illegitimate defence conduct is the sole cause of delay. Defence waiver
is not the basis upon which delay flowing from late s. 11(b) applications may
be apportioned to defence. In J.F., the Court firmly rejected the argument
that, on its own, defence inaction can constitute a clear and unequivocal
waiver: para. 52. Rather, delay flowing from the timing of a s. 11(b) application
can only be attributed to the defence where its conduct in raising the
application amounts to illegitimate defence conduct. To that end, in my view, a
Court assesses the timeliness of a s. 11(b) application in much the same manner
as it determines whether any other defence action or inaction amounts to
illegitimate defence conduct, with reference to the guidance set out in Cody.
[78]          
In this specific context, in my view, the Court should consider all the
circumstances, including but not limited to the procedural history, what was
known or ought to have been known to the parties in terms of whether delay was
a live issue in the case, the circumstances of the accused, in particular,
whether they were self-represented, and whether earlier opportunities arose for
the defence to raise the issue, even informally, for example before a case
management judge.
[79]          
I find that Mr. Hillier did not raise his s. 11(b) application in a
timely way. First, as early as February 2024, despite being self-represented,
Mr. Hillier was evidently aware of his s. 11(b) rights. The parties attended a
pretrial conference on February 12, 2024, approximately two months after the set
date appearance. At that time, dates had already been reserved in September
2024 for the Crown’s pretrial motions. The purpose of the February 12 pretrial
was to discuss what, if any, pretrial motions Mr. Hillier wished to raise.
[80]          
At the pretrial, Mr. Hillier was engaged, articulate and informed. He
told the pretrial judge that he intended to remain self-represented as he found
it liberating. Mr. Hillier asked the pretrial judge numerous questions. The
parties discussed the nature of the admissions they sought, the expert evidence
that Mr. Hillier wished to call, the potential appointment of an amicus
curiae, and Mr. Hillier’s anticipated disclosure motion. The pretrial
transcript discloses that Mr. Hillier was proactive in researching applicable areas
of the law before the pretrial commenced. For example, he asked the case
management judge to approve a “McKenzie Friend” to assist him at trial.
[81]          
In the context of the above discussions, Mr. Hillier stated the
following:
[82]          
Mr. Hillier’s comments on February 12, 2024, reflect that he was not
only aware of his rights under s. 11(b) of the Charter, but he knew of
the leading case and the presumptive ceilings that applied to his matter. He
did not provide the Crown formal notice of his s. 11(b) application until July
24, 2024, almost eight months after the set date appearance and almost six
months after the pretrial conference, despite having appeared before the case
management judge numerous times between November 2023 and July 2024.
[83]          
In my view, given that Mr. Hillier is an intelligent, articulate, and inquisitive
litigant who was aware of his s. 11(b) rights, his duty to act was triggered
long before his July 24 notice. I am satisfied that Mr. Hillier could easily have
sought guidance from the Court as early as February 12, 2024, in terms of how
to raise delay as an issue if he did not already know. Indeed, he was confident
and articulate enough to advise the Court that he was concerned about delay and
did not wish the appointment of amicus curiae to further delay his
matter.  I also find that he knew enough regarding his rights that if he wished
to secure legal advice on the issue – which he ultimately did – he could have
done it earlier. To be clear, I am not suggesting that Mr. Hillier acted in bad
faith. Nor must I make that finding to conclude that his s. 11(b) notice was
untimely.
[84]          
Establishing that the defence did not act timely when raising a s. 11(b)
application does not on its own give rise to defence-caused delay. The Crown
must also establish that the late application contributed to the matter
not being heard within a Charter-compliant timeframe: Mengistu,
at para. 40.
[85]          
This too is assessed contextually. In my view, the extent to which the
Crown ought to have known that delay was an issue, even in the absence of a
timely s. 11(b) notice, is a relevant factor when assessing whether and to what
extent defence contributed to the delay. For example, in Wright, the
Court heavily criticized the defence for not promptly raising its section 11(b)
application: “[b]y simply waiting to file an application close to or on the
trial date results in the Crown being unable to mitigate delay. It also means
the court cannot remedy the situation by finding earlier trial dates”: para.
29. Notwithstanding its strong comments, the Court declined to apportion the
trial delay equally between the parties because, despite the late s. 11(b)
notice, the Crown had always understood that delay was a live issue. The
record disclosed that after the trial dates were set, the Crown took early
action to remedy the delay, yet inexplicably failed to follow up on those
preliminary steps. In other words, the failure of the defence to notify the
Crown that delay was an issue did not deprive the Crown of the
opportunity to mitigate the delay. Despite already knowing that s. 11(b) was a
serious issue, the Crown simply allowed the case “to disappear from view”: Wright,
at para. 34.
[86]          
The same could not be said in Nigro. There, trial dates were set
well outside the Jordan ceiling but in circumstances where the matter
had proceeded through the remand stage during the height of the pandemic, when
trial courts had been shut down for over seven months. In that context, the
Court found it reasonable for the Crown to presume that delay was a non-issue
subject to hearing otherwise from the defence. The Court found that the late s.
11(b) application constituted illegitimate defence conduct, which directly
impacted the Crown’s ability to mitigate the delay. The Court apportioned the
delay between the set date appearance and the trial date equally between the
parties.
[87]          
Assessing whether defence inaction actually contributed to the delay
must, therefore, be done on a case-by-case basis. For example, if a straightforward
matter proceeds through the remand phase with reasonable dispatch, yet trial
dates are not offered within the applicable Jordan ceiling, that alone may
be sufficient to put the Crown on notice that delay is a problem. In those
circumstances, an application judge may find that a late s. 11(b) notice had
little, if any, impact on the Crown’s ability to address the delay since it
ought to have acted without it. Other matters have more complicated procedural
histories where the Crown may reasonably presume that certain periods of past delay
are attributable to the defence such that delay is not a live issue despite
trial dates exceeding the applicable ceiling. This dynamic is well set out in R.
v. W.S., 2024 ONSC 1668, at para. 109:
[88]          
In the present matter, notwithstanding the late s. 11(b) application, I
find that the Crown ought to have been aware that delay was a live issue. On
the evidentiary record before me, for the following two reasons, the Crown
could not reasonably have proceeded on the basis that the defence was
implicitly acknowledging certain periods of delay as defence-caused.
[89]          
First, in Mr. Hillier’s pretrial conference reported filed in November
2023, which was a response to the Crown’s dated form filed in January 2023, in
the section asking each party to state their position on whether there has been
any defence-caused delay or exceptional circumstances, Mr. Hillier indicated
that there was no defence-caused delay to date, and he agreed with the Crown
that no exceptional circumstances had arisen. The pretrial conference form
poses these questions to the parties so that they can turn their minds to the
issue and put the other on notice of its position. In the face of Mr. Hillier’s
pretrial conference report, I cannot accept that the Crown reasonably believed
that Mr. Hillier had implicitly conceded that certain periods of delay
were defence-caused or that his change of venue motion triggered exceptional
circumstances when he explicitly advised the Court and the Crown of the
contrary.
[90]          
Second, as set out above, Mr. Hillier advised the Crown during the
pretrial on February 12, 2024, that he was concerned about delay in his
matter given that the trial dates had been set well outside the presumptive
ceiling. That was a perfect opportunity for the Crown to confirm with
Mr. Hillier whether he took issue with the existing trial dates. The onus on
the Crown to prompt that discussion was high given that Mr. Hillier was
self-represented.
[91]          
In the circumstances, like the trial judge in Wright, I cannot
find that the Crown was deprived of its ability to mitigate the delay because
the defence did not put the Crown on notice of its position. At the time the
trial dates were set, Mr. Hillier had explicitly advised the Crown of his
position that there was no deductible delay. In that context, when the
trial dates were set well outside the Jordan ceiling, the Crown had the
all the information it required to decide whether to 1) action the delay and
seek earlier dates if it felt necessary; or 2) maintain the existing trial
dates and defend the delay if called upon to do so. The Crown chose the latter.
[92]          
Finally, I note that in the Crown’s pretrial conference report filed on
January 18, 2023, the Crown indicated that no defence-caused delay or
exceptional circumstances had arisen up to that time. The Crown argued before
me that certain periods of delay in the Ontario Court of Justice were caused
by the defence. I need not address how, if at all, the Crown’s pretrial
conference report could have impacted its argument given that I found independently
that there was no defence-caused delay in the Ontario Court of Justice.
[93]          
In conclusion, I cannot find on this evidentiary record that the Crown
was prejudiced by Mr. Hillier’s late s. 11(b) notice. As a result, I decline to
apportion any of the delay between the set date appearance and the trial date
to Mr. Hillier. Further, even had I found that the Crown was deprived of the
opportunity to act, the Crown did not make submissions or tender evidence on
what local practices may be in place to ensure that Jordan-compliant
dates would have been secured even had timely notice been given.
[94]          
In the end, I attribute a total of sixty-five days to the defence flowing
from counsel’s failure to attend a pretrial conference pending the outcome of
the change of venue motion. The total delay is thirty-four months and
twenty-eight days. Therefore, the total net delay still exceeds the 30-month Jordan
ceiling and is presumptively unreasonable.
[95]          
The presence of exceptional circumstances is the only basis upon which
the Crown can justify a delay exceeding the ceiling: Jordan, at para.
81. Exceptional circumstances are those that lie outside the control of the
Crown in the sense that they are 1) reasonably unforeseen or reasonably
unavoidable; and 2) the Crown cannot reasonably remedy the delays emanating
from those circumstances once they arise: Jordan, at para. 69; Cody,
at para. 45. Exceptional circumstances generally fall into two categories: discrete
events and particularly complex cases. Like defence-caused delay, the
occurrence of discrete events results in quantified periods of time being
deducted from the total delay, but only to the extent that the Crown and
the Court could not reasonably mitigate the delay: Cody, at para. 48. In
other words, the Crown must demonstrate that it took reasonably available steps
to avoid and address the unexpected problem once it arose.
[96]          
As noted earlier, the change of venue motion was initially scheduled for
April 27-28, 2023. On April 26, 2023, on his own initiative, the first motion
judge summarily dismissed Mr. Hillier’s motion, consistent with the Supreme
Court’s direction that “trial judges should not hesitate to summarily dismiss
applications and requests the moment it becomes apparent they are frivolous”: Cody,
at para. 38.
[97]          
Two days later, the Supreme Court released its decision in Haevischer.
The parties appeared before the motion judge on May 15, 2023, to address
whether he needed to revisit his earlier decision. The Crown filed written
materials in advance of that court appearance. Counsel for Mr. Hillier appeared
on May 15, 2023, but asked for further time to address the issue since he had
been on vacation and understood that the parties were appearing on that date simply
to schedule a future date for submissions. On June 6, 2023, counsel for Mr.
Hillier filed his written submissions. On June 7, 2023, the motion judge set
aside his earlier decision and ordered that the change of venue motion proceed
before a new jurist.
[98]          
The parties subsequently agreed that the hearing could be completed in
one day versus two. The trial coordinator offered September 8, 9 or 18, 2023,
as a new date for the hearing. Counsel for Mr. Hillier was available on all
dates. The Crown was only available on September 18, 2023.
[99]          
The Crown argues that the necessity of re-arguing the change of venue motion
was exceptional and unforeseen and therefore the delay between April 28, 2023,
and September 18, 2023, should be deducted from the total delay. This is the
only period of delay that the Crown seeks to be deducted based on exceptional
circumstances. The Crown did not argue that the combined effect of a change of
venue motion, given their unique capacity to stall the proceedings unlike other
pretrial motions, with a defence refusal to set provisional trial dates, on its
own gives rise to exceptional circumstances beyond the control of the Crown;
therefore, I will not address that argument. Mr. Hillier argues that the parties
had already prepared their change of venue materials and were therefore ready
to proceed immediately. As a result, any delay resulting from the hearing
having to be rescheduled was institutional in nature and not exceptional.
[100]       In
my view, the release of Haevischer was an exceptional circumstance. The release
of a Supreme Court decision calling into question the correctness of an earlier
ruling was an event outside the control of the Crown that could not have been
foreseen. This is precisely the type of unexpected development envisioned by
the Supreme Court in Jordan that can create unavoidable delay. Exceptional
circumstances need not be rare or entirely uncommon. Trials “are not well-oiled
machines” and unavoidable developments may often arise that cause cases to
quickly go awry: Jordan, at para. 73.
[101]       Even
where unforeseeable events arise during a prosecution, however, the Crown must
take reasonable steps to mitigate and minimize delay: Cody, at para.
59.  Only delay that the Crown could not reasonably mitigate is deducted from
the total.
[102]       The
Crown learned on June 7, 2023, that new dates were required for the motion. At
that time, Mr. Hillier’s matter had been in the system for approximately fifteen
months. This left the Crown only fifteen months to resolve Mr. Hillier’s motion
and complete a judge and jury trial. The urgency of securing a prompt motion
date should have been apparent. Indeed, the necessity of setting a new date
“forthwith” was explicitly addressed by the motion judge in his June 7 ruling:
[103]       In
my view, in the circumstances, the Crown did not do all it could to ensure the
motion was re-heard promptly. Reasonably available steps include prompt resort
to case management processes to seek the assistance from the Court, where
appropriate: Jordan, at para. 70. The Crown did not advise trial
coordination of the unique circumstances that had arisen such that an earlier
date was required, nor did it bring the matter forward to address the urgency
on the record. The Crown simply accepted the later of the three dates offered
by trial coordination. The Crown is “not required to establish that the steps
it took were ultimately successful – rather, just that it took reasonable steps
in an attempt to avoid the delay”: Cody, at para. 59. As a result, the
Crown is not required to show that earlier dates would necessarily have been
made available, only that it tried to secure that result. The Crown did not
make those efforts despite the circumstances clearly calling for it, in my
view. As a result, though the complete record before me certainly does not
disclose an attitude of complacency towards delay, I find that the Crown cannot
satisfy the second prong of the test for exceptional circumstances in relation
to the period between June 7, 2023, and September 25, 2023.
[104]       I
am, however, prepared to deduct the forty-day period between April 28, 2023,
and June 7, 2023, as emanating from an exceptional circumstance. As stated
above, the release of Haevischer was unforeseen. The Crown promptly
turned its mind to the substantive issues that arose from the decision’s
release and provided the Court with written submissions. In my view, the Crown
addressed the development with appropriate dispatch.
[105]       The
total day is 1061 days. Sixty-five days is defence-caused delay and must be
deducted from the total. A further forty days shall be deducted on the basis of
exceptional circumstances. This brings the total net delay to thirty-one months
and thirteen days.
[106]       The
net delay is over the 30-month Jordan ceiling. As a result, the application
is granted. The charges against Mr. Hillier are stayed.