[1]              
            The Defendant, Valerie Landriault,
moves pursuant to s. 137.1 of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O.
1990, c. C. 43, for a dismissal of this action on the basis that this action is
a Strategic Lawsuit Against Public Participation (“SLAPP”) and that the public
interest of her expressions regarding being abused by the Plaintiff, Mr. Brown,
outweighs any harm to him.
[2]              
Mr. Brown opposes the motion and submits that anti-SLAPP
legislation was not enacted to dismiss legitimate claims for the vindication of
an individual’s reputation following Ms. Landriault’s false accusation of
criminal conduct.
[3]              
 At a s. 137.1 motion, the court
is not to engage in a “deep dive into the record and make definitive findings
of fact and credibility” which should be left to a summary judgment motion or a
trial: see Di Franco v. Bueckert, 2021 ONCA 476, at
para. 2.
[4]              
This motion turns on whether Mr. Brown can satisfy the court that
the public interest in permitting the proceeding to continue outweighs the
public interest in protecting the expression.
[5]              
 For the reasons that follow, I dismiss Ms.
Landriault’s s. 137.1 motion.
[6]              
The parties were involved in a short relationship
between September 11, 2021, and November 4, 2021. They met on a dating app
called “Tinder”.
[7]              
The parties had a tumultuous separation which
involved multiple complaints to the Ottawa Police Service (OPS) and various
allegations of sexual abuse against the other.
[8]              
A brief synopsis follows.
[9]              
During the relationship, Ms. Landriault advised
Mr. Brown that she was pregnant and asked for a commitment.
[10]          
On November 4, 2021, in a text, Ms. Landriault
advised Mr. Brown that she was no longer pregnant. Later she spoke to him on the
phone blaming him for her miscarriage and asked him to come to her home.
[11]          
Mr. Brown attended Ms. Landriault’s home that
evening and made an audio recording of the events of that evening as he was
worried she would attempt to make a false claim against him. His reason for
attending was to bring closure to the relationship.
[12]          
The audio recording, which is several hours long,
commences when he enters her home and ends when he is leaving. The recording
has been filed in evidence along with a transcript of the relevant portions.
[13]          
Ms. Landriault alleges that she was sexually
assaulted that night whereas Mr. Brown states that the recording demonstrates
that Ms. Landriault attempts to be intimate with Mr. Brown by kissing him and
trying to perform oral sex on him.
[14]          
On November 11, 2021, Mr. Brown texted Ms.
Landriault, ending the relationship and alleging that she harassed him. On that
day she dropped off his things at his home.
[15]          
Ms. Landriault alleged that on December 7, 2021,
 Mr. Brown sexually assaulted her  while she was sleeping by rubbing his penis
against her thighs.
[16]          
On December 10, 2021, Mr. Brown contacted the
OPS and said he was being harassed by Ms. Landriault.
[17]          
On December 31, 2021, Ms. Landriault learned
that Mr. Brown told people he had obtained a “peace order”.
[18]          
In January 2022, Ms. Landriault decided that she
would join the “Super Smash Bros” (Ottawa Smash) organization of the local
gaming community with approximately 1000 members after she was able to confirm
that Mr. Brown was no longer a  member. They would hold in person tournaments
for the video game “Super Smash Bros”. She made allegations regarding Mr. Brown
on this platform.
[19]          
Mr. Brown responded to Ottawa Smash regarding
Ms. Landriault’s allegations, on January 9, 2022. The Ottawa Smash organizer
advised Ms. Landriault that Mr. Brown had provided satisfactory response and
that she was acting in bad faith and on January 11, 2022, she was banned from
entering Ottawa Smash events. She made disparaging comments on Twitter about
the process and Mr. Brown.
[20]          
In February 2022, Ms. Landriault  made
allegations against Mr. Brown regarding sexual assault and child grooming to
the Global Ban Database (“GBD”) which is a group that blacklists global gaming
community members from participating in events.  Most local Smash communities
followed it.
[21]          
Through GBD’s investigation, Ms. Landriault
learned that Mr. Brown had recorded the events of November 4, 2021. She
reported the assault to the OPS and the investigation took over a year. In June
2023, she was advised that they had no grounds after their interview with Mr.
Brown. They said they were not pursuing it as there were conflicting narratives.
She filed a complaint against the investigating officer with the Law
Enforcement Complaints Agency (LECA).  On June 4, 2024, the complaint was dismissed,
and she brought an application for judicial review.
[22]          
On October 11, 2024, the parties agreed to a
consent order dismissing the judicial review and re-opening the LECA complaint.
[23]          
Ms. Landriault’s statements alleged to be
defamatory include tweets on X, with third parties, and on the Ottawa Smash
gaming platform including serious allegations that he sexually assaulted her, that
he was a sexual predator and child groomer, and that he was abusive towards
women, children, and animals.
[24]          
Ms. Landriault tweeted on X where she has 1,660
followers and she also spoke about Mr. Brown in private communications with
other individuals in the community.
[25]          
There are no outstanding charges facing the parties
at this time.
[26]          
 Section 137.1 of the Courts
of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, was established to provide an
expedited procedure to dismiss unmeritorious litigation that arises from
expressions on matters of public interest.
[27]          
 The Supreme Court of Canada’s decision
in 1704604 Ontario Ltd. v. Pointes Protection Association, 2020 SCC
22, [2020] 2 S.C.R. 587, sets out the required comprehensive
process.
[28]          
First, Ms. Landriault has the initial burden of
satisfying the Court, on a balance of probabilities, that the proceeding arises
from an expression made by Ms. Landriault; and that the expression relates to a
matter of public interest.
[29]          
 “Expression” is given an expansive meaning in
s. 137.1(2). In Pointes, at para. 24, the Supreme Court of Canada stated
that “arises from” is to be given a broad and liberal interpretation and the
proceeding need not arise directly from the expression. Therefore, this section
can apply to a varied number of proceedings and not just defamation suits.
[30]          
The parties do not dispute that Ms. Landriault’s
statements made on social media and other venues are “expressions” within the
meaning of s. 137.1(2), as articulated by the Supreme Court of Canada in Pointes.
[31]          
The court finds that Ms. Landriault’s
expressions on X, on the Ottawa Smash gaming platform and to third parties are
expressions.
[32]          
Regarding whether these expressions are of
public interest, this is a relatively low hurdle that is generally cleared by
the Defendants as they need only show that some segment of the public has a
genuine interest in knowing about the expression.
[33]          
The Supreme Court of Canada in Pointes further
expanded on this topic at para. 75 when it indicated that “a statement that
contains deliberate falsehoods, [or] gratuitous personal
attacks ... may still be an expression that relates to a matter of
public interest.”
[34]          
Ms. Landriault’s statements that she was a
victim of sexual abuse and the allegations that Mr. Brown is a sexual predator
are certainly a matter of public interest.
[35]          
  In my view, the public has a genuine
stake in knowing about matters pertaining to complainants of sexual abuse and
possible predators in the community.
[36]          
The burden now shifts to Mr. Brown to satisfy
that that this proceeding has substantial merit.
[37]          
 To prove a claim in defamation, Mr. Brown must
establish all of the following on a balance of probabilities:
[38]          
Ms. Landriault concedes this point.
[39]          
The court finds that the statement of claim
details the allegations of defamation as against Ms. Landriault and that her
statements to the public could cause him to suffer damages.
[40]          
As stated earlier, she admits to making
statements on X, on the Ottawa Smash gaming platform and to third parties
claiming that Mr. Brown sexually assaulted her, that he was a sexual predator
and a child groomer, and that he was abusive towards women, children, and
animals. This meets the criteria necessary to establish defamation.
[41]          
Next, Mr. Brown must satisfy the burden that Ms.
Landriault has no valid defence.
[42]          
She pleads only the defence of justification.
[43]          
To succeed in the defence of justification, the
Defendant must adduce evidence showing that the statements were substantially
true: see Grant v. Torstar, 2009 SCC 61, [2009] 3 S.C.R.
640, at para. 33.
[44]          
The onus is on Mr. Brown to satisfy the court
that, looking at the motion record through the reasonableness lens, a trier of fact could conclude that none of the defences
advanced would succeed. If that assessment is among those reasonably
available on the record, then Mr. Brown has met their onus.
[45]          
There remains an “evidentiary burden” on Mr.
Brown to put a defence “in play” by filing material that is “sufficiently
detailed to allow the motion judge to clearly identify the legal and factual
components of the defences advanced”.  As stated by Justice Côté in Pointes,
there must be “a basis in the record and the law – taking into account the
stage of litigation at which s. 137.1 motion is brought – for finding
that the underlying proceeding has substantial merit and that there is no valid
defence”: see para. 39. That is, the Plaintiffs are only “required to show
that there is a basis in the record and the law — taking into
account the stage of the proceeding — to support a finding that the defences …
do not tend to weigh more in [the defendant’s] favour”:
see Bent v. Platnick, 2020 SCC 23, [2020] 2 S.C.R. 645, at
para. 103.
[46]          
Ms. Landriault concedes that Mr. Brown has
demonstrated grounds that would defeat this defence. It will come down to
credibility of the parties. If this motion does not succeed, a motion to amend
the statement of defence to include fair comment and qualified privilege will
be made.
[47]          
As justification is the only defence before the
court and if this action proceeds, counsel indicate that they will be moving to
amend to include the defences of fair comment and qualified privilege. However,
for the purposes of this motion, Mr. Brown only has to show that he has some
grounds that he could defeat her defence of justification which is the only
defence before the court.
[48]          
Therefore, Mr. Brown has met his burden to show
there is no valid defence for the purposes of this motion.
[49]          
 In the weighing test, the court should
consider whether the litigation “smells of a genuine controversy”, in which
case it should be tried on its merits, or whether the litigation has the
characteristics of “SLAPP suits which reek of the Plaintiff’s improper motives,
claims of phantom harm, and bullying tactics”: Bondfield Construction
Company Limited v. The Globe and Mail Inc., 2019 ONCA 166, at
para. 28.
[50]          
The final weighing exercise under
s. 137.1(4)(b) is the fundamental crux of the analysis.
Section 137.1(4)(b) provides courts with the ability to scrutinize what is
really going on in the particular case before them.
[51]          
In this weighing exercise, the court must
consider whether this lawsuit has
[52]          
Mr. Brown’s lawsuit against Ms. Landriault does not
have these hallmarks.  There is no
[53]          
Ms. Landriault alleges that Mr. Brown is
attempting to continue his emotional manipulation and abuse against her and
trying to intimidate her in this litigation. He knows she has limited funds to
defend herself and is trying to intimidate her into silence. He alleges that
she had an abortion and refers to her employment.
[54]          
In the face of serious allegations of sexual and
criminal violence, it is within his right to
[55]          
 Nor do I find that
there is a “pattern or attempting to use the legal system to serve his own
[56]          
There is no power imbalance nor does Mr. Brown
benefit from any financial or power imbalance.
[57]          
A one-year delay in instituting a claim does not
translate to a claim that is punitive or retaliatory.
[58]          
Justice Côté in Pointes stated
that the weighing exercise was not simply an inquiry into the hallmarks of a
SLAPP. The Court is to focus on the harm suffered or potentially suffered by
the Plaintiffs, and to consider both the public interest in allowing the
proceeding to continue and the public interest in protecting the expressions at
issue.
[59]          
 In Pointes, Justice
Côté outlined the factors the Court should consider in this analysis at para.
78:
[60]          
As further elaborated below, the court finds
that Mr. Brown’s damages are more than
[61]          
Ms. Landriault submits that he has not outlined
his damages and that it is not clear if he has been banned from eSports as a
competitor as there is no evidence, nor has he established harm or that this
has affected his employment. She says he has not shown reputational damages as
he has a new partner, is still working and she assumes he is a member of Ottawa
Smash but he told her that he no longer wanted to be involved with Ottawa Smash.
GBD no longer exists.
[62]          
At this preliminary stage, Mr. Brown is not
expected to present a complete damages brief.
[63]          
 At para. 71 of Pointes, the Supreme
Court of Canada stated that the Plaintiff does not have
[64]          
 If the Court finds that the harm that has
been suffered or is likely to be suffered by the Plaintiffs, as a result of the
Defendants’ impugned expressions, is outweighed by the public interest in
protecting the expression, then the Court should dismiss the action.
[65]          
 In Subway Franchise Systems of Canada,
Inc. v. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, 2021 ONCA 26,
Justice Thorburn stated:
[66]          
 Further at para. 55, she
stated:
[67]          
He has also suffered humiliation and
embarrassment that has impacted his overall general
[68]          
The “kind of case that should be removed from
the litigation process through s. 137.1(4)(b) “is one where the plaintiff
may have a ‘technically valid cause of action’, but suffers ‘insignificant harm’”: Pointes,
at para. 98.
[69]          
Here Mr. Brown has set out damages with respect
to therapy costs.
[70]          
The reputational harm suffered by Mr. Brown can
be substantial.  The expressions accused him of being a “child groomer”, “sexual
predator” and alleged that he sexually assaulted Ms. Landriault and abuses
women, children, and animals.
[71]          
There is evidence of therapeutic costs incurred
and claimed in this action.
[72]          
Not only must the monetary harm pleaded by the
Plaintiff be considered in determining whether the harm is sufficiently
serious, but so too must the harm to the Plaintiff’s professional reputation,
even if it is not quantifiable at this stage: Pointes, at
para. 71.
[73]          
General damages are presumed from the
publication of libel, even in the absence of any proof of actual loss: see Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto,
1995 CanLII 59 (SCC), [1995] 2 SCR 1130, at para. 164.
[74]          
See Lyncaster v. Metro Vancouver Kink Society,
2019 BCSC 2207, at paras. 57-62 where the allegation was that the Plaintiff’s
social circle had been negatively impacted as he had been labelled “an abuser
and a dangerous predator”. He also provided affidavit evidence that he had
mental and physical health issues and the British Columbia Supreme Court stated
it was not surprising that at these initial stages of the litigation that he
had not provided medical evidence.  The court found there that he had
demonstrated that he had suffered some financial, physical, psychological, and social
harm and that there was a causal connection between the allegations and the
harm suffered.
[75]          
At para. 62, the British Columbia Supreme Court
stated:
[76]          
In Park Lawn Corporation v. Kahu Capital
Partners Ltd., 2023 ONCA 129, at para. 48:
[77]          
At para. 146, Justice Côté stated in Bent
“reputation is one of the most valuable assets a person or a business can
possess”.
[78]          
In the present case, there is evidence that Mr.
Brown has community connections not only as an electrician at his father’s
electrical company but with the gaming organization, Ottawa Smash as an
administrator and moderator. This involves a multitude of individuals who
belong to this gaming community.
[79]          
Mr. Brown is not expected, at this preliminary
stage, to present a fully developed damages brief. Assuming the claim
meets the merits-based analysis that precedes the weighing exercise, “a common
sense reading of the claim, supported by sufficient evidence to draw a causal
connection between the challenged expression and damages that are more than
nominal will often suffice”; see Montour v. Beacon Publishing, 2019
ONCA 246, at para. 30, citing 1704604 Ontario Ltd. v. Pointes
Protection Association, 2018 ONCA 685, at para. 90
[80]          
Mr. Brown need not prove harm or causation but
must simply provide evidence for the motion judge to draw an inference of
likelihood with respect to the existence of the harm and the relevant causal
link.
[81]          
In his affidavit, Mr. Brown has led evidence of
business and reputational loss that, if connected in whole or in part to any of
the allegedly defamatory statements, would result in a significant damage award
in their favour.
[82]          
I find that Mr. Brown have established a
temporal connection and have provided potentially credible evidence that the
impugned expressions caused reputational harm.
[83]          
Ms. Landriault alleges that she was a victim of
abuse and that Mr. Brown has dangerous past behaviour. She alleges that he made
statements against her with Ottawa Smash and that she needed to defend herself
in the gaming community, which is male dominated.
[84]          
Ms. Landriault states that the public interest
is high as intimate partner violence is prevalent in our society and that
sexual abuse survivors needs to speak about their experiences. She states she needs
to put it out there what she has experienced and let the community know what
she has suffered.
[85]          
If this claim is allowed to proceed, there would
be a chilling effect on survivors coming forward. She should be able to speak
about what has happened to her.
[86]          
See Bullard v. Rogers Media Inc., 2020 ONSC
3084 at para. 103 where the court states that gender-based violence is a
problem. Ms. Landriault submits that these types of defamation claims should
not be a barrier for victims of sexual violence, and they should not be
silenced. It is a “serious social problem in our society”.
[87]          
In Marcellin v. LPS, 2022 ONSC 5886, at
para. 193, Justice Nicholson noted that there is a very strong public interest
in public conversations about intimate partner violence. At para. 192 the court
states that “victims and their advocates, need to be able to recount their
stories without undue fear of reprisal”.
[88]          
However, in this case, the statements made about
Mr. Brown are offensive and degrading. For example, examples of Ms.
Landriault’s statements on X (Twitter) include:
[89]          
For the reasons set out above, the evidence
establishes that Mr. Brown could succeed on their claims for financial and
reputational harm and he has led evidence of “sufficiently serious” harm.
[90]          
The quality of the expression or motivation of
the speaker are relevant factors in measuring the extent to which there is a
public interest in protecting that expression. A statement that contains
deliberate falsehoods, gratuitous personal attacks, or vulgar and offensive
language may still be an expression that relates to a matter of public interest.
However, the public interest in protecting that speech will be less than would
have been the case had the same message been delivered without the lies,
vitriol, and obscenities: Pointes, at para. 75.
[91]          
The purpose of anti-SLAPP legislation is not to
dismiss legitimate claims for the vindication of  Mr. Brown’s reputation after
a former partner, Ms. Landriault, made defamatory remarks about him.
[92]          
 For the reasons set out below, I conclude that Mr.
Brown has met his onus under the last step set out in s. 137.1(4)(b) of the Courts
of Justice Act. The harm that has been suffered by him as a result of the
above-noted expressions is sufficiently serious that the public interest in
permitting this action to proceed to a hearing on the merits outweighs the
public interest in protecting the Ms. Landriault’s expressions.
[93]          
I conclude that the public interest weighs in
favour of allowing the action to proceed to a determination on its merits.
[94]          
Accordingly, the Defendant’s s.
137.1 motion is dismissed.
[95]          
The parties have filed outlines of costs. Both
parties claim costs on a partial indemnity basis in the approximate amount of
$11,000.
[96]          
Section 137.1 of the Courts of Justice Act
deals with directions to the court regarding costs:
[97]          
In other words, the Plaintiff is not
presumptively entitled to costs despite achieving success of the motion.  The legislature
does not wish to discourage s. 137.1 motions as they deal with the public
interest and expressions and wish to encourage the public to be able to comment
and make statements that are of public interest.
[98]          
The jurisprudence has followed the principle set out at para. 20 of
the Anti-SLAPP Advisory Panel Report to the Attorney General that
costs awards against unsuccessful defendants are intended to act as “costs
sanctions against parties who bring frivolous motions for protection”: Ontario:
Ministry of the Attorney General, October 28, 2010.
[99]          
   In Thompson v. Cohodes, 2017 ONSC
2590, at para. 42 Justice Arrell declined to order costs as he
was not persuaded that there was any inappropriate behavior on either side
that would affect the exercise of his discretion on costs
under s.137.1(8).
[100]       In Canadian
Standards Association v. Knight et al., 2019 ONSC 5630, Justice C. J.
Brown found that the plaintiffs had rebutted the presumption that no costs
should be awarded to them. The court found that there were none of the indicia
of a SLAPP proceeding and there was no public interest in protecting the
impugned expression. The court also found that a denial of costs to the
plaintiffs could be viewed as encouraging meritless s. 137.1 motions.
[101]       In
this case, I do not see any reason to depart from that presumption.
[102]       The
s. 137.1 motion was not frivolous. Intimate partner violence is a serious
matter, and this motion had some basis.
[103]       It
is a case of two individuals who had a tumultuous relationship and then
embarked in a tumultuous separation.
[104]       The
record is replete with allegations by both parties regarding statements made
against them. At some point, credibility will need to be determined.
[105]       At
this early stage, the court has only determined that this is not a SLAPP
action.
[106]       Accordingly,
the court finds that this is not an appropriate case to order costs.