[1]           The reference concerns only this action.
The trial in this action concerns the claim for lien of the plaintiff (“Continental”)
in the amount of $35,000 and the claim by Continental as against 8682470 Canada
Inc. o/a Chang Xin Construction (“Chang”) for damages for breach of contract in
the amount of $130,000. The defendants deny these claims and assert a
counterclaim against Continental in damages for breach of contract in the
amount of $63,516.77.
[2]           The property in issue is a commercial site
located at 2230 Markham Road, Toronto (“the Property”). The registered owner is
the defendant, 2646576 Ontario Inc. (“264”). The project was the demolition of
the roof, front and back walls and the excavation and construction of additions
to the front and back for the purpose of creating an enhanced storage area for
the owner.
[3]           Based on the evidence, the following facts
appear not to be in dispute.
[4]           The principal of Chang is Kenny Lin, a realtor
and a contractor. The principal of Continental is Saiid Nessari. The two met in
2014. The two companies worked together on several projects together thereafter
and before the subject project.
[5]           In December, 2018 Mr. Lin’s superior at
his realty firm introduced him to Peter Leung, the principal of 264, a meat
supplier. Mr. Leung wanted to expand the building on the Property to be a proper
storage space.
[6]           On December 3, 2018 Messrs. Lin and Leung
signed a one-page contract on behalf of their respective companies, a contract whereby
Chang undertook the work of designing the project, demolishing the roof, front wall
and back wall of the existing building, and building a new and higher roof and additions
at the front and the back with a loading ramp at the back. It was a fixed price
contract, with the fixed price being $370,000 (plus HST).
[7]           On December 3, 2018 Mr. Lin prepared and
signed a contract document, called a “Renovation Contract,” which contained
more details, such as a work schedule and a payment schedule. This document specified
that the project was to begin in April, 2029 (depending on the permit) and be
completed on or before November 31, 2019. It also contained a penalty clause
whereby Chang agreed to pay 264 $1,000 for every day the project was delayed.  Mr.
Lin signed this document, but Mr. Leung did not. Mr. Lin maintained that this
document formed part of the main contract.
[8]           In January or February, 2019 Mr. Lin prepared
the design and applied for a building permit. The permit was completed in May,
2018. Because of his previous relationship with Continental, Mr. Lin approached
Mr. Nessari in mid-May, 2019 to have them do much of the work. The permit was
issued on May 26, 2019. Mr. Lin sent it to Mr. Nessari.
[9]           Mr. Nessari and Continental’s project
manager, Bexhet Ajdarevic, stated that in the evening of May 27, 2019 the two
of them and Mr. Lin met in a Starbucks café and for two hours hammered out what
each thought was a contract whereby Continental would do the specified scope of
work for a fixed price of $205,000 plus HST. Mr. Lin admitted at discovery and
in cross-examination that this meeting happened on May 27 or 28, 2019 and at
discovery he admitted asking Mr. Nessari to send him a contract document. At
trial he denied doing this.
[10]       On May 28, 2019 Mr. Nessari drafted a
contract document to capture what he thought was agreed to, and sent it to Mr.
Lin. The contract document specified that the Continental work would include the
demolition of the roof, front and back walls, and the excavation for and installation
of the concrete footings, foundation, slabs and walls for the front and back
additions. The document specified a payment schedule which included the
following: $41,000 plus HST to be paid immediately as an initial deposit, and $61,500
plus HST to be paid upon completion of the demolition, excavation, footings and
foundation. It also authorized Continental to stop working if payments were not
made in accordance with this plan.
[11]       In his affidavit Mr. Lin stated, on the
other hand, that this document was nothing but an initial “offer” and that the
Starbucks meeting happened on May 29, 2019 at which time there was a verbal
agreement that differed significantly from what he called the Nessari “offer”
document. Two significant discrepancies, according to Mr. Lim, were the
following. He said in his affidavit that the parties verbally agreed to a
payment schedule that would have Chang pay only $30,000 by June 20, 2019 and
$10,000 at the end of “phase one” which he said was the demolition and excavation.
He also said that the parties agreed that the work would be done by September
1, 2019 and that there would be a $1,000/day penalty for any delay beyond that
date.
[12]       Mr. Lin’s response to Mr. Nessari’s May
28, 2019 email was to tell Continental to start working. There was no email or
text corroborating these instructions, but this was not denied. Mr. Nessari
said he took this as Mr. Lin’s confirmation of an agreement in accordance with
the document Mr. Nessari emailed on May 28, 2019.
[13]       On May 28, 2019 Mr. Lin instructed Mr.
Nessari to get the locates. These are maps and other information provided by utilities
identifying the location of their underground assets. They are required before
excavation can be done.
[14]       Mr. Nessari immediately ordered the
locates. He said he expected to get them in one week. The Bell Canada locates
were issued on May 29, 2019. However, the critical gas and hydro locates were
issued no sooner than on June 18, 2019 and received the next day.
[15]       In the meantime, on June 5, 2019
Continential commenced demolition. This work went slowly. Mr. Lin says that Continental
did not provide adequate manpower and machinery for its work. Mr. Nessari
denies these allegations. It was unclear if and when the demolition was finished.
[16]       On June 20, 2019 Chang paid Continental
$30,000.  Mr. Nessari took this money as a delayed part-payment of the initial
deposit. He also asserts that there was an unpaid debt from a previous project owed
by Chang to Continental in the amount of $6,000 that was to be applied to this
payment. The defendants deny this. Continental continued working.
[17]       Mr. Nessari says that he asked for the
allegedly outstanding deposit money when the demolition was done, and it was
not forthcoming as the defendants wanted more work done first. Mr. Nessari sent
a text on July 12, 2019 again seeking the money. He says that the money again
was not forthcoming as the defendants wanted more work done first.
[18]       There was an issue with the survey. A
survey was required before excavation can begin, as it identifies the exact location
for excavation. The survey was provided to Continental by text dated July 19,
2019.
[19]       With the locates and the survey finally in
hand and despite its complaints about money, Continental began the excavation and
the footings. Mr. Lin, however, became more dissatisfied with the level of
manpower and machinery that Continental applied to this work. He said he was
also dissatisfied with the methods used for excavation around utilities.
[20]       On July 30 or 31, 2019 Mr. Nessari says he
demanded payment of the unpaid deposit and threatened to stop work if it was
not paid. Mr. Lin says he told Mr. Nessari verbally that Continental had
delayed the project and he wanted the $30,000 back. He says that only 10% of the
excavation and footings was done by this point. He asserted in
cross-examination that he told Mr. Nessari “not to come again,” an assertion
Mr. Nessari denied.
[21]       Mr. Nessari stated in his affidavit that he
received no notice of contract termination (verbal or in writing), and that he
attended the site on August 1, 2019 and noticed the presence of the new
contractor. There was no formal contract termination in writing.
[22]       On August 1, 2019 Mr. Lin hired 2514080
Ontario Inc. o/a Build4Canada (“Build4Canada”) to complete what Mr. Lin called
phase one of the Continental scope, namely the remaining excavation and the footings
and foundation. Build4Canada provided an estimate to Chang on August 1, 2019
showing a fixed price of $75,340 plus HST. This estimate was accepted and
Build4Canada proceeded with the work.
[23]       Mr. Lin stated in his affidavit that Build4Canada
finished the project by the end of January, 2020. He provided nothing to
corroborate this statement.
[24]       On September 10, 2019 Continental
registered a claim for lien in the amount of $207,650. On December 6, 2019,
after hiring a lawyer, it commenced this action with a statement of claim that reduced
the lien claim to $35,000 and claimed damages for breach of contract, namely
lost profit and loss of opportunity, in the amount of $130,000.
[25]       On January 9, 2020 the defendants obtained
an order on consent vacating the Continental claim for lien with $35,000 of
cash security. The consent order of Master Robinson, as he then was, stated
that both defendants paid the cash security. It also stated explicitly that the
$35,000 of security pertained to both the claim for lien and security for
costs. This suggests that the claim for lien was further reduced to $28,000.
[26]       On January 29, 2020 the defendants served
a statement of defence and counterclaim. In their counterclaim, the defendants
claimed general and special damages that totaled $600,000.
[27]        On November 4, 2021 Continental obtained
a judgment of reference from Justice Pollak. On November 17, 2021, Continental
obtained an order for trial from me. The first trial management conference took
place with me on December 20, 2021. I made orders for necessary interlocutory
steps.
[28]       At the third trial management conference on
December 5, 2022 I scheduled a six-day summary trial in this action for
December, 2023 and early January, 2024.
[29]       On July 7, 2023, at the request of the lawyer
for Continental, I scheduled a motion by him to be removed as lawyer of record
for the plaintiff, returnable July 17, 2023. I granted the motion.
[30]       At the trial management conference on
September 5, 2023 Mr. Nessari appeared and advised that he could not find a lawyer.
At the request of the defendants, I scheduled a motion by them to dismiss this
action due to the plaintiff’s non-compliance with my removal order, returnable
September 19, 2023.
[31]       On September 19, 2023, Ms. Hanxhari
appeared by phone and advised that she was being retained by Continental. I
adjourned the motion to September 29, 2024. Ms. Hanxhari served her notice of
appointment on September 19, 2023. On September 29, 2023 I rescheduled the summary
trial to take place on May 2, 3, 7, 8, 9 and 17, 2024.
[32]       At the trial hearing, Continental called
Messrs. Nessari and Ajdarevic. As for the defendants, after listing five people
on their trial witness list, they called only Mr. Lin.
[33]       On May 8, 2024, the fourth day of the
trial, the defendants proposed calling an expert, Bill Wang. His admissibility
was challenged in the qualification voir dire. It came out that Mr. Wang
had probably written his expert report in violation of an order of the Discipline
Committee of the Association of Professional Engineers of Ontario. Also, Mr. Juzkiw
delivered Mr. Wang’s resume much too late, namely no sooner than on May 6, 2024
in the middle of the trial. After getting instructions, Mr. Wang withdrew Mr.
Wang as a witness on May 8, 2024.
[34]       The defendants had also served and filed
an affidavit sworn by Roostam Abdukhalilov, a representative of Build4Canada.
However, on May 8, 2024 Mr. Juzkiw also withdrew him as a witness stating that “he
is not available.”
[35]       Based on the evidence and submissions, I
find that the following are the issues to be determined:
[36]       Before I analyze the issues, I will
comment on the credibility of the witnesses.
[37]       I found all three witnesses poor in
quality. Their affidavits were not detailed, not well corroborated and
argumentative. They did not focus on the facts as they should have. Particularly
frustrating was the fact that the survey delay, a significant issue, was not
even addressed by the affidavits. It came up in cross-examination. I was left
wondering what preparation the parties had done for these affidavits and indeed
the trial hearing itself.
[38]       Mr. Ajdarevic had the added problem of including
much hearsay evidence in his affidavit, namely the evidence given him by Mr.
Nessari about the financial issues between the parties. This evidence I largely
ignored as a result. The useful part of his evidence boiled down to what Mr.
Ajdarevic stated about the Starbucks meeting and the contract formation, as he
was directly a part of that process. He also gave direct evidence about the
construction work. However, given the absence of corroboration and his long-time
employment with Continental, many of his assertions in this regard, such as the
assertion about the Continental scope being 60% done by the end of July, 2019, seemed
unreasonable and biased in nature.
[39]       Mr. Nessari had greater credibility. As
principal of Continental, Mr. Nessari attracted the usual concern about bias in
favour of the plaintiff. But his evidence was consistent and plausible. He
withstood cross-examination well. His story about the contract negotiation seemed
reasonable. For instance, there was his assertion that the previous verbal
contracts between the parties were not guides to what the parties did on this
occasion, as this contract was much greater and more complicated that the
earlier ones. That made sense. He also conceded that the focus of the contract
discussions on May 27, 2019 was on scope and price, not schedule, and that
there was no more than an “understanding” that the work would be done as soon
as possible with a target of “a couple of months.” This made sense within the
body of all the evidence. There was no evidence (other than Mr. Lin’s
uncorroborated assertions) that the parties agreed on September 1, 2019 as the
completion date with a liquidated damage penalty attached. Agreeing to such a
penalty clause would have been an extraordinary step for Continental given its
lack of control over such things as the locates and the survey.
[40]       Mr. Nessari also made concessions against
interest that bolstered his credibility. For instance, he admitted that Mr. Lin
was consistently unhappy with the pace of construction. He implicitly conceded
that materials were not being purchased and labour not being applied as he
would have liked. Generally, despite the deficiencies in his affidavits, I
found Mr. Nessari the most credible of the witnesses.
[41]       Mr. Lin, on the other hand, was not at all
credible. His evidence was full of contradictions. For instance, he stated in
his affidavit that Mr. Nessari’s contract document was nothing but an “offer,”
that the Starbucks meeting happened thereafter and that there was then a verbal
agreement. Yet, at discovery and in cross-examination, Mr. Lin admitted that
the meeting happened on May 27 or 28, 2019. Indeed, at discovery he even went
further and admitted asking Mr. Nessari to send him a contract document no doubt
embodying the agreement already reached at the meeting. In cross-examination,
he asserted in a feeble and self-serving way that this discovery transcript was
“inaccurate.”
[42]       There were other contradictions. For
instance, Mr. Lin stated that the verbal agreement he alleged required that
Chang pay Continental $30,000 on June 20, 2019; but he then stated that he paid
that money because Continental pressured him to do so. Also, Mr. Lin’s
affidavit asserted that Continental applied for the locates no sooner than on
June 13, 2019; but then he retracted that statement in cross-examination
conceding it was “incorrect.” Also, Mr. Lin asserted in cross-examination that Continental
abandoned the project. This contradicted his statement at discovery that he had
terminated the Continental contract and his other statement in
cross-examination that he told Mr. Nessari “not to come back.” Also, Mr. Lin stated
in his affidavit that there was a bidding process that led to the Continental
“offer,” but then in cross-examination he admitted there was no bidding
process. These contradictions seriously undermined Mr. Lin’s credibility.
[43]       Mr. Lin also took unreasonable positions
that were not corroborated. He asserted in his affidavit without support that
Continental could have started the excavation before getting the locates. This
was a dangerous proposition that he withdrew in cross-examination. He asserted
that Continental was responsible for getting the survey and that it did not do
so because it did not want to pay the surveyor. Yet, the evidence showed that the
surveyor’s contract was with 264 and it was 264 that had the responsibility to
get and pay for the survey and to do so in a timely way. When asked about this
in cross-examination, Mr. Lin gave an evasive and self-serving answer, namely
that this was indeed the defendants’ responsibility but only “at the
preliminary stage” of the project.
[44]       Mr. Lin also asserted that it was
Continental that was responsible for getting the locates. The evidence is clear
that it was Mr. Lin who delegated this responsibility to Mr. Nessari on May 28,
2019 when the contract was confirmed, thereby begging the question as to why
Chang had not itself obtained the locates sooner. These positions made Mr. Lin appear
as excessively biased in favour of the defendants and untrustworthy.
[45]       For these reasons I decided to prefer the
evidence of Mr. Nessari (and to a limited extent Mr. Ajdarevic) over that of
Mr. Lin whenever they conflicted.
[46]       Continental asserts that there was a
contract between it and Chang, and this contract was embodied in the contract
document Mr. Nessari emailed Mr. Lin on May 28, 2019, the document that
contains Mr. Nessari’s signature. Continental asserts that by instructing Continental
to begin working, Chang accepted that document as the contract. The defendants
deny this and assert that this document was only an offer that was not
accepted, that the Starbucks meeting then took place on May 29, 2019 and that
the parties reached a verbal agreement not reflected in the Nessari form of
contract. In the alternative, the defendants assert that there was no contract
as the parties never reached an agreement on the essential terms.
[47]       What makes
an enforceable contract? As stated by Associate Justice Robinson in Bellsam
Contracting Limited v. Torgerson, 2023 ONSC 468 (CanLII) para. 35, an
enforceable contract has five elements: offer, acceptance, consideration,
certainty of essential terms, and an intention to create a legal relationship.
Determining whether a contract is formed is done through an objective
assessment, namely a determination of how each party’s conduct would appear to
a reasonable person in the position of the other party; see Ethiopian
Orthodox Tewahedo Church of Canada St. Mary Cathedral v. Aga, 2021 SCC 22
(CanLII), [2021] 1 SCR 868 para. 35. It does not matter whether a party does or
does not subjectively intend to contract. It matters whether that party’s
conduct is such that a reasonable person in the position of the other party
would conclude that the party intended to be bound by the contract; see Ethiopian
Orthodox, supra, at paras. 37 – 38. The court must consider the factual
matrix between the parties; see Bellsom Contracting, supra, at para. 36.
[48]       What are the essential terms of an enforceable
construction contract? It is well established law that an enforceable
construction contract requires that there be a meeting of the minds between the
parties on three elements: the scope of the work; the price; and the schedule.
There must be a certain agreement on these elements; see The Gatti Group Corp. v.
Zuccarini,
2020 ONSC 2830 (CanLII) at paragraph 71.
[49]       Having reviewed the evidence, I find that Continental’s
position is more credible, and I accept it. Here are my reasons:
[50]       Mr. Juzkiw argued in his written closing
submission that silence cannot be taken as acceptance. He referred me to the
decision of Justice Himel in Toronto Airport Marriott Hotel Ltd. Partnership
(Receiver of) v. Kozma, 1999 CanLII 14944 (ONSC) at paragraph 43. I
have reviewed this case and it does not assist the defendants. The Court held
that the question of acceptance is a factual matter. While silence is generally
not considered acceptance, there are cases where the acceptance is implied
given the circumstances and the conduct of the offeree when looked at
objectively. The judge referred with approval to the decision of the
Supreme Court of Canada in Saint John Tug Boat Co. Ltd. v. Irving Refining
Ltd., 1964 CanLII 88 (SCC), [1964] SCR 614 where the Court found an
enforceable contract when the offeree simply started using the tug boats without
formally authorizing the written contract that had been offered. In the case
before me, I find that Mr. Lin’s instruction to commence work the day after the
intense contract negotiation between the parties at which they both thought
they reached an agreement, Mr. Lin’s request to Mr. Nessari at that meeting to
send him, Mr. Lin, a form of contract for him to review, Mr. Lin’s receipt of
Mr. Nessari’s form of contract the next day, and Mr. Lin’s immediate and
unconditional instruction to commence work, when looked at objectively,
amounted to acceptance.
[51]       Therefore, I find that there was an enforceable
construction contract between the parties in accordance with the contract
document Mr. Nessari sent Mr. Lin on May 28, 2019. I will call this contract
“the Subcontract.”
[52]       Continental asserts that Chang breached
the Subcontract by not paying Continental in accordance with the Subcontract
and by wrongfully terminating the Subcontract without just cause on July 30 or
31, 2019. Continental asserts that the Chang contract termination was a
fundamental breach of the Subcontract. Chang in turn asserts that it was Continental
that fundamentally breached the Subcontract by not applying enough resources
and delaying the project, by not doing its work properly, all of which justified
Mr. Lin’s actions on July 30 or 31, 2019 in terminating the Subcontract.
[53]       The law of fundamental contract breach in
construction contracts is well-known and well summarized by Justice Perell in D & M
Steel Ltd. v. 51 Construction Ltd., 2018 ONSC 2171 (CanLII) at paragraphs 49 to
56. In paragraph 49 His Honour had this to say about fundamental contract
breach by an owner: “Owner breach: if the owner without justification ceases to make required
payments under the contract, cancels it, or through some act without cause
makes it impossible for the contractor to complete its work, then the owner has
breached the contract and it has no claim for damages, and the contractor is
justified in abandoning the work and the contractor is entitled to enforce its  claim
for lien to the extent of the actual value of the work performed and materials
supplied up until that time, and the court may award the innocent contractor
damages for breach of contract or damages on a quantum meruit basis
in lieu of or in addition to damages for breach of contract.” This is
essentially Continental’s position as against the defendants.
[54]       On the other hand, in
paragraph 53, His Honour had this to say about a contractor’s fundamental
contract breach: “Contractor breach: if a contractor abandons the contract, repudiates the contract,
fundamentally breaches the contract, or performs the contract in a way that it
is so defective as to amount, in substance, to a failure or refusal to carry
out the contract work, the owner is entitled to terminate the contract, to
claim damages for breach of contract, and to be discharged from its obligations
to pay including any obligation to pay on a quantum meruit or
for work already performed.” This is essentially the defendants’ position as
against Continental.
[55]       Having reviewed the evidence and heard
submissions, I accept Continental’s position. The following are my reasons for
doing so.
[56]       Concerning payment, Continental has the
onus to prove that it was not paid by Chang in accordance with the Subcontract and
that Continental’s efforts to get paid were justified. I find this it has done
so.
[57]       Subcontract contained a payment schedule. The
first specified payment was a deposit of $41,000 plus HST, namely $46,330, that
was to be paid by Chang “on the day the work commences.” The second payment was
$61,500 plus HST, namely $69,495, when the excavation, demolition, footings and
foundation were done. On page 2 of the Subcontract, Continental was entitled to
stop working if it was not paid in accordance with the schedule: “Client
[Chang] agrees that if payment is not made according to the above plan, Builder
[Continental] has the right to stop all work until such time as the payments
have been brought current.”
[58]       It is undisputed that Chang did not pay
the deposit in full. It made no payment at all when the work began. Nevertheless,
Continental proceeded with the work in good faith. Mr. Nessari made it clear,
as I stated earlier, that Mr. Lin had a habit of delaying payment and that Mr.
Nessari relied on that past practice to start the work expecting the payment
would be made shortly. However, there was no evidence that Continental waived
its contractual right to stop working due to non-payment. I reiterate that I
accept Mr. Nessari evidence here.
[59]       The evidence then shows that Mr. Lin paid
Continental $30,000 on June 20, 2019. He asserted that this was done in
accordance with the verbal contract he alleged Chang had with Continental. I
have found that there was no such verbal contract. Indeed, Mr. Lin in
cross-examination admitted that he made this payment under pressure from
Continental.
[60]       There was then an issue about whether
$6,000 of this payment was on account of a past debt Chang owed to Continental on
another project. Mr. Nessari stated that there was this debt and that, as was
the case in the past between these two parties, the $30,000 payment was to be applied
first to pay this past debt. Mr. Lin did not deny the debt or the past practice
between the parties; but he did deny that this payment was to be applied to
this debt. I accept Mr. Nessari’s evidence here as it seemed reasonable and
consistent with the parties’ admitted past practice, and as Mr. Lin’s assertion
was patently self-serving. I also reiterate that I generally found Mr. Nessari
more credible that Mr. Lin. That means that this $30,000 payment was short of
the amount required for the deposit by $46,330 – ($30,000 - $6,000) = $22,330. This
was just under half of the required deposit. If the $6,000 was exclusive of
HST, the unpaid deposit was exactly half of the required amount.
[61]       The evidence shows that Mr. Nessari kept
pressing Mr. Lin for payment and that Mr. Lin kept deferring payment to extract
more work from Continental. Mr. Lin admitted doing this. In mid-July, 2019 the
project was finally ready for excavation and Mr. Lin pressured Continental to start.
On Friday, July 12, 2019, Mr. Nessari sent a text to Mr. Lin stating that he
had told Mr. Lin on Monday and Tuesday of that week to “get the cheque ready.”
Mr. Nessari stated in cross-examination that this referred to the unpaid
deposit. Mr. Lin did not respond to that statement. Nevertheless, Continental
carried on.
[62]       Finally, on July 30 and 31, 2019, Mr.
Nessari met with Mr. Lin and verbally threatened to cease working unless the deposit
was paid. This, in my view, was simply an assertion by Continental of its
contractual right to cease working if the payment schedule was not complied
with, and to resume working only when payments were brought current. It was not
a contract abandonment or Subcontract breach, as asserted by the defendants.
[63]       Concerning delay, Mr. Lin relied on
Continental’s alleged delay to justify his Subcontract termination at the end
of July, 2019. Chang therefore has the onus to prove that Continental delayed
the project. I find that it failed to do so. I find that there were two causes
of delay and that both were the fault of the defendants.
[64]       First, there were the locates. As stated
earlier, these must be obtained before excavation can be done. As the principal
of the general contractor, Chang, Mr. Lin could have started this process as
early as May 15, 2019 when he learned that the building permit would be issued
in two to three weeks, and called Mr. Nessari asking for a quotation. Mr. Lin did
not do so. Instead, he waited until the Subcontract was agreed upon two weeks
later on May 28, 2019, and then off-loaded this responsibility onto
Continental. Mr. Nessari wasted no time in applying for the locates. The fact
that it took three weeks for the critical gas and hydro locates to arrive was
not the fault of Continental. Had Mr. Lin applied for the locates in mid-May,
2019 this three-week delay in the gas and hydro locates would have been largely
of no consequence. This three-week delay in the locates caused an equivalent
delay in the project, as the excavation was clearly on the critical path of Continental’s
scope. Other than demolition, nothing could be done until the excavation was
done.
[65]       Second, there was the survey. It is
undisputed that the survey was necessary to locate exactly where the excavation
was to be done and that the excavation could not proceed without it.  The
survey for the excavation did not come until Mr. Nessari requested it on July 19,
2019. Mr. Lin blamed Continental for this problem, stating that, since
Continental was responsible for 80% of the overall project, it should have
pursued the surveyor for a timely survey for the excavation. This allegation
had no credibility. It came out in the cross-examination of Mr. Lin that the
surveyor was Mandarin Surveyors Limited. The initial survey report on the lot for
the purpose of the permit was done by Mandarin on October 19, 2018 and was
stated to be done for “2646576 Ontario Inc.” Mr. Lin in fact admitted in the
end calling the surveyor and paying him to get the excavation survey delivered.
Clearly, the surveyor reported to 264 (or Chang), and the defendants should
have as a result made sure of a timely excavation survey. That was not done. As
a result, the excavation was delayed further until July 19, 2019.
[66]       There was evidence that Continental’s work
in the meantime was slow. Demolition proceeded during these delays. It was not
clear when the demolition was completed, but it was clearly slowly done. That
is evident from the photographs produced during the trial. Mr. Lin complained
throughout his evidence that Continental did not supply sufficient manpower to
the project. In his affidavit, he stated that there were only 2 to 3 men on
site when there should have been 4 to 5. There was no corroboration for these
statements. Mr. Nessari denied that Continental unreasonably slowed down given
the above noted delays and the non-payment of the deposit in full. I find that
there was a slowdown in the demolition work, but that it was of no consequence
to the project schedule given the delays in the locates and the survey. The
evidence showed that the excavation could not begin until the locates and
survey were in place.
[67]       After the work on the excavation, footings
and foundation finally started in mid-July, 2019, there was evidence of delayed
purchase of materials. Mr. Nessari noted that that the deposit was intended
primarily for material costs. That evidence seemed reasonable as materials are
immediately necessary and their cost usually cannot be deferred. I accept it. Mr.
Nessari then noted that the non-payment of the deposit in full caused
Continental by mid-July, 2019 not to purchase necessary materials such as the
rebar and concrete for the footings. I accept this explanation as it is
reasonable given the deposit’s purpose.
[68]       Mr. Lin complained about the size of the
excavator Continental used and the manpower it applied. As for the excavator, Mr.
Nessari denied supplying an undersized excavator for the work at hand. Chang produced
no expert evidence as to what the appropriate excavator should have been. Mr.
Lin also again produced no corroboration for his complaint about the
insufficient manpower. I do not accept his evidence as I found Mr. Lin
generally of inferior credibility, as stated earlier. I find in the end that there
was no cogent evidence of further delay after the excavation started in
mid-July, 2019, certainly no delay that was the fault of Continental. Any delay
that may have occurred was the result of the Chang non-payment.
[69]       This all leads to my following conclusion.
Chang fundamentally breached the Subcontract by failing to pay Continental the
complete deposit and by then terminating the Subcontract when Continental
exercised its right in the Subcontract to cease working until it was paid. Furthermore,
Chang was not justified in terminating the Subcontract because of Continental’s
alleged delay as I find that it was the defendants who were at fault for this
delay for the reasons stated above. Continental had no choice but to accept
this fundamental breach by Chang as Continental was evicted from the site.
However, Continental can claim breach of contract damages and a lien for the
work it did.
[70]       Having found that Continental is entitled
to breach of contract damages from Chang, I do not have deal with the issue of quantum
meruit recovery, and, therefore, do not.
[71]       As
indicated in D & M Steel Ltd., supra, para. 49, Chang, having
fundamentally breached the Subcontract as described above, has no claim for damages
as against the innocent party, Continental. That is what I find. There was no
evidence concerning the 264 claim for damages as against Continental, and I
deny it as well.
[72]       Continental,
on the other hand, has a claim for breach of contract damages as against Chang.
First, there is its claim for compensation for the alleged unpaid work it did.
This also forms its claim for lien. The amount claimed is $35,000. Continental
has to the onus to prove this claim.
[73]       The
evidence in support of this claim was sketchy to say the least. There was no
expert evidence on the matter. At one point in his cross-examination, Mr.
Nessari stated that Continental completed between 46% to 47% of its “phase one”
work, which he described as including demolition, excavation, footings and
foundation. The contract price (including the deposit) allocated to this phase
one work totaled $115,825 (HST incl.). Therefore, the calculation of the value
of the unpaid work would be as follows: (46% x $115,825) - $30,000 (payment) =
$23,279.50. In closing argument, Ms. Hanxhari said that Continental would be
satisfied with such a finding.
[74]       Mr. Lin’s
consistent position was that Continental completed no more than 10% of phase
one of the Subcontract scope of the work. This calculation would be as follows:
10% x $115,825 = $11,582.50. Again, there was no corroboration for this
position. $11,582.50 is much less that the $30,000 Chang paid Continental. Therefore,
this position would leave Continental with no claim.
[75]       I have
decided to accept Mr. Nessari’s evidence, and not Mr. Lin’s. First, as stated
earlier, I found Mr. Nessari generally more credible than Mr. Lin. Second, Mr.
Nessari’s position correlates very closely with the about $23,000 I found was
owed to Continental on the deposit, a deposit that should have been paid at the
outset of the work. In short, this figure is a measure of the breach of
contract damages for the earned and unpaid contract price.
[76]       Third, the
evidence also suggests that this figure of $23,279.50 reflects the amount of Continental’s
earned and unpaid contract price regardless of the deposit obligation. As
stated earlier, Mr. Nessari’s evidence was that the deposit was intended
primarily to be used to purchase materials. I accept that evidence, as stated
earlier. By the end of July, 2019, according to Mr. Nessari, Continental had
run out of money from the paid $30,000 to buy materials, such as the rebar and
concrete for the footings. By this point, the end of July, 2019, Continental
had obviously spent considerable labour as well. The proffered photographs
showed the following work: the demolition was largely done; the excavation was
well underway; and the footings were being installed. This indicates that much
more than $30,000 worth of phase one work had been done. Therefore, I find that
Continental has met it onus and proved its claim for $23,279.50 in damages for
breach of contract on account of the work done.
[77]       This
figure, $23,279.50, is also the amount of Continental lien. For the reasons
stated, it represents the unpaid price for the materials and services that were
supplied. This amount must, therefore, by paid entirely from the cash that was posted
by both defendants for the Continental claim for lien pursuant to the order of Master
Robinson (as he then was) dated January 9, 2020.
[78]       Continental
also claims $130,000 in breach of contract damages for alleged lost profit and
lost business opportunities. There was no evidence tendered to support this
claim. In closing argument Ms. Hanxhari tried to refer to me to documents in
the filed affidavit of documents of Continental; but I stopped this process
advising her that affidavits of documents are not trial evidence in this court.
Therefore, I deny this claim.
[79]       For these reasons, I find and declare that
Chang is personally liable to pay Continental $23,279.50 in damages for breach
of contract, and that Continental has a lien for the same sum, which lien must
be paid from the cash deposited in court by both defendants. I dismiss the
remainder of Continental’s claim and the entirety of the defendants’ set off
and counterclaim.
[80]       Concerning costs, at the end of the
argument on May 17, 2024, I ordered that costs outlines for the reference be
served, filed and uploaded on or before May 24, 2024. On May 28, 2024 the
defendants filed and uploaded a costs outline that showed totals of $49,149.45
in partial indemnity costs and $77,957.43 in substantial indemnity costs. The
plaintiff did not file a costs outline, at all.
[81]       While preparing this decision in October, 2024,
I noticed that the plaintiff had not filed a costs outline. On November 1, 2024,
concerned that the plaintiff’s costs outline was misplaced by the court, I
circulated an email inquiring as to the status of the document. Later that day,
November 1, 2024, I received an email from “reception” at Ms. Hanxhari’s firm
containing the plaintiff’s costs outline signed by Ms. Hanxhari with the signing
date shown as being “May 28, 2024.” It showed $56,668.36 in substantial
indemnity costs and $37,778.91 in partial indemnity costs. I circulated an
email demanding clarification from Ms. Hanxhari as to when this document was
served and filed. Ms. Hanxhari emailed explaining that the problem was a “gross
miscommunication” between her and her clerk. She said that she had entrusted
the task of serving and filing the costs outline to her clerk and that her
clerk failed to do so. Ms. Hanxhari impliedly admitted her own failure to
follow up and ensure that this task was done, doing so only in response to my
November 1, 2024 email, over five months after the deadline.
[82]        By further email, I asked for Mr.
Juzkiw’s position. He responded with an email on November 1, 2024 arguing that
the costs outline should not be accepted. He pointed out rightfully that there
was no corroboration for the May 28, 2024 date beside Ms. Hanxhari’s signature on
the plaintiff’s costs outline and no good explanation for the huge delay in
serving and filing the costs outline. The suggestion appeared to be that Ms.
Hanxhari fabricated the date on the document, and that the plaintiff had an
unfairly lengthy time to prepare, serve and file its costs outline. Ms.
Juzkiw’s other comments were about the contents of the plaintiff’s costs
outline.
[83]       Having considered the matter, I have
decided to accept the plaintiff’s costs outline. To not accept the costs
outline would mean denying the plaintiff costs. That was made clear in my third
trial management directions of December 5, 2022 when I made my first trial
schedule. While Ms. Hanxhari’s explanation for this gross delinquency lacked
the particularity I would have liked, I am not prepared to ascribe to her the deviousness
suggested by Mr. Juzkiw. I accept her explanation that this costs outline was
prepared on May 28, 2024 and through gross lawyer inadvertence not served and
filed until November 1, 2024. As a result, the defendants should not be
prejudiced by my acceptance of the document. Furthermore, a lawyer’s
inadvertence should not be visited on a client when the opposing party is not
prejudiced. I will, however, consider this matter when making my final award of
costs.
[84]       I encourage the parties to try and resolve
the issue of costs and interest in light of the result. Should they fail to do
so, I order that written submissions on costs and interest be served, filed and
uploaded in accordance with the following schedule: