[1]              
On March 1, 2024, following a five-day trial by
judge alone that took place in June and July of 2023, I found C.G. guilty of
having committed two sexual assaults, contrary to section 271 of the Criminal
Code of Canada; i.e., “the Code”.
[2]              
The first sexual assault was committed in
November of 2019, and the second in January of 2020.  In relation to each
offence, the victim was A.S., (“A.”), the daughter of the woman who was the
intimate partner of Mr G. at the time of the two sexual assaults. A. was born
in February of 2001, and therefore was 18 when Mr G. committed each sexual
assault.
[3]              
Following the rendering of my judgment on March
1, 2024, I directed the preparation of a pre-sentence report pursuant to section
721 of the Code, and the matter was adjourned to May 14, 2024, for the receipt
of sentencing submissions.
[4]              
On May 14, 2024, (by which time I had been
supplied with the aforesaid pre-sentence report and nine attached letters of
reference, all of which collectively were marked as an exhibit on the
sentencing hearing), I received counsel submissions, as well as copies of further
material tendered by Crown counsel and counsel for Mr G.  In particular:
[5]              
All concerned were agreed that Mr G. had no
criminal record for presentation or consideration.  It was also agreed that Mr G.
had spent no time in presentence custody in respect of which he needed to be
given any credit towards any custodial sentence I might impose; e.g., pursuant
to subsection 719(3) or subsection 719(3.1) of the Code.
[6]              
After the completion of sentencing submissions
from counsel, Mr G. was asked, pursuant to section 726 of the Code, if he
wanted to make any direct comments to me prior to imposition of sentence.  He
declined the opportunity.
[7]              
The matter then was adjourned to November 15,
2024, (the first available hearing date), for imposition of sentence and
delivery of my associated reasons in that regard.  As my attendance that day
was prevented by illness, the matter then was rescheduled to today.
[8]              
The circumstances underlying the offences in
respect of which Mr G. has been convicted were outlined in extensive detail
during the course of my trial decision.
[9]              
While I have regard to all of those underlying circumstances
in arriving at an appropriate sentence for the crimes committed by Mr G., I
will not repeat all of that previously provided information in its entirety
here.  My trial decision instead should be read together with this one.
[10]          
For ease of reference, however, and only by way
of an abbreviated summary, I note that those underlying circumstances included
the following:
[11]          
With those introductory comments, and that
outline of the circumstances underlying the offences of Mr G. in mind, I now
return to my current task of determining the appropriate sentence Mr G. should
receive in relation to his two sexual assault convictions, in respect of which
he has not yet spent any time in custody.
[12]          
The personal circumstances of Mr G. were
outlined to some extent during the course of trial, but information in that
regard was supplemented by the pre-sentence report, letters of reference and
legal opinion letter from Mr Abrams, all of which I mentioned earlier, as well
as submissions I received from counsel for Mr G.
[13]          
In that regard, I nevertheless will note at the
outset, (in terms of my description of the personal circumstances of Mr G.),
that some of the content of the pre-sentence report seemed contradictory, inaccurate
or otherwise questionable.  In particular:
[14]          
Before going on to outline the personal
circumstances of Mr G., I also note that the reference letters supplied by D.W.
and R.W. are problematic.  In that regard:
[15]          
With the above caveats, I have reviewed and
considered all of the information provided to me, in relation to the personal
circumstances of Mr G., but note for present purposes that it includes the following
indications:
[16]          
The Crown submits that, having regard to all the
circumstances, an appropriate global custodial sentence for the two sexual
assault convictions of Mr G. would be six to seven years, to be served in the
penitentiary, with the Crown principally suggesting a total custodial sentence of
seven years generated by:
[17]          
In that regard, it was submitted that imposition
of consecutive custodial sentences in relation to the two sexual assault
convictions would be appropriate, insofar as the two underlying sexual assaults
took place on separate occasions, with no reasonably close nexus between the
offending behaviour Mr G. demonstrated in each instance.
[18]          
It was also submitted that the length of the
proposed consecutive custodial sentences being sought by the Crown adequately
took into account and reflected considerations of totality.  In particular, it
was submitted:
[19]          
Crown counsel also sought ancillary orders that
would include the following:
[20]          
Counsel for Mr G. generally took no position in
relation to the ancillary orders being sought by the Crown, subject to
indicating the following in relation to the Crown’s request for a Form 52 order
requiring Mr G. to comply with SOIRA:
[21]          
Counsel for Mr G. otherwise focused his sentencing
submissions on the duration of the custodial sentence or sentences Mr G. should
receive, suggesting that a global sentence of three years in the penitentiary
would be appropriate in this case.
[22]          
In that regard, counsel for Mr G. acknowledged
that a three-to-five-year custodial sentence is now the general sentencing
range or guideline in relation to a sexual assault involving penetration, and
that nothing in the circumstances of this case warranted deviation from that
range on an exceptional basis to impose a global custodial sentence less than
three years in length.
[23]          
However, it was suggested that the overall
circumstances, precedent, and particular emphasis on the principles of
restraint and totality, (insofar as the Crown was seeking the imposition of
consecutive sentences),  warranted imposition of a global custodial sentence at
the lowest possible end of the applicable range; i.e., with a three-year
custodial sentence being imposed in relation to each of the two convictions, to
be served concurrently rather than consecutively.
[24]          
As emphasized by section 718 of the Code, the
fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute, (along
with crime prevention initiatives), to respect for the law and the maintenance of
a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or
more of the following objectives:
[25]          
Pursuant to section 718.1 of the Code, a
sentence should be proportionate to the gravity of the offence, and the degree
of responsibility of the offender.
[26]          
Pursuant to section 718.2 of the Code, I note
that, amongst other considerations, the court is obliged to take into account:
[27]          
The sentencing objectives outlined above are
applicable in relation to all convictions, and I accordingly have them in mind
throughout the process of arriving at a just sentence for Mr G., in relation to
the offences that bring him before me now.
[28]          
However, the legislation provides further
guidance as to how these general sentencing objectives should be applied in
dealing with offences of this particular nature.  In particular:
[29]          
Beyond such legislative directions, I have
regard to judicial authority offering further guidance on how sentencing
generally should be approached in relation to such matters.
[30]          
This includes frequently repeated indications
that, having regard to the inherently serious and violent nature of sexual
assault, (underscored by its express inclusion within the Code’s section 752
definition of “serious personal injury offence”), and its unfortunate
frequency, considerations of denunciation and deterrence usually are paramount
in this context.  See, for example, R. v. Wells, [2000] 1. S.C.R. 207,
at paragraphs 25 and 47-48.
[31]          
However, the need for our courts to pay greater
attention to the gravity and serious consequences of sexual assault,
particularly in relation to women who are victims of the offence, has been the
subject of repeated appellate court emphasis in recent years.
[32]          
For example, writing for a majority of the
Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Barton, 2019 SCC 33 (CanLII), [2019] 2 S.C.R. 579, Justice
Moldaver began his decision by noting, (in paragraph 1), that we live in a time
where myths, stereotypes and sexual violence against women are tragically
common; that our society has yet to come to grips with just how deep-rooted
such issues truly are and just how devastating their consequences can be; and
that eliminating such myths, stereotypes and sexual violence against women
undoubtedly is one of the more pressing challenges we face as a society.  While
acknowledging that serious efforts were being made by a broad range of actors
to address and remedy such failings within the criminal justice system and throughout
Canadian society more broadly, Justice Moldaver also emphasized that all
concerned can and must do better.
[33]          
Less than a year later, the need to address
sexual violence in a more thoughtful and serious way was emphasized again by a unanimous
Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9 (CanLII), [2020] 1 S.C.R. 424.  Although
focused primarily on the imposition of sentences that fully reflect and give
effect to the profound wrongfulness and harmfulness of sexual offences against
children, numerous observations made in the course of the decision have more
general import, in relation to sentencing for sexual offences, and include the
following:
[34]          
Before leaving a discussion of the general
principles and approach to sentencing in this area mandated by Parliament and
our appellate courts, and returning to more specific consideration of the case
at hand, I will note that I also am mindful of our Court of Appeal’s decision
in R. v. A.J.K., 2022 ONCA 487, which was cited and relied upon by Crown
counsel and counsel for Mr G.
[35]          
In the course of addressing the sentencing
appeal in that case, our Court of Appeal noted and echoed the Supreme Court of
Canada’s observations in R. v. Friesen, supra, that previously
indicated “ranges” and “starting points” for sentencing are not “straitjackets”
but “historical portraits” and/or otherwise malleable products of their time,
and that departures from previous decisions in that regard are justified to
reflect deepening societal understanding of offences and the severity of harm
arising from those offences.  (See R. v. A.J.K., supra, at paragraph
71.)
[36]          
Echoing other comments made in R. v. Friesen,
supra, (albeit now in the context of addressing the sentencing of offenders
who have inflicted sexual assault on adult victims), our Court of Appeal also
emphasized, at paragraphs 74-75 of R. v. A.J.K., supra:
[37]          
In the result, our Court of Appeal chose to
revisit a general sentencing range, suggested by its earlier decision in R.
v. Smith, 2011 ONCA 564, of 21 months to four years in cases of sexual
assault involving forced intercourse with a spouse or former spouse.  In
particular, for the above reasons, and further detailed reasons set forth by
the Court of Appeal, (which I will not attempt to outline in detail here), it
chose:
[38]          
See R. v. A.J.K., supra, at paragraphs 70
and 76-77.
[39]          
Bearing in mind the general sentencing
objectives and guidelines outlined above, I turn next to a consideration of
possible aggravating and mitigating factors, starting with the former.
[40]          
In that regard, Mr G.’s assertion of innocence
certainly is not an aggravating circumstance, although it may undermine a basis
for inferring that he has insight into his behavior, and the absence of such
insight may be relevant to the need for specific deterrence and/or Mr G.’s
prospects for rehabilitation.   See R. v. C.B., 2008 ONCA 486 (CanLII), [2008] O.J. No. 2434 (C.A.), at paragraph 57.   In my view, such
considerations are relevant in this case, insofar as the pre-sentence report,
as noted above, emphasizes that Mr G., while regretting the situation in which
he now finds himself, apparently has no insight into his criminal behaviour, no
appreciation of the magnitude or seriousness of the offence of sexual assault,
nor any apparent regard for the harmful impact his actions have had on A. 
Moreover, the underlying facts strongly suggest that Mr G. is in dire need of
such insight, insofar as his objectification of A. as a means of sexual
gratification, (including his overt and to some extent video-recorded
indications that he viewed his stepdaughter as a dehumanized sexual commodity
to be rewarded and purchased with cash or loan forgiveness), seemed quite
extreme and extraordinary in my experience.
[41]          
This case nevertheless does present numerous
aggravating considerations, which in my view include the following:
[42]          
As for mitigating considerations, I start by
noting the absence of various mitigating considerations frequently seen and
relied upon in relation to such offences.  Without limiting the generality of
the foregoing:
[43]          
Having said all that, in my view there are a
number of mitigating considerations to be taken into account.  In particular:
[44]          
To the extent the mitigating considerations I
have mentioned are relevant to the principle of restraint and to the potential
rehabilitation of Mr G., I am mindful that assisting and promoting such
potential rehabilitation of an offender is always a relevant consideration in
sentencing,  and I certainly do not lose sight of that throughout this process.
[45]          
However, I also am mindful that, in this
context, such considerations take a figurative “back seat” to consideration of
necessary denunciation and deterrence.  In that regard, I once again note:
[46]          
In addition to the matters outlined above, I also
have considered the sentencing authorities provided to me by counsel by way of
suggested comparison to the circumstances of this case; i.e., bearing in mind
the sentencing objective, noted above, that a sentence should be similar to
sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in
similar circumstances.
[47]          
The reality, however, is that no two cases are
exactly alike.  As emphasized by Chief Justice Lamer in R. v. M. (C.A.), 1996 CanLII 230 (SCC), [1996] 1 S.C.R. 500, at
paragraph 92:
[48]          
Crown counsel nevertheless referred me, for
purposes of comparison, to the following three sexual assault sentencing
precedents, all released earlier this year, and therefore after the Supreme
Court of Canada’s decisions in R. v. Barton, supra, and R. v.
Friesen, supra, and after our Court of Appeal’s decision in R. v.
A.J.K., supra:
[49]          
Counsel for Mr G. referred me, for purposes of
comparison, to the following three sexual assault sentencing precedents, two of
which were released in 2023 and one of which was released earlier this year,
such that they too all post-date R. v. Barton, supra, R. v. Friesen,
supra, and R. v. A.J.K., supra:
[50]          
Before final determination and imposition of an
appropriate sentence for the offences of Mr G., I turn to principles and
considerations relevant to whether the custodial sentences imposed on Mr G., in
relation to his two sexual assault convictions, should be served consecutively
rather than currently.  In that regard:
[51]          
In reaching that conclusion, I nevertheless
remain mindful that the simultaneous imposition of consecutive sentences
requires consideration of the totality principle reflected in s.718.2(c) of the
Code; i.e., a provision indicating that, “where consecutive sentences are
imposed, the combined sentence should not be unduly long or harsh”.
[52]          
In that regard, as noted by the Supreme Court of
Canada in R. v. Friesen, supra, at paragraphs 37 and 157, and by our
Court of Appeal in R. v. Owusu-Sarpong, 2023 ONCA 336, at paragraphs
23-30:
[53]          
In this case, I intend to employ the former
method.
[54]          
With all of the above considerations in mind, I
turn finally to assessment of an appropriate sentence to be imposed on for Mr G.
for his two offences in this particular case, starting with determination of
the appropriate custodial sentences to be imposed.
[55]          
By way of further overview comments in that
regard:
[56]          
It has been said many times, and in many ways,
that determination of an appropriate custodial sentence is more of an art than a
science.  However, having regard to all the circumstances and considerations
outlined above, in my view appropriate custodial sentences for each sexual
assault committed by Mr G., (prior to consideration of their possible
modification through application of the totality principle), would be:
[57]          
As the custodial sentences of Mr G. are to be
served consecutively rather than concurrently, (for the reasons outlined above),
that initially would suggest imposition of a global custodial sentence of 8½
years.
[58]          
However, as noted above, I also am mindful of
the need to check and ensure that the total sentence resulting from the
imposition of sentences to be served consecutively does not exceed the overall
culpability of Mr G.  In that regard:
[59]          
In particular, I find that:
[60]          
In other words, for the reasons outlined above,
I will state again that I intend to impose a global custodial sentence of six years
in this case.
[61]          
As for the various further ancillary orders
requested by the Crown:
[62]          
Stand up please Mr G.
[63]          
For the reasons I have outlined, while I would
have been inclined apart from considerations of totality to impose a global
custodial sentence of 8½  years for your two sexual assault convictions, (i.e.,
consisting of a four-year sentence in relation to Count 1 and a consecutive 4½ 
year sentence in relation to Count 2), I will instead, having regard to
considerations of totality, formally impose the following custodial sentences:
[64]          
There will, as well, be further ancillary
sentencing orders whereby:
[65]          
The e-indictment will be endorsed accordingly.
[66]          
Please be seated.