[1]              
Vernon Holder is charged with attempted murder and seven other crimes of
violence involving the same complainant (“KP”). Count 8 on the indictment
alleges that Mr. Holder assaulted KP by hitting her with his motor vehicle on
December 26, 2020. The other seven counts flow from a series of altercations
between Mr. Holder and KP on the night of December 30, 2020 and continuing into
the early morning hours of December 31, 2020. These incidents occurred in a
sixth-floor apartment at 3111 Eglinton Avenue East, the home of a
friend/acquaintance of both Mr. Holder and KP. Shortly after midnight, KP
called 911 and reported she was being assaulted in the apartment by Mr. Holder.
On the instructions of the 911 operator, KP locked herself in the bathroom and
was still there when police officers arrived approximately 15-20 minutes later.
KP alleged that Mr. Holder: attempted to throw her off the sixth-floor balcony
(Count 1); threatened to kill her (Count 2); assaulted her (Count 3); assaulted
her with a beer bottle (Count 4); assaulted her with a wine bottle (Count 5); assaulted
her with a cellphone (Count 6); and assaulted her causing bodily harm (Count
7).
[2]              
After the completion of evidence and submissions, I made rulings on the
charges with brief oral reasons and indicated that more detailed written
reasons would follow. I entered the following verdicts:
[3]              
My detailed reasons are set out below.
[4]              
Earlier in the proceedings, a decision was made by another judge that
Mr. Holder would be proceeding to trial with or without counsel. A motion by
the Crown to have counsel appointed under s. 486.3(2) of the Criminal Code
to cross-examine the complainant was also granted by another judge prior to the
matter coming before me. On the appointed trial date, September 10, 2024, Mr.
Holder advised me that he had not been able to open the Crown disclosure
package because he did not have the required password. He had received the
package by email a week before and said he tried to open it every day to no
avail. However, he did not communicate that problem to the assigned Crown until
the morning of trial. Although I was of the view that Mr. Holder was at least
partially the author of his own misfortune, I adjourned the trial to commence on
September 16, 2024.
[5]              
The Crown had filed two pre-trial motions: (1) an application to
introduce into evidence the recording of KP’s 911 call; and (2) an application
for KP to provide her evidence by CCTV or remotely. At the outset of trial, the
Crown advised that the latter motion was abandoned. I heard argument on the
motion with respect to the 911 recording and found the evidence to be
admissible.
[6]              
In these reasons, I will start by providing some background factual
evidence to provide a context for what follows. I will then set out my reasons
for dismissing the charge relating to the alleged assault with the motor
vehicle, which is separate in time from the other counts on the indictment. Next,
I will deal with the incident on the balcony and the threatening death count,
as they are connected. This will include my ruling with respect to the 911
call, which is connected to that incident. Finally, I will deal with the
remaining assault charges, which are connected in time and place to the
attempted murder charge, but different in nature.
[7]              
KP testified that she had known Mr. Holder prior to 2020 but had never
socialized with him prior to July 2020. She had gone to a bar in Scarborough
with a friend at some point in July 2020 and Mr. Holder approached her and
chatted with her. She said that after that occasion she saw Mr. Holder “pretty
much every day,” would “hangout” with him after he finished work, and would go
to different bars with him. Through Mr. Holder, she had also met Vijay Sukhdeo
and Noel Cave, a cousin of Mr. Holder’s. KP testified that when the COVID lockdown
resulted in bars being closed, a group of people began hanging out in the
evenings and drinking at Mr. Sukhdeo’s apartment. Not everyone would be there
every night, but the regulars included Mr. Sukhdeo, Mr. Cave, Mr. Holder, and
KP. Other people would be there from time to time. At this time, KP was 40 years
old and Mr. Holder was approximately 65 years old. Both KP and Mr. Holder
denied that there was any romantic relationship between them.
[8]              
Mr. Sukhdeo agreed people would come to his apartment to play dominoes
and drink, but said it was not every night. Also, he said Mr. Holder (who is a
contractor) was there to help him out by doing some painting in his apartment. He
testified that KP would come with Mr. Holder and that Noel Cave would also be
there sometimes.
[9]              
Mr. Holder testified that his purpose in going to Mr. Sukhdeo’s
apartment was to help him out by doing some painting for him. He said when he
finished work, he would sometimes sit and have a drink, and then would leave. He
said he was “not sure” about playing dominoes.
[10]          
For present purposes, I take from the evidence that Mr. Holder was a
frequent visitor at Mr. Sukhdeo’s apartment in the evenings during the late
fall of 2020, and that he brought KP with him. There are discrepancies about
how often, and for what purpose, Mr. Holder would go there, but nothing turns
on that. I also note that KP’s only connection with this group was through Mr.
Holder, whose cousin, Noel Cave, was a friend of Mr. Sukhdeo.
[11]          
KP testified that on Christmas night 2020 she was at home with her kids.
She said Mr. Holder called her and they made plans to go to Mr. Sukhdeo’s
apartment. Mr. Holder said he would pick her up, which was their usual practice.
She had purchased Christmas gifts for the three regular guys (Mr. Sukhdeo, Mr.
Cave, and Mr. Holder) and distributed them upon arrival, which she said was
about 9:30 or 10:00 p.m. She said the gifts were different, but the same type
of thing (toiletry or cologne gift sets from Shoppers Drug Mart). In addition,
she said she gave Mr. Holder a bottle of red wine, because he was a closer
friend than the other two men.
[12]          
KP described Mr. Cave as being very touched that she gave him a gift,
and said that he hugged her and kissed her on the cheek. He then gave her a
$100 bill as a gift.
[13]          
KP said that she did not have anything to drink. She believed Mr.
Sukhdeo was drinking beer and that Mr. Holder and Mr. Cave were drinking
Absolut vodka, which Mr. Cave mixed with pop and Mr. Holder mixed with milk. She
said that after she handed out the gifts, Mr. Holder was upset that she had
given him his gifts along with everyone else. She said the others were telling
him to “chill” and were joking with him. KP said that she and Mr. Holder left
at about 3:30 a.m. Although she said he had about five drinks, she was not
concerned about his ability to drive.
[14]          
Mr. Cave’s version of this event is somewhat corroborative of the
complainant. He recalled the occasion when KP gave out Christmas gifts to
everyone. He was not sure if it was Christmas or Christmas Eve, but said all
four of them were there. He said that in return he gave KP $100, because he
knew she had kids. He recalled that she reacted to his gift to her by saying
“Wow” and he said she was “carrying on about it.”  Mr. Cave said he was not
there long, and thought that he would have left sometime between 5:00 p.m. and
7:00 p.m. He did not recall Mr. Holder being upset about anything while he was
there. Mr. Cave brought a bottle of vodka with him. He said Mr. Holder was
painting baseboards and that afterwards he had some vodka, which he mixed with
milk. He did not consider him to be intoxicated. However, he testified that he
doubted Mr. Sukhdeo would remember anything as he was drunk, and indeed
described him as being always drunk.
[15]          
Mr. Sukhdeo testified that on Christmas day 2020 people were coming and
going all day and evening. He recalled KP bringing a gift like a box of
deodorant and said she put it on the table but did not say who it was for. He
had no recollection of anyone else bringing gifts. He described himself as
being “a little tipsy” but not drunk. He knew KP and Mr. Holder were talking in
another room, but he did not know what it was about. It seemed like normal
conversation. Their voices were not raised. He said KP and Mr. Holder left
sometime after midnight and he locked his front door behind them.
[16]          
Mr. Holder testified that he remembered KP giving gifts to everyone. He
denied that KP gave him two gifts and said he never drinks wine. He also denied
any knowledge of Mr. Cave giving KP a $100 bill and said that the first he
heard of it was when she testified about it. He denied being angry about it.
[17]          
KP testified that she left Mr. Sukhdeo’s apartment with Mr. Holder at
about 3:30 a.m. and they drove in his truck to a pizza place about two blocks
from her apartment. She said they went there regularly. This was during the
COVID lockdown. Mr. Holder parked in the parking lot and KP went to the window
of the restaurant and ordered their food and drinks. She then returned to the
front passenger seat of the truck. She said Mr. Holder was angry with her for
giving him a gift in front of everyone else and also very angry about the $100
Mr. Cave had given her. She said that she gave the $100 bill to Mr. Holder and
told him if he was that angry about it, he could give it back to his cousin,
Mr. Cave. She said that Mr. Holder then said that he did not need the $100, did
not want it, and was not going to give it back to Mr. Cave. She said Mr. Holder
threw the $100 out of his window. KP then told him she was calling it a night
and that she was going to pick up the money, get the food, and walk home. She
got out of the truck, and walked back and around the rear end of the truck. At
that point, she heard the engine reversing and she moved quickly to get out of
the way. However, the truck grazed against her lower stomach area. She said she
did not sustain an injury. She acknowledged in cross-examination that she could
not tell if Mr. Holder looked behind him before reversing. She testified that
she yelled at him and thought that his car window was open such that he would
have been able to hear her. However, at the preliminary hearing she testified
that the windows in the truck were up. In any event, KP said Mr. Holder said
nothing in response. He reversed out of the parking lot and drove away.
[18]          
KP said that Mr. Holder called her later and asked her if she wanted
some tea from Tim Hortons. She asked him if he remembered what had happened and
when he said “No,” she told him that he tried to hit her when reversing out of
the parking lot. She said Mr. Holder told her that he did not remember that and
said he was sorry. She did not report this incident and testified that she had
forgiven him. Afterwards, she still saw him every day and their relationship
continued the same as it had been, until the incident on December 30.
[19]          
Mr. Holder denied that this ever happened. He testified that he did not
know anything about the $100 and said he did not hit KP with his truck. He also
did not believe that he had gone to this restaurant plaza after the gift-giving
evening.
[20]          
I do not believe Mr. Holder’s evidence about the $100 bill. It is clear
Mr. Cave gave it to KP when Mr. Holder was there and Mr. Cave said that KP was
making a big fuss about it. That rings true to me and is consistent with KP’s
evidence.
[21]          
However, it is not necessary to resolve the other discrepancies between
the evidence of KP and Mr. Holder, and the discrepancies between KP’s testimony
at the preliminary hearing and what she said at trial. If I take KP’s evidence
at its highest, I cannot be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Holder
saw her. If he did brush up against her with his truck while reversing, I have
no evidence with respect to his intent. I cannot be satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that she deliberately tried to hit her with his truck. That is
a necessary ingredient of the assault with a weapon charge at Count 8 on the indictment.
[22]          
Accordingly, I find Mr. Holder not guilty on this charge.
[23]          
KP alleges a series of assaults by Mr. Holder while she was in Mr. Sukhdeo’s
apartment on December 30, 2020 just prior to midnight. This included attempting
to throw her off the sixth-floor balcony, body-slamming her to the floor,
stomping on her, and assaulting her in the area of her mouth with a beer
bottle, a wine bottle, and a cellphone. There were only three people in the
apartment at the time: Mr. Holder, KP, and Mr. Sukhdeo. However, Mr. Sukhdeo
spent much of the time in the bathroom.
[24]          
In the immediate aftermath of these attacks, KP placed a call to 911. At
that point, Mr. Holder was still in the apartment. At one point during the
call, the 911 operator asked KP if she was able to get away by leaving the
apartment and KP responded that Mr. Holder was stopping her from leaving. The
operator then told her to go to the bathroom and lock herself in, which she did.
She was still in the bathroom when officers arrived in response to this and
another emergency call.
[25]          
Nearly four years have passed since the events that prompted KP to call
911. The Crown sought to introduce the 911 tape and transcript as part of the
evidence at trial. The Crown submits that the evidence is admissible as part of
the res gestae and also under the principled exception to the hearsay
rule.
[26]          
When considering the admissibility of a statement made out of court
(such as a 911 call), there are typically two issues that arise: (1) if the
person who made the statement is not a witness in court, then the statement may
be inadmissible hearsay; and (2) if the person who made the earlier statement
is called as a witness, then the earlier statement may be inadmissible because
it is a prior consistent statement.  In determining whether the statement
should be admitted into evidence, it is important to consider the reason it
might otherwise be inadmissible.
[27]          
The Crown relies on five Ontario Superior Court of Justice decisions in
which statements made by a complainant in a 911 call were found to be
admissible at trial.[2] 
In all of these cases, the 911 call was found to fall within the res gestae exception
and to be admissible as a spontaneous utterance. I agree with the result in all
five cases, although not necessarily with the reasoning. The  911 call in this
case was made in circumstances which bring it squarely within the spontaneous
utterance exception. Mr. Holder was still in the apartment at the time KP
placed the 911 call, and was at one point preventing her from leaving. Upon
hearing that KP could not get out of the apartment, the operator told her to
lock herself in the bathroom and wait there for the police to arrive, which she
did. Although the complainant’s statements to the 911 operator were not uttered
in the midst of being assaulted, she was still under the control of Mr. Holder
at the time of the call. This is sufficiently contemporaneous to meet the
requirements of res gestae. It was also an utterance made while still
subject to the shock of the event in question and without sufficient time to
concoct or fabricate a story. I would admit the statement on that basis.
[28]          
All five cases cited by the Crown also relied on the principled
exception to the hearsay rule to admit the evidence. With the greatest of
respect for my colleagues in those cases, in my view, the only one of those
cases to correctly apply that principle is the decision of Fairburn J. (as she
then was) in R. v. Brown. In that case, the victim of an armed robbery
had called 911 immediately after he was robbed and provided a description of
the man who robbed him and the license plate number of the get-away car. He
also gave a statement to the police not long afterwards. However, by the time
of trial, the police were unable to locate him and he therefore was not a
witness at trial. Fairburn J. held that the 911 call was admissible under the
principled approach as an exception to the hearsay rule. It was necessary
(because the witness could not be located) and it was reliable (because of the
circumstances in which it was made). Fairburn J. held that the 911 call was
made so close in time to the event that the witness would not have had time to
fabricate and noted that she could tell from listening to his voice on the call
that he was clearly still suffering from the shock of what had just happened.[3] 
This is the classic application of the principled exception to the hearsay rule
– a situation in which the statement of a witness is introduced because the
witness cannot testify himself.
[29]          
The other four cases cited also relied on the principled exception to
hearsay as a basis for admitting the 911 call, but, in my opinion, did so
incorrectly because the witness not only was available to testify, but did
testify at trial. The evidentiary problem with the introduction of a 911 call
in that situation is not the rule against hearsay, but rather the
inadmissibility of a prior consistent statement. Generally speaking, a prior
consistent statement made by a witness out of court is not admissible. The
rationale for the rule against prior consistent statements is the logical
fallacy that a story is more likely to be true if it is repeated. As stated by
Twaddle J.A., “Consistency is a quality just as agreeable to lies as to the
truth.”[4]
There is an exception to the prior consistent statement rule if the other party
alleges that the witness’ evidence is a recent fabrication, in which case the
prior consistent statement has probative value to demonstrate that it was made
prior to the event said to have given rise to the recent fabrication. That
exception did not arise in any of those cases, and does not arise in the case
before me.
[30]          
There are two prongs to the principled exception to hearsay: necessity and
reliability.[5] 
Demonstrating that the statement meets the reliability requirements of the
principled exception to hearsay does nothing to address the problem of prior
consistent statements being inadmissible. It does not even fully address the
requirements for admission as an exception to the hearsay rule as there is no necessity
to admit the out of court statement. If the witness is testifying in person,
her out of court statement is not necessary at trial, and it is not
permissible to buttress her testimony with evidence that she made the same or a
similar statement on a prior occasion.
[31]          
In some of the cases relied on by the Crown, the trial judge did not
refer to the necessity requirement when dealing with the principled exception. One
of the judges who did confront the necessity issue was Richetti J. in R. v.
Dessouza. He found that necessity was met because the incident had happened
16 years prior and the 911 call was the “best and only complete evidence of
what was said at the time” and also “the best evidence of [the complainant’s]
heightened emotional distress at the time which could never be repeated or
demonstrated to the jury.”[6] 
I note that the primary reason given by Richetti J. in that case was that the
911 call was admissible as res gestae.  Therefore, his ruling with
respect to the principled exception was obiter. The passage of time and
its effect on the witness’ memory is not normally a basis for admitting hearsay
evidence unless the witness has no present recollection at all of the event. If
the witness has some memory of it, a prior statement is typically used to
refresh her memory, rather than the whole statement itself being admissible for
its truth. The reference to the “best evidence” because the emotional state of
the complainant is apparent from the recording is an interesting and recurring
theme throughout these decisions (a point to which I will return later in these
reasons).
[32]          
In Byrnes, R.D. Gordon J. also relied primarily on the res
gestae rule for admitting evidence of a 911 call made immediately after the
complainant had been stabbed and while her assailant was still in the house. In
dealing with the necessity requirement for the application of the principled
exception to hearsay, Gordon J. gave a similar “best evidence” type of analysis
as that applied by Richetti J. in Dessouza, stating (without
citing any authority):
[33]          
Byrnes is the only decision of the five that deals directly with
the rule against the admissibility of prior consistent statements. Gordon J.
held:
[34]          
Again, no authority is cited for this proposition. Basically, it is
simply a restatement of the basis for the res gestae exception, or of
the reliability branch in the principled exception analysis. It is another
illustration of trial judges recognizing the inherent value of this kind of
evidence, without being able to pigeon-hole it within the recognized exceptions
for the admissibility of such evidence. I note as well that in Brown (which
is a true principled exception to the hearsay rule), the nature of the evidence
itself (the stress and shock that can be detected in the victim’s voice) is
cited as an additional earmark of its reliability, supporting its admission
into evidence.
[35]          
Finally, in Bryan, Pinto J. found that a complainant’s 911 call,
and statements made to her aunt at around the same time, were admissible at
trial (even though the complainant testified) for three reasons: (1) res
gestae or excited utterances as an exception to hearsay; (2) the principled
approach exception to hearsay; and (3) narrative as circumstantial evidence as
an exception to the rule against prior consistent statements.  In that case,
the complainant alleged that the accused had kidnapped her, taken her to
Niagara Falls, and forced her to provide sexual services for hire. He then
brought her back to her aunt’s home in Toronto so that she could pick up her
belongings and instructed her to immediately return to the car. He waited
outside in his car. Upon entering the house, the complainant broke down crying
and told her aunt and cousin what happened. Her cousin called 911 and the
complainant spoke to the operator, telling her what happened. In finding these
statements admissible, Pinto J. relied primarily on the res gestae
exception and the principled exception to the hearsay rule. However, while
acknowledging this was not essential to his decision, he also referred to the admissibility
of the 911 call on the basis of narrative as circumstantial evidence, relying
on R. v. Khan.[9]
[36]          
R. v. Khan is a 2017 decision of a five-member panel of the
Ontario Court of Appeal. In that case, a male police officer was charged with
sexual assault. The female complainant had been arrested by that officer and
charged with possession of cocaine. She alleged that while she was a prisoner
in the police car, the officer searched her, in an excessively thorough manner,
three times. When she got to the police station, she was told that a female
officer would search her, at which point the complainant said, “I’ve already
been searched three times, why are they searching me again?”  The Crown sought
to have this statement admitted as evidence at trial, even though the
complainant testified. The trial judge found it to be admissible as a
spontaneous utterance and also under the principled approach to the hearsay rule.
[37]          
The Court of Appeal unanimously found that the statement was admissible.
The majority reasons of the Court of Appeal were authored by Hourigan J.A.,
with LaForme, Pepall and Miller JJ.A. concurring. Doherty J.A. dissented, not
in the result, but with respect to the general approach that should be taken
when considering the admissibility of this kind of evidence. Hourigan J.A. (for
the majority) held that the statement was not admissible under the principled
exception to the hearsay rule. The reliability requirement could be met by the
spontaneity of the statement. However, since the complainant testified at trial
and had a memory of the events, the necessity requirement was not met. He then
went on to consider the admissibility of the statement as part of the narrative.
Clearly, it was admissible merely as part of the narrative to show the
unfolding of events in a coherent manner, but if only admitted for that
purpose, it would not be admissible for its truth. Hourigan J.A. held that the
statement was also admissible as relevant to the credibility and reliability of
the complainant’s evidence at trial because it provided the surrounding
circumstances and context by which the trier of fact could evaluate the
credibility of the statement. This was not the same as finding that consistency
in repeating the same statement over and over was admissible for its truth. Rather,
the narrative of how the statement was made provided circumstantial evidence of
its reliability given the sequence and timing of the events, the spontaneous
nature of the statement, and the emotional state of the complainant when she
made it.
[38]          
Doherty J.A. agreed with the disposition of the appeal, but wrote that
it was time to revamp the current approach to the rules governing prior consistent
statements. He noted that the existing common law approach to the admissibility
of prior consistent statements was to treat them as presumptively inadmissible,
subject to a series of discrete exceptions. He also noted that this approach
had largely been abandoned with respect to hearsay evidence in favour of the
principled approach to admissibility (if the evidence is necessary and
reliable). Finally, he advocated a similar approach to prior consistent
statements, focusing on “broader considerations rather than the technicalities
of established exceptions.”[10]
Under this suggested approach, the court would first consider the purpose for
which the prior consistent statement is tendered and then evaluate whether the
statement had probative value for that purpose. Applying that approach, Doherty
J.A. held:
[39]          
Similar issues to these arose in a relatively recent jury trial over
which I presided. The accused, Umar Zameer, was charged with first degree
murder after he drove over and killed a police officer in an underground
parking garage. His wife and young child were with him in the car. His defence
was that this was an accident and that he did not know the individuals who
approached his car were police officers. He made statements to that effect when
he was pulled from his car at the scene and placed under arrest. I found those
statements to be admissible under the so-called Edgar exception.[12] 
In Edgar, the Ontario Court of Appeal created a limited exception to the
rule against prior consistent statements to admit statements of an accused upon
first being told of the accusation against him. The Court in that case required
that the statements would only be admissible upon the accused testifying at his
trial and held that it was not extending the exception beyond that.[13] 
In Zameer, I was required to rule on the admissibility of statements
made by Mr. Zameer’s wife, which were made in precisely the same circumstances
and before she and her husband could have had a chance to confer. I ruled in
that situation that since the Edgar exception did not apply and Mr. Zameer’s
wife was a witness at trial, her earlier consistent statement was not
admissible. I also noted that this result seemed illogical to me but that this
was not an appropriate occasion to “veer off the well-worn path.”[14] 
I expressed the hope that further guidance on this issue from an appellate
court would be forthcoming.
[40]          
With respect to the case before me now, I again would welcome more
clarity on this issue and agree with the approach suggested by Doherty J.A. in Khan.
However, again, this case, with an unrepresented accused, is not an
appropriate one in which to veer off the traditional path.
[41]          
I find that the statements made by KP are admissible into evidence as
spontaneous utterances and part of the res gestae. They are also
admissible as part of the narrative, including circumstantial evidence of the
reliability and credibility of her evidence at trial. The 911 statements were
made in the presence of Mr. Holder and Mr. Sukhdeo. They were made under great
stress and fear, and in the immediate aftermath of serious injuries she had
sustained. The details she provided of the various assaults were made
spontaneously and before she would have had any opportunity to concoct a story.
They have probative value beyond being merely consistent with her evidence at
trial.
[42]          
It is clear there was a precipitating argument on December 30, 2020
prior to the physical altercations that gave rise to these charges. There were
three people present (Mr. Sukhdeo, Mr. Holder, and KP), all of whom gave
conflicting accounts.
[43]          
KP testified that on the night of December 30, 2020, she got a call from
Mr. Sukhdeo asking her if she would like to come over to his place with Mr.
Holder. She responded that she would if Mr. Holder could come and pick her up. About
ten minutes later, Mr. Sukhdeo called her back and said Mr. Holder was coming
to get her. She said Mr. Holder picked her up outside her apartment at
approximately 9:30 p.m. or 10:00 p.m. She had not had anything to drink all day.
She said that Mr. Holder told her he “had a few drinks” but she was not
concerned about his ability to drive. When they got to Mr. Sukhdeo’s apartment
building, they had a discussion in the car before going inside. Mr. Holder told
her that there was talk going around that she had sex with Noel Cave. She told
him it was not true, but Mr. Holder did not believe her. She said she told Mr.
Holder she wanted to confront the rest of the group about how this story got
started, but he was opposed to having such a confrontation.
[44]          
KP testified that she did confront Mr. Sukhdeo about the rumoured affair
as soon as they were inside the apartment. She said Mr. Holder was upset that
she did this and that Mr. Sukhdeo was “egging on” Mr. Holder, laughing and
joking about her having slept with his cousin (Mr. Cave). She said she told Mr.
Sukhdeo to stop saying that, because it was not true and also because it was
not funny. She told him it was making Mr. Holder very angry. Mr. Holder kept
asking her why she was denying it, and she told him she was denying it because
it was not true. He was angry that she would not admit it. She said Mr. Sukhdeo
still kept joking about it and she said she was going to leave if they did not
stop. At this point, she said Mr. Holder stated in an angry voice, “If it
wasn’t for one thing, I would throw you off the balcony.”  Mr. Sukhdeo said,
“What did you say?” and KP told him again that he needed to stop “jeering at” Mr.
Holder because he was obviously upset. She still maintained that she wanted to
go home and Mr. Holder said he would take her as soon as he finished his beer,
but not before. Mr. Sukhdeo agreed to stop and told them both they should calm
down. However, the argument between Mr. Holder and KP continued. She testified
that Mr. Sukhdeo was intoxicated at this time, and had been drinking before
they even got there. In cross-examination, KP said she did not remember Mr.
Sukhdeo asking her why she had invited Mr. Cave to her apartment at 2:00 a.m.
and did not remember any discussion about her getting his number from Mr.
Holder’s phone. However, she agreed that sometimes Mr. Holder would let her use
his phone while he was painting the apartment.
[45]          
Mr. Sukhdeo had only a hazy recollection of the events of that night. He
recalled that the three of them were drinking at his apartment and that he had
four or five shots of Absolut vodka. He denied hearing anything about KP having
an affair with Mr. Cave. He said he went to the bathroom and could hear an
argument from the living room that had something to do with money. He denied
that he was himself involved in the argument and said he did not know what
caused the argument. However, under cross-examination by Mr. Holder, Mr.
Sukhdeo was asked how KP got Mr. Cave’s number, and he responded, “I don’t
know. Maybe she went through your phone.”  Nevertheless, he denied having an
argument with KP or Mr. Holder about how KP got Mr. Cave’s phone number, and
said he had no memory of Mr. Cave calling him and asking him where KP got that
number. He claimed to have heard no part of the argument and to have been in
the bathroom the whole time, only emerging when he heard KP screaming and
banging on the wall, at which point he found KP lying on the sofa, with Mr.
Holder over her, hitting her in the face.
[46]          
Mr. Cave was not present on the night of December 30. However, he
testified at trial that he had heard a rumour that he was having an affair with
KP and that he did have a discussion with Mr. Holder about it. He also said
that between December 26 and December 30, he received a phone call from KP at
2:00 a.m. and that she said she wanted to have a conversation with him. He told
her it was 2:00 in the morning and he was not going to have a discussion with
her then. The next day, he asked Mr. Sukhdeo how KP had obtained his phone
number. He said that “apparently” KP went through Mr. Holder’s phone and got
his number, but it was not clear why he thought that.
[47]          
Mr. Holder testified that on December 30, 2020, he went to Mr. Sukhdeo’s
apartment to finish up some work he was doing for him. After he arrived, Mr.
Sukhdeo asked him if he could go pick up KP if she wanted to come over. Mr.
Holder agreed to do that. He said he picked her up outside her apartment at
about 8:00 p.m. and went directly back to Mr. Sukhdeo’s apartment. According to
Mr. Holder, as soon as KP walked into the apartment she started arguing with
Mr. Sukhdeo. He testified that at first he paid no attention and asked himself,
“Why are they arguing?” He then added that this was typical of them and that
they were always arguing. He said that he told Mr. Sukhdeo that if he knew they
were going to be quarrelling, he would not have gone to pick her up. He then said
he knew they were arguing about his cellphone and about whether KP had called
Mr. Cave at 2:00 a.m. He said that when he was painting the apartment, KP would
often borrow his cellphone. At some point during this quarrel, Mr. Holder said
he criticized KP for taking his cellphone and also for calling Mr. Cave at that
hour of the night. He said that when he did that, KP came up from behind him
and attacked him with a bottle.
[48]          
It is difficult to determine precisely what this argument was about in
light of the completely contradictory testimony at trial. What is clear,
however, is that the argument had something to do with KP and Mr. Cave. Whether
it was about an alleged affair, as opposed to a call placed by KP to Mr. Cave
at 2:00 a.m., or perhaps both, is difficult to determine with any certainty. However,
Mr. Cave confirmed that he heard the rumour, so I am inclined to believe that
at least some of the argument was about that. For present purposes, it does not
matter who said what to whom. It is sufficient that there was an argument. I am
fully satisfied that Mr. Sukhdeo was there for at least some of that argument,
whether he remembers it or not. I am also fully satisfied that the nature of
KP’s relationship with Mr. Cave was at the heart of the argument.
[49]          
Duodat Singh and Bibi Ayube have been married for 28 years and live in
the apartment building next door to Mr. Sukhdeo’s building. A grassy area and
parking lot lie between the two buildings. The Singh Ayube apartment is on the
fifth floor and its balcony faces directly into the balcony of Mr. Sukhdeo’s
apartment. They were familiar with the layout of Mr. Sukhdeo’s apartment having
previously lived in an apartment on the same floor of his building, which had
the same layout as Mr. Sukhdeo’s apartment. They were also familiar with Mr.
Sukhdeo, referring to him as “Hand” (which is also a nickname other witnesses
used for him, a reference to the fact that he was an amputee who only had one
hand).
[50]          
Mr. Singh is a contractor and had also done work on the next door
building a number of years ago. He testified that there is a distance of about
40 to 50 feet between the two buildings.
[51]          
Mr. Singh testified that on the night of December 30, 2020, he was on
the balcony of his apartment having a cigarette. His wife, his brother, and his
mother-in-law were inside his apartment unit. While on his balcony, he heard a
commotion from the balcony of Mr. Sukhdeo’s apartment. He saw a man come out
onto the balcony with a woman. He was pushing and shoving her onto the balcony,
and she was screaming at him to stop. He described both individuals as being
dark skinned and said that he had never seen either of them before. She said
the man had a beer bottle in his hand and that he saw him hit the woman with it
in the area of her face or head. At one point, the woman fell to the floor of
the balcony and he could hear the sound of bottles rolling around. The man then
bent down and grabbed her in a kind of bear hug. Mr. Singh could not see the
woman’s feet as the balcony has solid panels. He believed that the man was
trying to throw the woman off the balcony. He said she was screaming and
holding on to the railing of the balcony. He could see clearly because the
lights in the apartment were on and there was a lot of light from the double
windows looking directly onto the balcony. Mr. Singh yelled for his wife and
brother to come out to see this. He also yelled at the man on the balcony,
telling him to stop. He said other neighbours were doing the same, but the man
paid no attention. He told the man that the police were on their way. Mr. Singh
then saw Mr. Sukhdeo come to the balcony door. He said Mr. Sukhdeo pulled the
man and woman into the apartment. Inside the apartment he could still see the
man punching the woman. He and his wife then went downstairs and headed next
door, seeking to have the superintendent go into Mr. Sukhdeo’s apartment.
[52]          
Ms. Ayube testified that she was inside her apartment folding laundry
when her husband shouted for her to come outside. She, her brother-in-law, and
her mother-in-law went out to the balcony. She said she could see well because
there was light coming from the living room of the apartment and she was
wearing her glasses. When she came out on her balcony, she could see a struggle
between a man and woman on the balcony of a person she knew lived there and who
had only one arm. He was not the man on the balcony. She said that she did not
know the man or the woman. Ms. Ayube testified that her husband was yelling at
the man to stop. The man on the balcony was standing over the woman while
holding a beer bottle. She described the woman as screaming for her life. She
believed the man was trying to kill the woman by throwing her off the balcony.
He was behind her and holding onto her, while trying to shove her over. She
said that the woman had one foot over the balcony and was holding on to the
balcony while trying to get back in. Ms. Ayube called 911. For part of that
call, she had to go inside her own apartment because there was so much noise
outside that she could not hear properly. Ms. Ayube saw someone come out and
bring the man and woman back into the apartment. She did not know who did that.
However, she could still hear a commotion from inside the apartment. She and
her husband then went to the building next door and met the police there.
[53]          
Mr. Holder testified that the physical altercation with KP started when
KP came up behind him in the living room and hit him in the neck with a bottle.
He said she then punched him in the face with the bottle, leaving a cut on his
right nostril. He said he grabbed at her and she went onto the balcony. He went
onto the balcony and struggled with her until he got the bottle away from her. Then
he left the balcony, closed the door, and put the bottle on the kitchen counter.
He testified that KP then came back in from the balcony with another bottle and
hit him in the face again, this time cutting his face in the area of the left
nostril. He fell to the ground, and she came on top of him and tried to hit him
again. They struggled in a small area on the floor between the couch and a
table until he was able to get that second bottle away from her, which he then
placed next to the first bottle in the kitchen. He said Mr. Sukhdeo was
standing there during this altercation. He denied ever trying to throw KP off
the balcony. He said his only interaction with KP on the balcony was to take
the bottle away from her and that he then left her alone there.
[54]          
Mr. Holder testified that after getting control of that bottle, he saw
KP yelling on the phone. He said he thought the phone was his and he snatched
it from her. When he realized it was not his phone, he threw it at her.
[55]          
Mr. Holder maintained throughout cross-examination that he was the
victim in this incident and that he did not cause any of the injuries to KP. He
denied ever hitting her in any way. He suggested she might have received her
injuries when she jumped on him or when they were struggling on the floor
between the couch and the table.
[56]          
Mr. Holder testified that he did not know Mr. Singh or Ms. Ayube. He
maintained that they lied about witnessing a struggle on the balcony because they
wanted to get Mr. Sukhdeo in trouble. He said they had called security about
Mr. Sukhdeo on many occasions because of noise from his apartment, and said
that they were also aggrieved that he was only paying $900 a month whereas
their rent was $2500. He said he gathered this information by asking around
about them.
[57]          
KP testified that in the course of the argument about the nature of her
relationship with Mr. Cave, Mr. Holder referred at least twice to throwing her
off the balcony. She was not sure about the exact words, but they were
something like, “If it wasn’t for one thing, I would throw you off the balcony”
and “I would open this balcony door and push you over.”  She said they were
both upset and that she was crying. However, she did not in that moment believe
that he actually intended to throw her off the balcony. She also said she would
never have believed he would do something like that because he had never been
violent in the past. She said she wanted to go home and Mr. Holder said he was
going to finish his beer first and then he would take her.
[58]          
She did not have a clear recollection of how she wound up with Mr.
Holder on the balcony. She denied the suggestion in cross-examination that she
had started a physical fight with Mr. Holder and in the course of a scuffle,
they moved to the balcony. At trial, she said that after saying these words
about pushing her off the balcony, Mr. Holder opened the balcony door and
shoved her. In cross-examination, it was put to KP that at the preliminary
hearing she had testified that Mr. Holder invited her to come out on the
balcony and that she went out there. KP agreed that she said that at the
preliminary and that looking back on it, it could be that he invited her onto
the balcony. She said that one moment they were facing each other arguing and
she was crying, and the next moment they were on the balcony. She acknowledged
that she could not remember the exact words that were said by either of them. However,
up to that point, she did not believe Mr. Holder was serious about throwing her
off the balcony. That belief changed after they were on the balcony.
[59]          
KP testified that once they were on the balcony, Mr. Holder lifted her a
bit off the ground. She grabbed the railing, with her hand all the way around
the rail and her other hand grabbing onto his shirt in the chest area. He then
threw her to the ground, and again tried to lift her up, reaching down with his
arms under her legs. Again, she grabbed on to the railing. In the course of
this struggle, KP said that she bit Mr. Holder hard on one arm close to his
shoulder. She also scratched his face twice. He dropped her to the ground again.
At this point, she said Mr. Holder went to the door and she believed he was
going to lock her outside. She grabbed him and they both wound up inside.
[60]          
She said that at the beginning of this altercation on the balcony, she could
see Mr. Sukhdeo through the window, standing in his living room and watching. However,
at some point, he ran into the bathroom. She said she was screaming for him to
come and help her and for someone to call the police. By this point, she feared
for her life and believed that Mr. Holder was trying to throw her off the
balcony.
[61]          
KP testified that once they got inside, she told Mr. Holder she was
going to call the police. He then threw her onto the couch, with her back on
the couch, and sat on top of her. He asked her why she would not sleep with
him, but was messing around with his cousin. She said he then grabbed a beer
bottle from the table beside the couch and tried to shove it into her mouth,
holding his other hand on her throat while doing so. He then saw a wine bottle,
which was bigger than the beer bottle, and tried to shove that in her mouth,
making contact with her lips. He kept saying, “Why won’t you sleep with me?”
[62]          
She said she was struggling and trying to kick him off, all while
yelling for Mr. Sukhdeo to call the police. Mr. Holder then said, “You’re going
to call the police? I’ll give you something to call the police for.”  He then
picked her up and body slammed her to the floor and stomped on her with one
foot at least four times in the area of her chest.
[63]          
She tried to reach out and grab her phone, which was nearby. He grabbed
the phone and shoved it into her mouth, breaking off four teeth, two on the top
and two on the bottom. Then he dropped the phone and she called 911.
[64]          
As KP was calling 911, she saw that Mr. Sukhdeo had come out from the
back area where the bathroom was located. She believed he had not come out
prior to that. The 911 operator instructed KP to lock herself in the bathroom
until police arrived, which she did. The police arrived very quickly, as they
were already on their way in response to the call made by Ms. Ayube before KP
had placed her call.
[65]          
KP was in a panic, crying, and nearly incoherent throughout the 911 call.
In answer to the first question about the nature of her emergency, she said she
wanted the police. The next question asked for her address. It took her eight
attempts before she could correctly state the address 3111 Eglinton Avenue East.
In the middle of those attempts, she said “He broke my teeth.” This was not in
response to any question, but rather blurted out while a calm operator was
attempting to get a valid address. After the correct address was confirmed, the
operator told her that they already had a call on this and help was on its way.
The operator asked her if she needed an ambulance and she said that she did. She
then said, “He’s trying to leave. He tried to throw me off a balcony.”  She
also said some other things, which are largely incomprehensible. The operator
asked about weapons and KP told her that Mr. Holder bashed her with a beer
bottle and a wine bottle. She provided an accurate description of his clothing,
height, weight, and age. The operator asked her if she was able to leave the
apartment, and KP replied that she was “trying to” but “[inaudible] stopping
me.”  The operator told her to lock herself in the bathroom, which she did. The
operator then kept KP on the line until the police arrived and found her in the
bathroom.
[66]          
The injuries to Mr. Holder were photographed at the police station. He
had a small cut or scratch on his right nostril and another small cut or
scratch near his left nostril. He also had a full round bite mark on his left
arm just below his shoulder. Although Mr. Holder did not address how he got the
bite mark in his testimony, in his oral submissions he argued that the bite
mark was evidence of how KP broke her teeth, because she had bitten through the
jacket, his shirt, and his skin.
[67]          
KP was photographed by police in the lobby of the apartment building
before going to the hospital and also at the hospital. She and/or her daughter
also took photographs of some of her injuries over the next couple of weeks
after the incident. Four teeth were broken off. Her lips were swollen, cut, and
bloody. Her right eye was swollen shut and bruised. Her neck was bruised in a
manner consistent with strangulation. She had two areas of bruising on the
right side of her face, as well as areas of bruising and swelling on her left
shoulder, left thigh, and left knee. She testified that her left shoulder was
fractured from being slammed to the ground and that she has two pinched nerves
in her neck as well as a back injury. She also testified that being slammed on
the ground aggravated a previous ankle injury and previous knee injury. She
also has a herniated disc in her lower back, which she did not have before,
although she did have a prior back injury. She said she continues to suffer
from sciatica, migraines, and insomnia. Although there is no medical evidence confirming
these internal complaints or linking them to the assault, there can be no doubt
about the origin of the multiple cuts and bruises to her face, neck, and other
parts of her body.
[68]          
In R. v. W.(D.) the Supreme Court of Canada provided a helpful
three-step formula to apply in considering the evidence to ensure that the
presumption of innocence stays with the accused and the burden of proving the
case beyond a reasonable doubt remains on the Crown throughout. The Court
summarized that three-step process as follows:
[69]          
Mr. Holder testified in his own defence. He provided a version of the
events that cast him as the victim and KP as the aggressor. He denied attempting
to throw her off the balcony and denied hitting her in any way. If I accept his
evidence, he is not guilty of all charges against him. I do not accept Mr.
Holder’s evidence. His evidence is completely inconsistent with the physical
evidence, the evidence of two completely independent eye witnesses, some
aspects of the evidence of his own cousin, and the evidence of his friend Mr.
Vijay Sukhdeo on a crucial point. I find that Mr. Holder deliberately lied to
the court to avoid responsibility for these charges.
[70]          
There is nothing about Mr. Holder’s evidence that gives me a reasonable
doubt about any of the charges. His evidence is a tissue of lies. As I will
deal with in more detail below, I do have a reasonable doubt with respect to
whether he had the requisite intent for attempted murder, but that arises from
the evidence as a whole, and not from the evidence of Mr. Holder.
[71]          
I therefore turn to the third step, which is an assessment of the whole
of the evidence, including the defence evidence, and a determination as to
whether the Crown has proven the charges beyond a reasonable doubt. I will deal
first with the charges relating to the incident on the balcony and then the
various specific assault charges.
[72]          
KP testified that she did not take Mr. Holder seriously when he referred
to throwing her off the balcony. The specific language of the alleged threat is
not completely clear, but it appears to have been a contingent one. For
example, “I would throw you off” and “If it wasn’t for one thing, I would throw
you off.”  At that point, she had no expectation that this was a serious threat
to kill her. Up to that point in time, he was upset and angry but had exhibited
no physical aggression towards her. She acknowledged being unsure of exactly
how she got onto the balcony and that it could have been that he asked her to
come out there and she went. That was because she did not fear him, nor expect
that he actually would throw her off the balcony.
[73]          
As I noted above, KP testified that when they were on the balcony, Mr.
Holder lifted her up and tried to push her over the rail. She said she was able
to grab on to the rail with her hand completely around the railing. This
happened three times, in the course of which she scratched Mr. Holder twice on
the face and bit his shoulder.
[74]          
I find KP’s evidence on this point to be credible. I note that one of the
first things she said to the 911 operator was that Mr. Holder tried to throw
her off the balcony. The precise sequence of events may not be fully reliable,
but I accept that Mr. Holder lifted KP off her feet and was pushing her towards
the edge of the balcony while she held onto the railing. I accept that she was
struggling to escape what she reasonably believed to be her death if he was
successful in throwing her off the balcony. I also accept, as corroborated by
the physical evidence, that she scratched and bit Mr. Holder during this
altercation. Finally, I accept that KP honestly believed that Mr. Holder was
trying to kill her. It was only then that she believed his earlier threat to
throw her off the balcony was real.
[75]          
I am fully satisfied that the two witnesses from the neighbouring
building saw what they believed to be a man attempting to throw a woman off the
balcony of Apartment 604. It is also clear that these two individuals were Mr.
Holder and KP. These witnesses were deeply concerned about the woman’s safety. Although
not every detail of their recollection of the event is the same, the core
nature of Mr. Holder’s actions is clear in their minds. They not only called
911, they went over to the apartment building to see if they could help. I find
that their evidence substantially corroborates KP’s version of what happened on
the balcony and is at odds with Mr. Holder’s version.
[76]          
Mr. Holder testified that his only interaction with KP on the balcony
was to take a bottle away from her and that he then left her on the balcony and
went inside. That is completely inconsistent with the interaction described by
the two neighbours across the way. Mr. Holder’s explanation is that the two
neighbours are lying out of animus towards Mr. Sukhdeo, who he asserted they
resent because he has a cheaper rent and because he has loud parties. That
makes no sense. The neighbours specifically said the man attempting to throw
the woman off the balcony was not Mr. Sukhdeo. One of them saw Mr. Sukhdeo
inside the apartment during the altercation, which is consistent with KP’s
testimony about him being visible through the window. Quite simply, Mr. Holder
lied about what happened on the balcony. I also reject the evidence of Mr.
Sukhdeo on this point. It is not clear if he is lying about not being there to
see this incident on the balcony because it reflects him in such a poor light,
or if he was so inebriated that he does not remember.
[77]          
Although I accept the evidence of KP and the two independent witnesses
as to what was happening on the balcony, that is not enough to be satisfied
that Mr. Holder is guilty of attempted murder. In order to convict Mr. Holder
of attempted murder, I would also need to be satisfied that he had the
requisite intent to constitute this offence. Attempted murder is a specific
intent offence. I must be satisfied on the evidence that the actions taken by
Mr. Holder were carried out with the specific intention of killing KP.[16] 
This distinguishes the offence of attempted murder from that of planned and
deliberate first degree murder. For the latter offence, the mens rea element
is satisfied if the accused intended to kill the deceased or if he knew what he
did was likely to kill the victim and was reckless about whether or not death
ensued. This reckless element is not part of the crime of attempted murder. If
KP had gone off that balcony she would almost certainly have been killed, and a
murder conviction would likely follow (although perhaps not first degree murder
given the absence of planning and deliberation). However, where the charge is
attempted murder, the mental element is stringent. There must be an actual
intention to kill.
[78]          
It is difficult to know what was in Mr. Holder’s mind at the time. He
lied about his conduct at trial. However, that is not sufficient for me to
infer that he had the specific intent to kill. Such an act would have been very
out of character. Even KP did not believe his threat to throw her off the
balcony was serious until he actually picked her up and moved her towards the
edge of the balcony. Mr. Holder’s subsequent conduct inside the apartment,
although violent, was not consistent with an intent to kill. He did not appear
to be following through with murdering KP if in fact that had been his
intention on the balcony.
[79]          
It is at least possible that he was enraged by her failure to take him
seriously and was pretending to throw her off the balcony to scare her. I
cannot be sure that he intended to actually do it. If KP had lost her grip on
the railing, would he have tossed her off the balcony to her death? Perhaps. But
I am not sure. I am left with a reasonable doubt based on the whole of the
evidence. I therefore find Mr. Holder not guilty of attempted murder.
[80]          
However, Mr. Holder’s actions towards KP on the balcony were definitely
an assault. Further, his actions clearly endangered the life of KP. In the
struggle she could easily have gone over the edge of the balcony and would
surely have been killed. This constitutes aggravated assault. While aggravated
assault is not always an included offence of attempted murder, it can be if the
indictment is sufficiently particularized.[17]
In this case, Count 1 is particularized to allege that Mr. Holder “did attempt
to murder [KP] by attempting to throw her over a balcony.” For this reason, I
find that aggravated assault is a lesser included offence within the attempted
count murder. I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt as to the requisite
elements for the offence of aggravated assault, including an assault,
significant endangerment to life, and objective foresight of the risk of bodily
harm.[18] 
Therefore, and I find Mr. Holder not guilty of attempted murder but guilty of
aggravated assault.
[81]          
With respect to the charge of threatening death, I accept KP’s evidence
as to what Mr. Holder said. Even on her evidence, this was a qualified threat,
not an actual threat to kill. Further, at the time, KP did not believe it to be
a genuine threat to cause her harm or kill her. In these circumstances, I am
not satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Holder intended to intimidate
KP or that he intended his threat to be taken seriously.[19] 
Accordingly, I find Mr. Holder not guilty of threatening to kill KP.
[82]          
KP testified that after leaving the deck and returning to the living
room, Mr. Holder continued to assault her violently. She described being on her
back on the couch with Mr. Holder on top of her. Mr. Holder denies this. However,
Mr. Sukhdeo acknowledged seeing this and said Mr. Holder was the aggressor and
had his fist in KP’s face. As I have already said, Mr. Sukhdeo is not the most
reliable witness. However, his evidence with respect to other matters was more
about not remembering things or claiming not to have seen things. I do not
believe he would have invented a story about his friend assaulting KP in this
manner unless he had actually seen it. I find his evidence corroborates KP’s
version of the events and contradicts the testimony of Mr. Holder.
[83]          
When the 911 operator asked KP if Mr. Holder had any weapons, KP told
her that he had hit her with a wine bottle and a beer bottle. Those are very
specific memories and were blurted out to the 911 operator, not as part of a
narrative but in response to a question about weapons. In my view, having
listened to the tape, KP was terrified, in pain, and still trying her best to
answer questions put by the operator. She was in no state to be deliberately
fabricating a story about Mr. Holder hitting her with a wine bottle and a beer
bottle. She said that he shoved these bottles into her mouth. Her lips and face
near her mouth have injuries consistent with that version of events and
completely inconsistent with Mr. Holder’s testimony that she must have
sustained those injuries when they fell beside the couch. I believe these
incidents happened as described by KP.
[84]          
KP also testified that Mr. Holder shoved a cellphone into her mouth,
breaking four of her teeth. Again, this is a very specific recollection and
wholly consistent with the physical injuries to KP, which included four broken
teeth. KP also had bruising and swelling in the area of her throat where she
said Mr. Holder was choking her. Again, the photographs of KP immediately after
the incident are fully consistent with her being choked in the manner she
described. Mr. Holder’s explanation that she broke four teeth in the course of
biting his arm is ludicrous. I note that it was not part of his testimony given
under oath, but rather offered in the course of submissions. However, I will
make allowances for the fact that he was not represented by counsel. The injury
to Mr. Holder’s arm is consistent with him being bitten, which indeed KP said
she did on the balcony. However, any lay person can see that the extent of
those bite marks, given it was through a shirt, a sweater, and a jacket, is not
sufficient to have broken off four teeth.
[85]          
I found KP to be a truthful witness. She may have some sequencing wrong
and be mistaken about details about how she got from one point in the apartment
to another or where specific things happened. However, I am satisfied as to the
honesty of her testimony about the central core of her story. I also found her
to be very fair in conceding points she could not remember, including conceding
things that ultimately led me to acquitting Mr. Holder on some of the charges
against him. I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Holder held her
down on the couch and assaulted her, grabbed her with force against her throat,
assaulted her again when she was on the floor, stomped on her, and assaulted
her with a beer bottle, a wine bottle, and a cellphone. She sustained multiple
injuries as a result of these assaults, which were far more than trivial or
fleeting in nature.
[86]          
I find that Mr. Holder committed the offences alleged in Count 3
(assault), Count 4 (assault with a beer bottle), Count 5 (assault with a wine
bottle), Count 6 (assault with a cellphone), and Count 7 (assault causing
bodily harm). Counts 4, 5, and 6 were separate assaults with three different
weapons. I find Mr. Holder guilty on those counts. I also find him guilty of
Count 7, which is assault causing bodily harm. However, all these assaults were
a continuous series of acts. In my oral reasons, I found that Count 3 (common
assault) related to the “various stomping and punching and the incident on the
couch,” and I found Mr. Holder guilty on that count. On further reflection, I
believe this count is subsumed within the more serious offence of assault
causing bodily harm. I am therefore staying Count 3, pursuant to the principles
in Kienapple v. R.[20]
[87]          
For the reasons stated, I have reached the following verdicts: