[1]              
On December 1, 2023, Charles Herbert Officer
(“the deceased”) died at the age of 48 without a will. The deceased was
survived by his three-year-old son who is the sole beneficiary of his estate. The
respondent, Alice Snaden (“the respondent”) is the child’s mother. The
applicant, Ionie Agatha Officer (“the applicant”) is the deceased’s 85-year-old
mother.
[2]              
The respondent brings this motion for: (a) an order that the applicant,
and any other person, deliver vacant possession of the property in Toronto
which I will refer to as the “Condo”; (b) an order that a writ of possession be
issued to the respondent; (c) an order that the applicant leave all personal
property belonging to respondent when she provides vacant possession; and (d)
an order that the applicant pay to the respondent an amount to be determined
attributable to occupation rent owed by the applicant for her occupation of the
Condo.
[3]              
The respondent submits that the applicant has no right of
occupancy in the Condo, whereas the applicant submits that she had a verbal
agreement with the deceased that would permit her to live, rent-free, in the
Condo for the rest of her life.
[4]              
The respondent and the deceased commenced a romantic relationship
in May 2017.
[5]              
At the time of his death, the deceased and the respondent owned two
properties. In May 2015, the deceased purchased the Condo with the
proceeds of sale of a home that he owned prior to this purchase. The respondent
states that she and the deceased lived in the Condo from 2018 until 2021. Their
son was born in May 2021.
[6]              
In 2021, the deceased and the respondent jointly
purchased another property in Toronto which I will refer to as the “House”. The
deceased provided most of the down payment for the House and the balance of the
purchase was financed by a mortgage that used both the deceased’s and the
respondent’s credit.
[7]              
In November 2021, the deceased transferred the
Condo into his name and the respondent’s name so that he would be able to
refinance and could qualify for a new mortgage.
[8]              
In December 2021, the applicant moved into the Condo. She states
that the deceased told her that she could live in the Condo for the rest of her
life rent-free. The applicant states that the deceased told her that she had to
pay for hydro. The applicant estimates that she spends about $200 per month on
hydro, cable TV, and telephone costs.
[9]              
The respondent states that the deceased asked for her permission before
the applicant moved into the Condo. The respondent did not object to the
applicant residing in the Condo but  she did not agree that the applicant could
live there, rent free, for the rest of her life. The respondent states that it was
unclear what the deceased expected financially from his mother. The respondent
states that she recalls having a conversation in February 2022 or March 2022 with
the deceased about asking the applicant to pay rent because of the financial
strain that the deceased was feeling.
[10]          
The deceased and the respondent separated in about
September 2022 after a relationship of about five years. The applicant denies
that the deceased and the respondent resided together or that they were common
law spouses. The deceased and the respondent did not enter into an agreement
related to child or spousal support before the deceased died. The respondent
does not intend to make a claim as a dependant under the Succession Law
Reform Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S.26 (“SLRA”) against the deceased’s estate as
any amount that she collects would correspondingly decrease her son’s inheritance
from the deceased’s estate.
[11]          
On the day that the deceased died, the mortgage on the House was
renewed at $9,700 per month. The respondent could not afford to carry this mortgage.
On January 30, 2024, the respondent sold the House. The respondent received net
proceeds of sale of $108,151.93.
[12]          
Upon the deceased’s death, the respondent became
the sole owner of the Condo by right of survivorship. The Condo is
encumbered by a mortgage in the amount of $429,629.63. The respondent cannot
afford the monthly mortgage payment of $2,635.28 nor the monthly maintenance
fee of $599.26. The respondent also pays the utilities and other carrying costs.
The applicant pays her own electricity bill.
[13]          
The respondent states that prior to the deceased’s
death, the applicant told the respondent that “she does not want to be a
burden and she can go live with her sister-in-law in Brampton, her cousins in
Atlanta, or her friend in Toronto who rents a room and has already offered to
have her stay. She also has three adult daughters, all of whom she could
conceivably call upon”.
[14]          
On March 18, 2024, the respondent offered to meet with the applicant
to work out a resolution. The letter states:
[15]          
The applicant did not respond to this letter.
[16]          
The respondent sent three more letters to the applicant,
including the fourth letter dated June 9, 2024:
[17]          
The respondent also tried to contact the
applicant several times by telephone. None of the respondent’s calls were
returned.
[18]          
On June 17, 2024, the applicant issued a Notice of Application for,
amongst other things, dependant’s relief under the Succession Law Reform Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. S.26, an order restraining the respondent from
evicting her from the Condo and an order restraining the respondent from selling
the Condo. The applicant asserts that: (1) the deceased told the applicant
shortly before his death that he wanted to remove the respondent’s name from
title to the Condo; (2) the applicant contributed $22,000 towards the purchase
of the Condo (although the applicant states that such funds were provided in
cash and has produced no evidence of such payment); (3) the respondent did not
contribute towards the purchase of the Condo nor did she ever make any payments
towards the mortgage, property tax or utilities; (4) the respondent has never
lived in the Condo; (5) the applicant is an elderly woman with a physical
disability and uses a walker; (5) the applicant would be homeless if she were
evicted from the Condo; and (6) she receives $2,098 per month as old age
pension and that amount is not enough for her to rent and support herself in
Toronto.
[19]          
In her affidavit sworn June 20, 2024, the
applicant states:
[20]          
In her supplementary affidavit sworn July 29,
2024, the applicant states:
[21]          
The applicant was cross-examined on her affidavits. She acknowledged
that she had nothing in writing, whether a letter or an email, from the
deceased to confirm that he promised that she could live in the Condo,
rent-free, for the rest of her life.
[22]          
The respondent submits that the applicant’s
evidence that the deceased wanted her to live in the Condo, free of charge, until
she died is inadmissible pursuant to section 13 of the Evidence
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. E.23 because it has not been corroborated. The
respondent submits that the applicant is trespassing by continuing to occupy
the Condo and that a writ of possession should be granted. The respondent claims
occupation rent from December 1, 2023.
[23]          
The applicant submits that she was never asked
for rent and that there was no tenancy agreement. She submits that the deceased
wanted to take care of his elderly mother and wanted her to live in the Condo
for free for the rest of her life. The applicant submits that it is not fair
and just to order her to deliver vacant possession of the Condo to the
respondent. The applicant submits that she is a “dependant” within the meaning
of the SLRA and that the court may make an order under s. 63(1) of the SLRA for
her support as appropriate. However, I accept the respondent’s submission that
the dependant relief provisions of the SLRA have no application given that the
Condo passed by right of survivorship to the respondent and does not form part
of the deceased’s estate. The applicant further submits that it is not fair and
just for her to pay rent to the respondent for the period since December 1,
2023.
[24]          
The respondent relies on section 13 of the Evidence
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. E.23 which states:
[25]          
The Condo is not an asset of the Estate and thus
s. 13 of the Evidence Act has no application given that judgment is
sought against the respondent, not the Estate: Brisco Estate v. Canadian
Premier Life Insurance Company, 2012 ONCA 854, at para. 64.
[26]          
The applicant’s evidence that the deceased promised
that she could reside in the Condo for the rest of her life is hearsay evidence.
In R. v. Mapara, 2005 SCC 23 (CanLII), [2005] 1 S.C.R. 358, at para. 15, McLachlin, C.J.C,
stated that the admissibility of hearsay evidence should be considered within
the following framework:
[27]          
There is no exception to the hearsay rule that
is applicable in these circumstances. In considering whether this hearsay
evidence should be admitted on a principled basis, I find that necessity is established
given that the deceased has passed and that threshold reliability is established
given that the applicant’s evidence was given under oath and cross-examined on.
However, I find that this hearsay evidence should not be admitted as it is not
reliable given that the applicant has an obvious motive to lie. Further, while
the evidence shows that the respondent was aware that the deceased had permitted
the applicant to reside in the Condo without requiring the payment of rent,
there is nothing to corroborate the applicant’s assertion that the deceased had
agreed to permit the applicant to reside in the Condo, rent free, for the rest
of her life. The Condo was subject to a substantial mortgage and the deceased
was not a wealthy person. He could not afford to make any such long-term
promise. If it had been the deceased’s intention to provide the applicant with essentially
a life interest in the Condo, I expect that he would have also told the respondent
and/or reflected such promise in writing.
[28]          
The fact that the deceased permitted the
applicant in the Condo rent-free does not create a legal entitlement for the
applicant to occupy the Condo indefinitely or at all. Even if the deceased made
the alleged promise, it is not legally enforceable as there was no
consideration given for it. The respondent, as the sole owner of the Condo, is
entitled to possession of her property subject to the applicant being afforded sufficient
time to find alternate accommodations.
[29]          
Whether occupation rent is owed when a person
occupies a property without a lease was addressed by Karakatsanis J., as
she then was, in Dagarsho Holdings Ltd. v. Bluestone, 2004 CanLII 11271 (ON SC), [2004] O.J. No.
2654 (Ont. S.C.), at para. 26:
[30]          
The respondent did not ask the applicant to pay
rent immediately after the deceased died. However, she did notify her that she
could no longer afford to financially support her after July 1, 2024. Up to
that point, I find that both the applicant and the respondent intended that the
applicant’s occupation be without compensation. Thereafter, the respondent did
not continue to share that intention. I find that it is just for the applicant
to pay occupation rent from July 1, 2024 to date.
[31]          
The respondent notes that she has continued to be
required to pay a mortgage of $2,635.85 per month plus condo fees of $599.26
during this period. The respondent seeks compensation for the rental income
that she would have received for the Condo during the period following the
deceased’s death. A letter from a real estate agent dated July 22, 2024, which
should have been in the form of an affidavit, states that the Condo had a
market rental value of $2,150-$2,250 on November 1, 2021, and a market rental
value of $2,550-$2,650 on December 1, 2023. These figures were not contested by
the applicant. The court must use the best available evidence: Dyal v. Dyal,
2023 ONSC 4322, at para. 71. To account for the uncertainties of the range of
rental values as of July 1, 2024, and the cursory nature of the appraisal letter
provided, I find that the occupation rent for the period since July 1, 2024 shall
be $2,200 per month.
[32]          
The motion is granted. Order to go as follows:
1) the applicant shall deliver vacant possession of the Condo by February 28,
2025; 2) a writ of possession shall be issued on the above terms; 3) the
applicant shall pay occupation rent in the amount of $2,200 per month from July
1, 2024 until the day that she vacates the Condo; and, 4) the applicant shall
leave all personal property not belonging to her when she vacates the Condo.
[33]          
The respondent shall deliver her costs
submissions by November 22, 2024.  The applicant shall deliver her responding
costs submissions by November 29, 2024. The respondent may deliver reply costs
submissions by December 6, 2024.  Each submission shall be no more than three
pages in length exclusive of a bill of costs and any offers to settle that were
made.