[1]              
These two lien actions in the reference before
me arise from bridge rehabilitation work performed to a railway carrying bridge
over a portion of the Rouge River, which divides Pickering and Toronto. 
Metrolinx contracted SEMA Railway Structures Inc. (“SEMA”) to perform the work,
which took place over a two-day period on the weekend of April 23-24, 2022. 
Metrolinx shut down all railway traffic for the weekend to facilitate SEMA’s work.
[2]              
SEMA’s work included removing the original
masonry back walls constructed at the approaches and embankments on each side of
the bridge and replacing them with new precast concrete walls.  SEMA’s position
is that its work required the supply and placement of Granular B Type II aggregate
material as both sub-ballast and backfill.
[3]              
SEMA issued a single purchase order to “JCL
Group Inc.” to supply required stone material and aggregate as well as a stone
slinger truck and telebelt truck to convey the delivered aggregate to the
required locations.  Ontario Trucking and Disposal Ltd. (“OTD”) supplied the
stone material and aggregate.  JCL Concrete Pumping Limited
(“JCL Concrete”) supplied the rental equipment.
[4]              
The relationship between SEMA, JCL Concrete, and
OTD on the facts of this case is somewhat unique.  There is no dispute that SEMA’s
representative dealt with an individual who is involved with JCL Concrete
and OTD in negotiating the supply of stone material and rental equipment for
the project.  There is also no dispute that SEMA issued a purchase order for that
supply.  There is equally no dispute that JCL Concrete and OTD were ultimately
the actual suppliers of the materials and equipment contemplated by the
purchase order.  However, there is disagreement over what contracts were
entered into and the parties to those contracts.  SEMA’s position is that it
contracted with JCL Group Inc.  JCL Concrete and OTD argue that I
should find two separate contracts:  one with each of them.
[5]              
Ultimately, the supplied aggregate material was
rejected by Metrolinx and SEMA.  Replacement Granular B Type II aggregate was
sourced and supplied.  The plaintiffs argue that they were given no real
opportunity to address SEMA’s concerns with the supplied aggregate and that
SEMA wrongly continued to accept aggregate deliveries despite its concerns. 
SEMA disagrees.
[6]              
At the core of the parties’ dispute is the legal
relationship, if any, between SEMA, JCL Concrete, and OTD and,
specifically, the impact of SEMA’s purchase order being issued to “JCL Group
Inc.”  The other main dispute is whether the aggregate material requested by
SEMA had to comply with the requirements for Granular B Type II aggregate as
set out in Ontario Provincial Standard Specification 1010 (“OPSS 1010”).  The
parties’ agreed statement of facts confirms that OPSS 1010 is an industry
standard requirement for Granular B Type II aggregate.  SEMA argues that compliance
with OPSS 1010 specifications for composition of Granular B Type II aggregate was
required.  The plaintiffs disagree, arguing that there was no specified requirement
for aggregate as per OPSS 1010.
[7]              
JCL Concrete preserved and perfected a lien for
$29,082.58 for a claimed supply of “concrete pumping”, although at trial the
amount was pursued for supply of the slinger and telebelt truck rentals.  OTD
preserved and perfected a lien for $21,657.94 for delivery of Granular B
Type II aggregate.  SEMA asserts a set-off against both claims for the sum
of $53,865.51 in costs and expenses arising from the alleged non-conforming aggregate.
[8]              
Having considered the evidence and legal
arguments, I find that there was no contract formed between either of the
plaintiffs and SEMA.  Since both plaintiffs withdrew their claims in quantum
meruit and unjust enrichment prior to trial, I find no remaining legal
basis for judgment against SEMA in favour of either JCL Concrete or OTD.  Absent
a contract with SEMA or a claim in quantum meruit, I also find that neither
plaintiff is entitled to a lien under the Construction Act, RSO 1990,
c C.30.
[9]              
I am accordingly dismissing both of the plaintiffs’
actions, discharging their liens, and ordering the return of the lien security
previously posted by SEMA.  I am also dismissing SEMA’s set-off claim
against the plaintiffs, which SEMA conceded would fail if I found that no contract
was formed.
[10]          
In advance of trial, the parties exchanged and
submitted a summary of their positions on trial issues.  Having considered the
issues as framed by the parties and how the trial unfolded, I distill the
disputed issues in this reference to the following:
[11]          
I have discussed the law around contract
formation in my prior decision in Bellsam Contracting Limited v. Torgerson,
2023 ONSC 468.  My prior summary of the law captures the legal principles in
the cases put before me at this trial.
[12]          
An enforceable contract between parties has five
elements:  offer, acceptance, consideration, certainty of essential terms,
and an intention to create a legal relationship.  A contract will be
found where there is an offer by one party accepted by the other with the
intention of creating a legal relationship, which is supported by consideration: 
Bellsam, supra at para. 35.
[13]          
Determining whether a concluded agreement exists
does not depend the actual state of mind of one of the parties or on evidence
of one party’s subjective intention:  Electek Power Services Inc. v.
Greenfield Energy Centre Limited Partnership, 2022 ONSC 894 at para. 103. 
Instead, it is assessed on an objective standard.  The court will examine how
each party’s conduct would appear to a reasonable person in the position of the
other party.  In deciding if a contractual relationship existed, the court must
examine the factual matrix between the parties.  Ultimately, it does not matter
that one party may have had no intention to enter a legally binding
contract.  Rather, what matters is whether their conduct was such that a
reasonable person would conclude that they intended to be bound:  Bellsam,
supra at paras. 36-37.
[14]          
It is important to remember that the party
making an offer confers on the offeree the power to accept that offer.  Certain
actions that might be viewed subjectively by one party as an offer may be nothing
more than an “invitation to treat” or an “invitation to make an offer”.  The understanding
of the parties is important in deciding whether an offer that is capable of
acceptance has been made.  Mutual assent is not required, only a manifestation
of mutual consent.  Accepting an offer that is reasonably understood to be an
offer will form a contract:  Eltaib v. Air Canada Vacations, 2010 ONSC
834 at paras. 25-26.
[15]          
The plaintiffs have the evidentiary onus of
proving their claims.  Since SEMA denies having any contract with either JCL
Concrete or OTD, the plaintiffs accordingly have the evidentiary burden of
proving that SEMA did enter into contracts with each of them.
[16]          
There is no dispute over the factual
circumstances leading to SEMA issuing its purchase order and the delivery of
aggregate and the equipment rentals.  Many facts have been agreed and are set
out in the parties’ agreed statement of facts.  The parties dispute is largely
focused on the legal characterization of the underlying events and interactions.
[17]          
Communications about the potential supply of
stone material and equipment were all between Jean-Phillipe Poirier, a
supervisor for SEMA on the project, and Santo Costabile.  Mr. Costabile identified
himself in his trial affidavit and during cross-examination as the manager of
JCL Concrete, but his signature in emails sent at the material times lists him
as “Manager, JCL Group Inc.”
[18]          
Jean-Phillipe Poirier was directed by Zain
Jessani, a senior supervisor with SEMA, to source necessary Granular B Type II
aggregate material for the project.  Mr. Poirier was originally going to source
it from Brock Aggregates.  A telebelt truck was also required to move the
aggregate.  Undisputed evidence at trial is that Santo Costabile met with Mr.
Poirier and another SEMA representative on site to discuss rental of a telebelt
truck.  It is Mr. Poirier’s evidence that, during the meeting, Mr. Costabile proposed
that, in addition to renting their stone slinger truck and telebelt truck, SEMA
should also purchase aggregate material from them for the west side of the
railway bridge, which would help give SEMA the best pricing possible.
[19]          
Between April 8 and 12, 2022, Mr. Poirier and
Mr. Costabile exchanged text messages and emails about SEMA’s needs.  During
those exchanges, Mr. Costabile emailed Mr. Poirier two price lists
for stone material and telebelt rentals.  The former was on the letterhead of
OTD.  The latter was on the letterhead of JCL Concrete.
[20]          
On April 13-14, 2022, certain limestone material
was delivered to the site.  OTD issued two modest invoices for the supply:  one
for $2,521.53 and another for $664.18.
[21]          
On April 15, 2022, Zain Jessani from SEMA
prepared a purchase order for telebelt rental and granular deliveries to “JCL
Group Inc.”  It lists Santo Costabile as the contact person and specifically
refers to supply of “Granular B type 2 per Ton (triaxle)”.  The pricing
correlates to the two price lists provided by Mr. Costabile to SEMA.  The
purchase order was e-mailed by Mr. Jessani to Mr. Costabile, who
acknowledged receipt of the purchase order the next day by reply email stating
simply, “Great.  Thank you.”  Mr. Costabile also sent a separate text message
to Jean-Phillippe Poirier to confirm receipt of the purchase order, stating as
follows:
[22]          
In response, Mr. Poirier sought confirmation
that “the granular” would be delivered on Monday morning.  Mr. Costabile
replied, “Yes sir”.
[23]          
Two days later, on April 18, 2022, Mr. Costabile
arranged for delivery of aggregate material to the project site.  A telebelt
truck and slinger truck were also provided to the site for use by SEMA.
[24]          
SEMA takes the position that the issued purchase
order is the governing contract document.  SEMA argues that it entered into a single
contract with JCL Group Inc. for the supply of the services and materials,
including the required aggregate and equipment rentals.  The fact that the contractual
supply was ultimately fulfilled by JCL Concrete and OTD does not change that
there was no contract with either of them.
[25]          
JCL Concrete and OTD argue that SEMA’s
unilateral decision to issue the purchase order to JCL Group Inc. was a
misnomer and that there were two contracts:  one between SEMA and JCL Concrete
and another between SEMA and OTD.  Their position is that the purchase order is
not the governing document.  They do not argue that either or both of JCL
Concrete and OTD operate as “JCL Group Inc.”  Rather, they argue that the
purchase order names an incorrect party that is an unrelated entity to JCL Concrete
and OTD with no common ownership or control.  They submit that JCL Group Inc.
thereby cannot have been the contracting party.  They point to their price
lists for services and materials sent to SEMA by Santo Costabile as forming the
basis of the pricing agreed between the parties, which they emphasize are clearly
on letterhead for JCL Concrete and OTD.
[26]          
Contract formation starts with an offer made by
one party to another that is objectively reasonably understood to be capable of
acceptance.  The plaintiffs’ theory of the case requires me to find that, on a
balance of probabilities, both JCL Concrete and OTD objectively made offers to
SEMA that were accepted or that SEMA objectively made an offer to JCL Concrete
and OTD that they accepted.
[27]          
A central factual dispute is on whose behalf
Santo Costabile was objectively acting when dealing with Jean-Phillippe Poirier
of SEMA prior to the purchase order being issued:  on behalf of JCL Concrete
and OTD, or on behalf of “JCL Group Inc.”  As discussed below, I reject the
plaintiffs’ arguments that SEMA ought to have known that JCL Group Inc. was not
a proper party and that SEMA would be contracting directly with JCL Concrete
and OTD.  On a balance of probabilities, I find that, objectively, Santo
Costabile held himself out as acting on behalf of JCL Group Inc. and that SEMA
reasonably understood that it was dealing with JCL Group Inc. for the
supply of stone material and equipment for the project.  On the record before
me, I find that the only offers capable of being accepted were objectively made
by or to JCL Group Inc.
[28]          
As a preliminary matter, SEMA challenges the
weight that should be given to the evidence from the plaintiffs’ main witnesses,
arguing that the way their evidence was tendered is improper.  I agree
that the framing of their affidavit evidence is problematic and does impact the
weight of both that evidence and the testimony of those witnesses at trial.
[29]          
The plaintiffs tendered three primary witness
affidavits:  one from Laura Sciacca, the president of JCL Concrete and a
director of OTD; one from Santo Costabile, the manager of JCL Concrete; and one
from Claudio Sciacca, the president of OTD.  The primary evidence was given by
Ms. Sciacca, who swore a main affidavit that was adopted by the other two
witnesses.  Mr. Sciacca’s affidavit fully adopts Ms. Sciacca’s evidence
with no additions.  Mr. Costabile’s affidavit similarly adopts Ms.
Sciacca’s evidence, with two additional paragraphs of evidence.
[30]          
Most of Laura Sciacca’s affidavit is hearsay. 
It addresses matters for which she has no direct or personal knowledge, as confirmed
during her cross-examination.  Importantly, she tenders evidence on text and
email communications to which she was not a party that deal with central disputed
issues in this litigation.  That includes key communications between Santo
Costabile and Jean-Phillippe Poirier relevant to the issue of contract
formation and other communications between Claudio Sciacca and Zain Jessani on
the issue of composition of the supplied Granular B Type II aggregate.  Many of
the paragraphs in Ms. Sciacca’s affidavit also contain improper argument.
[31]          
The plaintiffs submit that there should be no
concern with hearsay because both Santo Costabile and Claudio Sciacca support
and adopt Laura Sciacca’s evidence.  Having a primary affidavit from one
witness adopted by other witnesses is argued to be a matter of proportionality
in preparing the trial affidavits.  The plaintiffs thereby submit that there
should be no impact on the weight of the evidence of these three witnesses.  I
disagree.
[32]          
In Schedule A to Trial Directions #1, I set out various
specific directions for trial materials.  Paragraph 1(a) states expressly, “All
affidavits must comply with Rule 4.06 of the Rules of Civil Procedure
and the rules of trial evidence (such as the rules against hearsay, opinion
evidence from a nonexpert witness, etc.).”  Subrule 4.06(2) of the Rules of
Civil Procedure, RRO 1990, Reg 194 provides that an affidavit must
be confined to statements of facts within the personal knowledge of the
deponent or to other evidence that the deponent could give if testifying as a
witness in court.
[33]          
In my prior decision in Schindler Elevator
Corporation v. Walsh Construction Company of Canada, 2020 ONSC 433, I
discussed the distinction between trial affidavit and other affidavits.  I
explained as follows at paras. 5-6:
[34]          
The more recent decision of Lumberjacks Tree Service v. 407 East
Construction General Partnership, 2024 ONSC 1744, includes similar
commentary on the purpose of trial affidavits.  Specifically, at para. 5,
Sutherland J. observed that trial affidavits are fundamentally different than
affidavits used on motions and applications.  They are used in lieu of oral
testimony given in direct examination at trial, so the laws of evidence must be
strictly complied with, such as the law of hearsay.  To that end, it is
important that trial affidavits be drafted with the purpose that the affidavits
are testimony given at a trial.
[35]          
Laura Sciacca’s’ affidavit contains statements
that are contrary to both my direction for affidavits and rule 4.06 of the Rules
of Civil Procedure.  She has given evidence on matters for which she has no
personal knowledge.   The fact that Santo Costabile and Claudio Sciacca adopt
her evidence does not improve it.  It is not their account of the dealings and
occurrences that involved them.  Moreover, they are also adopting portions of
Ms. Sciacca’s evidence on matters for which they similarly have no personal
knowledge or involvement.  Each of their affidavits ought to have been limited
to outlining their personal knowledge and dealings.
[36]          
I reject the proportionality argument
advanced by the plaintiffs for a single lead affidavit adopted by other
witnesses.  In my view, there is no reason why one trial witness should be
providing hearsay evidence on transactions, communications, and occurrences
involving another witness for which the affiant witness has no personal
knowledge or involvement.  Such paragraphs should have been put in the
appropriate witnesses’ affidavit and revised, as necessary, to reflect their
own personal observations and recollections of the relevant events.  Put
simply, in an ordinary trial, it would clearly be improper for one witness to take
the stand and simply state, “I agree with the last witness,” as their sole
evidence in chief.
[37]          
As a result of the foregoing, I have generally
preferred the evidence of Jean Philippe Poirier and Zain Jessani to the
evidence of the plaintiffs’ witnesses on dealings between representatives of
SEMA and the plaintiffs.  Both Mr. Poirier and Mr. Jessani gave direct evidence
on their own involvement.
[38]          
Based on the evidence at trial, no one other
than Santo Costabile had any dealings with SEMA on behalf of JCL Concrete
or OTD for the bridge rehabilitation project prior to SEMA’s purchase order
being issued.  As already noted, Mr. Costabile’s email signature identified him
as “Manager, JCL Group Inc.”  Importantly, there is no evidence before me,
including from Santo Costabile’s own testimony, supporting that he ever drew
attention to distinctions between the related corporate entities or that he
identified that different entities would be responsible for supplying the aggregate
and the trucks.
[39]          
During cross-examination, Mr. Poirier was asked
directly if it was his understanding when receiving the separate price lists
from JCL Concrete and OTD that aggregate would be supplied by one company and the
telebelt truck would be supplied by another company.  Mr. Poirier
testified that he was dealing with and making arrangements through one person: 
Santo Costabile.  Mr. Poirier confirmed that he “did not pay attention” to
where the material was coming from or if different companies would be supplying
the material and equipment.  He forwarded the price lists to Zain Jessani and
Mr. Jessani was responsible for putting the purchase order together.  Mr.
Poirier confirmed that he was not involved in preparing the purchase order and
did not recall whether he asked Santo Costabile to whom the purchase order
should be addressed.  Mr. Poirier was not asked about whether Mr. Costabile
ever identified any differences between the companies.
[40]          
I accept Mr. Poirier’s testimony.  It is
consistent with the text messages and emails exchanged between him and Mr.
Costabile.  The text messages deal with both the material supply and the
equipment rentals together.  There is no indication in any of them that there would
be separate supplies or that the supply would require separate purchase orders
or contracts.  Similarly, nothing in Mr. Costabile’s emails suggests that SEMA
was or would be dealing with multiple entities.
[41]          
Zain Jessani’s testimony is consistent that he
understood Santo Costabile to be from JCL Group Inc., which he maintained
during cross-examination.  Mr. Jessani testified that he made out the purchase
order to JCL Group Inc. based on Mr. Costabile’s email and other documents
referring to that entity, which gave him confidence that it was an umbrella
corporation.  When challenged about the price lists, Mr. Jessani maintained his
understanding that SEMA’s contract was with JCL Group Inc., stating that there
were multiple sister companies identified in Mr. Costabile’s email and it
was not his responsibility to know how the organizational structure worked
between the sister companies.
[42]          
Objectively, the text messages and emails exchanged
with Santo Costabile all support that SEMA’s representatives were dealing with Mr.
Costabile in his capacity as the manager of JCL Group Inc.  That includes
the failure of Mr. Costabile (or anyone else) to raise concerns about the
purchase order having been addressed to “JCL Group Inc.”  Mr. Costabile simply
acknowledged receipt of the single purchase order, which clearly included both
material supply and equipment rental, and proceeded to arrange the supply.
[43]          
Several pieces of evidence also support that it
was objectively reasonable for SEMA to have believed that it was dealing and contracting
with JCL Group Inc.  Notably, the plaintiffs’ own documents identify “JCL Group
Inc.” as a related entity in the same family of companies as the plaintiffs,
including the following:
[44]          
During cross-examination, Mr. Costabile tried to
characterize the reference to “JCL Group Inc.” in his email signature as
referring to the “JCL group of companies”.  However, Mr. Costabile confirmed
that he is not the manger for all companies in the group.  Significantly, he
specifically acknowledged in cross-examination that he was not a manager of OTD
and has given no evidence about having any specific role with that company. 
There is no evidence before me supporting a finding that Mr. Costabile had
any position with or authority on behalf of OTD.
[45]          
In my view, Mr. Costabile’s explanation is
convenient and lacks credibility, particularly when coupled with the various
documents available to SEMA prior to issuing the purchase order that specifically
note “JCL Group Inc.” on them.  The plaintiffs have failed to provide any
cogent and convincing explanation for why Mr. Costabile was identified as
“Manager, JCL Group Inc.” in his emails, particularly given their position at
trial that there was no such company affiliated with JCL Concrete and OTD.  Laura
Sciacca’s testimony suggests only that it was a mistake.  However, the
suggestion that it was only intended to refer to the group of companies is
inconsistent with the admission by Mr. Costabile that he was not a manager of
all companies in the group, which his email signature reasonably represented
him to be.
[46]          
The plaintiffs rely heavily on their price
lists, which are on letterhead of JCL Concrete and OTD, and the invoices from
OTD for limestone supply to SEMA that were issued on April 13 and 14, 2022,
prior to the purchase order being issued on April 15, 2022.  In my view, these
are circumstantial pieces of evidence in context of the overall dealings.
[47]          
I acknowledge that the price lists, which were
used in preparing the purchase order, do not indicate “JCL Group Inc.” and are
solely on the letterheads of JCL Concrete and OTD.  However, those facts cannot
be divorced from the circumstances under which they were provided to SEMA. 
Notably, they were provided to Jean-Phillipe Poirier under cover of an email
from Santo Costabile, in which he identified himself as “Manager, JCL Group
Inc.”  His email is brief and says nothing about JCL Concrete and OTD.  It
states only as follows:
[48]          
The document filenames for the two price lists
sent are, in my view, important.  The pdf price lists were forwarded by
Jean-Phillippe Poirier to Zain Jessani by email.  That email is appended to
Zain Jessani’s affidavit, which identifies the two files as “JCL QUOTE sheet -
SEMA.pdf” and “JCL PUMP NEW - SEMA railway.pdf”.  Both refer to “JCL” despite
the plaintiffs’ position that one was in respect of OTD’s material supply. 
Both price lists are also signed by Santo Costabile, the “Manager, JCL Group
Inc.” per the covering email.  Given these contemporaneous facts, the
letterhead on the price lists is far from being dipositive on the objective
understanding of the parties.
[49]          
The credit application referenced in Mr.
Costabile’s email was not tendered by any of the plaintiffs’ witnesses in their
evidence in chief.  It was introduced during the cross-examination of
Jean-Phillippe Poirier, together with a covering email from Sarah Jewell.  Ms.
Jewell is identified in the email as being with the credit department of JCL
Concrete and OTD, but was not called as a witness.  Mr. Poirier testified that
he did not recall receiving the email or credit application.  He also did not
know why it was not signed and returned.  He testified that it would have been
passed on to the supervisor.
[50]          
The credit application shows the logos of JCL
Concrete and OTD.  It does not refer to JCL Group Inc.  In the body of the
text, though, it refers to authorizing another company, Ontario Stone Slingers
Ltd., to conduct a credit information search.  Given Mr. Poirier’s lack of
recollection, the evidentiary value of the email and credit application is
limited.  There is no evidence from the plaintiffs on the document.  There is
similarly no evidence that anyone at SEMA reviewed or considered it, or even acknowledged
that it did not refer to JCL Group Inc., at or around the time it was sent.  It
is undisputed that SEMA did not complete the credit application.
[51]          
In my view, SEMA’s knowledge that the supply of
stone material and rental equipment was coming from JCL Concrete and OTD is not
material to whether, objectively, Jean-Phillippe Poirier of SEMA was reasonably
dealing with Santo Costabile as a representative of JCL Group Inc.  A
contractor may subcontract the supply of certain materials and equipment to a
particular supplier with full knowledge that they will, in turn, be obtaining
the contracted supply from third party suppliers.  That knowledge does not
create privity of contract between the contractor and the ultimate suppliers.
[52]          
With respect to the two invoices from OTD
rendered before the purchase order was issued, they reflect a small part of the
total stone material supplied.  As already noted, they each refer to the
website “www.jclgroup.ca”.  The related delivery tickets also note
“JCL Group Inc.” as one of the related companies.  I am unconvinced that
the fact that OTD invoiced SEMA for part of the stone material supply prior to
the purchase order being issued materially changes my assessment of the
objective evidence.  It is, in my view, circumstantial evidence that does not
override the totality of other evidence.
[53]          
The plaintiffs argue that SEMA ought to have
clarified the proper contracting parties.  I reject that argument.  There
is no cogent objective evidence supporting that Santo Costabile was acting on
behalf of each of JCL Concrete and OTD separately.  A single purchase order was
issued by SEMA to one entity for the supply of all materials and equipment that
the plaintiffs say was always to have been supplied by separate legal entities. 
Despite that position, neither Santo Costabile nor anyone else on behalf of JCL
Concrete or OTD pointed out that there would be separate supplies from separate
corporations, and that there should be separate purchase orders or contracts. 
Instead, Mr. Costabile acknowledged receipt of the purchase order identifying
“JCL Group Inc.” without comment on it.
[54]          
In support of their position that naming “JCL
Group Inc.” is an immaterial misnomer, the plaintiffs rely on G.C. Rentals
Ltd. v. Falco Steel Fabricators Inc., 2000 CarswellOnt 1040 (Div Ct)
and Stubbe’s Precast Commercial Ltd. v. King & Columbia Inc., 2018
ONSC 995.  Both are cases dealing with misnomer in the naming of a lien
claimant.  In my view, neither case assists the plaintiffs.
[55]          
In G.C. Rentals Ltd., the Divisional
Court overturned a decision of Master Sischy discharging two liens on the basis
that the named lien claimant, which matched the name of the party as written in
the agreements at issue, was a non-entity.  Master Sischy held that the liens
were thereby nullities.  In granting the appeal, the Divisional Court held that
the liens were not nullities and that there was a misnomer.  Significant in the
decision was that there was no evidence supporting that anyone was “misled,
prejudiced or acted to his, her or its detriment” (para. 10) and, specifically,
that the defendants themselves were not mislead and “knew that claims were
being made against them by the ‘other party’ to the contract” (para. 11).
[56]          
G.C. Rentals Ltd. is distinguishable from the facts of this case.  Unlike the named
lien claimant in that case, JCL Group Inc. is an existing entity, just one that
the plaintiffs say is not related to them.  Moreover, there is evidence from SEMA’s
witnesses supporting an understanding that the contract was with JCL Group Inc.
[57]          
Stubbe’s Precast Commercial Ltd. is also factually distinguishable.  In that case, the lien claimant
was incorrectly named with “Ltd.” instead of “Inc.”  Like G.C. Rentals Ltd.,
the named lien claimant was thereby a non-existent entity at the time that
the claim for lien was registered.  Stubbe’s Precast Commercial Ltd. was
subsequently incorporated.  Ultimately, the court dismissed the motion on the
basis that “[b]oth parties knew with whom they were dealing.”
[58]          
In this case, I am unconvinced by the
plaintiffs’ arguments that SEMA always knew with whom it was dealing.  The
separate legal personality of corporations is a fundamental principle of
corporate law.  SEMA’s position is that it dealt and contracted with JCL Group
Inc.  The plaintiffs’ position is that there were contracts with JCL Concrete
and OTD.  All three corporations are separate legal entities.  The plaintiffs
do not suggest otherwise.  Laura Sciacca, the president of JCL Concrete and a
director of OTD, gave evidence that the two entitles operate independently. 
However, the plaintiffs’ argument would seem to require that those related
entities be fluidly interchangeable given the manner in which Santo Costabile
dealt with SEMA.
[59]          
In my view, this case is unlike G.C. Rentals
Ltd. or Stubbe’s Precast Commercial Ltd.  There is no evidence
before me that JCL Group Inc. does not exist.  To the contrary, Laura Sciacca
gave evidence that it is an existing company, just not one controlled by anyone
operating JCL Concrete, OTD, or their related companies.  However, no
evidence was properly tendered at trial to corroborate that statement.
[60]          
JCL Concrete and OTD argue that it was obvious
that JCL Group Inc. was not a corporation controlled by them.  The only proper evidence
before me supporting that argument is the cross-examination testimony of Laura
Sciacca that JCL Group Inc. “isn’t our company” and that it was an error to use
that name.  The plaintiffs sought to corroborate Ms. Sciacca’s evidence in
closing submissions by relying on the corporate profile report for
JCL Group Inc., which was included in SEMA’s document book.  However, that
document was not tendered at trial through any witness and is therefore not
properly considered as part of the evidentiary record before me.  I expressly
advised counsel when marking the document books as exhibits that I would be
considering only those documents put to witnesses, and that the remaining
documents would not form part of the evidentiary record for trial.
[61]          
It would perhaps have been advisable for me,
prior to closing submissions, to have clearly struck out the documents that had
not been referenced in trial affidavits or put to a witness.  However, the way
in which the parties’ document books would be marked and used at trial was
clearly discussed at the time of entering them as exhibits and prior to any
witness being called.  In my view, there was no confusion that only documents
that had been tendered into evidence by a witness or put to a witness on
cross-examination would be considered.
[62]          
I also find it significant that the plaintiffs
did not take the position that JCL Group Inc. is an unrelated entity to the
plaintiffs until trial.  Laura Sciacca’s own trial affidavit states that Santo
Costabile was the “manager of JCL Group Inc.”  That evidence stood until the
first day of trial, at which time Ms. Sciacca corrected her affidavit prior
to being cross-examined.  She stated that it ought to have read “JCL Concrete
Pumping Limited”.  However, although Ms. Sciacca corrected her affidavit, neither
Mr. Costabile nor Claudio Sciacca was asked to clarify their affidavits. 
They continue to adopt the sworn statement that Mr. Costabile was a
manager of JCL Group Inc.
[63]          
During cross-examination, Mr. Costabile
confirmed that he agreed with everything stated about him in Laura Sciacca’s
affidavit.  Although Mr. Costabile’s own affidavit identifies him as the
manager of JCL Concrete, that does not necessarily preclude him from being a
manager of both.  The discrepancy was never reconciled in his testimony.
[64]          
JCL Concrete and OTD also rely heavily on the
Divisional Court’s comments in G.C. Rentals Ltd. about lack of
prejudice.  They point specifically to the lack of any evidence of prejudice to
SEMA from naming “JCL Group Inc.” on the purchase order.  SEMA understood that
it was contracting for the supply of aggregate and equipment.  It received the
supply of aggregate and equipment.  There is a certain logic to the argument,
but it ignores the factual matrix in G.C. Rentals Ltd., which as
already discussed is not the factual matrix in this case.
[65]          
Also, prejudice was discussed by the Divisional
Court in context of s. 6 of the former Construction Lien Act.  That
section provides essentially that minor irregularities in instruments required
by the legislation do not invalidate those instruments unless a person has been
prejudiced by them, and then only to the extent of the prejudice suffered.   It
does not override established law on contract formation.
[66]          
No case law is before me supporting that the
presence or lack of prejudice is properly a factor in deciding with whom a
contract may have been formed, particularly where there is objective evidence
supporting a finding that a defendant reasonably believed they were dealing
with an existing non-party.  That was not the factual situation in either G.C.
Rentals Ltd. or Stubbe’s Precast Commercial Ltd., in both of which
the named lien claimant was a non-entity (at least, in the latter case, at the
time of lien preservation).  The facts in both cases were such that there was
no genuine confusion regarding the true contacting parties.  I am unable
to find, on a balance of probabilities, that the same is true here.
[67]          
To accept the plaintiffs’ position that there
were two separate contracts would require me to strain, if not contort, the
evidence before me.  I would need to ignore the singular way in which Santo
Costabile communicated and dealt with Jean-Phillipe Poirier about the supply of
both stone material and equipment.  It would also require me to put undue
weight on the fact that two separate price lists from JCL Concrete and OTD were
provided to SEMA, despite the already-discussed circumstances surrounding
delivery of those price lists and the blended way in which Mr. Costabile
dealt with SEMA.
[68]          
On a balance of probabilities, I find that the evidence
and surrounding circumstances all support that Mr. Costabile was objectively
acting on behalf of JCL Group Inc. in negotiating the supply of both stone and
aggregate.  I find that he was reasonably understood by SEMA to be acting as
such and not as a direct agent for either JCL Concrete or OTD.  That objective
understanding is significant when assessing who made or received an offer
capable of being accepted.  JCL Group Inc. is, in fact, an existing corporate
entity.  Based on the objective evidence, it was represented to be an
affiliated corporation to JCL Concrete and OTD.
[69]          
There is disagreement about whether the price
lists sent by Santo Costabile were an offer or simply invitations to treat. 
I need not decide that.  If they were an offer, then my findings above
support that it was an offer objectively made on behalf of JCL Group Inc. with
respect to supply to be obtained from related corporations.  If the price lists
were not an offer, then SEMA’s purchase order was an offer issued to JCL Group
Inc.  In either case, the foregoing supports, and I find, that no offer capable
of being accepted was made by or to JCL Concrete or OTD.
[70]          
That finding is dispositive of the contract
formation issue.  Without an offer that was objectively capable of being
accepted being made either by or to JCL Concrete and OTD, there cannot have
been a contract with either of them.
[71]          
Given my finding above that there was no
contract between SEMA and either JCL Concrete or OTD, I need not address
the parties’ arguments on the terms of the contract.  That includes whether the
contract required the supply of Granular B Type II aggregate in accordance with
the specifications outlined in OPSS 1010.
[72]          
In my view, whether the supplied aggregate was
actually or reasonably required to meet all specifications for Granular B Type II
aggregate as set out in OPSS 1010, and whether it did meet those
requirements, only needs to be decided if the plaintiffs have a contract or
other legal basis to pursue SEMA.  I have found that they do not have a
contract and, as discussed below, I find that they have no other remaining
cause of action against SEMA.
[73]          
For the above reasons, I am unconvinced that
making findings on the Granular B Type II aggregate composition issue is
necessary to a proper disposition of these actions.  I thereby need to address
the trial evidence on that issue, including the evidence of Binyam Haile Gebregziabher
and Michael Szewczyk on behalf of SEMA, and of Anthony Ferritto on behalf of
the plaintiffs.  The evidence of those three witnesses was focused entirely on
the Granular B Type II aggregate dispute.
[74]          
Issues in an action are framed by the
pleadings.  Although not cited by either side, the Court of Appeal has held
that it is fundamental to the litigation process that lawsuits be decided
within the boundaries of the pleadings:  Rodaro v. Royal Bank of Canada
(2002), 59 OR (3d) 74, 2002 CanLII 41834 (ON CA) at para 60.
[75]          
In their respective lien actions, JCL Concrete
and OTD claim damages for breach of contract or, alternatively, in quantum
meruit and unjust enrichment.  No amendment to the claim was sought at or
prior to trial.  The plaintiffs have accordingly not pleaded any other cause of
action or basis for a claim against SEMA.
[76]          
Each of JCL Concrete and OTD take the primary
position that have direct contracts with SEMA.  I have found that there were no
such contracts.  Nevertheless, where a plaintiff claiming a direct contract has
failed to prove that contract, it may still seek to recover on a quantum
meruit basis for the value of services and materials that it supplied.
[77]          
In the event that I found there was no contract
(as I have), the plaintiffs argued in closing submissions that they should
recover on the basis of quantum meruit and unjust enrichment, with their
invoices and price lists used as a basis to fix the reasonable value of
services and materials supplied.  However, SEMA argues that I should not
consider that argument since both JCL Concrete and OTD unequivocally
withdrew their claims in quantum meruit prior to trial.  I agree
that they did.  The withdrawal is set out in the agreed statement of trial
issues and in the plaintiffs’ statement of law.
[78]          
The language used in the joint statement of
trial issues and the plaintiffs’ statement of law is clear and unequivocal.  In
the statement of trial issues, issue no. 5 is identified as “Are JCL or OTD
entitled to any amounts or damages on a quantum meruit or unjust
enrichment basis?”  The position of the plaintiffs is stated as follows
(emphasis added):
[79]          
In the plaintiffs’ statement of law, the quantum
meruit or unjust enrichment issue is outlined with the same language.  At
para. 6, the plaintiffs submit as follows (emphasis added):
[80]          
During closing submissions, the plaintiffs
sought essentially to rescind their withdrawal of their alternative claims in quantum
meruit and unjust enrichment to argue recovery on that basis.  I find that
it would be procedurally unfair to SEMA for me to consider those claims.  They had
been clearly withdrawn prior to trial and no notice was given before conclusion
of the evidentiary phase of trial that the plaintiffs would still be pursuing
recovery on a quantum meruit basis in the alternative to a contract (or
contracts) being found.
[81]          
Trial proceeded based on the alternative claims
by JCL Concrete and OTD having been withdrawn.  I accept SEMA’s
submissions that different questions may have been posed to witnesses and a different
approach may have been taken at trial had SEMA known that quantum meruit was
still being pursued.
[82]          
I acknowledge that there is no dispute that JCL
Concrete and OTD were the parties who actually supplied the stone materials and
rental equipment, for which they were not paid.  It may, at first blush, seem inequitable
to deny them the ability to argue recovery in quantum meruit.  However,
this is a case where the existence of a contract with the plaintiffs was
squarely in issue and hotly contested.  The purchase order was issued by SEMA to
an entity that the plaintiffs argued was not the correct contracting party. 
There was no certainty that a contract with either plaintiff would be found.  Nevertheless,
for their own reasons, the plaintiffs opted to withdraw their claims in quantum
meruit on the basis that they had been targeted solely at Metrolinx.
[83]          
The plaintiffs bear the evidentiary burden of
proving their case at trial.  The risk of withdrawing claims in quantum meruit
and unjust enrichment when the existence of a contract was a core disputed
issue properly falls on the plaintiffs who elected to withdraw them.  Had the
plaintiffs sought to revive those alternative claims prior to any witnesses
being called, or possibly even during ongoing witness examination by way of voir
dire, the result may have been different.  However, that did not occur.
[84]          
In my view, any unfairness to the plaintiffs from
denying them leave to revive the quantum meruit and unjust enrichment claims
during closing submissions is outweighed by the procedural unfairness and
prejudice to SEMA of permitting such a revival after the conclusion of evidence,
particularly in the context of summary lien proceedings.
[85]          
The right to a lien arises from s. 14 of the Construction
Act, which provides that a person who supplies services or materials to an
improvement for an owner, contractor or subcontractor has a lien upon the
interest of the owner in the premises improved for the price of those services
or materials.  “Price” is a defined term in the act.  The relevant definition is
found in s. 1(1), which states as follows (excluding subsection (b), which does
not apply on the facts of this case):
[86]          
 “Contract” is defined to mean “the contract
between the owner and the contractor, and includes any amendment to that
contract.”  “Subcontract” is defined as “any agreement between the contractor
and a subcontractor, or between two or more subcontractors, relating to the
supply of services or materials to the improvement and includes any amendment
to that agreement.”
[87]          
I have found that there was no subcontract
between SEMA and either of the plaintiffs.  The plaintiffs withdrew there claims
in quantum meruit and unjust enrichment.  No cogent argument was advanced
at trial for how the plaintiffs are still entitled to a lien in the absence of
a contract or a claim in quantum meruit.  No case law is before me
supporting a lien in such circumstances.
[88]          
The Construction Act requires a contract
or quasi-contract relationship to support a lien.  In my view, it would be
contrary to the language and scheme of the Construction Act to find that
a person having no contract or subcontract and no subsisting claim in quantum
meruit to nevertheless have a valid lien.  In my view, without either of
them, there is no remaining basis upon which to find that the plaintiffs
were entitled to a lien or to award judgment in their favour against SEMA.
[89]          
Given my finding on the contract issue and the
plaintiffs’ decision to withdraw their claims in quantum meruit, I
accordingly find that neither of the plaintiffs is entitled to a lien.  Their
liens shall accordingly be discharged and the lien security posted for those
liens shall be returned to SEMA.
[90]          
SEMA claims set-off against JCL Concrete and OTD
under s. 17 of the Construction Act and s. 111 of the Courts of
Justice Act, RSO 1990, c C.43.   Specifically, SEMA asserts
that it incurred $53,865.51 in costs and expenses arising from improper
aggregate being supplied, namely $2,260 for testing, $17,760.49 to move and
ultimately dispose of the aggregate, $16,807.25 in personnel costs, and $17,037.77
for replacement Granular B Type II aggregate material that complied with OPSS
1010.
[91]          
I need not address the set-off claim.  SEMA
agreed in closing submissions that its set-off claim would fall away if I were
to find that no contract was formed with either plaintiff.  Given that
concession and my findings, I am dismissing SEMA’s set-off claim.
[92]          
For the above reasons, the claims by JCL
Concrete and OTD against SEMA are hereby dismissed.  SEMA’s set-off claims are
also dismissed.  I further order that the plaintiffs’ respective liens be
discharged and that the lien security previously posted by SEMA to vacate the liens
be paid out of court to SEMA.
[93]          
The parties should make earnest efforts to
resolve costs of the two actions themselves.  If they cannot, then written
submissions shall be exchanged and filed.  Submissions shall not exceed five
pages, excluding any attachments such as offers to settle and case law.  Given
the result, SEMA shall serve its costs submissions first by December 20,
2024.  The plaintiffs shall serve responding submissions by January 24, 2025. 
SEMA shall be entitled to brief reply, if any, not exceeding two pages to be
served within seven (7) days of being served with the plaintiffs’ responding costs
submissions.  All costs submissions shall be submitted by email to my Assistant
Trial Coordinator (ATC), Christine Meditskos, with proof of service.
[94]          
Both the Construction Act and the Rules
of Civil Procedure require that the results of this trial be embodied in a
report.  I encourage the parties to discuss an appropriate form of draft
report, which shall be filed with my ATC, in Word format, by the deadline for reply
costs submissions.  If the parties cannot agree on a form of report, then my
ATC should be so advised and each side shall submit the version of the report
that they propose.  I will then settle the form of report following my decision
on costs.