[1]         
Anthony Bruzzese is accused of attempted murder.
The Crown alleges that he stabbed Mr. M. twice in the abdomen in the parking
lot of a Food Basics grocery store and left him there to die.
[2]         
This incident is alleged to have occurred in the
early morning hours of September 3, 2018, around 2:50 AM.  Mr. M. was
discovered about 40 minutes later by Sebastien Brugma, a local resident who
happened to be driving by. Mr. Brugma called 911 after observing Mr. M. lying
on his back on the ground in the parking lot, mumbling, and rolling side to
side, with blood pooling beside him.
[3]         
Mr. M. was transported by ambulance to Guelph
General Hospital. Upon arrival, he was hypertensive but responsive. He became
progressively unresponsive and ultimately required intubation and ventilation.
He had two stab wounds, one on the left side of his torso below his stomach, and
the other close to his umbilicus. He had lacerations to parts of his intestines
and bowel, and his inferior vena cava (the largest vein in the human body) was
compromised. He was bleeding heavily into his abdomen and required emergency
surgery to stem the flow of blood and repair the damage caused by the stabbing.
The undisputed medical evidence establishes that without intervention, he would
have bled to death in the parking lot.
[4]         
Mr. Bruzzese and Mr. M. had just met for the
first time a few hours prior to the alleged stabbing, in a nearby sports bar
called Shoeless Joe’s. Mr. M.’s goal was to get drunk that night to mask the
pain of a recent breakup with his girlfriend and the death of his best friend.
He started drinking shots of vodka alone in his apartment around 7 PM or 8 PM.
Then he went to Shoeless Joe’s at around 10:40 PM, where he sat beside a
stranger at the bar. That stranger was Mr. Bruzzese. They talked, watched
sports, and drank beer together. They left the bar around midnight and went to another
establishment, Crabby Joe’s, where they continued to sit together and drink
more beer.
[5]         
Mr. M. testified that he became increasingly
intoxicated as the night went on.  He said he “leaned into alcohol” that night
because he was grieving. He remembered that earlier in the day, while visiting
his parents, he stared at himself in the mirror in their bathroom, cried, and
talked to himself. He was feeling overwhelmed with deep sadness and despair. He
said he did the same thing in the bathrooms of both bars.
[6]         
At Crabby Joe’s, Mr. M. and Mr. Bruzzese encountered
another patron, Konrad Karcz, who was not previously acquainted with either of
them. They did not sit together, but they engaged in conversation with Mr.
Karcz from across the bar.  Video surveillance footage shows that they all departed
the bar around 1:30 AM.
[7]         
According to both Mr. Karcz and Mr. M., the
three men then walked to Mr. M.’s nearby apartment. Mr. M. was very intoxicated
and needed help to get home.  Mr. Karcz testified that, during the walk and
while at Mr. M.’s apartment, Mr. Bruzzese made repeated derogatory and
threatening comments about Mr. M., calling him a loser, worthless, and a piece
of shit, and saying he is weak, and it would be easy to kill him.  Mr. Karcz
assumed that the two men knew each other because they were seated together at
the bar.  He explained that he therefore did not take Mr. Bruzzese’s threats seriously.
He thought Mr. Bruzzese was just jokingly jawing Mr. M. with a kind of
sarcastic banter between friends.
[8]         
Mr. Karcz testified that, inside Mr. M.’s
apartment, Mr. Bruzzese took a knife out of his pocket and showed it to them. 
Mr. M. then retrieved a “Samurai sword” from the top of a shelf in his bedroom
and showed it as well.  Mr. Karcz had the impression that Mr. M. was trying to
look cool. He felt the situation was weird and it made him a bit uncomfortable,
but he was not interested in the knives, so he basically ignored what the other
two men were doing.
[9]         
Mr. Karcz recalled that, after the show of
knives, Mr. Bruzzese emptied an entire bag of cocaine on a desk, made three
lines for them to consume, and slid most of the coke off to the side.  He and
Mr. Bruzzese each did one line of coke. When it came to Mr. M.’s turn, instead
of just doing the last prepared line, he snorted all the remaining cocaine on
the desk. Mr. Karcz testified that this made Mr. Bruzzese angry. He recalled Mr.
Bruzzese saying to Mr. M., “look what the fuck you did”, and saying to him, “that
wasn’t for him.”
[10]      
Mr. Karcz testified that he and Mr. Bruzzese
then went outside for a smoke. When Mr. Karcz re-entered the apartment, Mr. M.
asked him, “Who is this guy? Do you know him?” and said he was afraid of Mr.
Bruzzese. It was at that moment that Mr. Karcz realized the two men were not
friends. He became fearful, recognizing that Mr. Bruzzese’s comments about how
easy it would be to kill Mr. M. were not a joke, and remembering that Mr.
Bruzzese possessed a knife.
[11]      
According to Mr. Karcz, Mr. Bruzzese then re-entered
the apartment and continued with the threats and insults toward Mr. M.  Mr.
Karcz was feeling scared and trying to think of a way to get Mr. Bruzzese to
leave with him so that nothing bad would happen to Mr. M.
[12]      
Mr. Karcz testified that he thinks Mr.
Bruzzese’s words got inside Mr. M.’s head because Mr. M. started crying, grabbed
a kitchen knife out of a drawer, fell to his knees, held the knife to his
chest, and said, “you guys don’t have to kill me I can do it by myself.”  Mr.
Karcz tried to calm him down.  He told Mr. M., “Don’t do it.”  He approached
Mr. M., who became aggressive. Mr. M. stood up and pointed the knife at him. 
He grabbed Mr. M.’s hand and took the knife.  He then slid the knife into some
books on a shelf.
[13]      
Mr. Karcz testified that Mr. Bruzzese was
standing silently nearby, watching this drama unfold. He recalled that Mr.
Bruzzese said to him, “that was brave,” after he disarmed Mr. M.
[14]      
Mr. Karcz testified that Mr. M. sat down on his
couch. He was still crying but was calmer than before. Mr. Karcz did not think
he was going to hurt himself if left alone, so he said to Mr. Bruzzese, “Let’s
go. Leave him alone.” He and Mr. Bruzzese then exited, leaving Mr. M. by
himself in the apartment. Mr. Karcz thought Mr. M. was safe, that he would wake
up in the morning with a hangover and likely not remember what had happened the
night before.
[15]      
Mr. Karcz recalled walking his bicycle alongside
Mr. Bruzzese in the direction of the Food Basics plaza. He was relieved to have
separated Mr. Bruzzese from Mr. M.  He did not feel personally threatened by
Mr. Bruzzese because Mr. Bruzzese did not appear to have an issue with him.
[16]      
After a short time, as they approached the Food
Basics plaza, Mr. Karcz heard Mr. M. running towards them, calling out to them,
“I want to be friends with you,” and screaming, “wait for me.”  It was shortly thereafter
that Mr. Karcz claims to have witnessed Mr. Bruzzese stab Mr. M. twice in the
abdomen in the Food Basics parking lot. His evidence about the alleged stabbing
is described later in this Judgment.
[17]      
Mr. M. has significant gaps in his memory of the
events of that day. His testimony is also summarized later in this Judgment.
[18]      
The implement used to stab Mr. M. was not recovered.
The Crown alleges that it was Mr. Bruzzese’s pocketknife.
[19]      
Mr. Karcz and Mr. M. are the Crown’s two key
witnesses. The Defence argues that their direct evidence of what transpired on
the day in question suffers from chronic and unsalvageable problems with
reliability and credibility, which give rise to reasonable doubt about Mr.
Bruzzese’s guilt.
[20]      
In addition to calling Mr. Karcz and Mr. M. as
witnesses at trial, the Crown also called two police officers, a forensic
expert, Mr. Brugma (who discovered Mr. M. in a pool of blood), and Rachel
Ragbir, a woman who was working at Crabby Joe’s on the morning in question. None
of these witnesses’ evidence was seriously challenged by the Defence. Mr.
Bruzzese elected not to testify and not to call any witnesses at trial.
[21]      
The Defence takes the position that the Crown
has not established beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Bruzzese committed the
stabbing. Among other things, Defence counsel argues that reasonable doubt
arises from the absence of any forensic evidence linking Mr. Bruzzese to the
stabbing, and from evidence that the stab wounds may have been self-inflicted.
[22]      
Before turning to the issues in the trial, I need
to explain why I have admitted evidence that Mr. Bruzzese engaged in discreditable
conduct other than that which forms the subject of the charge against him.
[23]      
The evidence in question came from Ms. Ragbir,
the bartender at Crabby Joe’s.  She testified about her interactions with and
observations of the three men in the bar from just after midnight until about
1:30 AM on September 3, 2018. Among other things, she described “inappropriate
comments” made to her by Mr. Bruzzese. She said his remarks were “gender-specific”
and related to her appearance. He told her how pretty she was, “but not in a
complimentary way.” He asked where she was from and where she lived. He asked
her to smile. He was aggressive and persistent.
[24]      
Ms. Ragbir said that, after last call, she was
putting chairs up on the tables, signalling that the bar was closing. The three
men were the only patrons left. She had stopped serving Mr. Bruzzese and Mr. M.
and had asked them to leave the premises.  Mr. Bruzzese approached her and told
her she had to smile and if she didn’t, he would make her smile. He cornered her
between the tables and the wall. She felt really uncomfortable and frantic. Mr.
Karcz stepped in and helped her by persuading Mr. Bruzzese to leave the bar. 
Mr. Karcz exited the bar with Mr. Bruzzese, then returned a short time later
and offered to walk her home. She declined his offer.
[25]      
Mr. Karcz’s testimony is consistent with Ms.
Ragbir’s account of this incident.  He testified that, as he was leaving the
bar to go home, a female bartender was cleaning a table near the exit. She was
asking Mr. Bruzzese and Mr. M. to leave, but they were refusing, stating that
they still had lots of beer to finish.  She conveyed to Mr. Karcz that she was
scared to be left alone with them.  He could not remember whether she spoke to
him or conveyed her fear through a facial expression, but he got the clear
impression that she was afraid, so he came back and said to Mr. Bruzzese and
Mr. M., “ok guys, the bar is closed, can we just go out” (or words to that
effect).  He and Mr. Bruzzese then went outside and had a smoke and some
conversation about cocaine. They re-entered the bar and he persuaded both Mr.
Bruzzese and Mr. M. to leave.
[26]      
Video surveillance evidence from inside Crabby
Joe’s corroborates both Ms. Ragbir’s and Mr. Karcz’s testimony regarding this
incident. There is no audio recording, but the video shows Ms. Ragbir stacking
chairs and cleaning tables near the exit, when Mr. Bruzzese confronts her, traps
her between the tables and the back wall of the bar, widens his stance, squats
and gestures something to her, and generally invades her personal space while
speaking to her. Mr. Karcz is seen approaching the exit door, but he turns back
toward Mr. Bruzzese, says something to him, places his hand on Mr. Bruzzese’s
back and gently guides him toward the door. The two men exit the
establishment.  Mr. M. is, at that point, still seated at the bar. According to
the time stamp on the video recording, this event occurred around 1:19 AM. The
video evidence shows that Mr. Bruzzese and Mr. Karcz eventually re-entered the
bar, then the three men left shortly thereafter.
[27]      
The Defence objected to this evidence on the
basis that it constitutes irrelevant bad character evidence that has no probative
value.  For the reasons set out below, I have overruled that objection.
[28]      
Evidence of an accused person’s prior
discreditable conduct is presumptively inadmissible because it has the
potential to be misused as propensity evidence, but this general exclusionary
rule is not absolute. Such evidence is properly admitted if it goes beyond
showing a mere general disposition of the accused and is more probative than
prejudicial in relation to a live issue at trial: R. v. Handy, 2002 SCC
56, at paras. 71, 94-97; R. v. Chizanga, 2024 ONCA 545, at paras. 19-23.
[29]      
The evidence of Mr. Bruzzese’s sexual harassment
of Ms. Ragbir does not make it more likely that he stabbed Mr. M. in the Food
Basics parking lot later that morning. There is no connection or “nexus”
between the prior discreditable conduct and the alleged conduct that forms the
basis of the charge against Mr. Bruzzese: Chizanga, at para. 26. The two
incidents did not occur in close proximity in time (they were separated by
about 90 minutes) and there are no distinctive features unifying the two
events. The evidence of what happened inside the bar has no probative value
with respect to the central issue of whether Mr. Bruzzese stabbed Mr. M.
[30]      
However, the evidence of Mr. Bruzzese’s conduct
toward the bartender has some probative value with respect to another live
issue at trial, namely whether Mr. Bruzzese made disparaging and threatening
remarks about Mr. M. after leaving the bar, as alleged by Mr. Karcz. The two
behaviours share similarities and common features. I disagree with Defence
counsel’s submission that Mr. Bruzzese’s conduct inside the bar amounted to
“awkward attempts at charm.” He sexually harassed the bartender and subjected
her to menacing behaviour.  In both that instance and during the walk to Mr.
M.’s apartment, Mr. Bruzzese is accused of being verbally aggressive, demeaning,
threatening and persistently belligerent toward a complete stranger, without
provocation. Moreover, the two behaviours are alleged to have occurred one
immediately after the other. There is therefore a nexus between Mr. Bruzzese’s
harassment of Ms. Ragbir and his bullying behaviour toward Mr. M. on the walk
to Mr. M.’s apartment.
[31]      
Mr. Bruzzese’s disrespectful and menacing treatment
of Ms. Ragbir does not prove conclusively that he made derogatory and
threatening comments to Mr. M.  The Crown concedes that it is not even evidence
from which a strong inference can be drawn that he made those comments. However,
Mr. Bruzzese’s interaction with Ms. Ragbir demonstrates that he was in a
combative and confrontational mood immediately prior to leaving the bar, which
makes it slightly more likely that he made the comments attributed to him by
Mr. Karcz during their ensuing walk toward Mr. M.’s apartment and while at Mr.
M.’s residence. This is sufficient to establish that the evidence of his prior
discreditable conduct has some probative value: Handy, at paras. 94-97; Chizanga,
at para. 24.  Whether or not he made the derogatory and threatening comments
about Mr. M. is relevant to a material issue at trial, namely his state of mind
at the time of the alleged offence.
[32]      
 The evidence of Mr. Bruzzese’s conduct toward
the bartender also has probative value in relation to the live issues of Mr.
Karcz’s reliability and credibility. The trustworthiness of Mr. Karcz’s
evidence is challenged on several fronts. Defence counsel questions the effects
of alcohol consumption on his perception and memory. Defence counsel also
suggests that Mr. Karcz displayed animus toward Mr. Bruzzese, painting Mr.
Bruzzese in an overly negative light and portraying himself in an exaggerated positive
light in recounting the three men’s interactions that morning.
[33]      
Ms. Ragbir’s testimony about Mr. Bruzzese’s
conduct toward her corroborates Mr. Karcz’s account of their interaction and
confirms Mr. Karcz’s role in diffusing the situation. Although the interaction
in the bar was a minor incident, Mr. Karcz’s ability to remember details of the
incident and the accuracy of his narrative regarding the incident are
significant factors that enhance the overall trustworthiness of his evidence,
despite his intoxication. Ms. Ragbir’s evidence about Mr. Bruzzese’s
discreditable conduct therefore has substantial probative value with respect to
the central issues of Mr. Karcz’s credibility and reliability.
[34]      
I have considered the strength of the evidence
of prior discreditable conduct in assessing its probative value:  Handy,
at paras. 133-135; Chizanga, at para. 25. There are no frailties in Ms.
Ragbir’s testimony about how Mr. Bruzzese treated her. She presented as an
independent and objective witness. She gave her evidence in a straightforward
manner. She demonstrated excellent recall of the day in question and was able
to describe the individuals involved and the events that unfolded with
significant detail, despite the passage of time. Her credibility was not
challenged. The Defence chose not to cross-examine her.  Finally, her testimony
about this specific interaction with Mr. Bruzzese is corroborated by
independent evidence from two different sources, namely Mr. Karcz and the video
surveillance footage. There is no evidence of intentional or inadvertent
collusion between Mr. Karcz and Ms. Ragbir. In summary, there are no identified
weaknesses that would reduce the probative value of her evidence.
[35]      
Having determined that Ms. Ragbir’s testimony
about Mr. Bruzzese’s discreditable conduct has sufficient probative value to
potentially warrant its admission, I must assess its prejudicial effect. This
assessment involves an analysis of the risk of two types of prejudice, namely, “moral
prejudice” and “reasoning prejudice,” either of which can lead to an unfocussed
trial or a wrongful conviction: Handy, at para. 139; Chizanga, at
para. 27.
[36]      
“Moral prejudice” arises when the trier of fact
infers guilt and convicts the accused not because the Crown has proven its case
beyond a reasonable doubt but merely because the accused has committed bad acts
in the past. The risk that such an impermissible inference will overwhelm the trier
of fact’s reasoning is particularly acute where the evidence of prior
discreditable conduct paints the accused as a person with a general disposition
to commit crimes: Handy, at para. 85; Chizanga, at para. 28. Those
circumstances are not present in this case.
[37]      
The risk of moral prejudice is also heightened
where the evidence of prior discreditable conduct is inflammatory or repugnant,
thereby potentially leading the trier of fact to convict the accused (consciously
or unconsciously) simply to punish them for their prior conduct: Chizanga,
at para. 28. That risk is low in the circumstances of this case. Mr. Bruzzese’s
sexual harassment of the bartender reflects poorly on him, but it is not the kind
of reprehensible behaviour that provokes moral outrage. Notably, it is not
evidence of conduct that is more egregious than the stabbing allegation that
forms the subject of the charge before the Court.
[38]      
“Reasoning prejudice” arises where the evidence
of prior discreditable conduct distracts the trier of fact from the real issues
in the case: Handy, at para. 100; Chizanga, at para. 29. This can
occur where the evidence is disputed or unclear, thereby causing the trier of
fact to focus improperly on the sufficiency of proof of the other discreditable
conduct, rather than on whether the Crown has proven the specific allegations
in the indictment beyond a reasonable doubt. Those circumstances do not apply
in this case; the Defence did not challenge the accuracy of Ms. Ragbir’s
account of the events in question.
[39]      
For the above reasons, the probative value of the
evidence of Mr. Bruzzese’s harassment of Ms. Ragbir is limited but is sufficient
to outweigh the minimal risk of prejudice that could be caused by its admission. 
The evidence is therefore admissible, but only for the restricted purposes
described above. To be clear, I have not relied on the evidence of other
discreditable conduct to draw any negative inferences about Mr. Bruzzese’s
character or disposition. I am mindful that the evidence of his treatment of the
bartender is not probative of the Crown’s allegation that he stabbed Mr. M.
[40]      
Before turning to the factual issues at trial, I
want to comment on the credibility and reliability of Mr. M.’s evidence.
[41]      
I am confident that Mr. M. was doing his best to
be truthful throughout his testimony. He answered questions in a
straightforward and frank manner. He volunteered sensitive and unflattering information
about himself. His candour bolstered his credibility.
[42]      
As the Crown submitted, Mr. M. testified with
“the opposite of guile”. Although demeanour has limited utility in assessing a
witness’s credibility, it is noteworthy that there was no artifice or craft in
Mr. M.’s testimonial presentation. He was objective and demonstrated no animus
toward Mr. Bruzzese.  Indeed, he exhibited no interest in having Mr. Bruzzese
convicted. He readily acknowledged that he does not remember who stabbed him.
He also admitted other gaps in his memory and did not attempt to fill them with
speculation. He carefully delineated between memories that are clear and
strong, and those that are vague and foggy.
[43]      
I conclude that Mr. M. is an honest witness who tried
sincerely to assist the court in its fact-finding mission.  I take no issue
with his credibility.
[44]      
I have considered whether the reliability of Mr.
M.’s evidence is diminished by the pronounced gaps in his memory, his state of
intoxication on the day in question, and the passage of time. Mr. M. has good
recall of what transpired in the bars, but his memories of what happened later
in his apartment are fragmented, and he remembers only “flashes” of what
transpired in the Food Basics parking lot. This is not surprising given his
increasing level of alcohol intoxication as the hours passed, and the trauma
that he ultimately experienced. I am therefore mindful of the need to proceed
cautiously in relying on his evidence.
[45]      
Mr. M. testified that, although his memories of
the day are incomplete, “the things I do remember, I remember.” I believe him. For
the reasons set out below, I find that his strong memories, while fragmented,
are reliable.
[46]      
Much of Mr. M.’s testimony is corroborated by
independent evidence. He described how he arrived at Shoeless Joe’s alone, ordered
a beer, and sat down beside a man near the taps at the bar. He identified Mr.
Bruzzese as that man and remembered that his first name was Anthony. He
remembered that they left together and went to another bar, but he could not
recall the name of the second bar. He remembered that they were both drinking
alcohol at the bars; he wasn’t sure, but he thought they were drinking beer. He
said they encountered a third man, but he could not recall whether they met him
at Shoeless Joe’s or at the second bar.
[47]      
Mr. M. accurately described, in general terms,
the appearance and clothing of the two men, who were previously unknown to him
and with whom he has had no contact in the past six years (except to see Mr.
Bruzzese during court appearances).  He recalled that Mr. Bruzzese was shorter
than him and that the third man was taller and had a more athletic build. He clearly
remembered the contrast between the third man’s white clothing and Mr.
Bruzzese’s dark clothing. He said Mr. Bruzzese’s t-shirt had “a band logo or
something” printed on the front. He remembered that the other man had a Polish
accent. He said he picked up on the accent right away because he has a Polish
family background. He thought it was “kind of remarkable to meet a Polish
person in a bar late at night.”  All the above evidence is corroborated by video
surveillance footage and by the independent testimony of other witnesses,
including Mr. Karcz, who began his testimony with the aid of a Polish-English
interpreter, but later requested and was granted permission to testify in
English.
[48]      
Mr. M. could not remember what he and Mr.
Bruzzese talked about in the bars, but he was able to recount some details of
their interactions.  For example, he remembered Mr. Bruzzese buying him a drink
in exchange for him letting Mr. Bruzzese use his cell phone to contact someone.
This is corroborated by Mr. Bruzzese’s stipulation, in an agreed statement of
fact, that he used Mr. M.’s cellphone to order cocaine.  Mr. M. remembered Mr.
Bruzzese showing him a white-handled pocketknife under the wood top of the bar.
This evidence is partially corroborated by Mr. Karcz’s testimony that Mr.
Bruzzese showed off a similar knife while the three men were at Mr. M.’s
apartment.
[49]      
Mr. M. has no memory of what transpired in his
apartment, other than telling his two acquaintances to keep quiet, doing
cocaine supplied by Mr. Bruzzese, and looking in the mirror while feeling a
wave of sadness about the loss of his girlfriend and best friend. These
fragments of his memory are corroborated by Mr. Karcz’s testimony that Mr. M.
told them to be quiet, that Mr. M. consumed cocaine in the apartment, and that
“something broke in his [Mr. M.’s] head” and he became despondent. Mr. M.’s
testimony about cocaine consumption is also corroborated by photographic
evidence of plastic packaging found inside his residence. The packaging is consistent
with drug packaging, and it was discovered on a computer desk, where Mr. M.
described the drugs being located.
[50]      
The corroborative evidence fortifies my confidence
that, although Mr. M.’s memory is partially blacked out, his testimony about
the things he does remember is reliable. There are no significant internal
contradictions in his testimony. As will be discussed below, to the extent that
he made prior statements that are inconsistent with his testimony, those
inconsistencies are satisfactorily explained. Furthermore, as discussed below,
any apparent inconsistencies between his testimony and other extrinsic evidence
are reconcilable.
[51]      
For all these reasons, I am satisfied that Mr.
M. is not only an honest witness, but also a reliable narrator.
[52]      
Some of the issues at trial were more
contentious than others. One of the less controversial issues is whether Mr.
Bruzzese was present in the Food Basics parking lot with Mr. M. in the early
morning hours of September 3, 2018. This fact was not seriously disputed by the
Defence, but nor was it explicitly conceded, so I will explain why I believe
that Mr. Bruzzese was present and therefore had an opportunity to commit the
alleged stabbing.
[53]      
Mr. Karcz, Mr. M. and Ms. Ragbir all identified Mr.
Bruzzese in court as the man who was seated beside Mr. M. at the bar in Crabby
Joe’s in the early morning hours of September 3, 2018. I need not concern
myself with the frailties of eye-witness identification evidence because the Defence
stipulated that, in the video recordings marked as Exhibits at trial, Mr.
Bruzzese is the man sitting directly beside Mr. M. at Shoeless Joe’s bar on
September 2, 2018 and at Crabby Joe’s bar in the early morning hours of
September 3, 2018.
[54]      
The Defence did not expressly concede that Mr.
Bruzzese is one of two individuals later captured on outdoor surveillance video
footage from various commercial establishments in the vicinity of the Food
Basics plaza between 2:50 AM and 2:55 AM. Neither person’s facial features are
visible on those videos. For the reasons that follow, I have concluded that the
two people depicted on the outdoor videos are Mr. Bruzzese and Mr. Karcz.
[55]      
First, there is overwhelming evidence that
places Mr. Bruzzese and Mr. Karcz in the vicinity of the surveillance cameras
at the relevant time, which was approaching 3:00 AM:
[56]      
Second, Mr. Karcz identified himself and Mr.
Bruzzese as the two men who are seen on the outdoor video surveillance
recordings. I find his evidence on this point to be both credible and reliable
for the following reasons:
[57]      
One of the outdoor videos is recorded from the
vantage point of a Scotia Bank drive-through ATM located across from the Food
Basics store. At 2:51 AM, the video shows two men walk across the front of the
store’s entrance, just to the right of where Mr. M. was later discovered lying
on the ground.  One of the men is wearing a white shirt and walking a bicycle.
The other man is shorter and is dressed in black. The two men walk off screen
in the direction of Firehouse Subs.
[58]      
The totality of the outdoor surveillance videos
and Mr. Karcz’s testimony provide overwhelming proof, beyond a reasonable
doubt, that Mr. Bruzzese and Mr. Karcz were both leaving the parking lot where
Mr. M. was found, 40 minutes later, lying on the ground in a pool of blood. 
From this evidence, I infer that Mr. Bruzzese had an opportunity to commit the
alleged stabbing.
[59]      
The Crown case rests largely on Mr. Karcz’s account
of what happened at the Food Basics plaza.  The following is a summary of his
eye-witness testimony.
[60]      
When he and Mr. Bruzzese heard Mr. M. running from
behind and calling out to them, Mr. Bruzzese said, “Get him back or I am going
to kill him.” Mr. Karcz then put his bike on its stand and walked back toward
Mr. M.  He warned Mr. M., “You got to go back because this guy is going to kill
you.”  Mr. M. did not want to leave and was saying, “I want to be your friend.”
Mr. Karcz approached him, yelling and pointing for Mr. M. to go home. Mr. M.
was not listening. He was resisting and he pushed Mr. Karcz away.
[61]      
Mr. Bruzzese approached them, handed Mr. Karcz his
knife and said, “Just stab him. It’s very easy. Nobody will know about it.” Mr.
M. then knelt down with his hands cupped in a pleading gesture and said, “guys,
I want to be your friend.” Mr. Karcz was holding the knife in his hand. Mr.
Bruzzese was trying to convince him to stab Mr. M., saying, “It’s very easy,
just slide the knife.” Mr. Karcz said, “No, I’m not going to do that” and walked
away. He headed toward his bike. Mr. Bruzzese followed him saying, “Give me
that fucking knife.”
[62]      
Mr. Karcz stopped and folded his arms with the
knife in his right hand under his left arm. The knife was closed the entire
time.  He never opened the blade. Mr. Bruzzese confronted him and yelled at him
to give up the knife. Mr. Bruzzese grabbed the knife from his hand and headed
back toward Mr. M.
[63]      
Mr. Bruzzese did not run toward Mr. M., but
rather walked at a normal pace. By then, Mr. M. was standing up on his feet. Mr.
Karcz turned away and resumed walking toward his bike. He then turned to look
back and he saw Mr. Bruzzese make two thrusting motions toward Mr. M.’s stomach
with a closed fist. After the first motion, Mr. M. took a short step back and
buckled at the knees.  Mr. M. said something like, “don’t play with me,” or
“are you playing with me?” His voice sounded strange, kind of surprised, shaky,
and afraid, as though something was wrong. Mr. M. was already falling down when
Mr. Bruzzese made the second thrusting motion. Mr. M. then fell to the ground
and was silent.
[64]      
Mr. Karcz estimated that he was standing about
20 metres away. He could not believe what he had seen. He turned back to his
bike, raised both palms to his temples and said to himself, “This is not
happening.”  He had not seen the blade of the knife in Mr. Bruzzese’s hand. He
saw only a fist, so he was hoping that Mr. Bruzzese did not open the knife. He
did not want to believe that he had just witnessed a stabbing.
[65]      
Mr. Karcz’s back was to Mr. Bruzzese and Mr. M. 
He heard Mr. Bruzzese tell him not to look, but he turned around and had another
quick look. He did not see anyone other than Mr. Bruzzese approaching him. He
did not see Mr. M. lying on the ground, so he thought that maybe Mr. M. had
escaped and run away. It was dark outside and there was a curb with grass in
the parking lot that may have obstructed his view of Mr. M.
[66]      
Mr. Karcz took his bicycle off its stand and started
walking away with it.  Mr. Bruzzese followed and caught up to him.  Mr. Karcz
asked Mr. Bruzzese, “Did you do it?” and Mr. Bruzzese responded, “yes, twice.”  Mr.
Karcz was still hoping that Mr. Bruzzese had just put on a show and didn’t
really stab Mr. M.
[67]      
Mr. Karcz did not see the knife in Mr.
Bruzzese’s hand when Mr. Bruzzese caught up to him.  He did not see what Mr.
Bruzzese had done with the knife.  He did not look back again and did not ever see
the knife again.
[68]      
The two men walked together for a few minutes,
then went in different directions.  Mr. Bruzzese told him that they might never
see each other again, that nobody can know about what happened, and that he
(Mr. Karcz) must not tell anyone what happened. Mr. Karcz interpreted these
comments as a threat. He shook hands with Mr. Bruzzese as they parted.  Mr.
Bruzzese said, “Welcome to Canada.”
[69]      
The events of the morning in question occurred
six years prior to the trial. The passage of that much time can adversely impact
a witness’s ability to recall facts with precision, but Mr. Karcz testified
that it would be hard for him to forget what happened that day because of “all the
aftermath going on since then.” He explained that he has been embroiled in
legal proceedings for the past six years. He gave a statement to the police about
the alleged stabbing on September 6, 2018. He testified at the preliminary
inquiry on July 7, 2020, then again before a judge and jury at a trial in October
2021. Finally, he testified before me in September 2024, in a second trial that
was ordered by the Court of Appeal.
[70]      
The events in question are obviously memorable
for several reasons. I accept that the experience of retelling the events
repeatedly in court proceedings could help to solidify and reinforce Mr.
Karcz’s memories, despite the passage of time.
[71]      
The consumption of mind-altering substances can
negatively impact the reliability of a witness’s evidence. It is a notorious
fact of which I can take judicial notice that, depending on several factors, different
people react differently to the ingestion of drugs and alcohol, but both
perception and memory can be adversely affected.
[72]      
Mr. Karcz consumed a significant amount of
alcohol in the hours leading up to the alleged stabbing. Video surveillance
shows that he arrived at Crabby Joe’s around 12:21 AM.  He testified that he had
not consumed any alcohol earlier that day.  He remembered this because he spent
the day with his then girlfriend, who did not want him to drink.  He said he ordered
and ate some flatbread at the bar. He thinks he drank two pints of beer and about
four shots of something stronger, likely Jack Daniels. He cannot be certain
because he was not counting his drinks. Video surveillance shows, and he confirmed,
that he took a swig of Mr. Bruzzese’s unfinished pitcher of beer just before leaving
the bar at 1:31 AM.
[73]      
Despite his considerable alcohol consumption,
Mr. Karcz testified that he was not drunk when he left Crabby Joe’s. Ms. Ragbir
said she continued to serve him because he did not appear intoxicated to her.
His movements as shown on the video surveillance footage from inside the bar do
not suggest that he was overly impaired.
[74]      
Mr. Karcz does not recall drinking additional alcohol
at Mr. M.’s apartment, but he testified that he did a line of coke there. As
will be discussed later in this Judgment, I have concluded that it is unlikely
the substance he ingested was in fact cocaine, but it may have been another
narcotic or synthetic drug.
[75]      
I have assessed the accuracy of all the above evidence
and have concluded that Mr. Karcz’s reliability is not diminished by either the
passage of time or the consumption of drugs and alcohol. I arrive at this
conclusion because many details in his testimony are corroborated by independent
evidence.
[76]      
For example, Mr. Karcz remembered that he rode
his bicycle to Crabby Joe’s on the morning of September 2, 2018.  He recalled
where he sat inside the bar and where Mr. Bruzzese and Mr. M. were sitting in
relation to him. He remembered their first names, and that Mr. Bruzzese was
Italian. He described, in general terms, what Mr. Bruzzese was wearing,
including his baseball cap. He remembered that he ordered flatbread to eat and was
texting and scrolling on social media on his cell phone while sitting at the
bar. He described the interaction between Mr. Bruzzese and Ms. Ragbir as she
was closing up the bar, and his interjection in that situation (as discussed
above). His evidence on all these topics was corroborated by video surveillance
footage and by elements of the testimonies of Mr. M. and Ms. Ragbir.
[77]      
Mr. Karcz testified that, when he stepped
outside with Mr. Bruzzese for a smoke, Mr. Bruzzese was waiting for someone to
bring something to him.  He recalled that Mr. Bruzzese asked him if he liked
coke. He had the impression that Mr. Bruzzese was trying to buy cocaine. His
evidence on this issue is consistent with Ms. Ragbir’s unchallenged testimony
that she stopped serving Mr. Bruzzese and asked him to leave the premises because
he told her that he was on the phone with his drug dealer trying to purchase
drugs. It is also consistent with Mr. M.’s recollection that Mr. Bruzzese borrowed
his phone to message someone, and with Mr. Bruzzese’s own admission (in an
agreed statement of facts) that he accessed his Facebook Messenger account on
Mr. M.’s cell phone to order cocaine for the parties to consume later.
[78]      
Mr. Karcz remembered details about Mr. M.’s
apartment that are corroborated by photographs taken during a subsequent police
search of the residence. Elements of his account of what transpired inside the
apartment are also corroborated by photographic evidence and by Mr. M.’s independent
testimony.
[79]      
For example, Mr. Karcz recalled that, when the
three men arrived at Mr. M.’s basement apartment, Mr. M. immediately asked them
to be quiet because there was a family with small children living upstairs. 
Mr. M. similarly testified that he remembered telling Mr. Bruzzese and Mr.
Karcz, when they arrived at his apartment, that they had to be quiet because
the family upstairs had little kids. Mr. M. recalled that it was Labour Day
weekend, and the children were starting school the next day.
[80]      
I should note that there is no evidence of intentional
collusion or inadvertent tainting of these two witnesses’ testimonies.  Mr. Karcz
and Mr. M. had never met before the morning in question and did not ever meet
again or communicate with each other afterward, including during the court
proceedings. Witness exclusion orders prevented them from hearing each other’s
testimony and there is no suggestion that they learned of each other’s evidence
through different means, including media reports.
[81]      
Mr. M. does not remember the show of knives in
his apartment, but Mr. Karcz’s evidence on that topic is corroborated by a
photograph of a dagger found in Mr. M.’s bedroom. The dagger is sheathed and matches
the description of the “Samurai sword” that Mr. Karcz said he saw Mr. M. show
Mr. Bruzzese in response to Mr. Bruzzese’s display of a knife.  Mr. M.
confirmed that the dagger belongs to him. Further corroborating evidence was
found when police searched Mr. Bruzzese’s apartment on September 7, 2018, and photographed
a collection of two dozen pocketknives. This circumstantial evidence makes it
more likely that Mr. Bruzzese displayed a knife in Mr. M.’s apartment, as described
by Mr. Karcz.
[82]      
There are notable similarities between Mr.
Karcz’s testimony about the knife that Mr. Bruzzese displayed in Mr. M.’s
apartment and the knife that Mr. M. said Mr. Bruzzese showed him in the bar.  Mr.
M. remembered that it had a white or pearl coloured handle. He did not see the
blade, which was concealed within the handle. He thought it was a switchblade
because it had some sort of button mechanism.  He estimated that the knife might
be 5 or 6 inches long when closed, and maybe 8 inches long if the blade was
opened. Mr. Karcz described the knife as having a “spring opening” and an ivory
or bone coloured handle.  He estimated that it was about 4 inches long when
closed, twice as long when opened.
[83]      
All the above evidence is corroborative of Mr.
Karcz’s testimony that Mr. Bruzzese was carrying a small pocketknife with a
quick-open mechanism on the morning of September 3, 2018.  This fact
establishes that Mr. Bruzzese had not only an opportunity but also the means to
stab Mr. M. in the parking lot of Food Basics.
[84]      
Mr. Karcz’s account of Mr. M.’s expressed
suicidal ideation while in the apartment is also corroborated by independent
evidence. Mr. M. does not remember holding a kitchen knife to his chest or
threatening to kill himself, but he did testify about how despondent he was
feeling that day. He remembered looking at himself in the mirror in his
apartment, as he had done earlier in the washrooms at his parents’ house and at
the bars. He said he cried and reflected on how sad he was. He testified, “the
experience of losing my girlfriend and my best friend at the same time was
overwhelming, as well as I have bipolar disorder and am generally a pretty
anxious person, so it was all coming to a head, I guess.” This evidence is
consistent with Mr. Karcz’s remark that “something broke in his [Mr. M.’s]
head” just before he threatened to kill himself.
[85]      
Mr. Karcz testified that he believes Mr. M. cut
his hand when he took the kitchen knife away from Mr. M., because there was a
spot of blood on his t-shirt.  Forensic DNA evidence confirmed that the blood
belonged to Mr. M.  Mr. Karcz surmised that the blood transferred from Mr. M.’s
hand to his t-shirt when Mr. M. pushed him away in the Food Basics parking
lot.  This theory is consistent with the location of the blood stain on the
edge of Mr. Karcz’s right sleeve, and it is also supported by other independent
evidence.  Specifically, a small amount of Mr. M.’s blood was found on the
frame of the patio door in his apartment, which suggests that he was bleeding
before he left the apartment.  Furthermore, when Mr. M.’s injuries were
photographed by police at the hospital in the afternoon of September 3, 2023,
he had a small laceration on the inside of his left thumb.
[86]      
Furthermore, when the police searched Mr. M.’s
apartment, they photographed a large knife on a shelf, with the blade hidden
between some books and the handle sticking out.  Mr. M. identified the knife as
one of his kitchen knives. He could not explain how it got there.  Mr. Karcz’s
account of how he disarmed Mr. M. and stored the knife between books on a shelf
matches the unusual placement of the knife found by the police. Moreover, Mr.
Karcz’s description of the knife matches the knife in the photograph, including
the black colour and red stripe on the handle.
[87]      
From all the above evidence, I conclude that Mr.
Karcz has a reliable and detailed recollection of the events of the day in
question. This is not to suggest that I accept his evidence wholesale, but I am
not concerned about his perception being skewed by the effects of drugs and
alcohol, or his memory being eroded either by those effects or by the passage
of time.
[88]      
Reliability and credibility are two different concepts.
A witness with a reliable memory can be dishonest and therefore not credible,
just as an honest witness can be mistaken and therefore not reliable. The Defence
argues that deficiencies in Mr. Karcz’s credibility give rise to reasonable
doubt about the truth of his account of what transpired in the Food Basics
parking lot.
[89]      
One of the contested elements of Mr. Karcz’s
testimony is his account of how Mr. Bruzzese became enraged because Mr. M.
consumed all his cocaine, instead of just doing the one line of coke that was
prepared for him. The Defence argues that Mr. Karcz fabricated that story to
create a false impression that Mr. Bruzzese had a motive to stab Mr. M.  The Defence
submits that the court should reject Mr. Karcz’s evidence on this topic and should
treat it as proof that he cannot be trusted generally.
[90]      
The Defence made three points to advance this
argument:  (1) the credibility of Mr. Karcz’s statement that he consumed
cocaine in Mr. M.’s apartment is doubtful because he made a prior inconsistent
statement to the police on the subject; (2) Mr. M.’s evidence about consuming
cocaine should not be treated as corroborative of Mr. Karcz’s evidence because
Mr. M. made a prior inconsistent statement on the topic at the first trial; and
(3) a toxicology screen performed on Mr. M.’s urine at the hospital was
negative for cocaine, so he could not have consumed any coke, let alone the
bulk of Mr. Bruzzese’s coke, as alleged by Mr. Karcz. I will address each of
these points in turn.
[91]      
First, Mr. Karcz initially told the police he
did not consume any cocaine on the day in question. The Defence argues that
this statement contradicts the narrative he gave at trial about how he and Mr.
Bruzzese each did a line of coke before Mr. M. consumed the remainder. The
Defence argues that his testimony at trial should be rejected. Alternatively,
if the court finds that Mr. Karcz did do a line of coke at Mr. M.’s apartment,
then the Defence submits that Mr. Karcz lied to the police, which undermines
his trustworthiness generally.
[92]      
At the time of his police interview, Mr. Karcz was
on probation and was under a court-ordered condition not to consume any drugs.
The officer was aware of that fact and mentioned it at the point at which Mr.
Karcz reported that Mr. Bruzzese asked him if he liked cocaine. This prompted
Mr. Karcz to tell the officer that he was only drinking alcohol while on
probation (implying that he was not doing any drugs) because he did not want to
get in any trouble. The officer then reassured him that, if he disclosed that
he used cocaine on the day in question, the police would not notify his
probation officer and would not charge him, because that was not what they were
investigating.  Later in the interview, after receiving that reassurance, Mr.
Karcz admitted to doing a line of coke at Mr. M.’s apartment.
[93]      
Mr. Karcz’s initial lie to the police about his
own drug consumption is troubling. It constitutes a blemish on his credibility,
but it was not motivated by an intent to mislead the police in their investigation.
The lie is explained by his initial concern that, if he admitted to doing coke,
he could be arrested for a breach of his probation. In the circumstances, the
inconsistency in his statements about his own drug use does not cause me to
question the veracity of his testimony about the three men doing cocaine in Mr.
M.’s apartment. There is an abundance of circumstantial evidence that corroborates
his testimony on that topic, including Mr. Bruzzese’s own admission that, while
at the bar, he contacted someone to purchase cocaine for the men to consume
later. Mr. Karcz’s testimony about the three men’s cocaine use is also
corroborated by the presence of plastic packaging on a desk in Mr. M.’s
bedroom, which is where both Mr. Karcz and Mr. M. said the lines of coke were
prepared.
[94]      
The Defence submits that Mr. M.’s testimony about
using cocaine that morning should be rejected because he gave a prior
inconsistent statement while testifying at Mr. Bruzzese’s first trial. To be
fair to Mr. M., he did not directly contradict himself on the issue of whether
he consumed cocaine on the day in question. At the first trial, he said he did
not remember doing cocaine, which is not the same thing as denying that he did
cocaine. Still, his testimony at the first trial is inconsistent with his
statement during the trial before me to the effect that he distinctly remembers
doing cocaine.
[95]      
Mr. M. testified that he ingested the cocaine to
escape his life because of the emotional pain he was experiencing. He said he
remembered the sensation it gave him, and that he recognized the sensation from
previously doing cocaine. He readily acknowledged that, at the first trial, he
said he had no memory of doing cocaine. He explained that his memories had all
been “confused together in a sort of whirlwind of emotion and alcohol” and that
it wasn’t until a few weeks ago, while writing an email to his ex-girlfriend,
that he “got flashes of new memories” from that night in 2018.  He said that
taking his mind back to the sadness around their breakup enabled him to remember
doing cocaine to mask his pain.
[96]      
I find this explanation to be reasonable and
believable. Common sense dictates that memories often fade with the passage of
time, but logic and human experience also dictate that time can sometimes bring
clarity to a memory of a stressful or traumatic event, with the benefit of
emotional distance and calm reflection. A memory that is “recovered” after some
time will naturally give rise to questions about its reliability, but in this
case, Mr. M.’s testimony about ingesting cocaine is not tainted by collusion
and is corroborated by significant independent evidence. The corroborating
evidence includes: Ms. Ragbir’s unchallenged testimony that Mr. Bruzzese was
trying to buy drugs while at Crabby Joe’s; Mr. Bruzzese’s admission that, while
at the bar, he ordered coke for the men to consume later; Mr. Karcz’s testimony
that Mr. Bruzzese asked him if he liked coke while having a smoke outside the
bar; and Mr. Karcz’s testimony that, at Mr. M.’s apartment, all three men
consumed cocaine.
[97]      
Furthermore, the reliability of Mr. M.’s recently
recovered memory of doing cocaine is reinforced by the detail he provided
regarding the small computer desk on which the cocaine was prepared. That detail
is corroborated by the plastic packaging located on the computer desk in his
apartment, and by Mr. Karcz’s testimony that Mr. Bruzzese prepared the lines of
coke on a desk in Mr. M.’s bedroom.
[98]      
In short, Mr. M.’s and Mr. Karcz’s independent
evidence about the cocaine consumption is mutually corroborative. However, as
the Defence points out, their testimony is contradicted by the fact that Mr.
M.’s urine tested negative for cocaine when a toxicology screen was performed
at the hospital on September 3, 2018.  This is an agreed fact, which I must and
do accept.
[99]      
Given the extrinsic circumstantial evidence that
corroborates Mr. Karcz’s and Mr. M.’s testimony about the cocaine consumption
in the apartment, I do not believe that either of them lied about this topic or
misremembered and confused the facts.  Rather, it is highly likely that they ingested
a powder that they reasonably believed to be cocaine, since Mr. Bruzzese had
earlier purchased what he thought was cocaine and had offered it to them.
[100]    Mr. Karcz was asked how he knows that the drug supplied to him by
Mr. Bruzzese was actually cocaine.  He responded, “That’s a good question.  I
believe it was, but I cannot be 100% sure.”  He stated that he usually does not
do drugs, so he would not necessarily be able to tell if the powder he snorted
was coke or a different substance.
[101]    Mr. M., in contrast, was certain that what he ingested was cocaine
because he recognized the sensation it gave him, but he could be mistaken. I do
not question his honesty or the vividness of his memory, but his deduction that
the substance was cocaine overlooks the possibility that a similar high could
be produced by the ingestion of other drugs. The source of the substance he
ingested is unknown, apart from the fact that Mr. Bruzzese apparently purchased
it from someone else believing it to be cocaine. Mr. Bruzzese could have been
duped by a drug dealer. The substance may have been a different drug.  In
short, the fact that Mr. M. did not have cocaine in his system does not
disprove the truth of his and Mr. Karcz’s testimony about consuming what they
sincerely believe to be coke that day.
[102]    For all the above reasons, I trust Mr. Karcz’s evidence about what
transpired in the apartment after Mr. Bruzzese laid out three lines of a
powdered substance on Mr. M.’s computer desk.  The fact that the packaging
later found on the desk by police was empty corroborates Mr. Karcz’s evidence
that the entire quantity produced by Mr. Bruzzese was consumed.
[103]    There is no corroboration of Mr. Karcz’s specific testimony that Mr.
M. consumed more than his share of the cocaine, or that his over-consumption
angered Mr. Bruzzese. I accept that uncorroborated evidence because I find Mr.
Karcz to be, overall, a trustworthy witness.  I am not suggesting that the
Crown has proven that Mr. Bruzzese had a motive to stab Mr. M., but I believe
Mr. Karcz’s account of what happened with the substance that he believed to be
cocaine.  I have no reason to suspect that he concocted the story to incriminate
Mr. Bruzzese.
[104]    The Defence submits that Mr. Karcz demonstrated bias against Mr.
Bruzzese by testifying that he “was behaving all night like he just came out of
jail,” and making other similar statements. Taken in context, I do not
interpret Mr. Karcz’s descriptions of Mr. Bruzzese’s conduct as evidence of
bias or animus.
[105]    Mr. Karcz testified before me in English, which is not his native
tongue. He tried to express with limited vocabulary the bravado exhibited by Mr.
Bruzzese, so he said it reminded him of guys he knew in Poland who had served
time in jail and were not afraid of anyone.  He conveyed Mr. Bruzzese’s psychological
manipulation of Mr. M. by saying it reminded him of how former inmates in
Poland would try to play with people’s emotions and exercise power over others
by saying things like, “go hang yourself” and “you have no reason to live.” Similarly,
he conveyed how persistently Mr. Bruzzese tried to goad him into stabbing Mr.
M. by testifying that Mr. Bruzzese was in his face, trying “with prison
language” to force him to do it, saying how easy it would be to kill him.
[106]    Mr. Karcz’s comparisons of Mr. Bruzzese’s words and conduct to those
of ex-inmates in Poland were not indicia of bias against Mr. Bruzzese.  He
simply employed an analogy to express himself effectively in a second language.
[107]    The Defence submits that the credibility of Mr. Karcz’s testimony is
marred by prior inconsistent statements about the events in question. Material
inconsistencies in a witness’s statements can undermine their credibility and
reliability, but most of the inconsistencies in Mr. Karcz’s evidence are minor
and inconsequential.
[108]    For example, during his police interview, Mr. Karcz told the officer
he drank two beer and two shots at Crabby Joe’s, whereas in court he said he
probably drank two beer and four shots. On both occasions, he expressly stated
that he was uncertain about how much alcohol he had consumed. Although his
alcohol consumption is circumstantial evidence of his intoxication, which is a
relevant factor in assessing his reliability and credibility as a witness, the precise
number of drinks he consumed is a mundane fact that I would not reasonably
expect him to remember.  The number of drinks he consumed is a peripheral issue
that does not go to the core of the allegations to be adjudicated in this
trial.
[109]    The Defence argues that there are material inconsistencies in Mr.
Karcz’s statements about the threats allegedly uttered by Mr. Bruzzese and
directed at Mr. M.  during the walk to Mr. M.’s apartment. The Defence submits
that Mr. Karcz’s evidence on this issue has become markedly more incriminating
over time, revealing that Mr. Karcz has developed a bias against Mr. Bruzzese. The
Defence argues that there is more than a minor variation in Mr. Karcz’s
statements, and that the inconsistencies reflect a “seismic shift” in his
narrative, an indicator that he is lying, or is at least embellishing his
evidence.
[110]    I will review the various statements made by Mr. Karcz on this topic
before comparing and analyzing them:
[111]    Evidently, there are inconsistencies in Mr. Karcz’s statements about
the words spoken by Mr. Bruzzese during the walk to Mr. M.’s apartment. I agree
with Defence counsel that the threatening character of the words attributed to
Mr. Bruzzese intensified over time.  In summary, Mr. Karcz told the police that
Mr. Bruzzese did not say anything about wanting to hurt Mr. M. while they were
walking to the apartment.  He told the judge at the preliminary inquiry that
Mr. Bruzzese said words to the effect that Mr. M. is not worthy of life. During
the two trials, he testified that Mr. Bruzzese said it would be easy to kill
Mr. M.
[112]    It is notable, however, that the overall tenor of Mr. Karcz’s testimony
did not become more incriminating of Mr. Bruzzese over time.  From the very
outset, during his police interview, he told the officer that Mr. Bruzzese said
it would be easy to kill Mr. M.  He told the officer that menacing remark was
made while they were inside Mr. M.’s apartment.  Consequently, the real
inconsistency in Mr. Karcz’s statement is not with respect to the words
attributed to Mr. Bruzzese, but rather with respect to the timing of when those
words were spoken.
[113]    Mr. Karcz’s prior statements were put to him during his
cross-examination. He maintained that, to the best of his current recollection,
the words “easy to kill” or words to that effect were spoken by Mr. Bruzzese on
the walk to Mr. M.’s apartment. But he acknowledged that he could be wrong.  He
said, “Maybe it’s my mistake and he didn’t say any of those words on the way to
the house but for sure in the house he said, ‘look we could kill him’.”
[114]    I do not agree that there has been a seismic shift in Mr. Karcz’s
narrative. The inconsistencies in his evidence on this issue are not
significant and do not reveal bias or suggest embellishment.  At most, they reflect
some confusion about the sequence of events, likely due to the passage of time,
but they do not detract from the overall trustworthiness of Mr. Karcz’s
testimony.
[115]    Finally, The Defence argues that Mr. Karcz told his girlfriend at
the time that he was not present when the stabbing occurred, which directly
contradicts his testimony at trial, and casts doubt on the veracity of his
entire narrative. Defence counsel further argues that Mr. Karcz’s lie to his girlfriend
amounts to a false alibi, which provides a basis to draw an inference of
consciousness of guilt, and points to Mr. Karcz as the potential stabber. 
Defence counsel concedes that there is not sufficient evidence to prove that
Mr. Karcz committed the stabbing but argues that Mr. Karcz’s fabrication of a
false alibi is sufficient to raise reasonable doubt about whether he was the
stabber.
[116]    During cross-examination, Defence counsel reminded Mr. Karcz about the
messages he exchanged with his then girlfriend in the days following September
3, 2018. Mr. Karcz remembered and confirmed that his former girlfriend accused
him of “stabbing that boy”.  He said he replied to her text and denied the
accusation. Defence counsel suggested that, in his reply text to his
girlfriend, Mr. Karcz wrote that he was not present when it happened, and that
he could only guess what happened five minutes after he left. Mr. Karcz denied
saying anything like that. He speculated that the English translation of his
Polish text message might be incorrect.
[117]    The text message in question was not adduced as evidence at trial, and
Mr. Karcz did not adopt the suggested content put to him in cross-examination, so
the content of the message has not been established. There is therefore no
evidence that Mr. Karcz gave his girlfriend a false alibi in order to distance
himself from the stabbing.
[118]    Mr. Karcz did, however, admit during his cross-examination that he
was not honest with his former girlfriend about his activities on the day in
question. He said he lied to her because she was “not right in the head” and
she disapproved of his drinking alcohol.
[119]    Even if Mr. Karcz conveyed to his then girlfriend that he was not
present during the stabbing (a fact that has not been established on the record
before me), that would not raise doubt in my mind about whether he was there.
The Scotia Bank video surveillance evidence proves that he was with Mr.
Bruzzese in front of the Food Basics grocery store at 2:51 AM. I accept Mr.
Karcz’s testimony that he witnessed the two thrusting motions by Mr. Bruzzese
just moments earlier because, as will be explained in greater detail below, there
is independent evidence corroborating his account of what happened in the
parking lot.
[120]    Whatever Mr. Karcz told his girlfriend was admittedly untrue, but I
do not infer from that fact that he invented a false alibi to deflect attention
from his own wrongdoing.  After learning from the media that investigators were
looking for him as a potential witness to the stabbing, he went to the police
station on his own initiative. He did not proffer an alibi to the police.
[121]    I note that Mr. Karcz also did not, in the days following the
incident, take steps to dispose of the t-shirt he was wearing that morning,
despite a conspicuous blood stain on the sleeve. Knowing that the police were looking
for him in the context of their investigation of a stabbing, he did nothing to
conceal or destroy that evidence. He did not engage in conduct suggestive of
consciousness of guilt.
[122]    Many people lie to their romantic partners for all kinds of reasons.
It does not mean they cannot be trusted to tell the truth during a police investigation
or while testifying under oath.  During Mr. Karcz’s cross-examination, Defence
counsel tried to get him to admit that he previously lied under oath by
pleading guilty to a charge of taking a motor vehicle without the owner’s
consent even though he did not, in fact, commit that offence.  Defence counsel
suggested that he did so because he wanted to help his boss make an insurance
claim after he drove and crashed his boss’s car while impaired.
[123]    Mr. Karcz steadfastly denied the suggestion that he was innocent of
the offence to which he plead guilty. He testified that his boss was out of
town in the United States, and he used his boss’s car without permission to
drive himself home.  Defence counsel put to him that he admitted the false
guilty plea while testifying before a jury at Mr. Bruzzese’s first trial. Mr.
Karcz did not agree that he made such an admission. Rather, he stated that Mr.
Bruzzese’s previous defence counsel “twisted everything” and made it “look like”
he pleaded guilty to an offence he did not commit.
[124]    The evidence does not establish that Mr. Karcz has a history of
perjury. He does have a criminal record, including two impaired driving
offences, in addition to the conviction for taking a motor vehicle without
consent. His offences do not include crimes of dishonesty or crimes that
suggest disrespect for the administration of justice. He is not a career
criminal. His alcohol-related driving offence convictions, and the fact that he
was dishonest with his former girlfriend, do not make him a person of
demonstrable moral lack.  He is not a person of such disrepute that extra
caution must be exercised before accepting his evidence without independent
corroboration: R. v. Vetrovec, 1982 CanLII 20 (SCC), [1982] 1 SCR 811.
[125]    The Defence argues that there are indicia of embellishment in Mr.
Karcz’s testimony at trial, discernable from omissions in his prior statements.
During cross-examination, Defence counsel put to Mr. Karcz that some of the comments
he attributed to Mr. Bruzzese during his examination-in-chief were not
mentioned by him during his police interview, or on the two prior occasions
when he testified in this proceeding.  Specifically, Defence counsel suggested
that Mr. Karcz had never previously asserted that: (i) Mr. Bruzzese said, “that
was brave” after he took the kitchen knife away from Mr. M., (ii) Mr. Bruzzese
told him, “don’t look back” after the alleged stabbing, or (iii) that Mr.
Bruzzese said, “welcome to Canada” as they were parting.
[126]    Mr. Karcz neither confirmed not denied these suggestions.  He said
he could not remember everything that was included or omitted from his police
statement and his prior testimony.  He noted that he previously gave his statements
in Polish, with an interpreter, so something may have been lost in translation.
He also said it’s possible that he now remembers more details than before
because, with time, he has become much calmer and less emotional about the
whole situation.
[127]    The purported omissions from Mr. Karcz’s prior statements have not
been established, so I cannot rely on them as inconsistencies in assessing his
credibility.  But even if they were established, they would amount to oversight
of minor details that would not detract from the overall trustworthiness of his
evidence. A person who recounts their recollection of the same event four times
over six years cannot reasonably be expected to do so without any variation in
the details, particularly on peripheral issues.
[128]    There is one significant omission from Mr. Karcz’s police statement
that is on a material issue, namely Mr. Bruzzese’s alleged confession to him. 
During his testimony before me, Mr. Karcz relayed that, after he witnessed the
two thrusting motions by Mr. Bruzzese and Mr. M. fell to the ground, he asked Mr.
Bruzzese “did you do it?” and Mr. Bruzzese responded, “yes, twice.”  According
to Mr. Karcz, Mr. Bruzzese had earlier threatened to kill Mr. M., had
encouraged Mr. Karcz to stab Mr. M., and had approached Mr. M. with a knife in
hand, so Mr. Karcz interpreted this exchange to be a confession by Mr. Bruzzese
that he stabbed Mr. M. twice.
[129]    Mr. Karcz did not mention this confessional exchange to the police
when he was asked what, if anything, Mr. Bruzzese said to him after Mr. M. fell
to the ground.  He simply told the officer that Mr. Bruzzese said they may
never see each other again, and no one can know about what happened.
[130]    This omission from Mr. Karcz’s police statement was put to him
during his cross-examination. He responded that he mentioned the confessional exchange
in his prior court testimony. While prior consistent statements cannot be used
to bolster the credibility of a witness’s evidence, in circumstances where the
witness is accused of a recent fabrication of inculpatory evidence, the
existence of prior consistent statements is admissible for the purpose of
rebutting the alleged recent fabrication: R. v. Stirling, 2008 SCC 10,
at paras. 5-7; R. v. D.K., 2020 ONCA 79, at para. 36.  I therefore take
note that Mr. Karcz did not report Mr. Bruzzese’s confession for the first time
at his second trial, six years after the events in question.
[131]    Still, the fact that the confessional exchange was not reported to
the police is a material inconsistency that casts doubt on the trustworthiness
of that evidence. The alleged confessional exchange is also inconsistent with
Mr. Karcz’s testimony that he still harboured hope that Mr. M. was unhurt after
Mr. Bruzzese admitted to stabbing him twice.  Had Mr. Bruzzese confessed, he
would have had no reason to maintain hope. For these reasons, I will not rely
on the evidence of the alleged confession.
[132]    The Crown correctly submits that I am entitled to accept some and
reject some of any witness’s testimony.  Given Mr. Karcz’s overall credibility
and reliability as a witness, I find that this one deficiency in his testimony,
albeit significant, does not warrant rejection of all his evidence.
[133]    The Defence argues that the video recording from the Scotia Bank ATM
surveillance camera directly contradicts Mr. Karcz’s testimony that Mr.
Bruzzese approached him twice in front of the Food Basics entrance, the first
time to retrieve the knife, and the second time after he stabbed Mr. M.  The
Defence argues that the video recording proves this story is false because it
shows that Mr. Bruzzese only approached Mr. Karcz once, and it does not show
Mr. Bruzzese taking a knife from Mr. Karcz.
[134]    The camera’s frame captures only part of the Food Basics parking lot
directly in front of the store’s entrance. The area where Mr. M. was found
lying on the ground is off screen several metres to the left. The video runs
for two hours, between 2:00 AM and 4:00 AM. There is no activity on screen apart
from the two men seen walking across the front of the store at 2:51 AM and a
car that is later driven across the lot at 3:34 AM.  I infer from the totality
of the evidence that the car was likely driven by Mr. Brugma.
[135]    On the video recording, Mr. Karcz enters the frame first, from the
left, at 2:51:12 AM.  He is walking his bicycle. Mr. Bruzzese enters the frame seconds
later, also from the left.  He is behind Mr. Karcz by a few paces. He quickly catches
up to Mr. Karcz and the two men walk side by side until they exit the screen on
the right at 2:51:51 AM.
[136]    This video evidence does not contradict Mr. Karcz’s testimony. He
said it depicts the moments after the stabbing occurred. He testified
that he had been walking his bicycle beside Mr. Bruzzese but stopped when he
heard Mr. M. calling out to them.  He then put his bike up on its stand in the
Food Basics parking lot and walked back toward Mr. M.  He later walked back toward
his bicycle with Mr. Bruzzese’s knife in hand. Mr. Bruzzese followed him and retrieved
the knife, then Mr. Karcz turned again and continued walking toward his bike.
It was only after he subsequently looked back and witnessed the two thrusting
motions that he took hold of his bicycle and started walking away with it.
[137]    At no time is a stationary bicycle shown anywhere on the Scotia Bank
video recording.  It could have been on its stand just beyond the left edge of
the camera’s frame, in which case Mr. Karcz’s first interaction with Mr.
Bruzzese (when Mr. Bruzzese retrieved the knife) would have happened off
screen. The moment where Mr. Karcz looked back and then placed his hands on his
forehead in disbelief would also have occurred off screen. The moment captured
on the video would be, as Mr. Karcz stated, when Mr. Bruzzese caught up to him
after the stabbing, while he was walking away with his bicycle.
[138]    Defence counsel argues that Mr. Karcz said his bicycle was on its
stand in front of the entrance to the Food Basics store when Mr. Bruzzese took
the knife back from him.  If that were true, the bike (at minimum) would appear
on the Scotia Bank video. Mr. Bruzzese’s retrieval of the knife would not
necessarily be captured on the video because Mr. Karcz testified that he was on
his way back to his bicycle when Mr. Bruzzese confronted him and retrieved the
knife.
[139]     Upon close review of Mr. Karcz’s testimony, I have concluded that
he did not say he stopped his bicycle directly in front of the entrance to the
grocery store.  During his cross-examination, Defence counsel asked him if he
stopped his bicycle at the entrance at the time he gave the knife back.  He
responded, “Yes, something like that.”  He confirmed that he lived in the area
and was familiar with the grocery store. He also confirmed that there was only
one entrance to the store, which is the entrance depicted on the Scotia Bank
video. Defence counsel then put to him, “Your best estimate is that your bike
was in front of the entrance when you gave the knife back?” He responded,
“Close by, yes.”
[140]    Mr. Karcz’s “estimate” that his bicycle was “close by” the entrance
is not contradicted by the Scotia Bank video, which does not depict the area
immediately to the left of the store’s entrance. The Scotia Bank video
therefore does not contradict Mr. Karcz’s testimony.  Rather, it is consistent
with his evidence that Mr. Bruzzese had to catch up to him after the alleged
stabbing took place a few metres away.
[141]    Defence counsel suggested to Mr. Karcz that, if Mr. Bruzzese had
taken the knife from him and headed toward Mr. M. after having expressed an
intention to kill Mr. M., then Mr. Karcz would have called 911 for assistance
from law enforcement. Mr. Karcz responded with a rhetorical question, “I’m in
front of a guy with a knife and I’m supposed to take out my phone and call
911?”  I accept his explanation that fear dictated his actions.  Some people in
those circumstances might call 911, others might flee, others might freeze. 
There is no typical way that people respond to stressful and dangerous
situations. His failure to call for help does not raise reasonable doubt about
the truth of his testimony.
[142]    Defence counsel also suggested to Mr. Karcz that he did not see what
he described in the parking lot, or did not know what had happened, because he
would have called 911 if he thought at the time that Mr. M. had been stabbed. 
Mr. Karcz responded that he knew what happened, he just did not know what to do
about it.  Mr. Bruzzese still had the knife.  Fear, shock and denial continued
to dictate his actions.  He said he did not see the blade of the knife, so he
was hoping that Mr. Bruzzese did not open it. When he looked back the last
time, he did not see Mr. M. on the ground, so he was hoping that Mr. M. was not
seriously injured and had run away.
[143]    I am satisfied with these explanations. Mr. Karcz’s failure to call
911 after witnessing the alleged stabbing does not raise reasonable doubt about
the truth of his testimony.
[144]    The Defence argues that Mr. Karcz’s narrative of the events is not
plausible because Mr. Karcz would not have walked away from the Food Basics
parking lot without a care in the world, fist bumped Mr. Bruzzese, and gone
home and done nothing for a couple of days, if he suspected that Mr. Bruzzese
had stabbed Mr. M. and knew that Mr. M. could be lying on the pavement
wounded.
[145]    Mr. Karcz and Mr. Bruzzese did not flee the Food Basics parking lot.
Video surveillance evidence shows them walking away casually, conversing with
each other for a few minutes, then shaking hands before parting. Mr. Karcz was
questioned about why he was so calm and friendly toward Mr. Bruzzese if he had
just witnessed the alleged stabbing.  He effectively described a state of shock
and denial.  He said he could not believe what was happening, and did not know what
to believe.  He was faintly hoping that Mr. Bruzzese had not opened the blade
of the knife before he thrust his hand into Mr. M.’s abdomen. He hoped that Mr.
M. was not seriously injured.
[146]    Mr. Karcz did not call 911 or contact the police immediately after
arriving home safe, or later that day. Defence counsel suggested that it was
because he had not witnessed anything that warranted contacting the police. Mr.
Karcz said he did not contact authorities because Mr. Bruzzese had threatened
him not to tell anyone what happened.  He conceded that he made a mistake by
not calling 911.
[147]    The next day, after Mr. Karcz’s girlfriend told him about news
reports of a stabbing in the area, and he learned that media were circulating
his image as a possible witness, he immediately went to the police station to
give a statement.
[148]    Based on the totality of the circumstances, Mr. Karcz’s actions in
the aftermath of the alleged stabbing do not render his account of what he
witnessed implausible.
[149]    For all the above reasons, I conclude that the only significant flaw
in Mr. Karcz’s credibility is with respect to the alleged confession by Mr.
Bruzzese.  I accept his other evidence as both reliable and credible, including
the evidence about what he witnessed in the Food Basics parking lot after Mr.
Bruzzese retrieved the knife from him. My confidence in the trustworthiness of
that evidence is reinforced by the testimony of Mr. M.
[150]    As noted previously, Mr. M. has only fragmented memories of the morning
in question.  He does not remember significant events, such as his threat to
commit suicide with a kitchen knife. He does not remember Mr. Bruzzese making
threats. He has no idea how he got to the Food Basics parking lot after doing
(what he believed to be) cocaine in his apartment with the other two men.  He
said he has only a vague memory of being in the parking lot. He acknowledged
that he might be remembering a different time that he was there because he
lived nearby and shopped at that grocery store.
[151]    Mr. M. testified that his last clear memory from inside his
apartment is of looking at himself in the mirror and feeling sad about his best
friend dying and the love of his life breaking up with him. He said he might
have a memory of ushering people out of his apartment because it was becoming
too noisy, but he was uncertain about that.
[152]    When the Crown asked Mr. M. to relay his next memory, he said: “Of
that night? I remember being in pain. And I remember thinking of [J.A.], my
lost love. And I remember falling to my knees and, uh, that’s sort of it. And
just confusion, and I heard the word “useless” or “worthless” spoken to me.” 
He testified that he does not know who spoke to him. He was asked if he
remembered the speaker’s accent. He said it was a Canadian English accent, like
people speak in southern Ontario.  Later during his testimony, Mr. M. added a
small detail, namely that he remembered clenching his abdomen as he fell to his
knees. He also clarified that when he said he remembers being in pain, he meant
emotional pain, not physical pain. His next recollection is of vague memories
of being in an ambulance and then being at the hospital.
[153]    Mr. M. was not challenged in cross-examination on his statement that
he heard the word “useless” or “worthless” spoken to him as he fell to his
knees. I have no reason to question the reliability or credibility of his
evidence on that point. The only reasonable inference that can be drawn from it
is that Mr. Bruzzese is the person who uttered those words as Mr. M. fell. Had
it been Mr. Karcz, Mr. M. would have noticed his Polish accent. Video
surveillance evidence confirms Mr. Karcz’s testimony that no one else was in
the vicinity.  Moreover, the word that Mr. M. remembers hearing spoken to him
at the moment when he fell to the ground is similar to the derogatory comments
that Mr. Karcz remembers Mr. Bruzzese making earlier.  Indeed, in the absence
of any opportunity for collusion between these two witnesses, the similarity is
striking.
[154]    Mr. M. did not identify Mr. Bruzzese as the person who stabbed him,
but he provided strong circumstantial evidence that Mr. Bruzzese was standing
near him and was insulting him as he clutched his abdomen and fell to the
ground.  This is compelling corroborative evidence that fortifies my confidence
in the truth of Mr. Karcz’s account of what he witnessed in the parking lot.
[155]    The ultimate question for me to decide is whether, based on the
totality of the evidence at trial, and the absence of evidence, the Crown has
established beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Bruzzese deliberately stabbed
Mr. M., and did so with an intent to kill him. The Defence takes the position
that Mr. M.’s suicidality raises reasonable doubt about whether his stab wounds
were self-inflicted.  The Defence further argues that the absence of any
forensic evidence linking Mr. Bruzzese to the stabbing raises reasonable doubt
about Mr. Bruzzese’s guilt.
[156]    The theory that Mr. M.’s wounds may have been self-inflicted is not
frivolous, given the evidence of Mr. M.’s bipolar condition, depressed mood,
state of intoxication, and expressed threat to kill himself with a kitchen
knife. Crown counsel argues that, given the severity of his wounds, it is far
fetched to suggest he could have stabbed himself twice. I am not prepared to
discount that possibility without expert evidence.  A person in a highly
intoxicated and despondent state of mind might well be able to stab themselves
twice.
[157]    During closing submissions, I queried whether this theory of
self-inflicted wounds is refuted by the fact that no knife was found on the
ground with Mr. M.  Defence counsel agreed that, if Mr. M. attempted to kill
himself with a knife in the parking lot, it is very unlikely that he would have
disposed of the knife after stabbing himself. However, Defence counsel
suggested that the knife could have fallen down a nearby sewer grate, or that
Mr. M. could have stabbed himself in a different location and left the knife
there, a place that was never identified or searched by the police.
[158]    The possibility that Mr. M. stabbed himself twice in another
location, other than his apartment, and then walked to the parking lot is
far-fetched. There is no evidence of his blood anywhere other than the smudge
on the frame of his patio door, and the large pool of blood that accumulated
beside him on the ground in the parking lot.  Given the severity of his
injuries and the blood loss that he sustained, I infer that he could not have
walked a significant distance, after stabbing himself, without leaving a trail
of blood. I am satisfied, beyond a reasonable doubt, that he sustained the
stabbing wounds in the Food Basics parking lot, at the location where Mr.
Brugma found him.
[159]    Mr. Brugma testified that when he drove by that morning, he noticed
an individual “laying over a drain” in the parking lot.  Photographs taken at
the scene show a drain grate within a few feet of a large blood stain.  There
appear to be spaces in the grate large enough to allow a small knife to pass
through.
[160]    The Defence has no onus to prove that Mr. M. stabbed himself and
dropped the knife down the sewer. The Crown will have failed to satisfy its
burden of proving Mr. Bruzzese’s guilt if I find that the possibility of
self-inflicted wounds raises reasonable doubt about whether Mr. Bruzzese
committed the stabbing. I must make that assessment based on the totality of
the evidence at trial.  For all the reasons detailed in this judgment, I find
Mr. Karcz’s evidence to be compelling, credible, and overwhelming. I believe
his testimony about what he observed in the Food Basics parking lot. What he witnessed
eliminates reasonable doubt about Mr. M.’s wounds being self-inflicted.
[161]    I am mindful that Mr. Karcz did not see the blade of the knife in
Mr. Bruzzese’s hand.  He was unsure, in the moment, whether Mr. Bruzzese had
opened the knife and stabbed Mr. M. or had simply punched him in the abdomen
with a closed fist.  When all the evidence is taken into consideration – the fact
that Mr. Bruzzese had threatened to kill Mr. M. and had tried to coax Mr. Karcz
to stab him, that Mr. Bruzzese insisted on retrieving his pocketknife from Mr.
Karcz, that he had the pocketknife in his hand as he approached Mr. M., that he
made two thrusting motions toward Mr. M.’s abdomen, causing Mr. M. to buckle at
the knees, clutch his abdomen and fall to the ground, and that Mr. M. sustained
two stab wounds (consistent with two thrusting motions) – the only reasonable
inference is that Mr. Bruzzese stabbed Mr. M.  When stacked against the weight
of this evidence, the theory of self-inflicted wounds does not raise reasonable
doubt about whether Mr. Bruzzese committed the stabbing.
[162]    The fact that Mr. Karcz did not see Mr. M. lying on the ground when
he turned back one last time to look in that direction does not raise
reasonable doubt.  Mr. Karcz only glanced quickly; it was dark and there was a
curb in the parking lot that could have obstructed his line of sight. Mr.
Bruzzese was walking toward him and also could have obstructed his line of
sight.
[163]    The police searched Mr. Bruzzese’s residence on September 7, 2018.
From a pile of laundry, they seized some items of clothing that Mr. Bruzzese
may have been wearing in the early morning hours of September 3, 2018, when the
stabbing is alleged to have been committed.  They took two pair of blue jeans, a
black t-shirt with a white logo printed on the chest, a camouflage-coloured
Blue Jays baseball cap with a blue brim, and boxer shorts.  From the
surveillance video evidence, it appears that Mr. Bruzzese was wearing denim
jeans, a black t-shirt with white logo, and a baseball cap with a blue brim when
he was at Shoeless Joe’s and at Crabby Joe’s.
[164]    The items of clothing were examined at the Centre for Forensic
Sciences. No blood was found on the boxer shorts or on either pair of jeans,
including inside the pockets and waist band of the jeans. Blood was found on
the outside right front sleeve of the black t-shirt.  A sample was taken, and
DNA testing confirmed that it contained Mr. Bruzzese’s own blood. The sample
also contained a different source of DNA, but there was an insufficient amount
to be able to determine whether it was from a single source or more than one
source, and whether it was from blood or from another bodily fluid.  It was
impossible to create a profile from the second sample to use for comparison
with Mr. M.’s DNA.
[165]    The Defence argues that the absence of Mr. M.’s blood on Mr.
Bruzzese’s clothing is compelling exculpatory evidence.  The Defence submits that,
if Mr. Bruzzese had thrust the blade of a pocketknife into Mr. M.’s abdomen
twice, there would have been blood splatter on his clothing.  In the absence of
expert evidence, I am not prepared to speculate about blood splatter. Such
conjecture does not raise reasonable doubt:  R. v. Kruk, 2024 SCC 7, at
para. 68.
[166]    However, even if there was no blood splatter, logic and human
experience dictate that there would blood on the blade of the knife: Kruc,
para. 71-79.  Defence counsel points to Mr. Karcz’s testimony that Mr. Bruzzese
probably put the knife back in his pocket after stabbing Mr. M. because it was
no longer in his hand when he approached Mr. Karcz. The Defence submits that the
absence of blood in or around the pockets of Mr. Bruzzese’s jeans therefore
raises reasonable doubt about his guilt.
[167]    It is well established that a reasonable doubt need not arise from
the evidence. It can derive from the absence of evidence, from what the Crown
has failed to prove:  R. v. Lifchus, 1997 CanLII 319 (SCC), [1997] 3 S.C.R. 320, at paras. 36,
39; R. v. Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 1000, at paras. 28, 36-37;
R. v. Darnley, 2020 ONCA 179, at para. 33. This principle applies to
cases in which there is an absence of forensic evidence connecting the accused
to the charged offence: R. v.  Tebo, 2003 CanLII 43106 (ON CA), 175 C.C.C. (3d) 116 at paras. 5-12;
R. v. Bero, 2000 CanLII 16956 (ON CA), 151 C.C.C. (3d) 545, at paras. 57-58, 61-64. However, the
absence of forensic evidence will vary in importance depending on the facts of
each case.  In some cases, it may assume a place of prominence, whereas in
other cases it will be of little significance: R. v. Stark, 2000 CanLII
3503 (ONCA), at paras. 29-31, leave to appeal to the S.C.C. ref’d [2000] S.C.C.A.
No. 326; R. v. Hassanzada, 2016 ONCA 284, at para. 71.
[168]    The significance of the absence of forensic evidence in this case is
diminished by two factors. First, it is unclear whether the denim jeans seized
from Mr. Bruzzese’s apartment are those that he was wearing on the day in
question. The parties submitted an agreed statement of fact that the seizure of
clothing “was based on information [the police] had received about what Mr.
Bruzzese might have been wearing on September 2-3, but they received no
specific information confirming that the items he in fact wore that night were
the items that they seized.” Mr. Bruzzese’s apartment was not searched until September
7, 2018; he could have disposed of blood-stained jeans prior to the search.
[169]    Second, there is no evidence of what Mr. Bruzzese did with the
knife. Mr. Karcz did not testify that he saw Mr. Bruzzese put it back in his
pocket; that was merely an assumption he made. Placing the knife back in his
pocket is not the only reasonable inference that can be drawn from the
evidence.  Mr. Bruzzese could have, for example, discarded it down the sewer
grate beside where Mr. M. was lying on the ground.  There is no evidence that
the sewer was searched by police.
[170]    I am not suggesting that the absence of forensic evidence is of no
significance in these circumstances, but it is not sufficiently important to
raise a reasonable doubt when stacked against the weight of the Crown’s direct
and circumstantial evidence that Mr. Bruzzese stabbed Mr. M.  The Crown has
proven that he intentionally stabbed Mr. M. to the legal standard of beyond a
reasonable doubt.
[171]    The Crown has also satisfied its burden of proving beyond a
reasonable doubt that Mr. Bruzzese meant to kill Mr. M. when he stabbed him. Mr.
Bruzzese’s words and actions, the nature and severity of the harm he inflicted,
and his disregard for Mr. M.’s life and wellbeing after the fact, are
compelling evidence of his intention to kill Mr. M.
[172]    In the hours leading up to the stabbing, Mr. Bruzzese stated, more
than once, that Mr. M. was unworthy of life, and that it would be easy to kill
him.  In the minutes prior to the stabbing, at the Food Basics plaza, he threatened
to kill Mr. M. if Mr. Karcz did not convince Mr. M. to go back home.  He then stabbed
Mr. M. with sufficient force to puncture his abdomen. Twice. Then he left Mr. M.
lying on the ground in empty parking lot where he was unlikely to be noticed by
anyone who could render or summon emergency medical assistance. The only
reasonable inference that can be drawn from the totality of the evidence is
that Mr. Bruzzese intended to kill Mr. M.
[173]    For all the above reasons, I find Mr. Bruzzese guilty of attempted
murder.