[1]         
The
plaintiffs claim damages in the amount of $3,139,931.30 arising out of the defendant’s
allegedly wrongful termination of a Consulting Agreement between the parties. 
The defendant submits that it rightfully terminated the Consulting Agreement
pursuant to a clause that allowed it to terminate in the event of wilful
conduct by the plaintiffs which had the effect of materially injuring the
reputation, business or business relationships of the defendant. In addition,
the defendant counterclaims for $14,220,000 on account of damages for allegedly
fraudulent or negligent misrepresentations by the plaintiffs.
[2]         
For the
reasons set out below, I:
[3]         
The
plaintiff, Sergio Martines, is the founder and principal of Naturale Science
Inc. (“Naturale”).  Martines and Naturale were also the 51% shareholders in
Canapar, an Ontario cannabis startup business with operations based in Ragusa
Italy. Martines was a founder of Canapar and its CEO.
[4]         
Canapar’s
plan was to construct a facility in Ragusa which would extract cannabinoids
from cannabis plants.  Its objective was to become a manufacturer of active
pharmaceutical ingredients for medicinal or pharmaceutical cannabis products.
[5]         
Canapar’s
business received its impetus from liberalizing views about cannabis in
industrialized democracies generally and, in particular, from the Kanavape
decision of the European Court of Justice which was released in May 2020.  That
decision was widely perceived as liberalizing the law concerning cannabis
operations in Europe.
[6]         
Until
December 30, 2020, the other 49% shareholder of Canapar was Canopy Rivers.  On
December 30, 2020, Canopy Rivers sold its 49% interest in Canapar to the
defendant RAMM Pharma Corp.  In addition, RAMM acquired $3,000,000 of debt
convertible into shares.
[7]         
RAMM is a
Canadian public company, primarily engaged in the research, development,
production and sale of cannabinoid pharmaceutical products. Its Chief Executive
Officer and directing mind is Jack Burnett.  Burnett is a sophisticated business person with a wide
range of experience.  He began his career working as a mortgage broker
extending loans to developers.  This led Burnett to develop shopping centres himself
in Ontario, Québec, and the Maritimes.  After selling his shopping centre
business to Robert Campeau in 1982, Burnett moved to Geneva where he headed an
investment fund for 16 years.  In 1999 he acquired a telecommunications company
in France which partnered with France Telecom to develop a mobile network
throughout that country.  He then “semiretired” to a farm in Argentina.  In
2017 he purchased 50% of a pharmaceutical company in Uruguay which developed
the first registered cannabis drug approved by any ministry of health in the
world.  He took that company public as RAMM.
[8]         
On June
15, 2021, RAMM acquired the remaining 51% of Canapar by way of an amalgamation
in which Canapar shareholders received one RAMM share for every two Canapar
shares.  Martines received 2,458,333 RAMM shares; Naturale received 92,929 RAMM
shares.  As part of the amalgamation, RAMM also entered into a Consulting Agreement
with Naturale pursuant to which RAMM would pay Naturale a fee of $23,500 per
month plus HST. For all practical purposes, the monthly fee was for the services
of Martines who also became a Vice President of RAMM on the amalgamation.
[9]         
On July
9, 2021, RAMM terminated the Consulting Agreement.  Martines and Naturale then
brought this action claiming payment of the balance of the monthly payments
under the Consulting Agreement and an order requiring RAMM to purchase the
plaintiffs’ RAMM shares at their trading price on the date of the termination. 
In addition, the plaintiffs claim reimbursement of expenses in the amount of $14,971.80. 
In total, the plaintiffs’ claim $3,139,931.30.
[10]      
RAMM defends
and counterclaims alleging that Martines made misrepresentations which RAMM
alleges entitled it to terminate the Consulting Agreement without continuing
the monthly payments or repurchasing the plaintiffs’ shares.  In addition, RAMM
claims damages of $14,220,000 which it alleges is the amount it overpaid for
Canapar’s shares based on the alleged misrepresentations.
[11]      
Burnett was
introduced to Martines in 2019 by the head of Power One.  Power One was an
investor in Canopy Rivers which in turn held a 49% interest in Canapar.  The Power
One representative had spoken to Burnett about the potential synergies between Canapar
and RAMM.
[12]      
Burnett became
interested in Canapar because understood that Canapar would be applying for a
license to produce medicinal cannabidiol (“CBD”)  in Italy.  RAMM was selling medicinal
cannabis products in Uruguay but did not have a manufacturer of active
pharmaceutical ingredients.  In
July 2019, Burnett visited Canapar in Ragusa where construction was just
beginning on Canapar’s plant.  As time went on Burnett learned of problems with
the facility and its construction.  He also learned that Canapar’s primary
investor, Canopy Rivers, was facing challenges.  Burnett understood that
raising funds was becoming more difficult for Canopy Rivers because, as he put
it, “the shine was off the apple and the cannabis industry was becoming
unfashionable.”  In addition, Canopy Rivers was subject to a large lawsuit and
was running out of cash.
[13]      
RAMM initially
proposed to invest $7.5 million in Canapar in February 2020 by way of convertible
debenture.  When RAMM made that offer, it knew that Canapar was a startup
company that was still in the process of constructing a plant for its proposed
business.   Nothing came of the offer.
[14]      
The salient facts I
draw from this background are that Burnett was an experienced, sophisticated,
savvy business person. He was interested in Canapar as a manufacturer of active
pharmaceutical ingredients for his South American cannabis business.  He was
highly knowledgeable about the cannabis business given that he was an early mover
in the field and had the first registered cannabis drug approved by any
ministry of health in the world.  He also knew the cannabis business was on a
downward trend.  This meant he had bargaining power and pricing power.
[15]      
The chronology of
events concerning misrepresentations can be divided into two parts:  Events
before the acquisition of 49% on December 30, 2020 and events between January
1, 2021 and the of the termination of the Consulting Agreement.
[16]      
Although RAMM does
not claim damages for alleged misrepresentations in connection with the
purchase of 49% of Canapar on December 30, 2020, it alleges that the
misrepresentations made in connection with that purchase were never corrected
and therefore remained misrepresentations at the time of the amalgamation on
June 15, 2021.   In addition, RAMM alleges that further events occurred between
the date of the alleged misrepresentations and June 15, 2021 about which the
plaintiffs did not inform RAMM which amounted to further misrepresentations for
which the plaintiffs are liable.  RAMM alleges the representations are
fraudulent, or in the alternative, are negligent.
[17]      
The fundamental
legal principles applicable to this case are not at issue although their
application to the facts is.  Fraudulent
misrepresentation requires proof of four elements: [1]
[18]      
There is
currently some uncertainty in the law about whether fraudulent
misrepresentation requires a fifth element, namely that the person making the
fraudulent misrepresentation intended the claimant to rely on the statement. 
This has historically been an element of fraudulent misrepresentation.[2]  The uncertainty has arisen
because, in Bruno Appliance and Furniture Inc. v Hryniak,[3] Karakatsanis
J., writing for the court, did not discuss this fifth element.[4]  Courts have appeared to
address this uncertainty by holding that proof of the representors’ knowledge
of the false representation is proof of intent.[5] 
I am satisfied that the plaintiffs intended RAMM to rely on the statements they
made to RAMM.  The statements were made in a presentation to investors and in
the context of an ongoing business relationship between Canapar and RAMM.  
Inherent in those communication is an intent that they be relied upon at the
time they are made.
[19]      
In the
alternative to fraudulent misrepresentation, RAMM claims damages for negligent
misrepresentation.  Negligent misrepresentation requires RAMM to establish the
following five elements:
[20]      
Although
the parties have raised a wide variety of issues concerning the elements of the
tests for fraudulent or negligent misrepresentation as well as other legal
issues, this case resolves itself by asking whether there were
misrepresentations (either fraudulent or negligent) and whether RAMM relied on
those misrepresentations. In my view, the answer to both of those questions is
no.
[21]      
I turn first to the
events before December 30, 2020.
[22]      
In November 2020 RAMM
received a Canapar Investor Presentation consisting of a 25-page PowerPoint
deck.
[23]      
The core
representation on which RAMM bases its claim is the statement  in the Investor
Presentation that Canapar has a contract with Extraction Solutions (the
“Extraction Solutions Agreement” or the “Agreement”).  The Presentation
describes the contract as follows:
[24]      
Canapar never
delivered any product to Extraction Solutions.  RAMM takes the position that
the representations about the Agreement in the Investor Presentation are fraudulent.
[25]      
A misrepresentation is a false statement of a
present or past fact.[8]
[26]      
It should be made
clear at the outset that this is not a situation where there simply was no
contract or where the contract the plaintiffs produced was a forgery.  When the
Investor Presentation was delivered, there was a written Agreement with
Extraction Solutions, signed by both parties.  RAMM received a copy of the
Agreement as part of the due diligence disclosure associated with its purchase
of Canapar shares in December 2020.  As a result, there is no misrepresentation
of a present or past statement of fact about the simple existence of the
Agreement.
[27]      
RAMM submits that
the Investor Presentation contained a number of other misrepresentations.  In
particular, RAMM complains that p. 13 of the Presentation states:
[28]      
RAMM says the
plaintiffs knew this was not the case. I agree.  I also find, however, that
Burnett knew, when he was investigating and closing the 49% purchase, that Canapar
would not be operational by the end of 2020 and continued to know throughout
the piece that Canapar was not and would not be operational for quite some
time.
[29]      
A complainant’s knowledge
about the truth with respect to an allegedly fraudulent misrepresentation bars
a claim.[9]  Knowledge of
the truth is  only a defence, however, if there is “clear” and “unequivocal”
proof that the complainant had actual, not constructive, and complete, not
fragmentary knowledge.[10]   I find that Burnett had such
knowledge about the state of Canapar’s facility at all times material to this
action.
[30]      
At trial, Burnett
denied knowing that Canapar would not begin production in December 2020 before
RAMM acquired its 49% interest.  On discovery, however, Burnett admitted that
he knew that production would not start in December 2020 before RAMM acquired
any interest.[11] 
Burnett tried to disavow this evidence by claiming that his memory was better
at trial than on discovery because he had reviewed much of the documentation
when preparing for trial.  I do not accept that explanation.  Parties are
required to prepare for discovery as well as trial.  If they do not, they bear
the risk of that neglect.  Moreover, parties have an ongoing obligation to correct
answers on discovery if they are later found to be incorrect.  Burnett never
corrected his discovery answer.  In those circumstances, I find that Burnett’s
answer on discovery was correct.
[31]      
Returning to the
statement quoted in paragraph 27 above, it is what is known as a forward
looking statement.[12]
 That is to say that it does not speak of a present fact but of a circumstance
that is expected to occur in the future.  In this regard it is worth noting
that the Presentation contains the usual cautions about forward looking
statements.  After warning that that statements in the Presentation containing
“will” or words of similar meaning as well as   information regarding the Company’s
expected extraction capacity, production capacity, and revenue generation,
to name only a few, are forward looking, the Disclaimer notes:
[32]      
The statements in
the Presentation about the Extraction Solutions Agreement and or Canapar’s
operations are also either explicitly forward looking because they are
associated with the word “will” or are implicitly forward looking because they
are describing operations which, to the knowledge of RAMM, do not yet exist.
[33]      
The Investor
Presentation also contains a disclaimer clause under an all caps, large fonted
heading reading “DISCLAIMER”[13]
on the page immediately following the cover page.  Burnett described it as the
“cover your bum page.”  Burnett did not read the disclaimer but acknowledged that
all investor presentations contain such clauses and that he was familiar with
them.
[34]      
The Disclaimer
clause provides, among other things, that:
[35]      
I accept that such a
disclaimer clause does not immunize the maker of a fraudulent misrepresentation
from the remedies available to the innocent party.[14] 
As I have found though, there was no misrepresentation as of November or
December 2020.  RAMM submits that the statements in the Investor Presentation were
no longer accurate as of June 15, 2021 when it purchased the remaining 51% of
the shares and that the plaintiffs should have corrected those statements.
[36]      
Although the warning
about forward looking statements and the disclaimer do not excuse statements
that are fraudulent when they are made, they do put the reader on notice that
statements in the Presentation might no longer be accurate seven months down
the road.  If RAMM invested in Canapar in June 2021 based on forward looking
statements made in November 2020, that, in my view, would amount to
unreasonable reliance.  If there were statements in the Investor Presentation
that were material to RAMM’s decision in June 2021, RAMM ought to have made
inquiries about those statements.  This is especially so because the drafter of
the Presentation would not know what RAMM or any other particular reader would
find to be material in June 2021.
[37]      
RAMM does not,
however, rely solely on the four corners of the Investor Presentation for its
allegation of fraud.  It submits that the allegation of fraud about the
Extraction Solutions Agreement remains well founded because the Agreement was
illegal under Italian law and because it was impossible to perform; both to the
knowledge of the plaintiffs.
[38]      
In this
regard, RAMM relies on authorities that hold that half truths can amount to
false representations because they fail to disclose facts that are material to
the representation that is made.[15] 
Misrepresentations that arise from what is left unsaid can constitute
fraudulent misrepresentations.[16]  
The law does not allow one to “knowingly omit anything which is required to
render completely true that which without it is not completely true”.[17] 
As a result, RAMM argues that the plaintiffs alleged
knowledge that the Agreement was illegal or could not be performed, rendered fraudulent
the representation that there was an Agreement.
[39]      
The core
legal issue in Italy at the time was whether a cannabis business required a
pharmaceutical licence from the Italian Drug Agency, AIFA, to conduct its
business. Canapar did not have a pharmaceutical licence but had plans to obtain
one so it could produce active pharmaceutical ingredients.
[40]      
The
Extraction Solutions Agreement envisioned that, before Canapar received its
licence, it would produce CBD oil for non-pharmaceutical products. At the
material time, Italian law permitted Canapar to do so provided: that: (i) The plant
varieties it used were those contained in the European Union’s Common Catalog
of Agricultural Plant Species;[18]
(ii) THC levels were below 0.2%; and (iii) The plants were used for the
purposes referred to in Law no. 242/2016 which included cosmetics.
[41]      
A word
about the distinction between CBD and THC may be helpful at this point.  When
processed, the cannabis plant produces a thick substance full of compounds
called cannabinoids.  The two most common cannabinoids are cannabidiol (CBD) and
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC).   CBD is not psychoactive.  That is to say,
it does not create a “high” in the user.  THC is psychoactive.  It is for this
reason that Italian regulations require THC content in a cannabinoid produced
without a pharmaceutical licence to be less than 0.2%.[19]
[42]      
An
overall point to bear in mind when considering the legality of the Extraction Solutions
Agreement is that Canapar obtained legal advice on the legality of its proposed
operations throughout as new issues arose.
[43]      
On
January 23, 2019, Canapar received an initial legal opinion from its Italian
external counsel, Giacomo Bulleri, to ensure that Canapar understood the rules
and regulations concerning the cultivation and extraction of CBD in Italy.  The
advice was consistent with the principles outlined in paragraph 40 above.
[44]      
On
February 20, 2020 Bulleri received written confirmation from the General
Director of the Italian Ministry of Health that CBD could be used in the
production of cosmetic products in Italy.[20]
[45]      
On
September 25, 2020, Bulleri received further confirmation from another branch
of the Italian Ministry of Health that CBD could be used as an ingredient in
the formulation of cosmetic products in Italy.[21]
[46]      
On October 1, 2020 another
individual in the Italian Ministry of Health issued a decree stating that a
pharmaceutical license from AIFA was required to manufacture or sell any
product containing CBD in Italy.  As noted, Canapar had no such license at the
time.  After the October 1 decree was issued, Canapar sent a copy of the
Extraction Solutions Agreement to Bulleri to obtain legal advice on the issue.
[47]      
Bulleri began
discussing the issue with the Ministry of Health.  On October 19, 2020 he reported
on a conversation with health officials in which they took the position that full-spectrum
oils could only be manufactured by those with an AIFA pharmaceutical license. 
The Investor Presentation referred to Canapar shipping full-spectrum oil to
Extraction Solutions.  Generally speaking, full spectrum oils are those with
THC content above 0.2% and broad spectrum oils are those with THC content below
0.2%.    In addition, the official advised that broad-spectrum oils containing
50% CBD was not prima facie usable as an ingredient for cosmetic products.
[48]      
Martines agreed that
this could potentially impact the Agreement because it contemplated the
delivery of CBD oil in a solvent at a concentration of 50%.  The news came as a
surprise to Martines who had not been advised of this earlier.
[49]      
On October 21, 2020,
Bulleri sent an email to Canapar summarizing his analysis of the Extraction
Solutions Agreement in light of the Decree of October 1, 2020 stating:
[50]      
RAMM
relies heavily on the exchanges between October 1 and October 21, 2020 as
evidence that the Extraction Solutions Agreement was illegal before Martines delivered
the Investor Presentation which, argues RAMM, makes the statements in that
Presentation fraudulent.  I do not accept that argument.  The exchanges and
Bulleri’s email of October 21, 2020 arose in light of the Ministry’s decree of
October 1, 2020.  However, the Ministry suspended that decree on October 28,
2020 and never re-instituted it.
[51]      
As a
result of the October 1 decree and the ambiguity of Italian regulators, Bulleri
sent a series of emails suggesting amendments to the Extraction Solutions
Agreement.  RAMM submits that Bulleri’s emails further demonstrate that the
Agreement was illegal, thereby rendering the Investor Presentation
fraudulent.   I do not accept that submission either.
[52]      
RAMM
focuses on the English translations of emails from Bulleri which contain
passages in which Bulleri refers to the “needed amendments” or the “required
amendments.”[22] 
In my view, RAMM takes these statements out of context. Those emails also refer
to the same changes as “suggested” amendments.  Bulleri’s suggestions were not efforts
to turn an illegal agreement into a legal one but were suggestions that would
decrease the risk that one of the many Italian regulatory authorities and
inspectors to which Canapar was subject would find something amiss.  This was a
serious risk given that cannabis products were new to Italy and it appeared
that a variety of views existed within a single regulator despite the decision
of the European Court of Justice in Kanavape.  Indeed, Bulleri’s email of March
2, 2021 which is among the emails on which the defendants rely for the
allegation of illegality, sets out competing regulatory considerations and
concludes by stating:
[53]      
After
Bulleri made these suggestions, he delivered a Pro Veritate legal
opinion to Canapar on February 2, 2021.  A pro-veritate opinion is generally
one that presents the law objectively without taking into account the views of
the parties.  Bulleri’s pro Veritate opinion confirmed that “…that
the cultivation and processing of Cannabis sativa L. is lawful in Italy, without
the need for prior authorisation, as long as it is intended to obtain the
products strictly listed in Article 2 of Law No. 242/2016” (which included
cosmetics).
[54]      
Martines
never received any advice to the effect that the Extraction Solutions Agreement
was illegal other than the one email from Bulleri in response to the October 1,
2020 decree from the Ministry of Health which was suspended a few weeks later.
[55]      
Martines
continued to receive confirmation  of legality after Bulleri’s email of March
2, 2021,. On March 25, 2021 Martines received confirmation from DLA Piper’s
Milan office that the Agreement was legal.[25]
 On April 20, 2021 Bulleri delivered an Audit legal opinion confirming that
Canapar pursues the purposes set out in Law 242/2016 and does not cite any
legal issues with its business.[26]
[56]      
Moreover,
RAMM’s own knowledge of the legal status of Canapar’s business prevents it from
claiming misrepresentation in this regard.  RAMM was aware of the October 1
decree and was alive to the state of Italy’s emerging and potentially
conflicting regulatory environment about cannabis before it purchased its 49%
interest in Canapar.  As part of its due diligence on that transaction, RAMM
sought advice from its own Italian lawyers who told RAMM the following in their
due diligence report:
[57]      
This passage
specifically refers to the fact that:   (i)  the October 1 decree was not
abolished but was merely suspended pending further investigation; (ii) regulatory
changes are expected but had not yet occurred that would allow the liberalized
production of cannabis products in Italy; (iii) those changes are subject to
political risk, (iv) liberalization of the cannabis sector is controversial;
and (v) the liberalizing tendencies “seem” to be such that they will influence
developments in Italy.  Those are all fairly tentative statements about the
legal and regulatory state of the cannabis industry in Italy and demonstrate
significant risk.  This left the legal and regulatory landscape open for either
liberalization or maintenance of the historically conservative and stigmatized
approach to cannabis in Italy.
[58]      
Despite their due
diligence report, RAMM’s Italian lawyers raised no issues about the legality of
the Extraction Solutions Agreement.
[59]      
Indeed,
the Agreement itself contemplated the legal risks referred to in the due
diligence report.  Section 13.2 of the Agreement was referred to at trial as
the “regulatory no go” clause.  It provided that if either party was prevented
from performing under the Agreement because of an order, request, judgment or
resolution of any government agency, court or public authority, that party
would not be in breach of the Agreement.  In such a case, the parties would
negotiate in good faith to find the best way forward.  If the government action
resulted in prevention or delay of performance for over 60 days, then the other
party was entitled to terminate the agreement.  Thus, the danger of a
government agency finding that the Agreement was illegal did not render
Canapar’s statements about the agreement fraudulent. This was a possibility that
the parties contemplated and in respect of which they allocated risk.  RAMM
knew about this risk because it received a copy of the Extraction Solutions
Agreement as part of the due diligence disclosure from Canapar.
[60]      
RAMM
further argues that the Agreement is illegal because it refers to the
specifications of the CBD oil and the solvent as being attached as schedules
2.1 and 5.1 to the Agreement when in fact, no schedules had been agreed to and
none were attached when the Agreement was signed.
[61]      
RAMM’s
expert on Italian law, Giorgia Massaro testified that the absence of the Schedules
renders the Agreement incomplete and unlawful because, without the Schedules,
the Agreement had no object.     RAMM argues that this too turns the statement
in the Investor Presentation that Canapar had an Agreement with Extraction
Solutions into a misrepresentation because there was no such Agreement under
Italian law.  I do not accept that argument.
[62]      
I note
first, that the plaintiffs’ legal expert, Emiliano Bartolozzi, testified that
the absence of the Schedules did not render the Agreement unlawful.  I also note
that the Italian law firm that reviewed the Agreement on behalf of RAMM before
it acquired its 49% interest in Canapar did not say that the absence of the Schedules
rendered the Agreement unlawful.  To the extent I am required to make a finding
about Italian law in this regard, I find that the absence of the Schedules did
not render the Agreement unlawful.  For reasons I will discuss later, where the
evidence of Massaro and Bartolozzi conflict, I  prefer the evidence of
Bartolozzi.
[63]      
In my
view, however, the whole issue of the absence of the Schedules is a red
herring.  Their absence does not turn the statements about the Extraction
Solutions Agreement in the Investor Presentation into a misrepresentation.  All
the Investor Presentation said is that there was a contract with Extraction
Solutions.   A contract is nothing but a piece of paper and a potential cause
of action if the contract is breached.  A contract is not a guarantee that
anything will occur under it in the future.  Especially not when both parties
to the contract are startups without completed plants and are operating in a
novel, controversial industry like the cannabis industry in Europe in the early
2020s.    Whether a contract will actually be performed in light of all of the
contingencies associated with it is a separate question.  Simply because one
has an agreement does not mean that the counterparty will not try, at some
future date, to argue that it is unenforceable for some reason or other.
[64]      
It is
also not unusual that parties enter into an agreement with certain terms
remaining to be fleshed out.  That appears to have been the case here.  There
was no misrepresentation of that fact because the Agreement without the Schedules
was provided to RAMM before it acquired any interest in Canapar.  It was up to RAMM
to decide whether the Agreement was sufficiently enforceable to warrant
purchasing an interest in Canapar, if in fact the Agreement was material to
that decision.
[65]      
RAMM next
argues that two documents that the parties referred to as the Technical Data Sheets
constituted Schedules 2.1 and 5.1 and that those documents rendered the
Agreement illegal thereby turning any statement about the Agreement in the
Investor Presentation into a misrepresentation.
[66]      
The
Agreement called for Extraction Solutions to provide specifications for oil and
solvent to Canapar.  Extraction Solutions sent the Technical Data Sheets to
Canapar three days after the Agreement was signed stating they needed them to be
completed urgently.  One Technical Data Sheet contained the specifications for
a CBD oil, the other contained the specifications for a solvent.
[67]      
RAMM
argues that the Technical Data Sheets would render the Agreement illegal
because the sheet for the CBD oil called for delivery of a “full spectrum crude
oil.” Bulleri   had advised on October 19, 2020 that
the Ministry of Health had taken the position that full-spectrum oils could only
be manufactured by someone with a pharmaceutical licence.  The Investor
Presentation also referred to Canapar shipping full-spectrum oil to Extraction
Solutions.
[68]      
Antonio Caruso
and Rico Folcarelli, both testified that the Technical Data Sheets were
intended to be the schedules under the agreement. Caruso is a founder and the Chief
Operating Officer of Canapar.  He was retained by RAMM to run its European
operations, continues to do so today and was called by RAMM to testify at
trial. Folcarelli
was the broker who finalized the Agreement between Extraction Solutions and
Canapar.
[69]      
Martines testified
that he had not seen the Technical Data Sheets before the litigation, was not
involved in their preparation, and did not approve them. In addition, he
testified that he did not believe they were intended to be the Schedules because
they were described as “controlled documents” which are normally prepared for
pharmaceutical products and the Agreement did not contemplate the sale of
pharmaceutical products.  In addition, he notes that the Technical Data Sheets
refer to “product available for sale after AIFA   certification.”  The products
contemplated under the Extraction Solutions Agreement did not require AIFA
certification.  Caruso conceded that the Agreement did not contemplate pharmaceutical
grade ingredients.
[70]      
When Bulleri
was suggesting amendments to the Agreement to decrease regulatory risk, he appears
to have assumed (without  ever addressing the point)  that the Technical Data Sheets
were part of the Agreement because he suggested in November 2020 that they be
revised to remove the reference to  the product being available for sale after 
AIFA certification.
[71]      
The
plaintiffs’ Italian legal expert, Bartolozzi testified that, as a technical
matter of Italian law, the Technical Data Sheets did not form part of the Agreement
because they are not, on their face, identified as constituting Schedule 2.1 or
5.1 nor do any other emails surrounding the data sheets identify them as the
Schedules.  Bartolozzi explained that under Italian law of contract, if a
schedule to an agreement is not included when the contract is signed but is
included later as an amendment to the contract, it must explicitly say that it
constitutes an amendment or addition to the agreement and the title of the
document must bear the same title as the one referred to in the contract.
[72]      
More
importantly and substantively, Bartolozzi explained that even if the Technical Data
Sheets did constitute Schedules 2.1 and 5.1 under the Agreement they would not
render it illegal.  Although the Technical Data Sheet may refer to a “full
spectrum oil” which is usually an oil with a higher THC content and therefore may
cause concern for Italian regulators, the Technical Data Sheet in question here
provided for a THC content of less than 0.2% which would be less likely to
cause concerns for Italian regulators and would not require AIFA certification.
[73]      
There may
also well be an explanation for the confusion about the references to control
documents and AIFA certification in the Technical Data Sheets.  It appears that
an earlier draft of the Agreement called for the delivery of pharmaceutical
grade products in respect of which Folcarelli wrote to Extraction Solutions as
follows on September 30, 2020:
[74]      
Folcarelli explained
at trial that Extraction Solutions wanted to be approved by the Spanish Health
Authority and needed Technical Data Sheets that referred to approval by AIFA 
to obtain approval  as a pharmaceutical supplier from Spanish authorities.  It therefore
appears that Extraction Solutions had its own internal reasons for having Technical
Data Sheets with a greater level of formality than contemplated under the
Agreement.
[75]      
It may also be that
the Technical Data Sheeets were intended to describe a different set of
products as referred to in Folcarelli’s email of September 30, 2020.  In either
of those circumstances there was no harm in Canapar staff agreeing to the
Technical Data Sheets because they were not intended to form part of the
Agreement and, given Bartolozzi’s evidence, would not form part of the
Agreement unless they expressly said so on their face.
[76]      
At the end of the
day, whether the Technical Data Sheets did or did not constitute the Schedules
under the Agreement appears to be a non-issue.   Even if they did constitute
the Schedules, the fact that the CBD oil they refer to has a THC content of
less than 0.2% would appear to enable Canapar to produce the oil without AIFA
certification.
[77]      
As noted, each side
tendered experts who opined on the legality of the Agreement under Italian
law.  RAMM’s expert was Giorgia Massaro.  The plaintiffs’ expert was Emiliano
Bartolozzi.  I accepted both as experts.  Both are experienced Italian lawyers.
[78]      
Both experts agree
on the fundamental points of relevant Italian law namely that CBD oil can be
produced by a party that does not have a pharmaceutical license provided its
THC level remains below 0.2% and provided the CBD is made from cannabis biomass
that does not contain upper leaves or flowering or fruiting tops which contain
higher THC levels.
[79]      
To the extent the
two experts differ, I prefer the evidence of Bartolozzi.  It struck me that
Massaro’s views were either highly conservative views of Italian law that
amounted to an outlier when compared to the views of other Italian lawyers in
the record or were the product of someone who wanted to help the party that
retained her by making arguments to support that party’s position rather than
presenting a more objective view of Italian law.
[80]      
  By way of example,
Massaro asserted that the Extraction Solutions Agreement was illegal because:
[81]      
Those views are clear
outliers.  Canapar’s expert Bartolozzi does not share Massaro’s views in this
regard.  The Agreement was prepared with the assistance of DLA Piper in Milan. 
DLA Piper is a reputable international firm which presumably would not be in
the business of drafting illegal agreements.  As noted, the Agreement was also
reviewed by RAMM’s lawyers as part of the due diligence process.  They raised
no concerns about any of these issues.
[82]      
The Massaro report also
suggests that the Agreement is illegal because the product “could also have a
possible medicinal use”.[28]
 Bartolozzi disagrees with this.  He points to a case of the Italian Supreme
Court which held that cannabinoids are not medical products or active
substances.  Massaro also pointed to government efforts to include CBD on a
list of narcotics.  Bartolozzi replied that the producer of that product
appealed to the Italian Supreme Court which suspended that decree because the
government failed to produce any scientific evidence that CBD was a narcotic. 
Massaro distinguished the two cases on which Bartolozzi relied by noting that
they were issued by specific sections of the Supreme Court and not by joint
sessions, the decisions of which have greater authority.  Bartolozzi agreed
that decisions of a joint session are more persuasive but pointed out that joint
sessions only arise when there are conflicting decisions issued by different
sections of the Supreme Court.  There do not appear to be any conflicting
decisions here.  In the absence of a decision by a joint session, a decision of
a specific session of the Supreme Court would still appear to be authoritative.
[83]      
Finally, Massaro
tried to testify beyond the area of expertise in which she was qualified.  Massaro
argued that Canapar could not produce the product required under the Agreement
without using biomass that contained upper leaves, fruiting tops or flowering
tops contrary to Italian regulations.  This is not so much a legal opinion as
it is a manufacturing or operational opinion.  Massaro was not tendered as an
expert in industrial processes concerning CBD and was therefore not qualified
to opine on the way Canapar could or could not manufacture product under the
Agreement.
[84]      
RAMM next
argues that the representation of a contract with Extraction Solutions was fraudulent
because the plaintiffs knew that the Agreement was impossible to perform.  RAMM
bases this argument on the quantity of CBD oil required under the Agreement,
the volume of cannabis required to produce that amount of product, and the
capacity of Canapar’s plant.
[85]      
Turning
first to the volume of CBD oil.  There was some debate at trial about what the
specific volumes were under the Agreement. Section 3.1 of the Agreement required
Extraction Solutions to purchase “a yearly quantity of CBD equivalent in Oil”
of 5000 kg.  The CBD oil was foreseen to be contained in a solvent solution at
50% concentration.  This led to debate about whether this meant 2,500 kg of CBD
in a total solvent solution of 5,000 kg or 5,000 kg of CBD in a total solvent
solution of 10,000 kg.[29]
 On my reading of the Agreement, it is the latter. The relevant provision states:
[86]      
The
quantities referred to are those of CBD, not of solvent solution containing
CBD.
[87]      
RAMM submits
that it was next to impossible to produce those quantities because, until Canapar
had a pharmaceutical license, it was limited to using those parts of the cannabis
plant with THC content of less than 0.2%, namely stems and lower leaves.  To produce 3000 kg of CBD oil using the
cannabis plants with those levels of THC would require 882,353 kg of biomass. 
To produce 5000 kg would require 1,470,588 kg of biomass.  Canapar’s plant had
a capacity of only 1,500 kg per day.  It would therefore take 588 days to
produce 3,000 kg and 980 days to produce 5,000 kg.  Moreover, these figures
assume an operational efficiency of 100% which Martines agreed was
unrealistic.  According to Caruso, Canapar obtained 65% efficiency in the best
of conditions.
[88]      
Finally, RAMM
pointed to the production schedule of cannabis to demonstrate the impossibility
of performance.  Cannabis
is planted in the early spring and harvested in the fall.  To produce for
delivery in June 2021, Canapar would have to place orders for cannabis in the
spring of 2020 and certainly no later than the fall of 2020.  Canapar had
placed no such orders, had no plan to do so, and only had biomass which required
a pharmaceutical license to process because it contained flowering and fruiting
tops with high THC content.
[89]      
While
these no doubt constitute operational challenges, those are not unusual in a
start up.  Recall that Canapar had no operating facility when RAMM invested in
it.  RAMM was investing in potential, not in an existing operating facility.  RAMM
knew that.  When making statements about the operations of a non-existing
facility, those statements often fall somewhere on a continuum between fraud on
the one end and highly conservative assumptions on the other end.   Somewhere
between the two ends is the optimism of a can-do entrepreneur.  In my view,
Canapar’s statements in the Investor Presentation fall closer towards the
optimistic, can-do entrepreneur part of the continuum than to the fraudulent
end. Canapar had a number of options it was exploring to satisfy orders under
the Extraction Solutions Agreement   including purchasing CBD oil in less
restrictive jurisdictions like North America until it received its AIFA
certification or producing oil with a higher THC content which would then be
reduced to acceptable levels by diluting the end product in solvent or by
removing THC through crystallization.
[90]      
Here
again, the Agreement contemplates that there were operational issues which remained
to be worked out.  Section 2.4, for example, provided that the process of
delivering CBD oil in a solvent was merely “an initial measure which Canapar
endeavors to substitute with THC mitigation technology as soon as possible, but
in any event not earlier than 8 (eight) months after the Signing Date.”
[91]      
RAMM
further submits that the statements about the existence of the Agreement were
fraudulent because it says Bulleri advised that a closed loop system was
“required” and was never achieved.
[92]      
A closed
loop system refers to a manufacturing process that would create CBD oils which
might, at certain times, have THC levels above 0.2% but which would
nevertheless be acceptable to regulators because the product would be
inaccessible and would be manufactured in a “closed loop.”
[93]      
In my
view, the evidence does not support the proposition that a closed loop system
was a legal necessity.  Bulleri had suggested a closed loop system to mitigate
against the risk of repressive inspections by government agencies that were
hostile to initiatives in the cannabis sector, such as the Central Narcotics
Office.
[94]      
Caruso,
who testified for RAMM, agreed that the closed loop system was a risk
mitigation strategy, not a legal requirement.
[95]      
At trial,
RAMM elicited evidence from Caruso about his reservations concerning Canapar’s
operational solutions as further evidence of fraud.   Caruso had reservations
about importing extraction equipment from the United States because he did not
believe it would work.  Caruso says he told Martines that the closed loop system
was not achievable, and that the extraction machinery was not eligible to be
certified for European pharmaceutical purposes.  He also did not agree with the
production forecasts being used in Canapar’s financial models.  This caused him
to resign in July 2019.  Caruso, however, returned to the company, a few months
later.  Although Caruso did not believe the closed loop system would work, he
did testify to the various potential workarounds that were discussed.
[96]      
Caruso
expressed the view that the extractor, the chief piece of equipment in
Canapar’s process, was not certifiable to meet the European Union’s Good
Manufacturing Practices (GMP) standards because 15 shortfalls had been identified,
some of which, in his view, were not solvable such as the nature of the welding
within the extractor’s pipes.
[97]      
On the
evidence before me, I am not prepared to find that this amounts to
misrepresentation. It was unclear precisely when or how Martines was told about
these allegedly unsolvable problems.  The allegedly unsolvable nature of the
problems was based on general statements like that of Caruso’s that the
extractor’s internal pipe welding did not meet European Union standards.  He
did not compare particulars of the extractor’s welding to the requirements for
GMP approved welding.   Caruso was not presented as having any particular
expertise in the standards of GMP certification for equipment.  RAMM did not
present any expert evidence in this regard.  The simple fact that one person in
an organization does not believe a particular problem can be solved does not
make it so; nor does it turn another person’s view into a misrepresentation.
[98]      
Although
someone who communicates statements about GMP certification with knowledge that
such certification is impossible may well be liable for fraudulent or negligent
misrepresentation, the evidence in this regard does not persuade me on a
balance of probabilities that any statements in the Investor Presentation or
otherwise amounted to a misrepresentation in this regard.
[99]      
After purchasing
Canopy Rivers’ shares in late December 2020, Burnett became the Chair of
Canapar’s board.  Martines
kept Burnett apprised of the status of the plant.  That status is fairly characterized
as a series of delays that kept pushing certification and production out further
and further into the future.  By way of example, on December 22, 2020, Martines
advised that commissioning and completion were expected between February and
March of 2021.  On March 17, 2021, Martines advised that certification was not
expected until the end of April at the earliest. On April 1, 2021, Canapar advised
that it was still waiting for a safety certification which was now expected in mid-May. 
On May 7, 2021, Canapar advised that recently detected problems would further
delay completion to June.  On June 9, 2021, Martines advised that an ethanol spill
had pushed projected completion further into the future.
[100]   
RAMM submits
that the plaintiffs became aware of information after December 30, 2020 which
they failed to disclose to RAMM, which failure turned their statements about
the Agreement into either fraudulent or negligent misrepresentations.  In doing so RAMM relies on authorities
that hold  that a party is liable for misrepresentation if  it makes a
statement under the belief that it is true but fails to correct it when it
subsequently learns that the representation has become untrue.[30]  
Thus, even though Canapar may have believed the statements in the Investor
presentation up to December 30, 2020, it had a duty to correct those statements
between December 31, 2020 and June 15, 2021 if it learned that the statements
were no longer true.
[101]   
RAMM’s allegations
in this regard concern principally:
[102]   
In February 2021, Representatives
of Extraction Solutions and Canapar met in Ragusa over two days.  Among the
topics scheduled for discussion were the Agreement and “the Extraction
Solutions blending system.”
[103]   
Caruso described the
discussion about the Agreement as follows:  The parties discussed the
amendments that Bulleri had suggested but only briefly because the CEO of
Extraction Solutions, Sammy Kapleta, made it clear that there was no Agreement
and that the Agreement was “rubbish.”  Kapleta offered, however, to discuss
something for the future.  According to Caruso, Canapar’s reaction was to try to
understand whether Extraction Solutions would enter into another agreement and
how things could go forward.
[104]   
Folcarelli’s
evidence was more guarded.  He said, Extraction Solutions expressed serious
issues about whether the deal was doable.  Both Caruso and Folcarelli say that
the parties recognized that it was very unlikely that the Agreement was going
to be performed.
[105]   
Martines described
the portion of the meeting about the Agreement as follows:  The purpose was to
discuss the changes Bulleri was suggesting and how to move forward.  That discussion
had no particular conclusion.  There was no discussion about the legal validity
of the Agreement.  Martines does not recall anyone saying that the agreement
was dead, rubbish, illegal or null and void.   The discussion about the
agreement was short because neither side knew when their facility would be
finished.  Extraction Solutions told Canapar about the delays their own plant
was experiencing.  It was obvious to Extraction Solutions that Canapar was delayed
by seeing the status of the Canapar facility.
[106]   
The following day,
Martines instructed Hasan Yamani, Canapar’s Chief Technical Officer, to
“freeze” work on building Canapar’s methanol blending station. The station’s only
purpose was to produce product for the Extraction Solutions Agreement.  In
cross-examination, Martines denied telling Yamani to freeze the project because
he knew the Agreement would not be proceeding but does not recall why he did
so.  Caruso testified that he and Martines told Yamani to freeze work on the
blending station because of the discussions with Extraction Solutions.   Martines
did not tell Burnett or RAMM anything about the meeting in Ragusa.
[107]   
I am not prepared to
accept that Extraction Solutions told the plaintiffs that the Agreement was
rubbish or dead at the February meeting.  Nor do I draw anything negative from the
direction to have Yamani stop work on the blending station.
[108]   
After RAMM
terminated the Consulting Agreement, Burnett asked Caruso to prepare a report[31] 
that tracked the evolution of the issues surrounding the Extraction Solutions Agreement. 
Among other things, the report reviews all of the communications between Canapar
and Extraction Solutions about the Agreement.  Caruso referred to the February
meetings in the report but did not suggest that the Agreement was at an end or
was unlikely to be performed.  Instead, Caruso wrote as follows about the
February meeting:
[109]   
The tone of that
document is far more collaborative than Caruso’s or Folcarelli’s evidence at
trial suggests.
[110]   
Moreover, Caruso admits
that it was he and Martinez who directed Yamani to stop work on the blending
station.  Caruso was also copied on the email directing Yamani to stop work but
did not include that in his report of November 1, 2020, presumably because it
did not raise any alarms for Caruso.[32]
[111]   
The last sentence of
the passage quoted in paragraph 108 above may explain why Yamani was told to
stop work on the blending station.  The purpose of blending was to decrease
THC.   The last sentence of the quotation in para. 108 above suggests that
Extraction Solutions was going to help Canapar use the KD10 distillation unit
to reduce THC as well because Extraction Solutions had the same equipment and
its employee, Adam Mackenzie was an expert with it. Caruso was not examined on
this specific passage at trial. As a result, I do not draw anything conclusive from
it.  It does, however, underscore the inconsistency between Caruso’s evidence
at trial and the more upbeat nature of his more contemporaneous report to Mr.
Burnett.  If indeed it were the plan to use the KD10 as part of the THC
remediation strategy, then it would make to tell Yamani to freeze his work on
the blending station.  Otherwise he risked continuing down a potentially
erroneous path if Mackenzie had a better way of doing things.[33]
[112]   
In light of the more
positive tone of this more contemporaneous evidence, I do not find that the
events of February 2021 gave rise to a misrepresentation on the part of the
plaintiffs.
[113]   
On March
16, 2021 Extraction Solutions’ external counsel sent Martines an email
attaching a draft termination agreement for Canapar’s consideration. The email
notes that the object of the attachment was to terminate the contractual
relationship “given the [ ] impossibility of complying with the corresponding
regulatory requirements in a sufficient time and manner to respect and perform
the terms and conditions agreed and provided in the supply agreement.”
[114]   
Martines forwarded
the email to DLA Piper asking for advice.  DLA Piper advised that the
regulatory no go clause did not apply, but if Extraction Solutions was set on
terminating, there was a possibility that Canapar might be able to negotiate
for at least reimbursement of the expenses it had incurred.
[115]   
DLA Piper responded
to Extraction Solutions’ external counsel on March 29, 2021 stating that there
were no grounds to terminate the Agreement.  Extraction Solutions responded on
March 31 through counsel saying that “for the moment, the issue of the
agreement termination is on hold.  As soon as we have a clear outcome on the
compliance outlook of the agreement, we will inform you.”  After this email,
Extraction Solutions never approached Canapar again to terminate the
agreement.
[116]   
RAMM emphasizes
that, on March 18, 2021 Martines sent Burnett an update notifying him that
plant certification was scheduled for April 15 and that production was scheduled
for April 22.  Although Martines sent this email only two days after receiving the
termination agreement from Extraction Solutions, he did not mention it to
Burnett even though Burnett
was Chair of Canapar’s
board.   Martines explained his silence by saying that his email was not a full
corporate report and that it was his role as executive to do the work while it
was the Board’s role to provide high level guidance.  Martines says he would
have told Burnett had the Agreement actually been terminated but he was seeking
legal advice on the point and received a further email from Extraction Solutions’
lawyer indicating that the termination was on hold, so he did not think it
necessary to raise it with Burnett.
[117]   
Precisely what a Board
should or should not be advised of is not a clearcut issue.  It depends on,
among other things, the size of the corporation, the importance of the issue to
the corporation, and the expectations set by the Board.  One can see though how
Burnett and the Board could reasonably expect to be advised of a development of
this nature given that Canapar was a start up with only one contract, two
principal shareholders, and with Burnett being Chair of the Canapar Board.  Although
Burnett and the Board might be legitimately upset with Martines for his failure
to bring this matter to their attention, I decline to find that the failure to
advise of Extraction Solutions’ attempt to terminate the contract rose to the
level of misrepresentation at this point.
[118]   
One element
of fraudulent misrepresentation is that the representor have knowledge of the
misrepresentation.  Knowledge can be established through actual knowledge or recklessness
about the truth or falsity of the statement.[34] 
A representor who is indifferent or shuts his eyes to the truth or falsity of facts
is  as fraudulent to the same degree as if he had knowingly stated falsehoods.[35]
[119]   
In my
view, the circumstances in March 2021 were not such that Sergio knew or ought
to have known that his failure to advise of Extraction Solutions attempt to
terminate amounted to misrepresentation.  Martines testified that Burnett did
not care about the Extraction Solutions Agreement, mocked it  and never raised
it before terminating the Consulting Agreement.  I accept that evidence.  There
was no evidence from RAMM to suggest that it ever asked any questions about the
Extraction Solutions Agreement before it terminated the Consulting Agreement. 
There is not a single email from RAMM asking about the Agreement despite the
series of delays on the project.  As a result, Martinez had no particular
reason to believe that Ramm was concerned about the Extraction Solutions
agreement or had any particular interest in it.  In addition, Martines was
managing the situation with Extraction Solutions, sought legal advice, was
advised that there was no basis for the attempted termination and was then told
by Extraction Solutions that the attempt to terminate was withdrawn.
[120]   
On June
7, 2021 Martines advised Burnett of an ethanol spill that would further delay
the commissioning of the plant.    In addition, Martines told Burnett that Canapar’s
Chief Technical Officer, Hassan Yamani had resigned.  This was one week before
the scheduled closing of the amalgamation transaction in which RAMM would
acquire the remaining shares of Canapar.  In response, Burnett called a board
meeting for June 10.
[121]   
On June 8, 2021
Burnett received a detailed email from Yamani setting out the timeline to
complete the Canapar plant.   Yamani concluded the email by noting that the
plant would not be ready to produce before the first quarter of 2022.
[122]   
Recall that the
Extraction Solutions Agreement called on Canapar to begin delivering product no
later than June 15, 2021.
[123]   
According to
Burnett, the Extraction Solutions Agreement remained as important as of June 10
and the amalgamation on June 15 as it was when RAMM acquired its 49% interest
because it would provide revenue until Canapar received its pharmaceutical certification.
[124]   
Burnett testified
that there was a short discussion about the Agreement at the June 10 board
meeting during which Martines advised that neither the Extraction Solutions nor
Canapar plants were complete, but that Extraction Solutions had agreed to
receive and Canapar would begin to ship product in September 2021.
[125]   
Martines says he
told the Board during the June 10 meeting that: (i) the Agreement called for
Canapar to deliver product by June 15; (ii) the Agreement required amendment in
this regard; and (iii) establishing any schedule under the Extraction Solutions
Agreement would be a challenge.  According to Martines, Burnett said nothing in
response to this.  Martines denies telling the Board that Extraction Solutions
had agreed to take deliveries in September.
[126]   
Of the
two versions, I find Martines’ account to be more plausible.
[127]   
Given
that Burnett had an email from Yamani saying that the plant would not be able
to produce before the first quarter of 2022, I find it implausible that
Martines would have told Burnett that Canapar would start delivering in
September 2021 without a serious challenge from Burnett in this regard if the
Agreement had any importance to RAMM.[36]
[128]   
Burnett maintains that
he confronted Martines with Yamani’s statement at the Board meeting and that
this was recorded in the minutes of the meeting.  The only “minute” I was taken
to was an email from Olivier Dufourmantelle to Burnett dated June 10, 2021
which was sent right after the meeting.  The only reference to the Extraction
Solutions Agreement in that email is a statement to the effect that:
[129]   
The reference to “concerns
about the impact of delays on the” Agreement is hardly evidence of the sort of exchange
one might expect if Martines was providing information that contradicted the
information Burnett had from Yamani and the Agreement were of significance to
RAMM.
[130]   
Burnett admitted
that he knew at the June 10 meeting that there was a delay in the delivery of
products to Extraction Solutions.  He ultimately admitted that he knew that the
deadline for delivery of product under the Agreement had to be extended but then
denied that the Agreement had to be amended in this regard.  At the same time, Burnett
did not ask Martines to provide copies of any email exchanges around the
alleged agreement to postpone deliveries to September.  The only information
Burnett says he had about the extension of delivery dates was Martines’ alleged
statement that deliveries had been extended to September.  That alleged oral agreement,
however, conflicted with the information from Yamani that the plant could not produce
before the first quarter of 2022.
[131]   
As noted earlier in
these reasons, a complainant’s knowledge about the truth with respect to an
allegedly fraudulent misrepresentation  bars a claim  if the evidence shows
that the complainant’s knowledge of the truth is “clear” and “unequivocal” and
that its knowledge was “actual and complete”, not constructive or fragmentary.[37]  
Burnett’s knowledge about the lack of an Agreement that could be performed met
that standard as of June 10, 2021.
[132]   
Burnett knew that
Canapar was obliged to deliver as of June 15 and could not do so.  In those
circumstances the counterparty to the Agreement could terminate.  He knew there
was no written agreement to extend the delivery time.  Even if I accept his
evidence that Martines told him there was an agreement to extend delivery to
September 2021, he knew that the plant could not produce until the first
quarter of 2022. In those circumstances, Burnett’s knowledge prevents any
misrepresentation from arising.
[133]   
On June 9, 2021,
Martines emailed DLA Piper in Milan, noted that the deadlines in the Agreement
had passed because neither side was ready and asked if the Agreement was
“dead.”  The deadlines referred to the requirement that Extraction Solutions
provide order forecasts by May 15, 2021 and the requirement that Canapar begin
delivering product by June 15, 2021.
[134]   
DLA Piper responded
the same day providing Martines with a draft letter to Extraction Solutions
which stated:
[135]   
The
parties referred to this email at trial as the “Bluff” email because of its
assertion that Canapar was ready to ship product as of June 15, 2021 when in
fact it was not.  Martines referred to this as a “bluff”.  RAMM gives it a less
charitable moniker.
[136]   
Martines did not
advise Burnett of his email to DLA Piper or DLA Piper’s response even though,
on the following day, he attended the June 10 Board meeting with Burnett.
[137]   
On June
14, 2020 one day before the amalgamation was set to close, Martines sent the
Bluff email to Extraction Solutions, again without telling RAMM.
[138]   
Martines thought it
was advisable to send the email because it would force a renegotiation. 
Martines says he did not tell RAMM about the email because he was the CEO with
authority to conduct these communications and that he would not bother the Board
with operational details like this.  Martines was the CEO for only a few more
days.  As of June 15, he would become a Vice President of RAMM.
[139]   
In my view, this was
a “detail” that should have been brought to the Board’s attention; especially
in light of the Board’s discussion of the Agreement on June 10.  Quite apart
from whether RAMM relied on the Agreement to complete the amalgamation, the
Agreement was Canapar’s only contract.  It was therefore material to the
corporation.  In addition, the email involved a strategic consideration of how
best to address the fact that the timelines in the Agreement had not been met. 
Arguably that is a strategic consideration on which a Board should be consulted
if the agreement is the corporation’s sole contract.
[140]   
Much was made at
trial about whether the conversation in the first paragraph of the email actually
occurred.  Martines denies that it occurred.  While I do not believe anything
turns on it, I find that, on a balance of probabilities, such a conversation either
had occurred or was planned to occur before the email was sent.  Martines
described the email as an effort to protect Canapar’s interests in light of the
timelines under the Agreement.  I accept that explanation.  The text of the
email is consistent with that intention.  It is unlikely, however, that one
would begin an email with that objective by referring to a conversation that
never occurred.  Doing so would simply divert the discussion from the substance
of the email to the allegation of a fictitious conversation.
[141]   
Burnett learned of
the Bluff email on June 16, 2021.  It led him to investigate and gather emails
between Canapar and Extraction Solutions.  He became frustrated when Martines
and/or his assistant did not include the Bluff email among the emails they sent
in response to his requests.
[142]   
Extraction Solutions
replied to the Bluff email on June 18, 2021 saying they wanted to negotiate a termination
because there was no clear regulatory landscape that allowed the parties to
perform. This was, in effect, the same reason for which Extraction Solutions
sought to terminate the Agreement in March 2021.
[143]   
On July 5, 2022, Extraction
Solutions sent a draft agreement terminating the contract.  Martines tried to
arrange a call with Burnett and counsel.  Burnett gave instructions that no
steps were to be taken with Extraction Solutions without his authorization.
[144]   
Burnett decided to
dismiss Martines after receiving the Bluff email and the other emails with
Extraction Solutions about the potential termination of the agreement.  Burnett
says that once he saw the Bluff email, he realized that what Martines told him about
an agreement to defer deliveries to September was wrong.  After receiving the Bluff
email Burnett did not ask Martines any questions about it,  did not ask for an
explanation about why the email was sent or for an explanation about how he
would propose to deliver product on June 15 when the plant was not ready.
[145]   
Although I can
understand Burnett’s frustration at not being advised of the Bluff email, that
failure did not rise to the level of a misrepresentation.  The email did not
add anything to the facts that Burnett already knew on June 10.  At that time
he knew that the timelines under the Agreement had expired and that either side
could terminate.  The objective of the email was to protect Canpar and RAMM by
either offering product or by negotiating compensation for termination.  As
noted earlier, Martines testified that one option available was to source CBD
oil elsewhere and sell it to Extraction Solutions.
[146]   
On July
9, 2021 Burnett sent Martines a letter terminating the Consulting Agreement.   The
principal reason for termination was that Martines and NSI did not disclose
communications with Extraction Solutions about terminating the Agreement by
consent either before or after the Amalgamation closed, despite the
representations and covenants contained in the Amalgamation Agreement.  The reference
to representations and covenants presumably refers to Section 15 (r) of the Master Agreement,
in which Canapar, through Martines, represents that:
[147]   
The
validity of the termination and what if anything flows from it will be
addressed later in these reasons.
[148]   
RAMM continued
discussions with Extraction Solutions until approximately February 2022.  RAMM
ultimately decided not to pursue the Agreement and not to demand compensation
from Extraction Solutions.
[149]   
At some point after
Burnett terminated the Consulting Agreement, he received a virtual tour of the
Extraction Solutions facility.  This led him to conclude that there was no
longer an agreement with Extraction Solutions and that Martines knew this long
ago but did not tell the Board.  Burnett and Extraction Solutions ultimately agreed
the Agreement was at an end without further documentation.
[150]   
After
terminating the Consulting Agreement, RAMM continued to complete the Ragusa facility. 
It hired a new engineering company to finish commissioning the plant, submitted
its application for AIFA certification and, according to Burnett, spent a
further $2,000,000 over the next year to have the plant pre-commissioned.
[151]   
Caruso continued to
be engaged by RAMM after Martines was terminated and was, in effect, the on the
ground leader of the Ragusa facility.  According to Caruso it would have taken
an additional 24 months and a further investment of €3 million to obtain AIFA certification. 
I was not provided with any break down of those costs or estimates.  Caruso
explained that, since the market for cannabis products was “crashing”, RAMM
decided not to proceed.
[152]   
In
September 2022 when, according to Burnett, it would have cost only a further $100,000
to commission the Ragusa facility, RAMM stopped work on it. At the same time,
RAMM bought Hemp Poland, a Polish company in the same business as Canapar with
the exception of medicinal products.  According to Burnett, Polish law allowed
it to conduct those activities freely.
[153]   
Hemp Poland had over
$30,000,000 invested into it.  It had been offered to Burnett for $15,000,000
in December 2020.  He declined.  Four months later it was offered to him for $5,000,000. 
He declined again.  In August 2022 when he learned that Hemp Poland was about
to go into receivership, he purchased it for $1.35 million.
[154]   
Since the
acquisition of Hemp Poland, the Ragusa facility has stood idle.
[155]   
In my view, RAMM has
not demonstrated on the balance of probabilities that the Extraction Solutions
agreement did not exist or was illegal so as to cause any statement about it in the Investor Presentation or
otherwise to amount to a fraudulent
or negligent misrepresentation.
[156]   
The issue of
legality arose out of evolving legal and social attitudes towards cannabis
businesses and the ambiguity of that evolution in Italy.
[157]   
The decision of the
European Court of Justice in Kanavape was thought to mark a change in course
towards more rapid and meaningful liberalization. Burnett described the
Kanavape decision as “front page news everywhere.” According to Burnett, Kanavape
led all to believe that CBD could be freely marketed in Europe but that was
not so.  According to Burnett “we all misinterpreted the case.”
[158]   
In fact, all Kanavape
said was that cannabis
products that were legally manufactured in one European Union state could be
sold in another European Union state under the open borders principle.  Even
then, however, the receiving state remained free to regulate cannabis products
for genuine health reasons. The decision did not affect any country’s domestic
law about the manufacture of cannabis products within its borders.  If Canapar,
Martines and Naturale misinterpreted the case as optimistically as Burnett and
others did, that is hardly grounds for characterizing their interpretation as
fraudulent misrepresentation.
[159]   
RAMM knew about the
regulatory ambiguity surrounding cannabis.  It had its own lawyers’ due
diligence report.  The Agreement contained a regulatory no go clause in section
13.2 that allowed either party to walk away from the agreement if the ability
to perform was hindered by government action.
[160]   
Although RAMM was
aware of these risks, it did not present its Italian operation as being
illegal.  By way of example, on December 2, 2021, six months after terminating
the Consulting Agreement, RAMM published a press release about the legalization
of marijuana in Germany:
[161]   
Despite whatever
liberalizing tendencies there may have been, there continued to be strong
resistance to liberalization within certain governmental agencies.  The thrust
of the various amendments that Bulleri or others proposed to the Extraction
Solutions Agreement did not aim to render legal an illegal agreement, but aimed
to reduce the risk of investigation and prosecution in an uncertain regulatory
environment.
[162]   
Even a fraudulent
misrepresentation is not actionable without reliance. The question therefore
becomes, even if the Investor Presentation or other statements by the
plaintiffs amounted to misrepresentations, did RAMM rely on them?  I find that
RAMM did not rely on such statements and, if it did, such reliance was
unreasonable.
[163]   
Reliance
is a question of fact. Whether a material misrepresentation did, in fact,
induce reliance is “to be inferred from all the circumstances of the case and
evidence at trial.”[38]
The court will infer that the plaintiff relied on a misrepresentation that is
“obviously material”.[39] 
The plaintiff will have relied on a statement where it exercised “a material
influence” on the plaintiff’s decision to act, but need not be the only 
operative influence.[40]
[164]   
Although Burnett was
interested in Canapar as a manufacturer of active pharmaceutical ingredients
for his existing business, he nevertheless described the Extraction Solutions
Agreement as the “catalyst” that pushed RAMM into the Canopy Rivers deal
because the revenue from the Agreement would help tide Canapar over until it
received its pharmaceutical license. Thus, if the Extraction Solutions Agreement was in fact
the catalyst to RAMM’s purchase of Canapar, it was a material influence on the
decision and Ramm will have relied on the representations.
[165]   
One
further aspect of reliance is that once the plaintiffs have established all
elements of the tort other than inducement, “the onus shifts to the defendant
to show that the plaintiffs did not rely on the misrepresentation”.[41]
[166]   
Although
I have found that the plaintiffs did not make misrepresentations, I
nevertheless apply this higher test to reliance and find that Naturale and
Martines have established that RAMM did not rely on the any of the statements
that RAMM alleges are misrepresentations.  I come to that conclusion for several reasons.
[167]   
First, although
Burnett asserts that he relied on the Investor Presentation’s statements about
the liberalization of the Cannabis industry in Italy, I do not accept that assertion. 
Burnett pointed specifically to CaseLines page F515, a page in the Investor
Presentation that discusses the regulatory framework for cannabis in Italy. 
According to Burnett, that slide and speaking to Martines led him to believe
that Italian laws were favourable to the manufacture and sale of cannabis
products.  That page in the Investor Presentation is what one would call
“puffery”.  It provides, among other things:
[168]   
What the statement at
CaseLines p. F515 actually says is quite limited.  The quotation says that medical
cannabis has been liberalized.  The Agreement, however, does not deal with
medical cannabis.  The non-medical industry does not yet exist.  Rather,
Canapar is deploying its regulatory and government relations expertise to do
something in that regard.  That something has two components.  The first is to
eliminate black market sales.  In other words, the nonmedical sector of the
business continues to be stigmatized by black-market sales.  The second
component is to entrench extraction as a mandatory part of the value chain.  In
other words, extraction is not yet a part of the value chain.  The statement
underscores the potential nature of the business not its present
reality.
[169]   
In my view, it is
unrealistic to believe that RAMM would rely on generic puffery of the sort
found at CaseLines p. F515 in preference to the statements from its own Italian
counsel of the sort quoted at paragraph 56 above.
[170]   
Second, RAMM was
buying nothing but potential.  Burnett testified that he was attracted to the
“potential” of Canapar in the global market and as a manufacturer of Active
Pharmaceutical Ingredients.  Even if we focus only on Canapar’s ability to
perform the Extraction Solutions Agreement, RAMM was buying nothing but
potential.  It was clear that Canapar was not an operating company when RAMM
acquired either share tranche.  Moreover, RAMM was buying that potential when,
in Burnett’s own words, the shine was off the cannabis market.
[171]   
The agreement
pursuant to which RAMM purchased its 49% interest makes clear that RAMM was
buying potential.  Section 2.03 of that agreement provides that RAMM would pay
additional consideration of $2,000,000 to Canopy Rivers   if the Canapar
facility “becomes viable” or a fundamental change like a takeover occurs within
5 years of RAMM’s purchase of 49%.
[172]   
In other words, RAMM
knew it was buying a 49% interest in a company that was not yet viable, whose
product was in a stigmatized industry that was previously illegal and with
knowledge that Italian regulators had competing views about the legality of the
business.
[173]   
Third, given the
novelty of the cannabis businesses in Europe, had RAMM truly been relying on
the representation of the Extraction Solutions Agreement as a catalyst to
investing in Canapar, one might have expected RAMM to conduct due diligence on Extraction
Solutions.
[174]   
I appreciate that negligence, carelessness, or
want of due diligence by the plaintiff do not rebut a claim of fraudulent
misrepresentation.[42]
Nor does the fact that the plaintiff had an opportunity to investigate or
verify the true facts provide a defence to misrepresentation.[43]
[175]   
The due diligence of
the sort I am suggesting here is not one to verify the existence of the Agreement;
that is a statement on which RAMM was entitled to rely.  But, as noted earlier,
an agreement is nothing but a piece of paper.  If the Extraction Solutions
Agreement had truly been the catalyst to the investment, one might have
expected RAMM to satisfy itself that Extraction Solutions had the wherewithal
to perform the Agreement and to satisfy itself that Extraction Solutions was able
to operate in Spain without regulatory impairment.  In this regard it was
particularly relevant that Extraction Solutions, like Canapar, was a startup
business which did not yet have an operating plant.  Burnett admitted that RAMM
did no due diligence on Extraction Solutions, and did see its facility until
after it terminated the Consulting Agreement.  In addition, I was not taken to
any evidence to suggest that Spanish authorities took  an any less ambiguous
approach to the cannabis industry  than Italian authorities did.
[176]   
Burnett said he
would not invest solely on the basis of the Investor Presentation but that any
investment would also have to be based on a relationship with a person.  That
makes good business sense.   That, however, only underscores the importance of
inquiring about Extraction Solutions’ intentions, capabilities and the
regulatory landscape in which it operated.
[177]   
Fourth, in the face of
all of the reports of delays in the plant’s commissioning, there is not a
single email back from RAMM asking whether the delays would affect the delivery
obligations under the Extraction Solutions Agreement or whether an amendment to
the Agreement was necessary to address those delays.  Had the Agreement truly
been the catalyst to invest in Canapar, one might expect RAMM to have asked
that question at least once as things unfolded.
[178]   
Even at the June 10
Board meeting, Burnett knew that some of the timelines under the Agreement had already
expired and that the remainder would expire within days; knew that neither
company could perform under the Agreement; knew that Canapar could not produce
until the first quarter of 2022;  and knew that there was no written amendment
to the Agreement to extend the timelines.  All of this gave RAMM the option to defer
the amalgamation until the circumstances surrounding the Agreement became
clearer.[44] 
Instead, faced with all of this information and uncertainty, RAMM completed the
amalgamation and acquired the remaining 51% of Canapar on June 15, 2021.
[179]   
I do not accept that
a business person as experienced as Burnett would, in these circumstances,
complete the amalgamation in reliance on the Extraction Solutions Agreement. If
he did in fact do so, I find that such reliance was not reasonable.
[180]   
Finally, Burnett’s
own evidence about reliance was somewhat tepid.  Burnett never said that he
would have refused to conclude the Amalgamation but for the Extraction
Solutions Agreement.  When pressed on the point, he said he did not know if he
would have pursued the amalgamation without the Agreement. Burnett also explained
at trial that had Martines disclosed all of the discussions about termination
that had occurred and had Martines involved Burnett in the emails relating to a
possible termination, Burnett might have been able to maintain a relationship
with Martines.  Thus, it appears it was the fact that Martines had those
discussions behind everyone’s back that was critical to Burnett, not the
presence or absence of the Agreement.
[181]   
I find
that, at most, RAMM viewed the Extraction Solutions agreement as a nice thing
to have but not something on which it relied in any material respect for its acquisition
of shares in Canapar.
[182]   
 The
plaintiffs claim damages and expenses under the Consulting Agreement.    On its
face, the agreement is between NSI and RAMM.  Some of the claims are advanced
by Martines, such as reimbursement for personal expenses and the purchase of
his shares in RAMM at their trading price on the termination date.  It is not
clear whether the unpaid balance under the Consulting Agreement is being
claimed by Naturale or Martines.  In my view, Martines has standing to make
those claims in his personal capacity, including the claim for the unpaid
balance  of monthly fees under the Consulting Agreement.
[183]   
A non-party
to a contract can obtain the benefit of and enforce the contract:
[184]   
I am
satisfied that Martines has met those requirements.  The Consulting Agreement
specifically refers to Martines as the person providing the Consulting Services. 
As a result, there is an implicit intention to extend the benefit of the
Consulting Agreement to him.  The damages Martines claims come within the scope
of the Consulting Agreement in that they reflect a loss to him arising out of RAMM’s
allegedly wrongful termination of that agreement.
[185]   
Martines
makes three claims under the Consulting Agreement: payment of his monthly fees
until the end of the contract, purchase of his RAMM shares at the price at which
they were trading on the date of his termination and reimbursement of expenses.
[186]   
Section
6.2 of the Consulting Agreement provides that if RAMM terminates the Consulting
Agreement other than for a breach of section 6.1, Naturale shall be entitled to
the unpaid balance of the Monthly Fee for the remainder of the Term and RAMM agrees
to purchase Naturale’s and Martines’ shares of RAMM at fair market value as
determined by the Board.  The parties have agreed that fair market value in
this case is the trading price of RAMM shares on the date the Consulting
Agreement was terminated.
[187]   
I find
that the plaintiffs are not entitled to the unpaid balance under the Consulting
Agreement nor are they entitled to have their RAMM shares bought out because,
in my view, RAMM was entitled to terminate the Consulting Agreement.
[188]   
Section
6.1 (a) of the Consulting Agreement allows RAMM to terminate for:
[189]   
Martines’ failure to
disclose the events surrounding the Bluff email were willful and intentional
acts on the part of NSI in that they were willful and intentional acts of its
directing mind and principal, Martines.  The failure to advise Ramm was not an
oversight but was a conscious decision by Martines.  According to Martines,
dealing with Extraction Solutions was an executive responsibility, not a Board concern because the
Board’s role is to give only high level direction while management is
responsible for operational matters.
[190]   
 I also find that Martines’
failure to advise the Board had the effect of materially injuring the “business
or business relationships of the Company.”
[191]   
The “Company”
referred to in this clause is Ramm.  The terms “business” and “business relationships” are not defined in the Consulting
Agreement.  They therefore bear their ordinary, everyday meaning.   The Oxford
Dictionary of English[46]
defines business as including “an activity that someone is engaged in” and “commercial
activity”.
[192]   
The question then
becomes, did Martines’ failure to disclose, materially injure the business of
RAMM or the business relationships of RAMM?  In my view it did.
[193]   
The effective
operation of a business (or “the activity someone is engaged in”) depends on trust,
honesty, and transparency within the organization.  Lack of trust, honesty and
transparency within an organization is inherently harmful to the activity of
the organization.   The concept of business relationships includes
relationships between a corporation and its senior executives, between senior
executives and the board, and between senior executives themselves.  Martines’
failure to disclose the events surrounding the Bluff email materially injured
the activity of RAMM and the business relationships within RAMM in that it
materially diminished or destroyed the trust between the Board and Martines.
[194]   
Martines
agrees that the issue of the Extraction Solutions Agreement was discussed at
the June 10 board meeting.  His request of DLA Piper and their bluff email in
response were directly relevant to that discussion.  Martines received the
Bluff email the day before the June 10 Board meeting but did not tell the
Board.  Although Martinez justified this by describing it as an operational
decision rather than one that related to high level guidance, this does not
explain why Martines felt obliged to disclose the ethanol leak and the expiry
of timelines under the Agreement to the Board.  One might think that if the
expiry of timelines under the Agreement was relevant for the Board, then the
steps Martines was taking in that regard, particularly the possibility of
terminating the agreement were also relevant for the Board to know.
[195]   
In the
circumstances of this case I infer that Martines failed to disclose the
termination because of a concern that RAMM might not close the amalgamation had
it received the information.  In my view, Martines was trying to skate a very
fine line between sufficient disclosure to the Board to avoid misrepresentation
but also not tell the Board, and in particular not tell RAMM,  so much that it
might give RAMM a reason to postpone or re-negotiate the Amalgamation.
[196]   
Burnett
conceded at trial that had Martines been open about those events, it may well
have been possible to maintain a business relationship with him.  It was
Martines’ failure to be open about those issues that led Burnett to lose
confidence in him.
[197]   
In my
view, Burnett’s position is well founded in this regard.  While Martines’
conduct did not rise to the level of fraudulent misrepresentation because of the
more detailed legal requirements surrounding misrepresentation and reliance,
that does not mean that his conduct did not harm the business or the business
relationships of RAMM.  I find that Martines’ lack of forthrightness harmed
both the business and the business relationships of RAMM in that it failed to
meet the standards of trust and transparency that a Board has the right to
expect of senior officers within a corporation.  The disappearance of that
trust was sufficient to terminate the Consulting Agreement under s. 6.1(a).
[198]   
The
plaintiffs submit that the Consulting Agreement only took effect on June 15 and
that RAMM’s complaints relate to conduct that occurred before June 15.  However,
the Bluff email was sent on June 16 without advising the Board.    Between June
15 and July 9, Martines continued to fail to advise the Board about having
received or sent the Bluff email.  Although Martines’ conduct before June 15
might not be cause for termination, it is nevertheless relevant to considering
whether RAMM was justified in losing confidence because of Martines’ conduct as
of June 15 and onward.  Put another way, RAMM was entitled to consider whether
Martines’ conduct after June 15 was a one-off spur of the moment anomaly or
whether it went to a larger issue of trust and transparency.
[199]   
The plaintiffs’
third claim under the Consulting Agreement arises out of section 3.4 which requires
RAMM to reimburse Naturale for “any business and out-of-pocket expenses
reasonably and properly incurred by NSI…”.
[200]   
Section 6.2 of the Consulting
Agreement provides that RAMM remains liable to reimburse NSI for any expenses
incurred for Canapar up to the date of termination even if RAMM is entitled to
terminate.
[201]   
The
expenses the plaintiffs claim are set out in a letter dated August 27, 2021
from Plaintiffs’ counsel.  They come to $14,971.80.[47]
[202]   
Martines
confirmed the legitimacy and accuracy of those expenses at trial.  He was not
challenged on that evidence.  The expenses include items like rent for the
Ragusa premises, airline tickets, car rentals and a variety of sundry
expenses.  There was no suggestion at trial that these were not valid business
expenses.  As a result, I award Martines judgment in the amount of $14,971.80
on account of those expenses.
[203]   
The
parties addressed a number of issues at trial which I have not addressed in
these reasons given the nature of my findings.  I avert to some of them here.
[204]   
The first
is damages.  In light of my findings that there were no misrepresentations and
more importantly, that Ramm did not rely on any of the alleged misrepresentations
I do not find it necessary to assess damages.
[205]   
Second, the
plaintiffs raised a limitations issue in relation to an amended statement of claim
and counterclaim by Ramm.  I allowed the amended pleading at the outset of
trial on the basis that it did not plead any new cause of action.  At the
request of counsel for the plaintiffs I undertook to make findings about
discoverability of the newly pleaded allegations in the event my finding about
the absence of a new cause of action was wrong.
[206]   
The amended
statement of defence and counterclaim was delivered on February 5, 2024.
[207]   
  When Burnett terminated the Consulting
Agreement on July 9, 2021, he had access to all of the emails in Martines’
inbox, including those on which RAMM relies for its allegations of
illegality.   It may, however, be asking too much of Burnett or RAMM to begin
combing the email boxes of employees in a newly acquired corporation.  However,
Burnett received the report from Caruso on November 1, 2021.  As a result of
that report Burnett knew or ought to have known about all of the allegations of
unlawfulness surrounding the Agreement because the report discloses the facts
on which those allegations are based.  As a result, if the newly pleaded
allegations in the amended statement of claim and counterclaim do constitute
new causes of action, the limitations period on those causes of action would
have expired on November 2, 2023.  Given that the amended pleading was not
delivered until February 5, 2024 any new causes of action in it would be time
barred.
[208]   
In my view, however,
the limitations period is a non-issue given that I have assessed the
allegations, concluded that they did not amount to misrepresentations and have
concluded that RAMM did not rely on those alleged misrepresentations.
[209]   
Third, much
was made at trial about whether Martines could be held personally liable for
any of the allegations made against him.  The issue arises out of a conflict
between the amalgamation documents which provide that any representations by
corporate officers are made in their corporate capacity and are made without
personal liability on the one hand;[48]
and principles of tort law on the other hand which hold that corporate officers
are personally liable for torts they commit, including misrepresentation, even when
the tort is committed in a corporate capacity.[49]
[210]   
Given my findings
about the absence of any misrepresentation and my finding that RAMM did not
rely on the alleged misrepresentations, this is not the appropriate case in
which to opine on the potential conflict between exculpatory clauses and tort
principles in the context of misrepresentations by corporate officers.
[211]   
Finally,
the plaintiffs raised a host of issues concerning negligent misrepresentation
including duty of care, proximity, foreseeability, proximate cause and residual
policy considerations.  I appreciate that a sequentially perfect analysis would
require those issues to be addressed before addressing the misrepresentation
and reliance.  I do not, however, find it necessary to do so given my findings on
the substantive issues of misrepresentation and reliance.
[212]   
For the
reasons set out above, I grant judgment in favour of the plaintiffs in the
amount of $14,971.80.  I otherwise dismiss the plaintiffs claim and dismiss the
defendant’s counterclaim.
[213]   
Any party
seeking costs arising out of these reasons will have three weeks to deliver
written submissions.  The responding party will have two weeks to deliver its
answer with a further one week for reply.