[1]              
Ontario Power Generation Inc. (OPG), the defendant, brings a
motion to strike the following causes of action from the plaintiff, M.P.’s Amended
Amended Statement of Claim dated October 23, 2024 (the Claim) pursuant to rule
21.01(b) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg 194 (the
“Rules”):
[2]              
The defendant also moves under Rules 25.06 and 25.11.
[3]              
At the hearing of the motion, both counsel advised that for
purposes of the motion, the operative pleading was the Amended Amended
Statement of Claim dated October 23, 2024.  Although that pleading has not yet been
issued, it was agreed that consent to issue it had been provided and it was the
relevant pleading for purposes of this motion.
[4]              
As pleaded in the Claim:
[5]              
With respect to the tort of negligent investigation, the Claim
specifically pleads:
[6]              
With respect to the tort of intrusion upon seclusion, the Claim
specifically pleads:
[7]              
With respect to the breach of fiduciary duty, the Claim
specifically pleads:
[8]              
With respect to the tort of harassment, the Claim specifically
pleads:
[9]              
Additional causes of action, including, among others, breach of
contract, breach of statutory or common law duty and contrastive dismissal are
also pled, but are not the subject of this motion.
[10]          
The four issues to be decided on this motion are whether the
following claims should be struck for failing to disclose a reasonable cause of
action, on the basis that they are frivolous or vexatious, and/or for failing
to plead all material facts:
[11]          
The relevant Rules, being 21.01(1)(b), 25.06(1) and 25.11 provide
as follows:
[12]          
The law under Rule 21.01(1)(b)
has been summarized in Darmar Farms Inc. v. Syngenta Canada et al., 2018
ONSC 7129 [Darmar] at para. 16:
[13]          
In R. v. Imperial
Tobacco Canada Ltd. [cited
in Darmar] at para 19, the Supreme Court of Canada noted:
[14]          
However, as stated in Doyle Salewski Inc. v. Lalonde, 2016
ONSC 5313 at para 50, the test for sustaining a pleading is not high, a germ or
a scintilla of a cause of action will be sufficient.
[15]          
As set out in Blunt v. Dr. Vaidyanathan, 2018 ONSC 3243 [Blunt],
at para 42: Pursuant to Rule 25.06(1), disclosure of
material facts must be made. These include facts that establish the constituent
elements of the claim or defence. The material facts are to be stated
concisely, i.e. set out with precision and clarity. The plaintiff
is required to plead facts capable of supporting each constituent element of
the cause of action raised. Rule 25.06 mandates a minimum level of material
fact disclosure. If the level is not reached, the remedy is a motion to strike.
[16]          
As well, as set out in Blunt at
para 43: Pursuant to Rule 25.11, the court may strike out or expunge all or
part of a pleading, with or without leave to amend, on the ground that the
pleading may prejudice or delay the fair trial of the action; is scandalous,
frivolous or vexatious; or is an abuse of the process of the court. The claim
must be read as generously as possible. Any inadequacies in the form of the
allegations which are merely the result of drafting deficiencies are to be
accommodated. Material facts are to be taken as proven, unless it is plain and
obvious that they are based on assumptive or speculative conclusions that are
not capable of belief. Similar facts may be pleaded as long as the added
complexity arising from their pleading does not outweigh their potential probative
value.
[17]          
OPG and M.P. agree that in assessing the adequacy of pleadings
under Rules 21.01, 25.06 and 25.11, the court must bear in mind their purposes as
set out in Blunt, at para 32:
[18]          
The tort of negligent investigation was recognized by the Supreme
Court of Canada in Hill v. Hamilton-Wentworth Regional Police Services Board
2007 SCC 41 where it was held that police officers owed a duty of care to
suspects being investigated for a crime.
[19]          
In Correia v. Canac Kitchens, 2008 ONCA 506 [Canac],
the Ontario Court of Appeal addressed the issue of whether private actors can
be held liable for the tort of negligent investigation.  Although the Ontario Court
of Appeal concluded that the tort should be expanded to allow a claim of
negligent investigation against a private third-party investigation firm that
was retained by the employer for the purpose of investigating issues of theft
and drug dealing in the workplace, it expressly declined to recognize and
impose a duty of care on employers when conducting an investigation with
respect to their employees.
[20]          
In reaching this decision, the Ontario Court of Appeal noted that
private investigation firms often exercise functionally equivalent powers of
the police, but without the oversight and accountability.  Accordingly, the Ontario
Court of Appeal found at paragraph 71 and 72 that the investigation firm could
be held liable for the tort of negligent investigation given that it was in the
"business of investigation, performing functions analogous to those
performed by the police" and because “[w]here, as here, the private firm
performs a function analogous to the public police, they ought to be subject to
similar liability”.
[21]          
However, the Ontario Court of Appeal in that case expressly
declined to recognize and impose a duty of care on the employer that would give
rise to liability under the tort of negligent investigation.  In Canac,
the Ontario Court of Appeal upheld the motion judge’s decision to strike the
claim for negligent investigation as against the employer but allowed it to
proceed against the private investigation firm.
[22]          
Canac was recently followed in Lee v. Magna
International Inc. 2020 ONSC 3912 [Magna].  The plaintiff in Magna
alleged that he had been constructively dismissed by his employer as a result
of its failure to conduct an appropriate investigation, as required by the
Occupational Health and Safety Act. The plaintiff further claimed that his
employer was liable for the tort of negligent investigation.  In Magna, the
court held that amendments to the Occupational Health and Safety Act introduced
following Canac, which imposed
new standards regarding workplace
investigations, did not give rise
to a duty on behalf of employers under the tort of negligent investigation.
[23]          
M.P. does not take issue with the relevant case law.  Rather, he
argues that the OPG’s position incorrectly equates the Nuclear Safety Team at
OPG with OPG in its role as employer as opposed to the Nuclear Safety Team’s
position as “peace officers” under The Security for Electricity Generating
Facilities and Nuclear Facilities Act, S.O. 2014 C.15, Sched. 3, S. 2. (the
Nuclear Facilities Act).
[24]          
In R. v. Ramnath, 2018 ONCJ 853 [Ramnath] a member
of Nuclear Safety Team arrested Mr. Ramnath on suspicion of impaired driving.  In
considering a challenge to the conduct of the relevant Nuclear Safety Team
member, the court confirmed that the relevant officer was a security officer
who was employed by the Ontario Power Generation Nuclear Security and that the
Nuclear Facilities Act designates such officers employed in that capacity to be
“peace officers” while engaged in providing certain services [see para 7 of Ramnath].
[25]          
Section 2-4 of the Nuclear Facilities Act provides:
[26]          
The question to be answered, is whether the members of the OPG
Nuclear Security Team were acting as peace officers under the Nuclear
Facilities Act or as employer when they conducted the Investigation.
[27]          
Under section 4 of the Nuclear Facilities Act, they are peace
officers when providing “security services in relation to premises where a
restricted access facility is located” Under section 1 of the Nuclear
Facilities Act, the ‘security services’ are defined to include, “without
limitation guarding or patrolling for the purpose of protecting persons or
property”.
[28]          
If the Investigation is part of the Nuclear Safety Teams’ role of
as a peace officer, it must be while they are (i) providing security services
(being without limitation, guarding or patrolling for the purpose of protecting
persons or property) and (ii) in relation to premises where a restricted access
facility is located.
[29]          
As noted above, according to the Claim, the Investigation was to
be undertaken to determine the identity of the individuals who disseminated the
McArthur Connection.  M.P. then pleads that the OPG fell below the standard of
care based on the investigative techniques used, failing to obtain and consider
all necessary evidence, arriving at unreasonable conclusions about the individuals
and the risk they posed to M.P., relying on unreasonable sources of
information, failing to properly investigate the sources of information and
breaching its duty of good faith and candour to M.P.
[30]          
The investigation as framed in the Claim does not relate to the guarding
or patrolling the premises where a restricted access facility is located.  To
be part of ‘security services’ as defined in the Nuclear Facilities Act, it
must therefore be encompassed in the ‘without limitation’ language.  Even if I
assume that the Darlington Facility is a restricted access facility, the
Investigation does not appear, on its face, to relate to the premises on which
a restricted access facility is located.  M.P. claims that the Investigation
was intended to protect him as a person located on the relevant premises. 
However, I find that based on the Claim, it is more appropriate to characterize
the Investigation not as part of the Nuclear Safety Team’s security services
being provided under the Nuclear Facilities Act, but rather as part of OPG’s
role as employer.  The Investigation of the McArthur Connection dissemination
is not unique or related to the nature of the premises on which the Darlington
Facility is located, it cannot be said to concern security specifically
relating to electrical generating or nuclear facilities.
[31]          
Accordingly, I find that to the extent the OPG Nuclear Safety
Team members were involved in the Investigation they were not doing so in their
capacity as peace officers under the Nuclear Facilities Act but rather as representatives
of OPG as employer.  As a result, it is plain and obvious based on Canac
that the claim of M.P. as against OPG for the tort of negligent investigation
cannot succeed.
[32]          
I would allow this portion of OPG’s motion and M.P. will remove
paragraphs claims for negligent investigation from paras 1(i) and 39-42 of his
Claim.
[33]          
In order to establish a claim for intrusion upon seclusion, a
plaintiff must demonstrate that: (i) the defendant’s conduct was intentional or
reckless; (ii) the defendant invaded, without lawful justification the
plaintiff's private affairs or concerns; and (iii) a reasonable person would
regard the invasion as highly offensive, causing distress, humiliation or
anguish: see Jones v. Tsige, 2012 ONCA 32 [Jones], at para 71.
[34]          
The Ontario Court of Appeal in Jones at para 57 explained
that “the tort focuses on the act of intrusion, as opposed to dissemination or
publication of information”. Further, in paragraph 72, the Ontario Court of
Appeal explained that the three elements noted above would not open the
floodgates as the tort “will arise only for deliberate and significant
invasions of personal privacy…that, viewed objectively on the reasonable person
standard, can be described as highly offensive.”
[35]          
In order to establish liability for the tort of intrusion upon
seclusion, the defendant must actually engage in an intrusive action themself,
rather than fail to prevent the intrusive acts of another individual.  In Owsianik
v. Equifax Canada Co., 2022 ONCA 813, the Ontario Court of Appeal struck
the plaintiffs’ claim under the tort arising from the data breach of a company
that stored personal information for commercial use. The Court found that while
the defendant failed to take steps to prevent hackers from invading the privacy
interests of the plaintiffs, the defendant did not itself interfere with such
privacy interests.
[36]          
M.P. claims that the intentional conduct of OPG arises not
because it failed to stop the individuals from disseminating the McArthur
connection, but rather because OPG itself should be vicariously liable for the
dissemination by the individuals as a result of the employer / employee
relationship.
[37]          
M.P. submits that the Ontario Court of Appeal’s decision in Trans
Union of Canada v. Obodo 2022 ONCA 814 makes it explicit that an
employer-employee relationship can ground a vicarious breach of privacy claim. In
that case, the Ontario Court of Appeal dismissed an appellant’s claim for
intrusion upon seclusion against Trans Union of Canada as a result of the
actions of a third-party hacker.   The Ontario Court of Appeal held that that
the appellant’s claim for vicarious liability ignored that fact that the third-party
hacker was not an employee of the plaintiff:
[38]          
Turning to the requirements of vicarious liability in paragraph
41 of Bazely the Supreme Court of Canada stated:
[39]          
In applying the criteria set out in Bazely, the court in Osmani
v. Universal Structural Restorations Ltd., 2022 ONSC 6979 [Osmani]
held that an employer was vicariously liable for the tort of assault committed
by one of its employees.  In that case, an employee with direct supervision
over the victim was found to have assaulted the victim (a subordinate
employee).  The conduct complained of came to the employer’s attention, the
employer told the employee to stop, but the assaultive incidents continued. 
The court found the employer did precious little to investigate the incidents
or prevent their recurrence.  Further the assault was committed by an employee
who was tasked with supervising and directing the conduct of his crew against a
member of his crew.
[40]          
In considering the court’s finding in Osmani, it is also
important to consider the Supreme Court of Canada’s statement in Bazely
at paragraph 42 that: It must be possible to say that the employer significantly
increased the risk of the harm by putting the employee in his or her position
and requiring him to perform the assigned tasks.  In Osmani, the
employer placing supervising employee in a position of control over the victim significantly
increased the risk of harm.
[41]          
However, unlike the situation in Osmani, in the present case, I do
not find anything in the employee/employer relationship that significantly
increased the risk of the harm by the individuals.  Accepting as pled that the
individuals used OPG provided technology and computer systems and that M.P. had
a managerial role over the individuals, I do not find that the wrongful conduct
of the individuals pled (i.e their dissemination of the McArthur Connection)
was sufficiently related to the individuals’ employment so as to ground a
finding of vicarious liability.  Rather, it amounted to an incidental
connection to the employment enterprise as referred to in Bazely.
[42]          
I also note in this regard that the conduct complained of by the
individuals is one of dissemination of personal information as opposed to
intrusion.  As held in Jones, dissemination by itself is not enough to
ground a finding of intrusion upon seclusion.
[43]          
Accordingly, I would allow this portion of OPG’s motion and M.P.
will remove the claims for intrusion upon seclusion from paragraphs 1(i) and 48
his Claim.
[44]          
The parties agree that an employment relationship is not presumptively fiduciary
in nature, but a fiduciary relationship may arise
on an ad hoc basis. There must be
something beyond the contractual employment relationship in order for a
fiduciary obligation to be imposed.  It is a question of context and the
factual circumstances which exist as to whether an employer acts as a fiduciary
for an employee: see Canada (Attorney General) v. Confederation Life
Insurance Co. 1995 CanLII 7097 (ON SC), at para 169.
[45]          
In Elder Advocates of Alberta
Society v. Alberta 2011 SCC 24 [Elder Advocates] at para
36, the Supreme Court of Canada summarised the test as follows:
[46]          
In Elder Advocates, the Supreme Court of Canada at para 31
required as part of the first portion of the test that the party asserting the
fiduciary duty “…must be able to point to a forsaking
by the alleged fiduciary of the interests of all others in favour of those of
the beneficiary, in relation to the specific legal interest at stake”.
[47]          
Counsel for M.P. argued that there are cases where a claim of a fiduciary
duty being owed to an employee by an employer has not been struck at the
pleading stage.  For example, in Jackson v.
Canada (Attorney General) 2006 CanLII
32311, the Ontario Court of Appeal found
that a breach of fiduciary duty could potentially be established where the
employer, Correctional Services Canada failed to protect an employee address
listing which found its way into the hands of the prison population.
[48]          
Further, in Thomas v. Woolworth Canada Ltd., [1996] O.J.
No. 2760 (Gen. Div.). at para. 6, in discussing alleged claims of sexual
assault by the plaintiff, the court held it is not plain and obvious that no fiduciary duty arises where a continuing course of demeaning conduct reported to the employer which
makes it impossible for the employee to continue to work in dignity and without
fear is permitted without any action by the employer and those in authority (and therefore with its tacit
permission or acquiescence).
[49]          
Both of the cases noted by M.P. predate the Supreme Court of
Canada’s analysis in Elder Advocates and do not provide an analysis of
the first portion of test outlined therein.
[50]          
In this regard, M.P. pleads that from 2018 until M.P.’s departure
from OPG, OPG and M.P. agreed that OPG would act on M.P.’s behalf in respect of
the prevention of abuse and harassment towards himself and his family in
relation to McArthur Connection.  Specifically, the Claim states that in 2018,
M.P. informed his manager of the McArthur Connection and his desire to keep
that information confidential.  In turn, M.P.’s manager and members of the
Nuclear Safety Team promised to liaise with police in order to ensure the
safety of M.P. and his family as well as set up online monitoring of whether
M.P.’s name was connected in any way to McArthur.
[51]          
It does not appear to me that the facts as pleaded – a promise to
liaise with police and set up online monitoring – amount to a forsaking by OPG of
their interests in favour of M.P.’s.  Accordingly, the first branch of the ad
hoc fiduciary test set is not met.
[52]          
Accordingly, I would allow this portion of OPG’s motion and M.P.
will remove the claims for breach of fiduciary duty from paragraphs 1(i) and
43-46 of his Claim.
[53]          
In Merrifield v. Canada
(Attorney General), 2019 ONCA 205, the court held that there is no cause of action in tort at
common law for harassment, but at para 53 went on to say: “In summary, while we
do not foreclose the development of a properly conceived tort of harassment
that might apply in appropriate contexts, we conclude that Merrifield has
presented no compelling reason to recognize a new tort of harassment in this
case.”
[54]          
From a policy perspective, the Ontario Court of Appeal in Merrifield
at para 42 noted that in that case there were other legal remedies available to
address the conduct that was alleged to constitute harassment.  Like in Merrifield,
there are multiple additional causes of action that remain in M.P.’s Claim
against OPG including breach of contract, breach of statutory or common law
duty and contrastive dismissal which have also pled by M.P., but are not the
subject of this motion.
[55]          
In Caplan v. Atas, 2021 ONSC 670, at
paras. 163 – 175, Corbett J.
held that a new tort of “internet harassment” should be recognized in Ontario
and found that the defendant’s conduct met the following test drawn from
American case law:
[56]          
Here, none of the allegations of harassment is conduct of the
sort referred to in Atas. Accordingly, I would allow this
portion of OPG’s motion and M.P. will remove the claims for the tort of
harassment from paragraphs 1(i) and 49 his Claim.
[57]          
To summarize, I would grant OPG’s motion to strike the portions
of M.P.’s claim relating to the tort of negligent investigation, the tort of
intrusion upon seclusion by way of vicarious liability; breach of fiduciary
duty; and the tort of harassment.
[58]          
In OPG’s factum, in connection with the tort of negligent
investigation OPG suggested certain additional paragraphs (21-24, 30, and 35) referencing
the failure of OPG to adequately conduct the Investigation also be struck. 
However, to the extent these paragraphs are relevant to other remaining causes
of action (i.e., breach of contract, breach of statutory or common law duty and
constructive dismissal) I decline to do so.
[59]          
Fixing costs is a discretionary decision under s. 131 of the Courts
of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43.  In exercising my discretion, I may
consider the result in the proceeding, any offer to settle or to contribute
made in writing, and the factors listed in Rule 57.01.  These factors include
but are not limited to: (i) the result in the proceeding; (ii) the experience
of the lawyer for the party entitled to the costs as well as the rates charged
and the hours spent by that lawyer; (iii) the amount of costs that an
unsuccessful party could reasonably expect to pay in relation to the step in
the proceeding for which costs are being fixed; (iv) the amount claimed and the
amount recovered in the proceeding; (v) the complexity of the proceeding; (vi)
the importance of the issues; and (vii) the conduct of any party that tended to
shorten or lengthen unnecessarily the duration of the proceeding. Rule
57.01(1)(f) provides that the court may also consider “any other matter
relevant to the question of costs.”
[60]          
In exercising my discretion to fix costs, I must consider what is
fair and reasonable for the unsuccessful party to pay in this proceeding and
balance the compensation of the successful party with the goal of fostering
access to justice: Boucher v Public Accountants Council (Ontario) (2004),
2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R. (3d) 291 (C.A.) at paras. 26 and 37.
[61]          
For these reasons, I fix the costs of the motion at $7,000,
inclusive of disbursements and Harmonized Sales Tax, and order the plaintiff to
pay that amount to the defendant within 30 days of the date of this order.