[1]          This is a
motion by the plaintiff, Suzana Kovacevic, for leave to bring a motion for production
of a document from a non-party, American Express. More specifically, the plaintiff
seeks leave to bring a motion for production from American Express of the defendant’s
American Express credit card statement showing the purchases he made on December
29, 2014 (the “AMEX Statement”). The motion also seeks “compensation for the
punitive damages caused by the abusive behavior and legal misconduct of the
Defendant”.
[2]          This
motion follows a motion by the plaintiff heard by this court on April 24, 2024 (the
“April 2024 Production Motion”). In the April 2024 Production Motion, the
plaintiff moved for an order compelling the defendant to produce the very same document,
the AMEX Statement, that is the target of this motion. In his reasons for
decision dismissing the April 2024 Production Motion, Associate Justice
Robinson held as follows:
[3]          Associate
Justice Robinson also considered submissions from the defendant that the
plaintiff’s April 2024 Production Motion was an abuse of process. On that
issue, he held as follows:
[4]          The
plaintiff did not appeal Associate Justice Robinson’s decision on the April
2024 Production Motion. Following the release of that decision, she requested a
case conference seeking, among other things, leave to bring a motion requiring
American Express, a non-party, to produce the AMEX Statement.
[5]          By
direction of the Team Lead, Toronto Region dated August 8, 2024, the case
conference was assigned to me. At the plaintiff’s request, I convened a case
conference which proceeded on September 26, 2024. After hearing the parties’
submissions, I declined make an order at a case conference granting leave to
the plaintiff to bring any discovery‑related motions. My endorsement
included the following:
[6]          The
plaintiff then brought this motion. Although I was not seized of it, the motion
came before me.
[7]          In support
of her request for leave to bring a motion to compel American Express to
produce the AMEX Statement to her, the plaintiff submits that:
[8]         
The defendant submits that:
[9]          With
respect to the issue of whether leave is required, the plaintiff submits that
her proposed motion seeks production of a relevant document that the defendant
improperly failed to produce. She also submits that she was not able to ask the
defendant about the document on his examination for discovery because the
defendant’s lawyer ended the examination prematurely and improperly. She argues
that, in these circumstances, she does not require leave to bring her motion.
[10]      In support of her position, the
plaintiff relies on Heathcote v. RBC Life Insurance Company.[3]
In that case, Henderson J. held that leave is not required for a plaintiff to
bring a motion relating to unfulfilled undertakings, as that is one of the
exceptions provided by subrule 48.04(2)(a). Henderson J. also held as
follows with respect to refusals:
[11]      In my view, Heathcote is
not applicable in these circumstances, and I do not accept the plaintiff’s
submissions that leave is not required for her proposed motion. Unlike the
situation in Heathcote, the plaintiff’s proposed motion is not a motion
to compel the defendant to answer unfulfilled undertakings or proper questions
that he has refused to answer on his examination for discovery. The intended
motion is a motion for production from a non-party under Rule 30.10. Such a
motion does not fall under subrule 48.04(2)(a) or subrule 48.04(2)(b)(iii), and
it is not otherwise one of the exceptions under subrule 48.04(3)(a). Therefore,
pursuant to the order of Associate Justice Robinson, the plaintiff requires
leave to bring her proposed discovery-related motion.
[12]      In my view, the plaintiff is
attempting to obtain leave in circumstances where the court has already
determined that leave should not be granted. The substance of this motion –
whether leave should be granted to seek production of the AMEX Statement – has
already been determined in the April 2024 Production Motion. The substitution
of a non‑party, American Express, as the intended responding party does
not alter the fact that the plaintiff is seeking leave to bring a motion to
compel production of the very same document with respect to which she previously
sought leave and with respect to which leave was denied in the April 2024
Production Motion. The plaintiff should not be permitted to do indirectly
(obtain leave to bring a motion compelling production of a document from a non‑party)
what the court has already determined she cannot do directly (obtain leave to
bring a motion compelling production of the very same document from the
defendant). Whether viewed from the lens of issue estoppel or abuse of process,
the motion must fail.
[13]      In any event, I would not grant
the plaintiff leave to bring a discovery related motion in the circumstances.
The plaintiff’s arguments on this motion for leave as to why the proposed production
motion should be permitted appear to repeat those made to Associate Justice
Robinson on the April 2024 Production Motion. In his reasons for decision,
Associate Justice Robinson held as follows with respect to the issue of whether
the plaintiff should be granted leave to bring a discovery‑related
motion:
[14]      I concur with this reasoning and
find that it applies equally in the context of this motion.
[15]      I also note that the plaintiff has
taken an additional step that is inconsistent with this motion by serving and
then attempting to file a trial record on August 8, 2024. This was done after
the release of Associate Justice Robinson’s decision with respect to the April
2024 Production Motion. I recognize that the plaintiff has attempted to explain
her past efforts to set the action down for trial as having been undertaken
without a proper understanding of their consequences, namely that doing so could
be a bar to the April 2024 Production Motion and other the discovery‑related
motions. However, the plaintiff’s recent attempt to file a trial record cannot
be reconciled with Associate Justice Robinson’s reasons for decision on the
April 2024 Production Motion in which he makes it clear that setting the action
down for trial is a bar to further discovery‑related motions (with some
exceptions that do not apply here) without leave of the court.
[16]      Finally, I note that in his
reasons for decision on the April 2024 Production Motion, Associate Justice Robinson
concluded that, even if leave were granted, he would have dismissed the
plaintiff’s production motion because she did not meet her onus of
demonstrating that the AMEX Statement is a relevant document.[6]
This finding, which was not appealed, is highly relevant because even if leave
were granted to the plaintiff to seek production of the AMEX Statement from American
Express, it has already been determined that the document is not relevant.
[17]      In view of all the circumstances
outlined above, I decline to exercise my discretion to grant leave to the
plaintiff to bring a motion seeking an order compelling American Express, a non‑party,
to produce the AMEX Statement. This aspect of the motion is dismissed.
[18]      In her notice of motion for this
motion, the plaintiff seeks “compensation for the punitive damages caused by
the abusive behavior and legal misconduct of the Defendant”. At the hearing of
the motion, the plaintiff made various submissions that the defendant and his
lawyer have acted improperly throughout the course of this action. In my view,
those submissions are unsupported by any evidence. On the record before me, I
see no basis to find that there has been any misconduct by the defendant or his
lawyer. This aspect of the motion is also dismissed.
[19]      For the
reasons outlined above, the plaintiff’s motion is dismissed.
[20]      With respect
to costs, the defendant
shall serve the plaintiff by email with the defendant’s written costs
submissions not exceeding two pages and the defendant’s Costs Outline by
December 2, 2024. The plaintiff shall serve the defendant’s counsel by
email with her responding cost submissions not exceeding two pages and her Costs
Outline by December 9, 2024. Both parties’ costs submissions shall be filed
through the online portal and uploaded to CaseLines.