[1]              
Ashley Keenan is charged with murdering her mother in Ashtabula
Township, Ohio. It is alleged, on January 11, 2024, Ms. Keenan, estranged from
her family for several years, followed her mother to her mother’s home and shot
her in the driveway.
[2]              
On January 14, 2024, Ms. Keenan had made her way to Toronto and walked
into the front lobby of 22 Division and admitted that she shot her mother. She
was arrested. She faces extradition back to the United States. The Attorney
General of Canada has been authorized by the Minister of Justice of Canada to
seek an order for the committal of Ms. Keenan to await surrender for murder.
[3]              
I have been appointed a case management judge in her extradition case. An
extradition hearing date has not yet been set. There have been complications
and delay. This motion is but one of them.
[4]              
Ms. Keenan brings a motion asking me to order disclosure. From many
people and organizations. For many things.
[5]              
As is her right, she has chosen to represent herself on this motion. To
help her and to help me, I have the appointed a lawyer, Mr. Gray. Though Ms.
Keenan raises complaints about Mr. Gray, who was her past counsel in this case,
his help is necessary. Also given some distinctive things about this case,
another lawyer would not be as helpful. That said, the extradition judge can
always retain another amicus if they see fit.
[6]              
Given her self-represented status and other factors particular to who
she is, I will read my decision in court, so Ms. Keenan hears what I have to
say and has the best chance of understanding why I decided in this way. Also, I
will avoid, the best I can, talking about law and cases. This is not to say I
have ignored the helpful legal arguments full of law and legal analysis given
to me by the lawyers. And I have also listened very carefully to the lengthy
arguments made by Ms. Keenan and have paid close attention to them. One such
argument was that she needed further disclosure so that she can properly make a
request for disclosure. In other words, to properly conduct this motion itself.
I have taken that into account in coming to my decision.
[7]              
Let me begin with two observations that do not deal with the merits of
the motion but are important to the conduct of the hearing. First, I have no
grounds to believe that Ms. Keenan was not fit to conduct the hearing. Ms.
Keenan herself strongly disputes she suffers from any mental illness and
disagrees with Dr. Roland Jones’ diagnosis of her found in his report of October
7, 2024, that she suffers from a delusional disorder, paranoid type. More
relevant is Dr. Jones’ conclusion that Ms. Keenan is fit to conduct this
hearing. No party challenges that conclusion. Second, Ms. Keenan said that she
would like to retain a lawyer to represent her. Her desire to represent herself
has varied over time. Upon questioning of Ms. Keenan, it is clear to me that
she wishes to speak for herself in court. She did so at this hearing. And she
was able to make her points known. As well, amicus has provided a
detailed list of her requests for disclosure. Amicus has also provided
law in his written materials, highlighting the law and those authorities that favor
her position. I have also tried to help her the best I could at this
challenging hearing.
[8]              
In sum, I am satisfied that Ms. Keenan has had a fair hearing.
[9]              
Moving onto the merits of the motion. The long list of disclosure
materials is set out in detail in amicus’s letter dated July 29, 2024,
updated October 25, 2024. Without detailing each request, they broadly are:
documents held by the Canadian Border Services Agency and the Toronto Police
Service; devices held by the Toronto Police Service; documents held by the
Vanier Centre for Women; documents held by hospitals in Ontario; communications
between Canada and U.S. authorities; documents from the United States and
Mexico; and documents held by the Canadian government.
[10]          
I will repeat what I said before in court. An extradition hearing is not
a trial. The role of an extradition judge is limited. Also, the disclosure
legally required to run a fair and just extradition hearing is different from
the disclosure needed from a prosecutor to allow a defendant to make full
answer and defence at trial. It is much less. Of a different nature. And for a
different purpose.
[11]          
For Ms. Keenan’s benefit I will say this, just because I do not order
something for the extradition hearing that she feels she needs to defend
herself on the charge of murder, this does not mean that she will not receive
such evidence before her trial. Likely she will.
[12]          
Moreover, my role is not to provide a fugitive disclosure to pursue
inquiries into all sorts of complaints they may have against domestic or
foreign state authorities. No matter how justified those complaints might be.
[13]          
Save for one exception, I do not order disclosure of any items Ms.
Keenan wants. They do not meet the legal test of disclosure in R. v. Larosa,
2022 OAC 108 at para. 76. I agree with the written submissions of
the Attorney General of Canada about the bulk of Ms. Keenan’s requests. While
there may be exceptional circumstances where there is authority to do so, I do
not generally have the authority to order foreign actors to disclose, to take
actions, or conduct investigations. This is far from such an exceptional case
to exercise this authority, even if I had it. Moreover, the various allegations
of abuse or misconduct have no air of reality. And if they pass that modest
threshold, they are not capable of supporting a remedy of a stay of proceedings
for an abuse of process. For example, even if Ms. Keenan has not been
adequately protected, treated, or cared for while in custody, they are
incapable of leading to a stay of her extradition proceedings. Though I do not
need to say, if true, these allegations could lead to other civil or criminal remedies.
More specifically, even if her incarceration at the Vanier Center for Women was
not Charter compliant, this situation is not capable of supporting the
remedy of a stay of the extradition proceedings. Regarding the disclosure of the
lengthy list of other items, even leaving aside issues of privilege and jurisdiction,
most of these requests are overly broad and have no relevance to any of the
allegations Ms. Keenan wishes to bring. They are truly fishing expeditions with
the speculative hope that they might uncover something useful to her. Ms.
Keenan’s request for disclosure to pursue disclosure is but an example. She
hopes to uncover something but has no reasonable basis for her hope. I can
easily foresee endless and boundless speculative requests for future ongoing disclosure
if this type of motion is even remotely entertained.
[14]          
That briefly decided, there are two requests that need more careful
scrutiny.
[15]          
The first category is disclosure of the police notes, audio/video
recordings, or other evidence held by the police about the interactions between
Ms. Keenan and the police officers at 22 Division on January 14, 2022. The Record
of the Case (ROC) names three officers who did: P.C. Richmond, P.C. Le, and
D.C. Burns. There may be others as well who interacted with her during the time
she was investigated and detained.
[16]          
I find that the test for disclosure has been met for this category of
evidence. The ROC outlines how Ms. Keenan came into 22 Division and admitted
her involvement in the murder. As I see it, this evidence will be significant
for the extradition judge to consider when deciding the issue of committal for
surrender. As the ROC reads, while the U.S. investigation up to that point,
suspected Ms. Keenan’s involvement, no one could positively identify the shooter,
or the vehicle driven by the shooter.
[17]          
Two material allegations arise based upon what is said and reasonable
inferences from what is said in the ROC.
[18]          
The first one. Ms. Keenan disputes the accuracy of what the ROC outlines
she told the police that night. The ROC only sets out in summary form what she said,
especially to P.C. Richmond who first spoke with her. There is an air of
reality to the possibility that Ms. Keenan’s statements were not fully and
accurately set out in the ROC. I do not need an affidavit from her to support
an inference that there may well be inaccuracies or other statements made by
her that could vary the meaning or put into context her statements set out in
the ROC. That is simply a matter of commonsense. Moreover, it is a matter of
fairness that in these fact specific circumstances, where the ROC depends so
heavily on Ms. Keenan’s “confession,” she should receive as complete a record
of these statements as there exists for her to challenge her committal at the
extradition hearing. The disclosure is relevant to this issue, and they are capable
of supporting her remedy which is to challenge the reliability of those
statements as found in the ROC.
[19]          
Second, Ms. Keenan was not given her right to counsel until she was
placed under investigative detention by P.C. Le. However, before then, P.C.
Richmond had already interacted and questioned Ms. Keenan. If P.C. Richmond
detained Ms. Keenan, her right to counsel was violated given that P.C. Richmond
did not tell her she had a right to counsel and by continuing to question her.
Detention includes not just physical restraint but also psychological
detention. If her right to counsel was violated, the statements she gave to P.C.
Richmond as found in the ROC, could be excluded from her extradition hearing as
a remedy.
[20]          
The Attorney General submits that there was no detention and that Ms.
Keenan freely confessed to P.C. Richmond.  That may well be the ultimate
conclusion by the extradition judge. However, even as set out in the ROC, there
is an air of reality to the allegation of a constitutional breach. Even after
receiving information from Ms. Keenan that she killed her human trafficker,
P.C. Richmond continued to question Ms. Keenan eliciting information about
where it happened and who she killed. It is more than arguable that prior to
questioning Ms. Keenan, he should have given Ms. Keenan her right to counsel.
This allegation is capable of supporting the remedy of the exclusion of her
statements at the extradition hearing. And the information sought is relevant
to those allegations. Indeed, it would be standard disclosure if this was a
domestic criminal prosecution.
[21]          
For these reasons, this disclosure is ordered.
[22]          
About the Canadian Border Services agents who may have interviewed her at
22 Division, they do not fall within the same category. There is no air of
reality to any allegation they may have breached her constitutional rights. The
ROC does not refer to the agents or any interview conducted by them. Any
interview by a Canadian Border Services agent could only have come after her
dealings with the police. After her detention, Ms. Keenan was given her rights
to counsel and she spoke with duty counsel for half an hour. I see no air of
reality to the allegation any Canadian Border Services agent violated her
rights. In addition, given the ROC does not refer to any statements made by her
to these agents, no remedy of an exclusion of evidence at her extradition
hearing is implicated. Finally, if the remedy is a request for a stay due to
the conduct of the agents, even if the agents did violate her rights, this
violation is not capable of supporting the remedy of a stay. I conclude this
even if I assess all the allegations of constitutional violations including
these, cumulatively.
[23]          
The second category of potential disclosure has to do with her personal
property or items found in the Ford Focus she drove to 22 Division.
[24]          
I have considered the following factors.
[25]          
First, I see that the ROC only mentions that the Toronto Police Service
officers took possession of Ms. Keenan’s belongings and sealed and photographed
the black Ford Focus bearing Texas license plate TPS 1996. P.C. Richmond then
placed all the personal property taken off Ms. Keenan into a property bag which
was provided to D.C. Burns. Although not contained in the ROC, it is not
disputed that the police sealed the Focus and returned it to the United States
with the owner’s consent. Counsel for the Toronto Police Service advised in a
letter that the police sealed the Focus without any review or inventory of its
contents. The ROC and the motion record does not refer to any evidence, whether
inculpatory or exculpatory, as being a part of her belongings or in the Focus, aside
from what Ms. Keenan initially told the police which was that she had evidence
in her car including a gun in a safe.
[26]          
Second, the ROC refers to D.C. Burns providing Detective Ward of the
Ashtabula County Sheriff’s Office the VIN and photos of the Ford Focus and certain
details of bank and other cards in Ms. Keenan’s name. This sharing of
information is something the police can legally do.
[27]          
Third, while Ms. Keenan says she has evidence that is exculpatory
amongst her possessions, she is not entitled to lead her trial defense at the extradition
hearing. So even if there was exculpatory evidence, such evidence is not relevant
to the role of the extradition judge.
[28]          
Fourth, counsel for the Attorney General advises me that the United
States has requested under the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty, Ms.
Keenan’s cellphone, clothing, and bank and financial cards seized by the
Toronto Police Service. Ms. Keenan has been given a copy of the ex parte application
record, two judicially authorized evidence gathering orders, and information
regarding the Attorney General of Canada’s intention to make an application for
a sending abroad hearing to which Ms. Keenan will be provided notice of.
[29]          
From these factors, I find that there was a reasonable basis to return
the Ford Focus to the United States. The car did not belong to Ms. Keenan. It
was a rental and reported stolen as it had not been returned to the car sharing
agency. The owner consented to the police action to return the vehicle. Thus,
there is no air of reality to any allegation that the return of the Focus was
done illegally or for any improper purpose.
[30]          
More concerning are the contents of the car and Ms. Keenan’s personal
property. Regarding the former, the letter from the Toronto Police Service
states that the Focus was sealed without review or inventory taken of its
contents. It does not say whether it was searched in any fashion before it was
sealed. Regarding the latter, the Toronto Police Service have Ms. Keenan’s
personal belongings. But under what legal authority did they seize these
belongings?
[31]          
For the sake of assessing the disclosure request, I will assume the
police conducted an illegal search of the vehicle’s interior and an illegal seizure
of Ms. Keenan’s belongings or property. Having done that, I have decided that the
test for disclosure has not been met.
[32]          
No remedy of an exclusion of evidence based on a Charter violation
is involved as no evidence obtained from such a search will be presented at the
extradition hearing. Therefore, there is no basis to order disclosure to pursue
this particular remedy.
[33]          
The only other remedy would be a stay of proceedings. In my view, even if
the police conducted an illegal search and seizure, their actions would not
rise to the level of a stay of proceedings for abuse. I conclude this based on many
cases that I know of in my many years as a judge, where the police have
searched cars, residences, or persons, without proper legal authority. In none
of these cases, on that basis alone, has there been a stay of proceedings.
Disclosure of the documents sought by Ms. Keenan in relation to this issue,
would not advance the remedy for a stay of proceedings. The standard that must
be met for an abuse of process leading to a stay is extremely high. It will
only be granted in the clearest of cases. Even assuming an air of reality to the
allegation that the police conducted illegal searches and seizures, the
allegations on the case specific facts of Ms. Keenan’s extradition is not
capable of supporting such a drastic remedy.
[34]          
For these reasons, the motion is only allowed in part.