[1]       The Plaintiff, Kamaljit
Chauhan, and the Defendants in this litigation were real estate investment
partners, who together purchased a property located at 15842 Horseshoe Hill
Road in Caledon, Ontario (“Horseshoe Hill”) along with other investors. The
intention was to make some improvements to the property, and then sell it for
profit.  The property was eventually sold approximately two years later.  The
parties disagree as to the quantum of the net sale proceeds owed to the
Plaintiffs.
[2]       Prior to trial, the
Plaintiffs’ action was discontinued as against the Defendants 2074874 Ontario
Inc. o/a Versailles Convention Centre Inc. and Satnam Khakh. At the conclusion
of the trial, the Plaintiffs also withdrew their claim as against the Defendant
Onkar Taggar. The three Defendants that remain in the litigation are therefore
Daljit Samra, Avtar Sangha, and Balwinder Bhandal.
[3]       Horseshoe Hill was purchased
by a group of ten investors, which includes the parties, on March 31, 2017.  On
February 14, 2019, the Defendants entered into an agreement of purchase and
sale to sell Horseshoe Hill. When the Plaintiffs learned of this event, they
registered a caution on the property. On July 30, 2019, Barnes J. ordered that
$297,230.10 from the sale proceeds be paid into court to the credit of the
action, which allowed the sale of Horseshoe Hill to proceed.
[4]       Ultimately, a consent Order
was obtained from Fowler-Byrne J. on September
27, 2019, that $200,000 from the proceeds of sale be paid into court pending a
further order of the court.
[5]       The
Defendants have also filed a Counterclaim against the Plaintiffs claiming
damages resulting from the caution that the Plaintiffs registered on title.
[6]       The ten investors who
collectively purchased Horseshoe Hill were not all previously known to one
another. There is no dispute between the parties that an individual named Gurpal
(“Paul”) Saini was involved in the purchase, although there is some dispute as
to the extent of his involvement. Mr. Saini was previously familiar with some
of the investors, including the Defendant, Daljit Samra, and also the Plaintiff,
Kamaljit Chauhan. The purchase price for Horseshoe Hill was $1,350,000.   At
the time of the closing, there was a verbal agreement that the ten investors
were to each contribute $7,000 towards a downpayment.  Each investor was also
expected to contribute approximately $69,000 towards the purchase of the
property, leaving a balance owing of $750,000, which was paid by way of a
mortgage taken out by the Defendant, Daljit Samra, on behalf of all the
investors.  The investors did not all pay precisely the same amount for the
purchase.
[7]       Mr. Saini provided $7,000 as
a downpayment. Mr. Chauhan also provided $7,000 as a downpayment, but his wife,
the Plaintiff, Gurbir Chauhan, did not pay a $7,000 downpayment. The balance of
the investors each provided a $7,000 down payment.
[8]       There were two groups of
people involved in the investment. There is no dispute that the first group was
comprised of Daljit Samra, Balwinder Bhandal, Avtar Sangha, Tarundeep Devgan,
and Buta Singh. There is no dispute that the second group included Kamaljit
Chauhan, Dilbag Aujla, Onkar Taggar, and Harpreet Kaur Sidhu, but the parties
do not agree as to the identity of the fifth investor in the second group. Mr.
Chauhan claims that his wife, Gurbir Chauhan, was the fifth investor. The Defendants
claim it was Paul Saini.
[9]       At the time that the
property was purchased, Mr. Chauhan agreed to contribute $190,949 towards the
purchase, which was intended to be his own contribution to the purchase, plus
two additional purchase shares. However, Mr. Chauhan did not initially have
sufficient funds to pay for these shares, so he and Mr. Saini approached Mr.
Taggar to request that Mr. Taggar provide the funds for the three shares that
Mr. Chauhan was going to fund.  Mr. Taggar agreed to provide the purchase funds
for the three shares, along with a share for himself.   Mr. Taggar therefore
paid four-tenths of the purchase price to allow the deal to close.
[10]       On March 31, 2017, Mr.
Taggar provided a bank draft for $260,000 to the lawyer handling the real estate
purchase, which he testified represented the contributions of himself, Kamaljit
Chauhan, Paul Saini, and one other investor. Mr. Taggar did not identify this
investor in his evidence. One week later Mr. Chauhan provided Mr. Taggar with a
bank draft for $190,949, which was paid from a line of credit that he held
jointly with his wife, Gurbir Chauhan. Mr. Chauhan testified that the payment
to Mr. Taggar was for himself, his wife, and Ms. Kaur Sidhu, who was a family
friend he had known for over fifteen years. Mr. Kaur Sidhu confirmed in her
evidence that she repaid Mr. Chauhan $67,000 for the money he paid for the
purchase of Horseshoe Hill on her behalf. Gurbir Chauhan did not testify.
[11]       At the time of purchase, the
Defendants, Daljit Samra, Avtar Sangha, and Balwinder Bhandal, were placed on
title to Horseshoe Hill as the owners of the property, based on a verbal
agreement between the parties that these individuals held title on behalf of
all the individuals who had contributed to the purchase of the property. There
was no written agreement between any of the investors regarding the purchase.
[12]       At the time of the Horseshoe
Hill purchase, Mr. Chauhan did not owe any money to Mr. Saini.  However, before
the Horseshoe Hill property was purchased, Mr. Chauhan and Mr. Saini had
purchased another property located at 13330 Torbram Road in Caledon, Ontario, along
with another investor, Mr. Gupta. A few months after Horseshoe Hill was
purchased, Mr. Chauhan sold the Torbram Road property, but did not initially
distribute any net proceeds of sale to Mr. Saini or Mr. Gupta.
[13]       There was no evidence before
me as to when Mr. Saini learned that the Torbram Road property had been sold by
Mr. Chauhan, but Mr. Saini testified that it was late 2017 to early 2018 before
he began suspecting that Mr. Chauhan was not going to pay him for the sale of
Torbram Road. Mr. Saini eventually sued Mr. Chauhan, resulting in a judgment on
April 18, 2024 in Mr. Saini’s favour.
[14]       A few months after the
Horseshoe Hill purchase took place, Mr. Chauhan, Mr. Saini, and Mr. Aujla wished
to jointly purchase an additional property located at 77 Havelock Drive in
Brampton, Ontario, on behalf of  Mr. Aujla’s son, Harpreet Aujla. However, they
did not have sufficient funds to close on the purchase, so the Defendants
jointly loaned each of them $40,000, with Mr. Samra managing the arrangements
on behalf of the lenders. Mr. Chauhan and Mr. Saini both signed promissory
notes dated July 7, 2017 in favour of Mr. Samra,
in the amount of $40,000.   Mr. Aujla signed a promissory note in favour of Mr.
Samra in the amount of $55,000.
[15]       The promissory notes each
stipulated that the principal amount of the loan was due in one year’s time, on
July 7, 2018, with an interest rate of 6% per annum.
[16]       When Mr. Chauhan, Mr. Aujla
and Mr. Saini had each not repaid their $40,000 debt to Mr. Samra by the spring
of 2018, they each signed a document that was titled “Assignment of Beneficial
Interest in Property”. The key paragraph in each of the three Assignments is as
follows:
[17]      
The parties agree that after Horseshoe Hill was purchased, Mr. Samra
paid all expenses related to the property, including mortgage payments,
property maintenance and repairs, lawn mowing, utilities, taxes, and insurance.
The parties reached an agreement during the trial that Mr. Samra is entitled to
claim reimbursement of $189,260.69 from the net proceeds of sale for the monies
he paid to manage and maintain Horseshoe Hill from the time that it was
purchased until the time that it was sold.
[18]       The parties also agree that
after its purchase Horseshoe Hill was rented for approximately one month, and
then not rented again after the tenant was evicted.
[19]       Horseshoe Hill was sold on
July 31, 2019 for $1,670,000. After payment of the outstanding mortgage and
closing expenses, the net proceeds of sale were $841,235.52, which does not
include payment of any taxes for capital gains. Once Mr. Samra’s reimbursement
of $189,260.69 is deducted, there is $651,974.83 remaining to be disbursed
amongst the investors if the capital gains taxes are not also deducted prior to
the funds being distributed.
[20]       Some of the investors have
received partial payment for their share of the net sale proceeds.  A total of
$545,000 has already been distributed from the net sale proceeds as follows:
[21]       The
Plaintiffs did not receive any payment from the Defendants following the sale
of the property. In addition, Mr. Saini,
Mr. Aujla, and Ms. Kaur Sidhu have also not received any payment.
[22]      
There is no dispute that Mr. Chauhan did not repay Mr. Samra the $40,000
owed to him by the due date of July 7, 2018. There is also no dispute that the
$40,000 owed by Mr. Saini to Mr. Samra remains unpaid.
[23]      
The three main issues to be
determined at this trial are as follows:
[24]       The Plaintiffs take the
position that they are one-third owners of Horseshoe Hill because they provided
one-third of the purchase funds. As Ms. Kaur Sidhu has already paid Mr. Chauhan
for her investment share but has chosen not to
sue to recover her investment, the Chauhan Plaintiffs suggest that once they
recover the funds for her investment, they will address this issue directly
with Ms. Kaur Sidhu.
[25]       Alternatively, if it is
found that Mr. Saini was a one-tenth investor in the Horseshoe Hill property,
the Plaintiffs ask that Mr. Samra be directed to pay Mr. Saini’s one-tenth of
the net sale proceeds to the Plaintiffs, along with Mr. Chauhan’s one-tenth payment,
and Ms. Kaur Sidhu’s one-tenth payment. They submit that Mr. Saini’s evidence
confirms that he only paid $7,000 towards the downpayment of the property, and
that they paid the additional $63,000 on his behalf.
[26]       The Plaintiffs also argue
that the Defendants, Mr. Samra, Mr. Sangha, and Mr. Balwinder, as the owners of
the property on behalf of the group of investors, were functioning as trustees
on behalf of the other investors. They argue that these Defendants breached
their duties as trustees for the following reasons:
[27]      
The Plaintiffs also submit that they are entitled to receive
reimbursement for rental income that ought to have been obtained by the
Defendants for the 24 months during the period between when the Horseshoe Hill
property was purchased and later sold. Although Mr. Chauhan testified that the
rent paid on the initial lease was $5,000, he asks for a finding that a more
conservative rental payment of $3,000 per month for 24 months, totaling $72,000,
should have been obtained by the Defendants. The Plaintiffs argue that one-third
of this amount, or $24,000, should be allocated to them representing the value
of lost rental income that they ought to have received during the two-year period
that the property was owned by the group of investors.
[28]       The Plaintiffs argue that
Mr. Samra’s evidence that all the investors had agreed not to rent out the
property after the first tenant left is contradicted by the evidence of Mr.
Bhandal, Mr. Sangha, and Mr. Taggar, all of whom testified that Mr. Samra did
not discuss with them the issue of renting the property a second time.
[29]       The
Plaintiffs also urge me to reject Mr. Saini’s evidence that he was not required
to make an equal contribution for Horseshoe Hill because Mr. Chauhan owed him
money for the sale of Torbram Road. They argue that this evidence should not be
accepted by me, or should be given little weight, for the following reasons:
[30]      
The Plaintiffs take the position that the assignment of Mr. Chauhan’s
interest in Horseshoe Hill is limited to repayment of the $40,000 principal
advanced to Mr. Chauhan by Mr. Samra, and interest at 6% which totaled $16,800
as of May 28, 2024. The Plaintiffs therefore argue that the maximum that Mr.
Samra should have retained from their share of the net proceeds of sale from
Horseshoe Hill is $56,800. The Plaintiffs therefore argue that they are
entitled to judgment from the Defendants jointly and severally in the amount of
$207,924.94 as of May 28, 2024, which they calculate as follows:
[31]       The Plaintiffs also ask that
the Counterclaim be dismissed.
[32]       The Defendants submit that
the Plaintiffs have produced no evidence to establish that Ms. Chauhan was an
investment partner in addition to Mr. Chauhan, and that they have therefore
failed to establish that Gurbir Chauhan is entitled to a one-tenth investment
interest in Horseshoe Hill.
[33]       The Defendants also argue
that an adverse inference should be drawn from Ms. Chauhan’s failure to testify
at the trial with respect to her claim and suggest that her evidence would not
have been supportive to the Plaintiffs’ position.
[34]       The Defendants rely on the
following facts to suggest that Mr. Chauhan paid for an investment share for
Mr. Saini, not Ms. Chauhan:
[35]      
The Defendants submit that Mr. Saini is properly entitled to a one-tenth
share of the Horseshoe Hill investment, and that any issues between him and Mr.
Chauhan as to money potentially owed by Mr. Saini to Mr. Chauhan for other
investments are between the two of them, and should not affect this litigation.
[36]       The Defendants also submit
that Mr. Chauhan has no standing in law to make a claim for Ms. Kaur Sidhu’s
one-tenth investment interest. They argue that Ms. Kaur Sidhu is not a
plaintiff in this litigation, and that she has not assigned her interest to Mr.
Chauhan.
[37]       The Defendants deny that Mr.
Chauhan is entitled to receive rental income for the property for the following
reasons:
[38]      
The Defendants accept that Mr. Chauhan is entitled to one-tenth of the
net proceeds of sale, subject to the Promissory Note that he signed for $40,000
plus interest.
[39]       The Defendants deny that
they had a duty to rent out Horseshoe Hill. In particular, the Defendant, Mr.
Samra, takes the position that there was an agreement between the owners that
the property was not going to be rented after the tenant was evicted.
[40]       The Defendants made no
submissions regarding their Counterclaim.
[41]      
None of the parties dispute that Mr. Saini was heavily involved in
putting together the purchase deal for Horseshoe Hill, and that it was Mr.
Saini who knew the listing agent for the property. There is no dispute that Mr.
Saini and Mr. Chauhan approached Mr. Taggar together to request that he pay the
$260,000 to permit the deal to close, and there is no dispute that Mr. Taggar
provided $260,000 to close the deal. I accept Mr. Taggar’s evidence that when
he provided the funds, he understood that he was forwarding the purchase shares
for himself, Mr. Chauhan, Mr. Saini and one other investor. I also accept his
evidence that Mr. Saini was known to him before the Horseshoe Hill investment, and
that he would not have become involved with the Horseshoe Hill investment if
Mr. Saini was not involved with the project.
[42]       There is no dispute that the
$190,949 that Mr. Chauhan repaid to Mr. Taggar represented three shares of the
Horseshoe Hill purchase.
[43]       I accept Mr. Samra’s
evidence that Mr. Saini was always considered by him to be an investor in the
Horseshoe Hill property, as he had been involved with the project from the
beginning. I further accept his evidence that he had been informed by both Mr.
Chauhan and Mr. Saini that Mr. Taggar’s initial payment of $260,000 had
included purchase shares for Mr. Chauhan, Mr. Saini and Ms. Kaur Sidhu, and
that Mr. Samra had understood that the contributions of these three people were
in equal shares, although he did not know the precise amount contributed by Mr.
Saini to the purchase.
[44]       I accept Mr. Saini’s
evidence that he and Mr. Samra were the only investors who cleaned and
maintained the property, including mowing the lawn, fixing the interlocking
pavement, and cleaning the pool.
[45]       I accept the evidence from
Mr. Aujla that the intention was for Mr. Samra to be repaid for the loans that
he provided to the Havelock Drive investors at the time that the Horseshoe Hill
property was sold, with interest as stipulated in the Promissory Notes.
[46]       There is no dispute that Mr.
Chauhan, Ms. Kaur Sidhu, Mr. Aujla, and Mr. Saini have not received any net
proceeds of sale from the sale of Horseshoe Hill.   Mr. Samra and Mr. Chauhan
agree that Mr. Chauhan was not consulted as to the distribution of the net
proceeds of sale that has already taken place.
[47]      
After the Defendants took possession of Horseshoe Hill, there was a
tenant in place for approximately one month, who was later evicted. Mr. Chauhan
was the only witness to provide evidence as to the quantum of rent received
from the tenant, testifying that the tenant paid $5,000. I accept Mr. Chauhan’s
evidence on this point.
[48]       There is no dispute that after
the eviction of the tenant the property was not rented again throughout the
time that the Defendants held title to the property. I reject Mr. Samra’s
evidence that he discussed renting the property with all the investors, and
that they collectively chose not to rent the property. Several witnesses
testified that following the eviction the issue of renting the property again
was not discussed with them. I find that Mr. Samra alone decided not to rent
property. I also find that none of the other investors made inquiries with Mr.
Samra about re-renting the property, nor did any of the investors make any
effort to rent out the property again after the first tenant was evicted.
[49]       The evidence from the other
two Defendants, Mr. Bhandal and Mr. Avtar, was consistent with each other, in
that neither was involved in the day-to-day management of Horseshoe Hill, and
that Mr. Samra did not provide much information or updates to them as to the
financial status of the property.
[50]       The rule in Browne v.
Dunn exists to ensure fairness for the parties at trial.  The rule requires
that if a party intends to impeach a witness called by the opposite party, the
party who seeks to impeach must give the witness an opportunity while the
witness is in the witness box, to provide any explanation the witness may have
for the contradictory evidence: Browne v. Dunn (1893), 1893 CanLII 65 (FOREP), 6 R. 67 (H.L.
U.K.), at pp. 70-71.
[51]       Justice Watt wrote on behalf of the Court of Appeal in
R. v. Quansah, 2015 ONCA 237, 125 O.R. (3d) 81, at para. 77 that
the rule in Browne v. Dunn exists for the following reasons:
[52]       Remedies for a breach of the
rule in Browne v. Dunn can include recalling a witness or calling a new
witness. Although counsel for the Plaintiffs objected to the evidence being
given by Mr. Saini as to an agreement with Mr. Chauhan, counsel did not request
the opportunity to recall Mr. Chauhan to give evidence on this point.
[53]       There is no dispute that Mr.
Taggar initially paid for four investment shares for the Horseshoe Hill
property. There is also no dispute that the Chauhan plainitffs paid $190,949 to
Mr. Taggar about one week later, which represents three investment shares for
the Horseshoe Hill property, at approximately $64,000 per share. The question
is, for whom were the three investment shares purchased?
[54]       I reject
Mr. Chauhan’s submission that the $190,949 payment made by him and his wife
from their joint line of credit was intended to be the Horseshoe Hill
investment payment for him, his wife, and Ms. Kaur Sidhu. The only evidence
that Gurbir Chauhan was an investor in Horseshoe Hill came from Mr. Chauhan.
Gurbir Chauhan did not testify. I infer from her decision not to testify that
her evidence would not have been helpful to the position of the Plaintiffs. I
also note that Ms. Chauhan’s name does not appear on any of the real estate or
investment documentation with respect to the sale, and none of the other
witnesses identified Ms. Chauhan as one of the original investors. The fact
that the payment came from the Plaintiffs’ joint line of credit is not sufficient
evidence to establish that there was an intention amongst the group of
investors for Ms. Chauhan to have a one-tenth share in the investment, or that
the Plaintiffs intended for Ms. Chauhan to have a one-tenth share in the
investment.
[55]       I find that when Mr. Chauhan
provided Mr. Taggar with $190,949, his intention was to provide the investment
funds for himself, Mr. Saini, and Ms. Kaur Sidhu. The overwhelming evidence
presented from the other investors at the trial established that it was
understood between the investors that Mr. Saini was an equal investor in the
property.
[56]       There is no dispute in the
evidence that it was Mr. Saini who found the Horseshoe Hill property, connected
with the real estate agent, and brought together a number of the investors,
including Mr. Samra, Mr. Taggar, and Mr. Chauhan. The fact that Mr. Saini
personally only paid $7,000 towards the purchase of Horseshoe Hill does not
alter the understanding of the investors collectively that funds were paid into
the investment representing his share of the investment, and that he was an
equal investor in the property. The issue as to what funds may potentially be
owed by Mr. Saini to Mr. Chauhan resulting from the purchase of Horseshoe Hill
is not before me.
[57]       Mr. Taggar’s payment of
$260,000 at the time of closing was critical to ensuring that the sale
proceeded. There was no dispute in the evidence that Mr. Saini and Mr. Chauhan
approached Mr. Taggar together to request that he pay the $260,000 to permit
the deal to close. Mr. Taggar did not identify Ms. Kaur Sidhu as the fourth
investor for whom he was fronting the purchase funds, but he was clear in his
evidence that he knew he was providing funds for Mr. Saini and Mr. Chauhan. I
accept Mr. Taggar’s evidence that the only reason he became involved in this
investment was because Mr. Saini was also involved.
[58]       I also accept Mr. Samra’s
evidence that he was told the $260,000 provided to him by Mr. Taggar was for
the investment shares of Mr. Taggar, Mr. Chauhan, Mr. Saini, and Ms. Kaur
Sidhu. Ms. Chauhan did not provide her own financial contribution towards a
share of the purchase of Horseshoe Hill. The fact that Mr. Saini signed an
assignment of his interest in Horseshoe Hill supports the Defendants’ position
that it was understood by them that Mr. Saini had an equal share in Horseshoe
Hill. The fact that Mr. Samra and the other Defendants were unaware that Mr.
Saini had made no further financial contributions to Mr. Chauhan or anyone else
with respect to the property does not prevent Mr. Saini from receiving an equal
investment share in the property.
[59]       In his
testimony Mr. Chauhan did not provide an explanation as to why he paid Mr.
Saini’s share of the purchase of the Horseshoe Hill property. By not
questioning Mr. Chauhan about a possible oral agreement between him and Mr.
Saini regarding the exchange of funds pertaining to their investment
properties, I find that the rule in Browne v. Dunn was breached when Mr.
Saini gave evidence regarding the alleged agreement. I give little weight to
Mr. Saini’s testimony on this point, not only as a result of the breach of the
rule, but also for the following reasons:
[60]      
I therefore do not rely on Mr. Saini’s evidence that he and Mr. Chauhan
had an unwritten agreement that that they were going to work out the details of
their three property investments at some point. I find that Mr. Saini ought not
to have withheld any payments owed by him to Mr. Chauhan regarding the purchase
of the Horseshoe Hill property to address any debt that Mr. Chauhan may have owed
Mr. Saini for the Torbram Road property.
[61]       But Mr.
Saini is not a Defendant in this litigation. The fact that Mr. Chauhan did not
owe any money to Mr. Saini at the time that the funds were advanced by him for
Mr. Saini, and any subsequent failure of Mr. Saini to repay Mr. Chauhan for
these funds, does not take away Mr. Saini’s right to receive his equal share of
the net proceeds of sale for Horseshoe Hill. The operation of the Promissory
Note and Assignment of his Beneficial Interest in Horseshoe Hill may well be
the reason why Mr. Saini received no payment for the sale of Horseshoe Hill,
but that issue is not before me.
[62]         Mr.
Chauhan is not entitled to receive Ms. Kaur Sidhu’s one-tenth share of the net
proceeds of sale. There is no dispute that Ms. Kaur Sidhu repaid Mr. Chauhan
for the investment funds that he forwarded on her behalf. However, Mr. Chauhan
has not established that he is entitled to be paid the portion of the net
proceeds of sale that Ms. Kaur Sidhu ought to have received as a one-tenth
investor in the property. Mr. Chauhan produced no documentation to confirm that
he was acting as agent for Ms. Kaur Sidhu, or that she assigned her claim to
him.  It was open to Ms. Kaur Sidhu to pursue the Defendants for repayment of
her investment share. She did not do so. It does not legally fall on Mr.
Chauhan to now pursue the Defendants for payment of Ms. Kaur Sidhu’s share of
the investment.
[63]       The Promissory Note for
$40,000 signed by Mr. Chauhan does not extinguish his right to be paid any
proceeds of sale from the sale of Horseshoe Hill that exceed the $40,000 plus
interest that he owes to Mr. Samra. The evidence before me is that Mr. Chauhan
has still not repaid the $40,000 owed to Mr. Samra.  The interest owed on this
payment at 6% per annum as set out in the Promissory Note presently totals $17,753.42,
as of November 29, 2024, resulting in a total of $57,753.42 owed by Mr. Chauhan
to Mr. Samra.
[64]       There was poor communication
between the Defendants and Mr. Chauhan regarding the sale of Horseshoe Hill,
which led to Mr. Chauhan placing a caution on the property. The Defendants
ought to have distributed a one-tenth interest in the net sale proceeds of
Horseshoe Hill to Mr. Chauhan, minus the $40,000 and interest owed by him from
the Promissory Note, at the time that the proceeds of sale were distributed to the
other investors. I make no comment on the failure of the Defendants to
distribute payments to Mr. Saini, Ms. Kaur Sidhu or Mr. Aujla for their share
of the sale proceeds from Horseshoe Hill, as that issue is not before me.
[65]       Mr. Chauhan is entitled to
an equal one-tenth share of the net proceeds of sale. The parties agree that
net proceeds of sale are $651,974.83 after Mr. Samra is repaid for the
operating costs of the property. One-tenth of
this amount is $65,197.48.
[66]       The Defendants suggest that
taxes for capital gains of $22,484.39 resulting from the sale of Horseshoe Hill
should be deducted from the net proceeds of sale before distribution of Mr.
Chauhan’s share. The Plaintiffs submit that each investor who received funds
from the sale of Horseshoe Hill is responsible for paying his own capital gains
tax for the investment.
[67]       It is appropriate that each
investor pay the capital gains taxes owed on his own share of the investment. Mr.
Chauhan is therefore entitled to $65,197.48 -
$57,753.42 = $7,444.06.
[68]       Mr.
Chauhan is also entitled to prejudgment interest on the funds that ought to
have been distributed to him at the time that the other investors received
payment following the sale. Counsel for Mr. Chauhan suggests that an
appropriate rate of interest on this payment is 2% per annum, based upon the
date when the Statement of Claim was issued. The Defendants made no submissions
to dispute the reasonableness of this rate of interest. Accordingly, Mr.
Chauhan shall receive interest on the sum of $7,444.06 at the rate of 2% per
annum from July 31, 2019, which totals $793.76. The Defendants therefore owe
Mr. Chauhan $7,444.06 + $793.76 = $8,237.82 as of November 29, 2024.
[69]       The only evidence before me
regarding the quantum of rent paid at Horseshoe Hill comes from Mr. Chauhan,
who testified that the property was rented for $5,000 for approximately one
month. This evidence was not contradicted. Mr. Chauhan suggests on a
conservative basis that the property could have received a rental income of
$3,000 per month in the 24 months that elapsed between the date of purchase and
the date of sale. However, the Plaintiffs did not provide evidence from a
realtor or other professional as to the fair market value of the rental income
for the property.
[70]       Although Mr. Chauhan
testified that the rental income received from this tenant was $5,000, he
provided no documentary evidence confirming this income.  In addition, Mr.
Chauhan testified that he did not inquire with Mr. Samra about renting the
property again after the first tenancy failed.
[71]       The Plaintiffs have
therefore failed to establish the quantum of rental income that they say are
owed.
[72]       In the event that I am wrong
about this issue, and it is found that the evidence of Mr. Chauhan was
sufficient to establish the quantum of rental income that could have been
generated with the property, I further find that the Defendants did not have a
fiduciary duty to the other investors to rent the property until the time that
it was sold.
[73]       The evidence at trial was
that the first tenants created issues which led to
their eviction. I reject Mr. Samra’s evidence that the investors jointly agreed
not to rent the property after the first rental attempt failed. Mr. Taggar, Mr.
Sangha, and Mr. Bhandal all testified that they did not have a discussion with
Mr. Samra about whether the property should be rented. However, there is no
evidence before me that Mr. Chauhan or any of the other investors requested
that the Defendants attempt to rent the property until such time as it was
sold. The evidence from all the witnesses that testified was that the intention
had been to attempt to sell the property quickly after its purchase.
[74]       The evidence does not
suggest that renting the property was a priority to any of the investors,
including Mr. Chauhan, who provides no evidence of efforts he made to rent the
property again after the first failed tenancy, or that he made requests to the
Defendants to rent the property.
[75]       The
Defendants are not required to repay the Plaintiffs any sum for lost rental
opportunities at the property.
[76]       Kamaljit Chauhan is entitled
to a one-tenth share of the net sale proceeds of Horseshoe Hill. Gurbir Chauhan
is not entitled to a share of the net sale proceeds of Horseshoe Hill.
[77]       The Defendants shall pay to
the Plaintiff, Kamaljit Chauhan $7,444.06 for his share of the net sale
proceeds of Horseshoe Hill, plus $793.76 prejudgment interest which totals
$8,237.82 as of November 29, 2024.
[78]       The Defendants do not owe
any money to the Plaintiffs for lost rental income pertaining to Horseshoe
Hill.
[79]       The Defendants ask that any
payment owed to Mr. Chauhan be stayed until the accounting ordered by Barnes J.
in Gupta v. Chauhan has been completed. I
decline to stay the payment owed to Mr. Chauhan. The Plaintiffs in Gupta
v. Chauhan are not parties in the action before me. I see no reason to
delay Mr. Chauhan receiving the payment owed to him by the Defendants in this
litigation. The payment owed to Mr. Chauhan by the Defendants is accordingly
ordered to be paid out of the $200,000 held in the court for the action.
[80]       There will be no further
distribution from the funds held by the court until the issue of costs for this
action has been determined.
[81]       Each of the ten shares from the net sale proceeds of Horseshoe Hill is
worth $65,197.48. Any capital gains taxes applicable on the individual
shares shall be paid by each investor individually.
[82]       The
Defendants’ Counterclaim is dismissed.
[83]       The parties are encouraged
to agree upon the costs to be paid for this litigation. If the parties are
unable to agree upon costs, the Defendants are to file and serve a cost
submission no longer than three pages double spaced by December 9, 2024. The
Plaintiffs are to file and serve a responding cost submission no longer than
three pages double spaced by December 19, 2024.  The page limits for the cost
submissions do not include Offers to Settle or Bills of Costs. There will be no
reply submission unless requested by me. All cost submissions are to emailed to
my judicial assistant at Bihara.wijewardena@ontario.ca.
If cost submissions are not received by these deadlines, I make no order as to
costs.