[1]              
The issue before the Court is what decision-making regime and parenting
schedule is in the best interests of Violet Rose Gail Thwaites, born March 8,
2022.
[2]              
The parties lived together from approximately July or August 2021 until May
29, 2022.
[3]              
On the morning of May 29, 2022, while the Applicant mother was sleeping,
the Respondent father took the child to the home of his parents, the paternal
grandparents, who lived nearby. Such was done so the mother could remain
sleeping, and the father could rest while the infant was cared for by the father’s
parents. The father texted the mother to let her know where he and the child
were. The mother attended the paternal grandparents’ home when she woke and
learned that the paternal grandparents had taken the child to visit her
paternal great grandmother at a retirement home. The mother was extremely upset,
both about the father taking the child to the paternal grandparents’ home, and
about the child being taken to the retirement home. This dispute led to the
parties’ separation.
[4]              
After the separation, the child resided with the mother. the Respondent
father had parenting time as arranged through the mother. There were no
overnight visits. The father would text the mother each week and the mother
would determine whether the visit would take place on Saturday or Sunday. The
visits lasted from approximately 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
[5]              
The parties entered into counselling in approximately October 2022. The
mother believes that the counseling was for the purpose of working on and
resuming their romantic relationship. The father believes the counseling was
for the purpose of working on their co-parenting relationship. Whatever the purpose
of the counseling, the parties did not resume a romantic relationship and did
not resume cohabiting.
[6]              
From October 2022 to February 2024, the father would visit with the
child both when he spent time with the mother and when he exercised parenting
time alone with the child. He began having the child for overnights, usually
every other weekend from Friday after he was done work until sometime on Sunday.
The mother determined the pick-up time on Sundays, and it would vary.  This
schedule was inconsistent, and the mother would unilaterally change it from
time to time.
[7]              
On Family Day 2023 the mother became upset with the father. She
testified that they had made plans to spend Family Day together with the child,
however, the father did not return her messages and calls that day. She
attended his home, angry and upset. When she realized he was not home, she
entered his home and accessed his computer. She was charged on February 24,
2023, with break and enter on a dwelling house, and unauthorized use of a
computer. Her undertaking prohibited her from communicating with or having
contact with the father, except though legal counsel or a third party
specifically for making parenting arrangements.
[8]              
On June 10, 2024, the mother was convicted of the offence of being unlawfully
in a dwelling. She is subject to a 12-month probation order, which prohibits her
from having contact with the father “except pursuant to a family court order
made after June 10, 2024, in the presence of or through legal counsel, for the
purposes of making contact arrangements through a mutually agreed upon third
party for, or having contact with, [her] child.” She is also prohibited from
being within 100 meters of any place where she knows the father to be, except
for required court attendances, pursuant to a family court order made after
June 10, 2024, and in the presence of or through legal counsel.
[9]              
The mother testified that she is participating in the PARS program.
[10]          
After the mother’s arrest on February 24, 2023, the father made efforts
to arrange parenting time with the child through the maternal grandparents. He
was unsuccessful.
[11]          
The mother commenced these proceedings on March 12, 2023.
[12]          
At that time, the father was still not being provided with parenting
time and he brought an urgent motion. An urgent case conference was held on
June 13, 2023, and the father resumed parenting time.
[13]          
The current order relating to parenting is the order of Justice Madsen
dated July 13, 2023, which was made on the consent of the parties. Pursuant to
this order the father has parenting time on alternate weekends from Friday at
6:00 p.m. to Sunday at 6:00 p.m. and each Wednesday from 5:30 p.m. to 8:00 p.m.
[14]          
There is no current order relating to decision making.
[15]          
Each parent has re-partnered and is cohabiting with their new partner. The
mother has another child with her new partner, who was approximately 6 months
old at the time of the trial.
[16]          
On June 14, 2024, the parties signed final partial minutes of settlement
that resolved the issues of exchange of and access to third party information
about the child, primary residency as with the mother, holiday parenting time,
exchange of the child for parenting time, relocation, travel, child support,
s.7 expenses, and life insurance. A final order was granted pursuant to these minutes
of settlement on October 2, 2024.
[17]          
The mother seeks an order as follows:
[18]          
The father seeks an order as follows:
[19]          
Section 20 of the Children’s Law Reform Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.
12, sets out that except as otherwise provided in the CLRA, a child’s parents
are equally entitled to decision-making responsibility with respect to the
child.  It further provides that if the parents of a child live separate and
apart and the child lives with one of them with the consent, implied consent,
or acquiescence of the other, the right of the other to exercise the
entitlement to decision making responsibility is suspended until a separation
agreement or order provides otherwise.
[20]          
Section 24 of the CLRA provides that, in allocating parenting time, the
court shall give effect to the principle that a child should have as much time
with each parent as is consistent with the best interests of the child. This is
not a presumption of equal parenting time.
[21]          
 Section 24 of the CLRA further provides that the court shall only take
into account the best interests of the child when making an order relating to
decision making and parenting time.  The court is directed to consider all
factors relating to the circumstances of the child and give primary
consideration to the child’s physical, emotional, and psychological safety,
security and well-being. Section 24(3) of the CLRA provides a non-exhaustive
list of factors relating to the circumstances of the child, all of which this
court has considered, some of which are specifically discussed.
[22]          
The mother testified and called her partner, Thomas Purcell, as a
witness.
[23]          
Mr. Purcell was a credible witness. While his answers were brief, he answered
questions without hesitation. He testified what he had observed, even if it
might have been construed as being favourable to the Respondent.
[24]          
The mother, however, did not present as a credible witness. She answered
all questions in a manner to convince the Court that she was the superior
parent. She would not agree to any facts that would suggest that the father was
a good and responsible parent.
[25]          
The mother’s conduct during cross examination was concerning. During her
examination in chief, she recalled events very clearly. In cross examination,
she claimed to not remember facts that were very likely known to her, such as
how far away the paternal grandparents lived from the parties when they
cohabited. Further, she was reluctant to admit that a text exchange, presented
as an exhibit, was between her and the father, even though it was evident on
the face of it. Upon further cross examination she did eventually agree. When
challenged on cross examination about some actions and words, she would become
defiant and attempt to justify her decisions, instead of acknowledging that she
could have done better.
[26]          
During cross examination the mother would not answer questions put to
her, questioning out loud how they could possibly be relevant. This court had
to remind her several times that it was the Court that decides relevance, and
that her counsel was able to make objections on her behalf. She would become
upset, angry, and defiant. The mother even refused on cross examination to
provide the name of her partner, who she was calling as a witness.
[27]          
The mother also had difficulty following the direction of the Court. She
did not attend the first day of trial in person, although her request for a
virtual hearing had been denied and her lawyer had directed her to attend. This
was a wasted day. After the mother’s non-attendance, I reluctantly acceded to
the request of her lawyer to continue the trial virtually. I was not confident
the mother would attend in person and given the amount of time that the matter
had been outstanding, and the father’s request for expanded parenting time, it
was important to ensure that the matter proceeded.
[28]          
The mother’s conduct during the father’s portion of the trial, while it
continued virtually, was concerning. She interrupted the proceedings. She
talked back to the Court. She did not pay attention and engaged in other tasks.
Proceedings had to be paused as a result. She was frequently reminded that her
participation and attention were necessary to properly instruct her counsel. She
disregarded my comments. She failed to return to virtual court after the lunch
break on the third day of trial, and an afternoon of trial time was wasted. As
a result, I ordered that the trial resume in person. This is addressed in my
endorsement dated October 3, 2024.
[29]          
The mother failed to disclose criminal charges she was facing at the
time she swore her 35.1 Affidavit on March 2, 2023. Subsequently, she did not
provide an updated 35.1 Affidavit for trial that reflected her new living
arrangements with Mr. Purcell and his child with whom he exercises parenting
time.
[30]          
The mother also advanced contradictory evidence. The mother testified that
the child cannot be away from her for long periods of time, yet advanced
evidence that she attends daycare every weekday from at least 9:15 a.m. to 3:30
p.m. and she is thriving in that environment.  On the second day of trial, a
Thursday, the mother failed to return to court after the lunch recess. She
claimed to her lawyer that she needed to pick up the child from daycare. However,
she had earlier testified that the child was picked up from daycare by the
maternal grandparents every Thursday and spent the evening at their home.
[31]          
The father testified. He also called as witnesses his friend - Donald
Runstedler, his father - Robert Thwaites, and his partner - Laura Steffler.
[32]          
Mr. Runstedler and Ms. Steffler were straightforward in their answers. They
required little prompting in examination in chief, and their evidence was not
challenged in cross examination.
[33]          
While Robert Thwaites was generally straightforward in his answers, he
was somewhat argumentative in cross examination. He would not directly answer
some questions put to him, instead turning the answer into a further allegation
against the mother. The animosity between the mother and Robert Thwaites was
evident.
[34]          
There was evidence given by the mother, father, and Robert Thwaites,
regarding a telephone conversation the day of the parties’ separation when the
child was approximately 2 ½ months old. The mother and father both testified
that the conversation was between the mother and Robert Thwaites. Robert
Thwaites testified that it was a conversation between the father and himself. I
find the evidence of the father to be most credible and that the conversation
happened between Ms. Caniga and Robert Thwaites.
[35]          
Ultimately, I find the evidence as to what happened during that
conversation to have little weight on the determination of the issues. The
mother relies on the conversation to establish that the child was in distress
because she could hear the child crying during the call. If the child was
crying, while in the care of the paternal grandparents, this alone is not
evidence that she was at risk.
[36]          
The father answered all questions with thought and consistency. He did
not evade questions in cross examination. He remained calm and measured
throughout his evidence. While he was firm and consistent in his cross
examination, he was able to speak comfortably about the strengths of the mother
as a parent, despite his belief that she has minimized his role as the child’s
father. His credibility was not impeached on cross examination.
[37]          
If there is any discrepancy in the evidence, I prefer the evidence of
the father.
[38]          
Both parents love their daughter very much. When describing her the
faces of both parents lit up, and they spoke of the little things she does with
love and affection. This was the same for all witnesses. Violet has the benefit
of the love and support of many family members and friends.
[39]          
The child has a good relationship with both parents.
[40]          
Both parents can provide connections to extended family. The child has
good connections with her maternal grandparents, her mother’s new partner, and her
half sibling. The child has good connections with the father’s new partner and
her family, paternal grandparents, and paternal aunt. It is important that the
child’s time with each parent be sufficient to allow for the meaningful
development of these relationships, in order to feel a member of both her
maternal and paternal family.
[41]          
Each parent can provide appropriate care to Violet. Each described daily
routines that are child focused, age appropriate, and ensures the child’s needs
are met. Each parent has external family, friend, and community supports to
assist them as required in raising Violet.
[42]          
The mother raised concerns that the child often got sick while in the
care of the father. The illnesses complained of were minor ailments. The mother
alleges that the child contracted hand foot and mouth disease while in the care
of the father. The mother testified that she self-diagnosed the child with this
ailment and did not take the child to a doctor for verification or treatment. Accordingly,
there is no compelling evidence before the court that the child had hand foot
and mouth disease, and there is no evidence to suggest that the father
recklessly exposed the child to anyone who had the disease.
[43]          
There is no evidence to suggest that the father recklessly exposes the
child to any illness. The mother submits that on the date of separation the
father, and the paternal grandparents, were reckless and exposed the child to
harm when the paternal grandparents brought the child to visit the paternal
great grandmother at her retirement home without the mother’s knowledge or
permission. The risk alleged was due to the potential exposure to Covid-19. However,
there is no evidence that there were any forms of lock-down, disease outbreak, or
other restrictions that would establish that the child was at risk when
visiting with her paternal great grandmother.
[44]          
I find that the mother and father are equally skilled in meeting the
child’s day to day needs.
[45]          
The evidence establishes that the mother is not fully supportive of the
child’s relationship with the father, nor fully recognizes the importance of
the father’s involvement in the child’s life.
[46]          
The mother’s position is that the child needs to remain on the current parenting
schedule so as to enable the child to strengthen her relationship with Mr.
Purcell and the new child that Mr. Purcell and the mother have just had.
[47]          
The mother and Mr. Purcell testified that the child has a connection to
her half sibling and is a great big sister. I agree that it is important for
the child to continue to be able to strengthen this sibling relationship. However,
this relationship is not to be given priority over the child’s relationship
with her father.
[48]          
Mr. Purcell testified that he attends the child’s medical appointments,
when he can, and that he and the mother make decisions about the child. Contrast
this with how the mother involves the father. She does not involve the father
in the child’s medical appointments, nor does she engage him in decision
making. The mother testified that she does not tell the father when she attends
medical appointments, she only tells the father if there is medication
prescribed that must be administered during his parenting time.
[49]          
The mother chose the child’s daycare without advising the father.
[50]          
The mother’s original application sought an order permitting her to
change the child’s name to remove the father’s surname, although, that order
was not pursued at trial.
[51]          
There is also a pattern of the mother limiting the father’s time with the
child.
[52]          
Various text messages were introduced into evidence by the parties. There
were messages shortly following the parties’ separation in which the mother
said that the father would not see the child until he returned certain items to
the mother. In cross examination, the mother agreed she would become angry with
the father when he would not respond to her messages in which she wished to
discuss the status of their relationship. She further agreed that she would thereafter
not respond to his messages when he asked to see the child. In cross
examination, the mother was confident that her threats to withhold the child
were justified and appropriate.
[53]          
Eventually, starting in October 2022, the father had parenting time with
the child every other weekend from Friday after work to varying times on
Sunday. The father testified that on occasion the mother would not allow the
child to visit according to this schedule if she was upset with the father.
There are text messages from early 2023 in which the mother details her upset
with the father for not continuing their romantic relationship. There is a
specific text message, from this period, in which the mother states that she
has blocked him on all platforms, will not be able to contact him, and asks him
to stay away from her and the child.
[54]          
On February 24, 2023, the mother was charged with breaking and entering the
father’s apartment and unauthorized use of a computer. She became subject to a
criminal undertaking prohibiting contact with the father except through a third
party for making arrangements for parenting. The father tried to obtain
parenting time by reaching out to the maternal grandparents, but with no
success. He knew of no other person to contact. The mother made no effort to
enable the father to have parenting time and as a result, the child did not see
the father from February 24, 2023, until June 13, 2023, following an urgent
case conference initiated by the father.
[55]          
In March 2024, the mother threatened to withhold the father’s parenting
time after he renewed the child’s health card when the renewal notice arrived
at his address.
[56]          
Contrast this with the father’s evidence. He agreed in partial final
minutes of settlement that the child’s primary residence is to be with the
mother. He did not make allegations of inappropriate parenting by the mother. He
allowed the mother to determine his parenting time following separation. He
attempted to avoid litigation despite the mother’s inconsistency in offering
parenting time.
[57]          
The father testified that there are days where the child says she just
wants to sleep at his home, but he tells her that she needs to return to see the
mother. The father testified that the child is excited to see her mother when
he returns her at the end of parenting time, just as she is excited to see him
at the beginning of his parenting time. Conversely, the mother testified that
the child is emotionless when she sees the father at the beginning of his parenting
time.
[58]          
The father’s tone in his messages with the mother is respectful, brief,
and encourages focus on the child’s needs and interests.
[59]          
The father acknowledged that, despite times that the mother has withheld
or controlled parenting time, there have also been occasions where she has
accommodated his requests for changes.
[60]          
At the end of his evidence in chief, the father was asked if there was
anything else he wanted to tell the court. He stated that he wanted the court
to know that his actions were all in the best interests of raising “our”
daughter. His hopes are that he and the mother can eventually come to “some
coparenting ability together” because that is in the child’s interests and
animosity does not benefit anybody. After the completion of the trial, I have
the impression that this is a genuine reflection of the father’s views on
coparenting with the mother.
[61]          
The mother asserts that the child’s age requires the mother to be the primary
caregiver. She submits that maintaining the status quo will promote stability
for the child, and that the child is unable to transition back and forth
between the parents’ home without significant disruption to the child’s mood
and demeanour.
[62]          
The father asserts that his proposed parenting time schedule is
consistent with s. 24(6) of the CLRA, which states that in allocating parenting
time the court shall give effect to the principle that a child should have as
much time with each parent as is consistent with the best interests of the
child. He asserts that he is able to meet the child’s needs, as competently as
the mother, and is supportive of the child’s relationship with the mother.
[63]          
 Although mother’s counsel did not refer to it specifically in oral
submissions before the court, the Association of Family and Conciliation Courts
– Ontario Chapter (AFCC-O) Parenting Plan Guide Version 2.0 (2021) (“the
Guide”) was referred to in the Applicant’s case brief, and other written
materials uploaded to Case Center by the Applicant. Accordingly, I will make
some comment on the Guide here.
[64]          
The Guide is a summary of social science research about the needs of
children at various ages and provides guidance as to what types of parenting
arrangements can meet these needs.
[65]          
The mother relied on the Guide to support her position that the father’s
parenting time be gradually increased. She based this on her assertion that the
father has had limited parenting time with the child and that his current
parenting time is an “appropriate normal parenting time schedule for a 30-month-old”,
based on the recommendations found in the Guide.
[66]          
The suggestions relevant to this family, as found in the Guide, are as
follows:
[67]          
There is much value in the Guide. It is a helpful reference for parents
and their lawyers as they plan coparenting schedules upon separation. It can
also provide helpful, research-based information about child development to the
court while making determinations in the best interests of children. However, the
court must be cautious and not use the Guide as a default position. The Guide
should be used as reference tool only when determining the best interests of
the child, an analysis which must also include a thorough consideration of the cognitive
and social development, temperament, needs, and history of the specific child
before the court, together with an analysis of the history of family dynamics.
[68]          
The child is already spending weekend overnights in the care of the
father. These visits go well and there is no evidence that the child’s
well-being is compromised by those visits.
[69]          
The evidence establishes that the child has spent time in the care of
several different caregivers: the mother, the mother’s partner, the mother’s
parents, daycare, the father, the father’s parents, and the father’s partner. There
is no evidence that she does not do well in the care of all these caregivers,
or that the transitions between them are problematic for her.
[70]          
The evidence establishes the following:
[71]          
There is no evidence that there were disruptions in the child’s demeanour,
mood, or presentation in the hours or days following the transition from one
parent’s care to the other’s.
[72]          
A graduated increase is not necessary for the child’s best interests,
nor is it consistent with the principle set out in s.24(6) of the CLRA. The
child has a strong and established relationship with her father. Her father is
able to meet all her needs in this moment.
[73]          
Further, the Court is not confident that the mother will follow a term
which provides for gradual access. Her attitude towards agreements, orders, and
the authority of court is of significant concern. There is a risk that her
attitude will at best result in her assigning her own interpretation to how the
increases are ordered and thereby, in turn, not accurately follow the order. At
worst, the mother may conduct her own assessment at the time of increase, deem
for herself that it is not in the child’s best interests for parenting time to
expand, and then simply not comply.
[74]          
The following evidence establishes that the mother has difficulty
following court orders, alongside a reduced respect for the court process:
[75]          
For all of the above factors, the Court finds that the parenting
schedule in the child’s best interests is that proposed by the father.
[76]          
Justice Madsen summarized
the law as it relates to decision making in Gaynor v. Cruz Belliard,
2024 ONSC 1661, at paras. 88-90:
[77]          
It is important to a child’s well-being for them to know that both parents,
to the extent that it is in their best interests, participating in their life. This
participation does not only include spending time with the child but also
playing an active role in making decisions that will shape the child’s life.
[78]          
The mother submits that she has been the sole decision maker for the
child since her birth and the status quo should continue. However, this is a
status quo that she has manipulated. She has never involved the father in
decision making. She gatekeeps information about the child. She is selective in
the information she provides to the father. She does not appreciate that it is
in the child’s best interests that the father have knowledge of all important
events in the child’s life.
[79]          
The mother minimizes the father’s role in the child’s life. More than
once during her evidence she stated that on the day of separation, the father
“took the baby without my permission.” The parties were not separated at the time,
and the father messaged the mother to tell him where he and the child were. Being
the child’s father, he was entitled to decide to take the child to the paternal
grandparent’s home. He did not need permission. Further, the mother has made
decisions in the absence of the father without even advising him of these
decisions. She takes her to the doctor without advising, she enrolled her in
daycare without advising, she moved without advising.
[80]          
The mother’s communication with the father is inconsistent, both in
frequency and in tone. She is often rude and dismissive, includes comments that
are not respectful, and focuses on things unrelated to the wellbeing of the
child. She does not engage in dialogue and open sharing of ideas. She merely
imposes her expectations on the father regarding the care of the child. The
father, on the other hand, for the most part is respectful and child focused. He
provides information and reaches out for guidance about the child’s meals,
routine, and health.
[81]          
Parental disagreements about decisions to be made regarding children are
normal. This is the nature of co-parenting whether the parents are co-parenting
while in a romantic relationship or not in a romantic relationship. Perfection
in communication is not required. However, there needs to be some evidence that
the parents are able to have discussions that result in effective
decision-making. See Jackson v. Jackson, 2017 ONSC 1566,
[82]          
There is sufficient evidence that these parents can make decisions
together. There are times when these parents are able to set aside differences
for the benefit of the child. For example,
[83]          
There is no evidence that either parent has made or will make poor
decisions for the child. As stated earlier, both parents love the child very
much, and want to ensure her emotional and physical well-being. An order for
joint decision making is in the child’s best interests.
[84]          
The Applicant, Kristina Caniga, and the Respondent, Brandon Thwaites,
shall have joint decision-making responsibility for the child, Violet Thwaites
(female), born March 8, 2022. They shall consult and confer in writing, unless
otherwise agreed, with respect to all major decisions affecting the child’s
well-being.
[85]          
The Respondent, Brandon Thwaites, shall have parenting time with the
child, Violet Thwaites (female), born March 8, 2022, as follows:
[86]          
The Applicant, Kristina Caniga, shall forthwith provide to the
Respondent, Brandon Thwaites, the names, addresses, and contact information for
all dental and medical professionals involved with the child and the child’s
daycare.
[87]          
The Applicant, Kristina Caniga, shall forthwith provide to the
Respondent, Brandon Thwaites, notarized copies of the child’s birth certificate
and health card.
[88]          
All other claims are dismissed.
[89]          
The parties shall have meaningful discussions to resolve the issue of
costs. If they are unable to resolve said issue, the parties shall file written
submissions, no longer than 4 pages, double spaced, together with Bills of
Costs by January 8, 2025. Submissions shall be
filed through the online portal and then emailed to Kitchener.SCJJA@ontario.ca noting the portal confirmation number. Extensions
will not be granted. If submissions are not received, it will be presumed that
costs have been resolved.