[1]         
Mr. Gagnon has brought two applications before me, both of which seek as
their remedy a stay of proceedings pursuant to s. 24(1) of the Charter of
Rights and Freedoms.  The first is an application alleging a breach of the
defendant’s right to trial within a reasonable time contrary to s. 11(b) of the
Charter. The second is an application alleging an abuse of process
arising from (i) the circumstances of his return to Canada and arrest in what
is alleged was a “disguised extradition” from Indonesia to Canada contrary to
the common law or s. 7 of the Charter; or (ii) from alleged
misrepresentations to the court that are said to have resulted in depriving him
of his right to reasonable bail pursuant to s. 11(e) of the Charter.  The
two applications are independent but share many common evidentiary points and
were heard in a single, combined hearing.
[2]         
Mr. Gagnon left Canada knowing of the potential for a criminal
investigation into his business dealings, which investigation began shortly
after his departure and resulted in the present charges.  He brought his family
with him, settling in a country with whom Canada has no extradition treaty.  He
learned of the present charges almost as soon as the Information was sworn.  He
took no steps to return to Canada on learning of the charges.  In such
circumstances, the characterization of the resulting delay as Defence Delay is
plainly required by binding precedent and common sense.  The s. 11(b) Charter
application has no merit and must be dismissed.
[3]         
I also find that there was no “disguised extradition” from Indonesia.  Indonesia
law provided a lawful means to deport someone who was seeking to avoid
prosecution.  Canada provided logistical support to Indonesia in support of a Indonesian
sovereign and independent decision to locate and then deport a fugitive from
Canadian justice using its own legal procedures.  That action cannot be
characterized in any way as an abuse of process still less a clear case
requiring the drastic remedy of a stay of proceedings.  Finally, I find that
the strained interpretation that the applicant seeks to place on the
representations made by the Assistant Crown Attorney at his original bail
hearing are just that:  strained. There was neither misrepresentation in fact
nor intention to mislead.  The abuse of process application is also without
merit.
[4]         
The applications must both accordingly be dismissed.  My more detailed
reasons follow.
[5]         
Mr. Gagnon is charged with fraud over $5,000 (s. 380(1)(a) Criminal
Code) and use of a forged document (s. 368(1) of the Criminal Code).  His trial
is scheduled for April 28, 2025.  It is alleged that Mr. Gagnon defrauded 335
people of over $20 million of which only $9 million was returned.  Viva voce
evidence pertaining to both applications was heard over seven days followed by
oral argument immediately following the completion of the last witness on the
seventh day.  Both parties filed written arguments as well.
[6]         
Before proceeding with a review of the evidence and my findings of fact
in relation to it, some general comments about the evidence and my approach to
it are in order.
[7]         
There was a very considerable volume of hearsay evidence on these
applications.   In a perfect world, such evidence should be considered and
either admitted or rejected on an item-by-item basis.  I found that proceeding
in that fashion would have unnecessarily protracted the hearing of these
applications and placed the trial date at considerable risk.  A case-by-case
review of each document in the mass of documents attached, for example, to the affidavits
of the applicant’s law student, would have consumed all or substantially all of
the time set aside for the hearing and it would have been all but impossible to
reschedule the hearing on the merits prior to the scheduled trial date.
[8]         
As case management judge, I ordered the parties to exchange “will say”
statements of expected witnesses at the evidentiary hearing of these
applications and encouraged the parties as far as possible to file affidavits
of an intended witness’ evidence in chief thereby enabling the parties to
proceed directly to cross-examination after a summary in chief examination
following the adoption of those affidavits by the witness in question.  Both
parties filed affidavits from most of the witnesses they called at the hearing each
of whom adopted their respective affidavits as their evidence occasionally subject
to minor corrections identified at the outset.  This method of proceeding
enabled the hearing to be completed in the time allotted (which had already
been extended by two days) but left many admissibility issues to be addressed
in final argument.
[9]         
As mentioned, the applicant filed affidavits from an articling student
attaching a large volume of documents, primarily sourced from Crown disclosure
but also including other documents from various sources (including the
defendant who provided no direct evidence of his own) that the applicant sought
to rely upon.  Many of these documents contained hearsay statements of
non-witnesses.  Given the hybrid nature of the hearing and in the interest of efficiency,
I allowed the parties to state their objections to various items of evidence
for the record but reserved on such objections until after the evidence
had been received.
[10]       The
most significant point of disagreement between the parties on admissibility of
evidence was in relation to hearsay.  When the dust settled at the end of the
hearing and after hearing the parties’ arguments, I found that no novel
application of the exceptions to the hearsay rule were required and the separation
of the evidentiary wheat from the chaff presented no difficulties.  A very
large volume of the paper evidence consisted of hearsay evidence of little to
no evidentiary value.
[11]       One
category of hearsay that arose frequently was out of court statements of
non-party witnesses – primarily statements of various officials in Indonesia
whether reported by the person who heard them or, in some cases, as reported in
newspaper articles.  The law on the admissibility of such statements is
straightforward.  Such evidence cannot be relied upon to establish the truth of
the matter reported but may only be considered as evidence of why the person
through whom the statement was introduced into evidence did or not do a thing
after learning of the hearsay statement (where the doing or not doing of the
thing is itself relevant).  The evidence in relation to media accounts of Mr.
Gagnon’s deportation fits into that category and is relied upon for this
purpose and this purpose only.  The actions taken as a result of the media
accounts include inquiries made of Indonesian government officials to confirm
that there was no misapprehension of the nature of the proceedings and that
Canada’s consistently expressed position that it would not seek extradition was
understood.
[12]       The
second category of hearsay that arose was evidence of statements attributed by certain
witnesses to the accused applicant Mr. Gagnon or documents sourced from him.  Mr.
Gagnon bears the onus on this application (subject of course to the shifting
onus within a s. 11(b) application under R. v. Jordan 2016 SCC 27
(CanLII) if the 30-month threshold is exceeded).  He did not testify on this application,
nor did he swear an affidavit.  It was Mr. Gagnon’s choice whether to challenge
or confirm the accuracy of statements or documents attributed to him with his
own first-hand evidence.  He chose not to do so.  The use I may make of such
evidence is governed by well-established principles that I see no basis to
depart from.
[13]       Where
statements attributed to (or documents sourced from) a party are concerned, it
makes a difference who is eliciting the evidence and for what purpose.
[14]       Where
the statement attributed to him is relied upon by Mr. Gagnon in support of his
own application, hearsay evidence of such a statement is clearly inadmissible to
establish the truth of the statement made and such evidence can be afforded no
weight.  Such statements may have limited evidentiary weight in terms of
explaining why the witness did or did not do something in consequence of having
heard it.  However, a party adverse in interest - in this case the Crown – may
rely upon such statements for the truth of their content to prove an adverse
fact in issue.
[15]       Given
the large volume of documentary and viva voce evidence presented on this
application, it is neither practical nor necessary to produce an exhaustive
catalogue of all evidence reviewed or considered on any given point.  This
issue was of primary importance in relation to Mr. Gagnon’s state of mind in leaving
Canada – a relevant but not decisive fact.  I have ignored or attached no
weight to inadmissible hearsay declarations that found its way into materials
filed by both sides and so advised them during oral argument.
[16]       I
make the following findings of fact common to both applications:
[17]       Was
the delay between the date the information was sworn (October 13, 2021) and the
date Mr. Gagnon returned to Canada and was taken into custody on June 11, 2023
“Defence Delay” within the framework directed by the Supreme Court of Canada
for assessing applications under s. 11(b) of the Charter?
[18]       Do
the circumstances of Mr. Gagnon’s deportation from Indonesia constitute an
abuse of process for which warrant the remedy of a stay of proceedings whether
pursuant to s. 24(1) of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms or pursuant
to common law?
[19]       Did
statements made by the Assistant Crown Attorney at the applicant’s initial bail
hearing mislead the court and, if so, is a stay of proceedings under s. 24(1)
of the Charter an appropriate remedy?
[20]       I
do not find it necessary to examine the steps taken in the proceeding since Mr.
Gagnon’s return to Canada on June 11, 2023.  The applicant has not alleged any
circumstances that might bring into question the application of an 11(b)
threshold below the 30-month presumptive threshold directed by the Supreme
Court of Canada in R. v. Jordan.  Concluding as I have that the time
between the swearing of the Information on October 13, 2021 and Mr. Gagnon’s
return to Canada on June 11, 2023 is Defence Delay that should be excluded in
the Jordan calculation of Net Delay and that the Net Delay calculated on
that basis to the anticipated end of trial is well below the 30-month Jordan
threshold, there is no need to examine which, if any, time periods after June
11, 2023 might also be excluded from Net Delay since doing so would have no
bearing on the outcome of the application.
[21]       From
the time the Information was sworn on October 13, 2021 (or shortly thereafter) until
his return to Canada on June 11, 2023, Mr. Gagnon may fairly be described as a
fugitive from justice.
[22]       Mr.
Gagnon’s lawyers were notified of the charges the same day the Information was
sworn.  There can be no question that Mr. Gagnon was aware of the charges
against him on or about the date of the Information.
[23]       Upon
learning of the charges, Mr. Gagnon took no steps to surrender himself to
authorities.  To the contrary, he took steps aimed at frustrating the Canadian
investigation.  When it appeared that a former domestic employee of his in
Indonesia was cooperating with Canadian police, Mr. Gagnon sent another
employee of his to track her down and to attempt to persuade her to cease communications
with Canadian investigators.  Canadian investigators lacked detailed
information abut Mr. Gagnon’s location until shortly before the deportation
proceedings.
[24]       There
can be no question that Canadian authorities took all reasonable steps to
locate Mr. Gagnon.  Indeed, in the Abuse of Process application to be discussed
below, the applicant takes the position that the state went beyond merely taking
all reasonable steps to bring him to justice in Canada and strayed into
the realm of the unreasonable.
[25]       The
suggestion that a fugitive from justice, knowing of the existence of a warrant
for his arrest at all material times, can complain that delay in bringing him
to justice from the other end of the earth could be characterized as a
violation of his right to trial within a reasonable time is utterly absurd.  The
case law in this area is quite consistent with common sense and requires no
such absurd outcome:  R. v. White, 1997 CanLII 2426 (ON CA).
[26]       The
s. 11(b) application must be dismissed.
[27]       On
June 29, 2023, a bail hearing was held for Mr. Gagnon.  The hearing was a
contested one and Mr. Gagnon was represented by counsel.  Mr. Gagnon takes
issue with two statements made by the Assistant Crown Attorney in the course of
that bail hearing which the applicant asserts were intentionally misleading and
amounted to a violation of his right to reasonable bail and an abuse of
process.
[28]       The
first disputed representation was as follows:
[29]       The
second disputed representation was this:
[30]       In
the case of the first statement, the applicant described this as possibly a
“negligent characterization of the law” because it is possible under
Canadian law to request extradition of Mr. Gagnon and authorities chose not to
do so.  That statement is theoretically true in a certain light but is
quite incomplete and certainly does not rise to the level of misleading the
court, let alone knowingly.
[31]       The
first statement was factually accurate in the context in which it was
made.  There is in fact no extradition treaty with Indonesia.  Mr. Gagnon was
deported from Indonesia and the deportation process was in no way a “Canadian process”. 
The Crown did not seek extradition in this case because they factually could
not do so even if it is also factually correct to state that extradition is theoretically
possible with or without a treaty.
[32]       Under
s.78 of the Extradition Act, SC 1999, c 18 the discretion conferred on
the Minister to make a request for extradition to a State is not conditioned
upon the existence of a treaty.  Canada can request any state to extradite any
person for any reason under s. 78 whether or not there is an existing treaty. 
That does not mean that there is a “mechanism” to do so of the sort referred to
by the Crown in the context of the submissions made to the Learned Justice at
the bail hearing.
[33]       The
scheme of the Extradition Act when it comes to outbound requests (i.e.
from Canada to another state) requires a “competent authority” – in the context
of this case, the Ontario Attorney General whose agents are prosecuting Mr.
Gagnon - to make a request of the Minister to extradite a person for prosecution
of an offence over which Canada has jurisdiction.  The Minister is not obliged
to grant a request of the competent authority even if one is made.  If the
Minister accedes to the demand and makes the request of the foreign state,
there is no obligation for the foreign state to which the request is directed
even to consider an extradition request absent a treaty or similar
arrangement.
[34]       An
extradition treaty creates or adopts reciprocal rights and obligations between
states and thereby establishes a “mechanism” to operate under to process
requests in both directions.    For its part, Canada communicated to the
provincial Crown in this case a standing policy not to make such requests
absent a treaty arrangement, a position departed from only on rare occasions
and not in circumstances similar to the current case.  There is no obligation
to make a formal request from the Provincial to the Federal level where the
latter’s policy not to act upon the request in the present circumstances had
been clearly communicated.
[35]       There
was nothing misleading in the summary representation made by the Assistant
Crown Attorney to the Learned Justice at the bail hearing considered in the
context in which it was made it.  The statement made was in substance correct
even if a hypothetical qualification might have been more correct.   Given the
communicated policy of the Canadian government, the Crown in this case
accurately represented that there was no available mechanism to extradite Mr.
Gagnon.
[36]       I
reach a similar conclusion in relation to the second statement.  Mr. Gagnon was
in fact deported from Bali, Indonesia by Indonesian authorities after an
Indonesian process.  No RCMP officials were present at the hearing where the
order was made, at the airport when he was put on an airplane bound for
Australia nor on the airplane itself.
[37]       The
statement, viewed in isolation, did not mention the degree of logistical
assistance to the deportation provided by Canada.  The RCMP had a liaison
officer stationed at the embassy in Jakarta.  The prospect of deportation was
raised by Indonesian authorities with him.  He consistently and clearly
communicated that Canada would not be making a request for extradition and
Canada made no such request.  Indonesia communicated its ability and
willingness to deport Mr. Gagnon and made specific informational and logistical
requests of Canada which Mr. Laviolette relayed faithfully.  Canada supplied
information and agreed to provide the logistical support requested without ever
suggesting that Canada could or would go down the extradition route.  The
discussions encapsulated in this short paragraph extended over several months
from late July 2022 until Mr. Gagnon left Indonesia in June 2023.
[38]       While
all of the details of that logistical and informational liaison effort of the
RCMP liaison officer was not detailed in the statement of the Crown quoted
above, the evidence before the Learned Justice clearly demonstrated that Canada
had cooperated significantly with Indonesian authorities in the deportation
process.  Whether that liaison person was a police officer stationed abroad or
a career diplomat is utterly irrelevant.  The statement was accurate and not
misleading viewed in the context in which it was made.
[39]       This
abuse of process application insofar as it concerns alleged misrepresentations
made at the bail hearing has no merit and must be dismissed.
[40]       The
core of the applicant’s position is that his deportation from Indonesia was a
“disguised extradition” which the applicant contends amounts to an abuse of
process that requires the issuance of a stay of proceedings to safeguard the
integrity of the Canadian judicial process.  The applicant contends that his
deportation from Indonesia was a “sham deportation” that was “initiated,
facilitated and completed because of the actions of Canadian law enforcement”
that circumvented the extradition process of two nations, entailed an unlawful
revocation of the applicant’s passport without notice and a violation of the
written undertaking to seek extradition contained in the Red Notice.
[41]       None
of these allegations can withstand scrutiny.  I shall review each of the three
principal legs of the applicant’s claim in reverse order.
[42]       The
applicant takes issue with the fact that he was not provided with written
notice of the decision to cancel his passport and includes this failure as one
of the factors allegedly tainting the deportation procedures that resulted in
his return to Canada.  I find no merit in this suggestion in fact, and can find
no basis to elevate this alleged failing to the level of an abuse of process
warranting a stay of proceedings.
[43]       At
the time Canadian authorities cancelled Mr. Gagnon’s passport, Canada had
already clearly communicated to Indonesia that it would not be seeking
extradition from Indonesia given the lack of a bi-lateral treaty.  Indonesia
had provided informational assistance through its immigration officials in
locating Mr. Gagnon in Bali and in identifying recent entries and exits from
Indonesia.  Indonesia had also communicated its potential willingness to expel
Mr. Gagnon using immigration procedures available to them which had been used
in analogous situations in the past.  They indicated that it would be of
assistance to them in applying those procedures if Mr. Gagnon’s passport were revoked. 
The RCMP liaison officer conveyed that request up the chain to the relevant
Canadian passport officials.
[44]       There
can be no doubt that the outstanding Ontario charges faced by Mr. Gagnon were
proper grounds for the cancellation of his passport.  S. 10(1) of the Canadian
Passport Order provides that a passport may be revoked by the Minister on the
same grounds for which the issuance of a passport may be denied and s. 9(1) of
the same regulation provides that a passport may be denied in the case of a
person who stands charged with an indictable offence.
[45]       Where
a decision to revoke a passport is taken, the Minister is required to “take
reasonable measures to provide written notice of the decision to revoke the
passport to the person to whom the passport was issued”.  In this case, the
RCMP requested the cancellation of Mr. Gagnon’s passport without providing written
notice to Mr. Gagnon on the basis that the passport was being used to
facilitate Mr. Gagnon’s attempts to avoid justice.  The decision to defer providing
written notice was perfectly reasonable in the circumstances.  There were
reasonable grounds to conclude that Mr. Gagnon had used his passport to flee
Canada to a jurisdiction from which extradition was not possible to avoid
prosecution.
[46]       The
cancellation of the passport was lawful and the decision to defer providing notice
thereof was reasonable in the circumstances as contemplated by the regulation.
[47]       I
find no need to consider further the allegation that Canada breached an
undertaking in the Red Notice to seek extradition of Mr. Gagnon which somehow
confers rights upon him.  The Red Notice clearly and unambiguously disclaimed
any such undertaking which disclaimer was consistently and clearly communicated
to Indonesian authorities throughout.  The question of what benefit Mr. Gagnon
can seek to claim from a non-existent undertaking does not arise.  Once again,
there is no basis to characterize this alleged failing as an abuse of process
that rises to the level justifying the application of the extreme remedy of a
stay of proceedings.
[48]       I have summarized my findings of fact
in relation to this subject earlier and, at the risk of oversimplification
shall digest those findings still further here:
[49]       In
my view, the foregoing conclusions stand as an absolute bar to any conclusion
that Mr. Gagnon’s rights under s. 7 of the Charter have been breached or
that Canada’s actions can be characterized as a common law abuse of this
court’s process and at all events the applicant has failed to satisfy the test
under R. v. Babos, 2014 SCC 16 (CanLII) for the issuance of a stay of
proceedings.
[50]       Mr.
Gagnon was validly arrested on an existing warrant when he presented himself
for entry at Vancouver Airport on June 11, 2023.  The applicant conceded that
Indonesia was perfectly within its rights to apply its own law to deport him
but alleged that virtually any input into Indonesia’s decision-making process
by Canada irrevocably taints the result of that process as “disguised
extradition” and an abuse of process.  Neither common sense nor any of the
cited jurisprudence leads to such a conclusion.
[51]       The
applicant referred to two Ontario cases that refer to the concept of “disguised
extradition”:  United States of America v. Tollman, 2006 CanLII 31731
(ON SC) and Attorney General (Canada) v. Bartoszewicz, 2012 ONSC 250
(CanLII).
[52]       Tollman
was a case involving a United States citizen facing charges of tax evasion in
the United States but residing in the United Kingdom.  With advance co-ordination
with US authorities, Mr. Tollman was detained by Canada when passing through
Toronto in transit from London bound for Bermuda.  There was no Canadian nexus
beyond his transitory presence in Canada for the time necessary to board his
connecting flight at Toronto airport.  Instead, he was held by immigration
authorities who commenced proceedings to have him removed under immigration law. 
The plan hit a snag when Mr. Tollman was ordered released pending the
immigration hearing.  The order for his release was not immediately complied
with and the immigration proceeding was converted overnight to an extradition
hearing and Mr. Tollman was ordered detained anew.  In passing, it should be
noted that nothing prevented the United States from making an extradition
request in the first place – Canada has an extradition treaty with the
United States and in such cases there is a process that is as well understood
as it is quite regularly exercised.  Molloy J. found that the United States was
bound by treaty with Canada to pursue extradition and the circumstances of his
detention disentitled the United States from the relief sought.  Canada’s
use of immigration law to detain him was found to be unrelated to the purpose
of the immigration statute and thus an abuse of process.
[53]       Canada
has no extradition treaty with Indonesia and there can be no suggestion that
there is any legal obligation – by treaty or otherwise – for Canada to seek
extradition nor is there any legal requirement for Canada to withhold
cooperation with Indonesia in the application of its own immigration laws to a
Canadian citizen on its territory in any other manner.
[54]       Bartoszewicz
was an application for extradition from Canada to Poland that was challenged
with allegations of corruption of the requesting state and an allegation
that the Polish criminal proceedings were being improperly used to collect a
civil debt.  As with Tollman, the extradition proceedings had been
preceded by deportation proceedings.
[55]       Both
of these Canadian authorities examined steps taken under Canadian law to
remove someone from Canada to another place for prosecution where both the
immigration laws and the extradition laws under consideration were Canadian and
the intended criminal prosecution was foreign.    There is no question that a
Canadian court can consider whether the alleged (mis)application of Canadian
immigration law undertaken for the purpose of avoiding the provisions of applicable
Canadian statutes amounts to an abuse of its own process.
[56]       The
situation before me is effectively the inverse of Tollman and Bartoszewisz. 
The jurisdiction of those courts to review the Canadian proceedings in
question was undoubted.  Neither involved a Canadian citizen or an intended
Canadian prosecution.  Both cases preceded R. v. Babos and neither
entailed a weighing of the Canadian public interest in a decision on the
intended prosecution on its merits.    They are simply of no assistance to me
in deciding this case.
[57]       The
applicant also referred to the English case of R. v. Horseferry Road
Magistrate’s Court Ex parte Bennett, (1994) 98 Cr. App. R. 114 (H.L).  The
circumstances of that case were also quite different from this and I find it to
be of very little practical use.
[58]       Mr.
Bennett was wanted in England on fraud charges.  He was a New Zealand national
present in South Africa.  There was no applicable extradition treaty but there
was a “special procedure” that was potentially applicable under the English
statute which differs very considerably from our own statute.  Mr. Bennett was first
deported by South Africa to his home country (New Zealand where he was also
wanted).  He got as far as Taipei before he was forcibly detained – allegedly
by South African police – who returned him to South Africa against his will. 
From there he was put on a new flight by South African police this time to
London Heathrow.  He was transported in handcuffs, ostensibly being deported to
New Zealand again although this would have required a transfer of airports
across London.  He was arrested on arrival at Heathrow.  The case came on as a
reference to the House of Lords on assumed facts to consider the jurisdictional
point of whether the lower court had any authority to inquire into the legality
of the means by which he was brought to England.
[59]       Among
the assumed facts in that case was “that the English police took a
deliberate decision not to pursue extradition procedures but to persuade the
South African police to arrest and forcibly return the appellant to this
country under the pretext of deporting him to New Zealand”.
[60]       The
assumed facts in ex p. Bennett amounted to an extra-legal
rendition of a New Zealand national by South Africa to a country of which he
was not a citizen, undertaken at the instance of English police.  There
was no suggestion that South African police were acting lawfully (a proposition
that would be particularly difficult to defend in the case of actions taken by
South African police thousands of miles outside their home jurisdiction in
Taipei) and the assumed fact was that English police played a directing role in
the conduct in question.  That is quite the opposite of the facts present
here.
[61]       Mr.
Gagnon was a Canadian national resident in Indonesia deported to Canada under
an Indonesian statute in a procedure during which he was represented by
counsel.   I have found that Canada did no more than offer logistical support
to decisions independently taken by Indonesia.  There is no evidence that Mr.
Gagnon could legally have gone anywhere else in the world but Canada on June
11, 2023, when he was placed on an Australia-bound flight with papers that
permitted him to do no more than transit via Sydney airport to Canada.  The two
cases could not be more dissimilar.
[62]       Our
Court of Appeal considered ex p. Bennett in R. v. Khadr, 2011
ONCA 358 (CanLII).  However, I don’t consider that Khadr provides the
applicant with any material support here either even if Mr. Khadr was a
Canadian citizen.  Like Tollman, Khadr involved an application
for extradition on behalf of the United States where it was found that the actions
of the applicant United States disentitled it to the relief sought.  In Khadr
as in Ex p. Bennett there were distinct overtones of the prosecuting
state actively assisting in something very much akin to kidnapping.  There was
evidence that the United States had bribed Pakistan to hand over Mr. Khadr.  Khadr
is of no assistance to the applicant’s claim (while Khadr was a Canadian, the
prosecuting state in that case was the United States).
[63]       The
premise of the applicant’s case is that any involvement of the Canadian government
in immigration proceedings undertaken in a foreign country irrevocably taints
that process with illegality under international law regardless of the domestic
law of the country in question, a premise that in turn presumes the existence
of some sort of quasi-constitutional right to extradition.  No such right
exists.
[64]       Mr.
Gagnon was not a refugee and none of the international law principles
associated with that status apply here.  There is no principle of law obliging any
state to afford fugitives in their country with notice and a head start to try
to escape justice.  There is no right of sanctuary or asylum from common-law crime
abroad and every state has the right to expel foreign nationals from their soil
in such cases under their own domestic law free from foreign interference.  Canada
had no obligation to afford Mr. Gagnon with a passport to facilitate his
efforts to escape justice.  Canada had every right to cancel his passport and
to co-operate with Indonesian authorities in the exercise of its own sovereign right
to decide which foreign nationals should be permitted to enter or remain on its
territory.  There are no circumstances present here which could justify
abandoning the assumption of regularity that Indonesian legal proceedings
undertaken in Indonesia and in areas of unquestioned Indonesian sovereignty are
entitled to.
[65]       There
being no breach of s. 7 of the Charter attaching to the actions of
Canadian officials in this matter, I do not find it necessary to follow the applicant’s
invitation to overturn the Supreme Court of Canada’s decision in R. v. Hape,
2007 SCC 26 (CanLII) regarding the applicability of the Charter outside
of Canada.
[66]       The
applicant also took the position that “the only remedy historically granted” in
the case of “disguised extradition” is a stay of proceedings.  In support of
this proposition, the cases of Tollman, Bartoszewicz and Ex p.
Bennett referred to above were again cited.
[67]       In
fact, the remedy of a stay of proceedings to an otherwise valid, pending
Canadian criminal proceeding is not a remedy of first resort under Canadian law. 
It is an extreme remedy to be applied in only the clearest of cases where the
fairness of the trial process itself is undermined or where the continuation of
the process risks undermining the integrity of the judicial process.  The test prescribed
by the Supreme Court in Babos requires proof of:  (1) prejudice to the
right to a fair trial or to the integrity of the justice system that will be
impacted by the continuation of the trial or its outcome, (2) the lack of an alternative
remedy, and (3) a balancing of the considerations favouring a stay against society’s interest in having a final decision on
the merits of criminal charges.
[68]       My conclusions above are sufficient to dispose of the first
part of the Babos test.  Mr. Gagnon’s right to a fair trial has not been
impacted at all and the integrity of the Canadian judicial system is in no way
compromised by the manner of his re-patriation to Canada.  Finally, the
interest of Canada in prosecuting Mr. Gagnon is a strong one.  A permanent stay
of proceeding of the charges here would amount to the functional equivalent of
a pardon, putting Mr. Gagnon in a better position than where he was when he was
deported.  At that time, he was without a valid passport and facing charges in
Canada, a country with an extensive network of extradition treaties.  It
should be noted that the stay of proceedings issued in Tollman or Bartoszewicz
had no impact on the pending charges in the United States or Poland as the case
may be.
[69]       I
cannot concur that the Babos test can be deemed “automatically”
satisfied by the mere incantation of the phrase “disguised extradition.  In my
view, the application of the Babos analysis to this application is
obligatory in the circumstances of this case and precludes the application of a
stay of proceedings in this case.
[70]       In
conclusion, I cannot conclude that the Canadian judicial system has been abused
by what occurred prior to Mr. Gagnon’s return to Canada.  Mr. Gagnon chose to
flee to Indonesia.  His assumption that Canada could not extradite him from
Indonesia was indeed well-founded.  His assumption that Indonesia, applying its
own law, would not expel an investor-class resident whom it concluded was an
undesirable fugitive was not.  It is not an abuse of process to provide
logistical assistance to repatriate a Canadian citizen who is a fugitive from
justice being deported by a country in the application of its own laws.   There
is no principle of fundamental justice that prescribes extradition as the sole
and exclusive means by which a fugitive citizen of Canada can be returned to
Canada.
[71]       For
the foregoing reasons, I am dismissing both applications in their entirety.  Excluding
properly counted Defence Delay, Mr. Gagnon’s trial is scheduled to be completed
in less than thirty months.  There were no material misrepresentations made to
the court in the course of his bail hearing and the process by which he was
deported from Indonesia and returned to Canada cannot be characterized as a
breach of his s. 7 Charter rights or as a common law abuse of process.
[72]       Orders
accordingly.