[1]              
The respondent, Fildaus Uwamahoro, is the
biological mother of the four children who are the subject of the motion now
before the court (“the Children”).  The Children are (a) Dwayne Okenge (May 23,
2013); (b) Dowson Okenge (September 7, 2016); (c) Bella Turner (December 6,
2019; and (d) Lila Turner (March 19, 2022).
[2]              
The applicant David Turner is the biological
father of the girls.  Mr. Turner has, since February 2018, acted in loco
parentis to the boys.  Mr. Turner commenced this application in July 2024. 
The motion now before the court is the second of two motions heard in the
latter half of 2024.
[3]              
The respondent, Patrick Okenge, is the
boys’ biological father.  He did not deliver responding materials for the
motion.[1]
[4]              
In her notice of motion, Ms.
Uwamahoro sets out thirteen forms of relief she is seeking.  The topics covered
in the list include (a) the Children’s primary residence; (b) a parenting time
schedule; (c) that Mr. Turner participate in an anger management course; (d)
that Mr. Turner’s parenting time be supervised; (e) child support; (f)
counselling for the girls “if deemed appropriate”; and (g) Mr. Turner’s
adherence to a medication regime, as prescribed by his treating physician.
[5]              
In her factum, Ms. Uwamahoro asserts that
the issues to be determined on an interim basis are (a) a parenting time
schedule, and (b) “Whether an Order should be made addressing decision making
and, if so, whether same should be granted to one of the parties solely.”  Yet,
decision making is not one of the topics addressed in the forms of relief listed
in Ms. Uwamahoro’s notice of motion.  It would be unfair to both Mr. Tuner and
Mr. Okenge if the court were to make a determination regarding interim decision
making, when neither of them had notice that Ms. Uwamahoro would be requesting
relief in that regard.
[6]              
At this stage of Ms. Uwamahoro’s motion,
the court makes a temporary, without prejudice order related only to a
parenting time schedule and matters ancillary to such a schedule.
[7]              
It is undisputed that the Parties began
living together in February 2018 and have never married.  Neither of the Parties
provided the court with evidence as to when they met; where they met; where
they were living when they began cohabiting in February 2018; or where
they lived prior to moving to Kemptville, Ontario in 2020.
[8]              
It is also undisputed that the boys
resided with the Parties from February 2018 to July 2024.  In that 6.5-year
period, the boys have had infrequent, but consistent, parenting time with
Mr. Okenge.  It is undisputed that between their respective dates of birth and July
2024, the girls resided with the Parties.  The only exception to the Children’s
continuous residence with the Parties is a period of several days in the
early fall of 2023, when Ms. Uwamahoro left the family home with the Children.
[9]              
Mr. Turner’s application and the first motion
heard in 2024 were precipitated by Ms. Uwamahoro’s decision to leave the
family home on June 26, 2024.  Ms. Uwamahoro’s evidence is that she left the
home, with the Children and the Children’s maternal grandmother, and went to a
shelter for women experiencing domestic violence.[2]
[10]          
After leaving the family home on June 26,
2024, Ms. Uwamahoro spoke by telephone with a member of the Kemptville
detachment of the Ontario Provincial Police (“OPP”).  Ms. Uwamahoro’s evidence
is that she did so to inform the OPP that she and the Children were safe.
[11]          
Ms. Uwamahoro’s evidence is that, in the
four years after the family moved to Kemptville, she called the police on four
occasions out of the fear of Mr. Turner’s “violent outbursts and controlling
coercive behaviour”.  In his responding affidavit, Mr. Turner does not dispute the
prior calls to the OPP; he vehemently denies engaging in the behaviour
described by Ms. Uwamahoro at paras. 64-74 of her November
14, 2024 affidavit.
[12]          
Ms. Uwamahoro’s evidence is that between June
26 and July 11, 2024, she communicated by email with Mr. Turner in an effort to
arrange parenting time for him with the Children.  Ms. Uwamahoro’s evidence in
that regard, including as to the content of Mr. Turner’s responding emails,
is uncontradicted.  Mr. Turner does not dispute Ms. Uwamahoro’s description of him
refusing to discuss or arrange parenting time in that two-week period.
[13]          
Mr. Turner brought an urgent motion
for an order requiring Ms. Uwamahoro to return the Children to his care. 
Ms. Uwamahoro did not deliver responding materials or appear on the return of
the motion on July 10, 2024.  Ms. Uwamahoro’s evidence is that she received the
motion materials by email on July 9, 2024, but did not see them until after the
motion was heard.
[14]          
On July 10, 2024, Justice Abrams ordered
that the Children be returned to Mr. Turner’s care within 24 hours of the date
of order (“the Abrams order”).  On the same date,  Ms. Uwamahoro received a
copy of the Abrams order by email; the email was sent to her by a member of the
court’s administrative staff.  With the assistance of the OPP, Ms. Uwamahoro
returned the Children to Mr. Turner on July 11, 2024, with the exchange taking
place at a restaurant.
[15]          
Ms. Uwamahoro and her mother have not
returned to the family home.  They continue to reside at a shelter, pending a
subsidized housing unit becoming available to Ms. Uwamahoro.
[16]          
For approximately 2.5 months, between July
2024 and the end of September 2024, Ms. Uwamahoro did not have any parenting
time with the Children.  From the court’s review of Mr. Turner’s affidavit
materials[3],
there is no evidence to contradict Ms. Uwamahoro’s evidence that Mr. Turner did
not take any steps to arrange or facilitate the Children having parenting time
with their mother during that 2.5-month period.  That period ended on September
25, 2024—the date on which the motion now before the court was first returned
before this court.
[17]          
On August 16, 2024, Justice Johnson made
an order for the referral of the matter to the Office of the Children’s
Lawyers (“OCL”).
[18]          
On September 25, 2024, at Mr. Turner’s
request, Justice Schwartz adjourned Ms. Uwamahoro’s motion to December
11, 2024 (“the Schwartz order”).  Justice Schwartz addressed procedural issues
and made a ‘without prejudice’ order for Ms. Uwamahoro’s parenting time with
the Children.  The Schwartz order provides that Ms. Uwamahoro shall have
parenting time with the Children as follows:
[19]          
The Schwartz order (a) stipulates where
and how the exchanges of the Children shall occur, and (b) addresses
communication between adults in attendance at the exchanges (i.e., no negative
commentary).  On the consent of the Parties, the Schwartz order includes the
following term: “There shall be no negative commentary about the parties, by
anyone, in front of or within the hearing [range] of the children”.
[20]          
Pursuant to the litigation schedule in the
Schwartz order, the following materials were filed by the Parties prior to the
return of the motion and were before the court on December 11, 2024:
[21]          
Before turning to the substantive issue of
a parenting time schedule, I will first address two procedural matters raised
by Mr. Turner at the outset of the hearing on December 11, 2024.
[22]          
On December 11, 2024, Mr. Turner informed
the court that he intended to rely on two additional affidavits; he had
not served and filed either affidavit in accordance with the litigation
schedule set out in the Schwartz order.  The additional affidavits upon which
Mr. Turner sought to rely were sworn by him on September 29, 2023, and July 5,
2024.  Each affidavit was previously delivered in support of an
urgent motion, brought by Mr. Turner, for the return of the Children.
[23]          
For the following reasons, Mr. Turner’s
request for leave to rely on the additional affidavits is denied.
[24]          
In his endorsement dated July 10, 2024,
Justice Abrams refers to a temporary order obtained by Mr. Turner in
October 2023.  Mr. Turner’s September 2023 affidavit was filed in support of an
urgent motion brought by Mr. Turner at that time.  As noted by Justice Abrams
in his July 2024 endorsement, after obtaining a temporary order in October
2023, Mr. Turner informed the court that he would not be proceeding with his
application at that time (i.e., in the fall of 2023).
[25]          
It would not be reasonable or fair to Ms.
Uwamahoro to permit Mr. Turner to rely on his September 2023 affidavit.  That
affidavit was filed more than a year ago, prior to the commencement of this (or
any) application.  Within a matter of days after filing the September 2023
affidavit, Mr. Turner decided not to proceed with an application.
[26]          
Mr. Turner could have included in his
November 2024 affidavit any portion of the substance of the two earlier affidavits;
he chose not to do so.  As of September 25, 2024, Mr. Turner had been served
with Ms. Uwamahoro’s September 20, 2024, affidavit.  Mr. Turner had
approximately a week, after being served with Ms. Uwamahoro’s November 14, 2024
affidavit, within which to finalize his responding affidavit.  In summary, Mr.
Turner had from September 25 to November 22, 2024 to draft his affidavit in
response to the motion now before the court.
[27]          
The Schwartz order clearly stipulates that
the Parties would not be permitted to file further evidence, outside of
the litigation schedule ordered, without leave of the court.  If Mr. Turner
were permitted to rely on either of the earlier affidavits, Ms. Uwamahoro would
be deprived of the opportunity to deliver a reply affidavit.
[28]          
I turn next to Mr. Turner’s request for an
adjournment of the motion.
[29]          
Mr. Turner requested an adjournment of the
motion to permit him to file a revised or additional factum.  He wished to
respond, in writing, to matters raised in Ms. Uwamahoro’s factum that he had
not anticipated would be addressed in that document.
[30]          
For the oral reasons given on December 11,
2024, that request was denied.  To those oral reasons, I add the following
reasons for denying the request for an adjournment.
[31]          
Ms. Uwamahoro’s motion had already been
adjourned once at Mr. Turner’s request.  The Parties and the Children will
benefit from the court’s determination of an interim parenting time schedule – with
the court’s goal being to assist the Parties in returning stability and
certainty to the Children’s lives.
[32]          
Mr. Turner had been in possession of a
copy of the notice of motion for more than two months.  He was aware of the various
forms of relief Ms. Uwamahoro is requesting on her motion—including that
decision making is not addressed in the notice of motion.  Mr. Turner had more
than two months, following service on him of a copy of the notice of motion, to
draft his responding materials.  The Parties were otherwise required to follow
the litigation schedule set out in the Schwartz order.
[33]          
As a result of a last-minute change in Ms.
Uwamahoro’s representation, Mr. Turner’s factum was delivered before Ms.
Uwamahoro’s factum was delivered.  The court does not fault Ms. Uwamahoro’s
present counsel of record for that circumstance.  That timing, alone, results
in minimal prejudice to Mr. Turner in responding to the motion.
[34]          
With the motion having been adjourned for
over two months (from late September to mid-December 2024), the Parties and the
Children would be prejudiced if the motion were adjourned yet again.  They
would face continued instability and uncertainty.  That prejudice outweighs the
minimal prejudice to Mr. Turner of being first to deliver a factum for the
motion.  That balancing exercise is tipped even more in favour of denying the
request for an adjournment because the issue of decision making is not before
the court at this time.
[35]          
As stated above, in para. 6, the sole
issue determined at this interim stage of Ms. Uwamahoro’s motion is a parenting
time schedule that is in the best interests of the Children.
[36]          
When making a parenting time order, “the
court shall only take into account the best interests of the child in
accordance with” s. 24 of the Children’s Law Reform Act, R.S.O. 1990, 
c. C.12 (“CLRA”).  As the primary consideration, “the court shall
consider all factors related to the circumstances of the child, and, in doing
so, shall give primary consideration to the child’s physical, emotional, and
psychological safety, security, and well-being”: s. 24(2).
[37]          
The CLRA includes a non-exhaustive
list of the “factors” related to the circumstances of a child”; that list is
found in s. 24(3)(a)-(k).  The factors listed therein are addressed below under
Issue 1 and 2.
[38]          
One of the factors listed in s. 24(3) is
“family violence”; the court must consider the impact of family violence on
parenting and co-operation between the parties: s. 24(3)(j).  Factors specific
to family violence are stipulated in s. 24(4).
[39]          
When allocating parenting time, “the court
shall give effect to the principle that a child should have as much time with the
best interest of the child”: s. 24(6).
[40]          
Ms. Uwamahoro requests that she immediately
have two weeks of consecutive and uninterrupted parenting time with the
Children.  Ms. Uwamahoro proposes that Mr. Turner would have a video call with
the Children three times during each of those two weeks.
[41]          
Ms. Uwamahoro proposes that, following the
initial two-week period with her, the Children would (a) continue to reside
with her at the Lanark County Interval House (“LCIH”), and (b) have parenting
time with Mr. Turner one night a week (for two hours) and every second weekend
(Friday evening to Sunday evening).  Ms. Uwamahoro asks the court to order that
Mr. Turner’s parenting time with the girls be supervised until he has completed
an anger management course.  In addition, she requests that the boys have
parenting time with Mr. Turner, “as per their views and preferences and when/if
is safe.”
[42]          
Ms. Uwamahoro asks the court to take into
consideration that the Children have to date been raised Muslim.  Ms. Uwamahoro
submits that she is the parent who is committed and best-suited to continue
raising the Children as Muslims.
[43]          
In his factum, Mr. Turner requests that he
be granted “full custody” of and decision-making authority for the Children. 
He requests that the Children continue their schooling and extra-curricular
activities at his discretion in Kemptville.  In the list of relief he seeks,
Mr. Turner does not address a parenting time schedule for Ms. Uwamahoro with
the Children.
[44]          
Mr. Turner’s position is that it is in the best
interests of the Children for their primary residence to be the family home in
Kemptville.  Mr. Turner highlights the Children’s established routine in
Kemptville including school, sports activities, and time with their friends. 
Mr. Turner also relies on the proximity of the family home to parks and other
outdoor environments.
[45]          
Regarding the Children’s religion, in his
submission, Mr. Turner asked the court to make an order prohibiting Ms.
Uwamahoro from continuing to raise the Children as Muslims.
[46]          
One of the factors to be considered by the court
is “the Child’s views and preferences, giving due weight to the Child’s age and
maturity, unless they cannot be ascertained”: s. 24(3)(e).
[47]          
The OCL’s involvement in this proceeding is
pursuant to the August 2024 order of Justice Johnston, made after the Children
were returned to Mr. Turner’s care.
[48]          
As explained by the OCL, at para. 4 of their
factum and in oral submissions, because of the urgent nature of Ms. Uwamahoro’s
motion, the OCL did not have sufficient time to obtain a “clinical assist” who
could provide affidavit evidence of the Children’s view and preferences.  In
addition, the OCL did not have the opportunity to (a) have “two good interviews”
with the three older children, (b) collect the relevant third-party records for
each child, and (c) after reviewing the records, conduct a third interview of
each of the three older children.
[49]          
The OCL emphasized in their oral submissions
that they would present the court with an interim position, pending the completion
of the document review and interview process.  I found the OCL’s submissions to
be thorough; balanced regarding the Parties; based upon a thoughtful
consideration of the interviews with the three older children; and compelling.
[50]          
The Children’s views and preferences, as
presented by the OCL, are summarized below.
[51]          
The OCL found Bella to be challenging to
interview—even when compared to other four-to-five-year-old girls.  At para. 54
of their factum, the OCL summarizes Bella’s views:
[52]          
The OCL cautions the court regarding the views
and preferences expressed by eight-year-old Dowson.  First, the OCL highlights
that Dowson appears to be experiencing stress because of his role, as he
understands it, in the proceeding and its potential outcome.
[53]          
For example, Dowson was interviewed on September
24, 2024.  As of that date, Dowson had been made aware, by Mr. Turner, of the
September 25, 2024 return date for the motion.  Dowson reported that Mr. Turner
had told him in advance that the OCL would be meeting with him.  When
interviewed on that September date, Dowson asked the OCL if that interview was
his “last chance” to say what he wanted.
[54]          
Dowson shared information received from Mr.
Turner to the effect that Dowson would be living with Mr. Turner, would be
permitted to see Ms. Uwamahoro, but would not be staying over with her.  The
OCL does not ascribe to Mr. Turner any intention to influence Dowson.
[55]          
Second, Dowson expressed concern about the OCL
sharing with either of the Parties any information he provided to the OCL.  In
the end, Dowson did not consent to the OCL sharing with the court all of the
details from the interview.
[56]          
Remembering that Mr. Turner is not Dowson’s
biological father but has been in loco parentis for Dowson since February 2018, the OCL summarized Dowson’s “clear
and strong” views as follows:
[57]          
The OCL asks the court to give significant
weight to Dwayne’s views and preferences.  The OCL describes Dwayne as
exceeding the expectations one might have for a boy his age.  The only caveat
to that assessment is the OCL’s concern about unintentional influence; Dwayne
observed Mr. Turner to be “stressed out” and emotional as a result of conflict
between the Parties and the separation.
[58]          
The OCL asks the court to consider Dwayne’s
strong preference to reside primarily in the family home in Kemptville with Mr.
Turner.  The OCL emphasizes that Dwayne’s preference in that regard is “in
large part due to [Dwayne’s] strong dislike for residing in a shelter in
another community.”
[59]          
From the OCL’s interview with Dwayne, the court
has information, not evidence, regarding the environment for the Children when
they are with their mother at LCIH.  Their rooms at the shelter are private. 
They share communal space with children whom they do not know.  Dwayne told the
OCL that he would not otherwise choose to be friends with the children he
encounters at the LCIH.  Dwayne pointed out that when the Children are with
their mother, they are removed from their friends in the Kemptville area. 
Last, Dwayne reported that it is challenging, as an older brother, to keep his
little sisters entertained when the Children are at LCIH with their mother.
[60]          
Like his brother, Dwayne would like to have time
with Ms. Uwamahoro and to continue to see his biological father (the latter,
routinely every two months if possible).
[61]          
In her affidavits, Ms. Uwamahoro describes Mr.
Turner as racist towards the boys (whose biological parents are both persons of
colour), demeaning towards her because of her race, and dismissive of the
Muslim faith and traditions.
[62]          
As noted in the preceding section of this
ruling, on the return of the motion, Mr. Turner requested that the court make
an order, the effect of which would be to terminate the Children’s upbringing
as Muslims “until they are mature enough and informed enough” to make their own
choice regarding faith.  The court informed Mr. Turner that the court would not
make such an order on the motion.  Mr. Turner was directed to focus his
submissions on the issue before the court—a parenting time schedule.
[63]          
In H.(S.) v. M.(A.), 1998 CarswellNS 554
(N.S. Fam. Ct.), the court determined custody of a
mixed-race child, with the dispute being between the child’s paternal
grandparents and the mother.  At para. 16, Family Court Justice Levy says,
“Thus, the issue of race in this, and comparable cases, is much more than a
question of whether an applicant for custody is racially biased, and is much
more than a question of good intentions.  It is a question of the ability to
transmit to the child an understanding of her world and the capacity to
flourish in it.”
[64]          
Ms. Uwamahoro relies on the decision in H.(S.) in part because of the following
summary, at para. 16 of the decision, of the evidence given by a social worker
commissioned by the court to prepare a report:
[65]          
Family Court Justice Levy’s decision in H. (S.), is eloquent and thoughtful. 
The decision is not, however, of assistance to the court in determining a
parenting time schedule for the Parties and the Children.
[66]          
All things are not equal as between the
Parties.  On the motion before this court, I place significant weight on the
views and preferences of the Children, specifically of Dwayne’s views and
preferences.  Dwayne is described by the OCL as exceeding expectations for a
child of his age.  He had the maturity to consider his younger sisters’ needs, as
well as what he considers to be the challenged faced in attempting to meet
those needs when the Children are with Ms. Uwamahoro at the LCIH.
[67]          
Any concerns the court may have about Mr.
Turner’s lack of “cultural competence” or religious competence do not tip the
balance in Ms. Uwamahoro’s favour on the issue of a parenting time schedule.
[68]          
The issue of decision making regarding the
Children’s religion is not before the court on this motion; it may be before
the court in the future if the Parties are unable to resolve the issue between
them.  Better evidence from the Parties would be required.  Reliance on
anecdotal evidence, intended to tarnish the court’s view of the opposite party
will not suffice.  Much more thoughtful and considered evidence on the
importance of cultural and religious upbringing and heritage will be necessary.
[69]          
In addition, the Parties must be mindful of the
approach the Supreme Court of Canada directs be taken regarding cultural
identify: “It is important that the custodial parent recognize the child’s need
of cultural identity and foster its development accordingly” (see: Van de Perre v. Edwards, 2001 SCC 60,
[2001] 2 S.C.R. 1014, at p. 1,039).  When addressing decision making, the court
may choose to apply that approach by analogy to decision making regarding the
Children’s religion.
[70]          
It is important for the Children to have
certainty and stability in their lives.  The Parties both contributed to the
instability the Children have been experiencing since July 2024.  For example,
Ms. Uwamahoro uprooted the Children by leaving the family home.  In providing
that example, the court makes no finding regarding the merits of Ms.
Uwamahoro’s reasons for leaving the family home in July 2024.
[71]          
To Ms. Uwamahoro’s credit, after leaving the
family home in July 2024, she communicated with the OPP and made efforts for
the Children to have parenting time with Mr. Turner.
[72]          
Mr. Turner contributed to the instability in the
Children’s lives for 2.5 months by failing to make arrangements for them to
have parenting time with Ms. Uwamahoro.  Mr. Turner appears to continue to
place little importance on the Children’s parenting time with Ms. Uwamahoro, as
evidenced by his failure to address the topic in the relief he seeks in
response to the motion.  The court reminds Mr. Turner of the factor listed at
s. 24(3)(c): “each parent’s willingness to support the development and
maintenance of the child’s relationship with the other parent”.
[73]          
To those examples of creating instability, the
court adds (a) discussions by either of the Parties with the Children about the
court proceeding, and (b) each party’s negative comments made about the other
party, to or in earshot of the Children.
[74]          
As of the date on which the motion was heard,
Ms. Uwamahoro continued to reside, with her mother, at “LCIH in Carleton
Place.  To maintain the privacy and safety of individuals who reside there, the
address for LCIH is undisclosed.
[75]          
Ms. Uwamahoro is attempting to secure a
subsidized house unit.  She is, however, uncertain as to when she will be
successful in doing so.   As a result, Ms. Uwamahoro is unable to say when her
residence will be somewhere other than LCIH.
[76]          
Ms. Uwamahoro does
not provide the court with any evidence as to the type of accommodation she
currently occupies; the daily routine within LCIH; where the Children stay and
how they are accommodated when they are with her after school or on weekends;
or how the Children appear to her to have fared during their parenting time
with her, since late September 2024, at LCIH.
[77]          
Mr. Turner does not provide the court with any
evidence about the family home in Kemptville.  For
example, there is no evidence as to the size of the property on which the home
is situated; the number of bedrooms in the home; whether any of the Children
share a bedroom; the proximity of the home to the three older children’s
school; or extra-curricular activities in which the Children are engaged.
[78]          
Mr. Turner is home from work in time to receive
the three older children from the school bus following the end of the school
day.  On those occasions when he is unable to be home in time for the school
bus, one of Mr. Turner’s adult daughters from a prior relationship is present
to receive the three older children.
[79]          
The OCL highlights that as of the return date
for the motion, the Parties had struggled for two months to adhere to the terms
of the Schwartz order.  The Parties encountered significant challenges
implementing the scheduled video calls.
[80]          
The court also considers the conflicting
evidence on the subject of family violence.  Ms. Uwamahoro alleges a
longstanding pattern of emotionally and psychologically abusive behaviour on
Mr. Turner’s part.    Ms. Uwamahoro alleges that Mr. Turner’s behaviour is
directed towards her and towards some, if not all, of the Children.  In
response, Mr. Turner alleges that Ms. Uwamahoro has, on at least one occasion,
been physically violent towards him.
[81]          
At this stage of Ms. Uwamahoro’s motion, and
based on the conflicting evidence, the court does make any findings of fact
regarding family violence.  The court is aware of the outcome of the child
protection investigations carried out by the Family and Children’s Services of
Lanark, Leeds and Grenville (“FCSLLG”).
[82]          
First, in a letter dated September 23, 2024,
from the FCSLLG addressed to Ms. Uwamahoro, a child protection worker says,
that “the reported concern in relation to [Ms. Uwamahoro] included physical
force against your child. These concerns are not verified.”  The end result of
that investigation is that Ms. Uwamahoro’s name is placed on a provincial
database accessible by other Children’s Aid Societies in the event of reports
of concerns in the future.
[83]          
Second, in a letter dated September 24, 2024,
addressed by the FCSLLG to Ms. Uwamahoro, from the same child protection
worker, that worker says, “The verified concerns are in relation to Mr. David
Turner and include inappropriate discipline, post separation conflict and
emotional harm.  These concerns have been verified, therefor the file will be
moving to ongoing services to ensure further assessment and safe planning with
your family.”
[84]          
The court expects that the Parties will work
with the FCSLLG to address verified concerns, modify behaviours as required,
and educate themselves regarding appropriate methods of discipline, minimizing
conflict, and preventing against emotional harm.  When Ms. Uwamahoro’s motion
is again before the court, it will be incumbent upon the Parties to provide the
court with further evidence regarding the involvement of the FCSLLG with the
family.
[85]          
I am persuaded by the OCL’s submissions,
including the practical approach advocated by the OCL, that the parenting time
schedule proposed in the OCL’s factum is in the Children’s best interests at
this time.
[86]          
The family moved to Kemptville in 2020.  The
three oldest children each attend the same elementary school.  The youngest
child is not yet of school age. For the girls, the Kemptville home is the only
home they have known.  It would not be practical or in the Children’s best
interests to uproot them from their family home of more than four years and
have them spend a significant amount of time at a shelter located in another
community.  The life the Children know is in Kemptville, in their
neighbourhood, at their school, and with ready access to their friends.
[87]          
The three children who were interviewed
clearly expressed their respective desire to spend time with Ms. Uwamahoro.  It
is important that the Children continue to have the opportunity to spend time
with their mother.  The court anticipates that once Ms. Uwamahoro finds a home
for herself and the Children, the Children will enjoy their time with their
mother even more than they do now and view their mother’s home as contributing
to stability and certainty in their lives.
[88]          
 The order made below is a temporary and without
prejudice order.  Ms. Uwamahoro’s motion, including as it relates to a
parenting time schedule, is adjourned.
[89]          
The parenting time schedule must be reviewed as
soon as practicably possible after Ms. Uwamahoro’s housing arrangements are
settled.  With that goal in mind, the order requires the Parties to return to
court for a case conference at the earlier of (a) late March 2025, and (b) the
date on which Ms. Uwamahoro secures housing in a residential setting.  The
purpose of the case conference is for the court to be brought up as to date,
(a) on the status of Ms. Uwamahoro’s efforts to secure a home, and (b) as to whether
the Parties have been able to manage the parenting schedule ordered below.
[90]          
At the conclusion of the hearing on
December 11, 2024, the Parties were directed to attempt to agree upon a
parenting time schedule for the holiday period (ending on January 5, 2025). 
They were successful in doing so.  The parenting time schedule agreed upon is
set out in the court’s endorsement released the day after the hearing of the
motion: Turner v.
Uwamahoro
(December 12, 2024), Brockville, FC-23-226 (S.C.).
[91]          
The parenting
time schedule ordered below provides for the Children to have parenting time
with their mother on alternate weekends.  The first such alternating weekend commences
on Friday, January 17, 2025.  The respondent mother’s first weeknight,
after-school parenting time with the Children is Thursday, January 9, 2025. 
Those dates are based on the Children having parenting time with their mother
from December 29, 2024 to January 4, 2025, in accordance with the holiday
parenting time schedule agreed upon by the Parties.
[92]          
For the reasons set out above, the court makes
the following order on a temporary and without prejudice basis:
[93]          
Regarding item 9(b), above, the triggering event
is the date on which Ms. Uwamahoro secures housing (i.e., on which she is
informed housing will be available to her) and not the date on which she moves into
the housing.  It is in the Children’s best interests that the Parties plan
ahead for Ms. Uwamahoro’s move to a residential setting.
[94]          
Ms. Uwamahoro’s motion is adjourned and shall be
brought back in the usual manner, in accordance with the Family Law Rules, O. Reg. 114/99 and the
notices to the profession applicable for matters heard at the Brockville
Courthouse.  The costs of the materials for and the appearance on December 11,
2024 are reserved to the judge hearing the motion.