[1]              
The respondent, B.S.L., was charged with 11 offences.
The Crown withdrew three charges at the outset of trial and proceeded to trial
on six counts of breaching probation, one count of uttering threats against the
complainant, A.B., and one count of sexual assault of A.B.
[2]              
Following a trial, the trial judge acquitted B.S.L.
[3]              
The Crown appeals on two grounds. First, it argues
that the trial judge erred by failing to exercise his duties as a gatekeeper
and guard against inadmissible evidence of other sexual activity under s. 276
of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46. Second, the Crown argues
that the trial judge erred by relying on speculation and conjecture to make
adverse credibility findings about the complainant.
[4]              
The trial judge did not make either of these
errors. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.
[5]              
B.S.L. and A.B. had been in an intimate
relationship. They had two children. By early 2021, their relationship had
broken down. The couple was living apart.
[6]              
The respondent formally admitted at trial that he
was bound by a probation order, which prohibited him from contacting A.B. and their
children. The respondent also formally admitted that he and A.B. were previously
in a relationship and that he was the father of A.B.’s children, C.D. and E.F.
[7]              
The Crown called one witness at trial, A.B.
[8]              
A.B. testified that the respondent had called
her during the summer of 2021 to persuade her to allow him contact with his
children. A.B. refused. A.B. testified that in response, the respondent threatened
to kill her. A.B. also testified that the respondent called her multiple times
asking her to write a letter to his probation officer granting him permission
to see the children. A.B. refused.
[9]              
A.B. testified that a few days before Christmas,
the respondent went to A.B.’s home with a friend to see the children. She
testified that the respondent visited them and then left with his friend.
[10]          
Turning to the alleged sexual assault, A.B.
testified that the respondent went to her home on December 8, 2021. She
testified that after she had put the children to bed upstairs, she came back
downstairs and the respondent had not left. He told A.B. that he wanted to
talk. She testified that he started grabbing her arms. She described how he
pulled her towards him as she pushed him off. She testified that he grabbed her
waist, lifted her dress, and touched her underwear. She testified that he said words
to the effect of, “Oh, you’re my wife, like do this.” She testified that she
told him that “this is rape”, and he continued pulling her. She testified that
he stopped when she began speaking loudly. She testified that he apologized. She
asked him to leave. The respondent eventually did so.
[11]          
The Crown also relied on an audio recording that
it argued captured the alleged sexual assault on December 8, 2021.
[12]          
At the outset of the trial, the defence agreed
that, if the recording were authenticated by A.B., it would be admissible in
evidence, but that the defence would be making submissions as to what weight should
be given to it. In addition to direct evidence of the alleged assault, the
Crown also wished to rely on certain statements made by A.B. during the
recording for the truth of their contents because they were spontaneous utterances
(res gestae). Defence opposed the admissibility of A.B.’s statements on
this basis, but after an exchange with the trial judge, it was agreed that the
complainant’s statements were admissible but that the defence would argue what
weight should be given to her statements on the recording.
[13]          
The trial judge held a blended voir dire
with respect to the audio recording. The audio recording was played during
A.B.’s evidence. At several points, the recording was paused so that A.B. could
narrate what was happening and being said. A.B. testified that the male voice
belonged to the respondent. The Crown relied on A.B. to translate words being
spoken from Lingala to English. The Crown did not call a translator.
[14]          
Although the trial judge made no formal ruling
on the recording’s admissibility during the trial, it is plain from his colloquy
with counsel during closing submissions and in the trial judge’s reasons for
judgment that he admitted the recording but had significant concerns about its
reliability and about the complainant’s description of what it recorded.
[15]          
The defence did not call any evidence.
[16]          
On appeal, the Crown argues that the trial judge
made errors of law. Errors of law are reviewed on a correctness standard: R.
v. Shepherd, 2009 SCC 35, [2009] 2 S.C.R. 527, at para. 18.
[17]          
On cross-examination, the complainant testified
that she used her iPhone’s voice memo software to make the recording. The
complainant also testified that the date of the recording was not clear from
the actual audio. She stated that her phone had shorted and that when she went
to check the recording, it was dated December 8. The Crown led no other
evidence about when the recording was made. For instance, the Crown did not lead
any evidence regarding the recording’s metadata.
[18]          
The Crown’s first ground of appeal arises from
the following exchange between the complainant and the defence on
cross-examination:
[19]          
The Crown argues that this exchange constituted
other sexual activity evidence, within the meaning of s. 276(2), thus
triggering the procedures set out in s. 278.93 and 278.94. I disagree.
[20]          
This ground of appeal turns on the proper
characterization of the defence’s questions. The defence was testing the complainant’s
credibility and reliability about the date of the recording, not seeking to adduce
evidence that the complainant engaged in other sexual activity. It was evidence
of the sexual activity charged – the suggestion was simply that the complainant
was mistaken about the date.
[21]          
Subsection 276(2) does not apply to the limited
questions put by the defence.
[22]          
The Crown argues that had it known that the
defence would challenge the complainant’s credibility and reliability about the
date of the recording, it could have led metadata evidence or amended or
re-laid the information.
[23]          
But the purpose of s. 276 is not to help the
Crown plug gaps in its case. The objectives of s. 276 are to protect the
integrity of the trial process by striking a balance
between the dignity and privacy of complainants and the right of accused
persons to make full answer and defence. Section 276 seeks to eliminate the
twin-myths, to encourage the reporting of sexual
offences, and to exclude evidence which supports stereotypical reasoning: R. v. Goldfinch, 2019 SCC 38,
[2019] 3 S.C.R. 3, at paras 39 and 48. The defence’s brief line of questions
about the timing of the recording did not run afoul these important objectives.
[24]          
Thus, I would not give effect to this ground of
appeal.
[25]          
The Crown argues that the trial judge erred in relying
on speculation and conjecture to make adverse credibility findings about the
complainant with respect to the date of the recording. The Crown also argues
that the trial judge speculated that the recording was doctored. Finally, the
Crown argues that the trial judge erred in making an adverse credibility
finding about the complainant because of her delay in giving the recording to the
police.
[26]          
The trial judge’s reasons disclose no legal
error. In effect, the Crown invites this court to reweigh the trial judge’s
credibility findings on appeal. That is not this court’s function on appeal. It
was open to the trial judge on the evidence to be left with a reasonable doubt
as a result of the complainant’s evidence.
[27]          
One of the core issues at trial was whether the
recording was accurate and made on the date the complainant maintained it was.
Because the Crown led no other evidence about the date of the recording, such
as metadata, the only evidence the trial judge could consider was the complainant’s
evidence. And because the male voice was speaking in Lingala for portions of
the recording, the trial judge was also invited to rely on the complainant’s
explanation of what the male person was saying on the recording. Her
credibility and reliability were therefore central issues.
[28]          
In his reasons for decision, the trial judge
noted that there was no metadata evidence associated with the recording adduced
at trial. Because this was an electronic record, the trial judge analogized to R.
v. Aslami, 2021 ONCA 249, 155 O.R. (3d) 401, and noted that the Court of
Appeal cautioned trial judges about the need to rigorously evaluate an
electronic record’s reliability. He noted that everything turned on the
complainant’s evidence.
[29]          
The trial judge then addressed the complainant’s
delay in giving the police the recording. He found her explanation for why she did
not disclose the existence of the recording or play it for the police when she
was first interviewed on January 4, 2022 to be “very troubling.” The
complainant’s explanation was that she had not been asked. The trial judge
noted that the complainant only told the police of the recording’s existence 
in March 2022, and the complainant only produced it to the police a couple of
months before the trial, a year after the complainant told the police about its
existence. This caused the trial judge to express concern regarding the provenance
of the recording.
[30]          
In Aslami, the Court of Appeal cautioned,
at paras. 11 and 30:
[31]          
Aslami was about
text messages and messaging software, not electronic recordings. But I need not
resolve how broad a rule the Court of Appeal was articulating in that case. As
I read the trial judge’s reasons, he simply relied on Aslami to instruct
himself to rigorously evaluate electronic evidence in terms of its reliability
and its probative value. Doing so was not an error of law.
[32]          
Although the Crown was not required to lead
expert evidence about the recording, the result of the Crown’s trial strategy
was that the only evidence about the date of the recording and the recording’s
reliability came from the complainant. It was not an error for the trial judge
to consider the complainant’s credibility in this regard.
[33]          
Finally, a fair reading of the trial judge’s
reasons does not support the Crown’s contention that he speculated about the
audio being doctored. Rather, the trial judge concluded that he had significant
concerns about the complainant’s credibility with respect to what the audio
recording was a record of and how it came to be made. Put otherwise, the trial
judge concluded that the Crown did not discharge its burden in this regard.
[34]          
A trial judge’s findings of credibility deserve
particular deference on appeal: R. v. G.F., 2021 SCC 20, [2021] 1 S.C.R.
801, at para. 81. Absent a reviewable error, it is not for this court to
intervene in the trial judge’s assessment of the complainant’s credibility.
[35]          
Here, after considering the complainant’s
credibility in respect of the audio recording, and its delayed disclosure and
production to the police, the trial judge then considered the defence’s
cross-examination of the complainant, canvassing certain inconsistent
statements made by the complainant about the sexual assault. And, after
appropriately cautioning himself about the frailties of demeanour evidence, the
trial judge noted that the complainant was not always responsive on
cross-examination.
[36]          
These considerations led the trial judge to express
concern about the complainant’s credibility generally, and he concluded that he
was left with a reasonable doubt.
[37]          
On appeal, the Crown relied on R. v. M.W.,
2024 ONCA 499, to argue that the trial judge took a “piecemeal approach” to
assessing the evidence. In M.W., at para. 6, the Court of Appeal
concluded that the trial judge erred in considering the probative force of a
video of the alleged sexual assault only after the trial judge concluded that the
court could not rely on any of the complainant’s testimony.
[38]          
Here, the trial judge did not adopt a piecemeal
approach to assessing the evidence. He properly considered the audio recording
in the context of the evidence as a whole. Given that the complainant’s
credibility was a central issue at trial, the trial judge did not err in
focussing on this issue in his reasons.
[39]          
I would therefore not give effect to this ground
of appeal.
[40]          
The appeal is dismissed.