[1]              
The defendants (plaintiffs by counterclaim) move for default
judgment against the plaintiffs (defendants by counterclaim), after the plaintiffs’
pleadings were struck without leave to amend by Associate Justice Abrams. On
August 14, 2024, Chalmers J. directed that the counterclaim proceed as a motion
for default judgment in writing.
[2]              
Having reviewed the materials, I required
counsel to attend to make submissions with respect to the relief requested.
[3]              
Under rule 19.02 of the Rules of Civil
Procedure, RRO 1990, Reg. 194, a defendant who has been noted in default is
deemed to admit the truth of all allegations of fact made in the statement of
claim (here, counterclaim). Of course, judgment issues only if the facts
alleged entitle the plaintiff by counterclaim to judgment: rule 19.06.
[4]              
The inquiry undertaken by the court on a motion
for default judgment is the following:  (i) What deemed admissions of fact flow
from the facts pleaded in the claim?; (ii) Do those deemed admissions of fact
entitled the plaintiffs, as a matter of law, to judgment on the claim?; and
(iii) If they do not, has the plaintiff adduced admissible evidence which, when
combined with the deemed admissions, entitles it to judgment on the pleaded
claim? That is, do the deemed admissions and evidence filed make out the
elements of a valid cause of action?: Elekta Ltd. v. Rodkin, 2012 ONSC 2062 at para.
14.
[5]              
The deemed admissions flowing from the counterclaim,
and the affidavit evidence, establish the following.
[6]              
Payvault is a federally incorporated company which has no issued
and outstanding shares. It is authorized to issue only common shares. Hasan
Saleemi is the sole director of Payvault.
[7]              
Michael Nash founded Payvault with Mr. Saleemi and took the
required steps to incorporate Payvault. Terrain Strategic Alliance Inc. is a
federal corporation of which Mr. Nash is the sole director, officer and
shareholder.
[8]              
Nash and Saleemi founded Payvault together.
Payvault was to issue 51% of its common shares to Saleemi (indirectly through
120) and 49% to Nash (indirectly through Terrain).
[9]              
Prior to founding Payvault together, both Nash
and Saleemi were senior and key employees of another e-commerce payment
processing company, SmartPay. SmartPay offers similar services to those that
Payvault now offers. Nash was the Chief Financial Officer at SmartPay and
Saleemi was responsible for sales and customer service. At SmartPay, Nash had a
higher base salary than did Saleemi.
[10]          
In March 2020, both Saleemi and Nash were
dismissed from SmartPay. Nash and Saleemi were close friends.
[11]          
After being dismissed from SmartPay, Nash and
Saleemi decided to start a similar payment processing company servicing
e-commerce businesses. In the early morning hours of April 22, 2020, they
discussed names together over text message and settled on ‘Payvault’. Later
that day, Nash incorporated Payvault. Nash filed all Payvault’s corporate forms
with Corporations Canada.
[12]          
Nash commenced an employment claim against
SmartPay, claiming, among other things, wrongful dismissal. Saleemi has not
brought a claim against SmartPay.
[13]          
On Payvault’s Articles of Incorporation, Nash
listed Saleemi as the sole director. Nash did this because he was concerned
that if he listed himself as a director, it would affect his claim against
SmartPay. At the time, Nash and Saleemi were friends, and Nash was not
concerned that Saleemi was the only registered director on paper.
[14]          
Nash and Saleemi had an oral agreement that
Saleemi would own 51% of the shares of Payvault and Nash would own 49% once
they were ready to issue shares of Payvault. At the time of incorporation of
Payvault, no shares were issued to anyone.
[15]          
Saleemi’s father has a business with offices
located at 1087 Queen Street West, Toronto, Ontario. Due to the Covid-19
pandemic, few people were coming into Saleemi’s father’s office on a day-to-day
basis during the spring and summer of 2020, and Saleemi’s father offered to let
Nash and Saleemi work on Payvault at his offices rent-free.
[16]          
Accordingly, on May 18, 2020, Nash filed the
required form to change the registered head office of Payvault to 1087 Queen
Street West, Toronto, Ontario.
[17]          
Over the summer and fall of 2020, Nash and
Saleemi worked on the development of Payvault. Similar to their roles while at
SmartPay, Nash was the Chief Financial Officer of Payvault and Saleemi was
responsible for acquiring clients and the overall direction of the business. In
addition to being the CFO of Payvault, Nash was also responsible for industry
compliance documentation and building the back-end technology systems on which Payvault
operates. The parties therefore brought different skills to Payvault, but it
was by no means Saleemi’s expertise alone that led to its creation and
successful operation.
[18]          
Pursuant to the understanding that Nash was a
49% shareholder of Payvault, he worked on Payvault, as its CFO, financial
compliance manager, and back-end technology manager for eight months. Neither Nash
nor Terrain received any pay from Payvault (or anyone) for his services.
[19]          
There was an understanding that both Nash and
Saleemi were permitting Payvault to defer paying them while revenues were
nominal; however, there was an equally clear understanding that Payvault would
pay Nash and Saleemi for their services once it began to generate appropriate
revenues. There is some evidence that once Payvault reached a certain level of
revenue, Nash and Saleemi would pay themselves salaries.
[20]          
There were no issues with the work Nash provided
Payvault, and none were communicated to him.
[21]          
Nash expected to ultimately be paid, and to be
repaid for his shareholder loan of $5,848.19.
[22]          
Saleemi expressly referred to Nash as the CFO of
Payvault to third parties.
[23]          
Nash created a Google Workspace account for
Payvault. Saleemi opened bank accounts for Payvault at TD Bank and the Bank of
Nova Scotia. Saleemi then provided Nash the banking information and online
login credentials to the Payvault bank accounts.
[24]          
During the summer of 2020, Payvault had marginal
revenues and both Nash and Saleemi had to contribute several thousand dollars
to Payvault to cover its day-to-day expenses. It appears that Nash considered
this to be a loan.
[25]          
In August 2020, Nash prepared a draft
Shareholder Agreement for Payvault. The draft Shareholder Agreement reflected
Nash and Saleemi’s shareholdings of 49% and 51%, respectively, and noted that
they would take their shares through holding companies – Nash would use Terrain
and Saleemi would use a numbered company, 12098865 Canada Inc. (“120”). Nash
incorporated 120 for Saleemi on June 2, 2020, for this purpose and paid for the
incorporation. Nash emailed the Shareholder Agreement to Saleemi several times
throughout August and September 2020 asking him to review and sign it.
[26]          
In September 2020, Nash contacted a lawyer to
assist with finalizing the Shareholder Agreement and ancillary documents. The
lawyer requested a retainer of $2,500. Saleemi insisted that it was not
necessary for Payvault to incur the expense at that time since Nash and Saleemi
would have to loan the funds to Payvault. Instead, Saleemi insisted that they
wait until Payvault was generating revenues and then they would have Payvault
retain counsel to finalize the Shareholder Agreement. Nash decided not to push
the issue with Saleemi and chose to keep working on Payvault. At the time, he
completely trusted Saleemi and they were working together daily.
[27]          
The share distribution, being 51% Saleemi and
49% Nash, is clearly set out on the first page of the Shareholder Agreement.
Saleemi has never stated – in writing or orally – that he disagrees with any of
the terms of the Shareholder Agreement, including the share distribution
between him and Nash.
[28]          
Throughout the spring, summer and fall of 2020,
Nash prepared several financial models for Payvault. In each model, Saleemi was
noted as a slight majority shareholder, which impacted the distribution of
dividends. Nash shared these models with Saleemi, who was his business partner,
and they discussed them together. Saleemi never objected to the share split
that is clearly set out in the models, or otherwise objected to Nash’s
shareholding in Payvault.
[29]          
In late August or early September 2020, Saleemi
and Nash took steps to complete a loan application for Payvault on which they
represented that they were partners in Payvault.
[30]          
Payvault started to generate significant
revenues by mid-November 2020. From mid-November to mid-December 2020, Payvault
had revenues of approximately $150,000. There is evidence that in 2021 Payvault
had annual net income of $644,292.
[31]          
In mid-November 2020, Saleemi advised Nash that
he had determined that Payvault would ‘partner’ with a business called Secure
Digital Payments (“SDP”), who would refer Payvault customers and assist with
back-end technology and programming functions. Nash perceived this unilateral
decision made by Saleemi as somewhat autocratic, but ultimately, Nash agreed
that it was in the best interest of Payvault and did not think much more of it.
[32]          
On December 7, 2020, Saleemi called Nash and
advised him that he had made another unilateral decision in that SDP would take
over all Payvault’s back-end technological functions. In addition to being the
CFO of Payvault, this was a principal function that Nash was responsible for.
Saleemi also suggested over the phone that perhaps Nash could get a job at SDP.
[33]          
This conversation deeply distressed Nash. Now,
Nash felt as though Saleemi was taking active steps to cut him out of Payvault.
[34]          
After the call, Nash immediately attempted to
access the Payvault bank account through online banking, only to find that
Saleemi had pre-emptively cut off his access.
[35]          
Nash then checked the accounting system (which
he had established as CFO) and saw that Saleemi had withdrawn $14,750 from the
Payvault bank account over the course of the preceding month by email
transferring money to himself, and that he had used an additional $12,000 of
Payvault funds to pay down his personal American Express credit card.
[36]          
These withdrawals by Saleemi were the first
shareholder withdrawals from Payvault.
[37]          
In October 2020, Saleemi and Nash discussed hiring
Saleemi’s cousin as a compliance officer. However, they determined that it was
too early to hire someone, especially since neither of them had been paid by
Payvault yet. Regulatory compliance was also a role that Nash was responsible
for, and at the time, he was able to continue addressing regulatory compliance
matters.
[38]          
Nevertheless, in a December 6, 2020, email,
Saleemi, as CEO of Payvault, offered his cousin the position of Compliance
Officer, commencing March 7, 2021, despite Saleemi and Nash’s earlier
conversation where they agreed that Payvault was not in a position to make that
hire.
[39]          
Only a month after Payvault started generating
significant revenues, Saleemi had successfully usurped the entire business as
his own and put the pieces in place to replace Nash.
[40]          
Nash, through Terrain, or otherwise, has never
received payment from Payvault, nor has Payvault reimbursed Nash for thousands
of dollars of expenses that Nash paid on its behalf.
[41]          
Saleemi permanently locked Nash out of
Payvault’s GoDaddy account.
[42]          
Nash opened the Google account on behalf of
Payvault; he paid for the account out of his pocket; he was the CFO of
Payvault; and he is a principal shareholder of Payvault.
[43]          
In December 2000, Nash noticed that Saleemi had
started deleting documents in Payvault’s Google Account, locked Saleemi out of
the account for a period and restored the documents.
[44]          
On the basis of the factual admissions above,
Nash and Terrain ask the court to find that Saleemi’s and Payvault’s actions
were oppressive to Nash and Terrain. They seek various remedies under s. 241(3)
of the Canada Business Corporations Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-44.
[45]          
Nash and Terrain claim they are beneficial owners
of 49% of Payvault and therefore fall within the definition of “complainant” in
s.238. Nash and Saleemi agreed that Payvault would belong to them in a 49%/51%
ownership split. They argue that until Saleemi cut them out of Payvault, they
proceeded as business partners.
[46]          
The materials establish that that Nash, through
Terrain, was intended to be a 49 percent shareholder of Payvault, and the
parties operated as though this were the arrangement between them. Saleemi
advised third parties that they were partners, and that Nash was Payvault’s
CFO. Nash took the necessary steps to incorporate the company. They agreed on a
name together. They had worked together at SmartPay and planned to operate
Payvault together to conduct the same business. They agreed on the ownership
split. While they did not execute the shareholder agreement, it was not because
there was a disagreement on the percentage split between the parties. Nash had
equal access to the banking and google accounts of Payvault.
[47]          
I find that Nash and Terrain are proper complainants
under s. 238(d) of the CBCA.
[48]          
As set out in detail above, Saleemi and Payvault
 engaged in the following conduct;
[49]          
These activities demonstrate a lack of good faith on
Saleemi’s part, benefiting Saleemi, the majority
shareholder, to the exclusion or to the detriment of Nash and Terrain, the
minority shareholder. The conduct resulted into a lack of visibility into or
disclosure of material financial and other information to the minority
shareholders; and, at bottom, a plan or design to eliminate the minority shareholder:
Wright v. Donald S. Montgomery Holdings Ltd., 1998 CanLII 14805 at para.
25.
[50]          
I find that the business or affairs of the
corporation have been conducted, and the powers of the director of the
corporation have been exercised, in a manner that is oppressive or unfairly
prejudicial to Nash and Terrain, and that disregards their interest as
contemplated in s. 241 of the CBCA.
[51]          
The conduct is clearly attributable to Saleemi personally as director. He
has exercised his powers to effect the oppressive conduct (Wilson v.
Alharayeri, 2017 SCC 39, [2017] 1 SCR 1037 at para. 47). He has derived
personal benefits from his oppressive conduct and has acted in bad faith
vis-a-vis Nash and Terrain in so doing.
[52]          
I therefore find that Saleemi and Payvault’s conduct has been oppressive
to Nash and Terrain.
[53]          
The issue of remedy is more complicated. First, Nash and Terrain ask
that Saleemi and Payvault be noted in default. The endorsement of Chalmers J. makes
it clear that default proceedings are permitted. For the sake of completeness,
I grant the relief of noting Saleemi and Payvault in default and grant default
judgment. Given that the plaintiffs’ pleading has been struck, I also grant an
order dismissing the claim against Nash and Terrain.
[54]          
At the oral hearing, Nash and Terrain refined the relief they were
seeking and withdrew their request for relief for wages and pay in lieu of
notice for his position as CFO. But they also advised they believe Payvault is
now dormant. They believe Payvault earned funds between 2020 and 2024 and
believe that Saleemi took money out of the company in various ways including repayment
of shareholder loans, dividends, payment of personal bills, and salary.
[55]          
The difficulty is that the state of the evidence in the record is such
that it is impossible to tell what these amounts are. There is a single
financial statement in the record before the court. There is no point to
granting orders that Payvault be valued as of the date of judgment without more
information into its financial affairs, past and present. Nash does not know
whether he is asking for 49% of something, of nothing, or of outstanding
liabilities.
[56]          
Therefore, I am granting interim relief on the issue of remedy without
prejudice to Nash and Terrain’s right to seek further remedies once they obtain
the production I order below.
[57]          
I grant Nash and Terrain a tracing order to allow them to obtain a
sufficient accounting and documents to determine the assets, liabilities, and
income and loss of, and shareholder withdrawals from, Payvault, from its
inception until the date of this judgment. Saleemi and Payvault are ordered to
provide particulars of any payments made directly or indirectly to Saleemi
and/or any entities owned or controlled in whole or in part to Saleemi, and any
payments made to Saleemi’s benefit, whether by way of dividends, bill payments,
income, options, loans, repayments of loans, or otherwise. I also order Saleemi
and Payvault to produce all corporate tax returns and notices of assessment of
Payvault. Payvault and Saleemi shall also produce income statements, profit and
loss statements, and balance sheets for Payvault for the years 2020-2024
inclusive.
[58]          
Saleemi shall attend an examination in aid of execution by Nash and
Terrain if Nash and Terrain wish to examine him to inquire into the financial
affairs set out above.
[59]          
Once Nash has obtained the information, he may renew his motion before
me for appropriate and additional remedies under the CBCA.
[60]          
Fixing costs is a discretionary exercise under s. 131
of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43. Rule 57.01(1) of the
Rules of Civil Procedure outlines, in a non-comprehensive list, factors
that guide the exercise of this discretion. Relevant factors include the
results of the proceeding, the principle of indemnity, the amount an
unsuccessful party could reasonably expect to pay, the complexity of the
proceeding, the importance of the issues, and the conduct of any party that
tended to lengthen the proceeding.
[61]          
Ultimately, I must fix an amount of costs that is
proportionate, and that is fair and reasonable for the unsuccessful party to
pay: Boucher v. Public Accountants Council for the Province of Ontario
(2004), 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R. (3d) 291, at para. 26. A costs award should “reflect what is
reasonably predictable and warranted for the type of activity undertaken in the
circumstances of the case, rather than the amount of time that a party’s lawyer
is willing or permitted to expend”: Apotex Inc. v. Eli Lilly Canada Inc.,
2022 ONCA 587, at para. 65.
[62]          
Nash and Terrain have been put to significant time and expense and will have
to continue to expend costs to obtain what should rightfully have been
available to them. This expense is being incurred owing to the conduct of Saleemi
and Payvault. In considering the factors above, I order Saleemi and Payvault to
pay Nash and Terrain costs of $25,000 inclusive of HST and disbursements in
respect of the proceedings to date.