[1]              
The Appellant was found guilty of criminal
harassment under s. 264 of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 on
January 26, 2023, by Justice R. Wright in the Ontario Court of Justice. On
August 17, 2023, the Appellant was sentenced to nine months imprisonment
followed by two years of probation. He appeals his conviction and sentence to
this Court.
[2]              
The Appellant raises two issues on the
conviction appeal, both of which, he submits, are grounded in a misapprehension
of the evidence by the trial judge:
[3]              
With respect to the sentence appeal, the Appellant
submits that the trial judge imposed a disproportionate sentence by relying on
inapt comparator cases, and failed to adhere to the “step-up” principle.
[4]              
For the reasons that follow, the appeal is
dismissed, on all issues.
[5]              
In his Reasons for Judgment, the trial judge’s
finding on lawful authority was as follows:
[6]              
The Appellant submits that this was in error
because he ceased his harassing communications immediately upon being told to
stop by the police. It was only at this time that the harassment became impermissible,
it is argued.
[7]              
I disagree.
[8]              
In R. v. Savard, 2013 ONSC 2208 at para.
65, the phrase “without lawful authority” in s. 264(1) was interpreted to mean
that if the accused engaged in acts with “lawful authority” then an essential
element of the offence is missing.  Put another way, “to have lawful authority
to do something means that the law specifically allows a person to do what the
accused did in the circumstances in which he or she did it”: R. v.
Vandoodewaard, 2009 CanLII 66617 (ON SC) at para. 76, quoting from the Ontario
Specimen Jury Instructions.
[9]              
In Savard, the defence argued that the
communications were pursuant to lawful authority because the accused was trying
to convince the complainant to testify on his behalf, and therefore this was
protected, or privileged, speech. Although the court accepted that this could
be a lawful purpose, the communication went far beyond what was necessary for
that purpose and constituted harassment.
[10]          
There is no question that, standing alone, a
person has lawful authority to contact anybody they choose; but what they are
not lawfully authorized to do is harass them with repeated and unwanted
communications. As the Court of Appeal stated in R. v. Nadir, 2004
CanLII 59965 (ON CA) at para. 7:
[11]          
As was held in Vandoodewaard, even when
the predominant purpose of the communication is lawful, if the conduct is harassing
and known to be unwanted, it is prohibited and criminal. As Durno J. stated in Vandoodewaard
at para. 84:
[12]          
In the context of this case, the nature of the
communications satisfied the trial judge that the Appellant had no “lawful
authority” to engage in harassing communications.
[13]          
Further, there was ample evidence on which to
find that the Appellant knew that the conduct was unwanted, and there was no
evidence to suggest any lawful authority to engage in such unwanted
communication. The evidence was that the Appellant had repeatedly and
incessantly called the complainant’s business, a café she owned, and a business
owned by her family where she also worked. In one twenty-four- hour period the
Appellant called at least 30 times.  He also posted numerous messages on the
complainant’s “new customer contact” website. As Stansfield P.C.J. stated in R. v. Box, [1995] B.C.J. No. 2822 at
para. 23, “I have no doubt in my mind that 20 angry, belligerent calls in which
threats are made give rise to an inference of intent to harass.”
[14]          
The complainant corroborated the evidence of her
husband that they had told the Appellant “a million times” to stop calling,
among other things. The communications were part of an ugly and long-standing family
feud between, at least, the Appellant and his brother, who is the complainant’s
husband. The complainant’s husband has also had to change his phone number in
the past because of the Appellant’s unwanted communications.
[15]          
While the defence highlights that the calls to
the complainant’s businesses were not directly to the complainant, they involved
attacks on her husband and his family which would, logically, have been
conveyed to her as they were calls to her business and workplaces.  Much like
his previous communications, and regardless of the direct recipient, these
calls were unwanted and the Appellant had been told to stop on many occasions. Like
the trial judge, I see no merit in the submission that the Appellant was not
intending to contact the complainant but was trying to contact his brother. The
primary target may have been the Appellant’s brother, but that does not permit
him to harass the target’s wife.
[16]          
The trial judge accepted the complainant’s
evidence that the Appellant’s harassing conduct caused her to fear for her
safety. As the trial judge stated:
[17]          
Although, as the Appellant’s counsel points out,
the complainant testified to being annoyed and embarrassed, she also expressed
fear of the Appellant. This was accepted by the trial judge and is a finding of
fact amply supported by the evidence which is entitled to deference.
[18]          
The trial judge also referred to evidence to
support his finding that the complainant’s fear was reasonable in the
circumstances.  In particular, the complainant referred to a phone call she had
heard between her husband and the Appellant in which the Appellant  threatened her
children and wished a rape upon her daughter. The complainant’s husband also
testified about this call. Although this threat had occurred about five years
earlier, this was just one factor in the trial judge’s consideration of
reasonableness of her fear.  Further, as the Court of Appeal addressed in R.
v. D.D., 2005 CanLII 42472 (ON CA), [2005] O.J. No. 4904, 204 O.A.C. 55, at para. 29, albeit in the
context of admitting evidence of prior discreditable conduct (although in a
criminal harassment case), “the passage of time between prior incidents and the
conduct which gives rise to the charge, in circumstances where the evidence
demonstrates that the respondent's attitude toward the complainant had not
changed over the years, is no basis upon which to exclude such evidence.”
[19]          
The trial judge also referred to the “volume and
timing” of the communications, and the content of the messages, to support his
finding that the fear was reasonable.  As he said:
[20]          
Assessing the reasonableness of a complainant's
fear requires consideration of how a reasonable person would have felt in the
circumstances of the complainant: R. v. Sim, 2017 ONCA 856, at para. 19.
This includes having regard to the complainant's personal circumstances and
experience with the offender.
[21]          
Reasonable fear in this context can include fear
for one's physical safety, and fear of and freedom from, mental, emotional, or
psychological trauma caused by psychological violence: R. v. Finnessey, 2000 CanLII 16862 (ON CA) at para. 16.  The Crown does not have to
prove threats of violence. Protecting psychological safety is an objective of
the legislation. As Durno J. stated in R v. Wisniewska, 2011 ONSC 6452
at para. 38:
[22]          
Here, the trial judge had regard to the totality
of the evidence and committed no reversible error in concluding that the fear
of the complainant was objectively reasonable.
[23]          
The Appellant argues that the trial judge erred
in principle in accepting and applying the range applicable for criminal harassment
convictions involving intimate partners. Further, and as a result, he submits
that the sentence of nine months in prison was disproportionate to the offence
and is demonstrably unfit.
[24]          
It is well-accepted that sentencing is accorded
considerable deference, and that a sentence should only be varied if there is
an error in principle or it is not fit or, put another way, unreasonable: R.
v. C.A.M., 1996 CanLII 230 (SCC) at para. 90.
[25]          
I see no merit in this ground of appeal.  This
was the Appellant’s fourth conviction for criminal harassment, the three prior
convictions all having been within six years of the current offence. He also
has convictions for failing to comply with a recognizance, attempting to
obstruct justice, and disobeying an order of the court. There was evidence of
the serious impact the offence had on the complainant, her family and her
business. The Appellant showed no remorse, variously denying his involvement in
the offences, justifying his actions, and blaming the victims.
[26]          
The trial judge was aware of and considered the
fact that the range of sentences was based largely on intimate or domestic partner
cases, which aggravate the crime and sentence. He recognized in his reasons
that this was not the situation here.
[27]          
The trial judge appropriately considered the step-up
principle, noting that the “duration of sentence represents an appropriate step
up from his prior sentences and reflects the unusual circumstances of this
case.” On his second harassment conviction, which also included a conviction
for attempt to obstruct justice, the Appellant served 129 days pre-sentence and
was sentenced to an additional 51 days, or the equivalent of about six months.
The current sentence is nine months.
[28]          
In short, the trial judge considered all the appropriate
sentencing factors, including those complained of by the Appellant, and
committed no error in principle in sentencing the Appellant. Nor can it be said
that the sentence was demonstrably unfit.
[29]          
The appeal from conviction and sentence is
dismissed.
[30]          
The Appellant, Mr. Benyamin, shall surrender
himself into custody by no later than Monday, November 18, 2024 at 5:00 p.m. to
continue to serve his sentence. Should he fail to do so, a warrant of committal
shall issue.