[1]              
The parties have two children, a girl named P., age 3, and a boy
named B., age 2.  On January 1, 2024, the father removed the two children from
their habitual residence in Fort McMurry, Alberta, and took them to Ontario.   The
father left the mother a note saying he was leaving for a “vacation”.  The father
is now living with the children at his parents’ house in Sutton, Ontario.  The mother
remains in Fort McMurry.
[2]              
There are competing motions before the Court concerning this
Court’s jurisdiction to make temporary parenting Orders under the Children’s
Law Reform Act.  There is also a proceeding pending before the Alberta
Court of Justice.  The father commenced his Ontario application on March 8,
2024.  He then delayed trying to serve it for almost six weeks.  The mother
commenced her proceeding in Alberta on June 19, 2024, with a first Court date
of July 30, 2024, after a number of other things, procedural in nature, had transpired. 
I understand the Alberta proceeding has been adjourned more than once, awaiting
the outcome of this motion.  In broad strokes, if this Court declines
jurisdiction, then I am asked to make Orders for the children’s return to
Alberta pursuant to section 40 of the Children’s Law Reform Act, and
perhaps some more substantive temporary Orders pending next steps in Alberta. 
Alternatively, if the Court finds it has jurisdiction, then I am to decide what
temporary parenting Orders and child support should be put into place.
[3]              
In his Notice of Motion dated October 8, 2024, the father asks
the Court to find that it has jurisdiction.  He would then have the Court order
that the mother can have supervised parenting time only, here in Ontario, based
largely on an event that the father says amounted to the mother’s attempted “abduction”
of the children from his care, in early September.  Although the father in his
Notice of Motion seeks an order for child support, in response to questions
from the Court during oral argument, the father changed his position.  He
argued that the Court might choose not to order that, in lieu of the travel
costs that the mother will incur to visit the children in Ontario.
[4]              
Alternatively, if the Court declines jurisdiction, then the father
asks the Court to make orders that he have various holiday time with the
children in Ontario, and at other times in Alberta on 30 days’ notice, if he
can afford it.  The father did not have a realistic plan about how the
children’s travel would occur in either scenario, either logistically or
financially.  In the end, I understood his position, in the scenario where the
children are returned to Alberta, to be that the mother should fund the cost of
the children’s travel to see him Ontario, or at least part of it.  He would also
have the Court make no order for child support from him.
[5]              
In her Notice of Cross Motion dated October 18, 2024, the mother
asks the Court to recognize that Fort McMurry, Alberta is the children’s
habitual residence, and consequently to find that Alberta is the proper
jurisdiction for there to be family court proceedings.  She seeks an order for
the children’s immediate return to Alberta.  Either way, even if this Court takes
jurisdiction, the mother would still have the Court order the children’s relocation
to Alberta, on an interim basis.  She too seeks an order that the father have
supervised parenting time, or “otherwise as the Court may direct”, although her
position softened during argument.  And she asks that the Court order the father
pay child support and section 7 expenses.
[6]              
The mother offered a second alternative, should the Court take
jurisdiction and not order the children’s return.   In that second, alternative
scenario, she seeks parenting time with the children in Alberta in the summer,
Christmas and March Breaks, plus additional parenting time in either Alberta or
Ontario on 30 days’ notice, with the costs of travel deducted from her child
support that would be owing to the father.
[7]              
As I see it, the real issues on this motion are whether the
mother has acquiesced to the father’s removal of the children from Alberta to
Ontario, and whether the mother unduly delayed “commencing due process”.  I
find that she has neither acquiesced or unduly delayed.  In my view, the children’s
habitual residence is Alberta.  The father acted inappropriately by taking the
children to Ontario, with no notice to the mother.  He did so without regard
for the reality, that the parties’ finances are limited, making an
interjurisdictional parenting plan difficult if not possible to implement.  For
these and a number of other reasons that follow, I find that the children
should be returned to Alberta.  I decline to make any further Orders under
section 40 of the Children’s Law Reform Act, other than in aid of the
children’s return.  What parenting plan should be implemented, and child
support, can be dealt with in Alberta, where there is a pending proceeding.
[8]              
In his Reply affidavit sworn October 22, 2024, the father raised
certain issues about the mother’s housing, her employment, and the availability
of day care spots for the children in Alberta, to which the mother did not have
an opportunity to respond.  Although the mother has a cross-motion before the
Court, my scheduling Order of September 24, 2024 (discussed below) did not make
provision for the mother’s right of reply on her cross-motion, in error. 
Consequently, I permitted the mother to give some oral evidence, and she was
cross-examined, on these limited matters.  The record before the Court otherwise
consists principally of the parties’ competing affidavits.
[9]              
Sometimes, where the record consists of untested, conflicting
affidavits, that raise questions of credibility, a tension will arise.  On the
one hand, this dispute about jurisdiction needs to be resolved in a timely
fashion.  Yet that need for timeliness will not always dictate that the process
should be a motion, without oral testimony and cross-examination.  This is
particularly so, when there are credibility issues that need to be resolved: 
see Zafar v. Azeem, 2024 ONCA 15 ¶ 42, 60.
[10]          
But here, no one asked for an oral hearing or cross-examinations
on the entirety of the record, or even for an adjournment to obtain additional
evidence (until the father made a late request during submissions, to make further
written submissions, to better the workability of his proposed plan – discussed
later).  While that absence of a request is not necessarily determinative, nevertheless
having regard to the caution in Zafar v. Azeem, I carefully reviewed the
affidavit evidence (and the limited oral evidence).  I find that any conflicts,
gaps or credibility issues that arise out of the affidavit evidence, are not of
the kind that the Court is unable to make findings and decide the questions
raised about the Court’s jurisdiction:  see also Onuoha v. Onuoha, 2021 ONSC
2228 (Div. Ct.) ¶ 46, 47.
[11]          
As these Reasons for Decision continue, I indicate deliberately where
there is common ground as to both parties’ evidence, to explain why I find that
the jurisdiction issues and the question of the children’s return to Alberta
can be determined on this record.  To the extent that any gaps in the evidence
need to be filled, or credibility issues need to be resolved, I find they
largely pertain to the merits of the parties’ plans.  There is a process
available to the parties to resolve those disputes pending in Alberta.
[12]          
There are four circumstances in which a court in Ontario has
jurisdiction to make a parenting order under the Children’s Law Reform Act. 
They are:
[13]          
It is the father’s onus to demonstrate that a parenting Order
should be made on one of these bases.  If not, the Court should decline to
exercise jurisdiction:  see F v. N., 2022 SCC 51 ¶ 59.
[14]          
These various jurisdictional provisions are set out in Part III
of the Children’s Law Reform Act.  Section 19 provides that there are
four purposes of Part III.  The purposes guide how the above provisions are to
be interpreted.  The four purposes of Part III, set out in section 19, are:
[15]          
In regard to the first purpose, there was no suggestion raised in
argument, that Alberta employs anything other than a best interests standard (as
does Ontario), when dealing with parenting issues on their merits.  I have no
concern whatsoever that the proceeding, if heard in Alberta, would not be dealt
with on a best interests’ basis:  see F v. N. ¶ 52.  Therefore, it is
the other three purposes in section 19 of the Children’s Law Reform Act that
have far more relevance and application to the issues that confront this
Court.
[16]          
In regard to the other purposes set out in section 19 of the Children’s
Law Reform Act, at ¶ 3 of F. v. N., Kasirer J., writing for the
majority of the Supreme Court, held that “where a child who is wrongfully
removed to or retained in Ontario habitually resides in a country that is not a
party to the Hague Convention [or adapted to this case, in another
province], Ontario law provides that, but for exceptional circumstances, courts
will refrain from exercising jurisdiction and leave the merits to the foreign
jurisdiction with which the child has a closer connection”.  At ¶ 9, he further
wrote that the “return order procedure in s. 40 of the CLRA”, (which has
been invoked in this case before me) “starts from the premise that the best interests
of the child are aligned with their prompt return to their habitual place of
residence so as to minimize the harmful effects of child abduction.  Returning
the child to the jurisdiction with which they have the closest connection is
also understood to be in the child’s best interests”.   And at ¶49, Kasirer J.
wrote “[t]his reflects a legislative policy expressed in s. 19 for the whole of
Part III of the CLRA.  Through this policy, the legislature seeks to
discourage child abductions and the wrongful removal and retention of children
to Ontario as well as to ensure that parenting matters are determined by the
jurisdiction to which the child has a closer connection.”
[17]          
Section 22(1)(a) of the Children’s Law Reform Act provides
that this Court shall only exercise its jurisdiction to make a parenting order
with respect to a child if the child is habitually resident in Ontario at
the commencement of the application or the order.   Notably, the time to
consider habitual residence is at the commencement of the application for the
order.  Implicitly, this means that conduct following the beginning of the
Ontario application is presumptively not relevant to the determination of
habitual residence:  see section 22(1) of the Children’s Law Reform Act;  see
also Los v. Ross ¶ 38.
[18]          
Section 22(2) defines the term “habitually resident” as the place
where the child resided in whichever of the following circumstances last
occurred:
[19]          
Although neither side’s facta nor his or her oral
arguments particularly averred to this, the law respecting how the meaning of “habitually
resident” in section 22(1)(a) of the Children’s Law Reform Act has been
statutorily interpreted, may be currently unsettled.
[20]          
For example, at ¶ 74-76 of Zafar v. Azeem, Fairburn
A.C.J.O. cited the Supreme Court’s decision in Office of the Children’s
Lawyer v. Balev, 2018 SCC 16 in interpreting the meaning of habitual
residence, even though Zafar v. Azeem was not decided under the Hague
Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction (the “Hague
Convention”), but rather under other parts of the Children’s Law Reform
Act.  There, she wrote that the question is not simply about asking and
answering where the child last lived during what period of time.  While
important, so too are a number of other factors, that McLachlin C.J. described
in Office of the Children’s Lawyer v. Balev as “all relevant links and
circumstances”, including parental intention.
[21]          
The Court in Zafar v. Azeem, was nevertheless influenced by
the fact that the child was just three years old, and had spent her entire
young life in the mother’s primary care.  The child had yet to develop any
connection to school, to community or friends.   In the result, Fairburn
A.C.J.O. found that on these facts, determining “parental intent” was key to
determining habitual residence, despite the other aspects of the hybrid test in
Office of the Children’s Lawyer v. Balev.   See also the approach taken
by the Ontario Court of Appeal in Los v. Ross ¶ 31.
[22]          
Perhaps, but not necessarily in contrast, in Dunmore v.
Mehralian, 2023 ONCA 806, on appeal to the Ontario Court of Appeal the
father argued that the motions judge did not consider the “settled intention”
of both parties in determining that the child was habitually resident in
Ontario.  He argued that the parents did not have a shared intention to move to
Toronto when they travelled here.  He argued that they were merely visiting
Ontario temporarily, and planned to return to the Middle East:  see ¶ 35.
[23]          
Although the motions judge determined that she did not have to
decide that precise issue, and while she noted certain credibility concerns
respecting the evidence of both parties, she ultimately preferred the mother’s
evidence.  She found that the parties had in fact decided to move to Toronto. 
They were not merely temporarily visiting.  The Court of Appeal found that this
was a finding of fact, that was entitled to deference.
[24]          
In the result, the Ontario Court of Appeal concluded that there
was no reviewable error in the motion judge’s factual finding that the parties
were residing in Ontario at the relevant time.  The motion judge’s factual
finding was sufficient to establish habitual residence for the purposes of
section 22(1)(a):  see ¶ 37-44.
[25]          
Leave to appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada was granted in Dunmore
v. Mehralian on June 13, 2024.  That appeal may very concern the proper interpretation
of habitual residence under the Children’s Law Reform Act.
[26]          
Regardless, section 22(2)(2.) of the Children’s Law Reform Act
provides that the determination about where a child is habitually resident
does not turn solely on where that child last lived with both parents.  Section
22(2)(2.) of the Children’s Law Reform Act contemplates that the
children’s habitual residence may have changed to Ontario if, at the
commencement of the application, the parents were living separate and apart,
and the children were living “with one parent under a separation agreement or
with the consent, implied consent or acquiescence of the other or under a court
order”.  As acquiescence has been argued, the legal principles that define it
must be set out in order to be applied correctly.
[27]          
While in some instances, the Ontario Court of Appeal has turned
to the jurisprudence interpreting the Hague Convention, to aid or guide
the interpretation of the statutory language in the Children’s Law Reform
Act (see above), that has not been universally done.  Examples include when
the procedure is different as between the Hague Convention and the Children’s
Law Reform Act (see again Zafar v. Azeem ¶ 42;  see also Geliedan
v. Rawdah, 2020 ONCA 254), or when the statutory language is notably
different: see Ojeikere v. Ojeikere, 2018 ONCA 372 ¶ 51-62.  Still, at ¶
34 of Geliedan v. Rawdah, when considering the differing processes for
return applications under section 40 of the Children’s Law Reform Act distinct
from the process under the Hague Convention, the Ontario Court of Appeal
nevertheless wrote that considerations taken into account (under the Hague
Convention and section 40 of the Children’s Law Reform Act) may
overlap.
[28]          
In regard to acquiescence specifically, there are some key differences
between how it is included in the Children’s Law Reform Act versus in
the Hague Convention.  One difference is that in the Children’s Law
Reform Act, acquiescence is part of the definition of habitual residence; 
in other words, if there has been acquiescence the habitual residence is changed. 
Whereas “acquiescence” under Article 13(a) of the Hague Convention is an
exception to the child’s return under Article 12.  The effect may nevertheless be
the same (i.e. if there is acquiescence, the Court takes jurisdiction and/or
the child is not summarily returned).
[29]          
Another difference relates to the time period in which acquiescence
is assessed.  As part of the statutory definition of habitual residence under
the Children’s Law Reform Act, the focus is on time of the commencement
of the application (see section 22(1)(a) and section 22(2)(2.)), whereas the Hague
Convention’s Article 13(a) refers to “subsequently acquiesced in the
wrongful removal or retention”.
[30]          
Despite those differences, as the Ontario Court of Appeal has
already turned to the jurisprudence decided under the Hague Convention to
interpret habitual residence, acquiescence is part of the determination of
habitual residence in the Children’s Law Reform Act, and the concept of
acquiescence appears in both texts, I find there is some “overlap”.  It make
sense for there to be consistent interpretations.  I find it appropriate to
consider the jurisprudence decided under the Hague Convention about
acquiescence.
[31]          
A regularly cited definition of acquiescence appears in Katsigiannis v. Kottick-Katsigiannis, 2001 CanLii 24075
(Ont. C.A.). There, the Ontario Court of Appeal explained that to “consent” is to agree
to something;  to “acquiesce” is to agree tacitly, silently or passively to
something such as the children remaining in a jurisdiction that is not their
habitual residence:  see ¶ 48.  There may also be active
acquiescence, which involves taking a positive step or action that is
inconsistent with the “summary return of the child”: see ¶ 36.
[32]          
The Ontario Court of Appeal went on to hold that the test for acquiescence is subjective on the part of the left
behind parent:  see  ¶ 38.   The passage of time in itself is not
determinative.  Rather the length of time that must pass before acquiescence
will be found, will depend on the circumstances of each case:  see ¶ 36.
[33]          
The standard to establish acquiescence is high. 
There must be some formal indication of it, or actions or statements which
unequivocally indicate the subjective intention of the wronged party to permit
the child to remain in the location to which he or she was removed:  see Raposo
v. Raposo, 2023 ONSC 346 ¶ 49.  Acquiescence under Article 13(a) of the Hague
Convention, requires “clear and cogent evidence of unequivocal consent or
acquiescence”: see Katsigiannis v. Kottick-Katsigiannis ¶ 49.
[34]          
These are “contextual and factual” inquiries. 
This is the case, whether a decision is being made under the Children’s
Law Reform Act, or under the Hague Convention:  see Los v.
Ross ¶ 45.
[35]          
Section 22(3) of the Children’s Law Reform Act adds to the
analysis the concept of “undue delay”.  It provides that the “removal or
withholding of a child without the consent of all persons having
decision-making responsibility with respect to the child does not alter the
habitual residence unless there has been acquiescence or undue delay in
commencing due process by the person from whom the child is removed or
withheld”.
[36]          
At ¶ 96-99 of his factum in particular, and during oral
argument, the father asserted that the mother both acquiesced and unduly
delayed, although this was sometimes done interchangeably without delineating
how these may be distinct concepts.  While delay can be an indicia of
acquiescence and perhaps vice versa, the term “undue delay in commencing
due process” is a separate concept in section 22(3), that is tied to the
specific act of seeking redress before the Court.
[37]          
Neither counsel supplied the Court with any decisions that
attempt to specifically define when “undue delay in commencing due process” will
have occurred.  Based on my own review, the cases in which courts have found “undue
delay” are fact driven.  Usually, as is the case before me too, they accompany
related arguments about acquiescence.
[38]          
For instance, the father relies on Guillemand v. Guerts, 2015
ONSC 4229.  In that case, the mother moved out of the parties shared
residence in Alberta, in March of 2013.  She left with their child, who was
then less than one year old, and moved to Ontario.  By April of 2013, the
father obtained an Order from the Alberta Court of Queen’s Bench for the
child’s return to Alberta, but the Order was not complied with.  More than 8
months later, the father brought a proceeding in Ontario for the recognition of
the Alberta Order.  For various procedural reasons, the Ontario application was
not heard until 2015.  And the Court’s decision was not rendered until June 30,
2015, over two years after the child’s removal from Alberta.
[39]          
Notably, the proceeding before the Court in Ontario in Guillemand
v. Guerts concerned whether that Alberta Order should be recognized under
section 41 of the Children’s Law Reform Act.  While those are not the
exact circumstances before me in this case (as no extra-provincial order has
yet been made to recognize), the decision still has some applicability, as
section 41(1)(e) of the Children’s Law Reform Act allows for the Court
to consider the child’s habitual residence in section 22, and acquiescence and
“undue delay” are part of that.
[40]          
Although the Court in Guillemand v. Guerts declined to
recognize the Alberta Order for a myriad of reasons (most of which do not
matter here), it was of the view that after the father obtained the Alberta
Order, he should have acted differently, in particular with more haste, to
enforce it.  There is a specific finding at ¶ 78 of the decision, that the
matter could have been dealt with some 12 to 18 months earlier than it
was, had the father acted differently.
[41]          
That is not to say that undue delay cannot be
found, even after the passage of a shorter period of time.  For example, in Mehta
v. Gandhi, 2016 ONSC 2453, there had been a four-month delay only, but that
was nevertheless found to be undue.  And at ¶ 58 of Rifai
v. Green, 2014 ONSC 1377, which is another eight-month delay case, Pazaratz
J. wrote, “[t]here are consequences to the fact that the Applicant ended up
doing nothing – for eight full months.  Time moves on.  Children move on…”
[42]          
But the reverse can also hold true; the passage of more time does
not make it a foregone conclusion that “undue delay” will be found.   Although a
case decided under the Hague Convention, at ¶ 113 of Kommineni v.
Guggilam, 2022 ONCJ 66, Zisman J. found that the father did not “unduly
delay” in commencing the proceeding after three years, although
there, he had spent that time trying to ascertain the child’s whereabouts.  Importantly,
the child’s connection to the new environment was also lacking.  I will come
back to this latter point, as I find it, and not the passage of time in itself,
to be more key.
[43]          
The definition of “undue” in Black’s Law Dictionary, 11th
edition, includes “excessive or unwarranted”.  Its definition of delay includes
“the act of postponing or slowing” and “the period during which something is
postponed or slowed’.
[44]          
Just exactly how much, or when, “delay” will be “undue”, is not
specified in the Children’s Law Reform Act, nor is there any hard and
fast rule that emerges from the case law (as I have just indicated).[1] 
   The term “undue delay” does appear in other legislation though, which
has been judicially considered.  For example, sections 6 and 7 of the Arbitration
Act, 1991, provide for limited Court intervention and a stay, when a matter
has been properly submitted to arbitration.  One of the exceptions to the
granting of a stay is found in section 7(2), being if a motion for a stay is brought
with “undue delay”.
[45]          
Although under the Arbitration Act, 1991, delay is
considered from the time the proceedings commenced (see Thomson v. Thomson,
2012 ONCJ 141 ¶ 73), contrasted with section 22(3) of the Children’s Law
Reform Act, which considers the delay in “commencing due process”, there is
some helpful guidance in the jurisprudence about how “undue delay” for the
purposes of section 7(2) has been considered.  On the merits, courts have looked
at the totality of the circumstances, and considered more than the mere passage
of time in determining whether delay was undue.
[46]          
For instance, courts have considered whether the moving party
chose “willingly and knowingly” not to rely on the requirement to arbitrate,
whether he or she “acquiesced or waived” the requirement to arbitrate, whether
there is prejudice from the delay, meaning “when it outweighs the benefit of
proceeding to arbitration over the court”, whether the moving party had taken
steps in the litigation, only to later try to revert to the arbitration process,
and whether there had been intervening events:  see Bouchan v. Slipacoff,
2009 CanLii 728 (Ont. S.C.J.) ¶ 31-34; see Carillion Construction Inc.
v. Imara (Wynford Drive) Limited, 2015 ONSC 3658 (S.C.J.) ¶ 51-62;  see Delamarter
v. Desjardins Security Life Assurance Company (Desjardins-Laurentian Life
Assurance Company Inc.), 2007 CanLii 49484 (Ont. S.C.J.) ¶ 22-25;  see MTCC
No. 1171 v. Rebeiro, 2022 ONSC 503 ¶ 63 Thomson v. Thomson ¶ 78, 88 .
[47]          
In some of these cases, the analysis is undertaken through the
lens of the legislative policy that applies in the arbitration context, being to
encourage parties to submit their differences to a consensual dispute
resolution process rather than to the Court, where they had previously agreed
to do so:  see Bouchan v. Slipacoff ¶ 19;  see Delamarter v.
Desjardins Security Life Assurance Company (Desjardins-Laurentian Life
Assurance Company Inc.) ¶ 25;  see also F.W. v. D.B., 2024 ONSC 4823
(S.C.J.) ¶ 111.
[48]          
Returning then to the concept of “undue delay” in the context of section
22(3) of the Children’s Law Reform Act, the term must mean something
more than the mere passage of time:  see for example Ibrahim v. Girgis, 2008
ONCA 23 ¶ 28.  It only makes sense that the Court would also embark upon a
“contextual and factual inquiry”, just like it does when considering
acquiescence: see again Los v. Ross ¶ 45.
[49]          
Kubera v. Kubera, 2010 BCCA 118 was a case decided under
the Hague Convention (where the one-year period in Article 12 exists), but
I find its discussion about what “settled in” means to be helpful here.  The
case provides examples of the kinds of “prejudice” or changed circumstances,
from a child’s perspective, that may or may not arise from the passage of time,
and amount to being “settled in”.
[50]          
At ¶ 118, the British Columbia Court of Appeal explained that more
than a mere adjustment to surroundings is required.  Rather, there should be “a
physical element, relating to being established in a community, and an
emotional element relating to security and stability”.  It involves examining
“the child’s future prospects as well as his or her current circumstances”.
[51]          
Notably, courts have considered similar things under the Children’s
Law Reform Act, without expressly stating it as such.  For example, in
Guillemand v. Guerts upon which the father relies, after admonishing
the mother for having acted with self-help at ¶ 81, the deciding factor still
seemed to be that the disruption that would be caused by returning the matter
to Alberta would not serve the child’s interests.  Likewise, in Metha v.
Gandhi, it was not just the passage of four months that mattered, but that
passage of time combined with the fact the mother had arranged health care and
the child became connected to the community.
[52]          
Therefore in conclusion, I find that “undue delay” means more
than the mere passage of time.  The impact upon the children’s connection to
the new setting must be considered.  It is appropriate to do so through the
lens of the policy in section 19 to “discourage child abductions and the
wrongful removal and retention of children to Ontario as well as to ensure that
parenting matters are determined by the jurisdiction to which the child has a
closer connection” (see again F. v. N. ¶ 49).  How much weight one
factor or the other, or this policy will get, depends on the overall
circumstances of the case.
[53]          
With these principles in mind, I turn to the evidence.
[54]          
It is common ground that the parties met in Ontario in June of
2020.  They started dating, but did not cohabit initially.  It is common ground
that the mother became pregnant with P. in around November of 2020.  She decided
to relocate to Alberta, as she wanted the assistance and support of the maternal
grandmother during her pregnancy.[2]
[55]          
It is common ground that when the mother first moved to Alberta
in November of 2020, the father did not immediately come with her.  The mother
managed P.’s pre-natal care without any support or assistance from the father.
[56]          
It is common ground that the father came to Alberta around the
time of P.’s birth on April 25, 2021.  The father admits in his affidavit of
October 8, 2024, that he went to Alberta on April 2, 2021 to “live with the
Respondent and her mother”.  That was the first time the two lived together as
a couple.
[57]          
It is mostly common ground that the father was not present
consistently when he first came to Alberta.  The father claims in his affidavit
of October 8, 2024, that he stayed at the grandmother’s house in Alberta from
about April 2, 2021 until July of 2021. But the mother has a different account
of the length of time that the father remained at first.  Specifically, in her
affidavit sworn October 18, 2024, the mother says that the father left soon
after P.’s birth, leaving her alone to care for the child.  She says he
returned in May of 2021. She also says that on her first Mother’s Day in 2021,
she woke up to find the father gone.  She says he was gone for 1.5 months. And
in his reply affidavit of October 22, 2024, the father seems to have refined his
evidence, now saying that he was in Alberta from mid-April to mid-May, when P
was born.  He admits that he returned to Ontario in June, and then he came
back.
[58]          
While the precise periods of time that the father was absent
during these early days are in dispute, I find this does not really matter to
the analysis.  The point is that the mother experienced the father to be
unreliable in these early days, and there is some common evidence of that.
[59]          
It is common ground that the family would move to Ontario in
about July of 2021, due to certain conflict in the maternal grandmother’s
household, although the cause of the conflict is not agreed to.  The father
attributes most of the conflict to the maternal grandmother’s actions.  For
instance, he says that that during his “three month” stay in Alberta between
April and July 2021, the mother and grandmother got into a physical fight which
led him to call to the police.  In fact, at ¶ 19 of his October 8, 2024
affidavit, the father says that the maternal grandmother assaulted the mother
on more than one occasion (without specifying the number of assaults).
[60]          
By contrast, the mother says that she was hopeful that the father
would participate in the family, contribute to the household and help care for
newborn P.  Instead, she says the father was unreliable and was resentful of
the maternal grandmother’s involvement, even though the parents did not have
the financial means to seek alternative rental arrangements.  According to the
mother, the father’s refusal to comply with the general rules of the house,
including his “neglectful use of prohibited substances and causing damage to
the property by ripping out the smoke alarm from the ceiling”, caused tension.[3]
[61]          
The mother does not, in her affidavit sworn October 18, 2024,
address directly the father’s evidence of that there was a particular physical
fight, that the father says led to their departure from Alberta.  But she does
refute this in general later on, including his claim that there were numerous
physical fights between her and her mother at different points.  The mother’s
position in that she there was only one physical altercation between the two
women, which occurred later.  These facts are addressed further below, and will
be repeated somewhat in my analysis about section 23 of the Children’s Law
Reform Act.
[62]          
For my purposes here, as it pertains to jurisdiction under
section 22(1)(a), this too does not matter.  The point is that living with the
maternal grandmother in Alberta at the beginning was not stable, regardless of
the source of the conflict.
[63]          
It is common ground that the parents, and P., who was then
between 2 and 3 months old,  lived  in the paternal grandparents’ home after
the family moved here to Ontario in the summer of 2021.  According to the
father, the family remained in Ontario for 9 to 10 months, until April 28,
2022.  In her factum, the mother says this period of living in Ontario
was shorter.  In any event, it is common ground that the mother became pregnant
with B. during this time frame in Ontario, in about August of 2021.  It is also
common ground that the mother and P. were back in Alberta, before B. was born.
[64]          
It is common ground that there was conflict in the paternal
grandparents’ household, too.  To the extent that the mother was the cause of
it however, that is contested terrain.  For instance, the father says that
while living there, the parents had an argument in December of 2021, because
the mother was drinking while pregnant.  To “cool off”, he left and went for a
drive.  He says he later found out (somehow that is not explained), that the
mother told an unnamed family friend, to leave P. alone to cry, while she
“vomited and passed out” but that his “sober parents were there to take care of
the children.” [4]
[65]          
The mother’s account of living in the father’s parents’ household,
is different.  She says that the paternal grandfather and the father did not
have a good relationship and “constantly” got into altercations in front of
P.    The mother explained that the grandfather was displeased with the
father’s lifestyle choices, which included his carelessness, his failure to
contribute, his lack of effort and his unwillingness to get a job.  She says
that once, the situation between the father and the grandfather escalated to
the point that the grandfather called the police for help.  She found this
stressful, as it occurred during her pregnancy with B.
[66]          
Although in his Reply affidavit of October 22, 2024, the father claimed
the state of his relationship with his father was “fine”, I was able to find
common ground between the competing affidavits, that the father did in fact
have conflict with his father.  For instance, the father himself admitted that there
were problems.  He deposed that “the police” were called after the grandfather
found out that the parties were “flushing baby wipes down the toilet”.  An
argument ensued about fixing it.  That should have been no good reason to call
the police, yet both father and son called the police apparently.  The father
elsewhere admitted that the grandfather wanted the father to move out, but the
father would not do so, thus also leading to the police being called.
[67]          
And in addition, there is some common ground that the paternal
grandmother did not want the parents and P. living there, nor did she want
there to be more children in the household.  For instance, the mother says that
after she became pregnant for the second time (with B.), the grandmother made
it clear that she did not want an additional child added into the mix.  She
says that the grandmother even pressured her to have an abortion, offering to
pay for it.
[68]          
The father’s Reply affidavit of October 22, 2024 corroborates the
mother’s account of the grandmother’s dislike of having them in the house, in
some respects.  At ¶ 13 of that affidavit, he says that his mother was “not
thrilled” that they were all living there “rent free”, but she also understood
that the family was “trying to make ends meet”.   While he says that it was the
mother who did not want to be there and not the other way around, at ¶ 14, he still
admitted that the paternal grandmother did tell him and the mother, that they would
have to move out if they were having more children.  He did not specifically deny
the mother’s allegation, that the maternal grandmother suggested that she abort
her pregnancy with B.
[69]          
I find that the situation in Ontario during this time frame, with
both parents and P. now living with the paternal grandparents, was no more
stable than had been the case when the parents lived together as a couple in
the maternal grandmother’s home in Alberta.
[70]          
Having now tried to live together as a couple with both the
maternal grandmother in Alberta, and then with the paternal grandparents in
Ontario, the parties returned to Alberta.  This occurred no later than April of
2022.  The mother says that upon the parties’ return to Alberta, they rented
their own apartment, hoping that this additional step would improve their
family dynamic.  And it is common ground that they did get their own apartment
at some point after their return, despite some attempt by the father to suggest
at ¶ 18 of his affidavit sworn October 8, 2024, that one or the other of these
moves to Alberta was temporary in nature.
[71]          
B. was then born, in May of 2022, after that return to Alberta.
[72]          
It is also common ground that the father immediately repeated his
pattern of not being consistently present, although once again the time that
the father was away on this occasion, is likewise not agreed to.  The mother
says that the father “disappeared again for another few months”, taking money
that the maternal grandmother provided for rent, “without word”.  The father
claimed in his Reply affidavit that he took money from an account that he and
the mother shared, but he agrees that he left.  In any event, in his own affidavit
of October 8, 2022, the father says that he left at the beginning of June of
2022, because he has “another child here and wanted to see her before going
back to Alberta.”  According to the mother, this caused her to have to return
to work sooner than she expected, in order to financially survive.
[73]          
Incidentally, it is not clear to me why the father did not go to
see the other child before leaving for Alberta for the final time.  The father
offered no other details about his other child, the child’s age, who the mother
is, where she lives or what the parenting arrangements are.  Consequently, I am
left wondering whether the father’s later surreptitious departure from Alberta
on January 1, 2024, didn’t have something to do with that other child.  For
instance, if the father is entitled to parenting time with him or her (which I
do not know), certainly living in Ontario, with both P. and B., would make it
easier for him to see all three children.
[74]          
Regardless, what is notable, is that B. was about one month
old when the father left the mother again.  He engaged in the exact
same repeat behaviour of the kind he engaged in after P. was born, leaving the
mother to care for a newborn on her own, yet again.  And although the father
complains that while he was in Ontario, the mother denied him ”any contact with
our children, which caused fights between her mother and me”, I find this to be
hyperbole, introduced for the purposes of this motion now before the Court, to
bolster an argument that if the children are returned to Alberta, the mother
will not cooperate respecting his parenting time.  It was the father who left; 
not the mother.  And what exactly he expected in terms of any meaningful “contact”
while away is unclear, since P. was just a little over one year old,
and B. was about one month old at the time, as I have just
said.
[75]          
The father claims to have come back to Alberta in July of 2022.  He
says that he obtained a job at Canadian Tire until February of 2023, until he
broke his foot.  He says that the mother then preferred that he stay at home
and be a “full-time parent”, as the cost of day care was more expensive than
what he could make if he returned to work at Canadian Tire.
[76]          
In a likely attempt to minimize the impact of the evidence of the
parenting role the father took on after February of 2023, the mother says,
without details, that the father refused to work and even turned down “6-figure
work opportunities” that her mother arranged for him.  Therefore, she had to
obtain a second job while he was left at home with the children.
[77]          
The father denies in his Reply affidavit, that any such work
opportunities existed.  Notably though, the father did not provide any medical
evidence to establish that he could not return to work. It is common ground
that his not working caused conflict.  And to the extent that the father became
the children’s primary parent after February of 2023, that was due in part to
the fact that the mother was working hard, to support the family.
[78]          
The mother says that the maternal grandmother was concerned that she
was being rushed back to work so soon.  But the mother defended the father
staying at home, to her mother.  The mother says that there had not been a
history of violence or aggression with her mother before this, but her defense
of the father’s laziness led to the “single and unfortunate incident of an
altercation” between the mother and the maternal grandmother. The mother says
she “deeply regret[s]” this, and it has never repeated.
[79]          
In view of the father’s statements, mentioned earlier, that there
was far more conflict between the mother and the maternal grandmother, I find
that the extent of the conflict between the two women is not common
ground.
[80]          
However, despite that, in regard to the father’s own credibility
when it comes to casting aspersions on the maternal grandmother, what is
notable, is that it was the father who was charged for having “uttered threats”
against the grandmother.  The father did not otherwise provide the details of
the facts underlying this charge in his affidavit sworn October 8, 2024.  The
mother, however, did provide the details in her affidavit of October 18, 2024. 
They included that the father had left messages threatening to burn down her
mother’s house, with the grandmother in it, while saying that he had made
copies of keys to the house.
[81]          
The father’s sworn statements about the disposition of the
criminal charge was also incorrect.   The father did not receive an “absolute
discharge” as he claimed; he received a conditional discharge and 12 months of
probation terms.  As the mother pointed out, the probation terms, which were in
place until February 8, 2024, restricted the father from having direct or
indirect contact with the grandmother.  The mother says this now meant, that when
she wanted to see her mother, the father could not be there.  Nor could the
grandmother come to their apartment, where the father usually was, so she had
to meet her at her house, or somewhere else in town.  These restrictions
created additional logistic, if not other problems, including on the evening of
December 31, 2023, after which the father left Alberta.
[82]          
It is common ground that there was conflict between the parents when
they lived in the apartment in Alberta together.
[83]          
In addition to having conflict about finances, the mother says
that the father did not care for the children well.  She says he would spend
most of the day playing video games, and left the children unfed and
unchanged.  She says that she had to do “all the childcare and housework” that
he had ignored during the day, when she came home from work.
[84]          
The mother says that the father became angry when she engaged
with other people outside the household, including her mother and friends, regardless
of whether the children were present or not.  There is some indication from the
father himself in the text messages between the parties that have been filed,
that he did not enjoy socializing with others, or at least with people that he
did not know.
[85]          
The mother also says that the father called her or her mother
repeatedly when she was out, and if he did not get an immediate response, he
would call the RCMP.  She says this was a regular occurrence.  And there is
some common ground in the affidavit material before the Court, that the father
resorted to calling the police, regularly.
[86]          
According to the mother, by October of 2023, the parents’
relationship had deteriorated to the point that they were barely
communicating.   This background set the stage for the father’s improper
departure from Alberta with the children, on January 1, 2024.
[87]          
According to the father, the mother went to work on December 30,
2023 before children were awake.  She came home at night after they had gone to
bed.
[88]          
The father says that on December 31, 2023, the mother sent the
father a message, saying  that she would be home at 6:30 PM, but that she knew
it was New Years’ Eve, that stores were closing early, and that the family
needed groceries.  By 8:30 PM, the mother was not home, and so he tried to call
and message her.  He says she did not answer his calls and messages until after
midnight, only after he called in a “missing person report to the RCMP”.[5] 
The father claimed to have been left at home with the children “with little
food and no milk”, and that is why he was calling and messaging her.
[89]          
The father says that the mother was at a party and was “rude to
the police and told them she didn’t want to talk to me”.  How the father knows
this is not identified either, nor is the name of the police officer to whom
the mother allegedly spoke.[6]
[90]          
The father says that because he was “left in the apartment with
no milk and no contact from [the mother]”, and given that this “was not the
first time this had happened”, he felt he had little choice but “to leave and
go to [his] parent’s house in Ontario where [he] could ensure the children
would have proper food”.  The father left the mother a note telling the mother
that he went to Ontario for “a vacation”.  Apparently, the father obtained
funds from his parents to take the children to Ontario.  Notably, the father
himself admits that it was not his initial intention to stay in Ontario, but
with “the cold winter in Fort McMurray, no car for [him] to get the children
and [himself] around, too cold to walk, no money, as the [mother] controlled it
all, and really no idea how stable [they] were in [their] current apartment,
[he] felt the children needed some stability for a time while [the parents]
sorted out [their] future.”
[91]          
The father says that the mother ignored him until January 2,
2024.  He says he then received a call from the RCMP on January 3, 2024, after
he was already in Ontario, to make sure that the children were safe.  He says
the mother called to ask him about the internet, but did not ask to speak to
the children until March 9, 2024.
[92]          
The mother’s account is different.  She says that she had time
off on December 31, 2023.  She says her workplace was closed on January 1.  She
says she was already scheduled to work late on January 2, 2024, and she says the
father was aware of this.
[93]          
The mother says that December 31, 2023 was the only day where it
was possible for her to have some personal time.  She says that she was
originally supposed to have friends over, but the father was in a confrontational
mood, so she decided to go out instead.  She also wanted to see her mother,
which she could not do at home, in view of the probation terms.
[94]          
The mother says that the father started to call her in a
harassing fashion, as usual, when she went out;  this included several calls to
the RCMP.  She says he called the RCMP repeatedly over the course of several
hours, had a wellness check done, and even waited for a new shift of officers
to come on duty, to start his chain of calling the police again.
[95]          
The mother disputes that the father was without food or milk. She
says that her mother told the police, that the children had necessities, and
that the mother had “stocked the house from a pre-New Year’s grocery run on
December 27”.  The mother attached a bank record showing about $100.00 in
purchases from the “Real Canadian Superstore”.[7]
[96]          
The mother says that there was constant contact with the father
on December 31, 2023, responding to his many inquiries and complaints.   She
says that the grandmother even dropped of new items, but she had to leave them
some distance from the apartment, because of the probation order.
[97]          
The father then started sending a new series of text messages,
first denying that additional supplies had been provided.  The mother responded
with a photograph showing where the grandmother had placed the items.  There is
a photograph of a jug of milk in the exhibits before the Court.  The father
then complained that the milk was not fresh from the store.
[98]          
Notably, at ¶ 19 of his Reply affidavit of October 22, 2024, despite
the fact that the absence of milk was ostensibly one of the main reasons for his
departure with the children from Alberta, the father admitted that the
grandmother did in fact drop off milk, but he claimed that he only “later found
it in a different location”.  This would have been before he left.
[99]          
 In addition to the note that he left her about leaving for a
vacation only, exhibit “J” to the mother’s affidavit of October 18, 2024 is a
text message from the father dramatically telling the mother that she (or her
mother) were “getting what [they wanted].”.  He went on to warn the mother,
that the cheapest flights he could access would be on the following morning,
and that she better call or come home (or else he would be gone).  He accused
the mother of “acting just like [her] mother”, which he said he did not “want
to be around”.  In the end, when the mother did not respond to a number of the
father’s communications containing what appears to be attention seeking
behaviour, the father escalated the situation, and took the children out of the
province.
[100]      
The mother says that when she came home from work on January 2,
2024, the house was “ransacked and trashed, the children were gone and there
was a scribbled note from [the father] about taking the children on vacation”. 
The mother attached photographs of the appalling state in which she says the
father had left the house upon his departure.[8]
[101]      
By January 2, 2024, the mother messaged the father saying “where
the fuck are my kids” and “so you took my kids to Ontario?” and “So how am I
supposed to get them back”.  In other words, her immediate reaction was to
object.  The father did not answer the mother’s question about the return;  he made
comments about having no choice and he informed the mother about the amount of
money the paternal grandmother had just spent, to get him and the children to
Ontario.
[102]      
At no time during the early days, let alone during the weeks and
months that followed, did the father ever say his plan was to remain in Ontario
permanently.  Not only did the initial note he left say otherwise, but the fact
that the father did not intend to remain in Ontario was conceded in both his
affidavit evidence and during oral submissions by his counsel.
[103]      
In her affidavit sworn October 18, 2024, the mother denies that
she acquiesced or that she unduly delayed. In fact, and to the contrary, there
is evidence that she began to take steps to secure the children’s return, soon
after the father left.
[104]      
For example, at ¶ 58 of the mother’s October 18, 2024 affidavit,
she suggests that she didn’t immediately realize that the father was not coming
back to Alberta.   She says that as soon as she understood this to be so
(unless she agreed to continue the romantic relationship, which she did not
wish to do), she started to seek help about how to get the children back to
Alberta.
[105]      
On the one hand, this explanation has some air of reality to it,
given the father’s note that he was leaving for vacation.  However during
argument of this motion, counsel for the mother suggested that this realization
by the mother happened as late as April or May of 2024.  Yet the mother’s own
sworn statements suggest otherwise.  I do not find the realization to have
occurred that late.  For instance, the mother consulted with an Alberta lawyer
named Brian Vaughan on January 23, 2024.
[106]      
In any event, the mother also says that she tried to get help
from the RCMP, but the police would not assist, as there was no court order.  Notably,
the father admitted to having received a call from the RCMP on January 3, 2024,
which is some evidence corroborating the mother’s account that she sought
assistance from the police.   While I cannot make findings about the hearsay of
what an unnamed police officer would or would not do, I am prepared to accept
the mother’s evidence that she contacted the police for assistance.
[107]      
The mother also says she went to the court house in Alberta, to
seek help.  There, she says she obtained some paperwork and tried to fill it
out, but she didn’t get far with the process.  She says that she had some
difficulty getting in touch with a specific point person in the Alberta court
house when she tried to follow up.    I am prepared to accept this evidence. 
The father is not in a position to refute it.
[108]      
The father places great reliance on an argument that the mother
evaded service of his proceeding, after he started it.  Although my focus in
this decision is in regard to whether the mother acquiesced or unduly delayed, it
is notable that the father did not even retain counsel until February 12, 2024,
almost 1 ½ months after his departure from Alberta.  He then caused to be
issued his application in this Court, only on March 15, 2024, another month
later.  The father did not then notify the mother of this fact, in any prompt
manner.
[109]      
The father only arranged for a process server to try to serve the
mother some 6 weeks later.  While he says that there had been four attempts to
serve her, and she evaded service “over a period of 2 months”, the latter statement
is inaccurate.  The father’s process server’s first attempt to serve the mother
did not occur until the end of April.
[110]      
According to the affidavit of process server Patrick Noble sworn
May 9, 2024, he attended at the mother’s apartment on April 25, 26 and 28, 2024
in the evening, but there was no one home.  Mr. Noble says that he then called
the mother, but she said she was out of town, and told him that she would call
him back when she returned.  Mr. Noble says that the mother would not say when
she was coming back home, other than that it would be during the week of April
29, 2024.
[111]      
The evidence before me is that the last day of the parties’ lease
on their apartment in Alberta was April 30, 2024.  The father says he told the
process server through counsel, that perhaps the mother would be going to her
mother’s house thereafter.  So the process server made a fourth attempt to
serve the mother at the apartment on April 30, 2024.  It is not clear that any attempts
were later made to serve the mother at the grandmother’s home.
[112]      
The process server spoke on the telephone with the mother on
April 30, 2024.  He says that the mother said she would come to the apartment
within 5 minutes, but she never came and so he was unable to serve her.  The
mother’s explanation for this, is that the process server had posed as a
delivery person during that call, and she hadn’t ordered a package, so she did
not wait for him to come back to the house.
[113]      
As these four attempts to serve the mother over the course of a
one week period proved unsuccessful, on May 9, 2024, another 10 days later, the
father brought a 14B Motion, on an ex parte basis, asking
for alternative service by email and text message.  Notably, as indicated
already, there is no evidence before me that the father notified the mother that
he was doing this, to see if perhaps service might just resolved more
consensually.  Incidentally although he was asking to approve service by email,
there was nothing stopping him from serving that 14B Motion by email in advance
of court approval.
[114]      
Daurio J. made an Order for service by email, text message and by
regular mail on May 27, 2024.  During argument of this motion, Ms. Duggan
submitted to me, that she never received that Endorsement, and that she had to later
ask the Court again for another order for substituted service.  As I explain
below, that too was done on an ex parte basis. 
In the mean time, service continued not to be effected.
[115]      
On May 17, 2024, 10 days before the release of Daurio J.’s
Endorsement (that Ms. Duggan says she did not receive), Mr. Vaughan called Ms.
Duggan, to discuss this matter “in a manner that [Ms. Duggan] thought was going
to be collaborative”.  Ms. Duggan apparently asked Mr. Vaughan to accept
service, but he did not want to do so.
[116]      
The mother says that thereafter, Mr. Vaughan tried to file court
documents in Ontario, but did not know how to do so, process-wise, and whatever
documents that she tried to file did not make it into the Court file.
[117]      
It was on June 19, 2024, around a month after this telephone call
between counsel, but still before Ms. Duggan’s email service of the Ontario material,
that the mother commenced a proceeding before the Alberta Court of Justice
seeking the children’s return to Alberta, and for “parenting of child”.
[118]      
Incredibly, even though by this point, the father had commenced
his Ontario proceeding back in March of 2024, it was the mother who served the
father with her Alberta proceeding first.  The father says that on June 19,
2024, Mr. Vaughan “improperly emailed” his lawyer court documents for a hearing
in Alberta scheduled for July 30, 2024.[9]
[119]      
It was only then that the father was prompted to act with some
more haste.  The father says that the next day, he filed a 14B Motion in this
Court, requesting an urgent motion for temporary sole decision-making, primary
residence, and for a determination that this Court has “temporary
jurisdiction”, whatever that means.  This was the second 14B Motion brought on
an ex parte basis.   Incredibly, even then, the
affidavit of service signed by Ms. Duggan reveals that the mother was only first
served with the father’s Application by email, on June 27, 2024, after the
Court ruled on this new motion.
[120]      
By way of a series of Endorsements of this Court dated June 26,
2024, August 12, 2024 and September 24, 2024, the Court scheduled an urgent
case conference and this motion, and it made temporary without prejudice
parenting orders pending this ruling on jurisdiction. This matter would later come
on before me for the first time, on September 24, 2024, for the urgent case
conference.  As I will explain, I set this motion to be argued on October 29,
2024 before me, pursuant to my scheduling Order of September 24, 2024.
[121]      
According to the father’s affidavit of October 8, 2024, in
between a court appearance on August 12, 2024, and the penultimate September
24, 2024 court date in this case (for the urgent case conference), the mother
showed up at his parents’ home in Ontario unannounced.  He says this occurred
on September 12, 2024, whereas the mother says it occurred on September 5,
2024.  The date of the mother’s attendance in Ontario does not matter.
[122]      
The father says that the mother wanted to take the children for a
few days.  He says he said no to her, but that he would “sort things out”.  He
says he told her to come back in an hour.  The mother would not leave.
[123]      
Apparently, according to the father, the paternal grandmother
then told the mother that she could have a visit with the children, but that
the maternal grandmother, who had accompanied the mother on her trip to Ontario,
was not welcome.   The father says that the mother and the maternal grandmother
responded to this by saying that they were calling the police.  The paternal
grandmother then called the police, too.
[124]      
Who called the police first, or why matters escalated to the
point that either parent felt that was necessary, does not matter.  In the end,
police officers did come to the home.   The father says they came into the
backyard where he then was, and asked him if the mother could see the
children.  The father says that he, his mother and “the police” [10]
came up with a solution whereby the mother could visit the children in the
backyard for an hour, and have another visit later that afternoon.    The maternal
grandmother was to stay in her car.
[125]      
The father says that P. then came out to see the mother, and that
the mother and P. began to play on a swing set.  B. joined them.  The father
says that the unnamed police officer allegedly went over to tell the mother
what the guidelines were for her to have a visit, but the mother nevertheless tried
to take the children out of the backyard to the front to see the maternal
grandmother.
[126]      
While a great deal of this evidence rests on the hearsay of an
unidentified police officer or officers, the bottom line is that the father was
now accusing the mother of having tried to “abduct” the children.  He says the
police intervened.  According to the father, the mother stood by, while holding
P. in her arms, as she argued with the police for “close to 30 minutes”, before
“they” told her to leave or they were “charging her with trespassing”. 
Allegedly, “they” also told her to put P. down or they would “forcibly” take P.
from her and arrest her.  The father says that “the police” then told “us” that
“they” had a feeling that the mother was “going to try to take the
children”.
[127]      
According to the mother, after the paternal grandmother answered
the door upon her arrival, and while she waited for the father to come out, she
could see P. through the window.  She says that P. waved at her “excitedly and
frantically”.  She says that the father started arguing with her about the
relationship, but she tried without success to redirect the conversation to be
about the children.  She says that the father then decided that she could no
longer see the children and shut the door on her.  She says this happened when
he realized that she was not going to talk about the relationship with him.
[128]      
It was at this point that the mother says she called the police. 
She says she felt that the August 12, 2024 Endorsement had given her some in
person parenting time, and so that is why she had come to Ontario.  In the
midst of this, according to the mother, the paternal grandmother apparently
ordered the maternal grandmother off of the property.
[129]      
Like the father does, the mother also references the hearsay of
unidentified police officers in her sworn affidavit of October 18, 2024.   She says
that “the police” told her that they “couldn’t enforce anything” but they would
try to suggest to the father, to let her visit the children.
[130]      
Regardless of whether the police said this or not, it is common
ground that a visit did happen in the backyard.  But the mother also wanted the
children to see the maternal grandmother.  She says that because P. had also
seen the grandmother through the window and was asking for her, this is why she
tried to go to the car.  It was not to abduct the children.
[131]      
In any event, the mother admits that “the officers” told her that
she would “be arrested” if she tried to take the children away.  She says that
the situation was chaotic and that she and the children started to cry.  She
asked for time to say goodbye to the children, and then she went to join her
mother in the car.
[132]      
This unnecessary incident has seemingly made things worse between
the parties.  The father’s affidavit of October 8, 2024 now concludes with him
saying, at ¶ 68:
[133]      
Although there is no such request in his Notice of Motion dated
October 8, 2024, nor is there any notice to the maternal grandmother, the
father also says that a restraining order against the maternal grandmother is
necessary “to ensure she does not come around my parents’ property”.
[134]      
The father’s brief for the urgent case conference merely contained
a factual summary, and his litigation position.  That factual summary included some
description of the aforementioned September incident.
[135]      
Upon reviewing the material put before me, it became apparent
that the jurisdiction issue in particular was not amenable to a resolution and
that a quick decision needed to be made.   I advised the parties that I would schedule
a long motion before me on an expedited basis.  I declined to give any opinions
or engage in settlement discussions.
[136]      
As I was directed to do in the earlier August 12, 2024 Endorsement,
I set out the parameters of the motion.  I advised the parties that the motion
would concern all issues needed to put some order into place, on an interim
basis. In particular, my Endorsement of September 24, 2024, specifically sets
out that the issues for the motion would be:
[137]      
I also told the parties to file all of the evidence upon which
they wished to rely, in one place.  In other words, to give both sides a
complete opportunity to put whatever information they wanted before the Court, I
directed the parties to prepare one set of comprehensive motion
materials on all of these issues.  I expanded the page limits, but imposed
reasonable ones in consultation with counsel.  I made a scheduling Order, but
as set out earlier, I neglected to make provision for the mother’s right of
reply on her cross-motion. Finally, I indicated that I required facta from
both sides, and that I needed to know, comprehensively, what was
happening in the Court in Alberta.
[138]      
It is my understanding that there have already been court dates in
the Alberta Court of Justice on July 30, 2024, August 13, 2024 and September
24, 2024.  It is my understanding that the Alberta Court of Justice is waiting
for a ruling from this Court.   I am told that the next date in the Alberta
proceeding is on November 19, 2024.  At the conclusion of argument of this
motion on October 29, 2024, I advised the parties that I would endeavour to
render a decision promptly, prior to the upcoming November 19, 2024 date in the
Alberta proceeding.
[139]      
If the law in Ontario about habitual residence in section 22 of
the Children’s Law Reform Act is in fact unsettled, in this case before
me, I find the result would be the same, irrespective of which test applies.  And
I do not find that the mother acquiesced by the time this proceeding commenced,
to alter the habitual residence.  Nor do I find the mother engaged in undue
delay in commencing due process.
[140]      
Regarding the children’s habitual residence under sections
22(1)(a) and 22(2)(1.) of the Children’s Law Reform Act, and at the risk
of repeating myself, I make these findings because:
[141]      
Regarding whether the mother acquiesced for the purposes of
sections 22(1)(a) and 22(2)(2.), such that the habitual residence might now be
Ontario, I do not find acquiescence at the time of the commencement of the
Ontario proceeding, because:
[142]      
Regarding whether the mother unduly delayed “commencing due
process” for the purposes of section 22(3) of the Children’s Law Reform Act,
in addition to her efforts of consulting with counsel, calling the police
and going to the Alberta court house, I find that the mother did not unduly
delay because:
[143]      
Finally, even on the hybrid test to habitual residence to the
extent it applies (see Office of the Children’s Laywer v. Balev ¶ 44-47),
the children’s links to and circumstances in Alberta, the circumstances of the
removal, and the links to and circumstances in Ontario, are not such that the
habitual residence is now Ontario.  As in Zafar v. Azeem, the children
have not yet developed any real connection to school, to community or to
friends.
[144]      
In Zafar v. Azeem, the Court found the fact that the
mother had been the child’s primary parent throughout, to be significant.  While
I acknowledge that the father did stay at home between about February 2023
until the end of the year when he left with them, the mother had also been
involved in their parenting these two children throughout their lives.  There
are complaints from the mother, albeit contested ones, about the quality of care
that the father provided when he stayed at home, and the role she had to take
on to compensate for that nevertheless, during the period of time that the
father was supposedly the primary caregiver after February of 2023, until he
left.  Without needing to resolve the extent to which each parent was
responsible for the children’s care during that time frame, the record as a
whole reveals that this is not a situation where the children’s only connection
is to the father, as their only primary care giver.
[145]      
There is very little evidence before the Court from the father,
about the children’s relationships in Ontario, whether by the time of his
Ontario proceeding, or even if it is a relevant consideration, subsequently. 
For example, the father has said very little about the involvement of the
paternal grandparents since coming here.  All that he really said specifically,
is that his parents are a “great source of support”, as are unidentified
extended friends and other family.  Yet he is living in his parents’ house,
there was conflict there in the past, and the parents, when they had just one
child, were not exactly welcomed in that household.
[146]      
The father does not even have day care in place yet, despite
having had the children in his care in Ontario for the past 10 months by
default.  He has no plan to work and to acquire the financial resources to make
an interjurisdictional parenting plan work.
[147]      
Quite frankly, while I have focused my delay and acquiescence
analysis on the mother here, it does not go unnoticed by the Court, that after
he behaved inappropriately by removing the child from Alberta, the father
delayed.  One can’t help but wonder whether the father’s delay wasn’t somewhat
tactical, on the theory that the passage of time benefitted his position, if
the children’s established more ties to Ontario.  It is hard to imagine that,
had the father separated from the mother on January 1, 2024 and brought the
matter before a court promptly in Alberta, that it would have authorized an
interim relocation to Ontario on this record.
[148]      
As such, I find the father’s actions and delay to be interrelated
and important context when deciding what weight to place on the objectives in
section 19 of the Children’s Law Reform Act:  see Kubera v. Kubera ¶
47.  The policy consideration mentioned earlier, “to discourage child
abductions and the wrongful removal and retention of children to Ontario as
well as to ensure that parenting matters are determined by the jurisdiction to
which the child has a closer connection”, is entitled to great weight in the analysis
in this case.
[149]      
In regard to section 22(1)(b) of the Children’s Law Reform Act,
which is the second basis upon which the Court might exercise
jurisdiction over the children (where the Court finds the children are not
habitually resident in Ontario), that section contains a list of six
conjunctive factors.  Only if all of these factors are engaged may this Court
take jurisdiction to make a parenting order under section 22(1)(b):  see Ojeikere
v. Ojeikere¶ 28.
[150]      
In this case, subsection (iii) in particular, is fatal to any
argument that the father might mount under section 22(1)(b).  It provides that
there must be “no application respecting decision-making responsibility,
parenting time or contact with respect to the child [that] is pending before an
extra-provincial tribunal in another place where the child is habitually
resident” for the Court to act under section 22(1)(b).  In view of the fact
that there is a pending proceeding in Alberta, which the mother commenced
second (but which she served first), coupled with my finding under sections
22(1)(a) and 22(2), that the children’s habitual residence is in Alberta,
section 22(1)(b) is not available to the Court to take jurisdiction in this
case: see Ojeikere v. Ojeikere ¶ 31.
[151]      
Section 23 of the Children’s Law Reform Act provides that
the Court may exercise its jurisdiction to make a parenting order if the children
are physically present in Ontario and, the Court is satisfied that the children
would, on a balance of probabilities, suffer serious harm if (in the
circumstances of this case), the children remain with or are returned to one
parent or the other, or the children are removed from Ontario.  Like many of
the other statutory sections that I have referred to and considered in these
Reasons for Decision, section 23 is discretionary:  see Ojeikere v. Ojeikere
¶ 40.  The father’s onus to make out a case for “serious harm” is a
demanding one:  see F. v. N. ¶ 69.
[152]      
Although the Ontario Court of Appeal held in Ojeikere v.
Ojeikere, that the meaning of “serious harm” in section 23 is a less
exacting standard than the standard of “grave risk [of] expos[ing] the child to
physical or psychological harm or otherwise plac[ing] the child in an
intolerable situation” in Article 13(b) of the Hague Convention, the Ontario
Court of Appeal still drew some parallels to it, in its decision.  Regardless
under section 23 of the Children’s Law Reform Act, the Court must still
assess the “possibility or risk of harm if the child is removed from Ontario”. 
To be clear, this is not assessing harm from a past event;  rather it is the
prediction of future harm.  The Court assesses both the likelihood and severity
of future harm:  see Ojeikere v. Ojeikere ¶ 51-62;  see also F. v. N.
¶ 73.
[153]      
But that is not to say that past events cannot inform the risk of
future harm.  For example, the Court in Ojeikere v. Ojeikere went on to
consider the future risks to the children arising out of the father’s past
physical discipline of the children, among others:  see ¶ 69-74.
[154]      
  Interestingly though, in this case before me, the father
has not squarely raised section 23.  Arguably that should end the analysis. 
Nonetheless, out of an abundance of caution, because he has deposed some
evidence of risk in his affidavits and because the mother has also raised in
her factum arguments about section 23 (although perhaps she did so in
anticipation of the father making submissions under section 23), I will address
section 23 anyway.
[155]      
 In her factum, the mother principally argues that section
23 does not apply.  If it does, she says the result actually militates in
favour of a return order, in view of the “serious and ongoing nature of the
harm to be best interests of the children in perpetuating their continued
wrongful retention in Ontario following their wrongful removal from Alberta”.  But
in view of the father’s sworn statements, it seems to me that a risk assessment
under section 23 might more concretely revolve around whether there is a
serious risk to the children of physical harm, or of psychological harm, if
they are returned to Alberta.
[156]      
In regards to the former, I return to the aforementioned evidence
of the father’s, about a number of past physical altercations between the
mother and the maternal grandmother.  On the one hand, the harms from a child’s
exposure to family violence are well known:  see Barendgret v. Grebliunas,
2022 SCC 22 ¶ 142, 143.   If the past is a predictor of the future, there
could be a risk of harm since, as I explain below, the mother is now living
with the maternal grandmother again.
[157]      
However the extent of the altercations between the mother and the
grandmother is very much contested terrain.  While both sides said that there
was insufficient time to obtain the police records relating to the alleged
abduction issue in Ontario in September of 2024, the father had ample
opportunity to obtain police records from Alberta.   Those police records could
have tipped the scales, but the father did not obtain them.  Perhaps the Alberta
police records might have corroborated the mother’s account of the father
repeatedly calling the RCMP in a nuisance fashion, too.
[158]      
This is a significant gap in the evidence.  Given that the father
bears the onus here to mount an argument under section 23 and given that he has
not even squarely placed section 23 in issue, I find that any gaps in the
evidence fall on his shoulders.  In my view, the prospect of the children’s
exposure to future family violence between the maternal grandmother and the mother
is not a risk assessment that I can or should make findings about, under the
circumstances on this record.
[159]      
In regard to the risk of psychological harm, in F. v. N., Kasirer
J.  considered the prospect of separation of the children from their primary
caregiver could rise to the level of serious harm required under section 23.  However
the majority decision in F. v. N. authored by Kasirer J. ultimately
decided at ¶ 78, that such a separation, “in and of itself and without regard
to the individualized circumstances”, will not always rise to the level
required under section 23.  Finding otherwise could ultimately defeat the
legislative objective of discouraging child abduction of very young children.
[160]      
So while again, I appreciate that the father stayed home with the
children from February 2023 until his January 1, 2024 departure for Ontario,
and I appreciate that children have been in the father’s sole care since
January 1, 2024, as I have already found, the latter was a “self-engineered”
situation that the father created.  In view of my other findings, about the
mother’s involvement in parenting too before that, coupled again with the
father’s failure to squarely place section 23 in issue, I fail to see how the
children’s return to Alberta (which entails their removal from the father), rises
to the demanding standard that section 23 requires.
[161]      
Finally, the mother’s factum sets out why the Court need
not resort to its parens patriae jurisdiction.  Given that the father
has not asked the Court to exercise it either, I need not say anything further
about this.
[162]      
Section 40 of the Children’s Law Reform Act sets out the
interim powers of the Court where the Court (a) is satisfied that a child has
been wrongfully removed to or is being wrongfully retained in Ontario or (b)
has determined that it may not exercise jurisdiction under section 22.  Both of
these preconditions are engaged in this case, and as such the Court may
exercise its interim powers.
[163]      
The Court’s interim powers are threefold.  The Court may make an
interim parenting order in the best interests of the child.  It may stay this
proceeding on the condition that a party commence a similar proceeding before
an extra-provincial tribunal, or on such other conditions as the Court
determines appropriate.  And, it may order a party to return the child to such
place as the Court considers appropriate, which includes the power to order travel
costs:  see also F. v. N. ¶ 94.
[164]      
Although the exercise of the Court’s interim powers under section
40 is discretionary (see Zarar v. Azeem ¶ 42), the exercise of that
discretion is limited by the “interim nature of the s. 40 powers”:  see F.
v. N. ¶ 96, 97.   After having determined to decline jurisdiction, the Court
cannot for example indefinitely delay the return of a child from Ontario.  And
while the exercise of the section 40 powers are undertaken on a best interests’
basis, the Court should not embark on a detailed analysis of the best interests
factors in section 24(3).  An order under section 40 is not a parenting order
being decided on its merits: see again F. v. N. ¶ 96, 97.
[165]      
In this case, likely due to the fact that the issues for the motion
also concerned what temporary parenting arrangement and child support should be
put in place in the event that the Court found it had jurisdiction, I have been
given more best interests’ type evidence than necessary to decide which power
to exercise under section 40.   While some of it is conflicting and there are
gaps (such as the absence of police records), I do not find that there needs to
be common ground on every aspect of this evidence, to decide what interim
powers to exercise.  I find that the evidence is sufficient for the best
interests analysis that section 40 requires.  Any conflicts or gaps in this
evidence can be resolved by the Alberta Court of Justice in the proceeding
before it, in the more fulsome best interests analysis that will follow, when
the parenting issues are decided on their merits.
[166]      
For these reasons, and the additional ones that follow next, I
have decided merely to make a return Order, and the Alberta Court of Justice
can take it from there.
[167]      
I do so because, in regard to the mother, the record before me
reveals that:
[168]      
I do so because, in regard to the father, the record before me
reveals that:
[169]      
I make the following part final and part temporary Orders: