[1]         
On January 31, 2024 Mr. Sivasothy was found guilty by a jury of
possession for the purposes of trafficking of 55.78 grams of fentanyl found
secreted in the wheel well of a vehicle rented by him and seized by police on
August 12, 2020.  He is before me today for sentencing.
[2]         
During the evening of August 11-12, 2020, Mr. Sivasothy and two friends
met up at a mid-town Toronto bar where one of them worked for some drinks.  Mr.
Sivasothy drove to the bar to join them in a station-wagon style rental car. 
Mr. Sivasothy lived in Scarborough and had rented the car about 5 days earlier
from a Toronto Pearson airport rental counter and it was due to be returned two
days later.  After a while, the trio decided to go downtown to continue their
night out, going to another bar and staying well into the early morning hours.
[3]         
When it was time to leave, one of Mr. Sivasothy’s companions thought he
was more sober than Mr Sivasothy and drove the rental car to a nearby parking
lot with the initial intention of parking the vehicle there and taking an Uber
home together to their homes in Scarborough.  Once parked, Mr Sivasothy took
the wheel and advised his companions he was able to drive.  The group then left
the parking lot in the vehicle with Mr. Sivasothy at the wheel.  The two
passengers believed they were all heading back towards Scarborough but soon
found themselves on a downtown side street they did not recognize.  They were
not very familiar with downtown Toronto.
[4]         
The details of what followed are less important than the impression left
upon the two passengers in the vehicle once again being driven by Mr.
Sivasothy.  Mr. Sivasothy stopped the vehicle on a side street and got out of
the car to begin chatting with some people on the street, leaving his
companions in the car.  They pleaded with Mr. Sivasothy in their native Tamil
to come back and get into the car and leave.  Whether justified or a figment of
their alcohol-fuelled imagination, Mr. Sivasothy’s two companions came to
believe they were in some degree of danger from the people Mr. Sivasothy was
talking to.  They decided to get away and quickly.  The companion in the front
seat slid over to the driver seat, took the wheel and left the area at speed
while the other dialed 911 and alerted the police to what they perceived as
some kind of robbery in progress.  Police responded to the frantic 911 call
from the two who had little more than a general idea where they were.  Police eventually
located the vehicle and its two occupants parked at a condominium building on
St. Mary Street.  Meanwhile, Mr. Sivasothy made his own way home to Scarborough
without them or his rented vehicle.  Police searched the vehicle and located
approximately 56g of fentanyl vacuum-sealed in a ZipLock bag inside a brown
paper bag itself secreted in the spare tire wheel compartment in the back area
of the vehicle.
[5]         
The jury found that Mr. Sivasothy was in knowing possession of the
fentanyl which was possessed for the purpose of trafficking.  Ms. Freeman
correctly points out that I cannot infer very much beyond that fact from the
trial evidence.  “Purpose of trafficking” is a broad concept and just where
within the spectrum of trafficking purposes Mr Sivasothy’s possession lay
cannot be said without speculating to some degree.  There is no evidence that
he was directly selling to end users, for example.  The quantity of the
fentanyl, the manner of its packaging, the place where it was hidden and the
context in which it was found all provided sufficient context for the jury to
infer knowing possession for the purpose of trafficking.
[6]         
Mr. Sivasothy is currently 28 years of age.  He was 23 years of age at
the time of the offence in question, just over four years ago.  He is and was
thus a relatively youthful offender.  He was released after two days in custody
on very non-restrictive release conditions (no curfew and no house arrest).  He
had no prior record and has had no reported violations of his release
conditions since[1] 
From the pre-sentence report, I can find virtually nothing in his history that
presages the activity for which he was convicted.
[7]         
He comes from a supportive and apparently successful family.  His
parents are an insurance broker and a realtor respectively.  He has a younger
brother with whom he has a good relationship.  He graduated from high school
and began to pursue further vocational college training in the automotive
sphere away from home in Barrie.  He abandoned this about 1.5 years into a four-year
program.  He has been working full time in customer service for an insurance
company for the past five years and appears to have held full or part-time work
more or less continuously since graduating from high school.  His work ethic
and experience thus seem quite positive.  He does not appear to have had more
than what might be described as the usual dalliances of youth in occasional
abuse of alcohol or marijuana but now rarely uses alcohol and has discontinued
use of marijuana altogether.
[8]         
Mr. Sivasothy is a young black man of South Asian (Tamil in this case)
background.  While I can certainly take some judicial notice of general factors
associated with racism in society as discussed by the Court of Appeal in R.
v. Morris, 2020 ONCA 680, there is no tangible disadvantage that appears to
emerge from the evidence arising from this.  He had a stable family life.  He
did fairly well in school.  He pursued some post-secondary education but
ultimately decided it was not for him.  He appears to have worked quite
steadily throughout.  There is no indication of any disadvantage associated
with his housing conditions, neighborhood or school.  But for this episode, he
seems to have led a fairly successful and industrious life given his stage in
life.
[9]         
In short, this episode in his life seems quite unexplained, an
observation I make not as a criticism but merely as an observation.  Nothing in
the evidentiary record – including the Pre-Sentence Report – gives me much of
an indication as to why he did what he did.  It is thus difficult to form a
view about rehabilitation prospects that does not come with the caveats that
this unanswered question raises.  The lack of understanding of what impelled
Mr. Sivasothy to become mixed up in all of this necessarily limits the degree
of confidence I can have that he would not do it again.  All of the
characteristics of industriousness and diligence which I am being asked to lean
upon to infer that Mr. Sivasothy is, in effect, already rehabilitated and has
learned his lesson were equally present before August 2020.  I simply have no
basis to assess whether he himself has acquired any insight into what brought
him here and how to avoid a recurrence.
[10]       I
find the following mitigating circumstances to be present in this case:
[11]       I
find the following aggravating circumstances to be present:
[12]       The
Crown’s position on sentencing was as follows:
[13]       The
Defence position on sentence was that Mr. Sivasothy is eligible for and should
receive a conditional sentence of two years plus probation if the court thinks
necessary plus an appropriate degree of community service.  Should the court
impose a custodial sentence, the Defence asks for a waiver of the victim impact
surcharge.
[14]       The
Criminal Code prescribes a number of sentencing principles which a
sentencing judge must review in fashioning a fit and proper sentence.  The
principles are prescribed but their relative weight and the manner of their
application will vary from case to case reflecting the fundamentally
personalized nature of the exercise.
[15]       Proportionality
requires that a sentence reflect the gravity of the offence and the degree of
responsibility of the offender.
[16]       I
was asked to conclude that the gravity and degree of responsibility of this
offender must be considered mitigated or at least unproved given the lack of
evidence as to the precise concentration of fentanyl in the package seized and the
lack of evidence as to his precise role in trafficking fentanyl.  I reject both
of these arguments.  First, the agreed statement of fact at trial stipulated
that the substance in the bag was tested and confirmed as fentanyl.  Second,
the gravity of this offence is not dependent upon the precise manner in which
Mr. Sivasothy intended to traffic in the fentanyl that the jury found he
possessed for the purpose of trafficking.  The crime requires only the intention
of engaging in any activity that satisfies the definition of trafficking with
the substance in question not some prior activity at a different time.  Any
activity in furtherance of trafficking participates in causing the vast social
harm fentanyl leaves in its wake.
[17]       Fentanyl
is among the deadliest controlled substances subject to s. 5(2) of the Controlled
Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 1996, c. 19  The Supreme Court of Canada has
recognized that the degree of social condemnation of fentanyl trafficking is
evolving towards a more severe view by reason of the gravity of the offence and
the moral culpability of an offender demonstrating such a reckless disregard
for human life in trafficking in this substance:  R. v. Parranto, 2021
SCC 46 (CanLII), [2021] 3 SCR 366 at para. 70.-71.   In R. v. Lynch,
2022 ONCA 109 (CanLII), Nordheimer J.A. noted that fentanyl “is known to be a
much more dangerous drug than almost any other” and that this reality “directs
that a sentence imposed for trafficking in fentanyl should be as long or longer
than a corresponding sentence imposed for trafficking in cocaine” (Lynch
at para. 15).
[18]       I
do not propose to review in depth the numerous cases cited to me.  By way of
short summary:
[19]       The
amount of fentanyl involved in this case – between one and two ounces - is
clearly in the mid-level trafficking range.  It is certainly significantly
greater than “commercial trafficking on a minimal scale” that might more
readily produce a sentence materially outside the range discussed in the
above-cited cases.  The estimated “street value” of this quantify of fentanyl
was in the range of about $10,000 at the relevant time.
[20]       In
the case of this particular crime, the intention of Mr. Sivasothy in possessing
the substance, the nature of the substance and the quantity of it viewed in
combination enable me to conclude that the crime in this case is an
exceptionally serious one within the constellation of controlled-substance
crimes and that Mr. Sivasothy’s degree of moral blameworthiness is also quite
high having regard to the observations of the courts in Parranto and Lynch
among others.
[21]       Parity
is the next major sentencing objective that I examine.  It is in pursuit of
this broad sentencing objective that the subject-matter of appropriate ranges
arises.
[22]       Determining
a sentencing range by reference to precedents is always fraught with difficulty. 
Sentencing ranges are starting points for analysis, not mathematically precise
dictates of the outcome of that analysis:  R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64 (CanLII), [2015] 3
S.C.R. 1089 at para. 57-60. The sentencing process prescribed by the Criminal
Code is fundamentally an individualized process.  The various precedents I
have referred to above contain numerous distinguishing aggravating features that
are simply not present here such as the presence of other controlled substances
being trafficked, greater (or sometimes lesser) quantities of fentanyl, prior
criminal records with or without a relevant history of trafficking, the
presence of proceeds of crime or weapons, etc.  Many of the precedents also
contain mitigating circumstances that are absent here – more than few involving
guilty pleas, for example.  The process is unavoidably customized to the
particular circumstances of each case and the application – appropriately
weighted – of the governing principles dictated by s. 718 et seq. of the
Criminal Code of which parity is but one.
[23]       This
case quite properly can be characterized as a mid-level trafficking case.  That
conclusion is not the end of the analysis but it does provide an appropriate
framework from which to view the process of fashioning a fit sentence.
[24]       My
review of the jurisprudence leads me to conclude that the appropriate range to
be considered here is between five and eight or even nine years.  There may be
reasons to depart from this range in either direction, but adjusting for
distinguishing and common factors in the jurisprudence cited to me by the
parties (the Defence cited primarily non-fentanyl cases which I found to be of
limited use in this part of the exercise), the range is I think a reasonable
view of the current state of the law from a parity perspective.
[25]       Denunciation
and deterrence are required to bear considerable weight in fashioning a fit and
proper sentence among the applicable sentencing principles where, as here, the
moral culpability and degree of responsibility are particularly high for the
reasons noted in Parranto and the other precedents noted above.
[26]       I
have discussed the conundrum which is Mr. Sivasothy’s prospects of
rehabilitation above.  Overall, despite the lack of any insight as to what
brought Mr. Sivasothy to this juncture, I remain satisfied that his prospects
of rehabilitation are good.  He has a strong pro-social family and social
network and clearly has sufficient motivation and self-discipline to seek and
maintain steady employment.  All of these qualities augur well for his
prospects with the one cloud on the horizon being that these same qualities
were present before the crime before me was committed and did not deter him
then.
[27]       I
must now tie all of these disparate threads together and describe a conclusion
and a basis for it.
[28]       First,
I agree with the defence that a conditional sentence is not prohibited in this
case and I fully accept that in appropriate cases, a conditional sentence is
fully capable of satisfying the objective of general deterrence.  However, a
conditional sentence may only be considered pursuant to s. 742.1 of the Criminal
Code where a court imposes a sentence of less than two years.
[29]       Second,
Mr. Sivasothy’s status as a youthful first-time offender and his prospects of
rehabilitation also require serious thought be given to the potential outcome
of a conditional sentence, but that consideration must be undertaken in the
context of all of the other sentencing objectives before me.
[30]       However,
third I find that the weight of the other sentencing objectives inexorably draw
me to the conclusion that a conditional sentence would be entirely inadequate. 
The gravity of the offence, the high degree of moral blameworthiness of the
offender, society’s need for denunciation of this conduct in the strongest
possible terms, the need for deterrence all strongly pull towards the very
range of outcomes that the parity principle suggests even if the first two
observations dictate a degree of leniency.
[31]       Leniency
of course is a matter of context.  While I am satisfied that a lenient sentence
is in order, a lenient sentence in this context must nevertheless give proper
weight to the gravity of this offence, to Mr. Sivasothy’s high degree of
responsibility and to society’s very strong and important interest in
denunciation and deterrence.  In my view a sentence of less than two years
would be manifestly unfit in the circumstances of this case having regard to
the applicable sentencing objectives which means that s. 742.1 of the Criminal
Code cannot be applied.
[32]       I
find my self echoing the words of DeLuca J. in Abdella where he
commented about the offender in that case (at p. 14):
[33]       In
my view a sentence of 5 years strikes a reasonable balance in all the
circumstances here present.  To quote from DeLuca J. again (at p. 15):
[34]       I
am sure that Mr. Sivasothy will receive every consideration from the parole
board for the early release possibilities that the law permits.  He will emerge
from this and those same qualities of industriousness and his strong family and
social networks will be waiting for him to enable him to pick himself up and
make a fresh start.
[35]       The
Defence requested an order pursuant to s. 737(2.1) waiving the payment of the
mandatory victim surcharge.  In the present case, the mandatory surcharge
amounts to $200 under s. 737(2)(b)(ii) of the Criminal Code.  There is
no evidence before me establishing that such an amount would impose an undue
hardship upon Mr. Sivasothy who has been working full time for many years at
this point.  I do not consider that I have a basis to make such an order
waiving the surcharge in these conditions.
[36]       Accordingly,
Mr. Sivasothy is sentenced as follows:
[37]       Mr
Fedorchuk also requested an order returning to Mr. Sivasothy the contents of
his wallet which will be signed by me as soon as prepared.
[38]       Orders
accordingly.