[1]              
Zachary Cust murdered Malcom Ellis by shooting
him in the head.   Jovane Watson drove Mr. Cust away from the scene.  As a
result, Mr. Watson is now facing one count of accessory after the fact to
murder.
[2]              
Mr. Watson testified that Mr. Cust directed him
to drive him away, and that he feared for his life if he did not comply.  The
Crown concedes that there is an air of reality to the defence of duress.  Thus,
the key issue is whether the Crown has disproven beyond a reasonable doubt that
Mr. Watson was acting under duress when he drove Mr. Cust away from the murder.
[3]              
In the early morning hours of November 26, 2021,
five young men were gathered in the garage of Jarren Des Vignes.  Along with
Mr. Des Vignes and his cousin Tristan Lue, were their friends Malcom Ellis,
Zachary Cust, and Jovane Watson.   The men were socializing and catching up. 
There was nothing to suggest anything was amiss.    Then suddenly, and without
any warning or provocation, Mr. Cust shot Mr. Ellis in the head, killing him
instantly.
[4]              
On November 25, 2021, Mr. Des Vignes and Mr. Lue
were hanging out in Mr. Des Vignes’ garage.  This was not unusual.   Mr. Des
Vignes often had friends over to his garage to drink or smoke marijuana.
[5]              
Just after midnight on November 26, 2021, Mr. Lue
received a call from their mutual friend, Mr. Ellis.   He asked to be picked up
from a bar in Pickering, because he was having an argument with a woman
there.   Mr. Des Vignes and Mr. Lue went to pick up Mr. Ellis and they returned
to the garage.
[6]              
At the same time, Mr. Watson and Mr. Cust were
at a birthday party.   They decided to leave.  Mr. Watson intended to drive Mr.
Cust to his home, which was close to the Des Vignes home.   Mr. Watson,
however, realized that he was out of marijuana and wanted some before he
returned to his home in Ajax.   He called Mr. Des Vignes, who had been his
friend for about five to six years.   Mr. Cust was also friends with Mr. Des
Vignes – they had known each other since elementary school.  Both Mr. Watson
and Mr. Cust often socialized with Mr. Des Vignes in his garage.
[7]              
Mr. Watson told Mr. Des Vignes that he was close
by, that Mr. Cust was with him, and asked if he could stop by to get some
marijuana.   Mr. Des Vignes agreed that Mr. Watson could come over with Mr. Cust
and get some marijuana.   He did not tell Mr. Watson that either Mr. Lue or Mr.
Ellis were at his garage.   When he got off the phone with Mr. Watson, he told
Mr. Lue and Mr. Ellis that Mr. Watson was stopping by, but did not mention that
Mr. Cust was with him.  Mr. Des Vignes unlocked the door to his house, so that
when Mr. Watson and Mr. Cust arrived, they could come in, and enter the garage
through a door in the home.
[8]              
A few minutes after Mr. Watson called, he pulled
up outside of the Des Vignes home in his car.    He and Mr. Cust got out of the
car, went through the main door of the home, and into the garage.   Mr. Watson
and Mr. Cust greeted the three young men who were there.    They were warmly
received, and everyone seemed jovial.
[9]              
Mr. Watson was surprised and happy to see Mr. Ellis
there.   He has been friends with him since elementary school but had not seen
him in a while.   He gave Mr. Ellis a hug, and they asked each other about
their families.   Although Mr. Watson had initially planned on leaving after
getting the marijuana, that changed when he saw his friend Mr. Ellis.    Mr. Ellis
offered Mr. Watson shots from a bottle of vodka and the two men caught up with
each other.    By all accounts, everyone seemed to be in good spirits.
[10]          
Shortly after Mr. Watson and Mr. Cust arrived, Mr.
Des Vignes left the garage to use the bathroom.  Mr. Cust followed him.  Mr.
Cust retrieved a small black satchel he had left at the Des Vignes home a few
days earlier.   Mr. Des Vignes did not know what was in the bag.    Then, they
both returned to the garage.
[11]          
After he returned to the garage, Mr. Des Vignes
began scrolling through his Instagram.  Mr. Cust was looking at his phone.  Mr.
Lue began to roll a joint on a table in the garage.   Mr. Watson and Mr. Ellis
continued with their amicable conversation. It seemed light-hearted and
friendly.  Everything seemed fine.   No one was arguing.  There did not seem to
be animosity between any of the young men.  In particular, there did not seen
to be any problem or issue between Mr. Cust and Mr. Ellis.   It was a normal and
enjoyable get together.
[12]          
Then, without any warning, Mr. Cust shot Mr. Ellis
in the head.
[13]          
Mr. Des Vignes, Mr. Lue, and
Mr. Watson were all friends with the victim.   Each of them testified about the
shock and horror of seeing their friend gunned down in cold blood.  Mr. Des Vignes’
mother and sister also saw Mr. Des Vignes and Mr. Lue minutes after the
shooting.   They confirmed that both men were distraught.
[14]          
It was clearly a traumatic
event.  Not surprisingly, the witnesses all provided somewhat different
accounts of what occurred.
[15]          
According to Mr. Des Vignes, as he was looking
at his Instagram, he suddenly heard a loud bang and looked up.  He saw that Mr.
Cust had a gun and that Mr. Ellis was on the floor, clearly shot.   Mr. Des
Vignes froze at first, and then he yelled, “What the Fuck are you doing?”   He
heard Mr. Lue yell, “No!”   He heard Mr. Watson say something like, “What the
fuck!”
[16]          
Mr. Watson, who had been standing right beside Mr.
Ellis when Mr. Cust shot him, seemed frozen.    Mr. Watson had a shocked and
surprised look on his face.  Mr. Lue began to scuffle with Mr. Cust.  Mr. Des
Vignes then jumped in to help his cousin.  As the men struggled, Mr. Cust
pointed a gun in Mr. Des Vignes’ face and told him to move and “Get the fuck
out of the way”.   Mr. Des Vignes put his hands up and backed away, as he did
not want to get shot.   While he was good friends with Mr. Cust, he had just seen
him kill one of their mutual friends, and at that point he had no idea what he
was capable of.   He also saw Mr. Cust point his gun to Mr. Lue’s waist area,
causing him to also back off.
[17]          
Mr. Cust was waving the gun around.  Mr. Cust
then looked at Mr. Watson and said, “Come on, let’s fucking go.”   Mr. Watson
seemed to be in shock and did not respond right away.  He remained rooted in
place.  To Mr. Des Vignes, it seemed as if Mr. Watson did not know what to do.    Mr.
Cust said again to Mr. Watson, “Let’s fucking go.”  At that point, Mr. Watson
finally began to move.
[18]          
 Mr. Des Vignes’ evidence regarding whether Mr.
Cust pointed the gun directly at Mr. Watson evolved as he testified.   In
cross-examination, he said that as Mr. Cust told Mr. Watson to go, he had the
gun pointed in his direction. He did not mention this in his evidence-in-chief. 
When asked why he did not volunteer that evidence when the Crown was asking
questions, he said at that time he did not recall but that the questions in
cross-examination assisted his memory.
[19]          
 According to Mr. Des Vignes, as Mr. Cust moved
from the garage into the home, Mr. Des Vignes and Mr. Lue began to “scuffle”
with him again.  Once again, Mr. Cust pointed his gun towards their faces and
they both backed off.   Mr. Cust ran outside.  Mr. Des Vignes and Mr. Watson
followed him out.
[20]          
According to Mr. Lue, he decided to roll a
joint, and turned his back to Mr. Ellis and Mr. Watson to do so.  He could hear
them chatting, catching up with each other.    He heard the door from the home
into the garage open and assumed that it was Mr. Des Vignes and Mr. Cust
returning.   He was in the process of rolling the joint when he heard a loud
bang.
[21]          
Mr. Lue said, “What the fuck?”    He turned
around and saw Ellis on the floor and once again cried out, “What the fuck?” and
“No!”    It took Mr. Lue a moment to process what had happened.  Mr. Lue was
startled and scared.   He saw Mr. Cust and one other person run towards the
door.  He could not say if the other person running was Mr. Des Vignes or Mr. Watson. 
He did not recall if Mr. Cust said anything.
[22]          
Mr. Lue grabbed Mr. Cust as he was trying to
leave and pushed him through the door leading into the home. He scuffled with Mr.
Cust inside the home, pushing him up against the wall.  Mr. Lue has no memory
of Mr. Des Vignes jumping in to join in the scuffle with Mr. Cust.  As he
fought with Mr. Cust, Mr. Lue felt something “poke” against his hip, and Mr. Cust
told him to let him go.     Mr. Lue believed it was a gun, so he put his hands
up and backed away.
[23]          
Mr. Lue said that he has no memory of Mr. Cust
pointing the gun at Mr. Des Vignes or Mr. Watson.  While he agreed that Mr.
Cust may have pointed or waved the gun at them, he explained that because of
his emotional state after the shooting, he could not say. Mr. Lue explained
that he essentially “blacked out” from the shock of what had happened and that
things did not seem real.
[24]          
In cross-examination, several issues emerged
with respect to Mr. Lue’s evidence.  He initially testified that he did not
know the shooter and described him only as the man wearing a mask.  However, he
was confronted with his evidence from the preliminary hearing where he admitted
that he knew that the shooter was Mr. Cust. He agreed that he had not been
truthful in his initial evidence before me when he said he did not know the
shooter.    Similarly, Mr. Lue at first said he did not see a gun in Mr. Cust’s
hands.    But in cross-examination he was again confronted with his evidence
from the preliminary hearing and ultimately admitted that he did see Mr. Cust
with a gun.  He agreed he was concerned about potential repercussions if he
testified that he saw the gun in Mr. Cust’s hand.
[25]          
Mr. Watson testified that he was standing “arms
distance” from Mr. Ellis, catching up with his long-time friend.   He drank a
shot from a bottle that Mr. Ellis offered him.   As they were talking, Mr. Watson
heard a loud bang.  Mr. Ellis dropped to the ground.   Mr. Watson was shocked
and confused.  It took him about 10 to 15 seconds to process that Mr. Ellis had
been shot.  He could not wrap his mind around what was going on.   As he was
staring down at Mr. Ellis, he saw Mr. Cust run towards the door into the home. 
While still in the garage, Mr. Lue grabbed Mr. Cust and pushed him through the
door and into the home.   Mr. Des Vignes ran into the home.   Mr. Watson felt
like a “chicken with its head cut off”.  He could not “think straight” and did
not know what to do.   As the other three men went into the home, Mr. Watson simply
followed the crowd.
[26]          
Once in the home, Mr. Cust tripped and both Mr. Lue
and Mr. Des Vignes were over him, struggling.   Mr. Watson was standing just
behind the three men, watching the struggle.  He then saw Mr. Lue and Mr. Des
Vignes back away from Mr. Cust with their hands up, as Mr. Cust told them to “Get
away.”    It was at that point that Mr. Watson saw the gun in Mr. Cust’s hands
for the first time.
[27]          
Mr. Cust was waving the gun around. As Mr. Cust
gestured with the gun, he told Mr. Watson “Get me the fuck out of here.  Let’s
go to the car.”   Mr.  Watson did not respond.   Mr. Cust again told him to get
him out of there.   Mr. Cust then ran for the door.   Mr. Des Vignes followed
him out.  Mr. Watson then ran out the door as well.   He was still in shock and
was just moving without much thought.
[28]          
A video clip filed at trial showed Mr. Cust, Mr.
Des Vignes, and Mr. Watson running out of the home.  The video depicts Mr. Watson
initially running to the left, away from the direction of his car.   He can
then be seen changing directions and running towards the car.  Mr. Watson got
in the driver’s seat and Mr. Cust got in the passenger side.   Mr. Watson then
drove away.
[29]          
According to Mr. Des Vignes, he followed Mr. Cust
outside to ask him why he had shot Mr. Ellis.  He saw Mr. Watson run outside,
but it seemed like he did not know which way to go.   Mr. Cust yelled at Mr. Watson,
“Let’s get the fuck out of here”, while he still had the gun in his hand.   Mr.
Watson seemed hesitant, but he got in the driver’s seat, and drove away with Mr.
Cust.
[30]          
Mr. Watson testified that when he first ran out
of the home, he did not know what he was doing.  As he ran away from the
direction of the car, he heard Mr. Cust aggressively yell, “Get in the fucking
car.”  He took that as a direction.   He did as Mr. Cust directed because he
was scared and did not know what Mr. Cust would do if he did not comply.   He
had just seen Mr. Cust shoot his friend Mr. Ellis.  He had seen Mr. Cust
threaten Mr. Des Vignes, whom he had known longer than Mr. Watson, with the
gun.  Mr. Watson testified that he did not want to push Mr. Cust “over the edge”
and wind up being shot.  Because he was afraid of what Mr. Cust would do, he
got into his car and drove Mr. Cust away from the scene.
[31]          
Mr. Watson testified that when he began to
drive, he had no idea where he was going.   Mr. Cust told him to drive towards
the highway and directed him where to go.   Mr.  Cust had the gun he had just
used to shoot Mr. Ellis in his lap as he directed Mr. Watson where to drive.  Mr.
Watson felt “very scared and very worried.”
[32]          
As Mr. Watson drove, Mr. Cust was on the phone,
speaking to someone, perhaps his mother.  Eventually Mr. Cust had Mr. Watson
drive to an apartment building in the Mississauga area.   Once they arrived, Mr.
Cust got out of the car and put the gun in a black bag.  He then walked toward
the building.
[33]          
Mr. Watson drove away.  He stopped for gas, and
then drove to his girlfriend’s home in Ajax.
[34]          
According to Mr. Watson, after he dropped Mr.
Cust off, and before he drove to Ajax, he tried to call his brother, Roshane
Webster, who lived with their mother in Bowmanville.  Mr. Watson was thinking
about going there instead of Ajax and wanted to ask his brother to unlock the
door to the home.   However, he got Mr. Webster’s voicemail.   Since he did not
get to speak to his brother, he drove to Ajax as he had originally planned to
do before the shooting, and then went to sleep.
[35]          
Mr. Watson testified that when he woke up in the
morning, he tried to call his brother again. This time his brother picked up
and Mr. Watson asked him to open the door to the Bowmanville home.
[36]          
Mr. Webster recalled the phone calls
differently.  According to him, Mr. Watson called him in the early morning
hours and woke him up.   He could not recall the exact time that he got the
call.   When the Crown asked if the call was around 3:00 a.m. he said he could
not recall.  When the Crown asked if was before 6:00 a.m., he said “I would say
so, but I am not sure.”      Whatever the time of the conversation, Mr. Webster
recalled that Mr. Watson said he was going to come to the Bowmanville home and
asked him to open the door.   He recalled that the conversation took about 10
seconds.   He only recalled one conversation with Mr. Watson.
[37]          
Phone records filed as Exhibit 9 reflect that
Mr. Watson made a call to a phone number ending in 4289 at 2:59 a.m. and that this
number went to the voicemail system.  This number is associated with a person
named K.T.    I have no information about this person.   Mr. Watson said he did
not know this person, and that he believed the phone number was an old one of
his brother’s that he pressed by accident.
[38]          
The phone records confirm that Mr. Watson spoke
with his brother in the morning of November 26 as he testified.   There were
two calls between Mr. Webster and Mr. Watson, at around 9:28 a.m. and again at
9:50 a.m.   However, the records show that Mr. Webster called Mr. Watson, not
the other way around.
[39]          
After speaking with Mr. Webster in the morning
of November 26, Mr. Watson drove out to the Bowmanville home.   He stayed there
for several days.   He was feeling shaken and scared.
[40]          
On November 28, 2021, someone shot and killed Mr.
Cust in a hotel room in Windsor.   Mr. Watson heard about the killing from a
friend.   He was scared for his life.
[41]          
On November 30, 2021, the police contacted Mr. Watson’s
mother, and told her that he was wanted for first-degree murder and that the
police had concerns for his safety and well-being.    On December 1, 2021, Mr.
Watson went to the police station with his mother and was charged with murder.
[42]          
On December 7, 2021, the car that Mr. Watson had
been driving was found parked by the side of a road about 10 minutes distance
from the Bowmanville home.   At the start of the trial, the Crown had no
information as to who moved the car or why they moved it.  In his opening, he
advised that he intended to rely upon the fact the car was moved as
post-offence conduct to support an inference of guilt.
[43]          
However, Mr. Webster testified that a few days
after Mr. Watson turned himself in, he decided to move Mr. Watson’s car because
of the concerns the police had expressed to their mother.   He was worried that
his family might be in danger.   He decided to move the car on his own, without
being asked to by Mr. Watson.   After hearing Mr. Webster’s testimony, the
Crown fairly conceded that he could not establish that Mr. Watson was involved
in moving the car. As a result, he agreed that the car being moved should essentially
play no role in the analysis.
[44]          
The starting point of my analysis is that Mr. Watson is presumed to be innocent. This
presumption remains with him at all times, unless and until the prosecution has
proven the offence against him beyond a reasonable doubt.  A reasonable doubt
is not an imaginary or frivolous doubt. It is not a doubt based upon sympathy
or prejudice. Rather, it is a doubt based on reason and common sense. It is
logically derived from the evidence or absence of evidence.
[45]          
Proof beyond a reasonable doubt is a very high
legal standard. It is not enough for me to believe that Mr. Watson is possibly or even probably
guilty.  I must be convinced of his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.  As a
standard, reasonable doubt does not require proof beyond all doubt, nor is it
proof to an absolute certainty.  At the same time, reasonable doubt lies far
closer to absolute certainty than it does to a balance of probabilities.
[46]          
As noted above, the Crown concedes that there is
an air of reality to the defence of duress.  Thus, the key issue in this case
is whether the Crown has disproven that when Mr. Watson drove Mr. Cust away
from the murder scene, he did so under duress.
[47]          
The defence of duress is properly characterized
as an excuse, animated by the rationale of moral involuntariness: R. v. Ryan,
2013 SCC 3, at para. 23.    Excuses absolve the accused of personal accountability
by focussing, not on the wrongful act, but rather on the circumstances of the
act and the accused’s personal capacity to avoid it.   Duress provides a
defence to what would otherwise be criminal conduct because the accused acted
in response to an external threat.   The act remains wrong, but the accused
will not be punished because the act was committed in circumstances in which
there was realistically no choice: R. v. Ruzic, 2001 SCC 24, at para.
24. As articulated in Ruzic, at para. 40, the defence of duress is
characterized as a “concession to human frailty” in the face of “agonizing
choice.”
[48]          
While the defence of duress is grounded in both
statute and the common law, the essential elements of the two duress defences
are "largely the same": R. v. Aravena, 2015 ONCA 250, leave to
appeal refused, [2015] S.C.C.A. No. 497.   In Ryan, at para. 81, the
court set out the following six elements for the defence of duress:
[49]          
The Crown does not have to
prove that all elements of the defence do not apply.   If the Crown proves that
any one of the elements of the defence is inapplicable, the defence of duress fails.
[50]          
I will consider each element
in turn.
[51]          
Mr. Cust did not directly
threaten Mr. Watson. The question is whether he implicitly threatened to cause
Mr. Watson death or bodily harm.
[52]          
There were three witnesses
to the shooting and the aftermath, each of whom saw things differently.   The
defence argues I should have concerns about the reliability and credibility of
Mr. Lue’s evidence.   Similarly, the Crown argues I should have concerns about
Mr. Des Vignes’ account.   At the end of the day, however, I am not going to
delve into the various issues that could impact on an assessment of their
evidence.    In my view, neither witness really helps in the analysis.
[53]          
Mr. Lue could not say, one
way or the other, whether Mr. Cust waved or pointed his gun at Mr. Watson.   And
while Mr. Des Vignes testified that Mr. Cust waved the gun at Mr. Watson when
they were in the garage, Mr. Watson did not recall seeing that.  Even if I
accepted Mr. Des Vignes’ evidence that Mr. Cust had waved the gun at Mr. Watson
in the garage, Mr. Watson could not have felt threatened, explicitly, or implicitly,
since he did not see Mr. Cust take that action.
[54]          
Instead, it is the evidence
of Mr. Watson and what he saw and perceived that is key to assessing whether
there was an implicit threat.   In general, I thought that Mr. Watson came
across well.  He seemed to be genuinely answering the questions posed as best
he could.  He did not come across as evasive.  His evidence was clear,
coherent, and mostly consistent.  While there were differences between his
recollection and those of Mr. Lue and Mr. Des Vignes, given the chaos and
trauma of the shooting, that is not surprising.
[55]          
There were some issues with
respect to the phone calls made by Mr. Watson in the morning of November 26.  
Mr. Watson’s recollection that he called his brother in the early morning hours
and got the voicemail does not seem to be reflected on the records.   Instead,
the number called at 2:59 a.m. appears to be a wrong number.  His brother’s recollection
of speaking with Mr. Watson in the early morning hours, also does not seem to
be borne out.   Further, Mr.  Watson’s recollection that he called his brother
after 9:00 a.m. is not borne out in the records. Rather, it appears that his
brother called him.   But at the end of the day, the issues as to precisely
when Mr. Watson and Mr. Webster spoke, and who called whom does not cause me a
great deal of concern.    The calls all took place after Mr. Watson had already
dropped Mr. Cust off.    And the phone records generally support Mr. Watson’s
memory that he spoke with his brother after he woke up the morning of November
26.
[56]          
Apart from the issues with
the phone calls there was little that undermined Mr. Watson’s account.  Despite
a lengthy and vigorous cross-examination, Mr. Watson never wavered in his evidence
that Mr. Cust waved the gun in his direction, and that he believed that Mr.
Cust would shoot him if he did not drive him away from the scene.   I accept
Mr. Watson’s evidence on this point.  The context is important.   Mr. Cust had
just murdered Mr. Ellis.   There had been no warning.  Nothing to suggest that Mr.
Cust had a problem with Mr. Ellis.   The shooting was sudden, savage, and
shocking.    Mr. Cust yelled, “Lets go” at Mr. Watson, while still holding the
gun he had used to execute Mr. Ellis.   When Mr. Watson did not immediately
respond, Mr. Cust repeated his demand.   Again, while holding the gun.   Mr. Cust’s
words and actions could reasonably be seen as an implicit threat to cause
significant harm to Mr. Watson if he did not do what he was told to do – get
Mr. Cust out of there.
[57]          
Moreover, during the time
that he had Mr. Cust in the car after the shooting, Mr. Cust kept his gun out
and on his lap.   That action could reasonably be seen as a ongoing implicit
threat that Mr. Cust would cause Mr. Watson significant harm if he did not continue
to follow Mr. Cust’s demands and take him wherever he directed.  As Mr. Watson
said, “the person with the gun has all the power.”
[58]          
The Crown has not disproven beyond
a reasonable doubt that Mr. Cust implicitly threatened to cause death or bodily
harm to Mr. Watson if he did not drive Mr. Cust away from the scene.  This
element of the defence of duress has been made out.
[59]          
The Crown argues that I
should reject Mr. Watson’s testimony that he believed that Mr. Cust would shoot
him if he did not drive him away from the scene for two reasons. First, he
points out that Mr. Watson did not lead any evidence to suggest that Mr. Cust
had a propensity for violence. That is distinct from cases such as R. v.
Norman, 2021 ONCA 321.
[60]          
But this submission ignores the
important context. Mr. Watson had just witnessed Mr. Cust execute Mr. Ellis.
Only moments earlier. Whether or not Mr. Cust was a member of a gang, or had
been involved in violence previously, he had just acted in a shocking, savage,
and deadly way.  Mr. Watson’s testimony that he was afraid because Mr. Cust had
only minutes earlier murdered his friend Mr. Ellis strikes me as eminently
reasonable.
[61]          
Second, the Crown argues since
Mr. Watson and Mr. Cust were friends, he could not have reasonably believed
that Mr. Cust would shoot him.   But by all accounts, Mr. Cust was on friendly
terms with Mr. Ellis, the man he had just murdered.   Moreover, Mr. Cust also
threatened both Mr. Lue and Mr. Des Vignes, even though they had been friends
for a long time.    And despite the fact that they were friends with Mr. Cust,
it seems clear that both men believed he might shoot them.  They both backed
away and put their hands up when Mr. Cust pointed the gun at them.
[62]          
Looking at the totality of
the circumstances, I find that the Crown has not disproven beyond a reasonable doubt
that Mr. Watson reasonably believed that he would be seriously harmed or killed
if he did not drive Mr. Cust away from the scene. This element of the defence
of duress has been made out.
[63]          
The defence of duress does
not apply to persons who could have legally and safely extricated themselves
from the situation of duress.   An objective-subjective standard is used to
assess whether a safe avenue of escape existed.   The test requires that the
situation be examined from the point of view of a similarly situated reasonable
person. The court should consider the particular circumstances facing the
accused and their ability to perceive a reasonable alternative to committing a
crime, and do so with an awareness of their background and essential
characteristics: Ruzic, at para. 61.  The process involves a “pragmatic
assessment of the position of the accused, tempered by the need to avoid
negating criminal lability on the basis of a purely subjective and unverifiable
excuse”: Ruzic, at para. 61.
[64]          
The Crown argues that Mr.
Watson had several safe avenues of escape, but he failed to take them.   For
example, the Crown argues he could have remained in the garage when the other
men moved into the main home.   The Crown also argues that Mr. Watson could
have stayed in the Des Vignes home after Mr. Cust ran outside and locked the
door to the home.    Or, he argues, Mr. Watson could have continued to run away
from the direction of the car after he went outside, instead of veering back
and getting in the car with Mr. Cust.
[65]          
When these potential avenues
of escape were put to Mr. Watson in cross-examination, he maintained that they
were not safe. As he explained, there was nothing stopping Mr. Cust from kicking
in the door to the home and coming back in with his gun, thereby endangering
not just Mr. Watson, but Mr. Lue and Mr. Des Vignes as well.   There also was nothing
stopping Mr. Cust from shooting him if he tried to run away.
[66]          
In my view, Mr. Watson’s
responses to the questions posed about safe avenues of escape were plausible
and reasonable.  It may well be that, as the Crown argued, Mr. Watson had a
safe avenue of escape in that he could have remained in the home.  On the other
hand, Mr. Cust had acted in a stunning, unpredictable, and brutal fashion.  Mr.
Watson had the car keys.  Mr. Cust wanted to get away quickly.   It is an
objectively reasonable possibility that he would have reacted in a violent and
deadly way if Mr. Watson had attempted to lock himself in the home or run away
from the direction of the car.
[67]          
Looking at the totality of
the evidence, I find that the Crown has not disproven beyond a reasonable doubt
that Mr. Watson had no safe avenue of escape.   This element of the defence of
duress is made out.
[68]          
The Crown reasonably concedes
that if the first three elements have been established, that there was a close
temporal connection.   I agree.
[69]          
Mr. Watson drove Mr. Cust
away from the scene moments after he was implicitly threatened.    This element
of the duress defence has been made out.
[70]          
The Crown also concedes that
the act of driving Mr. Cust away from the scene was a proportionate response to
the implicit threat.  Again, I agree.
[71]          
The criminal act of
assisting Mr. Cust by driving him from the murder scene did not cause
significant harm.  On the other side, was Mr. Watson’s reasonable belief that Mr.
Cust would shoot him if he did not do so.    This element of the duress defence
has been made out.
[72]          
The final element of the
defence of duress, requires that the accused not be a party to a conspiracy or
association whereby they are subject to compulsion and knew that threats and
coercion to commit an offence were a possible result of the criminal activity,
conspiracy, or association: Ryan, at para. 78.
[73]          
Once again, the Crown
reasonably concedes this element.  I agree with this concession. While the
police initially charged Mr. Watson with first-degree murder, those charges
were downgraded to accessory after the fact.  The Crown does not allege that Mr.
Watson was a party to the murder of Mr. Ellis, or that he had any prior
knowledge that Mr. Cust was going to shoot Mr. Ellis.   This element of the
defence of duress has been made out.
[74]          
The Crown has not disproven beyond a reasonable
doubt that Mr. Watson was acting under duress when he drove Mr. Cust away from
the scene of the murder.
[75]          
As a result, I find Mr. Watson not guilty.