[1]              
National Bank of Canada
(“National”) moves for two orders:
[2]              
The motion is supported by the DIP
Syndicate and BMO, each of which advises that it intends to bring its own
motion for the appointment of receivers over properties of the Pride Entities
in respect of which it has security.
[3]              
The motion is opposed by the
Applicants, Mitsubishi and the Court-appointed Monitor, subject to an agreement
in respect of net rents as further discussed below.
[4]              
Defined terms in this Endorsement
have the meaning given to them in earlier Endorsements made in this CCAA
proceeding and/or the motion materials and the 18th Report of the
Monitor dated November 17, 2024, unless otherwise stated.
[5]              
For the reasons that follow, the
motion for the lift stay to appoint a receiver is dismissed, on the terms
proposed by the Applicants and supported by the Monitor, and specifically that
the Rent Enforcement Order is granted.
[6]              
National is the first ranking
mortgage lender to three of the Applicant entities, each of which is a
single-purpose entity (SPE) formed for the sole purpose of holding title to
real property. Four properties are the subject of this motion (the
“Properties”):
[7]              
The facilities pursuant to which
the mortgages were granted on those Properties are in default. That is not
disputed.
[8]              
National seeks the lifting of the
stay to allow for the appointment of a receiver for the reasons set out in its
motion materials and particularly the Affidavit of Dana Ades-Landy sworn
November 13, 2024.
[9]              
As a housekeeping point, the
motion materials refer to the proposed appointment of FTI as that receiver.
Over the weekend, certain parties raised issues of possible conflict with FTI,
and for expediency National now proposes that Richter be appointed instead. Richter
has filed a consent to so act if so appointed, and the motion materials are
taken to refer to Richter instead of FTI as appropriate. Richter maintains
offices and professionals in Montréal as does FTI. No party had any issue with
this, and I dispensed with the requirement for National
to serve and file formal motion materials to give effect to this substitution
and corresponding amendment.
[10]          
National submits that the Real
Estate SPEs were included as Applicants when this CCAA proceeding was
commenced. Now that this proceeding is effectively a liquidation and wind-down,
National submits that those entities should be removed from the proceeding.
[11]          
The Applicants (Pride Entities)
rely on the affidavit of the Chief Restructuring Officer, Randall Benson, sworn
November 16, 2024 and the 18th report of the Monitor. While the
Applicants oppose the appointment of a new receiver, the Pride Entities do not
oppose paying over to National all rent actually received in respect of the
Properties, net of paid and accruing operating and holding costs and taxes. The
Monitor and CRO support this.
[12]          
National submits that it has lost
confidence in the CRO and the Monitor to conduct the sale of the four
Properties. National submits, and its affiant states (para 10), that it does
not believe there is any realistic prospect that there is equity in these
Properties. This is based on, among other things, updated appraisals obtained
by National from CBRE, as well as from the objective fact that all of these Properties
are currently marketed for sale and have been for some time, none has yielded a
binding offer.
[13]          
National further submits that
there is no prejudice to the Applicants since none of these Properties are
required for the operations of the Pride Entities. They submit that a receiver
should be appointed, which can focus on realizing on these Properties, without
the added costs, delay and complications of the broader CCAA process.
[14]          
There is no issue about the test
for the appointment of a receiver under either the BIA or the CJA:
is it just or convenient to do so?
[15]          
In my view, and in the particular
circumstances of this case considered as against the factors set out in the
jurisprudence, the answer to that question is no.
[16]          
While I fully appreciate that this
CCAA has been lengthy and complicated, in my view the sales process
currently underway for these four Properties has not.
[17]          
The Properties are currently
marketed for sale pursuant to the Real Estate Protocol previously approved by
Court order in this proceeding. That Protocol was implemented at the request of
the DIP Syndicate and on the consent of all mortgagees.
[18]          
At present, the Protocol is
generally working. Numerous properties of the Pride Entities have been sold,
many are listed for sale, and a number of properties are the subject of pending
agreements in respect of which due diligence or other pre-closing steps are
being completed.
[19]          
These four Properties in
particular have been listed for some time. 3600 Pitfield is the subject of a
recently received letter of interest from a potential purchaser for a sale
price which, if closed, could pay out National in full on that property.
[20]          
Counsel for National was candid in
submissions that Richter, if appointed, would require a broker to be engaged,
as is the case at present. Counsel was equally candid that National may in fact
seek to have the receiver, if appointed, continue that broker engagement. In
short, it is possible if not probable that the very same listing agent will
have carriage of the sale and marketing process for these four Properties,
whether or not the receiver is appointed. I see no significant benefit in
appointing another court officer, with attendant fees, to perform that role.
[21]          
In my view, there is no evidence
of any material or significant advantage that yet another court officer such as
the proposed receiver, could do to realize on these Properties that is not
already being done.
[22]          
I also observe that the current
sale process has not only been undertaken in consultation with National, and
any sale is subject to Court approval, but National has been kept abreast of
developments along the way. In addition, the CRO, the Monitor and their current
listing agent are very prepared to accept any advice, recommendations or
suggestions from or on behalf of National and its professional advisors. The
CRO and the Monitor have been providing, and will continue to provide, to National
all expressions of interest, offers or other information about the Properties.
[23]          
At present, the Pride Entities and
the Monitor cannot accept any offer for the purchase of any of the Properties
pursuant to the Real Estate Protocol without the consent of National in any
event. They will continue to take direction from National with respect to
accepting or rejecting any offers, subject to the views of the DIP Agent. National
has not made any specific request of the CRO or the Monitor with respect to the
marketing and sale of the Properties to date.
[24]          
In addition, I am not persuaded
that another court officer in the form of a new receiver would be more
cost-efficient. The 18th Report reflects
that incurred professional costs allocated to these four Properties to date are
approximately $34,000 in total, accrued over the course of seven months.
[25]          
In further addition, the interests
of other parties in these Properties must be accounted for. While National has
not (for apparently valid contractual privacy and confidentiality reasons)
shared with the Monitor or the CRO the four appraisals it has obtained, they
date from May, 2024 and are therefore somewhat stale in terms of an evolving
market. In any event, the Monitor, CRO, Pride Entities, and Mitsubishi (as a
Recourse Lender who will look to proceeds from the sale of assets of the Pride
Entities at the end of the day) all submit that there is an expectation that
there could well be an excess of equity from Receivership Properties of the
Pride Entities after the payment in full of property-specific mortgagees and
the DIP Syndicate.
[26]          
It makes good practical sense for
the existing court officers, the Monitor and the CRO, to oversee the sale of
those Properties in which many parties have interests or potential interests
(in the Properties or the net proceeds from the sale thereof). The Monitor and
the CRO may also require access to the Properties along the way to facilitate
in advance the sales process.
[27]          
For all of these reasons, in my
view, it is not practical, appropriate or cost-efficient, and it follows therefore that it is not just or convenient
to appoint another court officer in the form of a receiver over these four
Properties, notwithstanding that Richter is a well-qualified firm to act in
that role.
[28]          
For all of these reasons, the
motion is dismissed. However, and as noted at the outset of this Endorsement,
the Monitor does not object, and the Pride entities do not object, to releasing
the net amount of rents in respect of the Properties where counsel have
confirmed the validity and enforceability of National’s mortgages and
assignment of rents, to National, after accounting for direct costs in respect
of the Properties which include taxes, repair and maintenance, utilities and
GST/QST.
[29]          
In the anticipation that other
creditors with mortgages on real property owned by the Pride Entities will seek
relief similar to that sought by National today, just as the DIP Syndicate and
BMO have indicated they will soon do, the Monitor will begin its analysis of
the appropriate amounts of rent to be distributed, and will undertake security
reviews with respect to the assignment of rents on the relevant Pride Entity. I
agree that it should do so.
[30]          
For all of these reasons, I
decline to grant the National Receivership Order, but grant the Rent
Enforcement Order, with effect as of November 22, 2024.
[31]          
National has also sought a sealing
order in respect of the four appraisals described above. The sealing order is
limited, both as to scope and temporally. I am satisfied that the factors set
out by the Supreme Court of Canada in Sierra Club and refined in Sherman
Estate are met here, since the appraisals, if made public now, and pending
the closing of a final sale transaction for each of the Properties, could
clearly but negatively affect any sales and marketing process (including the
current one) for any and all of these Properties. The sealing order is granted,
and the materials are sealed, subject to further order of this Court.
[32]          
Orders to go to give effect to
these Reasons.