[1]                 
The respondent is charged with
sexual assault and sexual interference contrary to sections 271 and 151
respectively of the Criminal Code. The complainant was nine years old at
the time of the alleged offences in 2010. She reported the alleged offences to
the police in August 2020. She is now 23 years old.
[2]                 
The Crown seeks an order to permit
the complainant to testify by way of CCTV or other device from outside the
courtroom. The respondent opposes the application.
[3]                 
On November 12, 2024, I allowed
the application. These are my reasons.
[4]                 
A very brief summary of the
allegations will suffice for the purposes of this ruling.
[5]                 
The respondent was the
complainant’s stepfather at the time of the alleged offences in 2010. The
complainant alleges that the respondent put his hand under her underwear and touched
her vagina as she lay on her bed. They were the only two persons in the room at
the time.
[6]                 
The Crown filed an affidavit sworn
by the officer in charge of this case, Detective Constable Kathryn Ferguson of
the Toronto Police Service. On October 24, 2024, in preparation for this trial
she contacted the complainant who advised her as follows:
[7]                 
The Criminal Code in ss.
486.2(2) – (6) sets out the procedure and authority on such an application:
[8]                 
Section 486.2((2) of the Code
was amended in 2015. The previous version required the judge to find that the
order would be “necessary to obtain a full and candid account from the witness
of the acts complained of.” The current standard is whether the judge “is of
the opinion that the order would facilitate the giving of a full and candid
account by the witness of the acts complained of or would otherwise be in the
interest of the proper administration of justice.” The threshold for the making
of such orders has clearly been lowered.
[9]                 
The use of testimonial aids such
as video-linked testimony may well promote society’s interest in getting at the
truth. It does not undermine the principles of fundamental justice nor impinge on
the Charter-protected right to a fair trial: R. v. Evans, 2017
ONSC 3464 at para. 21.
[10]            
The Supreme Court of Canada has
recognized that “testifying in a sexual assault case can be traumatizing and
harmful to complainants”:          R. v. R. V. 2019 SCC 41 at para. 33.
[11]        
The complainant will be asked
questions in a public courtroom related to an alleged sexual touching by her
stepfather when she was nine years old. She is understandably anxious, fearful
and nervous about testifying but is prepared to do so. It would facilitate the
presentation of her evidence for her to testify by CCTV. This process will not
inhibit the testing of her evidence in cross examination. She will be visible
to counsel and the accused throughout her testimony.
[12]        
I am satisfied that the statutory
preconditions for her testimony to be received by CCTV have been met on this
application.
[13]        
The application is allowed.