1.                 
The
Plaintiffs move for an order transferring the pending Application bearing Ct.
File No. CV-20-00001509-0000 commenced in Waterloo Region, to the Commercial
List in Toronto pursuant to Rule 13.1.02, and consolidating it with this
Action.
2.                 
The
Plaintiff, Nathan Schmerler, resides in Toronto. The Defendants, Zev and Ramy
Schmerler are his father and brother, respectively. They also reside in
Toronto. The Defendant Valley Mill Investments Limited (VMI) is the family’s
holding company.
3.                 
Defined
terms in this Endorsement have the meaning given to them in the motion
materials unless otherwise stated. I refer where appropriate to the parties by
their first names given the commonality of surname.
4.                 
For
the reasons that follow, the motion is granted.
5.                 
This
Court has jurisdiction to order transferring consolidation pursuant to Rule 6
of the Rules of Civil Procedure and section 107 of the Courts of
Justice Act.
6.                 
Section
107 provides:
7.                 
Rule
6 provides:
8.                 
Section
138 of the Courts of Justice Act has mandatory language. It provides
that as far as possible, multiplicity of legal proceeding shall be avoided.
9.                 
Both
parties rely on the decision of the Divisional Court in Hanif v. College of
Pharmacists, 2014 ONSC 2598 at para. 23, which states that the purpose of
section 107 is to:
10.             
The
Plaintiffs submit the non-exhaustive list of factors that this Court identified
in 1014864 Ontario Ltd. v. 1721789 Ontario Inc., 2010 ONSC 3306 (CanLII)
at para. 18 as being relevant to a consideration of whether consolidation or
order of a trial of issues together is appropriate[1]:
11.             
Ramy
is an officer of VMI and the owner of 50% of the non-voting common shares of
VMI. Zev owns all of the voting shares and is the sole director of VMI.
12.             
The
sole business of VMI is its ownership interest (50%) in a shopping plaza
located in Pickering known as Brockington Plaza. VMI formerly owned an interest
(50%) in another shopping plaza in Toronto, known as Westmore Plaza.
13.             
The
Defendant 574780 Ontario Limited (“574”) is also a
family holding company. It owns a commercial building on Sheppard Ave. East in
Toronto. Zev owns the voting shares of 574. Each of Nathan and Ramy own the
common shares of 574 - Ramy directly and Nathan through a corporation he
controls called Sheppard-Morning Holdings Limited. This property is leased to a
tenant who operates a Tim Hortons and a Wendy’s Hamburger franchise there.
14.             
Nathan’s
position is that since around 2018, Zev and Ramy have refused to share with him
information about the finances of VMI. Nathan alleges mismanagement of VMI and
related companies by Zev and Ramy, to his prejudice.
15.             
When
Zev and Ramy refused to provide audited financial statements for VMI from 2017
onwards, Nathan commenced the Application on November 23, 2020. He was at that
time, represented by previous counsel. The requested relief was originally
limited to an order requiring VMI to appoint an auditor and provide audited
financial statements, as well as declaratory relief and damages arising from
the alleged failure by Zev and Ramy to provide an accounting in respect of
various transactions and for the company generally.
16.             
The
Notice of Application was amended, however, on December 15, 2021 and the
Amended Notice of Application now includes additional allegations and heads of
relief sought. Nathan alleges that Zev and Ramy mismanaged an arbitration
proceeding regarding the ownership of VMI in the Westmore and Brockington
plazas and he seeks damages arising from that misconduct, and seeks an order
removing Zev and Ramy as officers and directors of VMI.
17.             
That
arbitration, commenced in 2015, related to an entity called Art Tile Limited
which was the co-owner of two retail plazas with VMI, and further included allegations
of mismanagement of the plazas.
18.             
Nathan’s
position is that in January, 2023, he learned that VMI was working to settle
the litigation with Art Tile on the basis that the companies would divide their
interests by each acquiring the 50% stake of the other in one of the plazas,
such that the parties would divorce and VMI would exclusively own one of the
plazas and Art Tile would exclusively on the other.
19.             
Nathan
alleges that Ramy had directed the proceeds of the Art Tile settlement (the 50%
stake in one of the plazas), to a new corporation that he (Ramy) owned:
1000456494 Ontario Ltd. (“494”). 494 had purchased Art Tile’s 50% interest in
Brockington Plaza. When counsel for Nathan sought to explore these transfers
and related issues on cross-examination in the Application, they were refused
by counsel to Ramy and Zev on the basis that they were not relevant to the Application.
20.             
Nathan
then engaged his current counsel. Given the breadth of his allegations of
alleged misconduct by Zev and Ramy, and their continued refusal to provide
information regarding the Art Tile settlement and resulting transactions,
Nathan commenced this action on June 20, 2024.
21.             
In
the action, Nathan alleges, among other things, that Ramy and Zev directed
funds or assets from the Art Tile settlement to themselves in a manner that was
oppressive and prejudicial to Nathan. The claim also includes other allegations
relating to 574 and related companies, none of which were advanced in the
Application (as originally brought, or in the Amended Notice of Application).
22.             
The
Plaintiffs proposed to the Defendants that the parties agree to consolidate the
action and the Application and address all outstanding issues in this Action
(certain allegations originally advanced in the Application now having been
rendered moot, such as with respect to the management of the Art Tile
litigation, given that the arbitration proceeding has been settled).
23.             
The
Defendants refused. Zev and Ramy submit that the Application has proceeded in
“fits and starts” with periods of intense activity, followed by periods of
inaction, all of which can be attributed to Nathan. They further allege that
they expressly invited Nathan to participate in the transaction for the
purchase of the Art Tile interest, and that Nathan refused. They adamantly deny
the allegations of oppression and assert that on the contrary, Nathan has
attempted to cause harm to each of them and their corporate interests. I make
no determination on the merits of any of the allegations. What is clear for
present purposes, however, is that all of the allegations are in my view,
inextricably linked, and should be determined together.
24.             
The
fact that all parties acknowledge the poor relationship between Nathan on the
one hand and Zev and Ramy on the other hand, and the fact that even Zev and
Ramy acknowledge that they (and at their direction, VMI) have limited the
disclosure that VMI provides of its books and records to only what Nathan is
entitled to receive under the Business Corporations Act, in my view
further militate in favour of having all issues resolved in one proceeding.
25.             
I
am satisfied that the circumstances of these particular proceedings (this
Action and the Application) justify consolidation. The test in section 107 of
the Courts of Justice Act and in Rule 6 is satisfied here.
26.             
It
is clear to me that both proceedings involve an overlapping factual matrix. The
relief sought in each proceeding arises out of a continuing, and common, series
of transactions and occurrences. Whatever the merits of the allegations (and to
be clear, those are for another day), both proceedings revolve centrally around
the alleged exclusion of Nathan by Zev and Ramy from VMI, the key transactions
at issue, and the related entities.
27.             
It
is inescapable that factual findings made in either proceeding will be
applicable to both. Witnesses and the evidence they give will have significant
overlap and duplication.
28.             
If
determined separately, there is a considerable risk of inconsistent or
contradictory factual findings.
29.             
There
is considerable overlap in the relief sought in both proceedings. I accept that
the scope of relief is broader in the Action, but it is artificial to state
that the only relief sought in the Application is the production of audited
financial statements. The Amended pleading in the Application is clear that
additional relief is sought. Findings of oppression are sought in both
proceedings.
30.             
In
the circumstances, in my view, the nature of the oppression alleged, based on
the reasonable expectations of the parties, is best evaluated in a
comprehensive manner on the basis of a complete record, in one proceeding,
rather than on a piecemeal basis in separate but concurrent proceedings.
31.             
 In
short, I cannot conclude other than that both this Court and the parties will
save considerable time and resources if these matters are consolidated and determined
together.
32.             
Both
proceedings involve the same parties and principals (and the same counsel). I
acknowledge, as submitted by Zev and Ramy, that as is obvious from the title of
proceeding in each matter, there are additional corporate entities in the
Action that are not parties to the Application. But the principal parties and
directing minds are all the same. There are no outsiders or strangers to one
proceeding who are parties to the other: the parties are, in both matters,
Nathan, Zev and Ramy and/or entities that one or more of them own, direct and
control. Moreover, those entities are essentially holding companies that hold
the respective equity positions of the principals in the corporate entities
that are common to both proceedings.
33.             
On
the other hand, in my view, no party, and in particular Zev and Ramy, will face
any prejudice if consolidation is ordered. Again, and as stated above, in my
view all parties will enjoy increased efficiency. I pause to observe that all
of the principals are located in Toronto, and none resides in Waterloo Region
where the Application was originally commenced (as that is where former counsel
for Nathan resided).
34.             
Further
in my view, there ought not to be costs, or at least any material costs, thrown
away. There is no reason why the evidence tendered to date in the Application
cannot be used in the Action, as has already been proposed by Nathan. That is
routinely done in this Court, and I encourage the parties to agree on a
protocol to do just that, failing which the Court may impose one. Documents
produced can be agreed to have been produced in the consolidated action. Many
steps can be agreed to maximize efficiency and minimize or eliminate prejudice.
35.             
To
the extent that there is duplication, or costs thrown away, those issues are
best determined, and appropriate relief awarded, by the trial judge presiding
over a determination of all issues in one consolidated proceeding.
36.             
I
cannot accept that the Application is ready to be determined on its merits,
while many steps need to be completed in the Action before it is ready to be
tried. Given the expanded relief sought in the Amended Notice of Application,
various steps will need to be completed before a merits hearing in the
Application as well as in the Action. Whether or not that is the case,
efficiency and the other factors clearly favour a determination of all of these
issues between and among the parties in one consolidated proceeding.
37.             
For
all of these reasons, the motion is granted. The Application is transferred to
the Commercial List at Toronto and shall be consolidated with the Action.
38.             
At
the conclusion of argument, the parties made submissions with respect to costs.
39.             
The
Costs Outline of the Plaintiffs reflects partial indemnity costs of $18,231.42
and substantial indemnity costs of $27,177.63. Both amounts are inclusive of
fees and disbursements but exclusive of HST.
40.             
The
Costs Outline of the Defendants reflects partial indemnity costs of $11,088.43,
inclusive of fees, disbursements and HST.
41.             
The
Plaintiffs have been successful on the motion. They are presumptively entitled
to their costs.
42.             
Pursuant
to s. 131 of the CJA, costs are in the discretion of the court, and the
court may determine by whom and to what extent the costs shall be paid.
43.             
Rule
57.01 provides that in exercising its discretion under s. 131, the court may
consider, in addition to the result in the proceeding (and any offer to settle
or contribute), the factors set out in that Rule.
44.             
The
overarching objective is to fix an amount that is fair, reasonable,
proportionate and within the reasonable expectations of the parties in the
circumstances: Boucher v. Public Accountants Council for the Province of
Ontario (2004), 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R. (3d) 291 (C.A.), at paras. 24-26.
45.             
A
costs award should “reflect what is reasonably predictable and warranted for
the type of activity undertaken in the circumstances of the case, rather than
the amount of time that a party’s lawyer is willing or
permitted to expend”: Apotex Inc. v. Eli Lilly Canada Inc., 2022 ONCA
587, at para. 65.
46.             
Rule
57.03 provides that, on the hearing of a contested motion, unless the court is
satisfied that a different order would be more just, the court shall fix the
costs of the motion and order them to be paid within 30 days.
47.             
In
my view, there is no reason to depart from an award of partial indemnity costs
on this motion. The parties agreed on the applicable legal test and factors. Further
in my view, and having considered the factors in Rule 57 as against the
circumstances of this matter as described above, a just and equitable award of
costs is $15,000, inclusive of fees, disbursements and HST. That amount is
payable by the Defendants to the Plaintiffs within 30 days.
48.             
Order
to go to give effect to these Reasons.