[1]              
In November 2021, Leigh and Harvin Gonzales were
in the market to buy a home. As part of their search, they viewed a residential
condominium unit, Suite 133, at the respondent condominium corporation. The
unit had a solarium, which the applicants appreciated, and it made the unit
more desirable for them.
[2]              
The applicants were working with Maria Fe-Reyes,
their real estate agent. On November 12, 2021, Ms. Fe-Reyes obtained a status
certificate from the vendor’s real estate agent. The condominium corporation
had issued the status certificate on October 25, 2021. The applicants admit
that they did not review the status certificate carefully and they did not review
any of the attachments to the status certificate. Instead, they accepted and
relied on Ms. Fe-Reyes’ opinion that the status certificate was “clear and
clean.” As I will explain, I do not share Ms. Fe-Reyes’ assessment.
[3]              
Because the applicants were anxious to purchase
Suite 133, the applicants signed an agreement of purchase and sale on November
14, 2021. The applicants struck out many of the standard conditions that would
operate in their favour. The applicants struck out the terms making their offer
conditional on an inspection, terms for obtaining a further satisfactory status
certificate within 10 days of the offer, and terms for obtaining insurance on
the property. The applicants acknowledge that although the agreement of
purchase and sale recommended that they obtain independent legal advice before
they signed the offer, they did not do so and only contacted a lawyer to
facilitate the closing of the transaction on December 3, 2021.
[4]              
In December 2022, the condominium corporation levied
a 9.98 percent increase in common expenses due to rising costs at the
condominium. The applicants objected to this increase.
[5]              
On April 17, 2023, the condominium corporation levied
two $3.2 million special assessments to be paid in proportionate shares by the
owners of the 161 residential units. The purpose of this assessment was to fund
the replacement of balconies in the condominium that were deemed unsafe. The
first instalment of the assessment was due on December 1, 2023. The applicants’
share of that special assessment was $21,905.50. The applicants objected to
paying this special assessment and did not pay. As a result, the condominium
corporation placed a lien on their unit.
[6]              
In order to replace the balconies, it was
necessary to demolish the applicants’ solarium along with the three other
solariums in the building. The board of the corporation initially took the
position that owners would be responsible for the cost of demolishing the
solariums because the solariums were exclusive use common elements. The board
communicated this position in a letter dated January 25, 2024. The applicants
refused to pay these amounts. The corporation then amended its position for all
units with solariums. The corporation agreed to pay for the cost of demolishing
the solariums and restoring the building envelope, providing that the solariums
were not re-installed. The applicants objected to this plan because they wanted
a solarium to be re-installed at the corporation’s expense.
[7]              
After negotiations failed to resolve the
dispute, the applicants commenced this application. They allege that the corporation
issued a status certificate that was not accurate in two respects: first, it failed
to make full and plain disclosure that the state of the balconies would lead to
a significant assessment; second, it failed to make full disclosure of facts
within its knowledge related to the solarium issues. Finally, the applicants
submit that the corporation has engaged in oppressive behaviour, contrary to s.
135 of the Condominium Act.[1]
[8]              
As I will explain, I find that the status
certificate dated October 21, 2021, was complete and accurate. It contained
sufficient information to put the applicants on notice of recent concerning
developments with some balconies. The status certificate was not required to
provide any additional information about the solarium. I conclude that the
applicants cannot avoid paying their fair share of the costs associated with
the ongoing capital maintenance of the condominium.
[9]              
However, I do find that after the applicants
moved in, the corporation engaged in bad faith and oppressive conduct towards them.
In particular, the corporation sent the applicants an altered and falsified
version of the status certificate dated October 21, 2021. The corporation then
lied to the applicants for months about the authenticity of the status
certificate. I find that the corporation did so in order to bolster its
position regarding the solarium. Equally troubling, in the material filed on
this application, the corporation offered no explanation for its circulation
and reliance on an altered and falsified status certificate. I find that the
corporation engaged in oppressive conduct toward the applicants, and I award the
applicants $75,000 in damages.
[10]          
I will first describe the legislative framework
governing status certificates. I will then assess whether the applicants relied
on the status certificate and whether it was accurate.
[11]          
The Condominium Act is, among other
things, consumer protection legislation that safeguards the interests of
current and future unit owners.[2]
Part V of the Act contains provisions dealing with the sale and lease of
condominium units. Section 76 of the Act requires the corporation to give
a dated status certificate to each person who requests one, in the prescribed
form. It must contain a variety of organizational and financial information
about the unit and the corporation as a whole.[3]
[12]          
The purpose of the status certificate is to
bring to the attention of a prospective purchaser matters which may be of
concern to them when contemplating the purchase of a unit.[4] Pursuant to s. 76 of the Condominium
Act and s. 18 of O. Reg. 48/01, the status certificate must contain
information under the following headings:
[13]          
The status certificate provides essential
information about the physical and financial situation of the corporation,
including any outstanding or expected claims or liabilities, major projects, or
costs.[5]
This information ensures that prospective buyers have
enough information to assist them to make an informed purchase.[6]
[14]          
In this case, the applicants submit that the
corporation failed to provide accurate information in two parts of the status
certificate:
[15]          
The corporation submits that paragraphs 12 and
23 of the status certificate were accurate and that they must also be read
alongside:
[16]          
I will first address the elements of the status
certificate dealing with the balcony repair expenses. I will then address the
elements of the status certificate that deal with the solarium.
[17]          
On October 25, 2021, the corporation issued a
status certificate for Unit 133 in Form 13, as was required at the time. The
key elements of the status certificate stated as follows:
[18]          
As indicated, the report from Gillespie
Engineering was included in the attachments to the status certificate. The
report was dated October 1, 2021, only days before corporation released the status
certificate dated October 25, 2021. The report was titled “Structural Integrity
of Several Balconies on South Elevation Facing Freshmeadow Drive.” It read as
follows:
[19]          
The applicants submit that they relied on paragraph 12 of the
status certificate and that this paragraph was not accurate. I disagree with
both elements of the applicants’ submission.
[20]          
In her affidavit, Ms. Gonzales stated she relied on the status
certificate, “believing it to be fulsome and true.” The affidavit reads as
follows:
[21]          
However, in cross-examination, Ms. Gonzales
provided a much different version of events. It is clear from her cross-examination
that, in fact, the applicants did not rely on the status certificate, they
relied on what their real estate agent told them about the status certificate.
[22]          
Ms. Gonzales admitted that she quickly looked at
Form 13 on her phone but that she never reviewed any of the attachments to the
status certificate (including the Gillespie Engineering report). Indeed, she admitted
that she did not even notice paragraph 25 of the status certificate, which disclosed
that the balconies on the South elevation posed a significant health risk and were
to be closed pending further review to determine the cause of this deficiency. Ultimately,
Ms. Gonzales agreed that she relied on Ms. Fe-Reyes’ opinion that the status
certificate was clean and clear:
[23]          
I do not accept the evidence that Ms. Gonzales
offered in her affidavit that she was “relying on this status certificate and
believing it to be fulsome and true.” Having reviewed the transcript of her
cross-examination, I would be surprised if Ms. Gonzales, on her own, used the phrase
“fulsome and true” to describe her assessment of the status certificate. That
language seems inappropriate to this witness.[10]
Those words seem more likely to have been the product of careful drafting by
counsel rather than words chosen and used by Ms. Gonzales in her own words. More
importantly, when counsel for the corporation tested that evidence, Ms.
Gonzales readily admitted that she quickly scanned the Form 13 on her phone,
did not read any of the attachments, and did not even notice paragraph 25.
[24]          
Ultimately, Ms. Gonzales admitted what I find to
be the facts: the applicants were in a rush and relied on Ms. Fe-Reyes’ opinion
that the certificate was clear and clean. In my view, there is a material
difference between “relying on the status certificate” itself and relying on
the opinion of a realtor that the status certificate “looks clear and clean.”
[25]          
I do not accept Ms. Fe-Reyes’ opinion that the
certificate “looks clear and clean.” It plainly does not. Not only did the
corporation disclose the contents of the very recent Gillespie Engineering report
in paragraph 25 of the status certificate, but it also attached the report to
the status certificate. It is incorrect to state that this certificate “looks
clear and clean.” It does not.
[26]          
I find that the applicants relied on Ms.
Fe-Reyes’ incorrect opinion that the certificate “looks clear and clean,” and not
on the status certificate itself.
[27]          
Second, the applicants submit that the corporation
did not meet its statutory obligations when it provided the status certificate
dated October 25, 2021.
[28]          
In my view, the information provided in paragraph
12 must be read alongside the information provided in paragraph 25 and the
attachments. One cannot read the answer to paragraph 12 in isolation from the
balance of the status certificate. For convenience, the relevant paragraphs are
set out again:
[29]          
The corporation also provided additional
information to the purchaser including a warning about its budgeting schedule:
[30]          
I find that on October 25, 2021, when the
corporation issued the status certificate, the corporation did not know that a
special assessment might be or would be required to remedy the balcony
situation. As of that date, the corporation had $2.4 million in its reserve
fund. On that date, it did not know that its reserve fund would not be
sufficient to address this situation. It did note on the status certificate
that a further reserve fund study would be completed in November 2021 to update
the prior study which was completed three years earlier.
[31]          
There is no doubt that the board was actively
involved in assessing the need for ongoing capital and maintenance projects at
the corporation. The building was completed in 1975. It was far from a new build.
The board understood that it needed to keep its eyes on the adequacy of the
reserve fund and the need for capital maintenance and upgrades.
[32]          
Prior to the 2018 reserve fund study, the board received
several engineering and restoration reports that outlined work to be done to
the masonry and balconies. The 2018 reserve fund study contemplated and funded
future balcony and patio repairs over a 10-year period. The reserve fund earmarked
funds for replacing waterproofing, repairing concrete, and addressing masonry
issues, and ensured that the recommended work could be accommodated and paid
for without the need for special assessments. In addition, the status
certificate correctly disclosed that the next reserve fund study was to be
completed imminently, in November 2021.
[33]          
Subsequent to the 2018 reserve fund study, the
board continued to monitor the need for capital repairs and maintenance. In
March 2019, the board approved instructing Gillespie Engineering to “further
investigate masonry on third floor and provide costing for balconies” as the
next phase of its work. Gillespie reported back to the board on April 15, 2019.
The four-page memo read, in part, as follows:
[34]          
This work began in July 2021, with the
reconstruction of the balconies for two third floor suites. On September 30,
2021, Gillespie came back to review the progress of the work. Gillespie
identified serious concerns. It itemized these concerns in its report dated
October 1, 2021. The corporation disclosed the existence and the main thrust of
this report in paragraph 25 of the status certificate. Moreover, it attached
the report to the status certificate.
[35]          
In my view, the status certificate accurately
described the situation faced by the corporation on October 25, 2021. The
answers to paragraphs 12 and 25 must be read together, along with the entire
October 1, 2021, report from Gillespie Engineering, which was incorporated into
the status certificate. The corporation disclosed everything it knew at that
time, including the very recent report from Gillespie Engineering. As of
October 25, 2021, the corporation had not been told that the dangerous
situation identified by Gillespie Engineering would or might result in a
special assessment or that it could not be remedied with the existing reserve
fund and the annual contributions of the owners.[11]
[36]          
Similarly, in my view, the 2019 statement that
the repairs to the fifth-floor balconies “could become significant” was
insufficient in these circumstances to require the corporation to say anything
further in paragraph 12 of the status certificate.
[37]          
In my view, as of October 25, 2021, the
corporation did not have knowledge of a circumstance that may result in an
increase in the common expenses because no expert had told them so. It was not
obvious to an objective observer that the cost would be more than what the
reserve fund contained and that it would require a special assessment or loan.
To the extent that the Gillespie Engineering report dated October 1, 2021, might
affect the future, the corporation disclosed the existence and the key findings
of that report in the body of the status certificate. Paragraph 25 flagged in
clear language the situation currently facing the corporation. In my view,
paragraph 25 was sufficient to prompt the applicants to dig deeper into the
situation to assess it for themselves.
[38]          
Unlike Tarko, this is not a case where there
was a special assessment that had been passed to come into effect in the
future.[12]
Unlike Bruce, this is not a case where the auditor had advised the
corporation that work to be commenced in the following fiscal year meant that
“there is a possibility of a special assessment to the unit owners and/or an
application for a loan.”[13]
Equally, this case is nothing like Bruce because this corporation
disclosed the information in its possession in paragraph 25 of the status
certificate, not in a footnote to an auditor’s report that was only an
attachment to the certificate.
[39]          
I find that the corporation did not have
knowledge of any circumstance that may result in an increase for the common
expenses of the unit until February 2022, when the work on the new reserve fund
study was completed. It was only then that the engineers recommended a special
assessment of $7.2 million to fund repairs and maintenance of the common
elements. From that point forward, the corporation was fixed with knowledge
that would have required disclosure in paragraph 12 of a status certificate. However,
as of October 25, 2021, the corporation did not have reason to believe that was
the case. All that it knew on that date was contained in the Gillespie Engineering
report. The corporation highlighted this report in the status certificate and
attached it to the status certificate.
[40]          
I find that the corporation complied with the
statutory and regulatory requirements in the status certificate issued on
October 25, 2021. I find that the applicants’ unit is not exempt from any
special assessment, levy, loan, or obligation to contribute to the cost of
maintaining, repairing, or replacing the balconies. Subject only to my finding
below with respect to the oppressive conduct of the corporation, the applicants’
unit is fully responsible for all future special assessments.
[41]          
It appears that when the applicants purchased
the unit, they believed that the solarium was part of their unit. It was not.
The publicly available plans clearly indicate that the solarium was an alteration
to the common elements of the building. The applicants had exclusive use of
this portion of the common elements, but they did not have the same property
rights over the solarium that they had over the portions of the building that
were a part of their unit. Had the applicants retained a lawyer or asked their
real estate agent to confirm these basic facts about the unit they intended to
purchase, they would have known this before signing the agreement of purchase
and sale.
[42]          
The applicants submit that the corporation erred
because the status certificate did not describe the solarium as an alteration
to the common elements. I disagree with the applicants’ submission.
[43]          
The relevant portion of the status certificate
reads as follows:
[44]          
Pursuant to the Act and its regulations,
the status certificate must disclose all agreements described in clause
98(1)(b) and s. 24.6(3) of O. Reg. 48/01. If, and only if, the solarium was the
subject of a s. 98 agreement, that agreement needed to be disclosed on the status
certificate.
[45]          
However, I find that the solarium was not
subject to a s. 98 agreement. The solarium was installed 15 years prior to the
May 1, 2001, amendments to the Act that recognized s. 98 agreements. There
was no statutory requirement to disclose the existence of agreements that
pre-date May 1, 2001. The corporation accurately reported that the unit was not
subject to any agreement under s. 98(1)(b).
[46]          
If the applicants wished to obtain further
comfort beyond the statement in the status certificate, they could have sought
representations or warranties from the vendor of the unit. They did not do so.
[47]          
In the alternative, the applicants submit that
the potential for the costs associated with the solarium should have been
disclosed in paragraph 12. I disagree. On October 25, 2021, there was no reason
to believe that the solarium would need to be demolished. That only became
clear much later when the balcony reconstruction was further advanced.
[48]          
I find that the applicants’ unit is not exempt
from any special assessment, levy, loan, or obligation to contribute to the
cost of maintaining, repairing, or replacing the solarium. Subject only to my
finding below with respect to the oppressive conduct of the corporation, the
applicants’ unit is fully responsible for all future special assessments.
[49]          
The applicants submit that the condominium corporation engaged in
oppressive conduct toward them. For the reasons that follow, I agree.
[50]          
Section 135 of the Act creates a statutory oppression
remedy that allows a unit owner to apply
to the court for relief from conduct that is oppressive or unfairly prejudicial
to the applicant, or that unfairly disregards the interests of the applicant:
[51]          
Section 135 of the Act is drafted in the
same language as the oppression remedies set out in the corporate statutes. Therefore,
corporate law principles regarding oppression are applicable in determining
what constitutes conduct that is oppressive, unfairly prejudicial, or that
unfairly disregards the applicants’ interests in the context of condominium
law. Prior cases help us understand the type of conduct captured by each of
these ideas:
[52]          
The oppression remedy protects a party’s
reasonable expectations, which are rooted in the law and legal documents that
govern the relationship between the parties. In BCE, the Supreme Court
of Canada described what an applicant must show to demonstrate oppression:
[53]          
Inaccurate disclosure to condominium purchasers
can result in a finding of oppression.[18]
I found that the status certificate dated October 25, 2021, which was provided
to the applicants in November 2021, was accurate, so that does not give rise to
any oppressive conduct. However, I reach a different conclusion with respect to
the corporation’s subsequent dealings with the applicants.
[54]          
The applicants submit that the corporation
engaged in oppressive conduct by sending them a falsified and misleading status
certificate in April 2023 and then relying on that document to pressure them to
pay costs associated with the demolition of the solarium.
[55]          
The corporation denies that its conduct was
oppressive. For the reasons that follow, I disagree.
[56]          
On April 27, 2023, the board of directors wrote
to the applicants regarding the “current state of [their] exclusive-use common
element patio and the upcoming exterior work.” The letter detailed the changes
to the common elements that went into the solarium. The letter then referenced
disclosure made in the status certificate as justifying the charge-back of
certain upcoming expenses:
[57]          
The letter indicated that any question should be
addressed to Colin Ogg at Maple Ridge Community Management.
[58]          
On April 29, 2023, the applicants objected to
the corporation’s position and indicated that they wished to reach an agreement
with the corporation on how to proceed. On May 2, 2023, the applicants wrote to
request a copy of the status certificated dated October 25, 2021, that the
board mentioned reviewing in its letter dated April 27, 2023.
[59]          
On May 4, 2023, Jyoti Lakhani of Maple Ridge
Community Management sent an email to the applicants attaching a document with
the file name “20211025 Status Certificate Unit 133.” The status certificate
attached to the email was similar but not identical to the original status
certificate. Paragraph 23 of the 2023 version of the status certificate is set
out below. For ease of reference, I will underline the text that did not appear
in the original status certificate:
[60]          
The status certificate delivered on May 4, 2023,
is dated October 25, 2021, and is still in the name of Karen King. Ms. King’s
signature appears on the status certificate, although it appears in a different
place on the 2023 status certificate than the original version of the status
certificate.
[61]          
I pause here to note two things. First, the
content of the 2023 status certificate might well justify the position taken by
the board in its letter to the applicants dated April 27, 2023. Second, the 2023
status certificate that purports to be the original status certificate dated October
25, 2021, has been altered, falsified, and is fraudulent.
[62]          
The applicants wrote to the corporation on May
6, 2023, asking for clarifications regarding the 2023 status certificate, and
requesting a copy of the Gillespie Engineering report. The corporation did not
respond. On May 23, 2023, the applicants followed up again asking for a
response. They did not receive a response.
[63]          
On June 23, 2023, the applicants exchanged email
messages with Colin Ogg, RCM, LCCI. His title is listed as Community Director
at Maple Ridge Community Management. The applicants attached a copy of the
actual status certificate they received back in October 2021. The applicants correctly
pointed out that the original status certificate did not mention the solarium. Mr.
Ogg did not address the obvious discrepancies, but responded as follows:
[64]          
On June 28, 2023, the applicants followed up
again asking for an explanation of the discrepancies between the status certificates.
On July 14, 2023, Mr. Ogg responded, but did not address the simple question
asked by the applicants. Instead, he responded as follows:
[65]          
Still not having received an answer, the
applicants followed up again on July 5, 2023, asking for an explanation about
the discrepancies between the two status certificates. Mr. Ogg responded
as follows:
[66]          
The corporation provided a similar response on
July 14, 2023. I pause here to note that it was Mr. Ogg’s company, MRCM, that
sent the second status certificate on May 5, 2023. He certainly could “comment
on” why his company sent an altered and falsified version of the status
certificate. In the following two months, he did not provide a credible or
coherent explanation for why his company had provided the 2023 status
certificate or how it came to be created.
[67]          
On September 8, 2023, the corporation announced
that it had engaged contractors to demolish the solariums at an estimated cost
of $19,600, plus HST. The corporation informed the applicants that the cost
would be charged back against the unit. On September 21, 2023, the applicants
retained counsel and the negotiations continued.
[68]          
On November 1, 2023, the board of directors
announced the special assessment to fund the balcony repairs. The applicants’
share of that expense was $21,905.80, which was due on December 1, 2023. The
board also announced a second special assessment of equal size, which would be
due in 2024. The board added this amount to the unit’s ledger on December 22,
2023.
[69]          
On January 25, 2024, the corporation added
$11,582.50 to the ledger for the cost of demolishing the solarium.
[70]          
On February 17, 2024, the corporation sent a
notice of lien, which would be placed on the unit unless the applicants paid
$22,989.02, which represented the charges discussed above, interest, and legal
costs. The lien was registered on February 27, 2024, and the corporation
threatened to sell the unit. By February 29, 2024, the unit’s ledger stood at
$33,488.30.
[71]          
The applicants clearly raised the altered and
falsified 2023 status certificate in Ms. Gonzales’ initial affidavit. The
corporation filed three responding affidavits for use on the application. Each
affidavit was sworn by Kavi Lochan, the president of the corporation’s board of
directors. Incredibly, the corporation did not address the provenance or use of
the 2023 status certificate in the three affidavits. Not only did the
corporation not provide a satisfactory explanation of what happened, the
corporation did not even try to do so. This decision is almost as troubling as
the falsified second status certificate.
[72]          
In the absence of any evidence to the contrary,
I conclude that the condominium corporation and its agents at MRCM deliberately
altered and falsified the 2023 version of the status certificate. The
corporation is responsible for the acts of its agents. They knowingly caused
additional text to be added to the authentic status certificate to support the
hard-line position they were taking with the applicants. I conclude that if the
applicants had not found a true copy of the original status certificate, the
corporation and its agents would have continued to lie to the applicants and
insist that the corporation’s position had been disclosed on the status
certificate prior to purchase.
[73]          
Moreover, once the applicants located a true
copy of the status certificate, Mr. Ogg engaged in a months’ long campaign of
obfuscation and delay. He never attempted to explain how someone from his
company sent the applicants a falsified status certificate. Indeed, his only
attempt to explain what happened was to blame the former company, which could
not have been responsible. Perhaps there is an explanation for Mr. Ogg’s troubling
conduct, but no explanation was offered in the record filed with the court.
[74]          
The condominium corporation and its agents
engaged in a shocking abuse of trust and power. The alteration and back-dating
of a status certificate is among the most serious breaches that a corporation
or its agents could commit. A unit owner is entitled to expect that the corporation
and its agents will communicate truthfully and not alter documents to mislead
owners regarding their rights and obligations.
[75]          
Oppressive conduct is burdensome, harsh,
wrongful, and requires a finding of bad faith.[19]
In my view, the corporation engaged in oppressive conduct. Knowingly falsifying a status certificate, attempting to rely on
that falsified certificate to compel a unit owner to accept the cost of
demolishing the solarium, and then continuing to lie and mislead the owner is a
paradigmatic example of acting in bad faith. I declare that the corporation’s
conduct is oppressive, contrary to s. 135 of the Act.
[76]          
The applicants are entitled to a remedy for the
oppression that they have suffered. The court has wide
discretion to award remedies for oppression under s. 135 of the Condominium
Act.[20]
The court may order a broad range of remedies tailored to the particular
circumstances of each case. The court may make any order it considers
appropriate to rectify the situation including, but not limited to, an order
that the corporation pay compensation to the applicants.[21] In
my view, the applicants are entitled to the following relief.
[77]          
First, the applicants are to be exempted from
any obligation to contribute to the cost of the demolition of their solarium.
The corporation is to bear those costs without any contribution from the
applicants. The $11,582.50 charge imposed by way of letter dated January 25,
2024, is to be reversed along with all interest and other charges related to
that expense. The applicants’ ledger is to be completely cleared of that
charge. If there are any other charges related to the demolition of the
solarium, the applicants are to be relieved of those charges and all accrued
interest.
[78]          
Second, the corporation is to pay $75,000 in
damages to the applicants. This award is to serve four purposes.
[79]          
Third, I am vacating the lien currently
registered on the applicants’ unit. The corporation shall not place any further
liens on the unit for a period of six months. During this six-month window, the
parties shall negotiate over the applicants’ payments of the special
assessments for which they are responsible. The corporation shall make best
efforts to allow the applicants to participate in the loan program for the
special assessment, if the applicants are interested in that process.
[80]          
I am not prepared to order the corporation to
reconstruct the solarium or to pay compensation for loss of the fair market
value of the applicants’ unit. I am not satisfied that the applicants proved an
entitlement to those damages, since the original status certificate was
accurate.
[81]          
I urge the parties to resolve the costs of this
application.
[82]          
If they are not able to do so, the applicants may
email their costs submission of no more than three double-spaced pages to my
judicial assistant on or before November 25, 2024. The corporation may deliver its
responding submission of no more than three double-spaced pages on or before December
2, 2024. No reply submissions are to be delivered without leave.