[1]         
Sadollah Zarrinmehr
died on November 15, 2020 (the “Deceased”), survived by his wife of almost 40
years, Soraya Shokrai, and his two children: Mehdi Zarrin-Mehr (the
“Applicant”), who is the Deceased’s son from a previous marriage; and Maral
Zarrin-Mehr, who is the daughter of Soraya and the Deceased. Soraya seeks to
propound a last will and testament of the Deceased dated September 30, 1999
(the “1999 Will”) in which she is appointed as the estate trustee of the estate
of Sadollah Zarrinmehr (the “Estate”). Mehdi brought this Application to
challenge the validity of the 1999 Will, alternatively, to seek directions
regarding the interpretation of the 1999 Will, to assert trust claims against
assets of the Estate and to contest Soraya’s administration of the Estate.
[2]         
In this Motion,
Mehdi sought an Order for the appointment of a professional estate trustee
during litigation for the Estate, nominating an experienced estates lawyer. For
the reasons that follow, this Motion is dismissed.
[3]         
For brevity and
clarity, I will refer to the parties by their first names, respectfully, in the
same manner as was done by their lawyers in their written materials and oral
submissions.
[4]         
The early stage of
the administration of the Estate proceeded as an intestacy. On June 18, 2021,
Soraya filed an application in Newmarket, probate file 2021-01272 (the “2021
Probate Application”), for a Certificate of Appointment of Estate Trustee
without a Will (“CAET Without a Will”) of the Estate on the submission that no
will had been located for the Deceased. Soraya, Mehdi and Maral were listed in
the 2021 Probate Application as “Persons Entitled to Share in the Estate”,
which was stated to have a value of $1,214,425.85. On November 16, 2021, a CAET
without a Will was issued to Soraya.
[5]         
Soraya claims that
after obtaining the CAET Without a Will, she located the 1999 Will, a last will
and testament alleged to have been executed by the Deceased on September 30,
1999. On November 16, 2022, Soraya issued an application in Newmarket court
file number CV-22-00003784-0000 (the “2022 Soraya Application”) for orders
revoking the CAET Without a Will and issuing a Certificate of Appointment of
Estate Trustee with a Will (“CAET With a Will”). Soraya set out to propound the
1999 Will.
[6]         
On February 9, 2023,
Mehdi initiated this application against Soraya. In this Application, Mehdi
contests the validity of the 1999 Will and challenges Soraya’s administration
of the Estate.
[7]         
Each party has brought
a motion:
[8]         
The Preservation
Issue was resolved by the parties’ agreement to a Restated No Dealings Order.[2] Considering the parties’ agreement to
preserve the Estate properties pursuant to the Restated No Dealings Order, and
limitations on the time available to hear Mehdi’s Motion, the CPL Issue was
adjourned to a date to be scheduled.
[9]         
In accordance with
the orders made upon dismissal of Soraya’s Rule 75.06 Motion, Mehdi brought a
Motion for production and non-party examination that was heard by Justice
Gilmore on July 31, 2024 (“Mehdi’s Production and
Examination Motion”). Justice Gilmore ordered documentary production from
the Deceased’s former lawyers pertaining to the drafting, execution and
circumstances surrounding the execution of the 1999 Will and examination.
[10]      
In this Motion,
Mehdi seeks an Order appointing a professional ETDL to administer the Estate until
adjudication of these proceedings and corollary Orders providing for the ETDL’s
authority and powers.
[11]      
I saw no
disagreement between the parties on the legal principles regarding the appointment
of an ETDL. Rule 75.06(3)(f) provides that on a motion for directions, “the
court may direct that an estate trustee be appointed during litigation, and
file such security as the court directs”. Furthermore, s. 28 of the Estates
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. E.21, provides the court with authority to “appoint an
administrator of the property of the deceased person”. As the son of the
Deceased, and thereby a residuary beneficiary of the Estate in the event of an
intestacy under s. 46(2) of the Succession Law Reform Act, R.S.O. 1990,
c. S.26, Mehdi is a person with a financial interest in the Estate.[3] Mehdi is therefore a proper person to
bring a motion for the appointment of an ETDL.
[12]      
 The power to appoint an ETDL
is an exercise of the Court’s broad and inherent jurisdiction to supervise the
management of estates and its own process.[4] The Court’s inherent
jurisdiction includes the appointment of a trustee to preserve and protect the
assets of the estate if they are at risk during the litigation.[5] The purpose of an ETDL is to “ensure
that the playing field is kept level” while the parties contest the
administration and management of the estate, to ensure fairness to the parties,
and to preserve the assets to the maximum benefit of the beneficiaries.[6]
[13]      
The
decision of whether to appoint an ETDL is discretionary.[7] Courts have considered the
following factors in the exercise of discretion regarding the appointment of an
ETDL:
[14]      
The appointment
of an ETDL as part of estate administration is not extraordinary.[9]
The Court will favour the appointment of an ETDL unless the administration of
the estate is particularly straightforward or simple.[10] It is in the
interests of all beneficiaries that the disputes between the litigating parties
do not impair the assets of the estate.[11]
[15]      
Mehdi submitted that
the appointment of an ETDL is warranted because Soraya has displayed hostility,
lack of transparency and openness with Mehdi and has disregarded his interests
as a beneficiary. Mehdi submitted that this is seen in the following ways:
Soraya’s refusal to provide Mehdi with a copy of the 1999 Will; failure to
provide proper notice to Mehdi regarding issues in administration of the
Estate; by taking positions regarding the ownership of estate assets that is
contrary to the Estate; and by acting contrary to the interests of Mehdi.
Soraya denies each of these allegations. I have considered these positions and
have determined that they do not support the appointment of an ETDL, as I will
explain.
[16]      
First, Mehdi
submitted that Soraya initially took the position that the Deceased died
intestate and then propounded the 1999 Will in an Application for a CAET With a
Will without notice to Mehdi. Soraya explained that she did not find the 1999
Will until the late Spring of 2022 and concedes that her Notice of Application
for a CAET With a Will was incorrect in that it stated, erroneously, that the
Deceased “left behind no children”. Soraya does not dispute that she did not
provide Mehdi with the 1999 Will and the Amended Notice of Application in the
2022 Soraya Application until February 28, 2023. However, Soraya’s lawyer, Ms.
Hollman, deposed she set upon correcting the error in the description of the
beneficiaries and effecting service upon Mehdi within days of the error being
detected. I accept Ms. Hollman’s evidence on this point and find that this
oversight does not support the appointment of an ETDL.
[17]      
Second, Mehdi
submitted that Soraya swore an Affidavit of Debts dated September 29, 2021
(“the Affidavit of Debts”), in which she stated that the Estate did not have an
interest in any business or business assets and that this was incorrect because
the Deceased had an interest in 2438890 Ontario Inc. (“24328890 Inc.”) at the
time of his death. I do not accept this submission because Soraya showed that
she disclosed the value of these shares in paragraph 5 of the Affidavit of
Debts.
[18]      
Third, Mehdi
submitted that Soraya intends to improperly use funds from the Estate to wind
up 24328890 Inc. There is no evidence of any steps having been taken in this
regard.
[19]      
Fourth, Mehdi
submitted that Soraya has refused to produce documents from the lawyers who
acted for her and the Deceased and that this has impaired an investigation of
whether the Deceased had another Will or had made other estate plans. I accept
Soraya’s submission that the production of these materials was subject to
determination of Soraya’s Rule 75.06 Motion and by determination of Mehdi’s
Production and Examination Motion. With the conclusion of these Motions, the documentary
production will now be made.
[20]      
Fifth, Mehdi
submitted that Soraya is taking a position contrary to the Estate regarding the
ownership of a property known municipally as 29 Pleasant Avenue, North York,
Ontario (the “Pleasant Avenue Property”). Soraya showed that the title to the
Pleasant Avenue Property was declared by a consent Judgment issued by Justice
Black on September 12, 2022, wherein Soraya and the Deceased were declared to
be 50% owners of the Pleasant Avenue Property.
[21]      
Sixth, I do not
accept Mehdi’s submission that an ETDL is necessary to protect the assets of
the Estate. The properties that Mehdi has alleged to form part of the Estate
are subject to the Restated No Dealings Order which, on the agreement of
Soraya, shall remain in effect until the determination of the issues raised by
this Application or further order of the Court. And, there is no evidence that
Soraya has breached the Restated No Dealings Order from the time that it was
first ordered by Justice Gilmore on March 23, 2023, and then restated in my
order of March 27, 2024.
[22]      
This evidence showed
that the differences between Mehdi and Soraya arose from an error in Soraya’s
Application and a delay in service on Mehdi, and then disputes on the scope of
production arising from Mehdi’s will challenge. These have been explained. Mehdi
and Soraya are adverse in interest in the issue of the validity of the 1999
Will. However, Mehdi did not establish that there is a lack of communication
between the parties that is detrimental to the administration of the Estate or
that there is hostility between the parties that impacts the preservation of
the assets for the benefit of the beneficiaries.
[23]      
Last but importantly,
this is a simple, straightforward Estate that does not require the appointment
of a professional ETDL. In the Affidavit of Debts, Soraya deposed that the
Estate had a value on September 29, 2021, of $1,214,425.85, as follows:
[24]      
Even if Mehdi
establishes a severance of the joint tenancy of the properties said to have been
transferred outside of the Estate, the Applicant contends that the Deceased’s
interest would be limited to a share of each property.
[25]      
In my view, the
value of this straightforward Estate would be detrimentally impacted by the
cost of a professional ETDL. The costs of the motion practice to date and the
ongoing costs of advancing this litigation will already reduce the amount that
might be available to the beneficiaries in distribution without unnecessarily incurring
the costs of a professional ETDL. The issues raised by this Application are not
complex and should, in my view, be prepared by the parties for determination at
the earliest opportunity.
[26]      
On these reasons, I
dismiss Mehdi’s motion for the appointment of an ETDL.
[27]      
The parties are
encouraged to confer and agree
on the issue of costs of this Motion. If the parties cannot agree on the issue
of costs of this Motion, any party seeking costs may, at the Case Conference to
be scheduled, speak to a
process for the determination of the issue of costs.
[28]      
The CPL motion may
now be scheduled for determination, if Mehdi considers that it is necessary and
if the parties cannot agree on its resolution. Apart from the scheduling of the
CPL motion, if necessary, I endorse Justice Gilmore’s order, rendered on
October 30, 2024, that no further Motions are permitted in this Application
without leave. The parties have unresolved issues on the reserved costs of
their motion practice to date, and it is not in their interests that this be
expanded by further motion practice. Rather, it is in the interests of all
parties that this Application be prepared for prompt adjudication.
[29]      
While the Parties do
not agree on the validity of the 1999 Will, or on issues in estate
administration, they share a common objective of an efficient, proportionate
process for the adjudication of the issues raised by this Application on their
merits. I direct that the lawyers for the parties attend at a Case Conference
on December 11, 2024 at 9:15 am, to proceed by video conference for 30 minutes,
before me schedule permitting, to establish a timetable for the remaining steps
in this Application and a hearing date for its determination.
[30]      
On the basis of
these reasons, I order:
[31]      
This
endorsement and the orders and directions contained in it shall have the
immediate effect of a court order without the necessity of the issuance and
entry of a formal order. Nonetheless, any party may take out a formal order by
filing a draft order on Case Center, together with the approval as to form and
content of all parties and may then speak to the draft Order at the pending
case conference.