[1]              
The Plaintiff is a self-represented litigant. The Defendants are moving to
strike his Statement of Claim without leave to amend.
[2]              
The Plaintiff attended the motion in person accompanied by his wife who
is obviously a tremendous support to him. He was well-spoken, well prepared,
pleasant, and respectful. It was clear to me that he sincerely believes that he
has been the target of a wide conspiracy involving numerous US officials as
well as doctors, dentists, broadcasters, the Canadian defendants, and others,
which conspiracy has lasted over twenty years.
[3]              
The main allegations are against US officials, in particular the FBI.
[4]              
Both in his Claim and in person before me, the Plaintiff asserts that he
has been targeted by these US officials because he is in possession of
classified information relating to the US government’s ability to surveil
people and remotely impact them physically and mentally with their technology.
When I asked him how he came to possess this classified information, he had no
response.
[5]              
He says that the US government has used this technology to read his
mind, remove and reinstate sexual feelings, and to assassinate him on several
occasions by sending some kind of signal that affects his heart and mind
through satellites. In his factum, he says that this happened to him recently
while driving on the 401.
[6]              
He also says that he has been receiving messages on his television set
from President Obama and President Joe Biden. He says President Biden presented
himself to the Plaintiff while he was watching television, with a threatening
face and a closed fist under his chin. At the hearing, he provided me with a
photograph of President Biden to show me the way that President Biden appeared
to him. He says that this pose was a message to him that he should stay silent
about what he knew. When he complained to the police about this, he says he was
forcibly admitted to CAMH. He alleges that President Obama also spoke to him
over the television and advised him that he should go to Brazil.
[7]              
Other allegations in the Statement of Claim are that: parties have been
tampering with his food from Uber Eats, that he has been slandered in the media
because “broadcasters are doing eye gestures (moving both eyes completely to
the left or looking straight upwards with both eyes) on live television”, and
that his computers were hacked with the main impact being that the quality of
his music was degraded to a lower quality.
[8]              
He says that he has been falsely diagnosed with schizophrenia because
the US government and others have influenced his physicians in this regard in
order to silence him.
[9]              
The Claim against the Toronto Police Services Board (“TPSB”) is that it
has been involved with and/or collaborated with the US entities that have
targeted him, and that it failed to investigate his various complaints about
what these US bodies and officials were doing.
[10]          
As against the Attorney General of Canada (“AGC”), the Plaintiff’s claim
relates to complaints that he made to CSIS about some of the events set out in
the Claim.
[11]          
He claims damages in the amount of $1.5 billion.
[12]          
He commenced a similar claim in 2022 which was much shorter. The AGC
brought a motion to dismissed pursuant to r. 2.1 which was dismissed. The
plaintiff discontinued that Claim shortly afterwards.
[13]          
The defendants bring a motion to strike the Claim in its entirety
pursuant to r. 21.01(1)(d) and 21.01(3)(d) as well as r. 25.11.
[14]          
I grant the order sought and strike out this Claim without leave to
amend.
[15]          
Rule 25 of the Rules of Civil Procedure sets out detailed rules
applicable to pleadings.
[16]          
In Cerqueira v. Ontario, 2010 ONSC 3954, at para. 11, Strathy J.,
as he then was, set out the following principles applicable to pleadings which
are relevant in this case:
[17]          
As noted in the recent Court of Appeal decision, Burns v. RBC
Life Insurance Company, 2020 ONCA 347, at para. 16:
[18]          
Under Rule 21.01(1)(b), a party may move to strike out a pleading on the
ground that it does not disclose a cause of action. On such a motion, the
following principles apply:
[19]          
Leave to amend will only be denied in the clearest of cases when it is
plain and obvious that no tenable cause of action is possible on the facts as
alleged and there is no reason to suppose that the party could improve his or
her case by any amendment: Mitchell v. Lewis, 2016 ONCA 903, 134 O.R.
(3d) 524, at para. 21; Conway v. Law Society of Upper Canada, 2016 ONCA
72, 395 D.L.R. (4th) 100, at para. 16; South Holly Holdings Ltd. v. The Toronto-Dominion
Bank, 2007 ONCA 456, at para. 6.
[20]          
As noted, most of the Statement of Claim is about what US officials have
allegedly done. The TPSB is not mentioned in most paragraphs of the Statement
of Claim.
[21]          
Although not specified, it appears that the causes of action that the
Plaintiff is advancing against the TPSB are assault, negligent investigation
and conspiracy to injure. As noted, the Rules of Civil Procedure require
pleadings with respect to negligence and conspiracy to be pleaded with
particularity. However, the Plaintiff has failed to provide such particulars.
Apart from generalities, the “who”, “what”, “where” and “when” are missing.
These details are important to permit the TPSB to respond especially because
the allegations span a twenty-year period during which the Plaintiff admits he
has never been criminally charged with anything.
[22]          
For example,
[23]          
 There are also many paragraphs where there are allegations about an
“investigation” without identifying whether this relates to the TPSB or the
FBI. There are also insufficient particulars in these paragraphs.
[24]          
As well, many of the pleadings are bald, unsupported by material facts, and
amount to nothing more than conjecture, assumptions or speculation. For
example:
[25]          
The pleading is deficient. There are insufficient facts pled that would
permit the TPSB to properly defend itself and meaningfully respond to the
allegations.
[26]          
As well, there are numerous things set out in the claim that common
sense tells me are incapable of proof. It is plain and obvious that the
plaintiff cannot succeed on this claim, when read as a whole.
[27]          
There is no common law right to sue the Crown in tort. Liability of the
Crown in tort is derived from and governed by section 3 and 10 of the Crown
Liability and Proceedings Act (CLPA). By virtue of s.3(b)(i) of the CLPA,
the Crown can only be found vicariously liable for the acts or omissions of its
servants, that are committed within the course of their employment. In other
words, for the Crown to be liable for any of the torts alleged in the
Plaintiff's Claim, the pleadings must identify a "servant" of the
Crown, within the meaning of the CLPA, who is responsible for the acts
complained of.
[28]          
The Claim fails to appropriately identify any individual servants of the
Crown that are responsible for the conduct alleged to give rise to any of the
causes of action advanced.
[29]          
Additionally, there are only five paragraphs that mention CSIS or the
AGC. Even if the Plaintiff had set out who the Crown’s servant was, four of
these paragraphs fail to set out a cause of action even when read generously.
[30]          
Therefore, the pleading as against the AGC is also deficient.
[31]          
It is plain and obvious that the claim against the AGC cannot succeed.
[32]          
Finally, I am satisfied that this Claim, when read as a whole, fits
within the concerns raised by Myers J. in Gao v. Ontario WSIB, 2014 ONSC
6497. Although Gao involves r. 2.1, the wording of r. 2.1 is the same as
that in rr. 25.11 and 21.01(3)(d).
[33]          
Although the previous Statement of Claim was not struck pursuant to r.
2.1, it was not the same and did not raise all of the concerns raised by this
one.
[34]          
The defects are so significant that the Claim as a whole must be struck.
[35]          
I have had the benefit of hearing the Plaintiff’s response to the
arguments and he was unable to provide any new facts that he could plead that
would cure the defects. He essentially repeated much of what is in the Statement
of Claim, without providing the details that could cure it.
[36]          
I am satisfied that there are no possible amendments that would result
in this being a viable claim against these defendants.
[37]          
Therefore, the Claim is struck without leave to amend.
[38]          
I recognize that this will be a disappointment to the Plaintiff who, as
I said, I found to be a pleasant and sincere man.
[39]          
However, as the Court held in Rebello v. The Bank of Nova Scotia,
2018 ONSC 7127, [granting leave to amend] "would just be an initiation to
the plaintiff to inflict further costly …. proceedings on the defendant with no
realistic sense that a credible lawsuit lies dormant waiting to emerge."
[40]          
I encourage the parties to resolve costs but if they wish the parties
may make submissions as follows: the Defendants within 5 days no longer than 5
pages and the Plaintiff within 5 days no longer than 5 pages.