[1]              
These two competing applications arose from arbitral
awards in a franchise law dispute under the Arthur Wishart Act
(Franchise Disclosure), 2000, S.O. 2000, c. 3 and governed procedurally by
the Arbitration Act, 1991, S.O. 1991, c. 17. The parties resolved the
first phase of the arbitration by agreeing to a consent award holding the
franchisor liable for material non-disclosure when the franchisee bought into
the restaurant chain. For the reasons set out in my endorsement of October 22,
2024, I declined to adjourn the hearing to permit the amendment of franchisor
parties to amend the application to seek leave to appeal that consent arbitral
award.
[2]              
The franchisors thus seek leave to appeal the second phase arbitral
award under s. 45 of the Arbitration Act. In that award, the arbitrator
found that Marcel Hachem and Eastern Canadian Coffee Company Ltd. were
“franchisor’s associates” under the Arthur Wishart Act. The consequence
of that finding was that Mr. Hachem and ECCC were jointly and severally liable
to pay the rescission costs owed by the franchisor pursuant to the consent
award. The franchisors also seek leave to appeal the costs award. They argue
that the arbitration agreement required the parties to bear their own costs of
the arbitration. The franchisors also asked that the awards be set aside, once
leave is granted.
[3]              
The franchisees seek court enforcement of the arbitral awards, pursuant
to s. 50 of the Arbitration Act. There is no dispute that if the court
denies leave to appeal, the court should issue judgments enforcing the awards.
[4]              
For the reasons that follow, the franchisors’ application
for leave to appeal is dismissed. The proposed appeal from the finding that Mr.
Hachem and ECCC were “franchisor’s associates” raises a question of fact
dressed up as a question of law. Even if it were a question of mixed fact and
law, there is no right of appeal, because the agreement provided no such right.
The proposed appeal from the costs award is also dismissed, because the issue
lacks sufficient importance to the parties to justify an appeal.
[5]              
Since I denied leave to appeal both issues, there
is no need to decide the appeal. I will grant the franchisee’s application to
enforce the arbitral awards.
[6]              
The Arbitration Act contains the
following provisions regarding appeals:
[7]              
The franchisors conceded that the arbitration
agreement was silent on the question of appeal rights. Subsections 45(2) and
(3) therefore did not apply. Accordingly, they had no appeal right and had to
bring their application under s. 45(1) for leave of the court to appeal on a
question of law. They must also meet the criteria under clauses (a) and (b).
[8]              
The Supreme Court of Canada has directed courts
hearing applications for leave to appeal arbitral awards to exercise caution in
extracting questions of law from issue where fact and law are case specific and
interdependent: Sattva Capital Corp. v. Creston Moly Corp., 2014 SCC 53,
[2014] 2 SCR 633, at para 54.
[9]              
The Arthur Wishart Act, s. 6, sets the
conditions for a franchisee to rescind a franchise agreement based on lack of
disclosure by the franchisor. Although technically regulating the affairs
between businesses, the statute is generally considered akin to
consumer-protection legislation. It compels franchisors to exacting standards
of disclosure, given the power and knowledge imbalance between franchisors and
parties applying for franchises. If a franchisee is found to have properly
rescinded an agreement, it is entitled to compensation in the form of refunds
and damages. In the first phase of the arbitration, the franchisor agreed the
rescission had been justified.
[10]          
A “franchisor’s associate” is a class of persons
who face joint and several liability for a franchisor’s defective disclosure.
What qualifies a person as a franchisor’s associate depends on his or her
involvement in the representations and approval of a franchisee application. It
is intended to lift the corporate veil to implicate people who could otherwise
shield themselves behind a shell company. In some respects, the liability under
s. 6 and the definition of “franchisor’s associate” resembles statutes such as
s. 13 of the Construction Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.30, in which classes of
persons associated with a contractor can be held to have breached a
construction funding trust and be held personally liable.
[11]          
Subsection 1(1) of the Arthur Wishart Act
defines “franchisor’s associate” as a person:
[12]          
The second phase arbitral award determined that
Mr. Hachem and ECCC each qualified as a “franchisor’s associate” because of their
roles in reviewing and approving the franchise application. The franchisees
submitted evidence to the arbitrator that the franchisors’ agent sent the
application to Mr. Hachem, the president of the company, for review. Mr. Hachem
met with the franchise applicants, made representations about the franchisor’s
food and beverage offerings, and directly involved himself in the decision to
assign the Bloor Street location to the franchise applicants. The arbitrator
also found, based on Mr. Hachem being the sole director of ECCC, that it was controlled
by the franchisor for the purposes of the definition of “franchisor’s
associate.”
[13]          
The franchisors submitted no responding evidence
at the arbitration. In their request for adjournment, the franchisors’ newly
appointed counsel submitted that their predecessors’ failure to file responding
evidence amounted to a new ground of appeal based on lawyer negligence. That
issue was not before the court, and I declined to consider it. I appreciate
that the lawyer from Borden Ladner who handled the case and, until recently,
the leave to appeal application, would have been conflicted from advancing such
a ground of appeal. The evidence on which the arbitrator found against Mr.
Hachem and ECCC was not disputed. The franchisors’ counsel, instead, sought to
characterize the evidence as falling short of proving they were involved in the
review or approval of the franchise application.
[14]          
In the circumstances, it was unfair to the
franchisee to face an appeal based on lawyer incompetence at this late stage. For
lawyer incompetence to justify an appeal, there must be a miscarriage of
justice. R. v. Hartling, 2020 ONCA 243, at para 73. A decision not to
call evidence is not intrinsically incompetent, or even negligent. Although not
immune from suit, barristers have a wide degree of discretion in making
tactical decisions on behalf of clients. See Demarco v. Ungaro et al.,
1979 CanLII 1993 (ON SC), as discussed in Amato v. Welsh, 2013 ONCA 258,
at paras. 40-57, and Wong v. Thomson Rogers, 1994 CanLII 841 (ON CA). In
the circumstances of this case, such an appeal requires a trial of the lawyers’
negligence. The delay and cost of adding such a layer would be entirely out of
proportion with the arbitral process to which the parties to the franchise
agreed. If they are serious about this ground of appeal, they can pursue the
lawyers in a separate action.
[15]          
My reason for revisiting the failed request to
expand the grounds of appeal is to illustrate the tactical bind in which the
franchisors found themselves going into the second phase of the arbitration. Since
the first phase award determined the franchisor’s liability to compensate the
franchisee, the issue of Mr. Hachem and ECCC being the “franchisor’s
associates” turned on an assessment of the evidence of Mr. Hachem’s role in the
review and negotiation of the application to buy a franchise. Because of the
franchisors’ election not to adduce responding evidence, the arbitrator’s sole
task was to assess the reliability and credibility of the franchisees’
evidence. This basic framing of the issue before the arbitrator makes the
franchisors’ task of extracting a legal issue on appeal rather difficult.
[16]          
The franchisors’ submission that there was an
extricable question of law arose from the arbitrator’s language that the
evidence raised a “reasonable inference” that Mr. Hachem was involved in the
review and approval of the franchise application. They seized upon para. 46 of the
arbitral decision, relying on an email from the agent that the application was
forwarded “to our company President (Mr. Marcel Hachem) … You will meet Marcel
during your trip to Montreal.” The arbitrator stated that this evidence would
give rise to the inference “by any reasonable person prospective franchisee
such as Alejandra and members of the Bautista family, that Mr. Hachem would be
directly involved…” The franchisors contended that the arbitrator thus incorporated
a “reasonable person” standard to an otherwise pure fact-finding exercise.
[17]          
Paragraph 56 of the franchisors’ factum stated:
“The Arbitrator was required to make a factual finding of whether Mr. Hachem
was involved in the grant of the franchise, not a normative finding of whether
he would or ought to be involved in the grant of the franchise.” Given the
overall context of the arbitrator’s reasons and factual conclusions, I did not
glean an attempt to insert a “normative” standard of any kind to the fact-finding.
Rather, on the specific emails from the agent and Mr. Hachem’s admitted
presence at the welcome meeting, the evidence before the arbitrator was that
the franchise applicants would have drawn the inference that Mr. Hachem
received the application and was at the meeting for a reason, i.e., that he was
involved in assessing the candidates’ qualifications, demeanor, and other
factors in the approval process. If he received the application and met with
the candidates, it was undisputed that Mr. Hachem was “involved” in the review or
approval.
[18]          
Because the factual issue focused on Mr.
Hachem’s interaction with the franchise candidates, how a reasonable candidate
would perceive his involvement would have been a measure of the franchisees’
evidence. The use of the words “reasonable person,” in describing how the
arbitrator assessed the evidence, could be interpreted two ways.
[19]          
The first meaning is to take the deponent’s words
as being more than a subjective belief in Mr. Hachem’s involvement. His use of
the words, “reasonable person” was part of a typical credibility assessment of
a party deponent’s evidence of observations of another’s conduct: here, the
conduct of Mr. Hachem and his franchise agent. In the context of the
surrounding analysis, I saw nothing to indicate the arbitrator’s intention to
import a legal standard to the evidence he was required to review, beyond the
ordinary burden of proof to prove facts on a balance of probabilities. The
suggestion that he imported a “reasonable person” standard requires isolation of
those words from the context and amounts to an attempt to manufacture a legal
issue for appeal where there was none. Since the factual issue had to be
determined on an objective standard and not on the subjective belief of the
franchisees, the reasonableness of their evidence was no more than what the
trier of fact was required to weigh.
[20]          
The second meaning could be that the word
“person” was an inadvertent typographical insertion by a person with legal training
and judicial experience. The phrase, “reasonable person prospective franchisee
such as Alejandra” just seems less awkward and makes better sense if the word
“person” is removed.
[21]          
Either meaning is far from the imposition of a
legal standard for the application of the statutory meaning of “franchisor’s
associate.” The remainder of the arbitrator’s extensive analysis showed careful
consideration of how the evidence established the specific “prongs” of the wording
of clauses (a) and (b) in the statutory definition.
[22]          
There was no incorporation of an extraneous
legal test in the arbitrator’s distillation of the evidence. The arbitrator
made his findings of fact based solely on an assessment of the evidence
presented to him. Even if there were an issue regarding his application of the
statutory wording to those facts, the questions of fact and law were so plainly
connected that one could not extract an overriding issue of law. In any event,
the so-called “reasonable person” standard could not have been one of them.
There were no means of logically extracting a legal error, as in the case of
the arbitrator’s mistake regarding the rescission issue described below in the
appeal from the costs order.
[23]          
There being no extricable question of law, I
decline to grant leave to appeal the finding that Mr. Hachem and ECCC were
“franchisor’s associates.” There is no need to consider the remaining points in
s. 45(1), regarding the importance to the parties of the matters at stake and
the rights of the parties.
[24]          
The proposed appeal from the costs order is
based on arbitral jurisdiction. The arbitrator ordered costs in the amount of
$200,978.45. The sole ground of appeal is s. 18.6 of the franchise agreement,
dealing with arbitration, stating that “The parties will each bear their own
expenses, including their respective legal and accounting costs. The fees and
expenses of the arbitrator will be apportioned between the parties in the
discretion of the arbitrator.”
[25]          
On its face, s. 18.6 did not remove the
arbitrator’s authority to award costs under s. 54 of the Arbitration Act.
However, I agree with the franchisor’s counsel that it certainly reads like a
provision agreeing that the parties are expected not to claim costs.
[26]          
The arbitrator, at para. 124 of the award,
decided that s. 18.6 ceased to apply once the consent award in phase 1 ratified
the rescission of the franchise agreement. The franchisee’s counsel conceded
that s. 17(2) of the Arbitration Act ensured this clause survived the
rescission of the agreement. Consequently, the principal argument in the
arbitrator’s interpretation of s. 18.6 appears clearly to be wrong. In the
ensuing reasoning, especially at paras. 128-30, the arbitrator noted that s.
18.6 had been incorporated by reference into the arbitration agreement. The
arbitration agreement stated:
[27]          
However, he also held that the reference did not
make the section “not extant in the sense of having contractual force.” The
September 5, 2018, submissions of counsel for the franchisors before the
arbitrator asked for costs. The franchisee’s counsel argued that this was
evidence of an acknowledgment that the arbitration agreement amended s. 18.6.
The consent award in the first phase also referred to an expected award of
costs.
[28]          
Had the issue of the combined effect of s. 18.6
and the arbitration agreement been more limited, I would have concluded that
the interplay between the two agreements raised a question of mixed fact and
law, as the Supreme Court determined in Sattva, at para. 50. However,
the incorrect conclusion that s. 18.6 was rescinded with the rest of the
agreement seemed to lie at the root of the arbitrator’s argument. The court
must conclude that the entire reasoning was undermined by the error. While the
correctness of the decision is part of the leave-granting analysis, the entry
pass to s. 45(1) of the Arbitration Act is still the existence of a
question of law. I therefore conclude that the costs issue raises a question of
law. This does not mean the franchisors would succeed in the costs appeal. It
only means the rescission point raised an extricable question of law that could
result in the cost award being overturned on appeal.
[29]          
The existence of a question of law does not
conclude the analysis. Clauses 45(1)(a) and (b) add further conjunctive hurdles
for the would-be appellant.
[30]          
Clause (a) requires the court to consider
whether the arbitrator’s error in awarding costs is important to the parties
and justifies and appeal. In the courts, costs awards have been considered
inherently less important than the decisions in the actual dispute. This has
been so, even though the monetary value of costs demands can sometimes be as
much or greater than the main dispute. Ultimately, I accept the franchisees’
argument regarding the franchisors’ demand for costs in the application, not as
evidence that the arbitrator possessed jurisdiction to award costs, but rather
on the importance to the franchisors.
[31]          
The importance to the franchisors that s. 18.6
be enforced could not have been so significant as to prevent them from seeking
costs in the arbitration when their counsel submitted: “The Respondents ask
that this arbitration be dismissed, with costs.” Had the jurisdictional point
been important to the franchisors, they should have refrained from seeking
costs at an earlier point in the arbitration when they were seeking dismissal
of the claim altogether. Importance to the parties for the purpose of clause
(a) must be substantive and not dependent on the tactical direction or outcome
of the proceeding.
[32]          
Clause (b) requires the court to consider
whether the determination of the question of law will significantly affect the
rights of the parties. The judicial consensus on this point appears to be that the
question must result in overturning or setting aside the award: Aronowicz v.
Aronowicz, 2007 CanLII 1885 (ON SC), at para. 30. All that is required is
for the question to have a real impact on the award. I would not predetermine
what an appeal of the question of the interaction of s. 18.6 and the subsequent
agreement(s) could be. Counsel for the franchisees raised the possibility of
novation through the arbitration agreement and through the consent award in the
first phase. Quite clearly, the error in holding that the rescission of the
franchise agreement set aside s. 18.6 could lead to an argument either way,
regarding the arbitrator’s jurisdiction. The proposed appeal therefore appears
to satisfy the requirements of clause (b). However, since the requirements of
both clauses (a) and (b) must be satisfied, the franchisors have still failed
to satisfy the s. 45 test for leave to appeal.
[33]          
I therefore deny leave to appeal the costs
award.
[34]          
The franchisors’ application for leave to appeal
the arbitral awards is hereby dismissed. The franchisees’ application for
enforcement is hereby granted, and judgment will issue accordingly.
[35]          
Unless there are grounds under rule 49 to hold
otherwise, the franchisees are presumptively entitled to their costs of the
proceeding. I will reserve my ruling on costs, including entitlement, scale,
and amount, to allow the parties to attempt settlement of the costs. If parties
are unable to resolve them, I will invite the franchisees to provide their
submissions of no longer than three pages, as well as a bill of costs, within
20 days hereof. The franchisors will then have 20 days thereafter, to respond
with their submissions of same length.
[36]          
If the franchisees require a formal order before
the costs are settled or fixed, counsel may contact my judicial assistant to
provide an approved draft or to settle the form and content.