[1]              
In this Application, the Trustee
in Bankruptcy of the Estate of Jane Louis Layton (“Layton” or “the Bankrupt”)
seeks an order that the amount of $20,005.37 be paid over to the Trustee by the
Bankrupt or her son, Stephen Polanoski (“Polanoski”).
[2]              
For the reasons that follow, the
order is granted.
[3]              
The Bankrupt filed a voluntary
assignment for the general benefit of her creditors on March 19, 2003. The
Trustee was appointed by the Office of the Superintendent in Bankruptcy (“OSB”).
[4]              
The Trustee opposed the discharge
of the Bankrupt principally because of her non-payment of surplus income. The
Bankrupt did not attend her hearing on March 19, 2004, and on April 7, 2004 a “No
Order” was made. The Trustee was discharged on February 13, 2004. The Bankrupt
has remained undischarged since the order was made.
[5]              
On October 7, 2020, the Bankrupt's
brother passed away. He apparently left a significant amount of money to be
divided between the Bankrupt and her sister in his estate. The Bankrupt's sister
contacted the Trustee on July 6, 2022 to advise the Trustee about those
considerable funds available for distribution. The sister was a creditor and
was aware of the undischarged status of the Bankrupt.
[6]              
Given the history of this
bankruptcy proceeding and prior litigation among family members, an order was
made on consent on November 1, 2022 to reappoint the Trustee. The Order further
directed that the funds from the brother's estate be paid to the Trustee and also
provided for other relief.
[7]              
The Trustee then drafted a
Statement of Receipts and Disbursements to pay out the creditors in full, remit
the Tariff to the Office of the Superintendent, remove the Trustee and provide
for legal fees. Following completion of these distributions and all other
payments and obligations, the Statement of Receipts and Disbursements would see
the remaining balance remitted to the Bankrupt.
[8]              
Polanoski, the Bankrupt’s son,
repeatedly requested that the Trustee pay over the funds to the Bankrupt in
advance of final taxation. Ultimately, the Trustee agreed to do so, and paid
those surplus funds to the Bankrupt in the amount of $114,826.97 before
receiving final approval of the Statement of Receipts and Disbursements from
the OSB.
[9]              
The Trustee then submitted the
draft Statement to the OSB, which informed the Trustee that it had not calculated
the interest property. As such, the Trustee was required to remit a further $20,005.37
to the creditors in accordance with the revised Statement of Receipts and
Disbursements.
[10]          
On July 4, 2023, the Trustee wrote
to the Bankrupt, directing the correspondence to her son, Polanoski (who was
the point of contact, as confirmed by him) explaining the error and requesting
repayment from the Bankrupt of the $20,005.37. A second request was sent on August
8, 2023, a third on October 26, 2023 and a fourth request on November 7, 2023. No
response was received. The Trustee was concerned that the Bankrupt, who remains
undischarged, may have absconded with the funds.
[11]          
The Trustee’s office subsequently learned
that the Bankrupt had deposited the surplus funds into an account at the Royal
Bank of Canada ("RBC") in Kitchener, Ontario. In the circumstances, and
particularly given the lack of any response from the Bankrupt, the Trustee initiated
this proceeding.
[12]          
The Trustee sought and obtained interim
relief in the form of an order freezing the account and directing RBC to
provide bank statements and account information back to the date of the deposit.
That account information revealed that funds had been transferred to them from
various accounts, including through accounts at Canaccord Genuity Wealth
Management (“Canaccord”), where Polanoski is a professional investment advisor
and broker.
[13]          
The Trustee then sought and
obtained a further order dated November 27, 2023, directing Canaccord to
provide further account information so that the funds could be traced. The
Bankrupt was also ordered to provide an affidavit and attend an examination.
[14]          
There was no response from or on
behalf of the Bankrupt until that order was served. On December 4, 2023, the
parties appeared before the Court at a case conference. The Bankrupt was
represented by counsel who appeared for the first time to request an
adjournment of the hearing and fix a timetable. Following two additional case
conferences to deal with procedural matters, production issues and dates of
examinations, the matter was finally scheduled for hearing on the merits on May
17, 2024.
[15]          
There is no dispute that the funds
paid over to the Bankrupt by the Trustee were deposited into the RBC account in
Kitchener. That account was a joint account owned by the Bankrupt and
Polanoski. Funds from that account have been traced through other accounts
belonging to either or both of the Bankrupt and Polanoski.
[16]          
Ultimately, the funds originally
deposited into the joint RBC account on May 15, 2023 were transferred six times
(three times within the following few weeks), between and among accounts
controlled by either or both of the Bankrupt and Polanoski at Canaccord and/or
RBC. The records produced in accordance with the orders referred to above
disclose that the funds are currently in an account owned by 2055425 Ontario
Limited. Polanoski asserted that the account was an investment account
controlled by him and used to pay expenses for the condominium in which the
Bankrupt resides. 2055425 Ontario Limited owns that condominium unit.
[17]          
Accordingly, the Trustee now seeks
an order that the funds remitted to the Bankrupt in error in the amount of
$20,005.37 be paid over to the Trustee for the benefit of creditors of the
Bankrupt on the basis that the money was paid under mistake of fact (i.e., the
erroneous calculation of interest as reflected in the draft Statement of
Receipts and Disbursements).
[18]          
The Bankrupt and Polanoski,
represented by the same counsel, oppose the relief sought. In short, they do
not deny or contest any of the material facts. They simply take the position
that the Trustee made the error, and they have no obligation to repay the funds
to rectify that error resulting from the Trustee “acting in haste.” Polanoski
put it as follows on his cross-examination at Q. 123):
[19]          
The Trustee has the power to bring
this motion as there are no inspectors involved in the administration of the
estate: Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. B-3, s. 30(3)
("BIA"). A claim such as this should be brought to the
bankruptcy court, which has jurisdiction over all matters relating to Estates
and bankruptcy, and not as a separate claim or other proceeding: McLennan v.
Carter, [1927] 1 D.L.R. 475 (N.S. S.C.), at p. 477. The appropriate course
of action for the Trustee is to bring a motion to the bankruptcy court for an
order that the property be delivered over to it, on proper materials: Re
Waterbed King Ltd. (Trustee of), (1986), 62 C.B.R. (N.S.) 227 (Ont. S.C.);
and Re Taylor Ventures Inc., 2000 BCCA 647, 21 CBR (4th) 136, at paras.
4-5.
[20]          
The Bankrupt is entitled to any
surplus remaining after full payment of the Bankrupt’s creditors with interest
as applicable, and of the costs, charges and expenses of the bankruptcy proceedings:
BIA, s. 144.
[21]          
There is no dispute over the
following three facts. First, the funds at issue were paid to the credit of the
Bankrupt and the cheque was deposited in the RBC account in Kitchener. Second,
that account is in fact a joint account owned by the Bankrupt and Polanoski. Third,
the funds were subsequently transferred out and are now in an account
controlled by Polanoski at Canaccord, where he is employed as an investment
advisor and broker.
[22]          
Section 17(1) of the BIA
provides that where a person has in his possession or power, any property of
the bankrupt that he is not by law entitled to retain as against the bankrupt
or the trustee, that person shall deliver the property to the trustee. The duty
(which is that of any person, not just a bankrupt) to turn over the property is
mandatory.
[23]          
Where a third party has such
property of the bankrupt and refuses to turn it over to the party entitled to
that property, that third party is liable to turn over the property and is
liable for any deterioration or depletion of the value of the property before
the party entitled to it can take possession: Kostiuk (Trustee of), 2001
BCSC 1134, 27 CBR (4th) 249 at paras. 45-55. While in Kostiuk, the party
entitled to the property was a judgment creditor rather than a trustee, and the
tort of conversion was alleged (unlike in the present case), in my view the
same principles generally apply where a third-party refuses to turn over
property to a trustee for the benefit of creditors.
[24]          
It is unfortunate that the Trustee
made the error and the quantum of surplus funds paid to the Bankrupt -
following the requests from Polanoski, her son, that the funds be paid as soon
as possible, and prior to a final accounting - represented an overpayment to
the extent of the funds now claimed.
[25]          
However, there is no basis in law
or in equity for the Bankrupt, or Polanoski, to retain those funds. The funds
were paid over pursuant to a straightforward mistake of fact: BMP Global v.
Bank of Nova Scotia, 2009 SCC 15, [2009] 1 SCR 504, (“BMP”) at para.
19. In that case, the Supreme Court stated that: “In sum, this case is about
the restitution of amounts paid by [the Trustee] and the right to trace the proceeds”.
[26]          
The Bankrupt had confirmed to the
Trustee that her son, Polanoski, was to be the point of contact. As he stated,
his mother was “far too elderly to be spearheading these moves on her own. I
will be the principal contact.” However, he ignored each of the repeated
notices from the Trustee attempting to advance this matter on July 4, August 8,
October 26 and November 7, 2023. Polanoski gave an undertaking, through
counsel, that the funds would remain in the account pending a determination on the
merits, only when his counsel appeared to seek an adjournment and the
imposition of a case management timetable.
[27]          
The Bankrupt closed her Canaccord
account on November 10, 2023. As the Trustee was trying to contact Polanoski
and recover the funds, Polanoski transferred the funds repeatedly, and
ultimately to the account of the numbered company.
[28]          
There is a prima facie
right to recover funds paid by mistake of fact: BMP, at paras. 21, 24.
None of the recognized exceptions to that right apply here: a) principles of
finality and the intention of the payor that the payee shall have the money
without recourse in any event; b) payment for good consideration; or c)
circumstances where the payee has changed his position in good faith or is
deemed to have done so: BMP, at para. 21.
[29]          
With respect to the first factor,
in my view, the Trustee did not intend with finality that the Bankrupt, and
certainly not Polanoski, would be entitled to keep the funds in any event. The
objective fact is that the quantum of the payment was subject to the OSB's approval
of the Statement of Receipts and Disbursements. Polanoski has no legal right to
keep the funds. It is no answer for him to submit, as he does, that the Trustee
overpaid his mother, “recklessly and negligently in advance of taxation” with
the result that they cannot recover the funds from him. While the overpayment
was clearly unfortunate, it does not grant Polanoski the legal right to the
funds in preference to the creditors of the Bankrupt.
[30]          
Similarly, with respect to the second
exception, I am not satisfied that the payment from the Bankrupt to Polanoski
was made for good consideration.
[31]          
The evidence of the Bankrupt was
to the effect that she had nothing to do with the funds once they were
transferred to Canaccord and that if her son, who “was in a professional
capacity as a broker” asked her to provide instructions, she would have done
whatever he asked that she could not recall.
[32]          
The evidence of the Bankrupt and
of Polanoski is that the funds in the corporate account were owned by Polanoski
as they were paid to him by the Bankrupt (originally being sourced from the
Trustee’s cheque) as compensation paid to him to make up for the years of
support that he had given to his mother. Polanoski stated (at Q. 53) that as of
the date the funds were received from the Trustee, May 15, 2023, those funds “were
for my use, my movements, my decisions, stemming back to 20 years of
essentially family support of my mother”.
[33]          
The evidence of both
was also to the effect, however, that there was no agreement between the two as
to any such obligation or the payment therefor. The evidence of the Bankrupt was also to the effect
that while the funds were deposited into the joint account, there was no
agreement or anything in writing to confirm who had control of the funds in
that account.
[34]          
I agree with the submission of the
Trustee that even if there had been such an agreement, the Bankrupt would,
given her capacity as such, have lacked the legal capacity to have entered into
it. All assets of the Bankrupt vest in the Trustee (including any
after-acquired property) and any security agreement, or agreement providing a
preference to one creditor, would be a preference in law and invalid: BIA,
ss. 67(1), and 71.
[35]          
A bankrupt is not entitled to
build up or keep any assets acquired after her bankruptcy, and all
after-acquired assets vest in the trustee for the benefit of the creditors of
the bankrupt: Lepage (Re), 2016 ONCA 403, 36 CBR (6th) 207, at paras.
17-18.
[36]          
With respect to the third exception,
there is no evidence that Polanoski has changed his position in good faith or
otherwise. Rather, the funds remain in the account into which they were
transferred by him. Polanoski submits that the Trustee attempted to demonstrate
an intentional effort to conceal and obfuscate a tracing of the funds and that
the Trustee “attempted to prove chicanery” but that no such allegations can
succeed.
[37]          
In my view, the Trustee does not
need to show intentional misconduct or conduct amounting to fraud in order to
succeed.
[38]          
For all of these reasons, I find
that the relief sought by the Trustee for the benefit of the creditors of the
Bankrupt should be granted.
[39]          
Order to go in accordance with
these reasons directing the Bankrupt and Polanoski to pay over to the Trustee
the amount of $20,005.37. Once those funds are paid over, any orders freezing
the accounts can be vacated.
[40]          
With respect to costs of this
motion, the parties advised at the conclusion of oral argument of the existence
of (undisclosed) offers to settle with the result that they submitted that the
issue of costs should be addressed in writing following the disposition of the
motion.
[41]          
I encourage the parties to agree
on costs. If they are unable to do so, both parties should exchange and file
brief costs submissions with the Court within 10 days of this order. Such
submissions should not exceed two pages in length, double spaced. The parties
may append any relevant offer(s) to settle, together with a Costs Outline. Such
submissions should be filed to the attention of my judicial assistant, Ms. Mary
Sibenik at mary.sibenik@ontario.ca.