[1]              
The plaintiff moves for production of bank
records in three categories:  (i) bank records for the bank account where funds
given to Domarina Malek by the now-deceased John Stewart were deposited; (ii) bank
records showing when John Stewart was added and removed as a signing authority
for the account; and (iii) bank records for the account(s) into which the funds
received from John Stewart were ultimately transferred.  The first two are sought
from the Toronto-Dominion Bank (“TD”).  The third is sought from the defendants
themselves.
[2]              
Ms. Malek and Sarah Amazon Resort Amazing Health
Inc. oppose the motion, arguing primarily that the production request is an
overreaching invasion of privacy.  Although Daniel Irmya previously expressed
an intention to oppose the motion, he did not appear and did not deliver any
responding materials.  TD takes no position.
[3]              
This motion was originally scheduled for August
2023.  It became the subject matter of a series of case conferences before me
and was ultimately re-scheduled for this hearing at a case conference in March
2024.  At the outset of the hearing, Ms. Malek sought an adjournment of the
motion.  For reasons given at the time, I denied that request.
[4]              
Subsequent to the motion hearing, both Ms. Malek
and Mr. Irmya have sent various lengthy emails to my attention or the attention
of my Assistant Trial Coordinator.  It is not clear to me if all of them relate
to this motion, in whole or in part.  Some clearly do.  They were submitted following
the motion hearing and reserving this decision.  The submissions were not
requested by the court and were not on consent of all parties.  The
communications were and are contrary to rule 1.09 of the Rules of Civil
Procedure, RRO 1990, Reg 194 (the “Rules”).  I have
not considered them in deciding this motion.
[5]              
I am granting the motion, in part.  I am
satisfied that the bank records of the account into which Mr. Stewart’s drafts
were deposited and records confirming the dates during which Mr. Stewart
had signing authority on the account are relevant documents and that it would
be unfair to require the plaintiff to proceed to trial without having discovery
of them.  I am not ordering production of the remaining bank records, though,
since their relevance is tenuous and the request appears more in the nature of
a tracing order.
[6]              
This motion is brought in the context of the
defendants having failed to produce affidavits of documents and Schedule A
productions in compliance with the order of Graham A.J. dated October 13, 2022. 
Pursuant to that order, the defendants were to have served their affidavits of
documents and Schedule A documents by January 13, 2023.  They failed to do so. 
As of the motion hearing before me, they remained in breach of that order.
[7]              
The plaintiff has accordingly brought this
motion for production of bank records argued to be relevant to the underlying
dispute from both TD and the defendants themselves.
[8]              
Production from TD is sought under subrule
30.10(1) of the Rules, which provides as follows:
[9]              
Accordingly, to obtain production from TD,
the plaintiff must demonstrate four elements:  (i) the documents are in the
possession, control or power of TD; (ii) the documents are not privileged;
(iii) the documents are relevant to a material issue in the action; (iv) and it
would be unfair to require the moving party to proceed to trial without having
discovery of the document.
[10]          
I wish to deal first with Ms. Malek’s position
in response to the production request.  She has tendered a responding affidavit
and factum.  However, the substance of her affidavit and most of her written
and oral submissions are not material to the plaintiff’s production requests. 
They instead focus on why this action should be dismissed.  That issue is not
before me.  As explained in my case conference endorsement made on March 28,
2024, Ms. Malek’s proposed motion to dismiss this action appears more properly
brought to a judge.  I had encouraged the parties to seek a case
conference with a judge for directions on the various competing motions that
were or appeared to be beyond the jurisdiction of an associate judge.  That
does not appear to have happened.  No motion to dismiss has been initiated, so
I find no reason that this production motion cannot be heard.
[11]          
Notably, this is a discovery motion.  It is not
a motion for which I must make findings of fact in this action.  Many of Ms.
Malek’s arguments focus on facts that will need to be proved at trial and
substantive arguments that will be made when the case is decided, such as whether
Mr. Stewart gifted the funds to Ms. Malek, as alleged, and whether the
plaintiff estate can prove fraud when a police investigation is said to have
resulted in a dismissal of fraud charges.
[12]          
Apart from there being limited evidence on the
circumstances under which the funds were given to Ms. Malek and no evidence
before me of the police’s fraud investigation, neither are material to this
motion.  It is not for me to decide whether the plaintiff is able to prove that
the funds were not a gift and that Mr. Stewart was defrauded.  That is for the
trial judge.  On this discovery motion, I am only concerned with whether
the requested documents are relevant based on the pleadings and fairly produced
in this litigation.  I must thereby decide the motion looking to the pleaded
allegations as they stand, not the merits of the parties claims and defences.
[13]          
In support of production relief, the plaintiff
relies on the Supreme Court of Canada’s decision in R. v. O’Connor, 1995 CanLII 51 (SCC), [1995] 4 SCR 411, in which the
approach for production of records in the possession of third parties was
discussed.  No case law has been cited by either side dealing directly with
production under rule 30.10 of the Rules.
[14]          
O’Connor was a
criminal case dealing with production of sexual assault counselling records in
the possession of third parties that were requested by the accused.  At paras.
137-156, the Supreme Court of Canada detailed a two-stage approach for dealing
with such production requests at trial:
[15]          
I acknowledge that O’Connor has been
applied in the civil context, but there is more recent case law addressing the
analysis under rule 30.10, which I cannot ignore.  Notably, although not cited
by the parties, case law supports that the threshold for granting an order
under rule 30.10 is high.  That threshold has been discussed in cases such as Spina
v. Shoppers Drug Mart Inc., 2020 ONSC 4000, at paras. 114-116.
[16]          
In Spina, Perell J. observed that documentary
discovery as of right is generally limited to parties to the proceeding.  Rule
30.10 permits the court, where necessary, to order production from
non-parties.  However, the information sought must be relevant to a “material
issue” in the action and an order under rule 30.10 should only be made in
exceptional circumstances.  Perell J. outlined six factors that may be
considered:  (1) the importance of the document to the issues in the
litigation; (2) whether production at the discovery stage as opposed to
production at trial is necessary to avoid unfairness to the moving party; (3)
whether the examination of the opposing party with respect to the issues to
which the documents are relevant would be adequate to obtain the information in
the document; (4) the availability of the document or its information from
another source that is accessible to the moving party; (5) the relationship of
the non-party from whom production is sought to the litigation and the parties
to the litigation; and (6) the position of the non-party with respect to
production.
[17]          
Although the Supreme Court of Canada does not
specifically outline them, the factors outlined in Spina are all
considerations that could properly be assessed under the second branch of O’Connor. 
However, they were not specifically argued by the parties on this motion. 
Nevertheless, the plaintiff is represented and put forward only one case, which
is now somewhat dated.  The defendants are self-represented.  I find it
appropriate in the circumstances, particularly taking into account the parties’
acrimonious ongoing procedural disputes, to apply the above factors in deciding
this motion, which is to the benefit of the defendants.
[18]          
I am satisfied that both bank records for the
bank account into which the funds from John Stewart were deposited and records
showing when John Stewart was added and removed as a signing authority for the
account are documents reasonably within the possession, control, and power of TD. 
Notably, neither Ms. Malek nor TD have taken a position otherwise.
[19]          
The plaintiff asserts that the documents are
relevant to demonstrating that the funds were deposited and withdrawn without
Mr. Stewart’s approval.  Ms. Malek’s position is that the sole issue to be
determined in the action is whether the funds in question were a gift, for
which the defendants’ bank records are not needed.  Ms. Malek submits that
the request amounts to a “fishing expedition”, citing M(A) v. Ryan,
1997 CanLII 403 (SCC), [1997] 1 SCR 157.  In that case, at para. 37, the former Chief Justice
commented, “Fishing expeditions are not appropriate where there is a compelling
privacy interest at stake, even at the discovery stage.”  Ms. Malek argues that
making a production order would be a significant violation of her personal
privacy.
[20]          
I agree that fishing expeditions are not
appropriate in the discovery process, but the former Chief Justice’s comment
has been taken out of context.  It was made while discussing whether and when
to find privilege in psychiatrist-patient records.  The comment is immediately
preceded by an observation that “in most cases, the majority of the
communications between a psychiatrist and her patient will have little or no
bearing on the case at bar and can safely be excluded from production.”  That context
is not the same as in this case.
[21]          
Relevance is determined by reference to the
pleadings.  The pleadings in this action support that the bank records sought
from TD are relevant.  Notably, at paras. 16 and 20 of the statement of claim,
it is alleged that Mr. Stewart withdrew his life savings and deposited the
funds into Ms. Malek’s TD business account, that Mr. Stewart and Ms. Malek
agreed to add Mr. Stewart as a signatory, and that all funds were withdrawn
from the account without his signature.  At paras. 24, 31-32, 35, and 52 of Ms.
Malek’s statement of defence, she admits that the funds were deposited into her
business account, that Mr. Stewart was giving signing authority as a courtesy,
and that the funds were removed from the TD account.  However, the defence alleges
that the funds were a “special gift” and that, ultimately, Mr. Stewart’s signing
rights were removed following false accusations of fraud and embezzlement and the
funds were moved to “another major business bank account, as a precaution for [Ms.]
Malek’s safety and security”.
[22]          
In my view, this motion is not a fishing
expedition, at least insofar as the production sought from TD.  The documents
are all in respect of the bank account into which the parties agree that the
disputed funds were deposited.  The plaintiff has alleged breach of trust.  If
the funds are found not to have been a gift, then the court will still need to
determine the terms of the trust and whether use and withdrawal of the funds
was contrary to those terms.  In my view, the circumstances under which the
funds were deposited, used, and withdrawn are directly implicated by the
pleadings.  So, too, is the timing of and circumstances under which Mr. Stewart
was removed from the business account as a signatory.
[23]          
Ms. Malek argues that I should consider subrule
30.04(8) of the Rules, which permits the court to grant leave to
withhold disclosure or production of a document that will only become relevant
after the determination of an issue.  The subrule does not assist Ms. Malek’s
position.  It requires the party seeking to withhold production to bring a
motion for leave to withhold, which Ms. Malek has not done.  In any event, it
also requires that production of the document before the issue has been determined
would seriously prejudice the party requesting leave to withhold.  I am
unconvinced by Ms. Malek’s arguments that she will be prejudiced by the
production order, let alone seriously prejudiced.  In my view, this is not a
case where deferred production of the requested records from TD is necessary or
appropriate.
[24]          
No argument has been made that the documents are
privileged.  I find that they are not.
[25]          
On the final element, the plaintiff argues that
it would be unfair to require them to proceed to trial without these documents
given the failure of the defendants to produce documents.  Production of the
bank records from TD, which are limited to the bank accounts directly involved
in the transfer of the disputed funds, will allow the action to advance.
[26]          
Ms. Malek argues that it would not be unfair for
the plaintiff to proceed to trial without discovery on the bank records.  She
submits that a production order should only be made after it has been decided
whether the funds in question were or were not a gift and that the plaintiff is
not prejudiced in the litigation, or otherwise, if production is made after
that determination.
[27]          
For reasons discussed above, the deposit, use,
and withdrawal of the disputed funds is relevant to the alleged breach of
trust.  If Ms. Malek’s position at trial is unsuccessful and the funds are
found to have been subject to a trust, then the plaintiff will be prejudiced if
the breach of trust issue cannot be decided without further production.  It could
well result in a bifurcated trial process.
[28]          
Also, none of the defendants have served
affidavits of documents.  The plaintiff has the evidentiary burden at trial of
proving the claim and is already in a position of having no documents from the
defendants that may (or may not) support the pleaded allegations on misuse of
the funds.  I find it unfair to require the plaintiff to proceed to trial
without documents addressing the timing of the disputed transactions.  For
example, Ms. Malek pleads that Mr. Stewart was removed as a signing authority
as a precaution for her safety following allegations of fraud and embezzlement
by Mr. Stewart.  Documents confirming when Ms. Malek actually removed Mr.
Stewart as a signing authority is directly probative to that position.
[29]          
This is also not a case where examining the
defendants on these issues will adequately provide the information.  The
defendants are in ongoing breach of the prior production order.  In my view,
based on my own dealings with the parties at case conferences and my review of
prior endorsements, there has been a complete lack of cooperation by the
defendants in advancing this action to a determination on the merits.  I have
little confidence that they will voluntarily provide by way of examination for
discovery the information that they have opposed on this motion.  I am also
satisfied that, if Ms. Malek will not willingly provide the information that is
contained in the banking records (as she has not), then there is no other
source than TD from which the plaintiff may obtain the information.
[30]          
Given the foregoing, and since TD takes no position
on the production request, I am order production of the bank records from TD. 
However, the date range sought of January 1, 2019 to February 1, 2023 is
overreaching.  Per the record before me the two drafts made out by Mr. Stewart
to the corporate defendant were dated February 27 and March 5, 2019.  The statement
of claim pleads that Mr. Stewart discovered that the funds had been fully withdrawn
from the TD business account on March 10, 2020 (although there is no evidence
before me supporting how it was discovered).  In my view, the appropriate date range
for a production order is from February 27, 2019 to March 31, 2020.
[31]          
Ms. Malek seeks a term that any ordered bank
records be redacted.  However, having failed to comply with the order of Graham
A.J. to produce documents, I decline any such term.  It would have been
open to Ms. Malek to produce redacted banking records in her affidavit of documents. 
Having failed to comply with Graham A.J.’s order, and remaining in breach of
it, I see no unfairness in now ordering TD to produce the unredacted bank
records.  In my view, the deemed undertaking rule in rule 30.1 of the Rules adequately
protects Ms. Malek’s privacy interests with respect to unredacted disclosure of
the business banking records.
[32]          
As already noted, the defendants have failed to
produce affidavits of documents in compliance with Graham A.J.’s order dated October
13, 2022.  The plaintiff seeks production from the defendants of specific bank
records that, if relevant, ought to have been included in their affidavit of
documents.  Specifically, the plaintiff seeks an order pursuant to subrule
30.02(4) of the Rules for the bank records for the account(s) into which
the funds received from John Stewart were ultimately transferred for the period
from January 1, 2019 to February 1, 2023.
[33]          
Subrule 30.02(4) of the Rules provides
that the court may order a party to disclose all relevant documents in the
possession, control or power of the party’s subsidiary or affiliated corporation
or of a corporation controlled directly or indirectly by the party and to
produce for inspection all such documents that are not privileged.
[34]          
I have already noted that Ms. Malek admits, at
para. 52 of her statement of defence, that the funds were moved to “another
major business bank account.”  However, I am not convinced that a tracing of the
funds following the withdrawal is relevant.  If there was a trust on the terms
alleged by the plaintiff in the statement of claim, then that withdrawal would
itself seem to be a breach of trust.  The scope of requested production is also
broad and overreaching.  It speculates that there are other bank accounts and
does not identify other corporations controlled by the defendants that may be
implicated.  The plaintiff is seeking what amounts to a broad tracing order prior
to judgment.  I am not convinced that such a tracing order is relevant to proving
the allegation that the defendants took the disputed funds from Mr. Stewart or
is otherwise supported as relevant by the pleadings.
[35]          
In my view, into what bank account the funds were
deposited is an issue that may be explored during examinations for discovery,
which will be aided by production of the bank records from TD.  Production
requests made during discoveries may then be addressed by way of a refusals and
undertakings motion, for which relevance of more targeted production requests
arising from the discovery questions may be argued.
[36]          
I am accordingly dismissing the relief with
respect to production from the defendants, without prejudice to moving again for
such production, more narrowly defined, at a later date.
[37]          
In the event of success, the plaintiff seeks
$6,000 in costs on a substantial indemnity basis, citing the defendants conduct
and breaches of court orders as supporting heightened costs.
[38]          
I am indeed concerned with the defendants’
failure to comply with court orders.  This motion may have been entirely
unnecessary had the defendants simply complied with the ordered production
deadline.  They continue to disregard that order, which in my view made this
motion necessary at least with respect to the banking records sought from TD,
which have not been produced by Ms. Malek.  However, I am also mindful that
Ms. Malek has been partially successful in opposing this motion insofar as
production relief against the defendants.  There has been a measure of divided
success that is also a factor in deciding costs.
[39]          
The plaintiff failed to prepare a costs outline
in advance of the hearing as required by subrule 57.01(6) of the Rules.  As
Ms. Malek points out, the draft order submitted sought only $3,000 in
costs.  I have no means of verifying or considering the actual fees and
disbursements incurred for the motion.  That said, I am satisfied that the
costs claimed in the draft order are not unreasonable for a motion of this
nature and, in my view, it would be unfair to the plaintiff to deny any costs. 
The defendants ought reasonably to have expected that they would pay some costs
if a production order was granted.  The fact that Mr. Irmya did not appear
or oppose does not insulate him from an adverse costs award.  He consistently indicated
his intention to oppose leading up to the motion.
[40]          
In all the circumstances, and considering the
factors in subrule 57.01(1) of the Rules, I fix costs of the motion in
the amount of $2,500, including HST, plus the motion fee, for a total of $2,839,
payable jointly and severally by the defendants to the plaintiff within thirty
(30) days.
[41]          
For the foregoing reasons, I order as follows:
[42]          
The above order significant varies from the
draft order submitted.  A revised draft order may be submitted by email to my
Assistant Trial Coordinator, Christine Meditskos, in Word format.  Approval as
to form and content by the defendants is hereby dispensed with.  I will settle
and sign the formal order once the revised draft is submitted.