[1]              
Ronald Douglas Penrose died, at the age of 91, on September 18, 2023. He
was never married and had no children. It also appears that he had no siblings,
uncles, aunts or cousins. At the time of his death, Mr. Penrose lived in an
apartment, had an investment account of about $800,000.00, a 2017 Lexus, and
some jewelry.
[2]              
In his Last Will and Testament, dated July 2018, named an executor and
an alternate executor both of whom have renounced this position. The applicant, Linda Bridgewater, lived in the same apartment
building as the deceased and they were friends for about seven years before the
deceased died. She stepped forward to administer his estate when she saw that
it was not being administered. By Order dated July 16, 2024, Ms.
Bridgewater was appointed as Estate Trustee During Litigation.
[3]              
In his Will, Mr. Penrose made two bequests.
[4]              
First, Mr. Penrose left Cheryl Lang the sum of
$350,000.00. Ms. Bridgewater explains that Ms. Lang is a veterinary assistant
at a veterinarian’s office where Mr. Penrose would take his cat. He told Ms.
Bridgewater that Ms. Lang had been helpful and supportive when his cat had to
be euthanized.
[5]              
Second, Mr. Penrose made the following bequest:
[6]              
Unfortunately, there is no entity called “Guide Dogs of Canada”. After his death, Ms. Bridgewater found a brochure published by
the Canadian National Institute for the Blind (“CNIB”) on Mr. Penrose’s
refrigerator. The cover of the brochure is reproduced below:
[7]              
The affidavit of Garrett Nenson of the Canadian National Institute for
the Blind, sworn on October 22, 2024, states:
[8]              
The affidavit of Edward Mann, sworn on October 29, 2024, states:
[9]              
In April 2024, Ms. Bridgewater commenced this application for, amongst
other things, an order interpreting the gift of residue to the “Guide Dogs of
Canada” or alternatively, an order rectifying the Will by deleting “Guide Dogs
of Canada” and replacing it with the proper name of the organization intended
by the deceased, or in the future alternative, a Cy Pres Order sufficient to
fulfil deceased’s general charitable intention.
[10]          
In her affidavit sworn October 4, 2024, Ms. Bridgewater
states:
[11]          
The principles related to the interpretation of a will
were described by Brown, J.A. in Ross v. Canada Trust Company, 2021 ONCA
161, at paras. 36-41, as follows:
[12]          
Applying the above principles, I find that Mr. Penrose’s intention
cannot be determined solely from the plain meaning of the language that he used
in the Will as there is no entity known as “Guide Dogs of Canada”. The closest similarly
name entity is Canadian Guide Dogs for the Blind. However, the surrounding
circumstances show that Mr. Penrose had made charitable donations to the CNIB,
was on their email and mailing lists, and had a “CNIB Guide Dogs” brochure on
his refrigerator at the time of his death. There were no similar connections to
the Canadian Guide Dogs for the Blind or the other charities that have come
forward. Applying the “armchair rule”, I find that Mr. Penrose intended to make
his bequest to the Canadian National Institute for the Blind. Order to go
accordingly.