[1]              
Trial judges often say the most difficult part of their job is the
sentencing of an accused person.  The facts of this case demonstrate that
difficulty.
[2]              
 Mr. Norn sold fentanyl to Tyler Ginn (Tyler). Tyler and Mr. Norn may
not have been close friends but according to Tyler’s mother they were friends. 
Tyler’s father tragically found his son dead in his bedroom the morning of
March 12, 2021, after Tyler had consumed the fentanyl supplied to him by Mr.
Norn.
[3]              
Tyler was 18 years of age when he died.  Mr. Norn was 19 when he sold
Tyler the fentanyl that contributed to his death.  Both Tyler and Mr. Norn had
their entire lives ahead of them. Tyler will never see his life as it might
have unfolded.  Mr. Norn will have to live with the consequences of his actions
for the rest of his adult life. Two families have been scarred for life by what
happened the night of March 11/12, 2021.  No sentence this court can impose
will alter this tragic set of circumstances.  That said this court has the
responsibility to impose a sentence consistent with the principles of
sentencing and relevant jurisprudence.
[4]              
On March 11, 2021, Mr. Norn received a message from his friend Tyler
requesting fentanyl. Mr. Norn
travelled to Tyler’s house and supplied him with the drugs he
requested. Tyler subsequently consumed
the fentanyl. On March 12, 2021, Mr. Ginn’s
father discovered him deceased in his bedroom. The cause of death was fentanyl
and etizolam toxicity.
[5]              
At the start of the trial Mr. Norn entered a guilty plea to Trafficking
of a Schedule I Substance contrary to section
5(1) of the Controlled Drugs
and Substances Act (“CDSA”). He was found
guilty of Manslaughter after
a seven-day judge alone trial.
[6]              
Mr. Norn was 19 at the time of the offence. He is now 23 years old.   He
has no prior criminal record.  Since his arrest and while on bail he has
obtained his high school equivalency certificate.  He has been working in
Saskatoon in a potash mine where he has compiled over 4000 hours towards his
accreditation as an iron worker.
[7]              
It is clear from both a review of the presentence report (the PSR) as
well as from the evidence of his mother that Mr. Norn has struggled with drugs;
an addiction that both pre and post dates the subject offences. Mr. Norn began
drinking alcohol in Grade 7. He began smoking marijuana in grade 8.  By grade 9
Xanax was added to Mr. Norn’s life.   He began experiencing blackouts and
memory issues. Mr. Norn began stealing from cars looking for the money he
needed for drugs.  He also began selling drugs to support his growing need for
drugs.
[8]              
It is noted in the PSR that Mr. Norn completed a short term stay in a
rehab facility in Portage where unfortunately he tore his ACL for which he received
a prescription for Percocet.  He almost immediately developed an opioid
addiction.  He suffered an overdose.  While recognizing the impact his drug
habit was having on both himself and his family Mr. Norn continued to abuse
drugs. Mr. Norn has apparently been able to overcome his addiction to Xanax.
[9]              
Eventually Mr. Norn was introduced to fentanyl while he was attending an
adult learning centre. He became addicted but realized how much stronger
fentanyl was compared with anything he had used to that point in time.  Despite
this knowledge and despite the tragedy that befell Mr. Ginn the evidence establishes
that Mr. Norn continues to use non-prescriptive drugs. The Agreed Statement of
Fact filed as part of the sentencing submissions reveals that on June 9, 2024, Mr.
Norn was stopped by the police.  He was found to be in possession of 10.6 grams
of fentanyl packaged in 3 clear plastic bags. All of this occurred within
months of Mr. Norm plea of guilty to trafficking in fentanyl and the tragedy
that unfolded with Tyler’s death.
[10]          
Mr. Norn’s mother Tammie Kip testified during the sentencing
submissions.  It is clear to me that she is very concerned for her son; a
concern that is reflected in the numerous occasions she has tried to get Mr.
Norn to participate in rehabilitation aimed at getting him away from the drugs
that have dominated his life; drugs which ultimately led to the tragic outcome
in this case.
[11]          
Ms Kip is a well-educated lady who holds a position of seniority with a
major insurance company. She described in her evidence the first occasion when
her son overdosed-a time frame that coincided with his prescription for
Percocet. Ms Kip testified that Mr. Norn was in a coma for 2 days after he was
discovered in his bedroom.  He was 17 at the time.  As Ms Kip exclaimed after
this near fatal outcome “we didn’t know what to do”.  Mr. Norn was taken to the
emergency department of a well-known mental health facility where Ms Kip was
encouraged that for once her son would get the treatment he needed.  Sadly this
didn’t happen and to this day the mental illness that Mr. Norn suffers from has
not been properly addressed.
[12]          
   Mr. Norn has been diagnosed with a major depressive disorder.   Ms Kip,
not surprisingly, testified that she is of the belief that because Mr. Norn was
prescribed Percocet the health care system is at least partially at fault for
her son’s opioid addiction. She also believes the health care system has failed
her son by not providing the necessary treatment for his mental illness and
drug addiction.
[13]          
 It is clear to me Mr. Norn comes from a loving caring family. His life
is not at an end.  He has a future ahead of him.  The future in the short term
will be difficult but with treatment he can overcome the last 10 years and lead
a productive life.  For this to happen Mr. Norn must somehow with the
appropriate supports find a life that does not include drugs.  The tragedy of
Tyler’s death has had an undoubted effect on Mr. Norn-of this I have no doubt. 
But it was Mr. Norn who sold the fentanyl to Tyler.
[14]          
The Crown filed a brief of victim impact statements from various members
of Tyler’s family and friends. I have reviewed all of those statements that
speak from the heart and make clear to the court that Tyler was much loved. The
statements also reflect the many issues that Tyler faced in his life which
included his use of illicit drugs.
[15]          
The statement from Tyler’s mother speaks volumes to the loss she and
others suffered when Tyler consumed the fentanyl supplied to him by Mr. Norn.
Gayle Fowlie finishes her statement as follows:
[16]          
The person who last saw Tyler alive was his then girlfriend, Sarenity
Story.  She filed a victim impact statement.  Sarenity was only 16 at the time.
Her statement is both frank, poignant and full of insight. Sarenity has, to use
her words, “battled depression and substance abuse”.  Tyler’s death has had a
significant impact on Sarenity.  I take from the last few paragraphs of her
statement that while she will never forget Tyler, she has gone on to complete
high school and enroll in college.  Sarenity ends her statement as follows: “It
is not my place to judge if a person has room to grow, I can accept that people
can change”.  I take from this (perhaps incorrectly) that Sarenity was
referring to Mr. Norn.  People can change.  Mr. Norn can change if he wants to.
[17]          
The Provincial Crown
seeks a sentence of 8 years on the charge of manslaughter. The Federal Crown seeks a sentence of 3 years
concurrent to any sentence imposed for manslaughter.
[18]          
Given the lack of a mandatory minimum in section 236(b) of the Criminal
Code and 5(1) of the CDSA, counsel for Mr. Norn argue that a
conditional sentence remains available to Mr. Norn.
[19]          
Counsel for Mr. Norn argue that he has repeatedly been failed by our mental health care system – from the time he was a teenager to this day. It is
argued that by including a condition that Mr. Norn attends an in-patient
rehabilitation program, the Court can be satisfied that the sentence will not
pose a risk to the public.
[20]          
Conceding that a conditional sentence for a manslaughter charge is rare
counsel for Mr. Norn argue that his situation is unique and calls for a
conditional sentence. It is argued that the author of the pre-Sentence Report
provides some support for a conditional sentence when she opines that “should the Court consider
community supervision in lieu or in addition to another disposition, a condition to attend counselling for mental health and substance use is recommended.”
[21]          
Counsel for Mr. Norn argue that a conditional sentence order for a
period of two years, less one day, to be served concurrently would be
appropriate in the circumstances of this case. Mr. Norn would attend an
in-patient rehabilitation centre during this time to address the underlying issues that led to these offences.
This sentence would balance the various sentencing objectives, including
the need for deterrence and denunciation as well as rehabilitation.
[22]          
The Crown argues that Tyler’s death is the most aggravating factor this Court must consider. Both the
crown and the defence agree that the dangerous and destructive nature of the substance trafficked – namely fentanyl. is an aggravating factor. 
No one disputes that Fentanyl is an extremely deadly substance that has caused
an epidemic of overdoses in Canada.
[23]          
The Crown argues that there are few mitigation factors in this case but does
acknowledge that the following should be considered in mitigation:
[24]          
The Crown argues that the following factors are not mitigating factors.
[25]          
Mr. Norn was a low-level trafficker – While Mr. Norn was not running
a large-scale drug dealing
operation, dealing in drugs was Mr. Norn’s occupation.
[26]          
The fact that Mr. Norn is himself an
addict has been found not to
be a mitigating factor The Crown
refers to R. v. Holt 1983 CanLII 3521 (ON CA), [1983] 4 CCC (3d) 32,
where the Ontario Court
of Appeal declined to reduce the accused's sentence
for trafficking when he had been unable to show a causal connection between his addiction to heroin and trafficking
in heroin. The Crown also refers to R. v. Barham, 2014 ONCA 797 stating: "In order for
mental health issues and addiction to be considered as mitigating factors,
there must be some connection between those matters and the criminal conduct at
issue."
[27]          
As it relates to what has been described as Mr. Norn’s “Call to warn” the Crown argues that this is not a mitigating factor. The evidence at trial established that Mr. Norn called Mr. Ginn to
warn him “not to do a lot of the stuff”.
The Crown argues this so-called warning demonstrates a high degree of
moral blameworthiness on the part of Mr. Norn because he knew he was selling a potentially
deadly substance to an 18-year-old friend.
[28]          
While the Crown sees few if any mitigating factors in this case the
Defence refers to numerous factors that point to a sentence that does not lead
to the inevitable result of Mr. Norn being incarcerated in a penitentiary. 
These factors are set forth below and are largely drawn from the written
submissions made on behalf of Mr. Norn.
[29]          
The leading principle in manslaughter sentencing decisions is that general deterrence and denunciation require
a custodial sentence in the absence
of exceptional circumstances-
see R. v. Johnny 1994 CanLII 622 (BC CA), [1994] B.C.J. No. 1373 at para 14. The defence argues that exceptional circumstances exist in this case. Counsel for Mr. Norn argue that a custodial
sentence would have a
detrimental impact on Mr. Norn and would likely worsen the mental health
challenges that underlie his conduct that tragically led to Tyler’s death.
[30]          
Counsel for Mr. Norn point to a number of mitigating factors this Court
must consider in arriving at an appropriate sentence These factors begin with
the fact Mr. Norn entered a guilty plea to Trafficking contrary to section 5(1)
of the CDSA. By entering
this guilty plea,
it is argued, Mr. Norn accepted
responsibility for his actions.
[31]          
Mr. Norn is a youthful
first-time offender. He was
19 years old at the time of the
offence and is 23 at the time of sentencing.
[32]          
Counsel for Mr. Norn argue that the evidence establishes Mr. Norn is an addict offender. His trafficking was not for his own financial gain, but rather to support his own
addiction. The pre-sentence report outlines Mr. Norn’s history with substance
abuse that began in his youth when he began self-medicating for the
debilitating symptoms of his underlying mental health issues. Mr. Norn’s
underlying mental health issues began around grade seven. To date, he has been
diagnosed with Cannabis Use Disorder, Opioid Use Disorder & Stimulant Use
Disorder, Major Depressive Disorder, Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Social
Anxiety Disorder. All of these conditions are systemic to his addiction and
drug use. His reliance on substances gradually increased and he was introduced
to opioids after suffering a knee injury.
[33]          
Mr. Norn first entered
rehabilitation for his addiction at 17 years
old. His efforts
towards rehabilitation continue to
this day. Counsel for Mr. Norn point to the following efforts made by Mr. Norn
that demonstrate he has worked to rehabilitate himself:
[34]          
At the core of the submissions made on behalf of Mr. Norn is the suggestion
that despite Mr. Norn’s desire to heal, he has
been failed by our mental
health system. There may be some
truth to this suggestion. It is a belief certainly shared by Mr. Norn’s mother.
[35]          
It is argued by the defence that when Mr. Norn supplied the fentanyl to
Tyler he was “intoxicated”.  It is suggested that Mr. Norn now wishes he was
thinking with “a clear head at the time of the offence”.  There is no evidence
to support what state of mind Mr. Norn had at the time he sold the fentanyl to
Tyler.  What I do accept is that Mr. Norn feels a great deal of remorse for
what happened on March 11,2021.  This is made clear from the presentence report
as well as the various letters filed in support of Mr. Norn as part of the
sentencing submissions.
[36]          
Counsel for Mr. Norn argue that how this matter ultimately got to trial
has had a significant negative impact on Mr. Norn’s mental wellbeing which
should be considered in mitigation of sentence.  Specifically, it is argued
that both Mr. Norn and his counsel believed the Crown had agreed to withdraw
the manslaughter charge if Mr. Norn plead guilty to the fentanyl trafficking
charge. This issue was litigated before me as an abuse of process application
and was dismissed. Mr. Norn may very well have believed that the manslaughter
charge might be withdrawn but as I concluded there never was a meeting of the
minds between the Crown and the defence concerning a resolution of this matter.
[37]          
Counsel for Mr. Norn point to
the undoubted full support of his family
moving forward. His family is familiar
with supporting an individual trying to overcome substance abuse issues. This
is demonstrated by Mr. Norn’s grandfather (a retired police officer with nearly
40 years in policing) who saw both of his brothers through recovery from their
own drug addictions. I have no difficulty in accepting that Mr. Norn has been
and will continue to be supported by a unique and experienced community of
family and friends that is dedicated to seeing him succeed.
[38]          
Counsel for Mr. Norn argue that Mr. Norn was under harsh bail conditions
from April 2021 to July 2023 when he was granted a bail variation. Mr. Norn was
to remain in his house at all times, except for medical reasons for him or a family
member, court appearances, meetings with his Counsel, employment purposes, or with his surety or father. He remained under these
stringent conditions for approximately 27 months. Stringent bail conditions are
to be considered as a factor in sentencing.
[39]          
The principles of sentencing are well known and are set out in s. 718.1
and 718.2 of the Criminal Code of Canada (the Code).  The
principles of sentencing are intended for the protection of society and
maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society achieved by the denunciation
of unlawful conduct; deterrence both general and specific; and the separation
of an offender from society where necessary.  Another important principle of
sentencing is of course rehabilitation and reparation for harm done to victims
and/or the community as well as the promotion of a sense of responsibility in
the offender and an acknowledgement of the harm done.
[40]          
Pursuant to the provisions of s. 718.1 of the Code, a fundamental
principle of sentencing is that the sentence must be proportionate to the
gravity of the offence as well as the degree of responsibility of the
offender.  Aggravating and mitigating circumstances are to be taken into
account pursuant to the provisions of s. 718.2 of the Code.  As well, a
sentence to be imposed must be a sentence similar to those that are imposed on
similar like offenders in similar circumstances.
[41]          
The offences that Mr. Norm has been convicted of are grave and
demonstrate a high degree of moral blameworthiness. The dangers of fentanyl were well known to Mr. Norn as evidenced
at least in part by the warning Mr. Norn gave Tyler after he had sold him the
fentanyl, Mr. Norn called Tyler
to warn him “not to do a lot of the stuff”
because he “didn’t
want to be responsible for anything that happened”. These words strongly suggest that Mr. Norn was aware that he had sold Tyler a
potentially deadly substance.
[42]          
There is no doubt that Tyler struggled with drug addiction. There is equally no doubt that Mr.
Norn has had his own struggles with drug addiction.  Tyler did ask Mr. Norn to sell him fentanyl. Tyler chose
to ingest the fentanyl sold to
him by Mr. Norn. This does not lessen the gravity
of the offence, lessen the high level of moral blameworthiness or deserve
consideration as a mitigating factor.  Canadian
law does not recognize a line of reasoning adopted in the jurisprudence in the
United Kingdom that the willful consumption of lethal opioids by the end user
breaks the chain of causation. (See R.
v. Kennedy (No. 2), [2007] UKHL 38 and R. v Haas, 2016 MBCA, 42,
leave to appeal denied, [2016] S.C.C.A. No. 306.
[43]          
One of the principles of sentencing requires the Court to impose a
sentence that assists in the offenders’ rehabilitation. The evidence before
this court reflects many attempts by Mr. Norn and his family to get Mr. Norn
treatment for his mental health issues and his drug addictions. The proposed
terms of the conditional sentence recommended to this court by his counsel
adopt much of what Mr. Norn will need in the future to address his mental health
and his drug addictions. But as with so many offenders who come before this
court someone with a drug addiction must demonstrate they want to and will
participate in their rehabilitation. The events of June 24, 2024, give this
court real concern that Mr. Norn wants to kick his involvement with drugs –
which includes not just the use of, but the sale of drugs.
[44]          
Mr. Norn was driving his Honda Ridgeline motor vehicle in Oshawa on June
9, 2024, at approximately 11:00 a.m. when he was stopped by the police for an
investigation. He was found to possess fentanyl. The total weight of the fentanyl was 10.6 g. It was found packaged in 3 separate clear
plastic bags which together were in a cloth bag on the driver’s seat floor.
This occurred after his conviction while he is awaiting sentencing.
[45]          
The Crown does not suggest that Mr. Norn be sentenced for any untried
offences in this proceeding. The
Crown in its submissions argues that the evidence of Mr. Norn’s outstanding
charges is relevant to Mr. Norn’s character, and his prospects for rehabilitation –
see R. v. Angellilo 2006 SCR 2 728
at para. 31-33.
[46]          
There is no doubt that Mr. Norn has struggled with addiction during his
formative teenage years and now into his 20’s. In October 2023 while on bail
for these offences he again overdosed and was hospitalized. I entirely agree
with the suggestion that one should never give up hope that addiction can be
overcome. But Mr. Norn has at least on 2 occasions since his matter came into
the Superior Court of Justice demonstrated an inability to come to grips with
his drug addiction. In my view the sentencing principle of rehabilitation must
be given less weight in all the circumstances of this case.
[47]          
Counsel for Mr. Norn readily concedes that while a conditional sentence
is available for this court’s consideration such a sentence for manslaughter
would be rare. I agree on both points. A conditional sentence is not excluded
but it would be rare.  I would also suggest on the facts of this case a
conditional sentence would be demonstrably unfit.
[48]          
In support of his position that a conditional sentence is an appropriate
disposition counsel for Mr. Norn referred the court to R. v. Skookum 2024
YKTC 30 where the accused had supplied his friend opioids.  His friend died. 
The cause of death was “an acute combined fentanyl and etizolam intoxication”. 
Chief Judge Cozens imposed a sentence of two years less one day which was
accounted for by time served in custody awaiting disposition.  The sentence
imposed was after a plea of guilty to a charge of manslaughter and most
significantly it was a joint recommendation from the Crown and defence.  Mr.
Norn did not plead guilty to the manslaughter charge nor is there a joint
recommendation on sentence.
[49]          
The court was also referred to R. v. Clemons 2003 MBCA 51 at para.
7 where the Manitoba Court of Appeal summarized the range of sentence for
manslaughter as follows:
[50]          
Clemons involved an accused who plead guilty to a charge of
manslaughter. The accused was in a highly intoxicated condition and had been
provoked by the deceased over a period of time.  The Crown sought a sentence of
five years. The trial judge imposed a conditional sentence of two years less a
day plus three years’ probation. At the end of his reasons dismissing the Crown
appeal it is worth observing that Monnin J.A. stated
[51]          
Counsel for Mr. Norn also referred the court to R. v. Rodgers 2020
ONCJ 495 to support his argument that a conditional sentence was available as a
disposition for Mr. Norn.  Rodgers was a case involving an accused who
plead guilty to manslaughter where he and the deceased were using a drug, they
believed to be cocaine. It turned out to be a much more deadly
substance-specifically U-47700 (a synthetic opioid that has a potency 7.5 times
greater than morphine). The Crown sought a sentence of 18 months in prison. 
The defence suggested a sentence of time served after a Downes credit of
time served to 90 days in prison.  The sentence imposed was 18 months.
[52]          
The Crown has provided the court with a chart referencing numerous cases
where an accused was convicted of either manslaughter or criminal negligence
after trafficking fentanyl.  These cases establish a range of 3 years to 10
years.  Many of the accused had prior criminal records. Some involved pleas of
guilty. The case of R. v. Walker [2019] O.J. No. 1263 is strikingly
similar to the facts in Mr. Norn’s case.  Harpur J described Walker as a
23-year-old low level trafficker who had sold a small quantity of fentanyl and
heroin to his friend who subsequently died.  Walker plead guilty to
criminal negligence causing death and trafficking in fentanyl. Noteworthy in
his reasons is reference to the fact Walker had on a prior occasion
warned one of his customers that “only a line” of fentanyl can kill you.   On
these facts Harpur J was of the view that the appropriate sentence was one of 5
years.  The actual sentence imposed was one of 3.5 years.  The reduction in the
sentence was a reflection of the assistance Mr. Walker provided to the Crown in
prosecuting another accused person.
[53]          
A more recent sentencing decision involving fentanyl and a conviction
after trial on a charge of manslaughter is the decision of Boswell J. in R.
v. Brazier 2023 ONSC 6315. In his reasons Boswell J described the accused
as a low-level trafficker.   He had sold the deceased 2/10ths of a gram of
fentanyl and a half gram of cocaine at 1:00 p.m. and the same quantity at 4.30 p.m.
on the day the deceased died. Brazier was convicted of manslaughter and
trafficking in cocaine and fentanyl. The Crown sought a sentence of 12 years
while the defence sought a sentence of 4-6 years. In imposing a sentence of 8
years the following comments of Boswell J are worth repeating:
[54]          
The jurisprudence makes it crystal clear that those dealing in fentanyl,
whether they are low level, mid-level or high-level dealers, are complicit in
the opioid crisis that is everyday news in this province and across North
America. Mr. Norn was a low-level drug dealer. Regardless he knew full well he
was trafficking in a deadly substance.  His knowledge in that regard is more
than borne out when he called Tyler and warned him to be careful and not to use
too much of the drug, he had sold him. The warning would never have been
necessary if Mr. Norn had not sold Tyler the fentanyl.
[55]          
The jurisprudence is full of warnings from all levels of court that
those caught trafficking in fentanyl will face significant periods of
incarceration that will reflect their level in the drug trade.  The higher the
level of dealing the higher the sentence. But just because Mr. Norn was what I
have described as a low-level drug dealer does not mean he should not face the
consequences of his actions. Even a low-level dealer is part of the insidious drug
trading pyramid.  The high-level dealers at the top of the pyramid need the mid-level
dealers to move their product.  The mid-level dealers near the low-level
dealers like Mr. Norn to get their poison into the hands of drug addicts like
Tyler.
[56]          
Having reviewed all of the jurisprudence provided to me by counsel and
recognizing that Mr. Norn is a relatively young offender with no prior criminal
record and accepting that Mr. Norn has some potential for rehabilitation the
sentence on the charge of manslaughter is one of 6 years in the penitentiary.
[57]          
As it relates to a finding of guilt in relation to possession for the
purposes of trafficking in fentanyl the jurisprudence has evolved and makes it clear
that those convicted of trafficking in fentanyl will face a significant
penitentiary sentence and that denunciation and deterrence are of fundamental
importance.
[58]          
Section 10(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act also
reflects that a fundamental purpose of sentencing in a drug case is to
contribute to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and
safe society while at the same time encouraging rehabilitation and treatment in
appropriate circumstances.
[59]          
The emphasis on deterrence and denunciation as it relates to the
trafficking in controlled drugs is nothing new. Over thirty years ago the Court
of Appeal in R. v. Farizeh, [1994] O.J. No. 2624, made it clear that the
sale of even small amounts of heroin by first time offenders would attract a
penitentiary sentence absent exceptional circumstances.
[60]          
Over 20 years ago the dangerous nature of crack cocaine came in for
judicial commentary in R. v. Woolcock, [2002] O.J. No. 4927. The Court
of Appeal commented on the extremely dangerous nature of crack cocaine with its
potential to cause great harm to members of society, and thus directed
sentencing judges to emphasize the principles of deterrence and denunciation.
[61]          
The most recent pronouncement from the Supreme Court of Canada as it
relates to the sentencing of someone convicted of trafficking fentanyl is R.
v. Parranto 2021 SCC 46. While this decision may be more often cited as it
relates to sentencing ranges the comments of the court as it relates to the
dangers of fentanyl provide important guidance to sentencing courts.
[62]          
If there is any doubt about the severity of sentence to be imposed for
someone convicted of what might be described as street level trafficking of
fentanyl as distinct from someone trafficking to support their own addiction,
the following from the reasons of Moldaver J. makes clear that the sentence
will be significant:
[63]          
Decisions out of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal like Parranto,
and R. v. Lynch, 2022 O.J. No. 570 send very clear warnings to anyone
involved in trafficking in fentanyl.  The court also has to craft a sentence
that properly weighs rehabilitation in the balance.  General deterrence and
denunciation are clearly in the forefront of any sentence involving the
trafficking of fentanyl.  Rehabilitation however, has not been thrown out as a
relevant consideration.
[64]          
In Parranto Brown and Martin JJ dealt with the issue of range of
sentence. From paragraph 36 of their reasons, it is clear that ranges of
sentence are guidelines and not hard and fast rules.  Of equal importance at
para. 26 is the guidance to trial judges that in imposing sentence, judges may
“individualize sentencing both in method and outcome” and “different methods
may even be required to account properly for relevant systemic and background
factors”.
[65]          
As it relates to the starting point for the imposition of sentence it is
also worth repeating from Parranto at para. 61 that while on the facts
before the court the starting point that was set was nine years, the court
makes clear that sentencing judges are “free to depart from the starting point
and move up and down from this marker based on the specific characteristics of
the offender in order to meet the primary sentencing principle of
proportionality”.
[66]          
The danger of fentanyl has been well known now for many years.  Despite
these known dangers there are members of our society who seem to have no
concern that what they do is causing untold misery and death.  In his reasons
in Parranto, Moldaver J. reviews at great length the impact that
fentanyl has had on Canadian society.  Noteworthy at para. 98 of his reasons,
Moldaver J. states that trafficking in fentanyl is a crime “marked by greed and
the pursuit of profit at the expense of violence, death and the perpetuation of
a public health crisis previously unseen in Canadian society”.
[67]          
The guidance given sentencing judges by Moldaver J. in Parranto
is that the range of sentence for those convicted of large-scale trafficking in
fentanyl is in the upper single digit to lower double digit – with
justification where circumstances warranted to apply a higher range – see para.
101 Parranto.
[68]          
Since Parranto the Ontario Court of Appeal has also dealt with
the range of sentence for those convicted of mid-level trafficking in
fentanyl.  In R. v. Lynch, 2022 ONCA 109 the Crown appealed the sentence
of four years imposed on Mr. Lynch for trafficking in cocaine and fentanyl. 
The quantity of fentanyl was 41.37 grams.  The Crown in Lynch had sought
a sentence of 10 years while the defence had argued for a sentence of three
years.
[69]          
In allowing the Crown appeal Nordheimer J.A. at para. 14 of his reasons
in Lynch held that the sentencing judge was in error when he compared
mid-level trafficking in cocaine to mid-level trafficking in fentanyl.  As
fentanyl is a far more dangerous drug than cocaine, the aforesaid comparison
was wrong.  The more dangerous the drug the higher the sentence – see para. 15 Lynch.
[70]          
Ultimately at para. 25 of his reasons Nordheimer J.A. in Lynch
concluded that the requested sentence of the Crown (10 years) for someone
convicted of mid-level trafficking in fentanyl was “not unreasonable”. 
However, at para. 46 of his reasons Nordheimer J.A. accepted that Mr. Lynch’s
plea of guilty was a significant “mitigating factor” and taking into account
Mr. Lynch’s age (29) and his one entry criminal record, the appropriate
sentence was six years.
[71]          
In his recent reasons for sentence in R. v. Abdella (unreported
February 26, 2024) Di Luca J. dealt with an accused who had been found guilty
by a jury of trafficking in fentanyl.  The amount of fentanyl at issue was 1
ounce.
[72]          
In Abdella the Crown sought a sentence of eight to ten years. 
The defence suggested a sentence of four years.
[73]          
In his reasons at para. 9 Di Luca J. stated:
[74]          
As it relates to the issue of rehabilitation and how it intersects with
the principles of deterrence and denunciation the Court of Appeal decision in R.
v. Disher, 2020 O.J. No. 4849.provides guidance    Disher involved
an accused who pled guilty to possession of 42.6 grams of fentanyl for the
purposes of trafficking.  The Crown sought a sentence of 12 years while the
defence suggested a sentence of five to seven years.  Mr. Disher was noted to
have a serious criminal record spanning a period of 15 years without any
significant or recent gaps in his offending behaviour.  It was also noteworthy
that within two weeks from the time of his release on a recognizance for other
trafficking charges Mr. Disher was arrested again for trafficking in heroin
that contained fentanyl.
[75]          
The trial judge imposed a sentence of 12 years less pre-trial custody. 
Mr. Disher appealed on a number of grounds, one of which involved the failure
of the trial judge to address the issue of rehabilitation.  In addressing that
argument Gillese J.A. at para. 22 stated:
[76]          
Ultimately in Disher the Court of Appeal reduced the sentence from
12 years to eight years.  The failure of the trial judge to address Mr.
Disher’s rehabilitative potential was one of the reasons why the Court of
Appeal reduced the sentence.
[77]          
It is clear from a review of the jurisprudence that general deterrence
and denunciation are the primary considerations when addressing how to craft a
sentence involving someone convicted of mid-level trafficking in fentanyl.  I
am satisfied that Mr. Norn falls within the category of someone who was a
low-level trafficker in fentanyl.
[78]          
It is equally clear that the court is given the discretion to raise or
lower the range of sentence depending upon the circumstances of the offender
and in that regard the rehabilitative potential of Mr. Norn is a relevant
consideration.   I accept that Mr. Norn does have some prospect for
rehabilitation with the supportive family he has behind him His relapses since
being arrested in this case however reflect poorly on Mr. Norn’s short-term
prospects for rehabilitation. Taking into account all of the principles of
sentencing and the caselaw provided by counsel the sentence to be imposed for
trafficking in fentanyl is one of 3 years in the penitentiary.
[79]          
The Court of Appeal in R. v. Downes, 2006 CanLII 3957 (ON CA), [2006] O.J. No. 555
summarized the factors a sentencing court is to take into account as it relates
to what if any credit is to be given as it relates to stringent bail conditions
as follows:
[80]          
The sum extent of the submissions made as it relates to any credit for
the bail conditions imposed on Mr. Norn can be found in the written submissions
contained in the sentencing material submitted to the court.  At para. 35 (i)
the following submission is made:
[81]          
Other than this submission there is no evidence from Mr. Norn as
required by para. 37 of Downes.  The Crown in oral submissions noted
that the bail conditions imposed on Mr. Norn were not harsh and that when a
variation was sought it was granted on consent. The evidence would support the
Crown position that variations were granted which is at least, in part, evident
from the fact Mr. Norn appears to have been able to accumulate 4000 hours of
work experience as an iron worker – some of it in the Potash mine in Saskatoon.
[82]          
In the absence of evidence from Mr. Norn that he was in fact impacted by
harsh bail conditions, I do not accept that in this case the bail conditions
were such as to trigger any Downes credit.
[83]          
The Crown did not seek a consecutive sentence.  The global sentence
imposed is one of 6 years in the penitentiary.  The sentences imposed are to
run concurrently.
[84]          
Mr. Norn argues that the manner of his arrest and the ensuing police
questioning that produced a “confession” resulted in a breach of his S.7 and 10
(b) Charter rights that should be considered as a mitigating factor in
the sentence to be imposed by this court.
[85]          
Just prior to his arrest Mr. Norn was seen by police officers conducting
surveillance to participate in what was a suspected sale of drugs to another
person.  Part of the arrest involved one of the police officers unholstering her
police service firearm. Counsel for Mr. Norn argues that when he was arrested Mr.
Norn was exhibiting bizarre behavior.  While accepting that Mr. Norn was given
his rights to counsel and that he in fact did speak to a lawyer it is also
argued that there was a change in jeopardy that required the police to provide Mr.
Norn with a further opportunity to speak to counsel.  It is argued that the
police conducted the interview of Mr. Norn knowing full well that he had been
told by his lawyer not to speak to the police and that despite this knowledge the
police persisted in questioning Mr. Norn about his involvement in Tyler’s
death. It is also argued that the officer questioning Mr. Norn improperly made
inducements and false statements to him resulting in his confession.
[86]          
In assessing the issues raised as it relates to the allegations of breaches
of Mr. Norn’s Charter rights context is an important consideration.  Mr.
Norn argues the alleged police misconduct resulted in an involuntary confession
in which amongst other things Mr. Norn agreed he had sold fentanyl to Tyler. 
At the beginning of trial an agreed statement of fact was filed with the
court.  At the beginning of the trial Mr. Norn plead guilty to trafficking
fentanyl to Tyler. Mr. Norn’s so-called confession never became part of the
trial. It is difficult to see what if any prejudice Mr. Norn may have suffered
if this court were to accept the argument that police misconduct resulted in
his confession.
[87]          
The factual question of the manner in which Mr. Norn’s statement was obtained,
was fully litigated at the seven-day preliminary hearing held before West J in
September 2022.  On January 11,2023 West J released his reasons, R v Norn OCJ
January 11,2023, that address the voluntariness of Mr. Norn’s statement.  His statement
was ruled voluntary and admissible for purposes of the preliminary hearing. 
The reasons of West J are of course not binding on this court but in my view as
they relate to the argument that there has been a breach of Mr. Norn’s Charter
rights warranting a reduction in his sentence they are a full answer to the
issues now raised.  At para 52 and 53 West J made the following critical
findings-findings made with the advantage of hearing and seeing all of the
relevant evidence as it relates to Mr. Norn’s statement:
[88]          
If I am
wrong in accepting the findings of West J and if I were to accept the written
submissions of Mr. Thorning that there was police misconduct in how Mr. Norn’s
statement was obtained by the police, it does not necessarily follow that this
misconduct will result in a reduced sentence. It is not every Charter breach
or police misconduct that results in a reduction of sentence.  In order for the
breach or misconduct to have a mitigating effect on sentence it must relate to
the circumstances of Mr. Norn.
[89]          
In R. v. Nasogaluak 2010 SCC 6   the sentence imposed for
impaired driving and flight from police was reduced because the police used
excessive force in arresting the accused and breached his Charter rights
during his arrest and detention. When the state misconduct does not relate to
the circumstances of the offence or the offender an accused can not seek a
remedy through the sentencing process – see Nasogaluak at para 3-4 and
46-49. In determining if the state misconduct referenced in Mr. Thorning’s
written submissions warrant a reduction in sentence the court needs to ask some
fundamental questions. Those questions include whether the state misconduct
caused Mr. Norn any harm or additional prejudice and whether the state
misconduct resulted in the obtaining of relevant information that provided an
advantage to the Crown. The Court should also ask whether the failure to reduce
Mr. Norn’s sentence would constitute a form of additional punishment – see R
v Griffith 2021 ONCA 302 (CanLII), [2021] O.J. No 2514 (OCA) at para 87 and   R v Collins [2023]
O.J. No 4535 at paras 70 and 71.
[90]          
Even if one accepted that there
was police misconduct in the manner in which Mr. Norn was arrested and the
manner in which his statement was obtained there is no causal connection to
that misconduct and how the trial unfolded. Mr. Norn plead guilty to
trafficking fentanyl. The only issue at trial was whether it was the fentanyl
sold by Mr. Norn that caused Tyler’s death. Mr. Norn’s statement was never used
at trial.  The Crown was not advantaged by the obtaining of the statement as a
result of police misconduct.  There is no basis upon which to reduce Mr. Norn’s
sentence even if this court had accepted there was police misconduct in the
manner in which the police obtained his statement.
[91]          
The sentence imposed on Mr. Norn
is six years for manslaughter and three years concurrent for the trafficking in
fentanyl.  There is no reduction in the sentence.
[92]          
The Crown requests and the following ancillary orders
are granted.