[1]              
The Applicant, Norbert Tyll (“Norbert”), brings
this motion for:
[2]              
Without meaning any disrespect, throughout these
reasons I will refer to the parties by their given names.
[3]              
Eric Tyll (“Eric”) and Waltraud Tyll (“Waltraud”)
had three boys, Norbert, Wolfgang Tyll (“Wolfgang”), and Ruediger Tyll
(“Ruediger”).
[4]              
Eric passed away on May 22, 2016.
[5]              
Waltraud passed away on August 13, 2022.
[6]              
Norbert was named the sole Estate Trustee for
Waltraud’s estate.
[7]              
Norbert and Wolfgang were named co-Estate
Trustees for Eric’s estate.
[8]              
On June 15, 2023, Norbert commenced this
Application for directions.
[9]              
On July 19, 2023, pursuant to the Order of
Edwards J., Norbert was appointed Estate Trustee for the Estate of Waltraud
Tyll, and Norbert and Wolfgang were appointed co-Estate Trustees for the Estate
of Eric Tyll.
[10]          
The Order of Edwards J. also directed that:
there be no distribution of Waltraud’s estate until further order, or on the
agreement of the parties; within 60 days of his appointment Norbert was to
deliver to the beneficiaries of Waltraud’s estate a statement of assets as of
the date of Waltraud’s death; and Norbert was to provide copies of any
documents he received as a result of said Order to Wolfgang.
[11]          
Thereafter, the brothers battled over the
obligations set out in the Order of Edwards J. and whether Norbert had
fulfilled them.
[12]          
Counsel for Wolfgang brought a contempt motion
which was heard by Bale J. on May 15, 2024.  Norbert was represented by
counsel, Ms. Eni Hanxhari.
[13]          
On consent, Bale J. ordered that: within 15
days, Norbert swear and produce an affidavit confirming no assets of Waltraud’s
estate had been distributed, and provide a statement from the account in which
the funds were invested; Wolfgang was to provide Norbert certain specified
documents no later than June 1, 2024; the parties were to exchange affidavits
of documents no later than June 28, 2024; and the parties were to submit to
examinations for discovery no later than July 31, 2024.
[14]          
Wolfgang, being of the view that Norbert refused
to comply with Bale J.’s Order, brought a second contempt motion on July 31,
2024.  The contempt motion was heard by Charney J., who made the following
Orders relevant to this motion:
[15]          
Norbert contends that he did not have notice of
the contempt motion, and thus was unaware Wolfgang was seeking to have him removed
as Estate Trustee of both estates.  Norbert claims that his inability to respond
to Wolfgang’s allegations has resulted in procedural unfairness, which Norbert
seeks to reverse by having Charney’s J.’s Order set aside.
[16]          
On June 24, 2024, Norbert advised Ms. Eni
Hanxhari, his lawyer at the time, that he wished to end his retainer.
[17]          
Wolfgang’s contempt motion was issued on July 9,
2024, and scheduled for July 31, 2024.  The Affidavit of Service confirms that the
Motion Record was served on Norbert by way of email to Ms. Hanxhari on July 9,
2024.
[18]          
It is likely that Wolfgang’s lawyer, Mr. Jason Schmidt
canvassed motion dates with Ms. Hanxhari in advance of issuing the motion,
given that on July 3, 2024, Ms. Hanxhari advised Mr. Schmidt that Norbert was
in the process of retaining new counsel.
[19]          
On July 19, 2024, Ms. Hanxhari’s clerk emailed Norbert
to advise him of the upcoming motion.  She attached both the Confirmation of Motion,
and the Confirmation of filing of the Motion Record.
[20]          
On July 22, 2024, Norbert replied to Ms.
Hanxhari’s clerk as follows:
[21]          
Ms. Hanxhari replied the same day, advising
Norbert that he was required to advise the court, and opposing counsel, that he
was no longer represented by Bozai Law.  She further advised he was required to
serve a Notice of Intent to Defend or a Notice of Intention to Act in Person
(“Notice”). Ms. Hanxhari helpfully provided Norbert with a completed Notice for
his review and signature.
[22]          
Finally, Ms. Hanxhari confirmed that Norbert
should follow up with Mr. Schmidt regarding his position on the pending motion.
[23]          
On July 31, 2024, Ms. Hanxhari’s office emailed
Norbert, advising that they were in court on Zoom and trying to get off the
record.  They asked Norbert to sign off on the Notice.  There is no evidence that
Norbert replied to this email.
[24]          
On August 2, 2024, Ms. Hanxhari’s office
followed up with Norbert, once again requesting that he sign the Notice.
[25]          
It is Norbert’s evidence that he did not receive
a copy of the contempt Motion Record from Ms. Hanxhari, nor did he learn of the
results of the motion until he received an email from Ms. Lester on August 30,
2024.
[26]          
Norbert was cross examined on his affidavit
sworn in support of the within motion.  When asked whether receipt of the July
19, 2024 email from Ms. Hanxhari’s office would have put him on notice of the
July 31, 2024 motion, Norbert said no, he was not aware of the motion.
[27]          
When pressed, Norbert continued that the email
contained no detail as to what the motion was about.  Norbert then said he was
under the impression the motion was because of Bale J.’s Order.  Eventually
Norbert agreed, reluctantly, that he in fact did have notice of the motion.
[28]          
Norbert said that he did not attend the motion
because he was still in the process of looking for a lawyer.  Again, when
pressed, Norbert said he did not think the motion was important enough for him
to attend, as in his view it was “about exchanging documents.”
[29]          
Norbert confirmed that he did not reach out to
Mr. Schmidt’s office, nor did he attend court via Zoom, as Zoom was not working
on his computer.  He took no steps to figure out how he might attend the July
31, 2024 appearance.
[30]          
Nor did Norbert ask Ms. Hanxhari for a copy of
the motion record, or ask her for clarification on what the motion was about.
[31]          
Based on these facts, I am satisfied Norbert had
proper notice of the motion.  He received advice from Ms. Hanxhari that a
motion had been scheduled, and that it would be proceeding.  Given that Norbert
had not filed a Notice, Wolfgang’s lawyer was obligated to serve the Motion
Record on Norbert through his lawyer of record, Ms. Hanxhari.
[32]          
Norbert is familiar with the concept of a Notice
of Intent to Act in Person.  He had previously served one between being
represented by his prior lawyer (Ms. Ellen Brohm of Ellen’s Estates Advocacy[1]) and Ms. Hanxhari.
[33]          
Norbert was cavalier about the motion.  As an Estate
Trustee, it was incumbent upon him to contact Mr. Schmidt’s office and ask for a
copy of the Motion Record and request an adjournment that would permit him time
to retain counsel.  Instead, with reckless disregard he permitted a motion, in
respect of the two estates he was appointed to administer, to proceed without
representation.
[34]          
Norbert’s approach to the contempt motion is
echoed in his approach to administering Waltraud’s estate.  For example,
despite the clear Order of Edwards J. that there shall be no distribution of Waltraud’s
property or assets until further order of the court, Norbert felt the word
“distribution” was too vague.  Thus, he believed he was within his rights to
transfer money to himself from Waltraud’s estate, which he did a number of
times in the form of loans.
[35]          
Another example is when Norbert was faced with
the impropriety of using estate funds to make certain purchases.  His reply was
simply “I’ll deduct that from my inheritance.”
[36]          
A final example is Norbert’s inability to recall
what four withdrawals, for the exact same amount of money ($9,352), in a
relatively short period of time, were for.
[37]          
In the event I am incorrect, and Norbert did not
have proper notice, after an appeal of my decision (entailing yet another court
appearance) Charney J.’s Order would be set aside, and Wolfgang’s contempt
motion will be heard ab initio, with Norbert’s participation.
[38]          
Based on the information before the court for this
motion, including the transcript of Norbert’s cross examination on his
affidavit sworn October 23, 2024, I am satisfied that the outcome of the contempt
motion would be the same, and Ms. Lester would once again be appointed ETDL.
[39]          
Norbert and Wolfgang are clearly in an
adversarial position vis a vis the other.  In his affidavit, Norbert states
he has “serious concerns about Wolfgang’s records during the time that he acted
as Waltraud Tyll’s Attorney for Property.  Significant amounts of money were
withdrawn that have not been accounted for by Wolfgang.”
[40]          
For his part, Wolfgang alleges that Norbert has
failed to comply with various of terms of the Orders set out by Edwards J. and
Bale J.; has dispersed all or part of the funds of Waltraud’s estate; and has
failed to take meaningful steps to advance the administration of either Eric or
Waltraud’s estates.
[41]          
ETDLs serve an important function in estate
litigation, particularly where, as here, there are warring factions.  The ETDL
is an arm’s length, neutral, third party whose only concern is to manage the
estate, for the benefit of the beneficiaries, while litigation continues.
[42]          
I find favour with the approach taken by Myers
J. in Mayer v. Rubin, 2017 ONSC 3498, 30 E.T.R. (4th) 239, at para. 36,
in respect of the appointment of ETDLs:
[43]          
The same sentiment applies here; Myers J. could
have easily been speaking about Norbert and Wolfgang.
[44]          
Finally, I commend Mr. Schmidt’s office for
proposing Ms. Lester as an ETDL, as opposed to seeking Wolfgang’s appointment
as trustee of both estates.  Such an outcome would have muddied the battlefield
even further.
[45]          
At the conclusion of the hearing I asked counsel
what their clients would be seeking in costs if they were successful.  Each
side came in at virtually the same amount: $12,000.
[46]          
As the successful party, Wolfgang is awarded his
costs of the motion in the amount of $12,000.