[1]              
The plaintiff holds a first mortgage in the principal
sum of $392,000 registered against the mortgaged property, 5759 Robinson Street,
Niagara Falls, (“the property”) which is a residential property owned by the
defendant 2811230 Ontario Ltd. (“281”). The mortgage is guaranteed by the
defendant Alisa Chaly (“Ms. Chaly”).
[2]              
Payments were made as required during the
one-year term of the mortgage which matured and came due on February 2, 2023.
[3]              
No payments have been made since February 2,
2023, and the mortgage remains unpaid, with interest accruing and compounding
monthly since maturity.
[4]              
The Corporation of the City of Niagara Falls (“the
City”) is a named defendant because it is a subsequent encumbrancer, having
registered two work orders against the property. The plaintiff advised that the
City did not oppose the relief sought nor did it appear in court on the motion.
[5]              
AMB X Energy Inc. and 1000247710 Ontario Inc.
are holders of an unenforceable notice of security interest and of an expired
lien claim which were registered on title. They have been noted in default.
[6]              
Ms. Chaly requested permission to represent 281
as well as herself personally on this motion. She indicated that she is the
company’s sole officer and director and that the company did not have
sufficient funds to retain a lawyer. In addition, she advised that she is a
licensed private investigator and an experienced investor in property. She has
intimate knowledge of the matter and experience litigating in the courts and
tribunals of Ontario.
[7]              
On the basis of her representations, Ms. Chaly
was permitted to represent 281 pursuant to the court’s discretion under rule
15.01(2) of the Rules of Civil Procedure[1]
(“the Rules”).
[8]              
The plaintiff, as chargee, moves for summary
judgment for the relief claimed in the statement of claim, namely foreclosure
of the property that is the security for the mortgage, payment of the debt by
the chargor 281 and by the guarantor Ms. Chaly, and for possession and leave to
issue a writ of possession. The plaintiff also requests a dismissal of the
counterclaim.
[9]              
The plaintiff claims principal and interest to
November 29, 2024 of $451,699.67 plus a mortgage administration fee of $2,500
(as per the charge terms) and per diem interest of $88.91 after November 29.
[10]          
The defendants seek a dismissal of the motion.
[11]          
For the reasons set out below, the plaintiff’s
motion is granted.
[12]          
The mortgage loan was brokered for 281 by a
brokerage representing the borrower. The defendant’s lawyer received funds in
trust on February 1, 2022, paid the broker and lender fees, and applied the balance
of the funds toward the purchase of the property.
[13]          
The abstract of title for the property shows
that it was acquired by 281 on February 2, 2022 and that the charge was
registered immediately thereafter. Standard charge terms 20033 apply.
[14]          
The charge was for principal of $392,000,
payable interest only at the rate of $2,450 per month, not in advance, with a
maturity date of February 2, 2023. Monthly interest was payable at 7.5 percent.
[15]          
Interest was paid as required initially with
eight postdated monthly cheques and then with a lump sum.
[16]          
The mortgage matured and was not renewed.
[17]          
The property was purchased by 261 as an
investment for resale. Ms. Chaly and 261 made improvements to it and listed it
for sale.
[18]          
After the maturity of the mortgage, no immediate
action was taken by the plaintiff despite the lack of any further payments. The
plaintiff knew that the property was listed for sale.  A purported sale of the
property fell through in early July 2023, apparently due to the uncertainty
created by the work orders registered on title.
[19]          
A lawsuit was commenced by the plaintiff on July
27, 2023 for payment and possession. A default judgment was obtained and
subsequently set aside by the defendants for failure by the plaintiff to have
properly served the statement of claim. Costs were awarded to the defendants against
the plaintiff which have been paid.
[20]          
During the initial lawsuit, a process server was
directed to attempt to take possession of the property on behalf of the
plaintiff by changing the entrance door locks.  On finding that the property
was apparently unoccupied, he did so.  The defendants were able to have the
locks re-changed and retook possession.
[21]          
Ms. Chaly deposed that she moved into the
property as her residence in the first week of June 2024.  She also deposed
that as of about the same time, her “tenant/roommate” Alex Shishman moved in,
occupying the second bedroom. She filed a lease form in his name dated
September 27, 2024.
[22]          
The foregoing background facts are undisputed.
[23]          
The principles to be applied in a summary
judgment motion were established by the Supreme Court of Canada in Hryniak
v. Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7 (CanLII), [2014] 1 SCR 87.  They were summarized by this court in Mayers
v. Khan, 2017, ONSC 200  at para. 18:
[24]          
The plaintiff relied on Yamada v.
Joseph-Walker, 2023 ONSC 1725, which was a case in which the plaintiff sued
for a breach of an agreement of purchase and sale, as an example of the type of
case somewhat similar to this mortgage contract, which was found amendable to a
summary judgment motion.
[25]          
The defendants rely on several propositions to
support their request that the summary judgment motion should be dismissed, and
that there are genuine issues requiring a trial.
[26]          
By letter dated January 26, 2022, the plaintiff
committed to lend $392,000 secured by a charge.  The terms are not disputed.  The
funds were advanced, and the charge was registered. The defendants were
represented by independent legal counsel. The commitment contained in the letter
was accepted as shown by the signature of Ms. Chaly who initialled each page.  However,
it was not signed by the plaintiff.  The space over his printed name is blank.
[27]          
The defendants assert that the commitment, and
by extension the debt obligation and the charge was not legally binding.
[28]          
I reject that assertion.  The commitment was
fully executed as evidenced by payment of money and the charge.  The lack of
signature on the commitment letter is irrelevant.
[29]          
The defendants submit that the lack of signature
on the commitment letter may have been intentional, as part of a civil fraud or
conspiracy.
[30]          
The defendants combine the lack of signature
with a suspicion that the collection efforts by the plaintiff, including the
taking of possession of the property, could have been fraudulent.  An affidavit
filed by the plaintiff attached a copy of his driver’s licence as an exhibit,
which was distorted.  The defendants saw that as an alteration or forgery.  The
responding affidavit from the plaintiff was that the corruption happened
through a copying error, and the driver’s licence copy was replaced with an
uncorrupted version.  The defendants even suggest that the plaintiff is not a real
person, and that the summary judgment motion is brought to avoid exposing that ruse.
[31]          
Mere suspicion is insufficient to defeat an
otherwise legitimate claim for summary judgment.  The court must make its
decision based on evidence, not conjecture.
[32]          
The defendants are expected to “put their best
foot forward” and to include by affidavit, all evidence that would demonstrate
the existence of a genuine issue requiring a trial. As noted in Yamada
at para. 21, “[t]he anticipation of a party to have better evidence at trial will
not defeat a motion for summary judgment” (citing Van Nispen v. McCarron
& Chobotiuk Financial Services Inc., 2020 ONCA 146, at para. 4.)
[33]          
I conclude that there is a lack of evidence to
support the suspicion of civil fraud or conspiracy.
[34]          
The defendants note the existence of a lease
with Mr. Shishman as a possible bar to the foreclosure and claim it to be a
genuine issue requiring a trial.  Whether a valid lease exists is not a
question for the court in this action.  A foreclosure relates to the relationship
as between the chargor and the chargee, and a foreclosure order in the
chargee’s favour would be subject to the possessory rights of a legitimate
tenant.  As such, there is no genuine issue on that point.
[35]          
The defendants assert that due to the lack of signature
on the commitment letter, standard charge term clause 10 permitting the chargee
to take possession on default should not apply.  That argument fails based on
my prior finding as to the validity of the commitment letter.
[36]          
The defendants allege that the taking of
possession by the plaintiff when the locks were changed, albeit temporarily, was
not done “peaceably”. The events were said to have occurred on or about July 24
and 25, 2025 and September 14, 2024.
[37]          
The standard charge terms do permit taking
possession without notice.  Those terms, the common law, and the Mortgages
Act[2]
combine to require that the chargee do so “peaceably”.  That concept was
discussed in the decision of Hume v. 11534599 Canada Corp., 2022 ONCA
575.  There, the Ontario Court of Appeal opined at para. 59 that the question
about whether the actions were peaceable depends on the circumstances of the
case.
[38]          
There is no suggestion that violence or the
threat of violence was applied in this case.  The property was apparently being
used as a short-term vacation rental, and there is no allegation that it was physically
occupied by anyone at the time the re-entries happened and the locks were
changed.
[39]          
If the defendants consider that they have a
claim for trespass giving rise to damages, they have the right to assert that
claim in a civil action.  However, the potential for such a claim is not
relevant to the contractual ability of the plaintiff to claim foreclosure.
[40]          
The statement of defence alleges that the plaintiff
failed to act with due diligence in advising the defendants whether the charge
would be renewed after maturity. The defendants improved the property at their
cost, and it would be unfair to permit the plaintiff to reap a corresponding
benefit.
[41]          
On review, there was no provision that the
charge would automatically renew.  That fact is admitted by the defendants. They
allege in para. 10 of the statement of defence that Ms. Chaly began contacting
the broker and lawyer about the possibility of renewal in December 2022 prior
to the maturity of the charge in February 2023.  Although she understood that
there would be a renewal, she had no contact with the plaintiff. In para. 12,
the defendants allege that the first contact from the plaintiff was by letter
dated July 4, 2023, confirming that there would be no renewal.
[42]          
The plaintiff asserts that no enforcement steps
were taken initially despite the maturity of the charge because he anticipated
the imminent sale of the property.  It had been listed for sale, and in May 2023
an offer of purchase and sale was signed by the defendants, but that deal did
not close in July as anticipated or at all.  The plaintiff’s reason for
deferring collection efforts is reasonable.
[43]          
There is an absence of any evidence to suggest
that the defendants were misled by the plaintiff as to a renewal.
[44]          
In addition, clause 19 of the standard charge
terms prevents any extension of time given by the chargee  from prejudicing the
chargee’s rights against the chargor.
[45]          
The counterclaim contains allegations that the
lack of information from the plaintiff as to a possible renewal meant that the
defendants could not decide whether to renew, and that it was not possible for
the defendants to find an alternative lender.  The affidavits filed by the
defendants in response to the summary judgment motion contain no evidence in
support of that allegation.
[46]          
I conclude that there are no facts supporting an
allegation that the plaintiff’s collection efforts create a genuine issue for
trial.
[47]          
The claim for possession flows as a necessary
adjunct to the default, as set out in clause 10 of the standard charge terms.
[48]          
Rule 60.10 provides that a writ of possession
may be issued at the time an order entitling the party to possession is made.  The
granting of a foreclosure order is such a time.
[49]          
The court will only grant leave to issue a writ
of possession where it is satisfied that all persons in actual possession of
the property have received sufficient notice to have enabled them to apply to
the court for relief.
[50]          
In this case, the only person currently in
possession other than Ms. Chaly is Mr. Shishman.  A letter was sent to him
dated November 4, 2024, as well, on the same day, as a letter to “All Occupants
of 5759 Robinson St.”  While often an occupancy report prepared at the time of
the motion for the writ of possession is needed, in this case the court is
satisfied by the evidence from Ms. Chaly that no one else is in occupation.
[51]          
Therefore, leave to issue a writ of possession
will be granted.
[52]          
The defendants have crossclaimed against the
City of Niagara Falls and its co-defendants alleging that attempts by the
defendants to sell the property have been thwarted by the registrations against
title, with a corresponding financial loss to the defendants.
[53]          
The crossclaim is unaffected by the grant of a
foreclosure order and writ of possession.
[54]          
The undisputed claims by the plaintiff, namely
the existence of the charge, its default, and the admission about the occupants
of the property are, without clear evidence to the contrary, reasons to grant a
summary judgment.
[55]          
The concerns raised by the defendants do not
rise to the level of genuine issues requiring a trial, in that they do not
disclose evidence to challenge the plaintiff’s entitlement.
[56]          
On review of all the material, I am confident
that I can make the necessary findings of fact, most of which are undisputed, and
apply the relevant legal principles to resolve this dispute.  As between the
parties, there is no reason to expend more money and time on the claim and
defence.  To the extent that the defendants may have a cross-claim against the
City, they are free to continue to advance it.
[57]          
Discretion to grant an order for costs flows from
s. 131 of the Courts of Justice Act[3]
and the factors to determine how that discretion is the be exercised are found
in rule 57.01.
[58]          
Success is presumptive of a costs award.  The
standard charge terms at clause 8 call for costs to be added to any amount
owing under the charge, calculated at a solicitor and his own client scale.
[59]          
The plaintiff has submitted a costs outline
claiming costs of $27,662.45 inclusive of HST and disbursements.  Having
reviewed the costs outline, including the rates charged and hours spent, I do
not find the amount to be unreasonable or disproportionate to the nature of the
claim.
[60]          
Therefore, there will be an order that the
defendants pay the plaintiff that sum.