1.     
This
is the Applicant Mother’s (“Mother”) motion to relocate with the parties’ two
children from Toronto to Winnipeg.  The Respondent Father (“Father”) seeks to
adjourn the motion to a hearing where the Mother’s evidence may be subject to
oral cross-examination.  The Mother contests the adjournment.  She says she has
a recent job offer from an employer in Winnipeg, which job commences in
December, 2024.
2.      For the following
reasons, I grant an adjournment and order this motion be heard as a long motion
where the parties may be cross-examined on their affidavit evidence.
3.      The Mother has not
complied with a court order around the scheduling of this motion.  On October
3, 2024, Horkins J. ordered that if the Mother’s request for relocation was not
resolved, “the parties shall discuss how they wish to proceed to have it
decided.  If necessary, the parties may request an attendance at TBST court to
have the hearing of the relocation issue scheduled.  Otherwise, it shall be
scheduled at the settlement conference.”
4.      There is no evidence
that the Mother raised with the Father a discussion on how the relocation
should be decided by this Court, nor did the Mother seek an attendance at
TBST.  Instead, she just filed this 1-hour motion.  This Court will not reward
a litigant who fails to comply with court orders.
5.      The parties’ affidavits raise
credibility issues regarding the Father’s parenting time with the children,
efforts by the Mother to limit his parenting time, and the nature of the bond
between the children and the Father.  These are important and relevant facts in
determining whether a relocation is in the best interests of the children.  It
is not possible to resolve these credibility issues on an affidavit
record.
6.      The relief the Mother
seeks would create a new status quo and may have permanent implications
on the bond between the children and the Father.  Procedural fairness requires
that the Father be permitted to cross-examine the Mother, given the seriousness
of a relocation on this family and its impact in this proceeding.
7.      Furthermore, there is no
evidence in the affidavit material of a Notice of Relocation being served on
the Father, as is required under the Divorce Act.  However, Mother’s
counsel advises that a Notice of Relocation was sent and an Objection received.
8.      I appreciate that the
Mother has a job opportunity in Winnipeg with a marginally higher salary than
what she is currently earning in Toronto.  But as part of her evidence, she
relies heavily on family ties in Winnipeg, better schools, availability
of daycare, and ability to continue with extra-curricular activities for the
children.  Her evidence is that she has family in Winnipeg who would be nearby
and who can support her and the children.   While the job opportunity may be
new, the existence of family in Winnipeg is not.  Whether the job or a desire
to be closer with her family is the primary objective for the move will be a
relevant factor when the relocation motion is determined.
9.      If the impetus for the
move to Winnipeg is truly work related, her efforts to find improved job
opportunities in the Toronto area is disputed.  Her evidence of those job
search efforts is a screenshot of her email inbox, which is barely readable
given the size.  The contents of those emails were not in evidence.  This
exhibit is insufficient to establish bona fide efforts to find a better
job with a flexible schedule in Toronto.
10.  I adjourn the Mother’s motion to a
long motion on February 13, 2025.  Parties may re-file fresh motion material
that conforms with the Consolidated Provincial Practice
Direction for Family Proceedings at the Superior Court of Justice.  Leave is granted for
the primary Affidavits to be 25 pages, double-spaced, with 25 pages of
exhibits.  The Applicant’s Reply affidavit shall be no more than 10 pages, with
10 pages of exhibits.  Parties will be entitled to cross-examine the opposing
party at the motion for no more than 1.5 hours each.
11.  Parties shall deliver motion
material pursuant to the following schedule:
12. 
On
consent, I order disclosure of records held by any Children’s Aid Society or police
force that holds records in relation to this family.
13.  The Father was successful in
obtaining an adjournment to a long motion date and is presumptively entitled to
costs.  I decline to award costs to the Father.
14.  The Respondent Father’s affidavit
does not comply with the Consolidated Provincial Practice Direction for Family Proceedings
in the Superior Court of Justice.  It is not double-spaced.  The Father’s
affidavit also includes argument with quotes and citations from caselaw. 
Affidavits are to contain facts, not argument or legal authorities.
15.  In these circumstances, it is
unfortunate to penalize a party by denying costs when the party is
presumptively entitled to costs.  This is especially so since it is the
Father’s lawyer who prepared improper material.  However, for the reasons given
in Ramdoo v. Houlden, 2024 ONSC 5994, there appears to be no effective
tool for the Court to sanction a lawyer in these circumstances.  My limited
tool to sanction such behaviour is through a cost order.
16. 
I
have not condoned the Mother’s failure to follow the process for scheduling
this motion, as set out in the Order of Horkins J.  Similarly, I will not
condone the Respondent’s breach of the Consolidated Practice Direction issued
by the Chief Justice by granting the Father costs of today.