[1]              
This is a reference involving multiple lien and
non-lien actions arising from the construction of the Nobu Residences
condominium complex in Toronto. 
In the lien actions, there is some disagreement over proper application of the
transition provisions in s. 87.3 of the Construction Act, RSO 1990, c.
C.30.  Specifically, at issue is whether the Construction Act as it read
on June 29, 2018 – i.e., the former Construction Lien Act (the
“CLA”) – continues to apply to the improvement.  This special hearing
was convened as a motion hearing to decide the issue, which directly impacts
timeliness of certain liens and next steps in several lien actions subsumed in this
reference.
[2]              
Having
considered the evidence before me and the arguments made, I find that the CLA
continues to apply to the subject improvement and, accordingly, all liens
arising from it.
[3]              
Disputes on the project gave rise to numerous
liens at various levels of the construction pyramid.  In the course of this
reference, a vetting committee was struck to review and report on quantum,
lienability, and timeliness of the subtrade and supplier liens.  After vetting those
liens, the vetting committee reported, among other items, that timeliness of
seven liens could not be confirmed for various different reasons.
[4]              
The liens of Desco Plumbing and Heating Supply
Inc. (“Desco”), Baaron Group Inc. (“Baaron”), Independent Electrical Supply
Inc. (“Independent Electrical”), Flocor Inc. (“Flocor”), Cantrio Concept’s Inc.
(“Cantrio”), HTS Engineering Ltd. (“HTS”), and Elgin Sheet Metal Supplies Inc.
(“Elgin”) are directly impacted (or potentially impacted) by my decision on whether
the CLA continues to apply.  It will bear on whether several of their
liens were properly preserved and will impact how validity of the remaining
liens will be argued in this reference.
[5]              
The transition provisions in s. 87.3 operate
such that all liens arising from contracts (and subcontracts) in respect of the
same “improvement” are subject to the same version of the Construction Act: 
Caledon (Town) v. 2220742 Ont. Ltd. o/a Bronte Construction, 2024 ONSC 4555
(Div Ct) at para. 26; Crosslinx Transit
Solutions Constructors v. Form & Build Supply (Toronto) Inc., 2021 ONSC 3396 at paras. 4 and 23; DNR Restoration Inc. v. Trac
Developments Inc.,  2023 ONSC 1849at paras. 37-38.
[6]              
Only the primary transition provisions in ss.
87.3(1) and (2) of the Construction Act are implicated by this motion. 
They state as follows:
[7]              
There is no leasehold interest in this case, so
the operative transition clause is s. 87.3(1)(a) or (b), namely whether there
was a contract was entered into or a procurement process was commenced for the
improvement before July 1, 2018.  As I previously held in Crosslinx, supra,
at paras. 4 and 24, the date of a subcontract has no relevance in
determining which version of the legislation applies to an improvement.  No
challenge has been raised to what constitutes the “improvement” at issue in
this reference.
[8]              
Commencement of a procurement process is defined
in s. 1(4) of the Construction Act.  It provides that a procurement
process is commenced on the earliest of the making of (a) a request
for qualifications; (b) a request for quotation; (c) a request for
proposals; or (d) a call for tenders.  Those four terms are not defined in
the act, but do have a particular meaning in the construction industry. 
Regardless, interpretation of those terms is not at issue on this motion.
[9]              
Desco
argues that the current Construction Act ought to be found to apply.  The
owner, 35 Mercer Limited (“Mercer”), the contractor, Urban Integrated
Group Inc. (“UIG”), and a lien claimant, Brunco Insulation Ltd. (“Brunco”), all
take the position that the CLA properly continues to apply.  The
remaining parties to this reference have taken no position.
[10]          
Limited evidence is before me addressing factual
matters relevant to the transition provisions.  The sole evidence before me is
a single affidavit sworn by Josh Zagdanski, the Vice President of Mercer.  It
was prepared by Mercer in May 2023 and filed with the court in support of an
order vacating the liens of UIG based on the CLA continuing to apply. 
Prior to this hearing, all parties were afforded an opportunity to file any
additional evidence that they deemed necessary to decide the transition dispute. 
None of the lien claimants or other parties to the reference did so.  The
evidentiary record for deciding application of s. 87.3 of the Construction
Act in this reference is thereby limited to Mr. Zagdanski’s affidavit.
[11]          
Josh Zagdanski’s affidavit outlines that Mercer began
the procurement process for the condominium construction in 2017, which he
states was done “by retaining consultants and requesting quotations from trades
for various aspects of the construction of the Project.”  Mr. Zagdanski’s
affidavit specifically identifies negotiations with the proposed shoring trade,
Anchor Shoring & Caissons Ltd. (“Anchor”), which he says took place in
spring 2018.  Appended to the affidavit is a copy of Anchor’s letter dated
April 11, 2018 for the shoring work, which Mr. Zagdanski states is a
quotation.  That letter states it is Anchor’s “confirmation of contract amount
for proposed shoring required at the 15-35 Mercer Street Project”.  It is undisputed
to be in respect of the project at issue.  I am satisfied that the document is
a quotation.  That characterization is not disputed and the letter has not argued
to be anything else.
[12]          
Mr. Zagdanski’s affidavit does not directly address
the dates of any contracts being entered into for the improvement, but instead
speaks only to the timing of a procurement process.  In its totality, the
affidavit and exhibit support that a request for quotation or a request
for proposal had occurred for the improvement by no later than April 11,
2018.  There is no other evidence on a procurement process before me.
[13]          
Desco raises several arguments in support of why
I should find that the Construction Act applies to the improvement and
the liens.  I have distilled them as follows:
[14]          
I reject these arguments for the following
reasons.
[15]          
First, I am not convinced that evidence on the
prime contract is always required.  Desco points to my decision in Crosslinx
and the significance that I placed on the prime contract.  However,
that case turned on its facts.  Crosslinx did not involve a dispute over
the date of a procurement process.  The date of a contract for the improvement
and the date of a procurement process for the improvement are separate
transition provisions in s. 87.3(1)(a) and (b).  I appreciate that the
contract clause is first and the procurement process clause is second, but the
structure of s. 87.3(1) looks for the earliest date.  Given the requirement for
full and frank disclosure on an ex parte motion, it may have been
advisable for Mercer to also put forward evidence on the prime contract between
Mercer and UIG, but I do not accept that the failure to include such evidence renders
the affidavit “deficient”.
[16]          
Second, the context in which Mr. Zagdanski’s
affidavit was tendered is important.  It was prepared to support Mercer’s position
that only $50,000 was required for security for costs to vacate each of UIG’s
liens pursuant to ss. 44(1) and (2) of the CLA, as opposed to the
greater amount of security for costs that would have been required under the
current language of s. 44(1) of the Construction Act.  Accepting that the
affidavit evidence supported that the CLA continued to apply on the
vacating motion was not dispositive of the transition issue.
[17]          
The same issue was before me in Mobilinx
Hurontario Contractor v. Edge1 Equipment Rentals Inc., 2023 ONSC 5885.  In
that case, a contractor moved ex parte to declare a particular subcontractor’s
lien expired in reliance on my disposition of a prior vacating order.  In the
context of the vacating motion, I had accepted and approved security calculated
under s. 44(1) of the CLA based on evidence of a procurement process tendered
to address s. 87.3 of the Construction Act.  I declined to grant the
requested ex parte declaration of expiry and dismissed the contractor’s
motion without prejudice to moving again on further and better evidence or
on notice to the lien claimant.
[18]          
In dismissing the motion, I held that decisions
on ex parte vacating motions about the transition provisions
are not binding.  Vacating motions brought without notice are interlocutory in
nature and not intended to definitely resolve rights (para. 15).  I equated
an ex parte vacating order sought based on s. 44(1) of the CLA as
being more in line with an order under s. 44(2) of the Construction Act,
which permits the court to make a vacating order based on security “of an
amount that the court determines to be reasonable in the circumstances to
satisfy the lien” (para. 16).
[19]          
I remain of the same view.  I accordingly afforded
all parties to this reference with an opportunity to tender any new evidence
that they felt was relevant to deciding the transition issue.  It was thereby
open to Desco (or others) to tender evidence on the prime contract between
Mercer and UIG or evidence to challenge Mr. Zagdanski’s affidavit.  None was
filed.
[20]          
Third, I am unconvinced that there is anything
“murky” in the Construction Act about who bears the obligation to seek
out the facts relevant to s. 87.3 as they relate to timely preservation and
perfection of liens.  It is the lien claimant.
[21]          
A contractor and certainly an owner often cannot
reasonably know every subtrade and supplier who performs work or supplies
materials on a project.  That is particularly true on larger construction
projects where there are multiple tiers of contract and subcontract streams, as
is the case here.  In my view, it would be patently unfair to hoist on the
owner and contractor the obligation of ensuring that all subtrades and
suppliers are made aware of when a procurement process was commenced or when a
contract was entered into, so long as there is a statutory mechanism by which a
lien claimant may obtain that information itself.  That mechanism is found in
s. 39 of the Construction Act.
[22]          
Pursuant to s. 39(1) of the Construction Act,
any person having a lien or who is the beneficiary of a trust under Part II
of the Construction Act is entitled to require an owner or contractor to
provide information on contracts, procurement processes, the state of accounts
under a contract, and other information.  Specifically, a subtrade or supplier
on a construction project may request that the owner or contractor confirm “the
names of the parties to the contract, the date on which the contract was
entered into and the date on which any applicable procurement process was
commenced”.  A response to a s. 39 request for information must be provided
within no more than twenty-one days.  Accordingly, making a request for
information under s. 39 triggers a positive obligation on the owner or
contractor receiving the request to confirm the dates relevant to application
of the transition provisions in s. 87.3 of the Construction Act.
[23]          
Desco submits that, if the CLA applies,
then s. 39 of the CLA does not entitle a lien claimant to the extent of
information now obtainable under the amended s. 39 of the Construction Act. 
That is true.  The former s. 39 had a narrower scope that did not include
information on the date on which a contract was entered into or a procurement
process was commenced for the improvement.  Nevertheless, in my view, making a
request for information under s. 39 of the Construction Act would elicit
a response that relayed the owner’s or contractor’s position on application of
s. 87.3.   For example, a response by an owner or contractor that the information
sought under s. 39 of the Construction Act is not properly requested because
s. 39 of the CLA still applies would itself relay their position on
operation of s. 87.3.
[24]          
I accept that an owner or contractor may not respond
to the s. 39 request for information, in which case a subcontractor may have no
actual knowledge of the dates of procurement or contracts needed when
considering s. 87.3.  However, should that happen, a lien claimant is not left
without recourse.  It may simply opt preserve its lien on the basis that the CLA
applies (as Desco did).  It may also move before the court under s. 39(6) to
compel compliance with the unanswered request for information.  Alternatively,
if the preservation or perfection deadline is missed, then relief could be sought
under s. 39(5), which provides that a person failing to provide the information
or access to information as required by s. 39(1), or knowingly or negligently
misstates that information, is liable for any damages suffered as a result.
[25]          
Ultimately, a lien claimant’s actual knowledge of
the date of a procurement process or a contract for the improvement is not
material in assessing operation of s. 87.3.  Nothing in the Construction Act
supports that a lien claimant may avoid operation of s. 87.3, and thereby
have extended preservation and perfection deadlines, because they had no actual
or reasonable knowledge of the timing of procurement process being commenced or
a contract being entered.
[26]          
Fourth, s. 87.3 of the Construction Act must
be interpreted and applied by the court based on the language as drafted by the
legislature.  In deciding which version of the act applies, nothing in the
language of s. 87.3 permits me to consider delays between an initial
procurement process and contracts being entered into or prejudice to an owner,
contractor, subcontractor, or other person.  It is thereby irrelevant whether
there has been delay or if there is, on the facts of a particular case, no
“downside” to finding that a particular version of the act applies.  They are not
factors.
[27]          
I accept Desco’s argument that the legislative
drafters very likely did not anticipate the COVID-19 pandemic when drafting the
language of s. 87.3.  However, they may well have contemplated project delays
between procurement and contracting.  What the legislature did or did not
consider is not before me.
[28]          
I note that the standard vacating order signed
in Toronto Region requires that the lien claimant (and its lawyers, if known)
be served with the vacating order and the receipt from posting the lien security
into court.  Subrule 37.14(1)(a) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, RRO
1990, Reg 194, which applies in lien actions, permits a person
affected by an order obtained on motion without notice to move to set aside or
vary the order.  It is accordingly open to any lien claimant whose lien is
vacated on the basis that the CLA continues to apply to bring a motion
to set aside the order or to vary it and require additional security.
[29]          
In this case, Desco was evidently aware that its
lien had been vacated based on security calculated in accordance with s. 44(1)
of the CLA.  Although I have no evidence of whether or when the vacating
order was served on Desco, as the reference associate judge, I have the pleadings
in all lien actions.  When perfecting its lien, Desco’s statement of claim
specifically acknowledges the vacating order and the quantum of lien security posted,
which evidently includes only $50,000 in security for costs.
[30]          
It was open to Desco to move to set aside or
vary the order vacating its lien.  Not doing so did not preclude Desco from
arguing its position at this hearing.  However, the availability of that option
undercuts Desco’s position that it was precluded from advancing potentially
relevant arguments about COVID-19 interruption and project delay at (or at
least around) the time that vacating motions were brought.  I have, in any
event, rejected those arguments for the reasons outlined above.
[31]          
Case law has consistently held that the lien created
by the Construction Act is an extraordinary remedy.  It is a special statutory
right and protection for those supplying services and materials to an
improvement that would not otherwise exist.  Lien claimants are afforded a
secured interest in the property or statutory holdback funds on a construction
project simply by virtue of being a person supplying the services and materials
required for construction.  The lien provides a lien claimant with the right to
recover from an owner even in the absence of any privity of contract.  In my
view, it properly falls on a lien claimant, and no other party, to make
necessary inquiries to ensure proper and timely preservation and perfection of their
lien.
[32]          
For the foregoing reasons, I find and declare
that, by operation of s. 87.3(1)(b) of the Construction Act, the CLA and
its regulations continue to apply to the subject improvement and all liens
arising from it.
[33]          
Given my finding above and the report of the
vetting committee, the liens of Independent Electrical, Flocor, and Cantrio
would appear to have been preserved beyond the 45-day preservation period set
out in s. 31 of the CLA.  Desco’s lien appears to have been perfected
beyond the 45-day perfection period set out in s. 36 of the CLA.  There
are also additional potential timeliness implications for the liens of Baaron,
HTS, and Elgin.
[34]          
There is a pending holdback distribution motion in
December 2024 and a subtrade/supplier claim hearing in February 2025.  Prior to
those hearings, the affected lien claimants, Mercer, UIG, and any other parties
to those lien actions should be discussing the impact of my finding on
advancing the lien claims as well as appropriate next steps in each of those
lien actions.