[1]              
Ukraine Airlines Flight PS752 was shot down by the Islamic Republic of
Iran in January 2020. All of the passengers were killed, including many
Canadian citizens and others with ties to Canada. It was the largest loss of
Canadian lives in aviation since the 1985 Air India bombing.
[2]              
The Applicant, Mehrzad Zarei (“Mehrzad”) had a son on the flight.
[3]              
Mehrzad and other surviving family members established the Respondent,
the Association of Families of Flight PS752 Victims (the “Association”).
[4]              
Mehrzad was also the lead plaintiff in Zarei v. Iran et al 2021
ONSC 3377; 2021 ONSC 8569 where the court found that the defendants
intentionally destroyed the aircraft by firing two missiles into it. The court
awarded damages of $107 million to the five named plaintiffs.
[5]              
The Association was never involved in Zarei v. Iran et al.
[6]              
Mehrzad has had an ongoing dispute with the Association regarding
whether it has conducted itself in accordance with its constating documents.
[7]              
He asserts that the Association should be providing direct financial
support to the members and that it should also fund his efforts to enforce the
judgment he received against the Islamic Republic of Iran.
[8]              
Mehrzad brings an Application for an oppression remedy pursuant to s.
253(3) of the Canada Not-for-Profit Corporations Act, S.C. 2009, c. 23
(“CNCA”). He seeks the following:
[9]              
There is also certain relief claimed in the alternative including an Order
for the passing of accounts, a representation Order under r. 10.01 so that
Mehrzad can represent any person who is a member of the Association, an Order
appointing a receiver and manager, an injunction freezing the Association’s
expenditures, or the appointment of a public accountant.
[10]          
I note at the outset that the Association served a final Affidavit on
November 20, 2024, in response to an affidavit from a former director, Javad
Soleimani, dated October 25, 2024. Mehrzad took no issue that I should consider
this Affidavit but wanted me to take into account an email written by Javad
Soleimani in response. He says that he was not able to obtain sworn evidence
from Mr. Soleimani because of the late service of the November 20, 2024
affidavit provided by the Association.
[11]          
Mehrzad said that if I would not consider the further email from Mr.
Soleimani, then he wanted time to file a further affidavit. This would no doubt
lead to a further response from the Association and further cross examinations.
[12]          
This matter has already used up a great deal of the parties’ resources.
Given the materials before me, it would not be proportional to the issues to
continually permit additional evidence. There has already been one adjournment
for this purpose which led to the affidavit of Mr. Soleimani. I am not prepared
to allow this. Mr. Soleimani’s email is short and it is unclear to me why it
could not have been provided in a sworn affidavit in time for the November 27,
2024 hearing.
[13]          
To bring finality to this matter, I am prepared to accept the
Association’s further affidavit as agreed by Mehrzad and treat the email from
Mr. Soleimani in response as if it had been sworn, because in the end, it
changes nothing.
[14]          
For the reasons that follow, I am dismissing this Application.
[15]          
At its core, this dispute is about corporate governance.
[16]          
The decisions made by the Association’s Board have not violated any
reasonable expectation Mehrzad had. The Board is entitled to deference pursuant
to the business judgment rule.
[17]          
Further, Mehrzad has failed to avail himself of any remedies and options
that he has to pursue his goals under the CNCA using the Association’s
democratic processes.
[18]          
 Section 253 (1) of the CNCA provides that on the application of a
complainant, a court may make an order if it is satisfied that, in respect of a
corporation or any of its affiliates, any of the following is oppressive or
unfairly prejudicial to or unfairly disregards the interests of any member, or
causes such a result:
[19]          
Section 253 (3) of the CNCA specifies that the court may make any
interim or final order that it thinks fit.
[20]          
To succeed in an oppression claim under the CNCA, a complainant must
satisfy a two-part test: (a) the complainant must prove that they had a
reasonable expectation regarding a right in their favour that has been
infringed; and (b) if (a) can be proven, they must demonstrate that their
expectation was violated by conduct that demonstrates "oppression",
"unfair prejudice" or "unfair disregard" of a relevant
interest: Watto v. Immigration Consultants of Canada Regulatory Council,
2019 ONSC 701.
[21]          
The Supreme Court has confirmed that two related inquiries must be
conducted in a claim for oppression: (a) Does the evidence support the
reasonable expectation asserted by the claimant; and (b) Does the evidence
establish that the reasonable expectation was violated by conduct falling
within the terms "oppression", "unfair prejudice" or
"unfair disregard" of a relevant interest?: BCE Inc. v 1976
Debentureholders, 2008 SCC 69 at para 68.
[22]          
Not every unmet expectation, even if reasonably held, constitutes
oppression: BCE at para 67.
[23]          
Here I evaluate Mehrzad’s complaints.
[24]          
Mehrzad’s main complaint is that the Association has refused to provide
financial support for family members and to fund his civil litigation.
[25]          
To evaluate this claim, one must consider the Association’s constating
documents and its actual activities.
[26]          
The Association's purpose is set out in its Articles of Incorporation
(the "Articles"), as follows (the "Purpose"):
[27]          
These are broadly stated purposes open to interpretation.
[28]          
Mehrzad interprets “creating a community for collaboration and support
of the families of victims of Flight PS752” as requiring the Association to
give family members financial support and also fund the litigation he brought.
One former Board member who has resigned, Mr. Mahmoud Zibaie agreed that when
the Association was formed, he participated in discussions where they discussed
the possibility that providing support included financial support for members.
[29]          
However, the Board has interpreted this provision as meaning the
community is established for collaboration and support, not that the
Association was created to provide financial support. I note that the word
“financial” does not appear in the Purposes.
[30]          
I also note that the majority of the members of the Association were not
plaintiffs in Mehrzad’s civil suit and will receive no financial benefit from
that proceeding. The civil claim was not related to or affiliated with the
Association in any way.
[31]          
As well, providing direct financial support to members could risk the
Association’s status as a tax-exempt Not-For-Profit corporation.
[32]          
The Supreme Court of Canada has acknowledged that the "business
judgment rule" is a defence to an oppression remedy claim. The court looks
to see that the directors have made a reasonable decision, not a perfect
decision. Provided the decision taken is within a range of reasonableness, the
court ought not to substitute its opinion for that of the board. As long as the
directors have selected one of several reasonable alternatives, deference is
accorded to the board's decision: Peoples Department Stores Inc. (Trustee
of) v. Wise, 2004 SCC 68 at paras 64-65.
[33]          
The business judgment rule protects boards and directors from those who
might second-guess their decisions. This approach recognizes the autonomy and
integrity of a corporation and the expertise of its directors. The court should
not intervene in decisions that have been made honestly, prudently, in good
faith and on reasonable grounds. In such cases, the board's decisions will not
be subject to microscopic examination and the Court will be reluctant to
interfere and usurp the boards' function in managing the corporation: Hadjor
v. Homes First Security, 2010 ONSC 1589.
[34]          
The Court of Appeal has acknowledged that while the business judgment
rule was developed in the context of for-profit businesses, it has been applied
to not-for-profit corporations as well:3716724 Canada Inc. v. Carleton
Condominium Corporation No. 375 at para 50; Hadjor at paras 47-52.
[35]          
The Association has decided that it would fulfill the Purposes, not
through the provision of financial support but through the following
activities:
[36]          
In my view the Board’s decisions as to how the Association will achieve
its Purposes, and its decision that it will not provide the kind of direct
financial support that Mehrzad wants is a reasonable interpretation that falls
within the business judgment rule and which is entitled to deference.
[37]          
This disagreement does not amount to oppressive conduct, or any
disregard of Mehrzad’s rights as a member of the Association.
[38]          
As well, the failure to consult broadly with the membership about this
issue does not constitute oppression or unfair prejudice.
[39]          
In Campaign for the Inclusion of People who are Deaf and Hard of
Hearing v. Canadian Hearing Society, 2018 ONSC 5445, Wilton-Siegel J. held
that the board of a not-for-profit corporation has a responsibility to ensure
that the membership does not impose its own priorities over the stated purposes
of the corporation. He further confirmed that the members of a non-profit
corporation do not have a formal consultative function or authority in relation
to proposed policies of the corporation, and that any consultative role depends
entirely on a discretionary decision of the board of directors to invite such
consultation.
[40]          
Although Mehrzad’s materials baldly allege that the members of the Board
have political ambitions “to seek favours from or a political nomination to the
Liberal party in the next federal election,” there is no evidence to back this
up. There is also insufficient evidence to support the bald statement that the
Association has been improperly supporting a particular party in Canada.
[41]          
With respect to alleged partisan activities related to the Iranian
regime, there is also insufficient support. Mehrzad provides only two examples.
[42]          
He complains that the Association has been involved with “Global Network
Rallies,” which is a Global Network formed in the wake of the
Woman-Life-Freedom movement in Iran that arose after Mahsa Amini’s death after
being beaten by the morality police. The goal of the Global Network group was
to facilitate the organization of worldwide rallies to protest human rights
violations in Iran.
[43]          
As a prominent and reputable non-profit organization within the Iranian
diaspora, the Association undertook the formation and leadership of the Global
Network group for two reasons. First its contribution was seen as a moral
obligation given the Association’s capabilities and structure. Second, there
were obvious synergies between the core objectives of the Association for
seeking truth and justice for the downing of Flight PS752 and the protests
against human rights violations by the same regime. While the Association
supported the Global Network to hold numerous rallies in countless cities
around the globe, the Global Network also supported the core goals of the
Association on many occasions such as rallies for Flight PS752 on the
anniversaries.
[44]          
Mehrzad also references a rally in Berlin organized to protest Mahsa
Amini’s death that one Association Director attended.
[45]          
It is alleged that the speakers at the rally were chosen from “certain
political orientation,” but no details are provided as to what that was. In any
event, the rally was not organized by the Association.
[46]          
The Association’s Purpose is arguably broad enough for the above
activities. In my view, these were decisions within the realm of reasonableness
entitled to deference.
[47]          
Mehrzad says that the Association has not provided him with production
of all the books and records of the Association in accordance with ss. 22 and
23 of the CNCA. However, with the exception of the member’s register, the
Association has provided all documents that members of a not-for-profit
corporation are entitled to see as set out in the CNCA. As a voting member,
Mehrzad has received the Articles, By-Laws, Minutes of Member meetings and
audited financial statements. The CNCA does not give him the entitlement to
receive Minutes of Directors’ meetings.
[48]          
The failure to provide documents that Mehrzad has no entitlement to
cannot violate any reasonable expectation.
[49]          
Section 25(1) of the CNCA provides that on application the Director may
authorize the corporation to refuse access to corporate records if the Director
believes that furnishing these records would be detrimental to any member.
[50]          
On or about February 13, 2023, the Association made an application to
the Director under section 25(1) of the CNCA seeking an exemption to the
requirement to provide its members with the register of members or the members'
contact information (the "Exemption Application").
[51]          
Mehrzad’s counsel wrote to the Director seeking permission to make
submissions but he did not receive any response. Then, it appears Mehrzad’s
counsel made a submission to the Director opposing the exemption.
[52]          
The Director granted the exemption on March 16, 2023 (the “Exemption”).
[53]          
Mehrzad suggests that the purpose of this application for an exemption
was somehow nefarious.
[54]          
The Association provided evidence that the Iranian regime has been
intimidating and harassing family members of those who died on Flight PS752.
Many Iranians fear reprisals from the Iranian government. Accordingly, their
anonymity in these circumstances is a reasonable concern for the Board to have.
I note that some of the plaintiffs in the proceeding brought by Mehrzad were anonymous.
Belobaba J. issued a sealing order in respect of that proceeding because of
such concerns. He found that there were “genuine and credible fear[s] of
reprisal” in Canada.
[55]          
Mehrzad also complains that the Association has not provided him with a
copy of the Exemption Application but he points to no law that entitles him to
this production. The Director did not order this.
[56]          
As the Exemption was obtained in accordance with the procedure set out
in the CNCA and granted by the Director who is authorized to carry out the
duties and exercise the powers granted under that legislation, this cannot
constitute any violation of Mehrzad’s reasonable expectations. To suggest
otherwise would mean that a not-for-profit corporation exercising its rights
under the governing statute can be oppressive to an individual member.
[57]          
With respect to the argument that Mehrzad requires the register because
there might be some members who are part of the Iranian regime, there is
absolutely no admissible evidence to support this.
[58]          
The exemption contains a term requiring an alternate method for members
to communicate with each other. To comply, the Association created a private
group on the instant messaging platform “Telegram” which functions as a resource
to encourage and facilitate communications among members.
[59]          
Mehrzad has been an active participant in the Telegram Group and has
full access to it. He has used it in the past to discuss some of the same
issues raised by him in this application.
[60]          
Therefore, the Association’s actions in this regard, cannot have
violated Mehrzad’s reasonable expectations.
[61]          
Mehrzad has provided evidence from two former Board members, Mahmoud
Zibaie and Javed Soleimani. They both say that they resigned from the Board
because of their disagreements with how the Board was operating.
[62]          
Mr. Zibaie’s main concern was that former Board President, Hamed
Esmaelion, hijacked the Association to focus on his own partisan and political
issues including regime change in Iran.
[63]          
Mr. Esmaelion resigned in March 2023, almost two years ago and as such,
any concerns about him and the direction that he was taking the Association in
are not particularly relevant to the way in which the Board is currently
operating.
[64]          
Mr. Zibaie also takes issue with the Board’s alleged failure to comply
with its By-Laws by adding a clause that permitted it to accept anyone as a
member.
[65]          
When Mr. Zibaie was cross examined, he acknowledged that the By-Law was
approved by the Board and then brought to the members who also approved it. He
may not have liked it, but it was established through a democratic vote.
[66]          
As well, Mr. Zibaie was only a Board member for a few months in 2020. He
does not communicate with members on the social media site where they
communicate and as such, it is unclear how he has any current knowledge on
relevant issues. Therefore, I do not find his evidence persuasive.
[67]          
Mr. Soleimani also references an unhealthy atmosphere, as well as the
need for greater circulation of members and participation of family members in
Board decisions. However, he provides insufficient details as to what he means.
He points to no provision of the CNCA that requires the kind of involvement of
family members that he seeks.
[68]          
Mr. Soleimani also says that the Board has not dealt with Mehrzad’s
Application appropriately and that it has improperly incurred expenses as a
result.
[69]          
The Association says that it did not want to be involved in litigation
with a member but the Board determined that it had no choice to respond in
large part due to its obligation to safeguard the information of its members
and ensure their safety and well-being. This was a decision that it was
entitled to make.
[70]          
He alleges that volunteers have resigned due to mismanagement, but again
there is insufficient evidence and particulars to back this up.
[71]          
Finally, Mr. Solemani expresses concern about the lack of facility with
the English language of certain Board members and the impact this has on
decision making. Again, there are insufficient particulars.
[72]          
There is also an anonymous letter from some members dated April 8, 2022,
attached to Mr. Zibaie’s affidavit where they assert that they want greater
transparency on the Association’s finances and where they refer to
“questionable conduct”.
[73]          
There are insufficient details. Furthermore, this evidence relates to a
significantly contested matter and as such it is not admissible to prove the
truth of its contents pursuant to r. 39.01(5). It is also stale dated as it
predates this Application by 2 years.
[74]          
The totality of all of this evidence does not persuade me that the
Board’s disagreements are such that it is not operating effectively. The fact
that people may disagree with how a Board is operating or the decisions it has
made does not mean that it is operating in an oppressive manner.
[75]          
As explained by the Association’s affiant, “as expected with a group the
size of the Association, all of whom are grieving the senseless loss of a close
relative, there can be disagreements and disputes about how best to achieve its
Purposes.”
[76]          
Mehrzad challenges the way in which the Association has spent some of
the $1,000,000 it has raised. He says that it has been spent on things that the
Board personally want to do, and not in support of activities that would
support the Association’s objects.
[77]          
In support, Mehrzad refences an $83,000 consultation expense that he
says is unexplained. He says that the Board should not be spending money on
consultants.
[78]          
The Association explained that it hired a consultant to assist it with
its lobbying of the Canadian government. It felt that it required assistance
that went beyond what it could achieve with only volunteers which included the
Board. With the consultant’s assistance, it established deep connections with
many relevant ministries and international bodies. It says that this consultant
charged it only 50 % of the fee. Its achievements is a testament to the value
of the consultant.
[79]          
Mr. Zibaie wrote to the Hon. Ralph Goodale, Special advisor to the Prime
Minister who had prepared a comprehensive report on the Flight PS752 about this
issue. Although Mr. Goodale said that consultants are not required, he also
said that they can be of assistance.
[80]          
Mehrzad also raises concerns about expenses incurred on holding a
ceremony in respect of the third anniversary of the downing of Flight PS752.
While there is a suggestion that this ceremony served more as a political
platform than a platform for seeking justice, there are no details to back this
up. The Association indicated that it held this ceremony because it was the
first opportunity for the families of victims to come together and see each
other since COVID. The ceremony successfully brought together many of the
country’s most prominent leaders including the Prime Minister, federal cabinet
ministers and members of Parliament and renewed attention on the scale of the
tragedy of Flight PS752.
[81]          
Notably, while there is reference to “huge expenses” there is not a
single reference to a particular expenditure that was inappropriate or
excessive.
[82]          
Mehrzad also makes reference to the costs associated with a Director
attending the Berlin rally but as I noted above, this was within the Board
authority. Mehrzad has not demonstrated any concerns with any particular
expenditures.
[83]          
He also raises concerns that the Association appears to have received
some donations in the form of crypto currency upon which it appears to earn
profits. Mehrzad did not provide any legal reason why accepting a crypto
currency donation is problematic. Further, the Association explained that the
income statement was somewhat of a misnomer as it reflects the net balances of
the Association’s cash assets for the year after income and expenses. This is
permissible at law, otherwise a non-profit corporation would be required to
disgorge any assets in its possession at the end of every year to achieve a
zero balance.
[84]          
Again, the Board is the one elected by the members with the authority to
manage the Association and make decisions as to how best to achieve its
objects. All of the above expenditures are decisions that the Board was
entitled to make. Mehrzad has not shown how these expenditures constituted
oppression of him.
[85]          
With respect to concerns about transparency, the Association provides
annual reports related to its financial activities.
[86]          
There is simply insufficient evidence before me to show there is any
real concern that the money raised by the Association has been used for
improper purposes.
[87]          
In determining whether an expectation is reasonable, the court may
consider whether the claimant could have taken steps to protect themselves
against the prejudice they claim they have suffered: BCE at para 72; Carr
at para 52.
[88]          
The main relief that Mehrzad seeks in respect of his claim is an Order
requiring the Association to call a special meeting to discuss providing
financial support to family members and for Mehrzad’s civil suit. However, he
has failed to take steps that he could have taken democratically pursuant to
the Articles and the CNCA to seek other members’ support for his position and seek
a democratic vote on them.
[89]          
The Association holds an annual general meeting of its members
("AGM"), as required by the CNCA. All members receive notice of the
AGM and are invited to attend. Despite receiving notice, Mehrzad chose not to
attend the Association's AGM in either 2023 or 2024.
[90]          
The CNCA also allows any member entitled to vote at an AGM to submit
notice of any matter that the member wishes to raise at the AGM (known as a
"Proposal"), and to discuss at the meeting any matter with respect to
which the member would have been entitled to submit a Proposal. The Proposal is
required to be included in the notice of the AGM sent to the members, along
with any statement the member wishes to include in support of their Proposal. Mehrzad
was free to submit his requests for the Association to consider his two issues
at the AGMs for consideration by its membership. He was aware that he had this
right. He chose not to do so.
[91]          
There are also monthly meetings with family members and Mehrzad does not
attend.
[92]          
Mehrzad relies on the case Saskatchewan WFT Taekwondo et al v.
Taikwondo Canada, 2015 ONSC 2937 where Dunphy J. ordered such meeting.
However, this case is distinguishable.
[93]          
In Saskatchewan Taekwondo, the applicants had submitted a valid
requisition to call a meeting of the members pursuant to s. 167(1) of the CNCA
that permits members holding a prescribed percentage of votes to requisition
such meeting. The directors had no valid reason for rejecting the requisition
but did.
[94]          
Mehrzad has not argued that he has the right to call a meeting pursuant
to s. 167, much less that this has been obstructed by the Board after a valid
requisition. He has access to Telegram where members can communicate. If he
wishes, he can use this platform to discuss the issues about which he is
concerned and seek broad based support after which he could exercise his rights
under s. 167.
[95]          
He has failed to try this.
[96]          
He could also seek to become a Director which he has never attempted.
[97]          
In the end, the material before me does not establish that any
reasonable expectation that Mehrzad had has been violated, much less that he
has been oppressed in any way that satisfies the test. Not even the totality of
all the issues raised together leads to this conclusion.
[98]          
Mehrzad indicated at the hearing that he wished to only pursue the
oppression remedy and then adjourn the other relief he requests. I am not
prepared to do so. The parties have appeared multiple times in this matter and
this is Mehrzad’s own application. There has to be finality.
[99]          
Mehrzad has not provided evidence that would entitle him to any of the
alternate relief sought nor were they even argued at the hearing. For the same
reasons that he has not proven any entitlement to an oppression remedy, he has
not established any valid basis for the other alternative relief he seeks.
[100]      
A representation order pursuant to r. 10 is appropriate when there are
persons who have a present, future, contingent or unascertained interest in or
may be affected by a proceeding and who cannot be readily ascertained, found,
or served. There is no evidence adduced in respect of these issues.
[101]      
The test for the appointment of a receiver under s. 101 of the Courts
of Justice Act  is similar to the test for an interlocutory injunction. The
moving party must establish: 1) a serious issue to be tried; 2) that they will
suffer irreparable harm if the motion is refused; and 3) the balance of
convenience favours the appointment. Where the order sought is for interim
relief in an oppression action, the moving party must establish a strong prima
facie case, which is a higher standard than "serious issue". The
moving party must demonstrate the likelihood of ultimate success in the action:
Halsey v. Genoil, 2017 ONSC 4817 at para 14.
[102]      
The appointment of a receiver-manager is extraordinary relief which may
and often does give rise to significant cost consequences. As a result, it
should only be granted cautiously and sparingly. Halsey v. Genoil, at
para 12.
[103]      
Mehrzad has failed to satisfy this test. The evidence does not establish
a serious issue to be tried. As I have outlined, the evidence establishes that
the Board has been acting within the Purposes of the Association and does not
support impropriety alleged. Further, he has failed to establish any
irreparable harm because he can take steps pursuant to the CNCA to bring
forward the concerns he has. I add that he did not provide any sworn evidence
attesting to any irreparable harm either.
[104]      
For the same reason, Mehrzad has failed to establish the basis for an
injunction or the appointment of a public accountant.
[105]      
Therefore, the Application is dismissed.
[106]      
The parties can make cost submissions as follows: the Association within
5 days, Mehrzad within 5 days thereafter. Submissions shall be no longer than 5
pages.