[1]              
The City of Ottawa ("the City") moves
to set aside the Registrar’s order dated June 12, 2024, which dismissed this
action for delay. The City seeks to reinstate the action and extend the time to
set it down for trial.
[2]              
The defendants and the third party, R&D
Technical Solutions Ltd., consent to or do not oppose this motion. If
reinstated, they are prepared to follow the plaintiff's proposed timetable.
[3]              
The third parties, Concrete Polishing and
Sealing Ltd. and City Group (2001) Ltd. (the “responding parties”), oppose the
motion.
[4]              
The Court of Appeal in Piedrahita v. Costin,
2023 ONCA 404, outlines the test for setting aside a dismissal order for delay:
[5]              
This test is flexible, requiring courts to
balance the parties' interests while considering the public's interest in
timely dispute resolution (Prescott v. Barbon, 2018 ONCA 504).
[6]              
The responding parties concede that the City
acted promptly to address the dismissal and that it failed to set the action
down due to the inadvertence of counsel.
[7]              
This action is for damages to a parking garage
due to the defendants' alleged negligent design and construction. The City had
the claim issued on November 28, 2018, and an early mediation occurred on
December 4, 2018. Defences and third-party claims followed in 2019 and 2020.
[8]              
By September 17, 2020, affidavits of documents
were exchanged, and the City was discovered on September 22, 2020.  It answered
its undertakings by March 23, 2021.
[9]              
A second mediation was planned for January 26,
2020, but was postponed to allow the City to obtain an additional report
addressing the cause of the damage and repair costs. Counsel for the plaintiff
was of the view that the additional report was necessary because additional
deficiencies had been discovered in late 2021.
[10]          
There does not appear
to have been any progress to the litigation between January 20, 2020 and June
14, 2022.   Counsel for the plaintiff (not Ms. Sviergula) provided an affidavit
stating that he regularly followed up with the plaintiff about the status of
the expert report.
[11]          
Mr. Faris, a senior
project manager for the City of Ottawa stated in his affidavit that repairs
were being done to the garage between January 20, 2022 and June 14, 2024, the
cost of which were being claimed in this litigation.  Some of the repairs could
only be performed in clement weather as the garage is made of concrete. 
Moreover, the contractor the City retained to repair the garage added or
created new deficiencies.  The City commissioned an expert report to
differentiate between the damages caused by the defendants, and those caused by
the contractor it retained to complete the repairs.  The consultant it retained
to prepare the report did not respond to Mr. Faris’ enquiries in a timely
manner, but the City finally obtained the report in August of 2024.
[12]          
Mr. Faris’ evidence is
that the city had always intended to pursue this action.  Mr. Faris confirms
that the City has preserved all its documents relating to the project and the
repairs.
[13]          
In my view, the City
has shown sufficient grounds for reinstating the action.
[14]          
This litigation involves six parties, and some delay
is inevitable in such cases. All parties engaged in mediation, exchanged
documents, and the City completed discovery.
[15]          
The responding parties
argues that while the City explains the work done to the garage, it fails to address inaction in the litigation. 
In my view, the evidence of ongoing works to the garage explains the pace of
the litigation.  All parties were understandably interested in obtaining an
accurate assessment of damages attributable to the defendants before incurring
additional litigation costs.  By agreeing to adjourn the second
mediation, they tacitly agreed to await the consultant’s report.  The real cost of repairing deficiencies offers a more
reliable basis than estimates, and the City had an
obligation to mitigate its damages by conducting this work in the most
economical way, which affected the repair schedule.
[16]          
I do not suggest that,
in all cases, a plaintiff will be justified in pausing the litigation while
undertaking repairs to a property it alleges was deficiently constructed by the
defendants.  But where this is done with the apparent consent of the defendants,
the plaintiff’s action ought not be dismissed for delay.
[17]          
In my view, the
explanation for the delay is justifiable.
[18]          
I am also convinced that the City
consistently intended to pursue the action and that the delay resulted from
inadvertence.  Mr. Faris’ unchallenged evidence is that the
City has always intended to pursue the action and counsel for the plaintiff
confirmed that the dismissal arose from a clerical error regarding the deadline
to set the action down.  Counsel for the plaintiff testified
that between January 2022 and June 2024, he responded to the defendants’ requests
for updates about the status of the plaintiff’s report and followed up with his
client.
[19]          
Finally, I am not persuaded that the responding
parties would suffer prejudice as a result of the action being reinstated. The
prejudice in this context is to the defendant's ability to defend the action
that would "[arise] from steps taken following dismissal, or which would
result from restoration of the action following the registrar's
dismissal": 806480 Ontario Ltd. v. RNG Equipment Inc., [2014] O.J. No.
2979, 2014 ONCA 488, at para. 4.
[20]          
The responding parties claim they would suffer
prejudice if the action is reinstated, arguing that the elapsed time and delays
have further complicated the plaintiff's assessment of repair costs and
determination of liability. Although it is regrettable that the City’s
contractor caused additional damage to the garage, this complication does not
constitute prejudice arising from reinstatement. Furthermore, any challenges
the City faces in determining liability or assessing repair costs fall on the
plaintiff, who carries the burden of proof.
[21]          
The defendant,
Architecture49 Inc., commenced a third-party claim against R & D Technical
Solutions Ltd. and City Group (2001) Ltd on July 2, 2020.  Its claims are for
contribution and indemnity and are entirely derivative.  It does not assert any
separate cause of action. It consented to the plaintiff’s motion to set aside
the Registrar’s order dismissing the action and to the timetable that was
proposed.
[22]          
Architecture49 Inc’s
counsel appeared at the motion to address an issue raised in the responding
party’s factum, namely, the re-instating of the deemed dismissal of the third-party
claims. The responding parties suggested that the defendants were required to
seek an Order setting aside the dismissal of the Third Party actions and
questioned whether the defendants acted promptly in seeking this relief.
[23]          
When an action is dismissed under Rule 48.14,
Rules 24.03 and 24.04 apply to counterclaims, crossclaims, or third-party
claims, except for Rule 24.04(1.1). Rule 24.04(1) states: "Unless the
court orders otherwise, when an action against a defendant who has crossclaimed
or made a third-party claim is dismissed for delay, the crossclaim or
third-party claim shall be deemed dismissed."
[24]          
Architecture49 Inc. contends that the Rules do
not specify the effects on third-party claims when a Registrar’s order
dismissing the main action for delay is set aside. It argues that a defendant ought
not be required to file a motion to reinstate a third-party claim that is
purely derivative of the main action.
[25]          
I agree that once an administrative dismissal is set aside, the
deemed dismissal under Rule 24.04(1) is no longer applicable, which
automatically revives the third-party claims. It would be unfair to deny the
defendants the opportunity to pursue their third-party claims, especially since
these claims were dismissed not due to the defendants’ own delay, but due to
the plaintiff’s failure to set the action down before the
action’s fifth anniversary.  The third party claims themselves are four years
old and were not administratively dismissed for delay.
[26]          
The responding parties are of the view that the
timetable proposed, which was agreed to by all parties except them, is too
ambitious and is simply a “placeholder”.  I encourage the parties to negotiate
a revised timetable with the responding parties.  If the parties cannot agree,
they may request a 9:15 a.m. case conference before me to set a timetable for
the remaining steps.
[27]          
As the plaintiff succeeded on the motion, it is
presumptively entitled to costs. I have reviewed the parties’ respective cost
outlines. The plaintiff seeks $8,931.97 on a partial indemnity basis, while the
responding parties claim $6,636.38.
[28]          
It is understandable that the City, as the
moving party with the burden of proof, incurred more costs than the responding
parties on this motion. I set the City's costs at $7,000, all-inclusive, to be
paid within 30 days.
[29]          
Architecture49 Inc. appeared at the motion to
address an issue related to the reinstatement's impact on third-party claims,
as mentioned in the responding parties’ factum. I award it costs of $1,000,
payable by the responding parties within 30 days.