[1]              
Mr. Little brought this application for habeas
corpus, alleging that Correctional Service Canada (“CSC”) failed to
provide him with sufficient and meaningful rehabilitation opportunities. Mr.
Little submits that this violates his liberty, because it deprives him of the
opportunity to obtain a lower security level and/or parole. Mr. Little submits
that he has been left to languish in custody and has reached a “rehabilitative
impasse.” He seeks an unconditional release. In the alternative, he requests an
order transferring him to a minimum-security institution.
[2]              
The Respondent submits that the application
should be dismissed because a habeas corpus application cannot be used
to review CSC’s rehabilitation programming. According to the Respondent, Mr.
Little’s application is an improper attempt to circumvent the Parole Board’s
exclusive jurisdiction.
[3]              
For the reasons that follow, the application is
dismissed. First, many of Mr. Little’s arguments challenge the Parole
Board’s decisions and decision-making. Applying May v. Ferndale Institution,
2005 SCC 82 (CanLII), I decline to exercise habeas corpus jurisdiction
over matters within the Parole Board’s comprehensive and expert jurisdiction.
Second, even assuming (without finding) that CSC programming is not within the
Parole Board’s comprehensive jurisdiction, I would not grant relief in habeas
corpus. Mr. Little has not shown that his residual liberty interests were
deprived. There is no basis to conclude that his detention is unlawful.
[4]              
Mr. Little was declared a dangerous offender in
2007. He is serving an indeterminate sentence and currently resides at Bath
Institution, a medium-security facility. This is the fifth habeas corpus
application he has brought before the Ontario Superior Court of Justice since
2013.
[5]              
Mr. Little has a long history of violent,
criminal behaviour. In 2004, when Mr. Little’s federal sentence commenced, he
was assessed as a high risk and high needs offender. Since 2009, he has been in
a medium-security institution. In 2022 and 2024, Mr. Little requested a
transfer to a minimum-security institution. CSC denied these requests.
[6]              
As a dangerous offender serving an indeterminate
sentence, Mr. Little is entitled to Parole Board review every two years under s
761(1) of the Criminal Code, (R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46), to determine
whether parole should be granted in accordance with Part II of the Corrections
and Conditional Release Act, (S.C. 1992, c. 20) (“CCRA”).
[7]              
In 2010, 2011, 2013, 2015, 2017, 2019, 2021, and 2023, the Parole
Board denied Mr. Little’s requests for parole. At each review, the Parole Board
found that Mr. Little continued to pose a high risk of violent recidivism if
released.
[8]              
CSC has developed Correctional Plans for Mr.
Little, which include treatment and programming recommendations. The
Correctional Plans are designed to monitor Mr. Little’s progress and help him
address factors related to risk to the community.
[9]              
Mr. Little states that, by 2011, he completed
all the programming identified in his Correctional Plan. I accept that Mr.
Little has experienced challenges in accessing CSC programming over the years.
For example, between 2018 and 2021, CSC did not provide him with programming.
In 2021, the Parole Board raised concerns that Mr. Little had not participated
in programming. It wrote:
[10]          
In 2022, Mr. Little participated in integrated
correctional program model maintenance program and participated in a recovery
group offered through mental health services.
[11]          
There is no dispute that Mr. Little has made
“program gains” over the years. Both the Parole Board and CSC have recommended
that he participate in Escorted Temporary Absences (“ETAs”) and be exposed to
less structured environments.
[12]          
Mr. Little understands that reducing his risk
assessment depends on his ability to participate in ETAs. In this respect, he
relies on the Parole Board’s decision of 2013. The Parole Board noted that Mr.
Little had applied for unescorted temporary absences as well as full parole. It
commented, “you have not yet been approved for escorted temporary absences, and
this is viewed by the Board as a necessary first step.”
[13]          
Article 17 of the CCRA provides that ETAs
are discretionary and may be granted for reasons including rehabilitative
purposes and personal development. The review of an inmate’s ETA application
involves (among other things) meeting with the inmate, reviewing the
Correctional Plan, and assessing the inmate’s progress and associated risks.
The CCRA requires the institution to provide written reasons when
authorizing or refusing an ETA request.
[14]          
Mr. Little has made seven ETA requests since
2014. The following four ETA requests were approved:
[15]          
The last two ETAs were approved in late October
2024 and arrangements are being made to coordinate both visits on the same
date.
[16]          
Mr. Little submits that there were significant
delays in processing his requests for ETAs, no progress was made between March
2023 until sometime in the fall of 2024. For its part, the Respondent states
that “the most significant impediment to successful ETAs is that Mr.
Little has declined to participate in the process of developing an ETA
application and instead considers them to be an entitlement.”
[17]          
By October 25th, 2024, all Mr.
Little’s ETA requests had been processed and none were outstanding.
[18]          
While Mr. Little has made gains in his
rehabilitation, there have also been setbacks.
[19]          
Mr. Little has also refused to participate in psychological
risk assessments in November 2020 and January 2023.
[20]          
Mr. Little submits that psychological risk assessments and mental
health programs are voluntary and that he should not be penalized for declining
to participate. I agree that Mr. Little may decline to participate in voluntary
programming. The difficulty with his position is that he cannot both decline to
participate in available programs and also say that he has exhausted CSC’s
programming to the point of impasse.
[21]          
The application raises the following issues:
[22]          
Mr. Little submits that he is not challenging a decision of the
Parole Board, but rather the lack of programming available through CSC. He
states that programming issues fall outside of the Parole Board’s exclusive
jurisdiction and can properly be the subject of a habeas corpus
application.
[23]          
At the hearing, however, Mr. Little did take issue with how the
Parole Board assessed his risk level, submitting that it relied on incorrect
information and failed to appropriately consider his successful completion of
the programming. These aspects of Mr. Little’s arguments are a challenge of the
Parole Board’s decision and decision-making process.
[24]          
Courts have repeatedly held that habeas
corpus jurisdiction should not be used to
create a parallel system for challenging a Parole Board decision-making. Mr.
Little’s arguments about the Parole Board’s decision-making fall within the
second specified exception in May v. Ferndale Institution, 2005 SCC 82.
On this basis, I decline to exercise habeas corpus jurisdiction over
matters within the Parole Board’s comprehensive and expert jurisdiction:
see Little v. Bath (Warden),
2013 ONSC 7604 (CanLII); Little v. Canada (Attorney General), 2022 ONCA
457 (CanLII) at para. 44.
[25]          
The next issue is whether CSC’s programming also
falls within the comprehensive Parole Board scheme. In my view, it is not
necessary to decide this issue. Even assuming (without finding) that
programming offered by CSC’s falls outside the comprehensive jurisdiction of
the Parole Board, Mr. Little has not met the test and established that habeas
corpus is warranted in this case.
[26]          
A successful application for habeas
corpus requires establishing: (1) a deprivation of liberty; and (2)
that the deprivation is unlawful. The onus of making out a deprivation of
liberty rests on the inmate. The onus of establishing the lawfulness of that
deprivation rests on the detaining authority: May v. Ferndale
Institution, 2005 SCC 82 (CanLII), [2005] 3 S.C.R. 809 at para. 74.
[27]          
In habeas corpus, the court’s only remedial power is to
order the applicant freed from the unlawful confinement: Mission Institution
v. Khela, 2014 SCC 24, at para 39. It is not open to the court in a habeas
corpus application to direct that more or different programming be made
available to Mr. Little or that he be granted ETAs.
[28]          
According to the Supreme Court in Dumas v.
Leclerc Institute, 1986 CanLII 38 (SCC) at para. 10, there are three
general ways in which deprivation of liberty may arise in the context of a
detention. It may relate to: 1) the initial decision requiring the detention;
2) a restriction of residual liberty resulting from a change in the conditions
of the detention; or 3) a restriction of residual liberty resulting from the
continuation of the detention.
[29]          
In this case, Mr. Little submits that the continued denial
of his liberty is unlawful. In essence, he says CSC had an obligation to offer
meaningful and adequate programming to him, to allow him to reduce his risk
level and achieve greater residual liberty.
[30]          
The Court of Appeal dealt with a similar argument in Dorsey v. Canada (Attorney General), 2023
ONCA 843 (CanLII). The issue in that case was whether inmates could use habeas
corpus to challenge denials of their applications to transfer to
lower-security prisons. The Court of Appeal held that they could not. It wrote
(at para. 40):
[31]          
This is consistent with the language of sections
3, 4, and 5 of the CCRA, which require CSC to provide programs to assist
in rehabilitation. However, there is no statutory guarantee that rehabilitation
must be effective or that alternatives to custody will, in fact, be achieved.
[32]          
In Dorsey, the Court of Appeal also found
that maintaining a security classification is not a deprivation of residual
liberty. The denial of transfers to minimum security institutions places an
inmate in the same position they were before the request. The Court of Appeal
held that the appellants had not satisfied the first prong of the habeas
corpus test: their residual liberty was not further deprived, nor were
they placed in a more restrictive form of confinement.
[33]          
Courts have also held that an inability to
access rehabilitative programming is not a basis for habeas corpus: see Shea
v Canada (Attorney General), 2022 ABQB 241 (CanLII) at para. 23; Lord v.
Coulter, 2009 BCCA 62 (CanLII) paras. 8 and 5; Rain v
Canada (Parole Board), 2015 ABQB 639 at para. 15; and
Mapara v. Ferndale Institution (Warden), 2012 BCCA 127 (CanLII) at para. 22. 
The denial of an ETA, like the denial of parole, does not change an
inmate’s liberty status and is, therefore, not subject to challenge by way
of habeas corpus: see Mapara v. Ferndale Institution (Warden), 2014
BCSC 748 (CanLII) at para. 42.
[34]          
Applying these principles, I find that Mr.
Little has not established a deprivation of his liberty. Rather, he says he has
lost an opportunity to obtain greater residual liberty. This is not
sufficient to meet the first prong of the test. As the Supreme Court explained
in Dumas, supra, a decision that denies an inmate access to less
restrictive conditions does not constitute a deprivation of liberty. On this
basis, I would deny Mr. Little’s application.
[35]          
Mr. Little relies on R. v. Warren, 2024
ONSC 2785 (CanLII). However, that case is significantly different from the one
at hand. After declaring Mr. Warren a dangerous offender, the court tailored
his indeterminate sentence and held that it be served in a hospital rather than
a penitentiary. In reaching this conclusion, Justice Pomerance considered Mr.
Warren’s specific circumstances, including his complex needs, his cognitive and
other disabilities, and his experiences in prison. She concluded that the
treatment and programming Mr. Warren required were not available in a
penitentiary and that Mr. Warren’s constitutional rights would likely be
infringed if he served an indeterminate penalty of imprisonment in the
correctional system.
[36]          
Importantly, the Warren case was not a habeas
corpus application. It was about tailoring Mr. Warren’s indeterminate
sentence to his particular needs. Mr. Little was sentenced in 2007. This habeas
corpus application is not an appropriate means of challenging his sentence.
In any event, there is no evidence to suggest that Mr. Little’s needs rival the
complex and particular needs of Mr. Warren.
[37]          
In my view, the decision in Urbano v. Bowden
Institution, 2015 ABQB 279 (CanLII) is more instructive in these
circumstances of this case. In Urbano, an inmate applied for a writ of habeas
corpus, alleging that CSC had arbitrarily and unreasonably deprived him of
the programming necessary to complete his correctional plan. There, as here,
the applicant alleged that the lack of programming was a basis for the Parole
Board’s decision to deny him parole. At para. 59, the court in Urbano
held:
[38]          
There is no basis to conclude that Mr. Little’s
detention is unlawful. In addition, the evidence does not support Mr. Little’s
contention that he had reached a “rehabilitative impasse” or that CSC is solely
responsible for any such impasse. Mr. Little has been granted ETAs and at least
one of those absences is upcoming. Moreover, he has declined to participate in
certain assessments and programs.
[39]          
Mr. Little’s successful completion of
programming is only one of many factors that impacted his security level and
access to parole. While he has completed and received positive feedback about
his participation in programming, the Parole Board and CSC considered and
expressed concern about other factors, such as his behaviour, attitude, and
ability to implement the skills he gained in programs. These factors in his
rehabilitation are within Mr. Little’s control.
[40]          
The application is dismissed. Mr. Little’s arguments about the
appropriateness of the Parole Board’s decision-making fall squarely within the
Parole Board’s comprehensive and exclusive jurisdiction to decide. As it
relates to CSC programming, Mr. Little has not demonstrated that any failure on
the part of CSC to provide adequate or meaningful programming deprived him of
his residual liberty. There is also no basis to conclude that his detention is
unlawful.
[41]          
Costs were not sought and they are not awarded.