[1]              
On February 26, 2020, the plaintiff slipped and fell in
a public washroom at a condominium building – York Regional Standard
Condominium Corporation No. 1279; a condominium that was managed by Crossbridge
Condominium Services Ltd.  I will refer to these defendants as the condominium.
As a result of the fall the plaintiff suffered a fracture to her left distal
humerus and to her left distal radius.  At the time of the fall the plaintiff
was 61 years of age and a resident of Iran who was visiting the Greater Toronto
area.
[2]              
As previously indicated York Region Standard Condominium
Corporation No. 1279 is the condominium building where the plaintiff fell. 
Crossbridge Condominium Services Ltd. was the management company responsible
for the condominium.  Ingerv Cleaner Company Ltd. (Ingery) was the cleaning
company contracted to clean the building and, in particular, in this case the
public washroom where the plaintiff fell.  Elite Residential Concierge Services
Inc. (Elite) amongst other things provided security services to the building. 
Elite was the employer of a security guard Arshdeep Kaur (Kaur) who was a
security guard on duty at the time that the plaintiff fell.
[3]              
The claim against Ingerv was resolved prior to trial.
On November 10, 2023 a Pierringer agreement was entered into between the plaintiff
and Elite which settled all claims relating to the liability of Elite. The only
claims asserted by the plaintiff that proceeded to trial were those of the plaintiff
against the condominium.
[4]              
The meteorological records reflect that on February 26,
2020, there had been approximately 14 centimetres of snow fall in the location
of the condominium.  The meteorological records reflect there was approximately
seven centimetres of snow actually on the ground.
[5]              
Ingerv was on site pursuant to its contractual
obligations from 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on February 26, 2020 and was available
on call after 3:00 p.m. if required.
[6]              
At 9:00 a.m. and again at 1:00 p.m. the washroom where
the plaintiff fell was checked and cleaned by Ingerv.
[7]              
Between 1:03 p.m. and 5:19 p.m. when the plaintiff fell
there were 26 people who used the washroom prior to the plaintiff.  Between 3:30
p.m. and 5:19 p.m., 10 people used the washroom.
[8]              
Between 5:03 p.m. and 5:07 p.m. Ms. Kaur is seen on
video entering the washroom.  Her evidence which will be further reviewed below
establishes that she did not see any water on the floor while she was in the
washroom.
[9]              
Between 5:07 p.m. and 5:12 p.m. the evidence
establishes that four people used the washroom prior to the plaintiff entering. 
The last person to exit the washroom prior to the plaintiff is seen exiting at
5:16 p.m.
[10]          
The plaintiff enters the washroom at 5:19 p.m. and she
is present within the washroom for approximately one minute.
[11]          
The plaintiff is seen at 5:25 p.m. in the area of a
dental office located in the general vicinity of the washroom.  The plaintiff’s
evidence establishes that the dentist went to the washroom and made
observations.  The dentist was not called to give evidence as to any
observations that she might have made.
[12]          
The condominium is a large condominium building which
has three public entrances.  There are no restrictions on who is permitted to
use the public washroom where the plaintiff fell.
[13]          
The building is open to the general public between 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.  The washroom where the plaintiff fell is unlocked at 7:00
a.m. and is locked at 11:00 p.m.
[14]          
Ingerv was contracted to be at the condominium between
7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.  The maintenance of the washroom was scheduled to take
place twice per day at 9:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
[15]          
If the security guards employed by Elite made any
observations related to the state of the washroom the security guards were to make
arrangements to have any problems addressed either by contacting their superiors
and/or the cleaning company.
[16]          
No evidence was called as to the standard of care that
might be expected in a public washroom in a building of comparable size to the
condominium.
[17]          
Both sides called expert evidence as it relates to “slip
resistance testing” and whether the tiles on the washroom floor met appropriate
government standards.
[18]          
The thrust of the evidence called on behalf of the plaintiff’s liability
expert Andrew Huntley was that the washroom floor was required
to conform to the 2017
American National Standards Institute standard A326.3 entitled “American
National Standard Test Method for Measuring Dynamic Coefficient of Friction of
Hard Surface Flooring Materials” (referred to in these reasons as the American
standard). Mr. Huntley offered the opinion that because the washroom floor did
not meet a certain wet dynamic coefficient of friction number (a measurement of
slipperiness when wet) set out in this American standard, that the washroom
floor was unreasonably slippery and dangerous.
[19]          
In determining if the washroom floor met appropriate
government and industry standards context is of some importance.  The
condominium was constructed between 2011 and 2015. Occupancy began in February
2015. The American standard came into existence in 2018 well after the
condominium was built. The tile in the washroom floor is the same as the tiled
floor throughout the common entrance areas of the condominium.  No evidence was
called to suggest that there had been any slip and falls on any of the tiled
flooring in the common areas at any time prior to these proceedings.
[20]          
The design and construction of any building in Ontario
will be subject to governing laws and regulations one of which is the Ontario
Building Code (the Building Code). No where in the Building
Code is there any mention of a requirement for a builder to conform with
the American standard. No where in the Building Code is there any
mention of a minimum coefficient of friction number that a tiled floor must
meet.
[21]          
While the plaintiff will argue that the condominium
should have been constructed with tiled floors that conformed with the American
standard it is worth recalling the evidence of Mr. Huntley that conformity with
the American standard is voluntary.  The construction of a building that
conforms with applicable legislation including the Building Code will
not automatically absolve the owner/builder of liability in negligence when
faced with an occupier’s liability claim. That said, conformity with the Building
Code and any other applicable regulatory laws will assist in the
determination of whether an occupier may be liable to an injured party under
the Occupiers Liability Act.
[22]          
It is difficult to conceive how the condominium could
have tiled floors that conform with the American standard when that standard
was not even in existence when the condominium was built. As well, it is worth
observing the obvious that the American standard is precisely that, i.e., an
American standard not an Ontario nor a Canadian standard. There is nothing in
the Building Code that mandates the use of the American standard. In any
event, the 2012 ANSI/NFSI standard B101.3 provides that a level surface with a
wet dynamic co-efficient of friction (a measurement of slipperiness when wet)
of 0.30 to 0.42 has an “acceptable” slip resistance potential. The tiles in the
washroom were all measured to be above 0.30; therefore, the washroom floor had
an “acceptable” slip resistance according to the 2012 ANSI/NFSI standard B101.3
that existed at the time of the construction of the premises. Such a slip
resistance has been accepted in at least one decision of this court.
[23]          
In the 2019 case of Caron v. Omers Realty
Corporation et al., 2019 ONSC 1374, the Ontario Superior Court held that
the acceptable range for an indoor floor’s wet dynamic coefficient of friction
is 0.30 to 0.42. This is the same acceptable range
set out in the 2012 ANSI/NFSI standard
B101.3 referenced above and which existed
at the time of the construction of the condominium.  The washroom
floor falls within this acceptable range as the tiles all measured above 0.30.
[24]          
I do not accept that the tiled washroom floors were
inherently unsafe such that if wet the floors would unreasonably create a
safety hazard.  From the time that the condominium building opened to the
public to the date of the plaintiff’s unfortunate injury there is no evidence
to suggest that there were any other slip and falls on the tiled floors of the
common public areas including that of the washroom.
[25]          
The plaintiff who was 61 years of age at the time of
her fall was visiting from Iran.  She testified that she was going to see a
dentist in the condominium and that prior to her appointment she went to the
washroom and that she was alone at the time.  She stated that she took one or
two steps into the washroom and fell.  She stated that when she entered the
washroom, she did not see any liquid on the floor.  It was only after she fell
that she realized the floor was wet as her clothes were wet.
[26]          
The plaintiff was asked in cross-examination if she had
been paying attention would she have seen the liquid on the floor.  In response
to this question the plaintiff testified that “the time was short and I fell on
the ground – I fell down very quickly”.  On further questioning when she was
asked whether she was paying attention would she have seen the liquid on the
floor her response was “I don’t know what to say”.  She was further asked if
she had been paying attention and seen liquid on the floor would she have
stepped in it.  In response to this question the plaintiff stated, “if there was
enough water I would have seen it.”  She agreed that if she had seen the water
or liquid, she would have walked around it.
[27]          
The plaintiff acknowledges that the only people who saw
the state of the washroom immediately after her fall was herself and the dentist. 
The court received no explanation as to why the dentist was not called to
corroborate the plaintiff’s evidence.
[28]          
The only other contemporaneous evidence as it relates
to how and why the plaintiff fell can be found in the hospital records of the
MacKenzie Richmond Hill Hospital (Hospital).  The Hospital records reflect that
at 6:48 p.m. a nurse took a history from the plaintiff which amongst other
things states “was at dentist – slipped on wet floor – fell backwards – slipped
– fell with left hand”. Another registered nurse at 7:08 p.m. took the
following history, “plaintiff says she fell down and put her left hand out to
break her fall”.
[29]          
The plaintiff suffered a significant injury to her left
distal humerus and left distal radius which required two surgical
interventions.  The medical evidence consisted of the previously referenced
hospital records; the evidence of a psychiatrist Dr. Parekh; and the evidence
of Dr. Camazzola an orthopedic surgeon who treated the plaintiff at the
hospital and performed the open reduction and internal fixation to the plaintiff’s
left distal humerus.
[30]          
In Dr. Camazzola’s clinical note of October 20, 2021 (which
was the last visit that he had with the plaintiff) Dr. Camazzola noted that the
plaintiff had some functional limitations and was lacking twenty degrees
extension in her left arm.  Dr. Camazzola noted some tenderness in the flexor
mass of her forearm and that she had some mild tenderness of her wrist.  When
seen on October 20, 2021 the plaintiff was complaining of some stiffness at her
elbow and wrist as well as some numbness in her thumb.  Dr. Camazzola noted in
his report of October 20, 2021, that the plaintiff had some discomfort and some
mild deficits of motion that she would have to learn to live with.  Dr.
Camazzola explained in his evidence at trial that the plaintiff had reached
maximum medical recovery.
[31]          
No medical evidence was provided to the court with
respect to what if any treatment the plaintiff might have undergone in Iran.
[32]          
Dr. Parekh, who is a psychiatrist, saw the plaintiff at
the request of the plaintiff’s lawyer.  The evaluation of the plaintiff took
place on February 14, 2023.  Dr. Parekh was of the opinion that the plaintiff
suffered from an adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood and that
her psychiatric complaints arose primarily as a result of her injury suffered
in the slip and fall.
[33]          
There is no evidence that the plaintiff has received
any kind of psychiatric or psychological treatment in Iran.
[34]          
The plaintiff in her evidence testified that her local
pharmacy in Iran provides her with medication for her depression and anxiety. 
No records have been produced as to what if any medication has been used by the
plaintiff since her accident.
[35]          
The plaintiff testified that she has difficulty with
heavy housekeeping but did acknowledge that she has had the services of a
“maid” since prior to her slip and fall who assists her now with heavier duty
jobs. The plaintiff also testified that she has the assistance of both her husband
and her daughter with respect to housekeeping, but neither were called to
provide corroborating evidence.
[36]          
As it relates to the diagnosis of anxiety and
depression the plaintiff testified that she is very severely depressed and
anxious but acknowledged in cross-examination that she has never told any
doctor about these concerns other than Dr. Parekh who saw her at the request of
her lawyers.
[37]          
No evidence was provided to the court with respect to
what if any medical rehabilitation treatment has been provided to the plaintiff
in Iran.  No evidence was provided to the court with respect to the plaintiff’s
future needs both with respect to medical rehabilitation treatment as well as
housekeeping assistance.  No evidence was provided to the court as it relates
to the cost of any such medical rehabilitation treatment and/or housekeeping
assistance.
[38]          
The plaintiff brings her claim under s. 3 of the Occupiers’
Liability Act R.S.O. 1990, c. O.2 (the Act) which provides as follows:
[39]          
The claim by the plaintiff and the defence asserted in
this case engages s. 6 of the Act which provides:
[40]          
The leading case as it relates to occupiers’ liability
is a decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in Waldick v. Malcolm
1991 CanLII 71 (SCC), [1991] 2 S.C.R 456.  The Supreme Court affirmed the decisions of the Court of
Appeal and the Superior Court of Justice.  In that regard Blair J.A. for the
Court of Appeal (1989) 1991 CanLII 8347 (ON CA), 70 O.R. 2nd 717, described the duty of
reasonable care at para. 19 as follows:
[41]          
In the Supreme Court of Canada in Waldick, Iacobucci
J. at para. 33 stated:
[42]          
The simple fact that the plaintiff in this case ended
up falling and suffering a significant injury to her left arm does not in and
of itself constitute negligence on the part of the defendants.  It is improper
to infer that there has been a breach of the standard of care from the fact
that there has been an unfortunate and/or unexpected results.  As noted by
Stinson J. in Conn v. Darcel, 2013 ONSC 5080, at para. 109 “an
unfortunate outcome is not proof of negligence.”
[43]          
The duty imposed on an occupier is not a duty which
requires the occupier to maintain a constant surveillance or lookout for
potential danger.  The duty to take reasonable care imposed on an occupier is
met if the occupier has taken measures that are reasonable in the
circumstances. See Garofalo v. Canada Safeway Ltd., [1998] O.J. No. 302,
at para. 31.
[44]          
In Caron the plaintiff slipped and fell on water
found on the floor near the sink in the kitchenette of the plaintiff’s office
workplace.  The kitchenette was checked and cleaned twice a day (10:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m.) by a cleaning contractor hired by the defendants.  On these facts
Roger J., at para. 37, concluded that the defendants had met their positive
duty of care to take such care as in all the circumstances was reasonable to
see that persons entering their premises were reasonably safe.  The plaintiff’s
action was dismissed.
[45]          
Expert evidence was called before Roger J. in Caron. 
Specifically, the expert evidence was directed with respect to the dynamic
coefficient of friction which in layman’s language addresses whether the floor
was slippery or not.
[46]          
At para. 23 of his reasons Roger J. stated
[47]          
From the Reasons of Roger J. cited above I infer that
Roger J. concluded that the wet coefficient of friction ranging between 0.30 to
0.42 was considered acceptable.  Similar evidence was provided to this court.
[48]          
In Gujral v. Meat and Bread Sandwich Company Ltd.,
2022 BCSC 917, Taylor J. stated at para. 79:
[49]          
The law does not require perfection.  The law requires
that an occupier takes reasonable steps to ensure the safety of those entering
their premises.  The law does not require an occupier to act as an insurer to
provide against every eventuality.
[50]          
The evidence in this case establishes that there were
numerous people who used the washroom after 1:00 p.m. when it was last cleaned
and inspected.  None of those individuals between 1:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. had
any difficulty with respect to the condition of the washroom.  I reach this
conclusion because there was no report of any wetness on the floor nor is there
any evidence that anyone slipped and fell prior to the plaintiff’s fall.
[51]          
In this case I accept the evidence of the security
guard Ms. Kaur that when she entered the washroom shortly after 5:00 p.m. and
during the course of her four minutes in the washroom she made no observations
as it relates to any wetness on the floor. I also accept her evidence that if
she had she seen any wetness on the floor she would have taken the appropriate
steps to address that situation.  The evidence establishes that after Ms. Kaur
left the washroom four other individuals entered the washroom prior to the
plaintiff.  None of those individuals experienced any difficulty with respect
to wetness on the floor.
[52]          
If there was wetness on the floor after the fourth
individual left the washroom and prior to the plaintiff’s entry the only
explanation for wetness being on the floor is that either the last occupant of
the washroom somehow left water on the floor while he or she was washing his or
her hands or alternatively the water may somehow have been brought into the
washroom by the plaintiff herself.
[53]          
Plaintiff’s counsel has noted that there was snow on
the ground.  While there is no evidence that there was any accumulation of
precipitation on the entranceway to the condominium or anywhere else in the
public areas it is conceivable that the plaintiff herself may have brought
water into the washroom.
[54]          
It simply would have been impossible for anything to
have been done after the security guard was in the washroom to have prevented
against the accumulation of water on the washroom floor. I accept Ms. Kaur’s
evidence that the washroom floor did not have any wetness on the floor when she
was there no more than 12 minutes prior to the plaintiff’s fall.  Accepting
that the plaintiff did slip and fall because of wetness on the floor, that accumulation
of wetness occurred sometime between 5:07 p.m. and 5:19 p.m.-and the fall most
likely occurred sometime between 5:16 p.m. and 5:19 p.m.  Either the fourth
person seen leaving the washroom at 5:16 p.m. caused water to accumulate on the
floor or the plaintiff herself inadvertently caused the water to accumulate on
the floor resulting in her fall.  The plaintiff maintains the water was in the
immediate area of where she entered the washroom.  If that was the case, then
it is not unfair to consider why no one else fell on that water other than the plaintiff. 
We will never know who caused the water to accumulate on the floor, but the
floor was dry when Ms. Kaur was in the washroom when she left at 5:07 p.m.  On
these facts, what happened to the plaintiff was an unfortunate accident; and
adopting the words of Stinson J. in Conn, this unfortunate
outcome does not amount to negligence. The plaintiff has not met her onus. The
action is dismissed.
[55]          
As it relates to the plaintiff’s damages if I had found
liability in this case, I would assess those damages in the amount of
$100,000.  There is no issue the plaintiff suffered a significant injury that
required two surgical interventions and a period of hospitalization.  It would
have been helpful if the court had been provided with an up-to-date assessment
from an orthopaedic specialist.  It would also have been helpful to have
received contemporaneous medical records from the plaintiff’s treating doctors
in Iran.  None were provided.  It would also have been helpful to have been provided
with what costs had been incurred in Iran together with what costs might be
incurred in the future as it relates to the plaintiff’s needs for future care
and housekeeping.  None were provided.  In the absence of this kind of evidence
the court cannot speculate as to what if any future medical rehabilitation and
housekeeping needs the plaintiff might require.  I therefore make no assessment
for these damages.
[56]          
I encourage the parties to resolve the issue of costs. 
If costs cannot be resolved, I will receive written submissions from the
parties limited to two pages in length to be received no later than December
30, 2024.  If submissions are not received by then the court will assume the
issue of costs has been resolved.
[57]          
If there are any issues arising from these reasons as
it relates to the Perringer agreement and insurance issues flowing from that
agreement counsel may arrange a case conference with me to discuss those issues
and how they may be resolved. Counsel are encouraged to resolve those issues.