[1]         
On October 17, 2024, I
gave the following oral decision:
[2]         
The Crown has closed
its case. The defence has elected not to call evidence.  A pre-charge
conference has been held.  Counsel have submitted a number of changes to the
charge which have been accepted.  Apparently, a few minor changes remain.  And
now counsel have identified another potential issue that could substantially
affect the charge and the final submissions that counsel will make to the
jury.
[3]         
The Crown theory in
this case is that Mr. Parr and Ms. Rose-Podnar are liable to be convicted for
manslaughter on two different routes.  The Crown asserts Mr. Parr is also
liable to be convicted of manslaughter on a third route, namely that of forming
a common unlawful intention with Mr. Lozoomi to rob or attempt to rob the
victim Mr. Warsame.
[4]         
This third route is
reflected in the current amended draft of the charge.
[5]         
Section 24 of the Criminal
Code has a bearing on this aspect of the charge.  It provides:
[6]         
Counsel now rightly point
out that I must first rule if the actions and intentions of Mr. Parr as
demonstrated by the evidence constitute an attempted robbery, as this is a
question of law by operation of section 24(2) of the Code.
[7]         
Counsel have agreed to
provide written submissions on the issue.
[8]         
I have reviewed these
submissions.  I am persuaded by the arguments of the Crown and I conclude that
the evidence delivered at this trial in respect of Mr. Parr demonstrates his
actions and intentions were indicative of, among other things, an attempted
robbery rather than mere preparation to commit the offence of robbery.
[9]         
Written reason to
follow.
[10]      Here are those reasons.
[11]      The primary evidence relied upon by the Crown
to assert Mr. Parr was involved in an attempt to rob Mr. Warsame on January 12,
2019, was contained in a video which is part of the evidence.  The video was
slide 40 of Exhibit 40.  It shows Mr. Parr and Mr. Lozoomi at 625 Fulton Blvd
from 10:23 to 10:33 pm.
[12]      The Crown also relies on the text and
communications between Mr. Parr and Mr. Lozoomi on January 12, 2019.  In
addition, the Crown points to other evidence including Mr. Parr driving the
Blue Dodge Ram to demonstrate cooperation between the two.  Also, the Crown
says Mr. Joiles testified he and Mr. Lozoomi and Mr. Dick had entered 645
Sherrington (a building in the vicinity of 625 Fulton) at 8:59 pm in an attempt
to rob Mr. Warsame.
[13]      Counsel for Mr. Parr argues that the
evidence discloses merely preparatory actions, at most. While there is limited
evidence of a relationship between Mr. Lozoomi and Mr. Parr, the evidence
discloses some sense of Mr. Lozoomi's purpose, but Mr. Parr does not need to
share that purpose. Mr. Parr's mental state and actions must be assessed on
their own. Mr. Parr is a drug dealer who is meeting his supplier at an
apartment building. While Mr. Lozoomi makes an effort to obscure himself, Mr.
Parr does not seem concerned about his identity. Communications between Parr
and Lozoomi must also be considered against the backdrop of contemporaneous
communications with Dennis Crupi on January 12, 2019. Further, Mr. Parr's
attendance in the area of 137 Finlayson (according to the cell phone records)
just before this meeting could suggest Mr. Parr is looking for Mr. Lozoomi, in
the place where he has met him a few times and picked up the truck at 9 am, as
Mr. Lozoomi is known to be his supplier.
[14]      In R. v. Cline (1956) 1956 CanLII 150 (ON CA), 115 CCC 18 the
Ontario Court of Appeal held that there can be no general test to distinguish
attempt from preparation. Nevertheless, the Court set out six propositions to
assist trial courts in determining such issues.  In R. v Root, 2008 ONCA 869 (CanLII), [2008] OJ
No 5214 at paras. 93 through 100 Watt J.A. stated:
[15]      From my review of the evidence, I am
persuaded that Mr. Lozoomi and Mr. Parr were attempting to rob some person or
location when they are shown on video attending at 625 Fulton in the evening of
January 12, 2019.  The conduct of Mr. Parr shown on video using a rag to cover
his hand while entering the building suggests to me that he was trying to leave
no fingerprints on the door. This leads me to conclude his mental state was
that of anticipating an imminent act of robbery.  If he was just preparing to
rob the place, that would place the act some time in the future where it could
be imagined that other fingerprints of other tenants would supplant his on that
main entrance door.  Also, the video shows Mr. Lozoomi having covered his hand
with his hoodie sleeve, presumably to avoid leaving fingerprints. Also, if Mr.
Parr was simply preparing to conduct a robbery, one wonders why he would have
waited for Mr. Lozoomi to come in the building or had him there at all.  He could
have done “reconnaissance” on his own.  Relying on the direction of the Court
of Appeal in R. v. Root at para. 96 and R v. Deutsch, 1986 CanLII 21 (SCC), [1986] 2
S.C.R. 2 at pp. 22-23 my common sense tells me that the fact they stayed
together in the building is indicative of the fact they expected to do the
robbery then and not later.  The pair were “well down the path of robbery”
using language from paragraph 100 of R. v. Root.
[16]      Also, I assess that Mr. Parr’s conduct of
pulling back his hoodie and looking at the camera while at the entrance door
was an instance of carelessness rather than a lack of concern about being
detected.  He quickly ducked under the camera once he noticed it was there.
[17]      It seems to me that because the premises
was a multi-residential dwelling, there were two things that barred Mr. Parr
and Mr. Lozoomi from robbing a person who was either there, or had valuable
possessions there at the time. They were the locked doors in the building. Typically
for most multi-residential buildings these days the main entrance requires non
residents to be buzzed in or do what Mr. Parr did, an old newspaper carrier
trick of waiting for some resident to come along and then sneak in behind
them.  The pair made it past the first door. They either could not find, could
not get past or just did not get picked up on video at the second door they
were seeking.  I note there is a four-minute gap in the video between the time
they are shown entering at the front door and the next shot in a stairwell
where Mr. Lozoomi is showing looking out an exit door.
[18]      For these reasons I
conclude that the evidence delivered at this trial in respect of Mr. Parr
demonstrates his actions and intentions were indicative of, among other things,
an attempted robbery rather than mere preparation to commit the offence of
robbery.