[1]         
In
the latter half of 2020, H.W. and the complainant were in a dating
relationship. In mid-March 2021, a few months after the break-up of the relationship,
the complainant went over to H.W.’s house. They had sexual relations, including
intercourse.
[2]         
Stemming
from that incident, H.W. was charged with sexual assault contrary to section
271(1)(b) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, as amended
(“Code”).
[3]         
At
the time of the alleged offence, H.W. was 14 years old. The complainant was 15
years of age.
[4]         
As
a “young person” as defined in the Youth Criminal Justice Act, S.C.
2002, c. 1, as amended (“YCJA”), H.W. was tried in the Ontario Court of Justice
over three days in February 2023.  Three witnesses testified – the complainant,
the complainant’s mother, and H.W.
[5]         
After
trial, in written reasons for judgment dated March 14, 2023, H.W. was convicted
of sexual assault. He was later sentenced to a nine-month custody and
supervision order followed by probation for fifteen months, plus ancillary
orders.
[6]         
H.W.
appeals against his conviction and also seeks leave to appeal against his
sentence.
[7]         
For
the following reasons, I would allow H.W.’s conviction appeal and order a new
trial. This makes it unnecessary to address the sentence appeal.
[8]         
The
complainant and H.W. were students at the same high school, neighbours, and
boyfriend and girlfriend. Their romantic dating relationship had ended a few
months before the alleged offence date.
[9]         
On
the date in question, the complainant went over to H.W.’s house. They were
alone. They kissed and, ultimately, had sexual intercourse.
[10]       The
trial presented a stark contrast in the accounts of the two principal
witnesses, as is often the case in sexual assault prosecutions. The complainant
testified that she did not consent to any of the sexual activity that had
occurred.  H.W. testified that she did. The complainant’s mother’s evidence was
treated by the trial judge as being confirmatory of the complainant having not
consented to the sexual activity in that the mother testified that the
complainant was in physical pain afterwards and needed an icepack for relief,
had left blood in the toilet after going to the bathroom, was having trouble
walking, and was emotionally distressed after returning home.
[11]       In
thorough reasons for judgment, the trial judge properly instructed himself on
the basic legal principles applicable to criminal trials, including but not
limited to the burden of proof being on the Crown, the standard of proof being
beyond a reasonable doubt, and the W.(D.) instruction.
[12]       The
trial judge concluded that H.W. was not a credible witness. His evidence,
particularly on the issue of consent, was not believed by the trial judge, and
his evidence did not raise a reasonable doubt either (paras. 17 and 27 of the
Reasons for Judgment).
[13]       The
trial judge gave four reasons for drawing those conclusions about H.W.’s
evidence: (i) it made no sense for H.W. to say that the complainant consented
to sudden and escalating sexual contact with him when H.W. knew that the
complainant only came over to H.W.’s house to talk about being friends, and
(ii) H.W.’s evidence that the sexual activity was consensual was contradicted
by compelling evidence from the complainant and the complainant’s mother about
the pain and discomfort that the complainant experienced afterwards, and (iii)
H.W.’s evidence that the sexual activity was consensual was contradicted by the
evidence from the complainant and the complainant’s mother about the
complainant being upset and out of sorts afterwards, and (iv) the texts
exchanged between H.W. and the complainant, post-alleged offence date, were
incriminating in that, when confronted with the complainant’s allegation of
sexual impropriety, H.W. failed to deny or correct her allegation, and that
amounted to an admission by H.W. that the complainant had not consented to the
sexual activity (paras. 18-26 of the Reasons for Judgment).
[14]       The
trial judge then went on to explain why he believed the evidence of the
complainant and why he was persuaded that the Crown had established the guilt
of H.W. to the requisite standard of proof.
[15]       This
Court’s jurisdiction to hear H.W.’s appeal derives from (i) section 37(5) of
the YCJA, which provides that an appeal in respect of an offence prosecuted
summarily lies in accordance with Part XVII (summary conviction offences) of
the Code, and (ii) section 812(1)(a) of the Code, under Part XVII, which
provides that the Superior Court of Justice is the “appeal court” for summary
conviction offences.
[16]       The
within appeal is brought under section 813(a) of the Code, which provides, in
part, that the defendant may appeal (i) from conviction and/or (ii) against a
sentence.
[17]       Against
conviction, it is alleged that (i) the trial judge misapprehended the evidence
in two respects, regarding why the complainant went to H.W.’s house on the date
in question and with respect to the post-incident text messages exchanged
between the complainant and H.W., and (ii) the trial judge unevenly scrutinized
the evidence.
[18]       In
oral submissions, Mr. Rosen focused almost exclusively on the alleged
misapprehensions of the evidence.
[19]       Against
sentence, it is alleged that the trial judge made four errors that permit this
Court to sentence H.W. afresh. The sentence now being recommended, in light of
the fresh evidence filed about events that post-date the sentencing decision of
the trial judge, is 24 months of probation.
[20]       The
four errors alleged are that (i) the trial judge erred in comparing this
offence to a sexual assault in the context of overt acts of violence, (ii) the
trial judge erred in treating as a significant aggravating factor that H.W.
appeared to have little understanding of the impact of his behaviour on the
complainant, (iii) the trial judge failed to properly consider all reasonable
alternatives to custody, and (iv) the trial judge gave insufficient reasons as
to why a non-custodial sentence was not appropriate.
[21]       There
are three possible bases upon which the within appeal may be allowed: (i) the
verdict is unreasonable or cannot be supported by the evidence; (ii) there was
a wrong decision made on a question of law, and/or (iii) there has been a
miscarriage of justice: R. v. Hunt, 2024 ONSC 5454, at para. 11; R. v.
McLean, 2021 ONSC 34, at para. 11.
[22]       Though
questions of law are generally reviewed on a standard of correctness, the
jurisdiction of this Court to review a finding of fact made by the trial judge
is limited.  I am not entitled to retry the case or to substitute my own view
of the evidence for that of the trial judge. This is not a retrial. This Court
has no basis upon which to interfere with the trial judge’s findings unless
they are unreasonable or unsupported by the evidence: R. v. Smits, 2012
ONCA 524, 294 O.A.C. 355, at para. 67; R. v. Grosse (1996), 1996 CanLII 6643 (ON CA), 29 O.R. (3d)
785 (C.A.), at p.  791-792; R. v. Hunt, supra, at para. 12; R.
v. McLean, supra, at para. 13; R. v. Doyle, [2006] O.J. No. 315
(C.A.), at para. 6.
[23]       Put
another way, the factual findings of a trial judge are entitled to deference,
and an appellate court may only interfere where there has been a palpable and
overriding error. Findings of fact and factual inferences must be clearly
wrong, unsupported by the evidence, or otherwise unreasonable before an
appellate court can interfere: R. v. Hunt, supra, at para. 13; R. v.
Clark, 2005 SCC 2, [2005] 1 S.C.R. 6, at para. 9; R. v. Sheahan,
2017 ONCA 159, 8 M.V.R. (7th) 1, at para. 12; R. v. R.E.M.,
2008 SCC 51, [2008] 3 S.C.R. 3, at para. 54; Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002
SCC 33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235, at paras. 10 and 23.
[24]       Credibility
is a question of fact, and an appellate court should afford due deference to
the trial judge who actually saw and heard the witnesses.  Further, it is wrong
for an appellate court to dissect the trial judge’s reasons into small pieces
without examining how those pieces affect the end result (the verdict) and/or
without appreciating that reasons for judgment must be read as a whole:  R.
v. Morrissey (1995), 1995 CanLII 3498 (ON CA), 22 O.R. (3d) 514 (C.A.), 38 C.R. (4th) 4, at
para. 28; R. v. C.R., 2010 ONCA 176, 260 O.A.C. 52, at para. 31.
[25]       I
would allow the conviction appeal on this ground.
[26]       It was
of course open to the trial judge to reject the testimony of H.W. that the
sexual activity that took place was consensual, but his reasons for doing so
must be free of legal error: R. v. M.C., 2019 ONCA 502, 146 O.R. (3d)
493, at para. 82.
[27]       In
this case, with respect, two of the four reasons why the trial judge rejected
the evidence of H.W. are fatally flawed in that each one is the product of a
misapprehension of the evidence.
[28]       In R.
v. Doodnaught, 2017 ONCA 781, 358 C.C.C. (3d) 250, Watt J.A. summarized the
legal principles applicable to an appeal that is grounded on an alleged
misapprehension of the evidence by the trial judge. Paragraphs 71-75 of that
decision are set out below.
[29]       More
recently, Zarnett J.A., for the Court of Appeal for Ontario, stated the
following at paragraphs 53-55 of the decision in R. v. Kwok, 2023 ONCA
458, 427 C.C.C. (3d) 462.
[30]       At
paragraph 18 of the reasons for judgment, in the course of discussing the first
of four reasons for rejecting the evidence of H.W., the trial judge stated that
“[the complainant’s] uncontradicted evidence is that when this incident
happened, she visited with H.W. at his house to have a conversation about
restoring a relationship with each other as it was prior to dating.  I find as
a fact that H.W. was aware that since the prior December [the complainant] had
little interest in him and that the reason she came to his house was to talk
about restoring their relationship to what it was prior to dating.”.
[31]       It is
alleged on behalf of H.W. that the said findings by the trial judge are flawed
in that they rest on a material misapprehension of the evidence (the
complainant’s evidence was not that she went to H.W.’s house for that reason)
and, with regard to the finding of fact about what H.W. knew, are unsupported
by any evidence at trial.
[32]       The
Crown’s position is that the trial judge’s findings at paragraph 18 of the
reasons for judgment are based on a logical inference drawn by the trial judge,
an inference that was well-grounded on the evidence as a whole and on
discussions between the trial judge and then counsel for H.W. about why the
complainant may have gone over to H.W.’s house.
[33]       With
respect, I agree with counsel for the appellant.
[34]       There
can be no reasonable debate that, if there was a misapprehension of the trial
evidence on this point, it was a material one. It went to substance. It went to
a matter that was significant in the trial judge’s reasoning process. It did not
apply to peripheral reasoning or matters of detail or narrative only. To the
contrary, the findings made at paragraph 18 of the reasons for judgment were
essential to the verdict in that, at the very least, any misapprehension that
led to those findings could have affected the outcome, and accordingly, the
verdict would have to be set aside.
[35]       The
Crown takes no issue with any of the above, nor could it reasonably do so in
light of the structure of the reasons for judgment and this issue being the
first of four reasons given by the trial judge for rejecting the evidence of
H.W.  Rather, the Crown simply argues that there was no misapprehension of the
evidence. Respectfully, I disagree. The findings made by the trial judge at
paragraph 18 of the reasons for judgment were unsupported by the evidence.
[36]       The
trial evidence on this point consisted of (i) the complainant’s statement to
the police (adopted by her at trial), (ii) other testimony by the complainant
in direct examination at trial, (iii) the testimony of the complainant in
cross-examination at trial, and (iv) H.W.’s evidence at trial (both in direct
and in cross-examination).
[37]       In her
statement to the police, the complainant told the officer that she went over to
H.W.’s house because they just started talking one day, and she really liked and
missed his dog, and he messaged her after school to say that she could come
over and see the dog, and so she went.  Later, she told the officer that she
thought that they were just going to talk, sort some things out,  and try to
just become friends again. When the officer asked her whether H.W. knew what she wanted to talk about, the complainant answered “I
had mentioned it before. I had said, like, we could talk about it and just see
where things go, but.”.  The officer then moved on to something else.
[38]       In her
direct testimony at trial, the complainant was asked whether there was any
other conversation that she had with H.W. the night before the visit to his
house, apart from them having discussed her going to see his dog, and the
complainant answered “[n]ot that I can remember.”.
[39]       In
cross-examination at trial, the complainant, in answer to a question from the
trial judge, confirmed that, on the day before the visit to H.W.’s house, they
communicated by Snapchat, and he had invited her to his house to see his dog. 
Later, she said that she wanted to see the dog.
[40]       In
direct examination at trial, H.W. testified that the complainant came to his
house because she insisted on seeing his dog.
[41]       In
cross-examination at trial, H.W. testified that, although the dog was acting
aggressively, the complainant came over to his house in order to see the dog.
[42]       Besides
the above, there was no other evidence at trial on why the complainant went
over to H.W.’s house on the day in question.
[43]       In light
of that evidence on this point, it is my view that the trial judge erred (i) in
finding that the complainant’s uncontradicted evidence was that she went over
to H.W.’s house so that they could talk about restoring their relationship to
what it was prior to dating and, further, (ii) in finding that H.W. was aware
that the complainant came to his house for that reason.
[44]       On the
first point, the complainant’s evidence that she went to H.W.’s house for that
reason was contradicted. It was contradicted by much of her own
evidence. And it was contradicted by all of H.W.’s evidence. In fact, on this
issue, if one ignores the use of the word “uncontradicted”, only one small part
of the trial evidence as a whole, that is when the complainant told the officer
in her police statement that she thought that they were just going to talk and
sort some things out and try to just become friends again, was capable of
supporting the finding made by the trial judge. The rest of the trial evidence
from both the complainant and H.W. was that she went over to his house to see
the dog.
[45]       The
trial judge was of course entitled to accept all, some, or none of any witness’
evidence, including the complainant’s. In light of what the actual trial evidence
was on this point, however, there is no way to understand why or how the trial
judge made a finding that the complainant went over to H.W.’s house to talk
with him about restoring their relationship to what it was before they dated.
[46]       Almost
all of the trial evidence, including that from the complainant herself, was
that she went over to H.W.’s house to see the dog, yet the trial judge found as
a fact that she went over to talk with H.W. about restoring their relationship
to what it was before they were dating.  That finding of fact was significant
in that it bolstered the trial judge’s conclusion that H.W. would have known in
advance that the complainant was not interested in anything romantic or sexual
on the date of the visit, and thus, in the eyes of the trial judge, H.W.’s
evidence that the sexual activity was consensual was not credible.
[47]       On the
second point, even if the trial judge’s finding that the complainant’s
uncontradicted evidence was that she went over to H.W.’s house for the reason
stated by the trial judge was to survive appellate scrutiny, I am of the view
that the trial judge’s further finding of fact that H.W. knew that the
complainant came to the house for that reason was unsupported by the evidence
at trial.
[48]       This
was a very significant finding of fact that the trial judge made.  It was very
significant because it served to undermine the credibility of the appellant and
to make it seem totally nonsensical for him to suggest at trial that the two of
them had consensual sexual intercourse when they both knew beforehand,
presumably because they communicated with each other about it, that she was
coming to his house expressly for the purpose of restoring their relationship
as friends, and only as friends.
[49]       Yet
there was nothing in the trial evidence to support a finding that H.W. was
aware of that reason for the visit. At its highest, the only evidence adduced
at trial that was relevant to that finding made by the trial judge was that the
police officer asked the complainant if H.W. knew what she wanted to talk
about, and the complainant answered “I had mentioned it before. I had said,
like, we could talk about it and just see where things go, but.”.
[50]       The
trial judge would have had to infer that the “it” was her desire to restore their
relationship to being friends. The trial judge would have had to further infer
that “before” meant the day before or the night before the visit.  Finally, the
trial judge would have had to further infer that “we could talk about it” meant
that they would talk about it and, hence, that is why she was coming over to
his house the next day.
[51]       If
those inferences were drawn by the trial judge, and if that is how the trial
judge reached that finding of fact about H.W.’s knowledge or awareness of the
reason for the visit, then, with respect, I think that was an unreasonable
finding of fact to have made. That is particularly so given that the accused
was never cross-examined on this point – whether he knew that the complainant
was coming over to his house in order to talk to him about restoring their
relationship to what it was prior to dating, and, further, the issue does not
appear to have ever been raised by the Crown in submissions at trial or as part
of its discernible theory of the case as evidenced at any phase of the trial. 
In that sense, the within appeal bears similarities to that in R. v. Tran,
2023 ONCA 11, where Justice Copeland for the Court of Appeal for Ontario
allowed the appeal, set aside convictions, and ordered a new trial because the
trial judge had made a key credibility finding against the accused/appellant in
a procedurally unfair manner and on the basis of a misapprehension of the
evidence. That is what happened here as well, in my respectful view.
[52]       Separate
and apart from the findings made by the trial judge at paragraph 18 of the
reasons for judgment, at paragraphs 21-26 of the reasons for judgment, the
trial judge outlined the fourth and final reason why he rejected the evidence
of H.W. In the course of that discussion, the trial judge found that H.W.
effectively admitted that the sexual activity between him and the complainant
was not consensual because, during the texts exchanged between the two of them
post-alleged offence date, when confronted by the complainant about him having
sexually assaulted her, H.W. replied “all you had to say was no” rather than
deny or correct her allegation, and therefore, that amounted to an adoptive
admission by silence.
[53]       At
paragraph 26 of the reasons for judgment, the trial judge found that “[i]n the
circumstances of this case, it was reasonable to expect that when H.W.
responded to [the complainant’s] accusation that she did not say yes, he would
have challenged or denied her if what she said was untrue.”.
[54]       The
trial judge cited the decision of the Court of Appeal for Ontario in R. v.
Robinson, 2014 ONCA 63, 118 O.R. (3d) 581. It is alleged on behalf of H.W.
that the trial judge did not properly apply that decision because the trial
judge failed to make a finding that, in all of the circumstances, a denial by
the appellant would have been the only reasonable course of action expected if
he was not responsible: R. v. Warner (1994), 1994 CanLII 842 (ON CA), 21 O.R. (3d) 136 (C.A.), at
p. 144.  It should be noted that R. v. Warner, supra, and the
authorities cited therein, were cited by the Court of Appeal for Ontario at
paragraphs 55 and 56 of the decision in R. v. Robinson, supra.
[55]       In
oral submissions on the appeal, I asked the Crown (who was not the trial Crown)
whether it was agreed that the test for an adoptive admission by silence is the
“only reasonable course of action” test, and the Crown answered in the
affirmative.
[56]       If so,
then it would have to be found that the trial judge erred in law at paragraph
26 of the reasons for judgment when he employed a much less onerous test than
that – whether it was “reasonable to expect” that H.W. would have denied the
complainant’s accusation.
[57]       Rather
than paint it as an error in law, however, counsel for H.W. describes this as a
misapprehension of the evidence in that, contrary to the recent decision of the
Court of Appeal for Ontario, Coroza J.A. writing for the Court, in R. v.
D.B., 2024 ONCA 546, the trial judge failed to consider the explanation by
H.W., during his evidence at trial, as to why he did not say more than he did.
[58]       I am
not sure that I would agree with that submission made by counsel for the
appellant. After all, the trial judge did, at paragraph 24 of the reasons for
judgment, deal with part of the appellant’s explanation.
[59]       In
doing so, however, with respect, the trial judge misapprehended the trial
evidence in two ways. First, in fact, H.W. was never asked in cross-examination
why he did not correct the complainant when she wrote that she never said yes,
contrary to what the trial judge found at paragraph 24 of the reasons for
judgment. The trial transcript reveals that the Crown certainly asked H.W.
questions about the text messages exchanged post-alleged offence date, but the
appellant was never asked what the trial judge said in his reasons he was
asked.  What the Crown did was simply have H.W. confirm that when the
complainant messaged “I never, never said yes”, H.W. did not respond to say
that she did say yes (page 39 of the trial transcript of the cross-examination
of H.W.).  There was no questioning by the Crown as to why H.W. did not
correct the complainant.  Second, the trial judge conflated two issues when he
stated, at paragraph 25 of the reasons for judgment, that the appellant
testified that he failed to correct the complainant when she wrote that she
never said yes because he was trying to be non-confrontational in that the
complainant was being emotional. The trial judge rejected that explanation by
H.W., and that was a key reason for rejecting his evidence as a whole, but the
trial judge got the evidence wrong. The testimony from H.W. about trying to be
non-confrontational was not about why he did not correct the complainant when
she wrote that she never said yes. Rather, it was in answer to a direct
question by the Crown about why he sent a text message to the complainant the
next day which said that all she had to say was no (page 41 of the trial
transcript). The two things are different – why he did not correct the
complainant when she said that she did not say yes (which question H.W. was
never asked in any event) and why he sent a text message the next day which
said that all she had to say was no. Also, the trial judge found the appellant
to be lacking credibility for saying that the complainant was being emotional
because, in the trial judge’s eyes, there was nothing emotional about the text
from the complainant which said that she did not say yes or no. The problem is
that H.W. did not testify that the said text was emotional. He did not testify
that any of her post-alleged offence date texts were emotional. He said “I was
trying to be non-confrontational and I know she is emotional, and I was trying
to keep her on a level head.”.  Not that her text(s) was/were emotional.
[60]       The
end result is that the trial judge’s treatment of the entire issue of the text
messages between the complainant and H.W., post-alleged offence date, was,
respectfully, flawed.  The legal finding of an adoptive admission by silence is
precarious in that it was not based on the more onerous test that the Crown
concedes is the correct test, and it also seems to be incongruous with the
cautions expressed by Justice Coroza in R. v. D.B., supra about
making such a finding (the trial judge cannot be faulted for not referring to
that decision as it was decided well after the reasons for judgment were
delivered).  And the key factual findings made by the trial judge in rejecting
the explanation offered by H.W. in terms of why he did not say more in the text
messages were all based on misapprehensions of the evidence.
[61]       As was
the case with the first category of misapprehension of the evidence (that
related to why the complainant went over to H.W.’s house on the date in
question), the misapprehensions of the evidence that infect paragraph 24 of the
reasons for judgment are material ones. The Crown takes no issue with their
importance, if they are made out, but simply argues that they do not exist. I
find that they do exist.
[62]       In
summary, putting aside the issue of whether the trial judge erred in law in
dealing with the adoptive admission by silence issue, two of the four express
reasons as to why the trial judge rejected the evidence of the appellant cannot
stand. This is because they rest on material misapprehensions of the evidence,
without which the outcome could very well have been different. This was not an
overwhelming case for the Crown. The verdict depended on the credibility
analysis of the two principal witnesses, and crucial to that credibility
analysis of the appellant, and why his evidence was rejected by the trial
judge, were these two areas that were tainted by material misapprehensions of
the evidence.
[63]       In
those circumstances, the verdict is unsafe. There has been a miscarriage of
justice. There must be a new trial.
[64]       It is
unnecessary to deal with the alleged uneven scrutiny of the evidence issue. I
think that argument is weak in any event.
[65]       It is also
unnecessary to deal with the sentence appeal, although it should be observed
that the Crown conceded that what the trial judge stated at paragraph 24(e) of
the reasons for sentence, that is that a “significant aggravating feature” to
this case is that “[t]he offender appears to have little understanding of the
impact of his behaviour on the victim”, is, in the Crown’s words in oral
submissions on the appeal, “an issue”; “a problem”; and “concerning”.  I think
that Ms. Occhiogrosso ought to be commended for that candour, and I think that
she is correct in saying that in light of the decision of the Court of Appeal
for Ontario in R. v. C.B., 2008 ONCA 486, at para. 57.  That decision I brought
to the attention of counsel at the hearing of the appeal because it stands for
the proposition that a lack of insight or understanding on the part of an
offender, particularly one that pleaded not guilty and had a trial (like H.W.),
ought not to be treated as an aggravating factor on sentence but may be a
relevant factor on determining a fit sentence.
[66]       I
would accordingly allow the conviction appeal, quash the conviction, and order
a new trial.