[1]              
The plaintiff, Nathalie Silliphant, is a former unionized
employee of Eastern Ontario Regional Laboratories Association (“the
Association”).  Ms. Silliphant’s employment with the Association was governed
by a collective agreement between the Association and OPSEU[1] Local 475 (the
“Collective Agreement” and “the Union”, respectively).
[2]              
In August 2019, the Association terminated Ms.
Silliphant’s employment, without cause.  Ms. Silliphant turned to the Union.  In
September 2019, the Union filed a grievance on Ms. Silliphant’s behalf (“the
Grievance”).  The Union subsequently referred the Grievance for arbitration. 
The Grievance was withdrawn in August 2022, before it proceeded to an
arbitration hearing.
[3]              
In September 2022, Ms. Silliphant personally
filed an “Application – Employment” with the Human Rights Tribunal of Ontario (
“the Application” and “HRTO”, respectively).  In her application, Ms.
Silliphant alleged that the Association discriminated against her on the basis
of disability.  The HRTO administratively dismissed the Application in March
2023.
[4]              
In October 2023, Ms. Silliphant commenced this
action.  In her statement of claim, Ms. Silliphant,
[5]              
To date, the Association has not delivered a
statement of defence to Ms. Silliphant’s claims.  The Association chose,
instead, to bring this motion for an order dismissing the action, without Ms.
Silliphant being granted leave to amend her pleading.  The Association makes
three primary submissions:
[6]              
In response, Ms. Silliphant delivered a notice
of motion and an affidavit of documents.  In her notice of motion, Ms.
Silliphant asks the court to dismiss the Association’s motion, make an order
prohibiting the Association from bringing further interim motions, and make an
order “for discovery”.
[7]              
For the reasons which follow, the motion is
granted.  The action is dismissed, without leave to amend.  Ms. Silliphant’s
motion is rendered moot and need not be decided.
[8]              
Before addressing the substantive issues on the
motion, I will briefly review the evidence upon which each of the parties
relies.
[9]              
The Association relies on an affidavit from
Angela Coombs, sworn on May 6, 2024 (“the Coombs affidavit”).  The exhibits to
the Coombs affidavit include the following documents:
[10]          
In the substantive portion of her affidavit, Ms.
Coombs reviews Ms. Silliphant’s employment history with the Association, the
termination of Ms. Silliphant’s employment with the Association, and the
post-termination proceedings.  Ms. Silliphant did not cross-examine Ms. Coombs
on her affidavit.
[11]          
As noted above, the evidentiary portion of Ms.
Silliphant’s responding record is in Form 30A, an affidavit of documents.  At
the outset of Ms. Silliphant’s submissions, the Association consented to the
court granting Ms. Silliphant leave to rely on the affidavit of documents as
her responding affidavit for the purpose of the motions before the court.  In
this ruling, I refer to the affidavit of documents, sworn by Ms. Silliphant on
May 6, 2024, as “the Silliphant affidavit”.
[12]          
The Silliphant affidavit consists of eight
substantive paragraphs and a list of four types of documents upon which Ms.
Silliphant intends to rely.  The eight substantive paragraphs in the Silliphant
affidavit include argument.
[13]          
In none of the substantive paragraphs does Ms.
Silliphant take issue specifically with or contradict the evidence of Ms.
Coombs.  Specifically, Ms. Silliphant does not take issue with the chronology
provided by Ms. Coombs as to the steps taken by Ms. Silliphant following the
termination of her employment.
[14]          
In summary, Ms. Coombs’ evidence is both
unchallenged and uncontradicted.
[15]          
The following issues are determined in this
ruling:
[16]          
It is undisputed that Ms. Silliphant was a
unionized employee and that her employment with the Association was governed by
the Collective Agreement.  Article 9 of the Collective Agreement sets out the
mandatory dispute resolution procedures, including grievance and arbitration.
[17]          
As of the date of the termination of her
employment, Ms. Silliphant was well past completion of a probationary period
with the Association.  For non-probationary employees, Article 9.07 stipulates
that a claim of unjust discharge shall be treated as a grievance and submitted
through the Union.  Where a grievance cannot be resolved between the Union and
the Association, the matter may proceed to arbitration.
[18]          
Both Ms. Silliphant and a Union representative
signed the Grievance.  The subject matter of the Grievance is described as
follows: “The Collective agreement has been violated under but not limited to
Article 3 Management Rights, Human Right Code, and any/all applicable language
in that I was terminated for missing work for a chronic illness.”
[19]          
The Grievance was not resolved at the initial
stage.  On September 19, 2019, the Union referred the Grievance for
arbitration.  The dispute was scheduled to proceed to arbitration on March 3,
2022, before Arbitrator Reaume.
[20]          
A preliminary issue arose within the arbitration
proceeding.  That issue relates to documents to be produced by both parties. 
Arbitrator Reaume heard submissions on January 11, 2022.  Three individuals
appeared on behalf of the Union; the Association was represented by counsel. 
The Interim Award issued by Arbitrator Reaume does not list Ms. Silliphant as
having attended in person on that date.
[21]          
Arbitrator Reaume begins the Interim Award by
stating, “I was appointed by the parties as sole Arbitrator to hear and
determine a grievance arising from the termination of the Griever’s
employment.”  The Association, the Union, and Ms. Silliphant are listed in the
title of proceeding as the parties to the arbitration.
[22]          
Arbitrator Reaume describes the Interim Award as
addressing “the Employer’s request for medical records.”  The records requested
by the Association include the records of Coughlin & Associates (an
employee benefits service provider), hospital records, and medical records for
Ms. Silliphant.
[23]          
The arbitrator concludes that the documents
requested by the Association are “arguably relevant to the issue in dispute and
the positions taken by the parties on the merits of the grievance.”  The
arbitrator directs the Union to obtain Ms. Silliphant’s consent to the release
of records to the Union’s counsel and to the Association’s counsel.  The
arbitrator provides directions as to how the records are to be produced by the
Union’s counsel and the Association’s counsel.
[24]          
Last, the arbitrator directs Ms. Silliphant to
“provide the necessary authorization to ensure that the records are received by
the Employer at least 28 days prior to the hearing on March 3, 2022, namely February
3, 2022, or such other time as the parties agree.”
[25]          
There is no evidence to support a finding that
Ms. Silliphant complied with the arbitrator’s direction regarding the provision
of authorization for the release of the records.  The evidence as to what
transpired following the release of the Interim Award is that (a) the records
were never produced, (b) the arbitration scheduled for March 3, 2022 did not
proceed, and (c) on August 23, 2022, the Union advised the Association, in
writing, that the Union had closed its grievance file.
[26]          
At paragraph 7 of her affidavit, Ms. Silliphant
says that her grievance “was dropped without signature and without an
arbitration hearing as well as the entire arbitration process was not followed
with mediator acting as an arbitrator and the plaintiff being told she would be
on trial as a witness and not as a relevant party.”
[27]          
There is no evidence as to why the Union closed
the grievance file.
[28]          
The Association relies on r. 21.01(3)(a) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O 1990,
Reg. 194.  Pursuant to r. 21.01(3)(a), “[a] defendant may move before a judge
to have an action stayed or dismissed on the ground that […] the court has no
jurisdiction over the subject matter of the action”.
[29]          
The court must determine the essential character
of the dispute that was the subject of the grievance and arbitration process.  If
the essential character of the dispute arises either explicitly or implicitly
from the interpretation, application, administration or violation of the Collective
Agreement, the dispute is within the sole jurisdiction of the arbitrator to
decide: see Allen v. Alberta, 2003 SCC 13, [2003] 1 S.C.R. 128, at para. 15, citing Regina Police Assn. Inc. v. Regina (City) Board of Police
Commissioners, 2000 SCC 14, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 360, at
para. 25; Northern Regional Health Authority v.
Horrocks, 2021 SCC 42, 462 D.L.R. (4th) 585, at
paras. 50-51; and Weber v. Ontario Hydro, 1995 CanLII 108 (SCC), [1995] 2 S.C.R. 929, at paras. 50, 58.
[30]          
Article 3 of the Collective Agreement confers
management rights upon the Association.  The Association has the exclusive
right to carry out the direction of the work force including, but not limited
to, discharging, transferring, and laying off employees.
[31]          
In determining whether the essential character
of a particular dispute falls within or without a collective agreement, the
court must take a “broad and liberal approach”: Blake
v. University Health Network, 2021 ONSC 7139, at
para. 10.  Succinctly stated, “there is simply no general right to interfere
with the decision of an employer to terminate the employment of an employee
with or without cause”: Blake, at para. 12.
[32]          
The exclusive jurisdiction of arbitrators in a dispute
arising from the terms of a collective agreement is prescribed by s. 48(1) of
the Ontario Labour Relations Act, 1995, S.O. 1995, c. 1, Schedule A (“LRA”), which provides:
[33]          
I next apply these legal principles to the
dispute between Ms. Silliphant and the Association.
[34]          
I find that the essential character of the
dispute between Ms. Silliphant and the Association falls squarely within the ambit
of the Collective Agreement.  The dispute is therefore within the exclusive
jurisdiction of the arbitrator: see Jadwani v.
Canada (2000), 2001 CanLII 24157 (ON CA), 52 O.R. (3d) 660 (C.A.), at paras.
30-35.  The jurisdiction of the court has been removed by the Collective
Agreement and the governing legislation: see Skof v.
Bordeleau, 2020 ONCA 729, 456 D.L.R. (4th) 236, at
para. 8.
[35]          
In her affidavit, Ms. Silliphant asserts that
her grievance “was dropped without signature”; she does not explain what she
means by that phrase.
[36]          
Neither the fact that the Grievance was
withdrawn nor Ms. Silliphant’s dissatisfaction with how the Union handled her
grievance is relevant to the outcome of the motion before this court.  As noted
at para. 13 of Blake,
“The essential character of a dispute is not altered by strategic choices made
as to the remedy pursued.”  Whatever the Union’s reasons for closing Ms.
Silliphant’s grievance file, and not proceeding to the arbitration, nothing
about those reasons changes the essential character of the dispute.
[37]          
The court need not make any finding regarding
the merit of Ms. Silliphant’s dissatisfaction with the Union’s representation
of her in the grievance and arbitration process.  The proper avenue by which
Ms. Silliphant was entitled to pursue her dissatisfaction in that regard was by
way of an application to the Ontario Labour Relations Board: see LRA, s. 74; and Nelson v. Her Majesty the Queen in the Right of Ontario et al., 2020 ONSC 2147, 150 O.R. (3d) 309, at para. 17, aff’d 2020 ONCA
751.
[38]          
In summary, pursuant to the grievance and
arbitration procedures set out in the Collective Agreement, the claims in this
action related generally to the termination of Ms. Silliphant’s employment are
within the exclusive jurisdiction of an arbitrator.
[39]          
I turn next to the allegations in the Pleading
related to discrimination.
[40]          
The “Statement of Grievance”, set out in the
Grievance, encompasses the Code and implies that the Association discriminated against Ms.
Silliphant by terminating her employment “for missing work for a chronic
illness.”  After the Union closed the grievance file, Ms. Silliphant commenced the
Application to the HRTO; Ms. Silliphant alleged that she was discriminated
against on the basis of disability.  The Application was administratively
dismissed by the HRTO in 2023.
[41]          
In the action before this court, Ms. Silliphant
appears to be pursuing a human rights-based claim.  Ms. Silliphant is
self-represented, and not experienced in legal drafting.  At para. 1 of her
pleading, Ms. Silliphant claims she was wrongfully terminated because in the
termination letter, the Association refers to their “inability to accommodate
her disability when she was not disabled.”  Ms. Silliphant refers to the “Human Rights Code” in her pleading.
[42]          
Ms. Silliphant’s claims of discrimination arise
entirely from her employment.  Ms. Silliphant’s employment relationship with
the Association was governed by the Collective Agreement.  Article 4 of that agreement
expressly provides that there will be no discrimination, interference,
intimidation, restriction or coercion exercised or practice with respect to any
employee because of, inter alia, their exercising of rights under the Collective Agreement. 
Article 4.02 incorporates, as part of the Collective Agreement, the provision
of the Code regarding
discrimination in employment.
[43]          
 Ms. Silliphant’s claims of discrimination do
not give rise to an additional cause of action that is separate from the causes
of action based in wrongful termination of employment.  The comments made by
Schabas J., at para. 3 in Nelson, apply to Ms. Silliphant’s claims in discrimination:
[44]          
Justice Schabas addresses the same point at para.
62 of Nelson, with the
following summary of the applicable law:
[45]          
Like the claims of discrimination made by the
plaintiff in Nelson, Ms.
Silliphant’s claims of discrimination arise entirely from her employment, which
is governed by the Collective Agreement.  There is no separate or additional
cause of action, other than that of discrimination in the context of her
employment, advanced by Ms. Silliphant.  She is not entitled to commence a
civil action based solely on the alleged infringement of a right granted under
Part 1 of the Code.
[46]          
Ms. Silliphant’s action is dismissed in its
entirety because the court lacks jurisdiction.
[47]          
The Association relies on r. 21.01(3)(d) of the Rules of Civil Procedure.  Pursuant to 
r. 21.01(3)(d), “[a] defendant may move before a judge to have an action stayed
or dismissed on the ground that […] the action is frivolous or vexatious or is
otherwise an abuse of the court”.
[48]          
For the reasons given in the preceding section
of this ruling, the claim lacks merit—it is plain and obvious that the claim
cannot succeed.  The claim is frivolous within the meaning of 
r. 21.01(3)(d): see Castonguay Construction (2000)
Ltd. v. Commonwealth Plywood Co. Ltd., 2012 ONSC
3487, 14 C.L.R. (4th) 104, at para. 18.
[49]          
A general characteristic of vexatious
proceedings is the rolling forward from one proceeding to another of grounds
and issues raised in the earlier proceeding: Lang
Michener et al. v. Fabian et al. (1987), 1987 CanLII 172 (ON SC), 59 O.R.
(2d) 353 (H.C.), at p. 19.
[50]          
Ms. Silliphant rolled forward into this
proceeding issues raised in one or both of the Grievance and her application to
the HRTO.  For that reason, the claims she advances in her pleading are
vexatious within the meaning of r. 21.01(3)(d).
[51]          
In summary, Ms. Silliphant’s action is frivolous
and vexatious; it is dismissed pursuant to 
r. 21.01(3)(d).
[52]          
The court does not have jurisdiction over the
matters advanced in the Ms. Silliphant’s pleading.  No amendment to the
pleading could cure the fatal defect of lack of jurisdiction.
[53]          
Granting Ms. Silliphant leave to amend her
pleading “would just be an invitation to the plaintiff to inflict further
costly and abusive proceedings on the defendant with no realistic sense that a
credible lawsuit lies dormant waiting to emerge”: Rebello
v. The Bank of Nova Scotia, 2018 ONSC 7127, at
para. 52.
[54]          
Ms. Silliphant’s action is dismissed, without
leave to amend her pleading.
[55]          
With the action dismissed, Ms. Silliphant’s
motion is rendered moot.  In any event, at the outset of Ms. Silliphant’s
submissions, she was informed by the court that her motion would not be heard
that day.  Ms. Silliphant had not followed the requisite procedure for her
motion to be heard.
[56]          
I conclude this ruling by addressing the issue
of the costs of the Association’s motion and of the action.
[57]          
The Association is entirely successful on its
motion and is entitled to its costs of the motion and of the action.  The
Association asks the court to award costs on the partial indemnity scale in the
total amount of $6,572.19.  That amount is broken down as follows:
[58]          
The costs claimed are addressed in the bill of
costs delivered by the Association subsequent to the hearing date.  At the
conclusion of the hearing, the court ordered the Association to file a revised
bill of costs—eliminating fees for administrative work done by a law clerk
whose time is reflected in both the original and revised bill of costs.
[59]          
The fees claimed are for work done by three
associate counsel—the lawyer who originally had carriage of the matter, the
lawyer who had carriage of the matter as of the date of the hearing, and a
third associate lawyer.  The original lawyer was on leave by the date of the
hearing.  It was necessary for another lawyer to assume carriage of the file.  I
am satisfied that the hourly rates for the lawyers and the time docketed by
them are reasonable.
[60]          
All three lawyers worked on the matter prior to the
June 27, 2024 return date.  I am satisfied that there is no duplication of
effort related to the work done prior to the original return date for the
motion.  To the extent that there is any duplication of effort for preparation
for the original return date and the eventual return date, that duplication is
the result of Ms. Silliphant failing to attend on the June 27, 2024 return
date.  The court granted Ms. Silliphant an indulgence by adjourning the motion
to a return date on which it was hoped she would be present (as she was).
[61]          
I am satisfied that the hourly rate for the law
clerk and the time docketed by that individual are reasonable and for ‘legal’[2] work done by her ($205
per hour and 4.7 hours).
[62]          
The Association includes only one disbursement
item—the cost of filing the notice of motion.  That item does not attract HST. 
I am satisfied that the disbursement item is reasonable.
[63]          
The Association does not identify any fees
associated with the action that are distinct from the fees related to the work
on the motion.
[64]          
Ms. Silliphant shall pay to the Association its
costs of the motion and the action, on the partial indemnity scale, fixed in
the total amount of $6,572.19.
[65]          
In awarding costs in that amount, I have taken
into consideration the factors listed in r. 57.01(1).  For example, it was
important to the Association that the action be dismissed in its entirety (r.
57.01(1)(d)).  The finding that the action is frivolous is also relevant to the
issue of costs (r. 57.01(1)(f)).
[66]          
Rule 57.03(1)(a) stipulates that, “unless the
court is satisfied that a different order would be more just, the court shall […]
 fix the costs of the motion and order them to be paid within 30 days”.  Regarding
the issue of costs and her ability to pay costs if required to do so, Ms.
Silliphant informed the court that she faced challenges securing employment
following the termination of her employment with the Association.
[67]          
In the circumstances, it is reasonable to extend
the 30-day period prescribed by 
r. 57.03(1)(a) to 90 days.  Ms. Silliphant shall, within 90 days of the date of
the release of this ruling, pay to the Association, its costs of the motion and
the action, on the partial indemnity scale, fixed in the total amount of
$6,572.19.
[68]          
Ms. Silliphant is a self-represented litigant. 
It is clear from the Pleading and Ms. Silliphant’s motion documents that she
has not familiarized herself with the requirements of the Rules of Civil Procedure regarding the
form and content of court documents.
[69]          
The relief granted in this ruling is straightforward.
[70]          
The Association is not required to obtain Ms.
Silliphant’s approval as to the form and content of the draft order prepared on
the basis of this ruling.  The requirement to obtain such approval is dispensed
with.