[1]              
The plaintiffs move for an order striking the
statement of defence of The Corporation of the Town of Oakville (the “Town”) or
for an order compelling a further and better affidavit of documents.   However,
only a further and better affidavit of documents was pursued at the motion
hearing.
[2]              
This action arises out of a construction dispute
regarding a custom-built house in Oakville, which was constructed by the third
party, Aaron Breier, and purchased by Shaun and Cynthia Muldoon.  After this
action had been commenced, Mr. Muldoon passed away.  His daughter, Nicole
Muldoon, has since been appointed litigation administrator of the estate.
[3]              
The parties exchanged productions in 2021.  As I
understand it, the plaintiffs were discovered over a year ago.  The Town’s
representative was produced for examination on January 9, 2024, immediately
prior to which a sworn version of the Town’s previously unsworn affidavit of
documents was provided to the plaintiff.  The plaintiffs’ lawyer ultimately terminated
the examination based on inadequate production by the Town and thereafter brought
this motion.  Continued examination of the Town is currently scheduled for December
5, 2024.
[4]              
I am granting the motion, but only in part.  The
Town’s affidavit of documents is evidently deficient.  However, the scope of
documents sought by the plaintiffs is overreaching.  They have not met their
onus of demonstrating relevance and existence for many of the categories of documents
requested.  I agree with the Town that the plaintiffs are, in many cases,
seeking answers to discovery questions in advance of examining the Town’s
representative.  Those productions requests are dismissed, but without
prejudice to the plaintiffs examining on their existence and making more
specific requests for production arising from those questions during the
pending continued examination of the Town.
[5]              
The Town raises two threshold objections to this
motion proceeding:  (i) the plaintiffs have failed to comply with Chozik J.’s
order that all outstanding costs orders be paid before this hearing; and (ii)
the plaintiffs should be denied relief pursuant to rule 29.1.05 of the Rules
of Civil Procedure, RRO 1990, Reg 194 (the “Rules”) for failing to
agree to a discovery plan.
[6]              
With respect to the first objection, at the last
return of this motion, the plaintiffs remained in breach of three prior orders
to pay costs totalling $3,650.  Chozik J. directed that the plaintiffs pay the
outstanding costs by no later than 4:30 pm on October 25, 2024 or the
plaintiffs’ motion may be struck.  I agree with the Town that the costs remain
unpaid, but am satisfied that sufficient efforts to comply were made to avoid
this motion being struck.  A cheque for $3,230.09 from the plaintiffs’ lawyer
payable to the “Town of Oakville” was sent.  The cheque was dated October 25,
2024, but was mailed and not received by the Town’s lawyer until October 30,
2024.  It has not been cashed on the basis that the payee is incorrect.
[7]              
I agree with the Town that the payee of the
cheque ought to be the Town’s proper corporate name (i.e., the named
defendant) and that the amount is incorrect.  The plaintiffs submit that they
are both clerical errors.  The payment was also made late, since the order was
to have paid the costs, not cut a cheque on the deadline date.  It does not
appear that the plaintiffs (or their lawyer) heeded the seriousness of Chozik
J.’s warning.  Nevertheless, they did attempt to comply.  I accept that there
were clerical errors and that the difference in amount is modest.  In my view,
the default is not sufficient to bar this motion from proceeding.  It does
remain relevant to costs.
[8]              
To be clear, nothing in the foregoing relieves
the plaintiffs from complying with the outstanding costs orders and paying the
required costs.  If not already done since the motion hearing before me, counsel
for the parties should be coordinating on replacing the erroneous cheque.
[9]              
With respect to the second objection, no
discovery plan was agreed between the parties as required by rule 29.1.03 of
the Rules.  In fact, the record before me supports that the plaintiffs
stated that they would provide a proposed discovery plan, but never did.  The
only discovery plan ever proposed was prepared by a third party, Aaron Breier,
which was rejected by the plaintiffs.  A case conference to timetable the
action was then sought in November 2022.
[10]          
In my view, the parties’ dispute over many of
the plaintiffs’ production requests could have been avoided – or at least
brought to a head prior to documentary discovery – by proper discovery
planning.  Many of the documents now sought, including document custodians,
could and should have been discussed while defining the scope of relevant
productions sought from each party.  In my view, that is a key purpose behind
rule 29.1.
[11]          
Pursuant to subrule 29.1.05(1), on any
motion under rules 30 to 35 relating to discovery, the court may refuse to
grant any relief or to award any costs if the parties have failed to agree to
or update a discovery plan.  I reject the Town’s submission that I should deny
the plaintiffs’ motion on that basis.  The obligation under rule 29.1 for a
discovery plan applies to all parties:  both the
plaintiffs and the Town.  The plaintiffs did not propose a discovery plan, but neither
did the Town.  Both parties breached their obligation under rule 29.1.03.  I am
not prepared to penalize the plaintiffs for a default shared by the Town.
[12]          
Having rejected both of the Town’s threshold
objections to this motion, I turn to its substantive merits.
[13]          
Subrule 30.02(1) of the Rules requires
parties to disclose “every document relevant to any matter in issue in the
action that is or has been in the possession, control or power of a party to
the action.”  Subrule 30.03(2) requires that a party’s affidavit of documents
describe all documents relevant to any matter in issue that are or were in the
party’s possession, control or power.  The prescribed forms (Form 30A and 30B)
correlate the three categories of documents discussed in subrule 30.03(2)(a)-(c)
to Schedule A, B, and C, as follows:
[14]          
A party’s production obligation is ongoing. 
Rule 30.07 expressly provides that where a party, after serving an affidavit of
documents, (a) comes into possession or control of or obtains power over a
document that relates to a matter in issue in the action and that is not
privileged, or (b) discovers that the affidavit is inaccurate or incomplete,
the party shall forthwith serve a supplementary affidavit specifying the extent
to which the affidavit of documents requires modification and disclosing any
additional documents.
[15]          
The ambit of production is determined by
reference to the pleadings.  All documents relevant to an issue raised in a
pleading must be disclosed and produced, subject to proportionality concerns.  Production
rules are intended to ensure that parties make full disclosure of all relevant
documents and production of all relevant non-privileged documents well in
advance of the examinations for discovery or, in the case of newly discovered
documents, “forthwith” after their discovery.  Parties are expected to comply
with their document disclosure and production obligations without the need for
court intervention:  Falcon Lumber Limited v. 2480375 Ontario Inc. (GN
Mouldings and Doors), 2020 ONCA 310 at paras. 42-43.
[16]          
Subrule 30.06(b) provides that a further and
better affidavit of documents may be ordered where the court is satisfied by
“any evidence” that a relevant document in a party’s possession, control or
power may have been omitted from the party’s affidavit of documents.
[17]          
In Maalouf v. Bayer Inc., 2023 ONSC 4875,
I summarized the applicable legal principles on a motion for a further and
better affidavit of documents under the Rules.  Although that decision
was not specifically cited by either party, the principles are the same as
those identified in the cases put before me.  As I noted in Maalouf, at
para. 17, case law supports that four primary considerations are assessed on a
motion for a further and better affidavit of documents, as follows:
[18]          
Importantly, rule 30.06 is not a tool for “fishing
expeditions” nor does it permit production of documents relevant only to
the issue of credibility:  SecurityInChina International Corp. v. Bank of
Montreal,  2019 ONSC 7183at para. 8.
[19]          
The foregoing are the considerations that I have
applied in deciding this motion.
[20]          
The Town’s unsworn affidavit of documents was initially
served in January 2021.  It consists of 88 documents disclosed in Schedule
A, with no documents disclosed in Schedule B or C.  Although the plaintiffs
point out that a sworn copy was not served until January 2024, it is undisputed
that the sworn version is the same as the unsworn one.  There is no evidence
before me that, in the three years between 2021 and 2024, the plaintiffs raised
any concerns with the scope or completeness of the Town’s production.  Notably,
none of the documents sought on this motion were requested by the plaintiffs before
commencing the Town’s examination or even before this motion was brought.  The
plaintiffs were seemingly content to proceed with examining the Town based on
the existing productions, at least until the examination was underway.
[21]          
This motion was argued based on a chart prepared
by the parties as directed by Chozik J., which was structured akin to a
refusals and undertakings chart.  The plaintiffs seek further production
arising from 40 documents disclosed in its existing affidavit of documents.  In
total, there are 66 production requests reflected in the chart (some
overlapping).  Several were withdrawn prior to or during argument before me,
some based on the responses provided by the Town to this motion.  The Town has
also voluntarily produced a number of the requested documents.  The balance of
the plaintiffs’ requests are disputed.  The Town has generally conceded
relevance of the documents (if proven likely to exist), subject to those
documents where relevance is specifically challenged in the Town’s responding chart.
[22]          
Although I have regrouped the production
requests, the numbering referenced below matches the production tab references
in the chart used at the hearing.
[23]          
“Proper forms” (Tab 1):  The plaintiffs seek production of the “proper forms” referenced
in an email dated April 22, 2016 from Aaron Brier to the Town’s inspector,
Kelly Stephens.  Specifically, Mr. Brier states that “proper forms” were
submitted and accepted by someone named Michelle Durmanic.  There is
insufficient evidence to support a production order.  No evidence has been
tendered about what the “proper forms” being referenced may be, whether they
were (as stated by Mr. Brier) submitted to the Town, and whether they likely
exist and are within the possession, control, or power of the Town.  In my
view, inquiries about the “proper forms” are more properly made during
examination for discovery.
[24]          
Town representative files, notes, and records
(Tabs 1-3, 5-6, 8, 13-15, and 40-42):  The
plaintiffs make various requests for “a complete copy” of the files and “any
and all notes” made by various Town representatives arising from matters
identified in particular emails and documents:  Kelly Stephens, Michelle Drmanic,
Peter Kozeli, John Tutert, Eric Lehtinen, Vince Blosser, Rebecca Medaric,
Jennifer Maveal, Paul McCann, Kevin Wood, “WPM”, and “DONP”.  Most or all of
the individuals appear to have been inspectors involved in the construction. 
The Town’s position is that the requests are too vague and too broad.  Also, for
most of the requests, the individuals are said to have no files of their own. 
In the case of John Tutert and Eric Lehtinen, they are also said to now be retired.
[25]          
The Town has tendered no evidence supporting its
factual assertions about whether the inspectors did or did not maintain their
own files.  There is also no evidence on retirements nor any convincing argument
on why that is relevant to a production request.  The only inspection record to
which I have been directed in the Town’s productions is found at Tab 42, which
is a spreadsheet of inspections, dates, and notes.  No individual notes or
reports prepared by the various inspectors involved during the home
construction have been produced.
[26]          
I agree with the plaintiffs that it would be
unlikely that none of the Town’s inspectors took notes during inspections.  However,
I find no reasonable or fair basis to take judicial notice that municipal
inspectors do take and maintain notes from inspections.  The position that
there “must be” notes is not based on any evidence, such as inspection notes
and records that are available in other parties’ productions from the related
proceedings.  It is based entirely on speculation, guesswork, and intuition,
which the case law clearly states are insufficient to support a production
order.
[27]          
For example, the fact that various emails
produced by the Town refer to actions taken by or meetings and discussions with
Town inspectors does not itself mean that there are notes and records from
those interactions.  Similarly, the fact that a Town representative was copied
on an email is not evidence that there are undisclosed notes from that
individual.
[28]          
There is insufficient evidence before me to
find, on a balance of probabilities, that inspection records beyond the one
produced at Tab 42 do exist.  I accordingly find no basis to make a production
order.
[29]          
I am also concerned that I have been directed to
no evidence confirming how the various individuals from whom production is
sought were involved during construction.  I am not convinced that every
inspection that did or ought to have occurred during construction is relevant
based on the pleadings.  “WPM” and “DONP” are not even identified.  I am unable
to find that each individual is a relevant document custodian.  These are
examination inquiries.
[30]          
Documents relating to 1360 Acton Crescent
(Tabs 7-8):  The plaintiffs seek production of “any
and all documentation relating to 1360 Acton Crescent”, including notes and
text messages of David Silva and Kelly Stephens.  The request is based on
references in two emails produced by the Town.  The Town argues that 1360 Acton
Crescent is the neighbouring property and is irrelevant to construction of the house
on the property in dispute, which is 1368 Acton Crescent.  Both properties were
under construction at the same time.  The plaintiffs do not dispute that the neighbouring
property is irrelevant, but argue that the emails are referring to 1368 Acton
Crescent and must contain typographical errors for the property address.
[31]          
If the two emails deal with the neighbouring
property and that property is irrelevant, then it is unclear why the Town
produced the emails.  Regardless, I have been directed to nothing in the
pleadings supporting that construction at the neighbouring property is
relevant.  Quite apart from the fact that the plaintiffs’ document requests, as
framed, are overbroad, there is no evidence supporting a finding of unproduced,
relevant documents arising from either of these productions.  Whether or not
these emails do, in fact, refer to 1368 Acton Crescent and whether the documents
sought by the plaintiffs do exist is more properly explored during examination
of the Town’s representative.
[32]          
Notes
made by “Kevin” and correspondence with “Brad Sylvester” (Tab 7):  There
is no evidence before me supporting the identities of “Kevin” or “Brad Sylvester”
and that either of them has relevant knowledge or involvement.  The plaintiffs
assume that “Kevin” refers to Kevin Wood, who is purportedly another Town
representative.   Relevance of notes made by “Kevin” and notes made by Kelly
Stephens or correspondence between her and Brad Sylvester has not been
established, nor has existence of such documents.
[33]          
Specific email correspondence (Tabs 11-14):  The plaintiffs seek production of various email correspondence
between individuals that they argue are referenced in the affidavit of
documents.  The Town’s position is that these were provided on January 11,
2021, April 7, 2021, October 1, 2024 and November 5, 2024.
[34]          
In
responding submissions, the Town sought to rely on an affidavit that was
prepared, sworn, and served over the lunch break after the plaintiffs’
moving submissions were completed.  The Town submitted that the affidavit was
prepared to address the plaintiffs’ submission that they had not received
correspondence referenced in the chart.  Leave to tender further evidence was
not sought prior to the break or even upon return from it.  The plaintiffs did
not consent to the affidavit.  In such circumstances, preparing new evidence
after commencement of oral argument was improper.  I have not considered that
affidavit in deciding this motion.
[35]          
Ultimately,
the issue is moot.  The only version of the affidavit of documents in evidence
before me is the unsworn version found at Exhibit F to the plaintiffs’
supporting affidavit.  That version does not include any emails at Tab 11 (only
photographs) and does not include Tabs 12-14 at all.  The record supports that
the Town’s lawyers sent links to the affidavit of documents and Schedule A
productions, but the content of those links is not before me.  To the extent
that the complete Schedule A productions for Tabs 11-14 have not been produced,
they must be.
[36]          
Application for hearing (Tab 16):  The plaintiffs point out that the produced email does not include
the “Application for Hearing” attachment referenced in the email.  The Town’s
position is not that the application is irrelevant, but rather that it has
already been produced by the plaintiffs as an attachment to another email. 
That is beside the point.  Since the Town views the email exchange as relevant,
a complete copy of the noted email on September 10, 2019 at 5:41 PM, with
attachment(s), should have been produced.
[37]          
Demolition inspection (Tabs 25 and 28):  The plaintiffs seek production of notes and documentation
relating to an inspection before the demolition and revised demolition permits
were issued on the basis that “there must have been” an inspection.  I agree
with the Town that there is no evidence supporting that any such inspection
took place.
[38]          
The plaintiffs argue that the demolition permit
itself refers to inspections, which it does, but the notes about inspections
appear to be regarding inspections that will occur under the permit.  In my
view, the general statements about inspections are an insufficient foundation
for a production order.  What is meant by the statements is more properly the
subject matter of an examination of the Town’s representative.
[39]          
Building permit application documents (Tab 26):   The plaintiffs request (i) the building permit arising from
a produced application for a building permit, and (ii) the documents that
were attached to the application.  The Town has now produced the building
permit.  The Town further concedes that Schedule C to its affidavit of
documents must be updated to reflect purged records, which the Town
acknowledges are implicated by the production request.  The documents attached
to the application must accordingly be disclosed in Schedule A (if available)
or Schedule C (if no longer available).
[40]          
Excavation permit and pre-permit inspection (Tab
29):  The plaintiffs seek production of (i) an
application for excavation permit, (ii) the copy of an excavation permit
issued March 29, 2016, (iii) all notes and documents relating to any
inspection occurring before approval of the building permit, and (iv) the
application for building permit.  In each case, the plaintiffs argue that the
documents must exist, but they have tendered no evidence in support of that
bald assertion.
[41]          
The Town’s position is that the application for
building permit is found at Tab 26 of the Town’s affidavit of documents.  That
document is indeed an application for a permit.  Further inquiries about the
document are properly the subject matter of the upcoming examination.
[42]          
With respect to the remaining requests, the
Town’s position is that there is no document in its records named “Excavation
Permit” and that there is no evidence that any alleged inspections took place. 
I agree there is no evidence before me supporting the plaintiffs’ assertions
that there “must have been” an excavation permit.  I have been directed to
nothing supporting that a permit was issued on March 29, 2016 that has not been
produced or that pre-permit inspections occurred.  There is insufficient
evidence before me to support a production order.
[43]          
Documents relating to stop work order (Tabs
30 and 34):  The plaintiffs seek a “complete file”
from John Tutert relating to the produced stop work orders and, in each case,
“all notes he may have made prior to issuance of the Stop Work Order”.  The
plaintiffs also seek any notes of any other individual who may have issued the stop
work order at Tab 30.
[44]          
I find no basis to make a production order.  The
plaintiffs’ request is based entirely on speculation that “some form of
investigation must have been conducted” before the stop work orders were issued
and that documents therefore should exist relating to that investigation.  That
is insufficient to support a production order.  There is no evidence before me
supporting that John Tutert maintained any notes or records regarding the stop
work orders.  I also agree with the Town that there is no evidence that anyone
other than Mr. Tutert, who is named in the stop work orders, issued the order
or was involved in issuing it.  The Town’s representative may be examined on the
plaintiffs’ speculation.
[45]          
Documents relating to Order to Remedy (Tab
31):  The plaintiffs seek production of “the
compete file” and notes made by Kelly Stephens prior to issuance of the
produced Order to Remedy.  As with Tabs 30 and 34 above, the plaintiffs’
request is based on speculation that “some form of investigation must have been
conducted”.  There is no evidence of that and, accordingly, no basis for a
production order.  The Town’s representative may be examined on the plaintiffs’
speculation.
[46]          
Documents regarding building permit
application (Tab 32):  The plaintiffs seek the
related building permit to the produced permit application and “the complete
file” related to issuance of the building permit, including attachments to the
application for building permit.  There is no evidence of a “complete file”. 
The Town has pointed to Tab 33 for the related building permit.  The Town also
acknowledges that documents implicated by the request ought to have been listed
in Schedule C, since certain records were purged.  The documents attached
to the application must accordingly be disclosed in Schedule A (if available)
or Schedule C (if no longer available).
[47]          
Documents relating to building permits (Tabs
33 and 36):  The plaintiffs seek “the complete
file” related to issuance of these two produced building permits, including
notes regarding any inspection conducted prior to approving the permit.  In
both cases, the plaintiffs submit that there “must have been an inspection of
the subject property by Town officials prior to approving this Building
Permit”.  There is no evidence on what inspections took place, other than the
list of inspections found at Tab 42.  The plaintiffs’ production requests are
based entirely on speculation.  The Town’s representative may be examined on whether
there are any other inspection records.
[48]          
Attachments to application (Tab 35):  The plaintiffs seek “any and all supplemental documentation that
may have been submitted” in respect of the permit application.  Specifically,
the plaintiffs point to a reference to required schedules, which are not
included.  The Town’s position is that nothing is indicated as being attached. 
I agree.  The section referred to by the plaintiffs deals with required
schedules in particular circumstances.  There is no evidence before me that
either applied in the circumstances of the application.  A production order is
not warranted.  The Town’s representative may be examined on whether the
schedules were required and, if so, whether they were submitted.
[49]          
Documents over which privilege is claimed
(Tabs 17, 20, 37, 38, and 80):  The plaintiffs
request the following documents:
[50]          
I agree with the Town that the requests, as
framed, are overbroad.  However, the Town has conceded that there are at least
some relevant documents, but that such documents are solicitor/client
privileged (since they involve legal advice sought and received from its
in-house lawyers) or are otherwise litigation privileged.  However, Schedule B
to the Town’s sworn affidavit of documents indicates there are no relevant
documents over which privilege is claimed, stating unequivocally, “None.”  The
Town concedes that statement is inaccurate and that there are relevant,
privileged documents that are not listed.
[51]          
I need not address the privilege case law before
me and arguments made on it.  There is no evidence before me on which to assess
the scope and number of documents over which the Town claims privilege or addressing
how and when the documents came into existence.  Both are required to consider
and decide a privilege claim.
[52]          
I am satisfied that an order should be made
given the Town’s concession that there are relevant and privileged documents
that ought to have been particularized in Schedule B to its affidavit of
documents.  Whether all documents captured by the plaintiffs’ requests are
relevant is less clear, but I am satisfied that the Town reasonably and likely has
undisclosed documents relevant to the appeal, orders to comply, and prosecution. 
A further and better affidavit of documents is evidently required.
[53]          
I agree with the plaintiffs that the Town has
not put forward an evidentiary basis to support its privilege claims, but I am
not prepared to dismiss the Town’s privilege claims and make a blanket
production order.  Privilege is important.  Ordering production of documents
over which the Town asserts privilege on the bare record put before me by the
plaintiffs would unfairly deny the Town an opportunity to comply with rule 30.03(2)
of the Rules and more clearly set out what relevant portions of the
files are privileged, including on what basis, and what portions are not
privileged and will be voluntarily produced.  The privilege claims may then be
explored by the plaintiffs during examination for discovery of the Town’s
representative.
[54]          
 Although, on the record before me, I have found
no basis to make a production order for many items, I share the plaintiffs’
disbelief that no such documents exist, that the documents are not relevant,
and that they are not in the possession, control, or power of the Town.  In
declining to grant production relief, I am simply not satisfied that there is
sufficient evidence before me that they do exist, on a balance of
probabilities, and have not been produced by the Town.  The plaintiffs have not
met their onus on this motion.  Despite my doubts that the Town has indeed meaningfully
complied with its production obligations, I am not prepared to order a party to
do something that might not be possible to do based solely on intuition and
speculation.
[55]          
That said, it will remain open to the plaintiffs
to cross-examine the Town on its affidavit of documents as part of the
examination for discovery and probe whether there remain relevant and
unproduced documents, including inspection notes and records from individual
inspectors and other Town representatives.  If such unproduced documents do
exist, then that may lead to additional examination and costs consequences for
the Town.  Such concerns may be raised with Chang J. at the case conference
scheduled in early 2025.
[56]          
For various reasons, it has not been possible
for me to release my decision on this motion sooner.  The Town is scheduled for
a continued examination for discovery in just over a week on December 5, 2024,
which itself was only three weeks after the long motion hearing date. The
deadline to complete examinations has been fixed by Chang J. for December 13,
2024.  Chozik J. has already ordered that the parties must return before Chang
J. to vary that timetable, so in my view it is not open to me to vary the
deadline.
[57]          
The Town requests thirty days to prepare a
further and better affidavit of documents.  That date well is after the upcoming
examination and the deadline to complete examinations.  The plaintiffs dispute
that it should take so long.
[58]          
I accept that this motion was adjourned several
times through no fault of the Town.  The original return date was unilaterally
selected by plaintiffs’ counsel.  The next return date was adjourned because of
a trial conflict for plaintiffs’ counsel.  The last return, which was fixed by
Chang J. at a case conference, was adjourned because the motion was not
scheduled as a long motion as it should have been.  Chozik J. also rightly felt
that correlative work between the Town’s productions and the additional
document requests, which plaintiff’s counsel proposed to do by oral submissions,
should have been done in a chart.  In my view, none of these procedural delays
in this motion being heard were the fault of the Town.
[59]          
Nevertheless, the Town is in default of its
obligation under the Rules to prepare and serve an affidavit of
documents outlining all documents within the Town’s possession, control or
power.  It has conceded deficiencies in its affidavit of documents by producing
relevant and previously unproduced documents in response to this motion and by
acknowledging that Schedule B and Schedule C to its affidavit of documents
are incomplete.  Regardless of whether and when the plaintiffs objected to the
scope of productions, the obligation to prepare a proper affidavit of documents
rested with the Town.  It failed to do so.
[60]          
The timeline to the upcoming continued discoveries
is tight.  Nevertheless, this motion has been outstanding since April 2024,
meaning that the Town has been aware of specific further production requests
for months.  I give no effect to the Town’s argument that it was only required
to respond to the plaintiffs’ production requests as framed and that the
plaintiffs ought to have made these requests during examinations for discovery. 
That submission ignores the Town’s production obligations in rules 30.03 and
30.07 of the Rules.
[61]          
The Town has had months to consider in the
plaintiffs’ concerns and review its records for further relevant documents that
ought to have been disclosed in the Town’s original affidavit of documents.  Knowing
that its affidavit of documents was incomplete – at least in respect of the
late-produced documents and admittedly incomplete Schedules B and C – the Town
could have (and should have) already been working to update it.  The scope of
additional relevant documents that I am ordering is not expansive and reasonably
flows from documents admittedly not produced.  In my view, the production order
I am making was reasonably anticipated given how the hearing unfolded.  If the
Town did not immediately start work on a further and better affidavit of
documents after the motion hearing, then that was at its own risk.  Potential
hard work before the upcoming discovery will then be needed to remedy the
Town’s breached documentary disclosure obligations under the Rules.
[62]          
A further and better affidavit of documents
shall accordingly be prepared and served, with production of any additional Schedule
A documents in electronic format, by December 3, 2024 at 6:00 p.m.  Any
relevant documents not produced by the Town by that deadline shall not thereafter
be admissible or relied upon by the Town in this proceeding, including at
trial, subject to the terms ordered below.  This deadline will abridge
discovery preparation for the plaintiffs on new documents, but the delays in
this motion being heard were not the fault of the Town, so I am not concerned
with that.
[63]          
As noted above, given Chozik J.’s prior
endorsement, I cannot vary Chang J.’s timetable order.  However, since
examinations have not been ordered to be completed until December 13, 2024, the
plaintiffs and the Town are free to agree to a new date of the Town’s
examination and vary the deadline I have imposed on mutual consent pursuant to
rule 3.04 of the Rules.
[64]          
For the foregoing reasons, I order as follows:
[65]          
A draft order was not submitted by the
plaintiffs or included in the motion materials.  If a formal order is required,
then the parties may submit a draft order in Word format, with approval as to
form and content, to the Milton judicial assistants, Fiona Kelly and Sara
Stafford.  If the parties cannot agree on a form of order, then each may submit
a draft order in the form that they propose and I will settle the form of order
myself.
[66]          
Costs outlines have been exchanged.  There were
no offers to settle, but given the potential for divided success I did not take
the parties’ costs submissions at the time of the motion hearing.  I encourage
the parties to settle costs of the motion.  If they cannot agree, then written
costs submissions shall be exchanged.  The plaintiffs shall serve any costs
submissions by December 9, 2024.  The Town shall serve responding costs
submissions by December 16, 2024.  The plaintiff shall serve any reply
submissions by December 20, 2024.  Both sides shall clearly state the amount
and scale of costs that they are seeking and/or should be awarded.  Costs
submissions shall not exceed five (5) pages, excluding any offers to settle and
case law, for primary submissions and two (2) pages for the plaintiffs’ reply.
[67]          
Once served, all costs submissions shall be
submitted by email directly to the Milton judicial assistants, Fiona Kelly and
Sara Stafford, with proof of service.  Unless exchanged and submitted in
accordance with the above, the parties shall be deemed to have agreed on costs.