[1]              
The parties to this putative action have reached a settlement. On this
motion, the plaintiff seeks orders (i) certifying the action for the purposes
of settlement; (ii) appointing the plaintiff as representative plaintiff; (iii)
approving the settlement agreement, (iv) approving the notice of certification
and settlement approval and, (v) approving the plan of notice.
[2]              
The defendant Blackbaud, Inc. (“Blackbaud US”) is an American cloud
software company which provides data storage and other services to
organizations engaged in philanthropic activities. I refer to these
organizations as Blackbaud’s customers. The defendant Blackbaud Canada, Inc.
(“Blackbaud Canada”) is a wholly owned subsidiary of Blackbaud US.
Collectively, I refer to the defendants as “Blackbaud.”
[3]              
In the course of their charitable work, Blackbaud’s customers collect
information from and about their constituents, including their financial
donors, and upload and store that information within online platforms hosted by
Blackbaud US. It is up to the customer whether to collect data from their
constituents, and what data to collect. The data collected may include personal
and financial information. Encrypted fields are available for customers to
collect sensitive information like credit card numbers, but ultimately, it is
the customer’s decision whether to use the encrypted fields.
[4]              
In May 2020, Blackbaud US learned it was the victim of a ransomware
attack by cyber criminals, who had accessed Blackbaud’s systems from
approximately February 7, 2020 to May 20, 2020. The hackers were able to
extract a copy of a subset of data from the Blackbaud platform.
[5]              
Blackbaud paid a ransom to the hackers in exchange for assurances that
the exfiltrated personal information would be destroyed.
[6]              
On July 16, 2020, Blackbaud publicly announced that the ransomware
attack had occurred, and that it had paid the ransom.
[7]              
Blackbaud’s America cybersecurity team engaged in ongoing monitoring of
the dark web and has found no evidence of any improper use of any data
exfiltrated by the hackers.
[8]              
Following the data breach, proposed class actions were commenced against
both Blackbaud US and Blackbaud Canada in British Columbia, and in this
proceeding. In the United States, Blackbaud US was subject to regulatory
proceedings initiated by the Attorneys General in 50 states, all of which (save
one, in California) have been settled. The terms of the settlement require
Blackbaud to assume what is described as a “significant array of duties and
responsibilities intended to mitigate the risk of future cyber attacks and
their effects.” In California, Blackbaud US has consented to entry of judgment
and a permanent injunction which includes similar relief to that in the settled
proceedings. Such terms include implementing and maintaining written incident
response plans and breach response plans to prepare for and respond to security
incidents threatening or compromising personal information stored on
Blackbaud’s US network, provide training to employees, establish technical
safeguards, and engage an independent third party to assess its data security
practices and compliance.
[9]              
The proposed representative plaintiff in this action, Ms. Shriqui, was a
student in the external LLB program through the University of London in
England, a Blackbaud customer. She was advised that she was subject to a data
breach linked to the Blackbaud hack. Until this time, Ms. Shriqui had been
unaware that Blackbaud hosted any of her data; she did not know that the
University of London had used a third-party provider for that purpose.
[10]          
Over four years has passed since the data hack. Ms. Shriqui deposes that
she has had no negative experiences that she can link to the data breach.
[11]          
Similarly, Stephan Wittman, the proposed representative plaintiff in the
British Columbia action, was advised by an organization he had donated to, the
BC Cancer Foundation, that his personal information had been accessed in the
data breach. However, like Ms. Shriqui, Mr. Wittman has been unable to identify
any negative impacts or harm that he suffered from the hack.
[12]          
No one has come forward to class counsel, nor to Blackbaud, nor (to
Blackbaud’s knowledge), any Blackbaud customer, to advise that they have
suffered any harm from the data breach.
[13]          
Against this backdrop, the parties have negotiated a settlement that
envisions a cy-prés payment. On this motion,
they seek certification of this action for the purposes of settlement, approval
of the settlement, approval of the notice and notice plan, and approval of
counsel fees, and disbursements. They have abandoned their request for
honoraria for the representative plaintiffs. I consider each of these issues in
turn.
[14]          
Pursuant to s. 5(1) of the Class Proceedings Act, 1992, S.O.
1992, c. 6, CPA, the court shall certify a class proceeding if: (a) the
pleadings or the notice of application disclose a cause of action; (b) there is
an identifiable class of two or more persons that would be represented by the
representative plaintiff; (c) the claims or defences of the class members raise
common issues; (d) a class proceeding would be the preferable procedure for the
resolution of the common issues; and (e) there is a representative plaintiff
who would fairly and adequately represent the interests of the class, has
produced a workable plan for the proceeding, and does not have an interest in
conflict with the interests of other class members.
[15]          
Where certification is sought for the purposes of settlement, all the
criteria for certification must still be met, although compliance with the
certification criteria is not as strictly required: Waheed v. Pfizer Canada
Inc., 2011 ONSC 5057, at para. 36; Nutech Brands Inc. v. Air Canada,
[2008 CanLII 11643, at para. 9. The representative plaintiff must provide a
certain minimum evidentiary basis for certification order: Hollick v.
Toronto (City), 2001 SCC 68, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 158, at para. 24.
[16]          
Certification will not be denied under s. 5(1)(a) unless it is plain and
obvious that the pleadings disclose no cause of action: Hollick, at
para. 25.
[17]          
For the purposes of the settlement approval, the defendants do not
dispute, and I accept, that the pleadings disclose a cause of action in negligence.
[18]          
In determining whether there is an identifiable class, the court asks
whether the plaintiff has defined the class by reference to objective criteria
such that a person can be identified to be a class member without reference to
the merits of the action. The class must be bounded, and not of unlimited
membership, or unnecessarily broad, and have some rational relationship with
the common issues: Hollick, at para. 17, Cloud v. Canada (Attorney
General) (2004), 2004 CanLII 45444 (ON CA), 73 O.R. (3d) 401 (C.A.), at para. 45.
[19]          
For purposes of settlement, the plaintiff seeks to certify the following
class:
[20]          
I am satisfied that the class is defined by reference to objective
criteria, is bounded and bears a rational relationship with the common issue
which I discuss below.
[21]          
When considering whether a claim raises a common issue, the court asks
whether it is necessary to resolve the issue to resolve each class member’s
claim, and whether the issue is a substantial ingredient of each of the class
members’ claims. The issue is a substantial ingredient of each claim if its
resolution will advance the case or move the litigation forward, and if it is
capable of extrapolation to all class members: Vivendi Canada Inc. v.
Dell’Aniello, 2014 SCC 1, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 3, at para. 46.
[22]          
The plaintiff must prove that there is some basis in fact that the
asserted common issues actually exist, and they are common to the entire class:
Kuiper v. Cook (Canada) Inc, 2020 ONSC 128, at paras. 26-33.
[23]          
The plaintiff proposes to certify the following issue, common to the
class:
[24]          
I am satisfied that this question is common to all class members, and
the resolution of this question at a common issues trial would advance the
action for all class members, avoiding the need for each class member to prove
the issue in individual trials.
[25]          
Moreover, I am satisfied that the plaintiffs have adduced evidence
providing some basis in fact that the proposed common issue exists, including
evidence that Blackbaud hosted their data on its server through third-party
services engaged by the organizations with which the class members had a direct
relationship.
[26]          
This branch of the test requires that the court be satisfied that a
class proceeding would be the preferable procedure for the resolution of the
common issues. This inquiry is directed at two questions: first, whether the
class proceeding would be a fair, efficient, and manageable way to advance the
claim, and second, whether the class proceeding would be preferable to other
procedures for resolving the common issues. Preferable procedure is addressed
through the lens of the three goals of class proceedings, that is, access to
justice, behaviour modification, and judicial economy: Hollick, at para.
27; Banman v. Ontario, 2023 ONSC 6187at para. 313.
[27]          
In the context of the settlement, courts have recognized that a class
proceeding is a fair, efficient, and manageable method for advancing the class
members claims and is preferable to other procedures. As Perell J. held in Waheed,
at para. 27, where there is a cause of action, an identifiable class, common
issues, and a settlement, there is a strong basis to conclude that a class
proceeding is the preferable procedure because certification would serve the
primary purposes of the CPA: access to justice, behaviour modification,
and judicial economy.
[28]          
I am satisfied that, in the context of the proposed settlement, a class
proceeding is the preferable procedure to resolve the common issues.
[29]          
I am satisfied that it is appropriate to certify the action for the
purposes of settlement.
[30]          
Normally, once an action is certified for the purposes of settlement,
class counsel undertakes a notice program to advise the class of the settlement
and seek objectors, and where appropriate, give class members the opportunity
to opt out. A date is set for a settlement approval hearing at which class
members may elect to participate.
[31]          
In this case, I am asked to approve the settlement without such notice,
and approve a notice plan that will provide notice of the approved settlement,
thus depriving class members of the opportunity to object. The order sought is
highly unusual. Nevertheless, I have been persuaded that the order sought is
appropriate and just in the circumstances of this case.
[32]          
The factual background to this unusual request is as follows.
[33]          
Blackbaud, as a third-party service provider to its customers, does not
have lists of its customers’ constituents who were potentially impacted by the
cyber-attack. Blackbaud has no knowledge of any of their data that may have
been implicated in the cyber-attack. It is not able to provide contact
information for class members to allow them to receive notice.
[34]          
With a process estimated to take three to six months, at a cost of
$1-2.5 million USD, Blackbaud could produce, at best, an incomplete and
unreliable list of information. Direct notice to class members is thus
impractical, and would be unsatisfactory in any event, given the unreliability
of the information that could be gleaned.
[35]          
The other unique feature of this case that impacts upon notice is that
many, if not most, class members, like Ms. Shriqui originally, have no idea
that their data was hosted on Blackbaud’s servers. Blackbaud disclosed that it
had been targeted by a cyber-attack, but its public disclosure would not have
alerted many class members to the fact that their information may have been implicated.
Ms. Shriqui found out when she was contacted by the University of London. Mr.
Wittman found out through the BC Cancer Foundation. But Blackbaud’s customers
made their own determination about to whether to disclose the breach, and what
to disclose about it, to their constituents. Thus, it is likely that class
members would not be able to identify themselves as class members from a
published notice regarding the Blackbaud data hack class action.
[36]          
The CPA anticipates that notice will be tailored to the
particular case, and gives the court the power to dispense with notice where
appropriate. Section 27.1.(12) provides that “in approving a settlement, the
court shall consider whether notice of the settlement should be given under s.
19…”
[37]          
Similarly, s. 17(2) provides that the court may dispense with notice of
certification of a class proceeding based on the factors set out therein,
including the cost of giving notice, the nature of the relief sought, the size
of the individual claims of the class members, and any other relevant matter.
[38]          
Section 19(1) provides that, at any time in a proceeding, the court may
order any party to give such notice as it considers necessary to protect the
interests of any class member or party, or to ensure the fair conduct of the proceeding.
Section 19(4) directs the court to make such orders respecting notice as are
necessary to ensure the notice given is the best notice that is practicable in
the circumstances.
[39]          
In this case, the plaintiff proposes a notice plan that requires class
counsel to post notice of settlement approval on their three websites, and to
send direct notice to all persons who have contacted them in connection with
this action and who have provided their email addresses. There are only a few
such people, all of whom contacted class counsel before the action was
commenced.
[40]          
This is not a robust notice program, but I accept that it is appropriate
in the circumstances for the following reasons.
[41]          
First, the settlement in this action proposes a modest cy-prés payment.
The cost of a direct notice program, given the challenges in compiling even an
unreliable list from Blackbaud’s document, is prohibitive: see Cappelli v.
Nobilis Health Corp., 2019 ONSC 4521, at para. 30, where Perell J. declined
to order a direct notice plan because the settlement sum was too small to
justify the cost.
[42]          
Second, the cost of widespread publication of the notice in publicly
available news and online sources is out of proportion to its likely benefit,
given that most class members will not recognize that the notice is directed at
them. The purpose of notice is to allow those people who may be affected by a
class proceeding to identify themselves so that they can consider their rights,
including, significantly, the right to opt-out of a settlement to pursue
individual litigation against the defendant. The notice will serve no purpose
if class members cannot self-identify on reading the notice.
[43]          
Third, the value of the right to opt-out has to be considered in the
circumstances of the case. If there is reason to conclude that the right to
opt-out is not particularly valuable, a robust notice program is “far less
important”: Fantl v. ivari, 2018 ONSC 4443, at paras. 19-22. In this
case, I conclude that the right to opt-out is not particularly valuable. There
is no evidence, four years after the data breach, that anyone has suffered any
negative impacts from it, or that any person wishes to litigate individually. Moreover,
as I will come to, class counsel’s opinion is that there is no realistic
possibility of a worthwhile damages award.
[44]          
Notice is often waived, or posted solely on class counsel’s website,
when a plaintiff seeks to discontinue or dismiss a class action. As will become
apparent, this action is weak. It can be thought of as a request for a discontinuance,
with a positive benefit of a cy-prés payment. I would have granted leave
to discontinue this action; in the circumstances, the right to opt out of the
settlement is of little to no value.
[45]          
In these unusual circumstances, I conclude that the notice plan proposed
is appropriate.
[46]          
The proposed settlement provides that the defendants will pay the
all-inclusive sum of $340,000 in return for a release of claims against them
and the dismissal of this action. The settlement funds are intended to be
distributed cy-prés to two recipients: The Samuelson-Glushko Canadian
Internet Policy and Public Interest Clinic – University of Ottawa, and the
Computer Science Data Security Fund – University of Saskatchewan. If the
settlement is approved, the parallel action in British Columbia will be
discontinued without costs.
[47]          
Under s. 27.1(1) of the CPA, a proceeding brought under
the CPA may only be settled with court approval. The court shall not
approve a settlement unless it determines that the settlement is fair,
reasonable, and in the best interests of the class: s. 27.1(5) CPA, at
para. 7. The burden lies on the party seeking approval: Robinson v.
Medtronic, Inc., 2020 ONSC 1688, at para. 63; Nunes v. Air Transat A.T.
Inc., 2005 CarswellOnt 2503 (S.C.J.), at para. 7.
[48]          
Public policy favours the resolution of complex litigation: Nunes,
at para. 7.
[49]          
Settlements need not be perfect; they are compromises: Lozanski v.
The Home Depot, Inc., 2016 ONSC 5447, at para. 71. To find that a
settlement is not fair and reasonable, it must fall outside a range of
reasonable outcomes: Nunes, at para. 7. An objective and rational
assessment of the pros and cons of a settlement is required: Mancinelli v.
Royal Bank of Canada, 2017 ONSC 2324, at para. 38. There is a strong
presumption of fairness when a proposed class settlement, which was negotiated
at arms-length by counsel for the class, is presented for court approval: Nunes,
at para. 7.
[50]          
A court must be assured that the settlement secures appropriate
consideration for the class in return for the surrender of its litigation
rights against the defendants: Nunes, at para. 7. However, it is not the
court’s function to substitute its judgment for that of the parties or attempt
to renegotiate a proposed settlement. Nor is it the court’s function to
litigate the merits of the action, or, on the other hand, to rubber-stamp a
settlement: Nunes, at para. 7.
[51]          
When considering whether to approve a negotiated settlement, the court
may consider, among other things: (a) the likelihood of recovery or likelihood
of success; (b) the amount and nature of discovery, evidence or investigation;
(c) the proposed settlement terms and conditions; (d) the recommendation and
experience of counsel; (e) the future expense and likely duration of litigation
and risk; (f) the recommendation of neutral parties, if any; (g) the number of
objectors and nature of objections, if any; (h) the presence of good faith,
arm’s length bargaining and the absence of collusion; (i) the degree and nature
of communications by counsel and the representative parties with class members
during the litigation; and (j) information conveying to the court the dynamics
of and the positions taken by the parties during the negotiation: Lozanski,
at para. 73; Nunes, at para. 7; Robinson, at para. 65.
[52]          
I find that the proposed settlement agreement is fair and reasonable for
the following reasons.
[53]          
First, the likelihood of success in this litigation was low. Four years
after the data hack, there is no evidence of any misuse of the exfiltrated
data, or of any person suffering harm as a result. Recent developments in the
jurisprudence regarding data breach cases have rejected claims in contract and
negligence where there is no ability to show actual damages. Moreover, the
jurisprudence has foreclosed relying on the tort of intrusion upon seclusion in
data breach cases. There could be the potential for nominal damages for breach
of certain provincial privacy acts, but then only in four provinces. Three of
those statutes raise questions regarding the jurisdiction of the Ontario courts
to entertain such claims. These are not just issues of liability and damages,
but would create challenges for the plaintiff on the certification motion.
[54]          
Second, against this backdrop, the representative plaintiff does not
wish to be exposed to an adverse costs award. The proceedings, were they to
continue, could be expected to be lengthy, hard-fought, and expensive. The
representative plaintiff is not indemnified by counsel or any third party for
costs in this litigation. In these circumstances, it would be difficult to find
a new representative plaintiff.
[55]          
Third, there is no behaviour modification that can meaningfully be
achieved through this proceeding. The terms of the settlements Blackbaud US has
entered into in the United States require it to improve its data security,
among other things. The evidence is that these improvements will accrue to the
benefit of Canadian constituents of Blackbaud’s customers as well. Behaviour
modification has already been achieved in the regulatory proceedings in the
United States.
[56]          
Fourth, the settlement negotiations were undertaken at arms-length and
in good faith.
[57]          
Fifth, the settlement is recommended by both, counsel in this action,
and counsel in the British Columbia action.
[58]          
Sixth, the amount of the settlement is modest, and it would be
impractical to distribute it to class members, even if they could be
identified.
[59]          
Because I would have granted the plaintiff leave to discontinue this
action without costs, it is obvious that a cy-prés settlement is a fair
and reasonable resolution for the class, which at least receives the indirect benefit
of the charitable donation going to support efforts of organizations that do
work that will benefit people in similar circumstances to the class members.
[60]          
As to the proposed cy-prés recipients, I note the following:
[61]          
The proposed cy-prés receipients were chosen by the
representative plaintiffs, and are appropriate recipients. The work the
recipients intend to further with the funds is related to the issues raised in
this litigation and will be for the benefit of class members and the public generally.
[62]          
I thus approve the proposed settlement.
[63]          
Morgan J. recently noted in Austin v. Bell Canada, 2021 ONSC
5068, at para. 10, citing Commonwealth Investors Syndicate Ltd. v. Laxton, [1994]
O.J. No. 2922, at para. 63 (S.C.J.), that generally, considering whether to
approve class counsel fees, “the amount payable under the contract is the
starting point for the application of the court’s judgment.”
[64]          
In MacDonald et al. v. BMO Trust Company et al., 2021 ONSC 3726,
at para. 21, Belobaba J. held that the approach that presumes valid the
percentage of recovery agreed to in the contingency fee retainer (up to
one-third) is appropriate in most class action settlements, but not in “mega
fund” settlements that are in the range of $100 million or higher.
[65]          
I would have expected a retainer agreement to be placed in evidence
before me, but I have looked, and there is no retainer agreement in the record.
Counsel advise me that, in the Ontario action, the contract contemplates a
contingency fee of 25%.
[66]          
There is ample law explaining why contingency fees in class proceedings
advance the goal of access to justice: see, for example, Baker (Estate) v.
Sony BMG Music (Canada) Inc., 2011 ONSC 7105, at para. 64; Osmun v.
Cadbury Adams Canada Inc., 2010 ONSC 2752, at para. 21. Thus, even without
a retainer agreement in evidence, there is some basis to conclude that an award
of fees calculated as a percentage of the recovery makes sense in a class
action.
[67]          
The general principles to apply to the assessment of class counsel’s
fees were set out by Juriansz J.A., in Smith Estate v. National Money Mart
Co., 2011 ONCA 233, at para. 80:
[68]          
The court also considers the integrity of the profession as a relevant
factor: Fresco v. Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, 2023 ONSC 3335, at
paras. 127-133, aff’d 2024 ONCA 628, at paras. 101-102. It is important to
note, as the Court of Appeal did in Fresco, at para. 84, that the phrase
“integrity of the profession” is not meant to connote dishonesty in this
context, but rather, a fee that is not champertous.
[69]          
In McIntyre Estate v. Ontario (Attorney General), 2002 CanLII
45046, at para. 76, the Court of Appeal for Ontario found that a “fee agreement
that so over-compensates a lawyer such that it is unreasonable or
unfair to the client is an agreement with an improper purpose -- i.e.,
taking advantage of the client.”
[70]          
The risk class counsel took on must be measured from the outset of the
litigation, not with the benefit of hindsight: Gagne v. Silcorp Ltd.,
1998 CanLII 1584.
[71]          
In this case, class counsel seeks fees of $127,939 plus disbursements
for both, counsel in the Ontario action and counsel in the British Columbia
action. The amount sought is 33.3% of the settlement award, plus HST and disbursements.
It is thus higher than the contingency fee contemplated in the retainer
agreement between Ms. Shriqui and Ontario class counsel.
[72]          
The evidence before me details the steps taken by class counsel. Ontario
counsel met with the representative plaintiff, conducted legal and fact
research into the claim, drafted the pleading, negotiated a co-counsel
arrangement with BC counsel, and engaged in settlement negotiations. Counsel
spent approximately 115 hours on the action.
[73]          
In British Columbia, class counsel took additional steps, including
preparing a notice of application for certification, preparing for and arguing
a one-day sequencing hearing, and preparing for and arguing a two-day hearing
on whether the BC action should be stayed in favour of arbitration. British
Columbia counsel spent about 447 hours on the proceeding there.
[74]          
With respect to the fee request, I note the following:
[75]          
The use of contingency fees in class actions is designed to promote
access to justice. But one feature of contingency fees is that the premium
counsel obtains when they secure a good result in a case works to offset, to
some extent at least, the losses attached to the cases that end up not progressing
or succeeding. I see no justification for a fee at the high end of the
percentage range in a case that was not a success. Awarding a fee at 33.3% of
the value of the settlement amount only encourages counsel to take on bad
cases, settle early for what they can get, and maximize their fee recovery. It
would invite churning bad cases instead of focusing on ones that truly advance
the goals of the CPA: access to justice, behaviour modification, and
judicial economy.
[76]          
In the circumstances, I am prepared to approve fees to class counsel of
$60,000, which is just over 17.5% of the settlement funds, plus HST.
[77]          
There is evidence before me of disbursements incurred in British
Columbia, but not in Ontario. I am prepared to award disbursements of $36,157.85
with respect to the British Columbia matter; that amount is supported in the
record. Without evidence of Ontario counsel’s disbursements, I am prepared to
order $1,000 in recognition of the fact that counsel must have incurred some
disbursements.
[78]          
The plaintiffs in Ontario and British Columbia initially sought
honoraria, but have since withdrawn their request. Accordingly, I do not
address it.
[79]          
The parties have provided me with a form of Notice of Settlement
approval to be distributed according to the Notice Plan I have already
approved. I am satisfied with the form of the proposed Notice, with the
exception that the paragraph regarding approval of counsel fees will have to be
reworked to reflect my order.
[80]          
Counsel shall provide me with a revised draft order including the
revised Notice as a schedule for my signature.
[81]          
In summary, I make the following orders: