[1]   This case involves multiple parties with complex financial and legal
relationships, including a husband and wife, the wife’s mother, two separate
third parties with ownership interests in properties, and issues of trust,
property rights, and claims arising from the breakdown of a marriage. An
overview of the key facts and issues are as follows:
[2]        
The issues to be decided at trial are:
[3]             
Saman and Golnaz were born in Iran.
[4]             
They met in London, U.K., in January 2002, where
they were both taking an English course prior to attending the University of
Westminster in London. Both parties studied business and accounting at
University. Saman obtained a bachelor’s degree in business commercial finance
and accounting. Golnaz obtained a degree in accounting.
[5]             
In 2002, Saman immigrated to Toronto with his
family. He became a permanent resident of Canada on October 10, 2004.
[6]             
In 2006, Saman returned to London.
[7]             
The parties were married in Iran on August 5,
2008.
[8]             
They have two children of their marriage, M., a
daughter, who is 9 years old, and L., a son, who is 4 years old.
[9]             
In 2011, Golnaz applied to become a Permanent
Resident of the United Kingdom, but her application was rejected. The parties
then decided to move to Canada.
[10]         
In 2012, Saman came to Canada. He then sponsored
Golnaz and she came to Canada in June, 2014.
[11]         
During the marriage, Golnaz worked as a
bookkeeper and then did not work outside of the home once M. was born. Golnaz
testified that her only source of income is Ontario Works, which she began
receiving in 2023.
[12]         
During the marriage, Saman worked as an
accountant for MLA Power Corporation in Markham and in 2015, he started a
Telecommunications company. Saman testified that the core of his business was
wholesaling long distance calls and terminating the calls. In or around 2018, CRA
audited Saman’s company, and thereafter, the company ceased operating because it
owed CRA $9.5 million in HST. The outcome of the audit is unknown. Saman then decided
to become involved in real estate development.
[13]         
The first time Elaheh came to Canada to visit was
in 2016. She had inherited money and properties from her father and wanted to
invest in real estate in Canada. Saman testified that he helped Elaheh open a
bank account at TD Canada Trust and they decided they would purchase and
renovate a house and sell it for a profit. Elaheh would provide the funds and
Saman would manage the project.
[14]         
Elaheh submits that her funds totalling $830,700
were used by Saman to purchase and/or renovate three properties between 2015
and 2022, namely,
[15]         
Elaheh argues that Saman has never paid her back
for her investment, despite two agreements being signed that he do so. Further,
she submits that Saman was enriched by her advancement of funds to him; she was
correspondingly deprived; and there is no juristic reason for Saman to have
been enriched at her detriment. The remedy she seeks is a monetary award of
$830,700. Finally, Elaheh submits that Saman has never properly accounted for
the monies he took from her, with and without her consent; all the evidence for
such an accounting is in his possession or control; and his failure to do so
should be sufficient for the court to draw an adverse inference against him.
Elaheh has grounded her claims against Saman in claim in unjust enrichment and
she seeks a monetary remedy.
[16]         
Golnaz describes Saman as having been
physically, financially, and psychologically abusive toward her and the
children during the marriage. She also describes Saman as having a history of
drug use. This was denied by Saman.
[17]         
The parties separated on January 31, 2022, when
Golnaz was charged criminally for assaulting Saman. Golnaz’s criminal charges
were resolved prior to this trial.
[18]         
Other than a short period of time after the
separation, the two children have resided in Golnaz’s primary care since the
separation.
[19]         
On February 23, 2022, less than one month after
the parties’ separated, Saman sold the Viewmount Property, which he owned with
a third party named Morshedi, for $2,035,000. Upon learning of the sale of the
Viewmount Property, Golnaz brought an urgent motion to register a Certificate
of Pending Litigation (“CPL”) on title to the Viewmount Property.
[20]         
On April 11, 2022, Golnaz issued the within
Application, seeking, among other things, a divorce, decision-making
responsibility for the children, primary residence of the children, child
support, spousal support, equalization of net family property; an order
registering a CPL on title to the Viewmount Property; and an order that the net
proceeds of sale from the Viewmount Property be held in trust pending further
agreement of the parties or court order. At trial, Golnaz abandoned her claims
for spousal support and property division.
[21]         
Golnaz named her mother, Elaheh, as a respondent
in this family law proceeding because she believed her mother had a claim of
approximately $670,000 for monies she advanced to Saman which would impact her
equalization claim.
[22]         
On May 17, 2022, Golnaz brought a motion seeking
that the net proceeds of sale from the Viewmount Property be held in trust,
pending further order of the Court. Morshedi opposed Golnaz’s motion and sought
the release of his 50% share of the net proceeds of sale. On May 19, 2022,
Pinto, J. made an order registering a CPL on title to the Viewmount Property,
and an order that the net proceeds of sale from the Viewmount Property be held
in trust pending further court order.
[23]         
On July 18, 2022, the parties had a case
conference before Nishikawa, J.. Saman had not yet served or filed an Answer despite
having been served with Golnaz’s Application two months earlier, nor had he
responded to Golnaz’s disclosure requests. Saman was granted a further 30 days
to file his answer and provide the requested financial disclosure. Saman was
granted parenting time by video-conference.
[24]         
On August 11, 2022, Morshedi, brought a motion to
vary the Pinto, J. order dated May 17, 2022, to unfreeze a portion of the net
sale proceeds of the Viewmount Property which he claimed belong to him. Sharma,
J. made an order releasing the balance of 50% of the net proceeds of sale to
Morshedi. Accordingly, Morshedi has no further claims to funds from the
Viewmount Property.
[25]         
On July 25, 2023, the parties attended a case
conference before Brownstone, J., at which time she made a consent order (“Brownstone
Order”) as follows:
[26]         
Saman did not comply with the Brownstone Order.
He never paid child support to Golnaz. He testified that he did not so because
his lawyer told him not to pay child support directly to Golnaz but to wait
until the Brownstone Order was registered with the Family Responsibility
Office. According to Golnaz and Elaheh, Saman never produced the financial
disclosure he was ordered to produce. Saman testified that he provided
authorizations to Golnaz so she could find out his financial information but
there is nothing on the record corroborating this.
[27]         
On November 23, 2023, the parties signed Minutes
of Settlement regarding their parenting issues providing Golnaz with sole
decision-making responsibility for both children and primary residence of the
children. Saman’s parenting time was to be supervised for four visits before he
could have unsupervised time with the children. The terms of the parties’ consent
were incorporated into an order of Nishikawa, J. on July 26, 2024, eight months
after the Minutes were signed.
[28]         
It is agreed that Saman last saw the children at
the end of November 2023, which visit was supervised by Golnaz’s sister. Saman
then left for Iran. He did not tell Golnaz he was going to Iran. He testified
that he went to visit his grandmother who was ill and expected that he would
return to Canada in 2 weeks. However, Saman is banned from leaving Iran until
he pays the Mahr to Golnaz. As a result, Saman has had no contact with the
children in 11 months, either by telephone or video conference.
[29]         
On December 3, 2023, an order of the Family
Court in Tehran was made. Golnaz registered her Mahr in Iran. Saman asked the
Court in Iran to forgive or reduce the amount of the Mahr from 500 gold coins
to a lower amount.[4]
The court found that Saman did not prove his inability to make the Mahr payment
and, as a result, the Court did not grant forgiveness or a reduction of the
Mahr to the husband. Saman appealed this decision.
[30]         
During the trial, Saman testified that a
subsequent order of the Family Court in Tehran was made which reduced the Mahr
from 500 gold coins to 150 gold coins, which is the equivalent to $150,000 CAD.
Saman claims he cannot pay the Mahr, even in this reduced amount. Until he does
so, Saman is banned from being able to leave Iran.
[31]         
On November 24, 2024, the parties attended a
Settlement Conference before Akazaki, J, at which he confirms that the parties
had signed Minutes of Settlement regarding the parenting issues and were to
submit a draft order incorporating the terms of same. Akazaki, J. granted leave
to the parties to conduct questioning; Saman was to serve and file an Answer to
Elaheh’s claims by January 31, 2024; Elaheh was to serve her response to Saman’s
Request for Information (“RFI”) within 30 days; Saman was to serve his response
to Elaheh’s RFI within 30 days; leave was granted to Elaheh to bring a motion
for summary judgment against Saman; leave was granted to the parties to bring
motions as a result of Saman having failed to produce financial disclosure; and
a Trial Management Conference (“TMC”) was scheduled for April 12, 2024.
[32]         
On April 12, 2024, the parties attended a TMC before
Vella, J. Her Endorsement confirms that Saman attended the TMC but had not
filed a brief and he had failed to comply with Akazaki, J.’s order of November
24, 2023 to deliver an Answer to Elaheh’s claim by January 31, 2024. Vella, J.
granted Saman leave to file his Answer to Elaheh’s claim within 10 days,
failing which Elaheh was given leave to bring a 14B motion to note Saman in
default with respect to her claims against him. Vella, J. also ordered Golnaz’s
counsel to deliver a final RFI to Saman to include the outstanding items from
prior RFI’s within 7 days; and Saman to deliver his complete response to the
RFI within 30 days of being served with the final RFI.
[33]         
On September 3, 2024, the parties attended an
Exit TMC before Hood, J..  Saman did not attend the exit TMC.  Hood, J.’s Endorsement
scheduled Golnaz’s motion to strike Saman’s Answer for his non-compliance with
the RFI served as ordered by Vella, J., for October 1, 2024. Elaheh was to
proceed with her 14B motion to strike Saman’s claims based on Vella, J.’s order
and was granted leave to bring her motion to strike also returnable on October
1, 2024.
[34]         
On September 26, 2024, Horkins, J. heard Elaheh’s
14B motion to strike Saman’s claims because he did not file his Answer to her  claims
within 10 days of Vella, J.’s order, dated April 12, 2024. While noting that
Saman did not attend the exit TMC before Hood, J. on September 3, 2024, and
that he did not file his Answer to Elaheh’s claims, Horkins, J. gave him one
last chance to file his Answer to Elaheh’s claims by no later than October 9,
2024, failing which the trial judge was to decide what restrictions would apply
to Saman’s right to respond to Elaheh’s claims against him at trial.
[35]         
By the time of the trial, Saman had served his
Answer to Elaheh’s claims but he had done so late, and he had not filed the
Answer with the Court because of his inability to access Case Centre from Iran.
It was confirmed that counsel for Elaheh had received Saman’s Answer to her
claims.
[36]         
Golnaz seeks child support from Saman from the
date of separation onward, namely from February 1, 2022 onward.
[37]         
Saman has an obligation to pay child support
for the two children pursuant to s.15.1 of the Divorce Act, R.S.C.,
1985, c.3 (2nd Supp.). Any order for child support is to be made in
accordance with the Child Support Guidelines, SOR/97-175 (“CSG”):
s.15.1(3) of the Divorce Act.
[38]         
 In D.B.S. v S.R.G., 2006 SCC 37, [2006] 2
S.C.R. 231 (“D.B.S.”)  at para. 38, the Supreme
Court of Canada identified the core historical principles
governing child support as follows:
[39]         
 More recently, the Supreme Court of Canada reiterated
in Colucci v Colucci, 2021 SCC 24, 458 D.L.R. (4th) 183, “the
long-established principles that support is the
right of the child and that parents have a financial
obligation to their children arising at birth and continuing after separation”:
at para. 36.
[40]         
Child support is determined in
accordance with the CSG, which are legally binding.
[41]         
Retroactive child support is a claim for monies
that should have been paid by Saman to Golnaz in support. Child Support
arrears, on the other hand, is a calculation of unpaid child support that has
accumulated under an existing support order of agreement.
[42]         
Golnaz did not differentiate between her claim
for retroactive and child support arrears. Her position at trial was that Saman
ought to pay child support for their two children from the date of separation
onward based on a minimum wage income.
[43]         
There is no dispute that the parties separated
on January 31, 2022.
[44]         
There is an obligation for parents to support
their children from birth. This parental obligation, like the children’s
concomitant right to support, exists independently of any statute or court
order, D.B.S., at para. 54.
[45]         
Retroactive awards of child support are not exceptional.
It cannot be exception that children are returned the support they were rightly
due. D.B.S., at para. 97.
[46]         
D.B.S. set out
the four factors the court is to consider in awarding retroactive child support
where there is no order or agreement in place for child support. These four
factors are meant to balance the child’s interests in a fair standard of
support, the payor’s interest in flexibility, and the interest of the child and
recipient in certainty and are as follows:
[47]         
In applying the D.B.S. factors to the
facts of this case, I find as follows:
[48]         
For all the above reasons, I order Saman to pay
retroactive child support for the parties’ two children, based on an imputed
minimum wage income, which at the time of separation was $31,200 a year.
Pursuant to the CSG, table child support for two children is $477 a
month on a minimum wage income of $31,200 a year. For the 17 months from
February 1, 2022 to and including July 31, 2023, Saman owes Golnaz retroactive
child support of $8,109.
[49]         
Pursuant to the Brownstone Order, starting
August 1, 2021, Saman was obliged to pay Golnaz interim interim, without
prejudice child support for the two children on an income of $31,000 a year which
corresponds to table child support under the CSG of $474 a month.
[50]         
Golnaz’s evidence is that Saman breached this
order and did not make any child support payments to her. Saman’s evidence at
trial is that he made one payment of child support to Golnaz after the
Brownstone Order and then stopped because his lawyer told him not to pay Golnaz
directly but wait until the order was enforced by the Family Responsibility
Office. Saman did not put any evidence before the court to evidence that he
made a child support payment to Golnaz. As between the evidence of Saman and
Golnaz, I prefer Golnaz’s evidence and I do not accept that Saman paid Golnaz
any child support after the Brownstone Order was made.
[51]         
The Brownstone Order is based on Saman earning a
minimum wage income of $31,000 a year. However, the minimum wage in Ontario in
June 2023, at the time the Brownstone Order was made, was $15.50 an hour. It
then increased to $16.55 an hour on October 1, 2023, which translates to
$34,424 a year.
[52]         
I find that Saman owes child support arrears to
Golnaz from the effective date of the Brownstone order, namely, from August 1,
2023 to and including October 31, 2024, in the sum of $523 a month x 14 months,
totalling $7,322, which is the table amount of child support under the CSG
for two children based on a minimum wage income of $34,424 a year.
[53]         
Saman shall pay Golnaz retroactive and child
support arrears totalling $15,431 within 45 days.
[54]         
On a prospective basis, Golnaz asks the court to
impute an annual income to Saman in the sum of $100,000 a year. Saman argues
that no income ought to be imputed to him until he returns to Canada and once
he returns, his income should either be minimum wage income or whatever he is
able to earn. There was no date provided as to Saman’s expected date of return.
[55]         
 Section 19(1) of the CSG allows a judge
to impute income in various circumstances. One circumstance is where
a judge finds that a spouse is intentionally under-employed or unemployed
unless the unemployment is required because of the
needs of another child under the age of majority:
s. 19(1)(a) of the CSG.
[56]         
The decision to impute income is a
discretionary one, and the only limitation to that discretion is that there
must be some evidentiary basis for the
amount of income imputed: Monahan-Joudrey v Joudrey, 2012
ONSC 5984, at para. 21; see also Homsi v Zaya, 2009
ONCA 322, 65 R.F.L. (6th) 17, at paras. 27-28; Duffy v Duffy, 2009 NLCA
48, 289 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 132, at paras. 35-36.
[57]         
In Drygala v
Pauli (2002), 2002 CanLII 41868 (ON CA), 61 O.R. (3d) 711 (C.A.)
at para 23, the Court of Appeal for Ontario set out a three-part
test for imputing income because of intentional
unemployment or under-employment as follows:
[58]         
  The courts have recognized that intentional unemployment is
particularly complex. The court need not be satisfied that a payor spouse has
acted in bad faith before it imposes a support order based
on imputed income: Drygala, at paras. 29-30, and
36. Rather, the court must look to see if the parent’s decisions around
work choices are reasonable: Drygala, at paras. 38-40; see
also Duffy, at
para. 25; Tillmans v Tillmanns, 2014 ONSC 6773, at
paras. 59-60.
[59]         
In Drygala, the judge was
determining whether the payor’s choice to reduce child support to
meet his own educational needs was reasonable, and explained the following at
para. 38:
[60]         
When imputing income based on intentional under-
employment or unemployment, a court must consider what is reasonable in the
circumstances. The factors to be considered have been stated in a number of
cases as age, education, experience, skills and health of the parent. Cholodniuk
v. Sears (2001), 2001 SKQB 97 (CanLII), 14 R.F.L. (5th) 9, 204 Sask.
R. 268 (Q.B.). I accept those factors as appropriate and relevant
considerations and would add such matters as the availability of job
opportunities, the number of hours that could be worked in light of the
parent's overall obligations including educational demands and the hourly rate
that the parent could reasonably be expected to obtain.
[61]         
As a general rule, a parent cannot avoid child
support obligations by a self-induced reduction of income: Cholodniuk,
at para. [10(6)].
[62]         
When imputing income, the court must consider
the amount that can be earned if a person is working to capacity while pursuing
a reasonable educational objective. How is a court to decide that when,
typically, there is little information provided on what the parent could earn
by way of part-time or summer employment? If the parent does not provide the
court with adequate information on the types of jobs available, the hourly
rates for such jobs and the number of hours that could be worked, the court can
consider the parent's previous earning history and impute an appropriate
percentage thereof. [page 722]
[63]         
Golnaz acknowledges that the sum of $100,000 in
income is a “guess” but argues that it is based on what the parties’ expenses
were during the marriage. However, there is no evidence on record demonstrating
that Saman ever earned $100,000 in annual income.
[64]         
On Saman’s Form 35.1 affidavit, sworn on October
3, 2022, he deposed as follows:
[65]         
It is clear from this statement that eight
months after the separation, Saman had high expectations of his ability to find
employment and earn income. He swore that he believes his experience and skills
will enable him to find work and he clearly believed he would be able, in some
capacity, to continue in some capacity to work for his Telecommunications
Company. This statement in his Form 35.1 Affidavit was in direct contravention
to Saman’s sworn financial statement, sworn the day prior, on October 2, 2022,
in which he stated his income for the previous year (2021) was $25,000 and that
he has been unemployed since October 21, 2021.
[66]         
The further evidence on record regarding Saman,
his educational background, employment experiences is as follows:
[67]         
There is virtually no information on the record
as to what amount of income Saman could earn based on his various skill-set.
The evidence demonstrates that his prior work experience is in
Telecommunications, running a business, corporate finance, and accounting, and
managing real estate development projects. Based on this varied experience,
Saman should be employable.
[68]         
Saman’s only financial statement filed in this proceeding
on the record is dated October 2, 2022. In that financial statement, Saman
claimed he had been unemployed since October 21, 2021.
[69]         
 The Brownstone Order required Saman to provide
his income tax returns for 2020, 2021 and 2022. Golnaz’s evidence is that she
never received this disclosure. During cross-examination, in answer to a
question as to whether he complied with this aspect of the Brownstone Order,
Saman answered that he did file his income taxes for two years at once and
provided it to his lawyer and he believes his lawyer should have uploaded it
onto Caselines. There were no income tax returns on the record. As a result,
the last document that verifies Saman’s income is his 2019 Notice of
Assessment. The court virtually has no information about income earned by Saman
over the last four years.
[70]         
I am not prepared to impute Saman with an income
of $100,000 a year. However, I am persuaded that Saman can earn more than
minimum wage when he returns to Canada. His failure to produce current income
information in these proceedings could have been avoided if he had complied
with court orders and the Family Law Rules. I accordingly draw an
adverse inference against him and order Saman to pay child support based on an
imputed income of $70,000 a year for the two children starting November 1, 2024
in the sum of $1,067 a month.
[71]         
A portion of Elaheh’s action was framed as both an
unjust enrichment claim and a resulting trust claim. Specifically, Elaheh claims
that:
[72]         
Elaheh then framed the balance of her claim as
one of resulting trust with respect to a further $210,700 she deposited into
her TD bank account after the sale of the Carmichael Property which she did not
consent to Saman withdrawing, and which he then used toward servicing the
mortgages on the Viewmount Property and completing the renovations on the Castlefield
Property.
[73]         
Title to the Carmichael Property was taken in
Golnaz’s name. When it was sold, net proceeds of sale of about $616,000 were
deposited into Golnaz’s bank account and then used by Saman. Elaheh was not
repaid.
[74]         
Title to the Castlefield Property was taken in
the name of a third party, Mr. Siavash. A trust agreement was entered into
between Saman and Sivash that Siavash was holding 50% of the Castlefield
Property in trust for Saman. When this property was sold, Siavash retained most
of the proceeds and only partially paid Saman $220,000. Saman used those
proceeds and did not repay Elaheh. Saman is now suing Siavash for the remainder
of his share of the Castlefield Property.
[75]         
Title to the Viewmount Property was initially
taken in Saman’s name alone, and later placed in the joint names of Saman and another
third party, Morshedi. When the Viewmount Property was sold, Morshedi received
his share of the net proceeds by order of this court. The balance of the net
proceeds are those being held in trust by Philip Ulrich.
[76]         
To succeed with her claim for unjust enrichment,
Elaheh must show an enrichment or benefit to Saman, a corresponding deprivation
to herself, and the absence of a juristic reason for the enrichment: Kerr v.
Baranow, 2011 SCC 10 at para. 32 (“Kerr”).
[77]         
Where unjust enrichment is established, the
first remedy to consider is always a monetary award: Kerr v. Baranow, at
para. 100.
[78]         
The analysis of Elaheh’s unjust enrichment claim
became complicated because counsel seemed unclear about whether the claims
before the court were founded in unjust enrichment or resulting trust. Further
counsel for Elaheh intermingled arguments about Saman acting in the capacity of
fiduciary to Elaheh by virtue of having a Power of Attorney over her TD bank
account, and by virtue of the Trust Agreement entered into between them in 2021.
Whatever framework used by Elaheh to argue her claims against Saman, she is
seeking the return of monies he withdrew from her TD bank account, some of
which was taken with consent and some without consent.
[79]         
Counsel for Elaheh framed the issue for me to
determine as whether Saman was unjustly enriched by Elaheh having given him
$620,000 and she was deprived when he placed the Carmichael Property in
Golnaz’s name, and he then held a 50% interest in both the Viewmount Property
and the Castlefield Property, which he otherwise could not have acquired
without her funds, for no juristic reason.
[80]         
However, Elaheh agreed that Saman could use
$470,000 of her funds which she deposited into her TD bank account to invest in
the purchase and renovation  of the Carmichael Property. It is agreed that the
monies were always intended to be repaid to her when the Carmichael Property
sold. When a further $150,000 was advanced by Elaheh to Saman, it was
co-mingled by Saman with other funds he had obtained because of mortgaging the
Viewmount Property and the Castlefield Property. As a result, the parties
signed an agreement in 2018 and 2020 to set out the extent of Elaheh’s
investment so she would be repaid. The agreement signed in 2020 was a Trust
Agreement, where Saman was the Trustee and Elaheh was a beneficiary. Saman now
takes the position that Elaheh’s funds were not used toward the purchase of the
Viewmount Property and/or the purchase and renovation of the Castlefield Property.
This position is inconsistent with the terms of the 2018 Agreement and the 2020
Trust Agreement.
[81]         
As a result, the correct framing of Elaheh’s
claims against Saman are as follows:
[82]         
For a trust to come into existence, it must have
three certainties: certainty of intention, certainty of subject matter and
certainty of objects. If any one or more these are lacking, the trust fails to
come into existence or is void (see Walters’ Law of Trusts in Canada, 4th
ed, 5.1) and Lad v. Marcos, 2020 ONSC 6215 (CanLII),  at para. 43.
[83]         
As set out in Lad v. Marcos at para. 44,
[84]         
With respect to certainty of intention, the
court must be satisfied that the settlor, by conduct, word, or a trust agreement,
intended to create a trust by
intending that the trustee be required to hold the trust property for the benefit of the
beneficiary. A trust will
only exist where the trustee is obliged to deal with the property on the
beneficiary’s behalf. If the purported trustee is permitted, but not required,
to deal with the property for the benefit of the beneficiary, then a trust relationship
does not exist. (see: Rubner
v. Bistricer, 2019 ONCA 733 at para 52).
[85]         
With respect to certainty of subject matter,
there must be certainty as to the trust property and the shares in which
beneficiaries are each to take.  The trust property must either be clearly
described in the trust instrument
or must be clearly calculatable or identifiable by objective standards
(see: Waters’ Law of Trusts in
Canada, 4th ed., 5.III) and Lad v. Marcos, at para. 46.
[86]         
With respect to certainty of objects the court
must be satisfied that there is sufficient description of the purpose of
the trust that
it can be executed (see: Waters’ Law of Trusts in Canada, 4th ed., 5.I) and Lad
v. Marcos, at para. 48.
[87]         
Based on two agreements that were signed by
Elaheh and Saman in 2018 and its replacement Trust Agreement in 2021, I find
that it is clear that the intention was that Golnaz would be holding her
interest in the Carmichael Property in trust for Elaheh to the extent of her
original investment of $470,000 and her proportional interest in the property
when it was sold to the extent of 69%; and that Saman would be holding his 50%
beneficial interest in the Viewmount Property to the extent of an additional
$150,000 in trust for Elaheh. The subject matter of the trust was clear and I
am satisfied that the purpose of the trust was clearly to ensure that Elaheh’s
initial investment, at the least, would be repaid to her out of the Carmichael
Property and the Viewmount Property, when each was sold. I make this finding
for the following reasons:
[88]         
I find that in addition to the $470,000, Saman
withdrew a further $150,000 of additional funds Elaheh then deposited into her
TD account because he told her that more funds were needed to finish the
renovations on the Carmichael Property. However, Saman used Elaheh’s funds to
purchase and service mortgages on the Viewmount Property and the Castlefield
Property, and subsequently mortgaged these two properties to complete the
renovations on the Carmichael Property. I make this finding on the following
basis:
[89]         
It is not disputed that Elaheh invested at least
$620,000 into the Carmichael Property and/or the Viewmount Property as set out
in the 2021 Trust Agreement.  Elaheh claims her funds were also used either
toward the purchase of the Castlefield Property or the renovations to that
property as reflected in the 2018 Agreement. The 2018 Agreement is clear that
Elaheh was to be repaid for her contribution of $620,000 into the Viewmount
Property and the Castlefield Property.
[90]         
Therefore, I find that a trust existed where Saman, as the trustee,
was obliged to deal with the Viewmount Property on Elaheh’s behalf, as a beneficiary.
The 2021 Trust Agreement was clear and certain on an objective standard that
the property was the Viewmount Property and that Elaheh’s share was 74% of
Saman’s 50% interest in the property. Further, I am satisfied that there was a sufficient
description of the purpose of the trust , namely that Saman was to deal
with the Viewmount Property on behalf of Elaheh and his mother, as
beneficiaries.
[91]         
Further, there is no doubt that a Power of
Attorney creates a fiduciary relationship between Saman and Elaheh. Saman acted
under the Power of Attorney he had for Elaheh’s TD Bank Account at all material
times when he withdrew funds and used them to purchase and renovate the Carmichael
Property, and when he used her funds to either purchase the Viewmount Property
and/or service the mortgages on title to is and when he used her funds to
either purchase the Castlefield Property and/or renovate it and/or service the
mortgages registered on title to it. In his capacity as Elaheh’s Power of Attorney
he had an obligation to trace the use of her funds from the TD Bank Account and
account for the use of her funds. He failed to do so at the time he withdrew
the funds. He also failed to do so even after Elaheh was named an added third
party to this Application. Further, he failed to comply with various court
orders made in this Application to produce the necessary financial disclosure
and bank account documentation to enable the court to understand how Saman used
Elaheh’s funds.
[92]         
Based on all the above, the extent of Elaheh’s
investment or share in the three properties, at the very least was $620,000,
assuming there was no increase in the fair market value of the three
properties. Accordingly, Saman shall repay the $620,000 owing to Elaheh on the
basis of the express 2021 Trust Agreement and on the basis that he had a
fiduciary obligation in relation to Elaheh and must return the funds he
withdrew from her TD Bank Account using the Power of Attorney.
[93]         
Elaheh claims that she did not agree to Saman
continuing to withdraw funds from her TD Bank Account using the PoA after the
Carmichael Property sold. Notwithstanding this, Elaheh argues that Saman did withdraw
a further $210,700 from her TD Bank Account after June 21, 2018, and therefore
there is a presumption of a resulting trust for these monies. Elaheh argues
that Saman has not rebutted the presumption of a resulting trust and therefore,
he must return the funds to her.
[94]         
I adopt the principles of the presumption of a
resulting trust as aptly summarized by Pazaratz, J. in Jackson v. Mayerle,
2016 ONSC 1556 (CanLII), at para. 569:
[95]         
The term “resulting trust” does not indicate a
reason for the creation of the trust (unlike “constructive” trusts). The term
“resulting” indicates the way in which the trust operates. An interest subject
to a resulting trust “results” or goes back, to where it came from. As stated
in Kerr:
[96]         
To determine if the transferor intended to make
a gift, the court will determine the transferor’s actual intent by considering
several factors including:
[97]         
I find that Saman did not successfully rebut the
presumption of resulting trust for the $210,700 he withdrew from Elaheh’s TD Bank
Account after the Carmichael Property was sold on June 21, 2018.
[98]         
Elaheh argues that between January 10, 2019 and
February 17, 2021, Saman withdrew a total of $210,700 from her TD bank account
as follows:
[99]         
Elaheh’s evidence was specific and credible.
Essentially, her evidence is
[100]     
I do not accept Saman’s position that Elaheh’s
money was not used to purchase or maintain the mortgages on title to the
Viewmount Property and/or the Castlefield property. Further, I find there are
serious issues with Saman’s credibility and the reliability of his evidence.
There were no documents put forward by Saman to verify his  version of events
which the court finds troubling. I make these findings for the following reasons:
[101]     
Based on all the above, I find that Saman did
not meet his onus in rebutting the presumption that Elaheh always understood,
as did he, that her monies advanced through her TD bank account were to be
repaid upon the sale of the three properties. The 2018 Agreement and the 2021
Trust Agreement Saman brokered between Elaheh and his mother are further
evidence that he was keenly aware that Elaheh’s funds were used and applied
toward these properties and that she needed to be reimbursed.
[102]     
Given Saman’s repeated failure to give an
accounting as to Elaheh’s funds, Elaheh asks the court to draw an adverse
inference and find that Saman used the funds in her TD bank account toward
these three properties or for his personal use.
[103]     
It is a basic tenet of evidence law that a party
in sole possession of relevant evidence that chooses not to produce that
evidence should be subject to an adverse inference that the evidence is not
favourable to that party. Sigma v. Aimia, 2018 ONSC 3637 (CanLII), at
para. 21.
[104]     
Since Saman did not account for his use of Elaheh’s
monies, and he did not account for having co-mingled the various mortgages registered
on title to both the Viewmount and Castlefield Properties, or fulfil his
financial disclosure obligations to account for the funds he withdrew from
Elaheh’s TD Bank Account using his Power of Attorney, I draw an adverse
interest and find that Elaheh’s funds were used toward the acquisition,
maintenance and renovations of all three properties.
[105]     
If Saman could prove that Elaheh’s funds were
not used by him toward the Viewmount Property and or the Castlefield Property,
it stands to reason that he would have provided financial disclosure to show
this without hesitation. As found in Giavan v. Nagy, 2021 ONSC 5009
(CanLII), at para. 32, I find it suspicious that Saman failed to comply with
the court orders made in this Application to account for Elaheh’s funds, which
is concerning.
[106]     
Saman’s failure to account makes it impossible
to know with any degree of certainty how he used Elaheh’s funds.
[107]     
An accounting of Elaheh’s funds is entirely absent
from the evidence tendered by Saman at trial. Elaheh requested an accounting of
the funds from her TD bank account and there were several requests for this disclosed
since this application began, all of which remain unanswered by the time this
trial began.
[108]     
The actual accounting of Elaheh’s bank account
funds lies within the exclusive knowledge of Saman. Given his failure to
account, Saman cannot credibly rely on Elaheh’s inability to conclusively prove
that her funds were used for which specific purposes.
[109]     
Accordingly, I find that it is appropriate to
draw an adverse inference and conclude that Saman used Elaheh’s funds from her
TD Bank Account for acquiring, maintaining and preserving all three properties.
[110]     
I find that Saman did not rebut the presumption
of the resulting trust in connection with the $210,700 withdrawn from Elaheh’s
TD bank account after the Carmichael Property closed.
[111]     
Furthermore, Siavash was fully reimbursed and
made whole in connection with his investment in the Castlefield Property to the
exclusion of Elaheh. Similarly, Morshedi was made whole and reimbursed in
connection with his investment in the Viewmount Property. Saman was reimbursed
and made whole in connection with what he claims his investment was, as funded
by his mother, in connection with the Carmichael Property. The only person who
was not reimbursed or made whole was Elaheh.
[112]     
Saman shall repay the sum of $210,700 to Elaheh
on the basis of a resulting trust.
[113]     
Golnaz seeks to travel with the parties’ two children
without the need to first obtain Saman’s consent. It is agreed that she has
sole decision-making responsibility for the parties’ two children.
[114]     
Section 16.1(4) of the Divorce Act permits
the court to provide for any matter that the court considers appropriate, in
this case, that would be travel. Further, the court may make an order imposing
any terms, conditions, and restrictions that it considers appropriate:
s.16.1(6) of the Divorce Act.
[115]     
Given that Golnaz has sole decision-making
responsibility for the children, it follows that she can decide whether to
travel with the children and where she intends to travel with them. Given that
Elaheh, Golnaz’s mother lives in Iran and that Saman has been in Iran for the
past 11 months, with no known date when he will return to Canada, I find that it
is in the children’s best interests that they be permitted to travel with their
mother without the need for Saman to consent first. Golnaz shall be required to
provide notice to Saman about any planned travel, including providing the dates
of proposed travel, the place where the children will be staying and an
emergency telephone number where the children can be reached in case of an
emergency.
[116]     
Given that the children have not had parenting
time with Saman, virtually or in person since the end of November 2023, it is
in the children’s best interests for virtual parenting time to begin with him as
soon as possible. Golnaz has proposed that Saman have virtual parenting time bi-weekly
for one hour by zoom to be arranged on a weekend day. I do not agree that this
is sufficient time. The virtual parenting time shall take place twice a week
for a half hour each time on either Monday, Tuesday or Wednesday from 5:00 to
5:30 p.m. eastern standard time and Saturdays for a half-hour, the time to be
proposed by Golnaz.
[117]     
It is in the children’s best interests for the
parents to begin to communicate in a productive manner. In accordance with
s.16.1(4)(c) of the Divorce Act, the parents shall use a co-parenting
application for the purposes of communicating about the children, parenting
time and exchange of information concerning the children.
[118]     
This court makes the following order: