[1]              
Mr. Durant
appeals from the decision of Brunet J. on February 16, 2024, in the matter of
an application under s. 74 of the Firearms Act, S.C. 1995, c. 39.
[2]              
In March
of 2023, Mr. Durant applied
for a firearms licence. In the personal
history section of the
application form, he responded affirmatively to the question:
[3]              
A criminal
background check was then conducted. The firearms officer
assigned to the file
discovered two police reports that were adverted to by Brunet J. Several
occurrences outlining interpersonal conflict with others and/or
concerning behaviour were identified with only the most
serious or recent occurrences being specifically identified.
[4]              
As Brunet J. noted, on July 20, 2018, there was a family
dispute noted by the Ottawa
Police Service. Mr. Durant was alleged to have struck his father and his
father had concerns regarding Mr. Durant possibly using drugs. No charges were
laid in that incident.
[5]              
The next day, on
July 21, 2018, Ottawa Police attended the father’s home to remove Mr. Durant due to his odd behaviour. His father noted that over the last couple of months, his son, Mr. Durant, had changed and was asking
questions like why the father
was inside of his (Mr. Durant’s)
mind. Mr. Durant had been observed to pour ginger ale on the floor for no
reason.
[6]              
The firearms
officer asked Mr. Durant if he would agree to provide medical
records to see if he was in an improved mental state
compared to in 2018.
[7]              
The disclosed
medical records indicated that in 2018, Mr. Durant experienced psychotic
episodes and referential delusions, delusions of thought insertion and thought control,
body control and paranoia. He
felt that people around him, including family, strangers or others, could put
thoughts in his head, and had some referential delusions about music artists
referring to them in their songs. He thought that people were able to influence his body and that he did not have control of his body. He also reported
feeling unsafe at that time and was carrying a knife for protection. He
reported experiencing auditory hallucinations, hearing voices that he could not
recognize. He denied ever experiencing religious or grandiose delusions and
disavowed experiencing visual or tactile hallucinations.
[8]              
The curated
sample of the medical records
which were before
Brunet J. indicated
there was no evidence
of a history of mania,
major depression, OCD or PTSD.
This sample was from October 2018.
[9]              
The sample of
records also indicated that Mr. Durant had met with a social worker who also
met with Mr. Durant’s mother. His mother expressed concern about Mr. Durant’s
trip to Barbados, him possibly not taking his medication, and him being in
Barbados without parental supervision. She stated
that Mr. Durant still believed
he did not have a mental illness
and that she wanted him to receive his medication
by injection.
[10]          
When asked if he
could recall his first psychotic episode, Mr. Durant apparently told the social
worker that “I was crazy, but I’m okay now.”
[11]          
Further, in the sample, there
was a noted instance
when it was recognized that Mr.
Durant was at high risk of relapse
and brought in due to non-compliance with his medication regimen. In November of 2018, the attending physician felt that
Mr. Durant did not appreciate the risks of relapse and its association with medication non-compliance. He also tested positive on a cannabis screen. Based on this
presentation, Mr. Durant’s first episode of psychosis was likely schizophrenic
spectrum illness and cannabis use disorder.
[12]          
Later in November
of 2018, Mr. Durant’s mother felt there was a need for Mr. Durant’s
hospitalization, noting his increased aggressiveness.
[13]          
As a result of
this information, the firearms officer asked Mr. Durant to obtain more updated
information regarding his mental health in order to assess his eligibility for
a firearms licence. Mr. Durant denies there was an issue related to his mental
health.
[14]          
In his reasons,
Brunet J. reviewed the record which was before the court, setting out the
medical evidence and the evolution of this case. He noted that Mr. Durant sought out a second firearms examiner
when it appeared that it was taking what he viewed as an inordinate delay in
getting his licence application approved.
[15]          
At pp. 15-17 of
his reasons, Brunet J. outlined the firearms officer’s stated reasons for
refusing the application. The refusal was based on the following:
[16]          
Justice Brunet
noted that Mr. Durant’s application was refused because he had been reported as having experienced mental health issues
in the past, including auditory
hallucinations and delusions, which he refused to recognize and instead
believed that all of his thoughts back at that time were normal for society.
[17]          
Additionally, one
other person who knew Mr. Durant expressed concern regarding his impulsivity,
etc., and about the safety of others in the circumstances.
[18]          
Justice Brunet
upheld the decision of the firearms officer that it was not desirable in the
interest of Mr. Durant and public safety that he be permitted to hold a
firearms licence, finding that decision reasonable on the evidence.
[19]          
He cited R. v. Morgan,
[1995] O.J. No. 18 (Gen. Div.):
[20]          
The Crown in this
case did not object to the introduction of fresh evidence on this appeal of the
decision of Brunet J.
[21]          
Mr. Durant made
lengthy submissions regarding the genesis of his diagnosis, which he denies, and his treatment by mental health
professionals. His recounting of the history
of this
[22]          
Mr. Durant
harbours resentment toward his former treating psychiatrists and described them
as incompetent. He indicated he was a victim of medical malpractice and
vehemently maintains that he has no underlying mental
illness. He provided
evidence that he is employed
and an active member of the community. In addition to his employment, he
spends time working out at a gym. He indicated that he is not currently using
cannabis.
[23]          
On December
8, 2023, the firearms officer
refused to issue
a firearms licence
to Mr. Durant. The firearms
officer considered many factors including medical records which indicated that
Mr. Durant was treated for schizophrenia
and psychosis in the past, police
reports of family conflicts, the
fact that Mr. Durant denied ever suffering from mental illness, an interviewee
expressing concern about him possessing a firearm, and Mr. Durant’s
refusal to provide
an updated psychiatric assessment.
[24]          
Mr. Durant
reviewed the decision of the firearms officer to the Ontario Court of Justice.
On February 16, 2024, Brunet J. dismissed the appeal finding that the decision
of the firearms officer was reasonable.
[25]          
Absent an error of law, the standard of review for a reference
hearing is reasonableness.
[26]          
A lower court’s
findings of fact are not to be reversed absent a palpable and overriding error:
Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235, at para. 10.
[27]          
Having carefully
reviewed all of the evidence in this case, including the fresh evidence
introduced on this appeal, I am unable
to find that Brunet J. erred in upholding the decision of the
firearms officer as reasonable in the circumstances.
[28]          
Owning a firearm
requires discipline and responsibility. I have heard evidence that Mr. Durant
is very disciplined in aspects of his life. For example, he works out at the
gym and has trained sufficiently that he can bench press 155 pounds.
He also indicates that he is employed
and there was unchallenged evidence that he holds a position of responsibility
within the company which employs him. He has a drivers licence. Driving a car
also requires discipline and responsibility.
[29]          
However, a firearms officer
and a reviewing provincial court judge are entitled to consider
anything about the background or conduct of the applicant that is relevant
to the applicant’s safety,
the safety of others or public safety: R. v. Davidson, 2011 ONSC 249,
231 C.R.R. (2d) 342, at para. 73.
[30]          
In this case,
there is evidence of past family conflict which the firearms officer and the
reviewing court below were entitled to consider. There is a diagnosis, which
Mr. Durant denies, of schizophrenia and at least one episode of psychosis,
perhaps brought on by cannabis abuse.
[31]          
While there is
evidence before me of Mr. Durant’s discipline and responsibility in other areas
of his life, the mental health issues which presented in the past, and which he
has denied, were not improperly considered by the court below in determining whether
he meets the standard
required of gun owners, which is that the discipline and responsibility they exhibit in their day-to- day lives permits the ownership
of an item which can result in injury or loss of life.
[32]          
The court notes
that Mr. Durant was polite and prepared in his submissions to this court. He
clearly spent a great deal of time preparing his case to be argued and was
organized. Some of his submissions lacked in relevance, but when this was
pointed out to him, he quickly moved on to other areas.
[33]          
He attempted to
demonstrate that he is a person who is disciplined and responsible. As
indicated, the evidence suggests that he is disciplined and responsible in some areas
of his life. For example, he has been an athlete and has won medals in soccer.
This type of success in physical
[34]          
I find no error
in the judgment of Brunet
J. in the circumstances of this appeal.
Mr. Durant’s appeal is therefore dismissed. The professionalism and fairness displayed by the crown throughout
these proceedings was appreciated and merits mention.