[1]        Ryan
Daigneault and Daniel Bell appear before me today for the purpose of
sentencing.
[2]        Mr.
Daigneault and Mr. Bell pled guilty on the eve of trial to the following
charges:
[3]        There
was a pause in the sentencing process while Mr. Daigneault explored whether Gladue
considerations applied to him.  A letter dated July 16, 2024 from a Gladue
writer indicates that she was unable to confirm Mr. Daigneault’s claim to
Indigenous ancestry.  Mr. Daigneault withdrew his claim that Gladue considerations
applied on his sentencing.
[4]        On
consent of all parties, a lengthy Agreed Statement of Facts was filed in
relation to each offender.
[5]        Briefly,
Mr. Daigneault and Mr. Bell belong to the London chapter of the Outlaws
motorcycle club.  Mr. Daigneault is the president of this chapter of the Outlaws
and is known as “Big Red”.  Mr. Bell is known as “Tattoo”.
[6]        In
October of 2020, a Police Agent infiltrated the club and gained the trust of
Mr. Daigneault.  There were also judicial authorizations relied upon to
intercept the private communications between the Police Agent and Mr.
Daigneault.
[7]        From
approximately November 12, 2020 to January 19, 2021, the Police Agent purchased
significant quantities of cocaine and a handgun from Mr. Daigneault.  The
negotiations were done directly with Mr. Daigneault.  Mr. Bell had a secondary
role, primarily as a courier, transporting the drugs and gun to complete the
transactions.
[8]        On
December 4, 2020, the Police Agent purchased a black, Luger style handgun from
Mr. Daigneault for $4,000.
[9]        On
January 15, 2021, the Police Agent attended at Mr. Daigneault’s residence and paid
him $30,000 as half the payment for a kg (actually 1042g) of cocaine.  This
transaction was completed when the Police Agent paid a further $30,000 a few
days later.
[10]      On
February 17, 2021, the Police Agent purchased another kg of cocaine (1040g) for
the sum of $60,000.
[11]      Those
transactions form the charges to which Mr. Daigneault and Mr. Bell pleaded
guilty.  There were several other transactions for which they were charged but
do not form part of the guilty plea.  In total, approximately 3.5 kg of cocaine
was purchased from Mr. Daigneault during this operation over a span of approximately
four months.  Mr. Bell was the courier.
[12]      In
respect of Mr. Daigneault, the Crown seeks a total sentence of ten years, less
one year factoring in Downes and Duncan credits.  It is suggested
that Mr. Daigneault receive eight years in relation to the drug trafficking
convictions and four years for the firearm conviction, reduced from twelve
years to ten years based on the totality principle, less one year for the
aforementioned credits.
[13]      From
this proposed sentence, the Crown acknowledges that Mr. Daigneault is entitled
to a Summers credit for time served, at one and a half time.  To the
date of submissions on September 26, 2024, Mr. Daigneault was entitled to a pre-sentence
credit amounting to 982.5 days.  By my calculations, he has been in custody for
a further sixty days for a total credit of 1,072.5 days.  I would ask counsel
to check my arithmetic.
[14]      Counsel
for Mr. Daigneault argues that the appropriate sentence is seven years after
considering the totality principle and the Downes and Duncan credits. 
From that sentence, the Summers credit would then be applied.  As at the
date of the sentencing submissions, this would have amounted to a further four
years and three months to be served.
[15]      The
Crown proposes ancillary orders that include secondary DNA orders and a ten-year
s. 109 weapons prohibition.  Mr. Daigneault does not oppose those ancillary
orders.
[16]      In
respect of Mr. Bell, the Crown and Mr. Bell have a joint submission for the
court’s consideration.  They submit that a fit and proper sentence is five years
in total.  It is suggested that Mr. Bell be sentenced to three years in
relation to the firearm offence and a further four years in relation to the
trafficking convictions, reduced by two years to account for totality.  Mr.
Bell has been on interim judicial release since his arrest and Duncan
and Summers’ credits do not apply.  He does not seek a Downes’
credit.
[17]      The
joint submission in respect of Mr. Bell includes secondary DNA orders and a ten-year
s. 109 weapons prohibition.
[18]      The Criminal
Code sets out the fundamental purpose of sentencing in s. 718.  That
fundamental purpose is to protect society and to contribute to respect for the
law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just
sanctions.  Six objectives are then listed, as follows:
[19]      In
cases involving drug trafficking and firearms, the primary focus is on
denunciation and deterrence.  As noted in R. v. Wong, 2012 ONCA 767, at
para. 11, drugs and guns are a toxic combination that pose a pernicious and
persisting threat to public safety and the welfare of the community.
[20]      There
may still be a role for rehabilitation, but the focus is on denunciation and
deterrence.
[21]      In R.
v. Graham, 2018 ONSC 6817, at paras. 44-46, Code J. described at length the
harm caused by cocaine due to its addictiveness, and its association with
violence.  Trafficking in drugs such as cocaine are “rationally premeditated
commercial crimes driven by the profit motive.  Because of the significant
harms and violence associated with cocaine trafficking, and because it is a
planned and premeditated commercial crime, the courts have repeatedly stressed
that denunciation and deterrence are the most important sentencing principles
in these cases.”
[22]      Sentencing
judges are reminded by s. 718.1 that a sentence must be proportionate to the
gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
[23]      Thus, sentencing
is a highly individualized, discretionary process.  Somewhat paradoxically however,
the principle of parity requires the court to impose similar sentences to those
in similar circumstances who have committed similar offences.
[24]      Courts
must be mindful of the principle of totality, which is codified in s. 718.2 of
the Criminal Code.  Where consecutive sentences are imposed, the
combined sentence should not be “unduly long or harsh”.  The totality principle
requires the sentencing judge requiring an offender to serve consecutive
sentences for multiple offences to ensure that the cumulative sentence rendered
does not exceed the overall culpability of the offender (see: R. v. Parry,
2012 ONCA 171).
[25]      In Mr.
Bell’s case, the principle of restraint reminds judges to impose the shortest
possible sentence in cases involving first time offenders.  However, the
sentence must still be consistent with the relevant sentencing principles,
including proportionality to the gravity of the offence.  Nonetheless, while
the objectives of denunciation and deterrence must be given adequate weight,
they should rarely be the sole determinants of the length of a first
penitentiary sentence (see: R. v. Francis, 2022 ONCA 729, at para. 80).
[26]      In
respect of Mr. Bell, counsel have made a joint submission.   In R. v.
Anthony-Cook, 2016 SCC 43, [2016] 2 SCR 204, the Supreme Court of Canada
described resolution discussions between Crown and defence counsel as essential
to the criminal justice system.  Plea agreements permit the system to function
smoothly and efficiently.  Accordingly, judges are instructed not to depart
from a joint submission on sentence unless the proposed sentence would bring
the administration of justice into disrepute or is otherwise contrary to the
public interest.
[27]      The
administration of justice will be brought into disrepute or be contrary to the
public interest if the proposed sentence is so “markedly out of line with the
expectations of reasonable persons aware of the circumstances of the case that
they would view it as a breakdown in the proper functioning of the criminal
justice system”.
[28]      The
Supreme Court described “[r]ejection denotes a submission so unhinged from the
circumstances of the offence and the offender that its acceptance would lead
reasonable and informed persons, aware of all of the relevant circumstances,
including the importance of promoting certainty in resolution discussions, to
believe that the proper functioning of the justice system had broken down”.
[29]      I do
not intend to refer to each of the parties’ cases at any great length.  Nevertheless,
it is important to consider the sentencing decisions in cases involving the
same offences and similar circumstances.
[30]      The
Crown brief included the following cases:
[31]      In Bryan,
the Ontario Court of Appeal described a proper range of sentence to be five to
eight years for a person without a record convicted of trafficking slightly
more than a lb of cocaine.
[32]      In Battista,
the offender had trafficked approximately ten kgs of cocaine.  Parfett J.
described that dealers who insulate themselves from the actual sales and
deliveries of drugs should be dealt with severely.  In relation to trafficking
cocaine, she imposed a sentence of ten years, concurrent to other sentences.
[33]      In Burke,
Akhtar J. reviewed many cases involving cocaine trafficking, including some of
those listed earlier.  He imposed a sentence of nine years, after trial, in
relation to a conviction for 2.320 kg of cocaine.
[34]      In Collins,
the offender had 1.3 kg of cocaine.   The Court of Appeal stated that the
sentencing judge made no error in finding that the appropriate range in that
case was five to eight years.  Her sentence fell at the low end of the range
due to the mitigating circumstances, including a Charter breach.
[35]      In Muise,
the offender trafficked in 3 kgs of cocaine and was sentenced to eight years. 
Of note, Muise was a member of the Hells Angels.
[36]      Nero
is an informative case.  Again, the offender was a member of the Hells Angels. 
The Court of Appeal held that the sentencing judge had erred in imposing a
sentence of five years for trafficking.  The Court noted that there were two
offences of trafficking each of 1 kg of cocaine, one month apart.  These
offences were committed while Nero was on bail and probation which is a
distinguishing feature.  However, the Court described that it was an error in
principle for the sentencing judge to consider a five-year sentence adequate.  The
significant quantities of cocaine trafficked over a three-month period was
indicative of the offender’s extensive involvement in and familiarity at a high
level with the drug business.  The Court of Appeal indicated that the appropriate
sentence for the three counts involving cocaine would have been eight years. 
Overall, after considering totality, Nero received a sentence of nine years
factoring in his other convictions.
[37]      The
focus of the Crown’s cases was the trafficking charges.  In respect of the
firearm conviction, Nordheimer J. (as he then was) referred to several cases
involving the sale of firearms in Winchester.  The range of sentences he
identified was from three years (albeit on a joint submission) to nine years. 
However, most of those cases involved the sale of a significant number of
handguns.
[38]      Mr.
Daigneault also provided me with several cases to consider with respect to
range of sentence.  These include the following:
[39]      Shaikh
and Tanoli was a trafficking and firearm case after an extensive undercover
police operation.  Importantly, it was a joint submission, following a judicial
pre-trial with the sentencing judge.  Molloy J. referred to several cases supporting
a four-year sentence for firearm trafficking.  Ultimately, after reviewing the
cases, Molloy J. found that the range for trafficking firearms was three to
five years.
[40]      In Datta,
the offender sold firearms to an undercover police officer.  Forestell J. found
the range for trafficking two firearms to be three to five years.
[41]      In Allison,
Kelly J. dealt with a sentencing in a case involving organized crime importing
narcotics and firearms.  With respect to the firearm offences, one offender was
sentenced to four years and the other to seven years.
[42]      Recently,
Code J. in Owusu, referred to R. v. Lynch, 2022 ONCA 109, where the
Court of Appeal held that the appropriate range for “mid-level traffickers” in
cocaine was five to eight years.
[43]      From
these cases, it appears that trafficking cocaine in comparable quantities results
in sentences in the range of five to eight years, although several cases have
landed at the high end, particularly at kg levels.  The appropriate range for
gun trafficking appears to be three to five years.
[44]      Daniel
Bell is 37 years old.  He is currently in a common-law relationship of long
duration, and they have a young child.  He has two other children from a
previous relationship that no longer live with him.
[45]      I am
advised that Mr. Bell has no addiction issues.  He has suffered from some
depression but is not currently taking any medication.
[46]      Mr.
Bell is nine credits short of achieving his grade 12 diploma.  Since his
arrest, he has been attending the North America Trade School, taking welding
courses.
[47]      In
terms of aggravating factors, Mr. Bell was part of a criminal organization,
even if he was not a high-level member.  He was caught exchanging very
significant quantities of cocaine and his involvement in the offences would
have been financially motivated, although his share of the proceeds is likely
far less than those higher up.  The firearm was loaded.
[48]      In
terms of mitigating factors, Mr. Bell does not have a prior criminal record,
which strikes me as remarkable given his associations and his age.  His guilty
plea, although on the eve of trial, is a mitigating factor.  He has been on
bail for the past three years waiting trial and has adhered to the conditions
associated with his bail.  As noted, he does not seek credit for strict bail
conditions.
[49]      I
agree with the submissions of both the Crown and defence counsel that Mr. Bell
was only a middleman in these transactions and, “it is clear who was calling
the shots”.  In the Agreed Statement of Facts, Mr. Bell was physically
reprimanded via a blackened eye and bloodied nose for forgetting to bring the
product during a transaction.  He is clearly a grunt within the hierarchy of
the motorcycle club.
[50]      Again,
the principle of restraint applies to Mr. Bell due to his lack of a criminal
record and requires that where incarceration must be imposed, the term should
be as short as possible and tailored to the individual circumstances of the
accused (see: R. v. Batisse, 2009 ONCA 114, at paras. 32-34).
[51]      I note
that Mr. Bell addressed the court.  He apologized and indicated that he is
prepared to accept the consequences of his actions.  He indicated that he is
doing his best to get out of the criminal lifestyle with which he has been
associated.
[52]      Mr. Daigneault
was born on May 25, 1976.  He is accordingly 48 years of age at present.
[53]      I have
reviewed the pre-sentence report in respect of Mr. Daigneault.  I note that Mr.
Daigneault’s mother and brother were interviewed for the pre-sentence report.
[54]      I note
that Mr. Daigneault’s parents divorced when he was 14 years of age, and his
mother was his primary caregiver.  She also raised his two younger brothers. 
His relationship with his father appears strained, but improved as they aged
but they remain estranged.  I understand that his father passed away while Mr.
Daigneault was in custody.  Mr. Daigneault appears to have a good relationship
with his brother, Robert, and Robert’s family.
[55]      The pre-sentence
report notes that Mr. Daigneault has been a member of a motorcycle organization
in London since 1995.  In 2008, Mr. Daigneault was shot three times in the
chest.  His brother describes him as becoming more withdrawn since that event.
[56]      Mr.
Daigneualt has been involved in a relationship for nine years, although his
partner struggled with drug addiction.  They separated in January of 2023.  Mr.
Daigneault has no children.
[57]      Mr.
Daigneault dropped out of high school at grade 11.  He attended the Toronto
School of Business and obtained a diploma in Hotel Management in 2002.  He
reportedly obtained employment for two years as a Machine Operator.  He then
started a tattoo shop but discontinued this business due to a bad slip and
fall.  He has been in receipt of Ontario disability support due to the slip and
fall in 2007 in which he suffered an injury to the lumbar area of his back.
[58]      At an
early age, Mr. Daigneault experimented with alcohol and drugs.  This included
marijuana and hash.  He was prescribed oxycontin as a result of his shooting
and his back injury.  His mother and brother report that drug use is no longer
a concern.
[59]      Mr.
Daigneault has struggled with obesity, although he has lost a tremendous amount
of weight while incarcerated awaiting trial and now this sentencing.  He accordingly
has had issues with sleep apnea, high blood pressure and diabetes.
[60]      Mr.
Daigneault told the author of the pre-sentence report that “he is not the same
person” and that he has learned his “moral responsibility as a citizen”.
[61]      Indeed
when Mr. Daigneault addressed the court as part of his sentencing, his comments
were of the same ilk.  He indicated that he now has a foundation from having
taken Bible studies while in custody.  He has attempted to stay focussed on his
schoolwork.  He professed to be a changed man.
[62]      In
terms of mitigating factors, I note that Mr. Daigneault gets the benefit of
having pleaded guilty.  The fact that he did so on the eve of trial and in the
face of an overwhelming Crown case lessens this mitigating factor.
[63]      Also
mitigating are the efforts by Mr. Daigneault to better himself while in
custody.  As noted, he is taking Bible Studies and courses in Canadian Law. 
His transcripts were filed, and Mr. Daigneault is achieving high grades.  Words
of encouragement are written on the transcripts from his teacher.    Certificates
of completion of these courses were filed.  Three separate letters from
educators at the Penetanguishene Learning Centre were filed, again indicating
that he has made significant effort and has done well.
[64]      I note
that Mr. Daigneault does appear to have family support—his mother and brother,
whom I understand have attended in court during these proceedings.
[65]      The
mitigating circumstances are far outweighed by the aggravating circumstances.
[66]      First,
Mr. Daigneault is part of a sophisticated criminal enterprise that was
motivated primarily by financial gain and greed.  Not only is he part of this
enterprise, but he was the president of the London chapter.  The Agreed
Statement of Facts indicate that he was under consideration for National
leadership.  Accordingly, Mr. Daigneault was one of the Outlaw’s leaders.  It
is also noteworthy that while Mr. Daigneault was negotiating the transactions
with the Police Agent, he was insulating himself from detection through the use
of lower-level members of the club, such as Mr. Bell.
[67]      Second,
the Agreed Statement of Facts indicate that Mr. Daigneualt was able to traffic
in very high quantities of cocaine, on short notice.  He pleaded guilty to
trafficking just over 2 kgs of cocaine.  The Agreed Statement of Facts indicate
that he moved over 3.5 kgs in just four months.  Clearly, Mr. Daigneault had
easy and fast access to large quantities of cocaine.
[68]      Third,
these are very serious offences.  As noted by Code J., in Graham, supra,
at para. 44:
[69]      As
Justice Code noted at para. 45, cocaine trafficking is associated with
violence.  It spawns collateral violent crime, either to protect territory, to
protect and enforce unlawful transactions, or simply to steal an unlawful
product or its unlawful proceeds.  He then quoted from Doherty J.A., in R.
v. Hamilton (2004), 2004 CanLII 5549 (ON CA), 186 C.C.C. (3d) 129 (Ont. C.A.) at para. 161:
[70]      In
addition to the cocaine trafficking convictions, Mr. Daigneault was convicted
of trafficking a handgun.  The ills of handguns have been well described in our
courts and I will not repeat that exercise.  Handguns such as the one sold in
this case are concealable.  This one was loaded.  The only purpose for handguns
is to injure, maim and kill.  Further, in the Agreed Statement of Facts it is
clear Mr. Daigneault had the capability of obtaining many more firearms for
distribution, if requested.
[71]      In short,
these are very serious offences.
[72]      Fourth,
Mr. Daigneault has a very lengthy and relevant criminal record that goes back
to 1997.  There are, by my count, twenty-three prior convictions.  These
include assaults, theft, fraud, unauthorized possession of a firearm, drug
trafficking and drug possession.
[73]      Notably,
the Crown has produced the transcript from the sentencing proceedings with
respect to the most recent conviction, from November of 2016.  At that hearing,
Mr. Daigneault professed that he intended to move to another city and get a
fresh start.  Accordingly, Schnall J. imposed a sentence of probation for two
years.
[74]      Clearly,
from the Agreed Statement of Facts, the three convictions before me, the fact
that Mr. Daigneault is or was the president of the local chapter of the Outlaws
and that he was under consideration for National leadership, his stated
intention of a fresh start did not come to fruition.
[75]      Unlike
Mr. Bell, the issue of credits arises with Mr. Daigneault.  There are three
credits at play.
[76]      A Duncan
credit is available for harsh presentence incarceration conditions.  In R.
v. Duncan, 2016 ONCA 754, the Ontario Court of Appeal indicated that the
court should consider the conditions of the pre-sentence incarceration and the
impact of those conditions on the accused.  In Duncan, the offender had
served a considerable part of his pre-sentence incarceration in “lockdown”
conditions due to staffing issues in the correctional facility at which he was
housed.
[77]      In R.
v. Marshall, 2021 ONCA 344, the Court of Appeal described that the 1.5:1 Summers
credit already takes into account the difficult and restrictive circumstances
offenders often encounter during pre-trial custody, before any finding of guilt
has been made with respect to an accused still presumed to be innocent.
[78]      The Summers
credit is a specific calculation made after a fit and proper sentence is
determined and is not a mitigating factor.  On the other hand, a Duncan
credit is not a deduction from an otherwise fit and proper sentence.  It is a
mitigating factor, and it is not necessarily appropriate to quantify the Duncan
credit as a specific amount of time.  It is permissible to quantify the
reduction for the Duncan credit, provided it does not result in an unfit
sentence.
[79]      There
must be an evidentiary foundation for a Duncan credit.  Here, I have
specific records from Elgin Middlesex Detention Centre that show that Mr.
Daigneault, as of July 15, 2024, was subjected to 39 institutional lockdowns,
including both partial and full lockdowns.  He was also subjected to 14
separate lockdowns for unit discipline.  There have been periods of time when
Mr. Daigneault shared a cell with another individual, and a brief period of
time when he had two cellmates.
[80]      Similarly,
while housed at Central North Correctional Centre, Mr. Daigneault was triple
bunked for two days in 2024.  He was subjected to lockdowns on 98 occasions due
to “staffing issues”.  There were other lockdowns for contraband searches,
investigations and for medical reasons.
[81]      I was
advised during the sentencing submissions that Mr. Daigneault was triple bunked
at that time.
[82]      In R.
v. Shaikh, supra, Molly J. described the impact of lockdowns on inmates at
the Toronto South Correctional Centre at para. 73.  I am prepared to accept
that lockdowns at EMDC and CNCC would present comparably difficult
circumstances for inmates housed there.  I do not, however, have the evidence before
me to conclude, as Molloy J. did, that the conditions were “not humane”.
[83]      In R.
v. Downes, 2006 CanLII 3957 (ON CA), 79 O.R. (3d) 321, [2006] O.J. No. 555, the Court of Appeal
addressed the impact of strict house arrest bail conditions.  Similar to a Duncan
credit, the Court is obligated to take into account stringent bail conditions
as a relevant mitigating circumstance.  This is because there has been an
imposition upon the liberty of an accused prior to a finding of guilt.  Again,
it is a mitigating factor, not a specific deduction like a Summers credit. 
Some courts have done a calculation, while others have simply applied a general
deduction for strict bail conditions.
[84]      There
must be some evidence of impact of the strict bail conditions upon the accused. 
It is the impact of the bail conditions upon the accused that matters.  Thus,
even if a person is subjected to stringent conditions, if it has minimal impact
on them, it may be inappropriate to apply a significant, or perhaps any,
reduction.
[85]      Similar
to the Duncan credit, a Downes credit ought not to be utilized if
it would make an otherwise fit and proper sentence unfit.
[86]      Mr.
Daigneault was on strict house arrest from April 8, 2021 to January 12, 2023,
or a total of 645 days.  In this case, unlike the evidence provided in support
of the Duncan credit, I have little, really no, evidence of the impact
of the house arrest conditions that I understand were imposed upon Mr.
Daigneault pre-trial.  Mr. Daigneault was not legally employed, such that there
was no impact on his employment.
[87]      I
recognize, however, that the Crown has effectively conceded in its submissions
that Mr. Daigneault was subjected to a significant term of pre-trial house
arrest with strict conditions.  Therefore, the lack of specific evidence from
Mr. Daigneault is somewhat unnecessary given that acknowledgement.
[88]      As
noted, this is a joint submission.
[89]      The cases
establish that the range of sentences is five to eight years for cocaine
trafficking and three to five years for gun trafficking,
[90]      Mr.
Bell, as you are a lower-level courier in this criminal enterprise, it is my
view that an appropriate sentence would fall at the lower end of each range. 
This would bring the sentence to the eight-year range (five years for the drugs
and three years for the gun).
[91]      You
are also a first-time offender, at the age of 37.  You have, apparently, taken
positive steps towards rehabilitation and to distance yourself from the
criminal lifestyle.  I am satisfied that there remains potential for
rehabilitation.
[92]      You
are entitled to the benefit of the totality principle and the principle of
restraint.
[93]      I
cannot conclude that the joint submission in this case would bring the
administration of justice into disrepute or is otherwise contrary to the public
interest.  To the contrary, I accept that the Crown and Defence counsel have
realistically evaluated your role in the Outlaws and agreed upon a sentence
that is proportionate to yours level of moral responsibility.
[94]      That
is not to say that absent a joint submission, a low-level member of a criminal
organization would receive the same consideration as Mr. Bell.
[95]      Mr.
Bell, would you please stand.
[96]      In
accordance with the joint submission, I sentence you to five years of
penitentiary time.
[97]      I
impose a four-year sentence in respect of each of the cocaine trafficking
counts, Counts 8 and 11, to be served concurrently.  Each of these is reduced
to three-years concurrent, to reflect the totality principle.
[98]      In
respect of the gun trafficking charge, Count 3, I sentence you to three years,
to be served consecutively with the sentences imposed for Counts 8 and 11. 
This shall be reduced to two years on the basis of the totality principle.
[99]      In
accordance with the joint submission, there will be no further reduction on
account of a Downes credit.    Given the range of sentences that applies
to these convictions, the overall sentence of five years properly, in my view,
reflects any mitigation that stringent bail conditions would entitle you to.
[100]    Additionally,
I impose a secondary DNA order and a ten year weapons prohibition under s. 109
to commence upon the completion of your sentence.
[101]    Mr.
Daigneault, given that this is not a joint submission, your situation is more
complicated than Mr. Bell’s.
[102]    You were,
or perhaps remain, the head of the local chapter of the Outlaw motorcycle club. 
You were under consideration for the National presidency.  Your moral
responsibility is far greater than Mr. Bell’s.
[103]    As
described, cocaine trafficking is motivated by profit and greed.  As the Agreed
Statement of Facts show, vast sums of money were paid in relation to the drugs
in this case.  Obviously, those sums add up.
[104]    Those
at the highest echelons of these enterprises presumably reap the highest
rewards.  With those benefits, comes the risk that if caught, those at the
highest echelons will face the harshest consequences.
[105]    It is
my view that the Crown’s position in this case is eminently fair and reasonable
and does not necessarily reflect the high end of the range for an offender in
your position.  Your circumstances most closely resemble the circumstances of
the offenders in McGregor, Muise and Nero.
[106]    I
repeat that in McGregor, the Court of Appeal described that eight years
was toward the low-end of the accepted range for conspiracy to traffic in
cocaine for mid-level dealers trafficking in quantities that include the
kilogram level.
[107]    In Muise,
the offender pled guilty to two counts of trafficking in cocaine totalling 3
kgs and was sentenced to eight years in custody before considering credits.
[108]    In Nero,
the Court of Appeal described that the appropriate sentence for three counts
involving cocaine trafficking of 1 kg each was eight years.
[109]    Respectfully,
the sentence proposed by your counsel is too low given your position within the
organization.
[110]    The
range of sentences for firearm trafficking is three to five years.  Again, your
moral culpability, is at the highest end.  The Crown position of four years again
falls squarely within the appropriate range, and I would not deviate from it,
except on account of totality.
[111]    I have
considered the Downes and Duncan credits.  I have reservations
that the circumstances of your pre-trial bail merit any significant reduction,
but given the concession by the Crown, I will impose a mitigating credit of three
months.
[112]    I am
more sympathetic to the harsh conditions that inmates endure in our
correctional facilities.  Nonetheless, it is my view that the mitigating credit
should not result in what would otherwise be a fit sentence, becoming an unfit
sentence.  I will reduce your sentence on account of the Duncan credit
by a further nine months.
[113]    As I
promised you I would, I considered what you told me during the sentencing
submissions.  I have considered the certificates of achievement and the letters
of reference.  I am pleased that you have been participating in productive
activities, pursuing your education and religion.  Most importantly, I have
considered your stated desire to put this life behind you and reform.
[114]    It is
clear you were given an adequate opportunity to do so by Justice Schnall when
she imposed sentence upon you in November of 2016.  At that time, you were
given the benefit of the doubt and she accepted that you intended to “get a
fairly fresh start at things”.
[115]    Only four
years later, you were at the helm of the Outlaw Motorcycle club, trafficking
cocaine, and firearms.  You were under consideration for the National presidency. 
The only conclusion that can be drawn is that you had no intention to get a
fresh start.  Rather, you escalated.
[116]    Accordingly,
you have already had your opportunity for a fresh start, and you are not
entitled to a further one from this Court today.
[117]    Mr.
Daigneault, if you would please stand.
[118]    It is
my view that the Crown’s position is entirely reasonable in the circumstances
of this case, and it is my considered view that in your unique circumstances,
should not be taken as the high watermark, but rather within the range.
[119]    Accordingly,
I sentence you to eight years in respect of Counts 8 and 11, concurrently. 
With respect to Count 3, I sentence you to a further four years consecutive to
the sentence imposed for Counts 8 and 11.  This amounts to twelve years and I
agree that this should be reduced to ten years to account for totality.
[120]    Further,
I apply a three-month mitigating Downes credit and a nine-month
mitigating Duncan credit.  This reduces the sentence by a further year
to a total sentence of nine years.
[121]    I would
allocate this as six years and three months for the drug trafficking counts,
concurrent, and two years and nine months for the firearm, consecutive.
[122]    To the
global figure, you are entitled as a matter of law to the Summers credit
for pre-sentence detention.  By my calculations, and I invite counsel to
confirm, to date, you are entitled to credit for time served in the amount of
1,072.5 days.  Roughly, you have approximately six years and three weeks
remaining on this global sentence.  Again, I would ask counsel to confirm this
math.
[123]    Further,
I impose a secondary DNA order and a 10-year s.109 weapons prohibition to commence
upon the completion of your sentence.
[124]    Counsel,
other than perhaps the result, are there any concerns that we should address,
ie, my calculations or the ancillary orders?
[125]    What
shall we do with the remaining charges?