[1]              
As the Case Management judge for the numerous claims (collectively the
“Motherisk Cases”) arising from the hair follicle testing done at the Motherisk
Drug Testing Laboratory (“MDTL”, “Motherisk” or the “lab”) at the Hospital for
Sick Children (“HSC”), where Dr. Gideon Koren (“Dr. Koren”) was the Director, I
heard motions to strike in four of the Motherisk Cases.
[2]              
In each of the four of the Motherisk Cases, the Children’s Aid Societies
bring a motion to strike Dr. Koren’s claim or crossclaim for contribution and
indemnity against them, pursuant to r. 21 of the Rules of Civil Procedure,
R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, for failing to disclose a reasonable cause of action. In
one case, the Children’s Aid Society of the Niagara Region also brought a
motion to strike HSC’s claim for contribution and indemnity against it.
[3]              
The Rule 21 motions were brought in the following Motherisk Cases:
[4]              
The Motherisk Cases all arise from the use of results of hair follicle
testing for drug and alcohol abuse which was done at MDTL at HSC.  The test
results were used in family and criminal cases and in child welfare
investigations and proceedings. Ontario established an independent review
following controversy about the reliability of MDTL’s test results. The review was
conducted by The Honourable Susan Lang who delivered a report dealing with the
reliability of the hair strand tests conducted at MDTL between 2005 and 2015
and the operation of MDTL during that time. In 2016, Ontario established the
Motherisk Commission as an independent commission of inquiry to review various
cases and produce a report.
[5]              
The Plaintiffs in the Motherisk Cases allege that there were flawed
laboratory tests done at MDTL which were incorrect and unreliable, causing children
to be wrongfully apprehended by the local CAS. The children were temporarily or
permanently removed from the care of their parents. In some cases, the children
were made Crown Wards and ultimately adopted. Most of the Plaintiffs are family
members of children who were the subjects of Children’s Aid Societies’
investigations and child welfare proceedings. In some cases, the children themselves
are named as Plaintiffs.
[6]              
The Defendants are HSC, Dr. Koren, His Majesty the King in Right of
Ontario (“HMK”), as well as the various Children’s Aid Societies. Although
different Children’s Aid Societies were involved depending on the geographic
location, I refer to these Defendants collectively as the CAS. In some cases,
individual employees are also named as Defendants.
[7]              
Dr. Koren is a clinical toxicologist who founded MDTL to study the
effects of drug use during pregnancy by testing the hair of infants. He was the
leader of the research team and Director of the lab.
[8]              
Initially, the Plaintiffs claimed that the CAS and HMK owed them a duty
of care which was breached. The Plaintiffs claimed damages against HMK and the
CAS for negligence, negligent investigation, and supervision, negligent and/or
intentional infliction of mental distress, bad faith, breach of fiduciary duty
of care, and misfeasance in public office. The Plaintiffs asserted there were
breaches of ss. 7 and 8 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (“the Charter”)
because HMK allowed the CAS to demand bodily samples from the Plaintiffs which
were improperly tested and breached Charter rights.
[9]              
The Plaintiffs claimed that HMK breached its duties to oversee the CAS,
the HSC and MDTL, to make inquiries and satisfy itself that proper procedures
were followed, to ensure the hair follicle tests were reliable and appropriate
for use, and to prevent the CAS from using the hair tests once concerns about
their reliability were raised.
[10]          
J.B. also alleged that HMK owed them a fiduciary duty of care having
regard to the overrepresentation of Indigenous children in the system along
with the history of Indigenous peoples, and that there was a duty to ensure
that decisions were made recognizing the constitutional rights of the child,
family, and the First Nation communities. J.B. also pleads there was a
violation of s. 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982, and that the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission’s Final Report was disregarded.
[11]          
The Plaintiffs claim that the various CAS were negligent in relying on
the hair test results, assuming the accuracy of the results, failing to ensure
testing was done in accordance with appropriate standards and the courts in the
child welfare proceedings had reliable, accurate and complete information, and
misleading the courts by calling expert evidence based on the MDTL testing.
They also allege breaches of s. 7 of the Charter.
[12]          
In C.R. v. Ontario, 2019 ONSC
2734, [2019] O.J. No. 3863, aff’d 2020 ONCA 198, 445 D.L.R. (4th) 642, Wilson
J. (as she then was) dismissed the claims of parents and family members against
the CAS and HMK in the motions before her pursuant to r. 21 because it was
plain and obvious, they could not succeed.
[13]          
Wilson J. held that the CAS owed a duty of care only to the children,
not to the parents or family members. She also dismissed the actions against HMK
because it did not owe a duty of care to the parents, families, or children.
She further held that HMK had no liability for the MDTL testing in either its
supervisory role over the CAS and the MDTL or as a result of various statutes
governing the operations of hospitals and laboratories. She struck the
additional actions against the CAS and HMK after concluding that they were
based on a duty of care that did not exist.
[14]          
The CAS’s motion is allowed in part. It is plain and obvious that Dr.
Koren’s claim for contribution and indemnity against the CAS as a joint
tortfeasor cannot succeed.  The CAS’s motion to strike Dr. Koren’s claim for
breach of contract is dismissed because it is not plain and obvious that Dr.
Koren’s claims for damages against the CAS for breach of contract cannot
succeed.
[15]          
The CAS says that Dr. Koren’s claim against it is really a tort claim
dressed up as a claim for breach of contract. Dr. Koren has not pleaded the
essential elements of a claim for breach of contract. Only concurrent
tortfeasors can seek contribution and indemnity. Dr. Koren has no claim for
contribution and indemnity because he will never be called upon to pay more
than his fair share of the damages.
[16]          
Dr. Koren says that his claim for breach of contract is sufficiently
pleaded, and if it is insufficient, he ought to be given leave to amend. Dr.
Koren says that claims for contribution and indemnity are not limited to concurrent
tortfeasors.
[17]          
Rule 21.01(1)(b) of the Rules of Civil Procedure­, R.R.O. 1990,
Reg. 194 permits the court to strike a pleading on the ground that it discloses
no reasonable cause of action. The test to be applied under r. 21.01(1)(b) is
whether it is “plain and obvious” that the claim has no chance of success: R.
v. Imperial Tobacco Canada Ltd., 2011 SCC 42, [2011] 3 S.C.R. 45, at paras.
17-19.  “Plain and obvious” means “beyond doubt”: Hunt v. Carey Canada Inc.,
1990 CanLII 90 (SCC), [1990] 2 S.C.R. 959 (S.C.C.), at pp. 20-21.
[18]          
The test under r. 21.01(1)(b) is stringent and imposes a very high
threshold. Only claims that are certain to fail should be struck at the
pleadings stage: Rausch v. Pickering (City), 2013 ONCA 740, 369 D.L.R.
(4th) 691, at para. 34, citing Amato v. Welsh, 2013 ONCA 258, 362 D.L.R.
(4th) 38, at paras. 32-33. The court should not strike a claim if there is a
chance the plaintiff might succeed: Thelwell v. Toronto Police Services
Board, 2020 ONSC 1803, at para. 52.
[19]          
The facts pleaded are to be taken as true and read generously: Ahmad
v. Mehta, 2024 ONSC 3778, at para. 3.
[20]          
The court should err on the side of permitting an arguable claim, even
if novel, to proceed to trial: Rausch, at para. 34, and Fernandez
Leon v. Bayer Inc., 2023 ONCA 629, at para. 8. The claim should not be
struck if there is a “germ or a scintilla of a cause of action”: Golden Oaks
v. Lalonde, 2016 ONSC 5313, 133 O.R. (3d) 513, at para. 50, citing 1597203
Ontario Ltd. v. Ontario, 2007 CanLII 21966 (ON SC), [2007] O.J. No. 2349 (Ont. S.C.), at para. 12.
[21]          
Where a pleading is deficient and struck by the court, the court may
grant leave to amend the pleading to allow the plaintiff to plead all the
necessary ingredients of a cause of action: Hostman-Steinberg Limited v.
2049669 Ontario Inc., 2009 CanLII 29199 (Ont. S.C.) at para. 41. Leave
should be granted where it is possible that the failure to allege an essential
element is the result of an oversight: Golden Oaks, at paras. 53 and 56.
Leave to amend should only be refused in the clearest of cases: Thelwell,
at para. 52.
[22]          
Since Dr. Koren’s allegations are similar in the four cases in which
these motions are brought, they were argued together. To some extent, the issues
in each case overlap, but there are some differences. I will set out my reasons
fully in relation to the J.B. action and address the issues unique to the other
motions separately.
[23]          
Dr. Koren’s claim stems from an action commenced by the Plaintiff J.B.
[24]          
J.B.’s claim relates to hair and meconium tests performed at MDTL at the
request of the CAS in relation to child protection proceedings involving his
child. Following the testing, J.B.’s child was removed from the mother’s care.
[25]          
J.B. sued HSC, Dr. Koren, Joey Gareri (together the “MDTL Defendants”) and
the CAS alleging that MDTL’s testing was inadequate or unreliable and did not
meet internationally recognized forensic standards and that MDTL failed to employ
trained/qualified personnel. J.B. alleges that the Defendants were negligent and
that they breached their fiduciary duties, his Charter rights and s. 35(1)
of the Constitution Act.
[26]          
J.B.’s claims against the CAS were struck in C.R. because the CAS owes a duty of care only to the child who
was the subject of the CAS’s investigation and no duty to J.B. as a family member
because of the potential for a conflict of interest. Wilson J. dismissed
all of J.B.’s claims against the CAS.
[27]          
The MDTL Defendants have defended J.B.’s claim.
[28]          
Dr. Koren issued a separate claim against the CAS for contribution and
indemnity for any amounts found owing by him to J.B. Dr. Koren’s claim pleads
and relies on his Statement of Defence in the J.B. Action and further alleges:
[29]          
These facts are not patently ridiculous or incapable of proof and
therefore I must accept them as true for the purposes of this motion: Frank
v. Legate, 2015 ONCA 631, 390 D.L.R. (4th) 39, at para. 36.
[30]          
Dr. Koren also pleads and relies on provisions of the Negligence Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. N.1 (the “Negligence Act”).
[31]          
The CAS says that Dr. Koren’s claim for contribution and indemnity
against it cannot succeed because the plaintiff has no claim against the CAS: C.R.,
at para. 86.
[32]          
Claims for contribution and indemnity normally arise between joint
tortfeasors. The Negligence Act provides:
[33]          
The Negligence Act makes concurrent tortfeasors jointly and
severally liable and provides a right of contribution and indemnity between
them provided that the person from whom contribution and indemnity is sought is
also, or could be if sued, liable to the plaintiff: Lawson v. Viersen,
2012 ONCA 25, 108 O.R. (3d) 771, at para. 35.
[34]          
Where a defendant is not liable to the plaintiff, a claim for
contribution and indemnity under the Negligence Act also fails: Giffels
v. Eastern Construction, 1978 CanLII 39 (SCC), [1978] 2 S.C.R. 1346 (S.C.C.); Hiram Walker
& Sons Ltd. v. Shaw, Stone & Webster Canada L.P., 2011 ONSC 6869, at
para. 61; Niagara Regional Housing v.
Trustees of Carleton United Church, et al., 2022 ONSC 3413, at para. 123.
[35]          
Dr. Koren has pleaded that if J.B. suffered damages as alleged, such
damages were caused by or contributed to by the negligence of the CAS. To the
extent that Dr. Koren claims contribution and indemnity under the Negligence
Act from the CAS as a joint tortfeasor, it is plain and obvious that this
claim cannot succeed and must be struck, as CAS is not liable to J.B. Counsel
for Dr. Koren fairly conceded this point at the hearing of the motion.
[36]          
Claims for contribution and indemnity may also be made between
contracting parties: Parkhill Excavating Limited v. Robert E. Young
Construction Limited, 2017 ONSC 6903, at para. 153.
[37]          
Dr. Koren’s claim against the CAS is not just based on the allegation
that the CAS caused J.B.’s damages; it is based on an independent claim in
contract. Dr. Koren claims contribution and indemnity based on the contract
between MDTL and CAS: para. 9 of Dr. Koren’s claim.
[38]          
The CAS says that Dr. Koren’s claim for contribution and indemnity based
on breach of contract cannot succeed because he has not properly pleaded the
existence of a contract and he is not a party to any contract.
[39]          
A pleading must contain the material facts upon which a party relies but
not the evidence by which those facts will be proved at trial: r. 25.06(1).
[40]          
A claim for breach of contract must contain sufficient particulars to
identify:
[41]          
Dr. Koren’s pleading identifies the existence and nature of the contract
between MDTL and the CAS. It is sufficient that Dr. Koren pleaded that these
parties were in a contractual relationship: paras. 3 and 9 of Dr. Koren’s
claim.
[42]          
Dr. Koren pleaded that the contract was to perform hair tests: para. 2 of
Dr. Koren’s claim.
[43]          
Dr. Koren has not pleaded that the implied terms of the contract
included the obligations set out at para. 8 of his claim; however, he has pleaded
that misuse of the test results gives rise to a claim for contribution and
indemnity on the basis of the contractual relationship. I find that this is an
indirect way of saying that it was an implied term of the contract that the CAS
would use the test results properly and not misuse them. Also, as Dr. Koren
submits, it is possible a court might find the obligation to indemnify arises
from the implied duty of good faith in contracts.
[44]          
Dr. Koren has not explicitly pleaded that the CAS has breached the
contract. However, it is implicit in the pleading. Until the facts are
established in the J.B. action, it is not known whether Dr. Koren will be held
liable for J.B.’s damages, it is unclear whether the CAS misused the test
results, and it is not clear whether the CAS will be obligated to indemnify Dr.
Koren. It is sufficient that he has pleaded that “[i]n the event Dr. Koren is
found liable in the [J.B. Action], he seeks full contribution and indemnity
from the CAS for any amounts he may be liable to pay [J.B.]
[45]          
Dr. Koren has pleaded that his damages are “any amounts that may be awarded
to [J.B.] against Dr. Koren as a result of the claim initiated by [J.B.] in the
[J.B. Action] which are caused or materially contributed to by CAS”.
[46]          
Dr. Koren does not expressly plead that he is a party to the contract.
Dr. Koren submits that he has pleaded that he is a third party beneficiary of
the contract between MDTL and the CAS and this claim is not doomed to fail.
[47]          
In his Statement of Defence in the J.B. Action, which he pleads and
relies on in his claim against the CAS, Dr. Koren pleads that he joined HSC as
a fellow in 1982, and in 1986 became a clinician scientist. He founded the
Motherisk Program at HSC in 1985 to study the effects of drugs on infants in
utero and during breastfeeding. Over the years, the program grew to include
additional services. MDTL was founded as the research laboratory for the
program. Dr. Koren was the Director of MDTL.
[48]          
In para. 9 of his claim, Dr. Koren “pleads that as MDTL and CAS were in
a contractual relationship, to the extent that CAS misused hair test results
provided to them, that Dr. Koren is entitled to claim contribution and
indemnity from CAS on the basis of that contractual relationship.”  Dr. Koren
is pleading that he is entitled to the benefit of the contract between MDTL and
the CAS.
[49]          
Dr. Koren now submits that when taken as a whole, his pleadings are a
sufficient basis for a pleading of privity and that he is a third party
beneficiary of the contract between the CAS and MDTL. He relies on the
principled exception to privity of contract.
[50]          
Traditionally, the only circumstances where a third party could sue on a
contract formed between two others is (1) where one of the parties to the
agreement was the agent of the third party or (2) where the third party was the
beneficiary of a trust in respect of that agreement: Greenwood Shopping
Plaza Ltd. v. Beattie et al., 1980 CanLII 202 (SCC), [1980] 2 S.C.R. 228 (S.C.C.), at p. 238.
[51]          
In Fraser River Pile & Dredge Ltd. v. Can-Dive Services Ltd.,
1999 CanLII 654 (SCC), [1999] 3 S.C.R. 108 (S.C.C.), the Supreme Court elaborated a principled
exception to the doctrine of privity that required (1) the parties to the
agreement intending to extend the benefit of the agreement to the third party,
and (2) the activities of the third party being the very activities
contemplated as coming within the scope of that agreement: at para. 32.
[52]          
The doctrine of privity of contract has been relaxed and employees have
been found to be third party beneficiaries of contracts between their employers
and customers which have clauses limiting liability: London Drugs Ltd. v.
Kuehne & Nagel International Ltd., 1992 CanLII 41 (SCC), [1992] 3 S.C.R. 299 (S.C.C.).
[53]          
The principled exception is not limited to cases involving limitation of
liability: Madison Developments Ltd. v. Plan Electric Co. (1997), 1997 CanLII 1277 (ON CA), 36
O.R. (3d) 80 (Ont. C.A.); Tony and Jim’s Holdings Ltd. v. Silva (1999), 1999 CanLII 969 (ON CA), 43
O.R. (3d) 633 (Ont. C.A.); Rocky Heights Developments v. Biber, 2019
ONSC 3593.
[54]          
It is not plain and obvious that Dr. Koren’s claim has a radical defect.
There may be new exceptions to the doctrine of privity: Cameron-Gardos v.
Crawford and Company (Canada) Inc., 2024 ONSC 700, at para. 80, citing Fraser
River Pile & Dredge Ltd v. Can-Dive Services Ltd., 1999 CanLII 654 (SCC), [1999] 3 S.C.R. 108
(S.C.C.), at para. 31.
[55]          
Dr. Koren has sufficiently pleaded that he is entitled to the benefit of
the contract. It is possible that his claim for a principled exception to
privity of contract might succeed. It is possible that Dr. Koren will be able
to establish that the parties intended to extend to him the benefit of the
contract between the CAS and MDTL because of his involvement in MDTL’s
operations.
[56]          
It is not plain and obvious that Dr. Koren’s claim against the CAS for
contribution and indemnity based on CAS’s breach of its contract with MTDL is
doomed to fail.
[57]          
Dr. Koren’s claim stems from an action commenced by the Plaintiff M.B.
as litigation guardian for A.B. The claim originally included another plaintiff,
but the claim of that plaintiff was discontinued.
[58]          
A.B.’s claim relates to hair and meconium tests performed at MDTL at the
request of the CAS in relation to child protection proceedings involving him.
[59]          
A.B. sued HSC, Dr. Koren, and Joey Gareri (together the “MDTL
Defendants”) alleging, among other things, that they were negligent in
performing these tests. A.B. did not sue the CAS.
[60]          
A.B. has only sued the MDTL Defendants for their several liability. Paragraph
139 of A.B.’s claim provides as follows:
[61]          
The MDTL Defendants have defended A.B.’s claim.
[62]          
Dr. Koren issued a separate claim against the CAS for contribution and
indemnity for any amounts found owing by him to A.B. Dr. Koren’s claim pleads
and relies on his Statement of Defence in the A.B. Action and further alleges that
the CAS misused the drug test results in the child protection proceedings
involving A.B.
[63]          
In his claim relating to the A.B. Action, Dr. Koren pleads:
[64]          
Dr. Koren also expressly pleads that it was an implied term of the CAS’s
contract with the MDTL that:
[65]          
These facts are not patently ridiculous or incapable of proof and
therefore I accept them as true for the purposes of this motion.
[66]          
In his claim in relation to the A.B. Action, Dr. Koren’s pleading identifies
the existence and nature of the contract, the implied terms of the contract,
the manner in which he alleges the CAS breached the contract, and the damages
claimed.
[67]          
For the reasons set out in paras. 31 to 56 above, I find that Dr.
Koren’s pleading with respect to contribution and indemnity based on breach of
contract is plausible and ought not to be struck.
[68]          
Dr. Koren has pleaded and relied on the Negligence Act. To the
extent that Dr. Koren claims contribution and indemnity under the Negligence
Act from the CAS as a joint tortfeasor, it is plain and obvious that this
claim cannot succeed and must be struck.
[69]          
The CAS says that because A.B. limited his claim to the several
liability of the MDTL Defendants, Dr. Koren’s claim for contribution and
indemnity has no possibility of success because Dr. Koren does not face a
situation where he could be held liable for fault apportioned to the CAS. I disagree
because Dr. Koren’s claim is not based only the Negligence Act; it is
based on breach of contract.
[70]          
The CAS relies on Taylor v. Canada (Minister of Health), 2009
ONCA 487, 95 O.R. (3d) 561 and Johnston v. The Sheila Morrison Schools,
2012 ONSC 1322, 20 C.P.C. (7th) 103, where claims for contribution and
indemnity were dismissed because the plaintiffs had limited their claims to the
several liability of the defendants. These cases are distinguishable because
there, the claim for contribution and indemnity was based entirely on the third
party’s alleged negligence.  Here, Dr. Koren’s claim for contribution and
indemnity is based on an independent contract with the CAS and obligations owed
by the CAS to MDTL.
[71]          
The CAS has not cited any authority for the proposition that a plaintiff
in a negligence action can limit the rights of parties to a contract. It is not
plain and obvious that para. 139 of A.B.’s claim restricts Dr. Koren’s right to
seek contribution and indemnity from the CAS as both a joint tortfeasor and his
right to seek redress for the CAS’s breach of its contract with the MDTL
Defendants. It is not beyond doubt that the claims for contribution and
indemnity referred to in para. 139include Dr. Koren’s claim for damages for
breach of contract.
[72]          
Dr. Koren’s claim stems from an action commenced by the Plaintiffs M.M.,
D.W., and B.W. by his litigation guardian M.M.
[73]          
The Plaintiffs’ claims in the M.M. Action relate to hair and meconium
tests performed at MDTL to screen for use of or exposure to alcohol and drugs
of abuse. The Plaintiffs allege that some of the tests were performed at the
request of the CAS in relation to child protection proceedings involving the
minor plaintiff B.W.
[74]          
In the M.M. Action the Plaintiffs allege, among other things, that the MDTL
Defendants were negligent in performing these tests.
[75]          
The claims of the Plaintiffs M.M. and D.W. against the CAS were struck
in C.R. because the CAS owes a duty of care only to the child B.W. who
was the subject of the CAS’s investigation, and no duty to family members. B.W.’s
claims against the CAS were not struck in C.R because B.W. is the child
who was the subject of the CAS’s investigation, and it was not argued that the
CAS owes him no duty of care.
[76]          
The CAS and the MDTL Defendants have defended the M.M. Action.
[77]          
Dr. Koren commenced his claim in this action against the CAS, seeking
contribution and indemnity for any and all amounts found to be owing by him to
the Plaintiffs in the M.M. Action. As in the other actions, Dr. Koren’s claim
alleges, among other things, that the CAS misused the drug test results in the
child protection proceedings involving B.W. Dr. Koren pleads:
[78]          
I accept these facts as true for the purposes of this motion.
[79]          
Dr. Koren also pleads and relies on the provisions of the Negligence
Act.
[80]          
The Plaintiffs have entered into a tentative settlement of B.W.’s claim against
the CAS subject to court approval (the “Pierrenger Agreement”). B.W.’s
claims against the MDTL Defendants are not settled.
[81]          
Pierringer agreements are a way for plaintiffs in multi-party
litigation to settle with some, but not all, of the defendants. In a typical Pierringer
agreement, the plaintiff settles with one or more of the defendants, with the result
that the settling defendants are no longer required to defend the action
against them. The plaintiff proceeds to trial against only the non-settling
defendants. The settling defendants agree to pay a sum of money and they are released
from the action. The plaintiff agrees to waive their right to claim from the
non-settling defendants any portion of the loss ultimately attributed at trial
to the fault of the settling defendants. The plaintiff amends the claim to
pursue only the losses caused by the non-settling defendants, i.e., their
several liability. The settling defendants are shielded from claims by the
non-settling defendants for contribution and indemnity under the Negligence
Act.
[82]          
In the present case, the payment of settlement funds by the CAS to B.W.
pursuant to the Pierringer Agreement is contingent upon the CAS’s success
in this motion, i.e., the dismissal of all of Dr. Koren’s claims against the
CAS in relation to the M.M. action.
[83]          
This creates a chicken and egg problem. The Pierrenger Agreement
is contingent on the CAS being successful on its r. 21 motion and the CAS’s argument
on the r. 21 motion depends on the Pierrenger Agreement being
implemented. Fortunately, however, Dr. Koren acknowledges that the r. 21 motion
should be analyzed in the context of the proposed amendments to the claim which
would be made as part of the Pierrenger Agreement (the “Proposed M.M. Claim”).
[84]          
The Proposed M.M. Claim provides:
[85]          
The CAS says that if the claim is amended to limit Dr. Koren’s liability
to his several liability, then he has no claim for contribution and indemnity
in the context of the Draft Amended Claim in the M.M. Action because he will
never be called upon to pay more than his proportionate share of the liability.
[86]          
Dr. Koren says that the terms of the Pierringer Agreement are
irrelevant and cannot form part of the Court’s analysis on this motion because
the only question is whether there is a legally tenable cause of action pleaded.
One of the terms of the Pierrenger Agreement is that the Plaintiffs will
limit the claim against Dr. Koren to his several liability and the Plaintiffs
have brought a motion to amend the claim accordingly.
[87]          
Dr. Koren has pleaded that if M.M., D. W. and B.W. have suffered damages
as alleged, such damages were caused by or contributed to by the negligence of
the CAS. To the extent that Dr. Koren claims contribution and indemnity under
the Negligence Act from the CAS as a joint tortfeasor, it is plain and
obvious that this claim cannot succeed and must be struck, because the amended
claim will make it so that he will never be called upon to pay more than his
proportionate share of the liability.
[88]          
A claim for a contractual right of indemnity may succeed even
where the plaintiff’s claim is amended to limit it to several liability of the
non-settling defendant: Allianz v. Canada (Attorney
General), 2017 ONSC 4484, 139 O.R. (3d) 424, at
paras. 16 and 18.
[89]          
Apportionment is possible between multiple contract breachers, each of
which has a separate contract with a plaintiff who suffers the same damage from
concurrent breaches of those contracts: Gemeinhardt v. Babic, 2016 ONSC
4707, 68 R.P.R. (5th) 232, at paras. 595-596; Petersen Pontiac Buick GMC
(Alta.) Ltd. v. Campbell, 2013 ABCA 251, 556 A.R. 118, at paras. 42 and
51-54.
[90]          
I have not been pointed to any case where a court has apportioned fault
between a tortfeasor and a contract breacher. The CAS has not provided any
authority for the proposition that the court can apportion liability between a
tortfeasor who is liable to the plaintiff and a third party who has a contract
with the defendant.
[91]          
It is important to keep in mind that in C.R., Wilson J. did not
find that the CAS did not cause or contribute to the harm alleged by the
Plaintiffs. Rather, she dismissed the claims against the CAS on the basis that,
for policy reasons, the CAS owes no duty of care to family members, only the
children who were the subject of protection proceedings.
[92]          
A trial judge might find Dr. Koren liable in negligence and also find
that he is entitled to benefit from the contract between the CAS and MDTL, and
that the CAS breached that contract. Dr. Koren may persuade the trial judge
that the contract requires the CAS to indemnify him for some or all of the
damages which he is required to pay to the Plaintiff. The answers to these questions
are far from clear and depend in part on findings of fact. It should not be
determined on a motion to strike a pleading.
[93]          
For these reasons and the reasons set out above with respect to Dr.
Koren’s claim in relation to the J.B. Action at paras. 31 to 56, and the
reasons set out above in relation to Dr. Koren’s claim in relation to the A.B.
action at paras. 69 to 71, Dr. Koren’s claim for contribution and indemnity
based on the CAS’s breach of contract is not incapable of success even if the Plaintiff’s claims in the M.M. Action are
limited to Dr. Koren’s several liability.
[94]          
The CAS seeks alternative relief in the form of an order consolidating
this action with the M.M. Action. To date, the claims have progressed through
discoveries as if they were consolidated. Dr. Koren agrees that the two actions
should be consolidated. I order that Dr. Koren’s action against the CAS bearing
Court File No. CV-22-00691770-0000 is consolidated with the M.M. Action bearing
Court File No. CV-18-589318.
[95]          
As set out above, HSC does not oppose the CAS’s motion to strike its
claim. The CAS’s motion to strike HCS’s claim in CV-23-00704793-0000 is granted
and the claim is struck.
[96]          
In this action the Plaintiff sued the MDTL Defendants, the CAS and
others.
[97]          
The Plaintiff’s claim relates to hair and meconium tests performed at
MDTL to screen for use of or exposure to alcohol and drugs of abuse. The tests
were performed at the request of the CAS in relation to child protection proceedings
involving the Plaintiff’s child.
[98]          
The Plaintiff alleges, among other things, that the MDTL Defendants were
negligent in performing these tests.
[99]          
The MDTL Defendants have defended this action.
[100]       Dr.
Koren commenced a crossclaim against the CAS, seeking contribution and
indemnity for any and all amounts found to be owing by him to the Plaintiff.
Dr. Koren’s crossclaim alleges, among other things, that the CAS misused the
drug test results in the child protection proceedings involving Y.M.’s child.
[101]       Y.M.’s
claim against the CAS was struck in C.R. because the CAS owes a duty of
care only to her child who was the subject of the CAS’s investigation and no
duty to her as the mother.
[102]       Dr.
Koren’s crossclaim alleges that if the Plaintiff has suffered any damages and
if they were caused or contributed to by the negligence of the CAS then Dr.
Koren claims against the CAS for contribution and indemnity. Dr. Koren pleads
and relies on the Negligence Act.
[103]       Dr.
Koren’s crossclaim based on contribution and indemnity under the Negligence
Act is doomed to fail for the reasons set out at paras. 31-35 above.
[104]       As
set out at para. 40 above, a claim for breach of contract must contain
sufficient particulars to identify the parties, the facts supporting privity of
contract, the relevant terms, which term or terms were breached, and the
damages that flow from the breach.
[105]       Dr.
Koren’s pleading states:
[106]       Dr.
Koren suggests that his crossclaim included a claim based on breach of an
implied term of the CAS’s contract with the MDTL Defendants including him.
[107]       I
do not agree. In this pleading, Dr. Koren does not plead there was a contract.
[108]       The
CAS’s motion to dismiss Dr. Koren’s crossclaim in the Y.M. action is granted.
[109]       However,
this is not one of those clearest of cases where leave to amend should be
refused.  In this case, for the reasons set out above with respect to the other
motions before me, it is not plain and obvious that Dr. Koren’s claim for
contribution and indemnity against the CAS based on breach of contract is
doomed to fail. Dr. Koren may succeed in establishing that a contract existed between
CAS and all of the MDTL Defendants including him or that a principled exception
to privity of contract applies and he is entitled to the benefit of that
contract. He may succeed in establishing that the CAS
breached that contract and that he is entitled to contribution and indemnity as
a result of that breach.
[110]       Dr.
Koren is granted leave to amend the claim in Y.M.
[111]       The
CAS’s motions to strike Dr. Koren’s claims for contribution and indemnity based
on the Negligence Act are struck without leave to amend. I make these
orders because these pleadings fail to disclose a reasonable cause of action and
it would serve no purpose to grant leave to amend.
[112]       The
CAS’s motions to strike Dr. Koren’s claims for contribution and indemnity based
on breach of contract are not struck. I make these orders because it is not
plain and obvious that these claims will fail.
[113]       The
motion to strike HSC’s claim and the consolidation motion are unopposed.
[114]       To
summarize:
[115]       I
encourage the parties to agree on costs. If they cannot agree, I will consider
brief written submissions. These costs submissions shall not exceed five pages
in length (not including any bill of costs or offers to settle).
[116]       Any
party claiming costs shall file their written submissions within ten days of
the date of these reasons. Any responding submissions shall be delivered within
five days of receipt of the other party’s costs submissions. Any reply to
submissions shall be delivered within three days of receipt of responding
submissions and shall be no more than three pages long.
[117]       Costs
submissions shall be filed with the court and delivered to me by way of email
to my Judicial Assistant.