[1]              
On March 26, 2024, a jury found Ayodele Adeokoya
guilty of fraud over $5,000, possession of identity documents, uttering a
forged document, and possession of property obtained by crime.
[2]              
I am now prepared to pronounce sentence.
[3]              
I will first address the circumstance of the
offences, the circumstances of Mr. Adekoya, and the impact of the offences on
the victims and the community.
[4]              
The case against Mr. Adekoya was a
circumstantial one and the issue of one of identity.
[5]              
I accept as proven, all facts, express or
implied, that are essential to the jury’s verdict of guilty.
[6]              
Mr. Adekoya perpetrated a credit card fraud. He
made applications for Home Depot credit cards in the names of other persons.
This came to the attention of Citibank, which is the credit card company behind
the Home Depot credit card. Citibank’s internal investigators discerned
similarities in IP address and device numbers which triggered further
investigations and eventually the involvement of the police.
[7]              
In an apartment leased by Mr. Adekoya, the York
Regional Police found countless identity documents. The Crown went on to prove
that 113 credit card applications were made in the names of the people who did
not make the application. Credit was issued in their name. It was agreed that
those named in the credit applications did not authorize the application when
it was made. It was also agreed what the limit on those cards were and how much
was purchased on those cards. These credit applications and the cards were
found in the apartment of Mr. Adekoya.
[8]              
York Regional Police attempted to determine who
was making the applications by obtaining a warrant for the internet service
provider and linked the IP addresses to the subscriber which produced an
address. It then obtained information by warrant about about who signed the
lease of the physical address to which the IP address was connected.
[9]              
That led the police to the apartment and Mr.
Adekoya. When a warrant was executed, the apartment contained identity
documents in the names of persons other than Mr. Adekoya.
[10]          
Mr. Adekoya testified that he did not reside at
the apartment at the time the police executed the warrant. Rather, he told the Court
that he had sublet the apartment to a stranger and his wife. He told the Court
that while he originally paid the rent and had the subtenant pay him,
eventually he let the subtenant pay the rent directly and never went back to
the apartment.
[11]          
By its verdict, the jury rejected Mr. Adekoya’s
evidence and found that it was Mr. Adekoya who made the applications, who used
the credit cards, that he forged documents and that he was in possession of
property using the falsely obtained credit.
[12]          
The jury clearly rejected the story told by Mr.
Adekoya that there was another tenant in the apartment and that he had nothing
to do with the falsely obtained credit cards and the fake identification found
in the apartment.
[13]          
I find as a fact that Mr. Adekoya was running an
identity lab.
[14]          
The identify of 60 individuals were used and
compromised. Identity documents of many others were found in the apartment.
[15]          
With Citibank alone, the risk of loss, in terms
of the credit obtained, was $345,500. The total loss is $239,677 to Citibank.
[16]          
Based on the evidence, Mr. Adekoya’s victims
were from across Canada from Edmonton to Toronto. A nurse. An oil worker. A
person who worked in a dental office. Someone who worked in a bar.
[17]          
The identity documents found in the apartment related
to persons from a wide geographic area: from the United States, Markham, East
York, Toronto, North York, Kitchener, St. Catharines, and Kanata. Some persons
were deceased, some were old, and some were young.
[18]          
The type of personal information held by Mr.
Adekoya included the type of car the person had, the places they lived, whether
they were immigrants, cell and home phone numbers, social insurance numbers,
credit scores, mortgages, mothers’ maiden names, and more.
[19]          
Some persons had their mail redirected without
their knowledge.
[20]          
Sixty individuals had their identification used
and compromised.
[21]          
I have had the benefit of a pre-sentence report
and much of what we know about Mr. Adekoya is obtained from that report.
[22]          
Mr. Adekoya is a 44-year-old man who states that
he was born in Nigeria. He is an only child.
[23]          
Mr. Adekoya told the probation officer who
prepared the PSR that he had a normal upbringing. He lived an upper middle-class
lifestyle, lived in a large house, and attended private schools.
[24]          
Mr. Adekoya reported that in 2007, when there
was political turmoil, his parents were killed. He arrived home to find the bodies
of his parents deceased in the family home. Mr. Adekoya reports that his father
was actively involved in politics, and was in support of a political party that
was not the government.
[25]          
Mr. Adekoya felt threatened. The government
seized his family home and his assets and he fled from Nigeria to Switzerland
where he remained for a few months before immigrating to Canada and claiming
refugee status.
[26]          
Mr. Adekoya has not secured permanent residency
in Canada as he has a criminal record. He’s now been in Ontario for 17 years
and has been reporting to Canada Border Services Agency twice per month.
[27]          
Mr. Adekoya has engaged in some vocational
training in Canada including a forklift course and he did not finish a four-year
welding program.
[28]          
With his ex-partner he has a 12-year-old
daughter, with whom he was in a long-term relationship. Sadly, his ex-partner
is quite ill with kidney disease. His current partner is pregnant and is
expecting a baby in January, 2025.
[29]          
Mr. Adekoya has a good friend who was
interviewed for the purpose of the pre-sentence report. She states that he
provides a great deal of support to her with her two children.
[30]          
Mr. Adekoya has worked for Falcon Ridge Landscaping
and a renovation company. Each describe him as a good worker but cited concerns
about him not showing up for work for lengthy periods of time, the longest
being one year and six months straight. Absence has impeded his progress at
Falcon Ridge Landscaping.
[31]          
He has a criminal record which I discuss in more
detail later in these Reasons.
[32]          
In his evidence and in the pre-sentence report,
Mr. Adekoya maintained his innocence and he is supported in this view by his
longtime friend and his current partner who both believe that he was a victim
of racial profiling and police tunnel vision. Mr. Adekoya told the probation
officer that he was framed. In his allocution, Mr. Adekoya acknowledged making
some mistakes and asked for a second chance.
[33]          
No victim impact statements were tendered.
[34]          
In terms of the impact on individuals, it was
highly personal. Mr. Adekoya’s possession constituted a serious invasion of the
privacy and personal security of his victims.
[35]          
In terms of the impact on Citibank, the Crown
proved losses in the amount of $239,677 and a risk of loss of $345,500 which is
the amount of credit advanced between August 20, 2016 and December, 2018,
approximately a two-year period.
[36]          
The Crown seeks a sentence of 3.5 years, a
restitution order, and a DNA order. The Crown argues that the appropriate range
is 3.5 to 5 years.
[37]          
Mr. Adekoya asks that I impose a sentence of six
months less a day, asking that I consider the collateral consequences of a
criminal conviction considering that he fled Nigeria after the deaths of his
parents and given that he would be at risk to be deported and forced to return.
[38]          
Mr. Adekoya’s family and the support that he
provides to them, and his longtime friend is a mitigating factor.
[39]          
His ability to work and the periods of stability
when working are also mitigating factors as they demonstrate his rehabilitative
potential.
[40]          
Mr. Adekoya was arrested on July 20, 2020 and
does not appear to have spent time in custody following his arrest. His release
conditions are to remain in his residence from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. daily
along with other standard conditions. I find that these conditions were not
restrictive such that they should not operate to reduce his sentence.
[41]          
The criminal record is an aggravating factor.
[42]          
Mr. Adekoya has convictions for driving with
more than 80mg of alcohol in his blood, driving while impaired, dangerous
operation of a motor vehicle.
[43]          
What I find most aggravating are his three sets
of convictions for similar offences. In 2011, he was convicted of possession of
a credit card which was not his own and a failure to comply, in 2015, he was
convicted of fraud under $5,000, use of a credit card and possession of a
counterfeit mark and a second set of 2015 convictions for identity theft, use
of a forged document, and other offences.
[44]          
I also find the quantum of the fraud to be an
aggravating factor. I accept that it is in the range of a large scale fraud as
I will discuss further in more detail.
[45]          
The scale and breadth of the operation is an
aggravating factor.
[46]          
Section 718 of the Criminal
Code provides that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect
society and to contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect
for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by
imposing just sanctions that have one or more of the following objectives: the
denunciation of unlawful conduct, deterrence – both general and specific, the
separation of the offender from society where necessary, rehabilitation,
reparation for harm done to the victims and the community, and the promotion of
a sense of responsibility in offenders and an acknowledgment of the harm done.
[47]          
Section 718.1 mandates that
a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree
of responsibility of the offender. Sentencing judges must also consider parity
such that offenders who commit similar offences in similar circumstances should
receive similar sentence (See R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9, at para. 31).
This principle is reflected in s. 718.2(b) of the Criminal Code.
[48]          
In Friesen, the
Supreme Court again stated that that parity is an expression of
proportionality. Sentencing precedents reflect “the range of factual situations
in the world and a plurality of judicial perspectives. Precedents embody the
collective experience and the wisdom of the judiciary. They are the practical
expression of both parity and proportionality.” (Friesen, at paras. 32
and 33.)
[49]          
I note also that I am bound
by the principle of restraint. This means that I should not deprive an offender
of his liberty if less restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the
circumstances.
[50]          
Sentencing must be tailored
to the circumstances of the offence and the offender. The process of arriving
at a proportionate sentence is a highly individualized exercise, tailored to
the gravity of the offence, the blameworthiness of the offender, and the harm
caused by the crime. (See R. v. Nur, 2015 SCC 15, at para. 43.)
[51]          
In R. v. Scholz, 2021 ONCA 506, the Court
of Appeal for Ontario reiterated that the established range of sentence for
large scale frauds is three to five years, and that the offender does not have
to be in a position of trust to warrant the penalty of a penitentiary term of imprisonment.
See paras. 18 and 22.
[52]          
There have been exceptions to the range where
the individual circumstances require. See R. v. Dobis (2002), 58 OR (3d)
536, 2002 CanLII 32815 (ONCA), at paras. 36-47.
[53]          
In R. v. Okubadejo, [2008] O.J. No. 5416,
a case involving an unsophisticated identity lab, Justice Spies imposed
sentences of 42 months for possession of a counterfeit mark, 40 months for
possession of credit card data and 18 months for each count of possession of a
forged credit card less credits for pre-trial custody. In my view, the facts of
this case are very similar, and parity would demand a similar sentence.
[54]          
In R. v. Velupillai, [2007] O.J. No. 5495
(OCJ), in respect of a case involving multiple accused on charges of
conspiracy to defraud the holders of debit and credit cards. the Court stated
at paras. 7 and 8 that:
[55]          
In R. v. Pham, 2013 SCC 15 (CanLII),
[2013] 1 SCR 739, the Supreme Court of Canada considered whether
sentencing judges can exercise their discretion to take collateral immigration
consequences into account. The Court held at para. 14 that they may, provided
that “the sentence that is ultimately imposed is proportionate to the gravity
of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.” Further, the
Court held at para. 18 that:
[56]          
Justice Moldaver expressed caution in adjusting a
sentence  to circumvent Parliament’s position on immigration. The Court adopted
the position set out by Justice Doherty of the Court of Appeal for Ontario in R.
v. Hamilton (2004) 2004 CanLII 5549 (ON CA), 72 O.R. (3d) 1 (C.A.), at paras. 156 and 158, which
provided that the risk of deportation cannot justify a sentence which is inconsistent
with the fundamental purpose and the principles of sentencing identified in the
Criminal Code. The risk of deportation can be a factor to be taken into
consideration in choosing among the appropriate sentencing responses.
[57]          
In short, collateral immigration consequences
are a relevant factor among many related to the nature and gravity of the
offence, the degree of responsibility of the offender, and the offender’s
personal circumstances. See R. v. Pham, supra, at para. 20.
[58]          
Mr. Adekoya is a Black offender. I acknowledge,
the following principles set out in R. v. Morris, 2021 ONCA 680, at
paras. 1 and 123:
[59]          
Evidence about racism and the impact upon the
offender can assist a judge in determining a fit sentence and can lead to a
sentence below the established range. See R. v. Morris, supra, at para.
109.
[60]          
I have no specific evidence on the impact of
anti-Black racism upon Mr. Adekoya. The predominant challenges that he faced
appear to come from the loss of his parents, his displacement from Nigeria, and
his failure to secure permanent residency because of his criminal record.
[61]          
A custodial sentence is required. This was a large
fraud. I believe the Crown’s proposal of 3.5 years is appropriate considering
parity, the nature of the fraud, the length of time over which it was carried
out and the harm to the community. Denunciation and deterrence are of paramount
concern.
[62]          
There is no support that a sentence of six
months less one day is appropriate. I find this because Mr. Adekoya is not a first-time
offender, he received such a sentence from the Court when convicted previously.
[63]          
Mr. Adekoya argues that in the alternative, I
should impose a conditional sentence order (CSO). He argues that this is not a
crime of violence and that it would send a message to the Immigration and
Refugee Board.
[64]          
If not for the convictions involving breach of Court
orders, Mr. Adekoya might be the perfect candidate for a conditional sentence
order (CSO) and it would serve the fundamental purpose of sentencing to impose
one. It would have the salutary effect of Mr. Adekoya being able to continue to
care for his family. In addition, the PSR notes that Mr. Adekoya could benefit
from rehabilitative programming if placed on community supervision. I agree
that he has potential. He admitted mistakes to me, which is at odds with his
belief that he was the victim of an improper police investigation. I have
reason to doubt his statement to me.
[65]          
However, Mr. Adekoya has failed to comply
several times, and his record includes crimes of dishonesty. I find that a CSO
is not appropriate considering these factors.
[66]          
Mr. Adekoya is at risk of deportation and that
is a collateral consequence that concerns me. Counsel argues that he is at risk
of grave harm should he be deported. I have no evidence or information about
what Mr. Adekoya might face should he be ordered deported from Canada. The
immigration consequences concern me greatly.
[67]          
I have little confidence in Mr. Adekoya’s
reporting of his situation. Even if I were to believe all of it, a sentence of
six months less a day would take the sentence far below the appropriate range
and in my view would result in an unfit sentence. The sentence must reflect his
degree of moral responsibility.
[68]          
I have serious concerns for his children and
support that he can provide for their upbringing, especially given that his
child’s mother is unwell and that there is a child who will soon be born whose well-being
is likely strengthened by the presence of a parent. This applies to his chosen
family to whom he also assists.
[69]          
I will reduce the sentence to account for this
but in my view, mitigation on this ground cannot in this case bring the
sentence below the range and the sentence remain fit.
[70]          
There are no adjustments for pre-trial custody
or conditions of release as Mr. Adekoya was arrested and released and I have
found that the release conditions were not restrictive.
[71]          
Mr. Adekoya, please rise so that I may
pronounce sentence:
[72]          
On count one, for fraud over $5,000, I sentence
you to 40 months incarceration.
[73]          
On count two, for possession of identity
documents, I sentence you to 40 months incarceration to be served concurrently.
[74]          
On count three, for uttering a forged document, I
sentence you to 40 months incarceration to be served concurrently.
[75]          
On count four, for possession of property
obtained by crime, I sentence you to 40 months incarceration to be served concurrently.
[76]          
There shall be a DNA order.
[77]          
I also make a restitution order under s. 738(1)
in the amount of $239,677 in favour of Citibank.