[1]    
     In a
motion filed by the defendant, Bombardier Transportation Canada Inc.
(“Bombardier”), the relief sought included answering undertakings or refusals
of the plaintiff, Nicole Barrette (“Barrette”), as well as a request for a
defence medical.
[2]    
     In
my reasons dated September 4, 2024, I granted the relief sought by Bombardier.
[3]    
     The
parties were asked to provide costs’ submissions arising from my decision, and
they have each done so in writing.
[4]    
     These
are my reasons for costs.
[5]    
     Bombardier
was entirely successful in the motion, and served an offer to settle dated
August 8, 2024, which is more than seven days before the motion was heard on August
19, 2024.  Partial indemnity costs are therefore sought to the date of the
offer, and substantial indemnity costs thereafter on the basis of Rule 49.10.
[6]    
     In
its written submissions, Bombardier states that it is seeking a costs award in
the amount of $16,780.50 for fees, disbursements and HST, with its pre-offer
partial indemnity claim totaling $8,451.27 and its post-offer substantial
indemnity claim totaling $8,329.23.
[7]    
     Barrette
concedes that Bombardier was successful in its motion, and does not dispute
Bombardier’s prima facie right to seek costs.
[8]    
     However,
Barrette submits that the claim advanced, which totals almost $17,000, is
excessive and disproportionate to the issues addressed by the motion. Instead,
Barrette suggests that a costs award in the amount of $1,500 would be
reasonable and appropriate in the circumstances.
[9]    
     In
considering what an appropriate award for costs should be in this matter, I am
mindful of the plaintiff’s submissions with respect to this being a matter
governed by Rule 76, which limits the recovery of costs in a simplified
procedure action to $50,000 in fees and $25,000 in disbursements.  In other
words, a party is limited to a maximum of $50,000 in fees to cover pleadings,
investigation, discovery, pre-trial matters, and a trial which must be
completed within five days.  I agree that the defendant’s claim for $17,000 in
costs for a half-day motion should be assessed in this context.
[10]    
 The other consideration in
determining costs involves an assessment of the value of the outcome of the
motion, and how the resolution of the relevant issues could impact the case. In
other words, were the results worth the effort?
[11]    
 It is my assessment that
some of the issues raised in the defendant’s motion will likely have little
impact on the overall outcome of this litigation.
[12]    
 For example, the issue of
whether Barrette previously breached the drug and alcohol policy of Bombardier
was only made relevant due to the plaintiff’s broad assertion in her statement
of claim that she acted professionally in the past, without being guilty of
willful misconduct or neglect of duty. Bombardier maintained, however, that it
was not asserting after acquired cause. As such, it is likely that, while the
pleading made this question relevant, the answer will not form part of the
evidence during the trial.
[13]    
 The request for family
members to particularize concerns about Barrette’s past behaviour is another
example. Barrette was ordered to answer this question only because she provided
an affirmative answer initially, and Bombardier was entitled to explore that
answer. However, the answer to this question will likely have little impact on
the outcome of the action, since concern, or a lack thereof, on the part of a
family member neither supports nor denies the existence of a substance abuse
issue.
[14]    
 The question regarding the
availability of clinical notes and records from a Sault Ste. Marie facility
resulted in my decision to compel a supplementary affidavit of documents, to be
prepared by Barrette with a proper Schedule “C”. However, again, Bombardier
could have called the Sault Ste. Marie institution and determine for itself the
facility’s retention policy. Requiring Barrette to serve a Schedule “C” listing
documents which no longer exist – as confirmed by the plaintiff in her answers
to undertakings – will add nothing to the issues which need to be determined in
this matter.
[15]    
 Some of the requests for
information were more proportional, in that the answers to the questions could
very well impact the trial, such as the evidence relating to mitigation and the
background details to Barrette’s substance abuse disorder. In addition, it was
reasonable to seek an expert opinion to address the nature and extent of
Barrette’s substance abuse disorder, and an order granting the same was
provided.
[16]    
 So I agree that some amount
of costs should be payable to Bombardier.
[17]    
 In exercising my discretion to
assess an appropriate costs award, and considering the factors listed in Rule
57.01(1) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, I am mindful of the fact that
an offer to settle was served by the defendant which reflected the relief that
was ultimately granted.  I factor in the proportionality issues raised above,
some of which support a costs order, and some of which do not. By the same
token, some of the questions whose answers will only marginally impact the
outcome of this matter were refused, and I also recognize the plaintiff’s
position could have accounted for the questions being asked and reconsidered
the refusals.
[18]    
 According to the written
submissions, the plaintiff’s claim for costs, if successful, would have been
$5,410.80 on a substantial indemnity basis, and $3,607.20 on a partial
indemnity basis.  This informs the expectations of the unsuccessful plaintiff. 
The defendant put forth an offer which proposed a settlement of the matter with
costs payable in the amount of $3,500 approximately ten days before the matter
was argued, which speaks to its expectations before beginning in earnest to prepare
for the motion.
[19]    
 Finally, while the hourly
rates charged by counsel for the defendant may be considered reasonable in
Toronto, they do not reflect rates that would typically be allowed for Thunder
Bay counsel working on a motion addressing refusals and the request for a
defence medical.
[20]    
 All factors considered, and in
an effort to fix an amount for costs and disbursements that is fair and
reasonable for the plaintiff to pay, I order that costs in any event of the
cause be payable by the plaintiff in the amount of $5,000, inclusive of costs,
disbursements and HST.