[1]              
On May 30, 2024, a jury convicted M.B. of the following offences against
his biological daughter V and his stepdaughter M:
[2]              
The Crown requests that M.B. receive a prison sentence of 11 years,
whereas the Defence submits that the circumstances warrant a custodial sentence
of 5 years. The parties agree that the application of credits does not feature
in this case. For the reasons that follow, I find that a total sentence of 10
years is appropriate. Certain ancillary orders should also be imposed.
[3]              
The circumstances of the offences are that M.B. sexually assaulted his
stepdaughter, M, and then years later, physically and sexually assaulted his
biological daughter, V.
[4]              
When M was 8 or 9 years old, M.B. made M sit on his lap and then touched
her, initially outside of her clothes, but then underneath her underwear where
he rubbed her vagina. This pattern occurred many times during the day and these
assaults occurred upwards of 15 times. There were also two occasions where M
was sleeping on the couch and woke up to find M.B. rubbing her breasts. These
incidents occurred at an apartment on Keele Street.
[5]              
When M was 11 or 12 years old, her mother moved to an apartment on
Inverhouse Drive in Mississauga. The assaults continued but occurred at
nighttime while M slept on a mattress on the floor. M has a vivid recollection
of waking up in the middle of the night and seeing M.B. lying beside her and
rubbing himself and rubbing her. M.B. guided M’s hand toward his private area
and instructed her to rub his erect penis over his clothing. These incidents
happened frequently, at least once a week. On occasion, M woke up with
discharge in her underwear or without underwear on. These incidents stopped
once V was born.
[6]              
V’s parents continued to live separately. Over the years, her father
spent time with her both at her mother’s home and at his apartment when she
would visit him. M.B. disciplined her by violence when she misbehaved,
including on one occasion when he picked up a heavy textbook and slammed it
down on her hands several times, leaving her in significant pain afterwards.
[7]              
On another occasion, when V stole candy from Walmart and lost her key to
M.B.’s apartment on her way to school, her father became enraged and choked
her.
[8]              
Shortly after V started menstruating, while she was showering at M.B.’s
apartment, he instructed her to shave her vagina until it was clean shaven. He
did so under the guise that he was trying to “teach her” about good hygiene. He
instructed her to cover her clitoris with two fingers so it would not get cut
and then he used a barbering tool to shave her. He also made her do part of the
shaving. V was 11 or 12 years old when this occurred.
[9]              
M, who is now 30, provided a victim impact statement. She stated that experiencing
sexual abuse at such a young age was very confusing. She did not tell her
mother what her stepfather was doing to her because she did not know how her
mother would react. As she became older, she began to understand how he had
taken advantage of her. Her fear and uneasiness, especially at night, has
continued into her adult years.
[10]          
V, who is now 17, also provided a victim impact statement. She stated
that her father’s abuse was very hurtful because it made her doubt herself a
lot and impacted on her relationships with others, including her mother. It was
very difficult because she was forced to stay with her father during the week.
She was angry because she knew that other children had positive relationships
with their fathers. She is upset at herself because she should have told
someone sooner about the abuse. She lived in fear for a very long time. When
her father injured her hands, it was very painful, and she could not write
which disrupted her attendance at school. She also fears for her younger
sister.
[11]          
A Pre-Sentence Report (PSR) was prepared by Kasia Szczuka, a Probation
and Parole (P&P) Officer, dated July 18, 2024.
[12]          
M.B., now 56, was born in March of 1968. He has two daughters from his
marriage to S.E.: V, one of the victims, and E, V’s younger sister. M.B. and S.E.
are now separated.
[13]          
M.B.’s prior criminal record consists of a 1987 conviction in Edmonton,
Alberta for possession of property under $1,000 obtained by crime, and a 2007
conviction in Windsor, Ontario for sexual assault. The latter offence entailed
the sexual assault of his girlfriend’s 13-year-old niece. M.B. received a
suspended sentence and one year’s probation.
[14]          
The P&P Officer noted that, during the interview for the PSR, M.B.
presented as uncooperative and arrogant. He used condescending language, talked
over the Officer, and displayed body language that showed a lack of interest in
the interview. M.B. refused to provide personal information if he believed it
was not relevant to his current offences.
[15]          
M.B. advised the P&P Officer that he was born and raised in Guyana.
He described his childhood as good and said that he had lots of fun growing up.
He declined to elaborate. Ministry records indicated that his mother worked as
a nurse and that his father had a Ph.D. His parents divorced and moved to
England, leaving him under the care of his grandparents in Guyana. He visited
his parents in England, and during his teen years he moved to Canada. He has
also resided in the United States. He reported that, prior to his marital
relationship with S.E., he was previously married. He was convicted of
assaulting his female spouse on August 5, 1997, although this information is
not noted on his CPIC information.
[16]          
According to the PSR, M.B. blames his wife S.E. for their marriage not
working out. He described himself as a dedicated husband who took care of his
family. S.E. had her own children from a former relationship. M.B. claimed that
S.E. “took the kids for one long weekend and she never return[ed] them to me.”
He blames his legal problems on his wife and states, “she did it to win the
custody war.”
[17]          
The PSR reports that M.B. completed elementary and high school in
Guyana. He claimed to have attended university in the U.S. but declined to
provide the name of the university and courses he took there. He further
informed that, approximately 6 years ago, he attended an IT program at Seneca
College but “hated it from the beginning.” He failed to complete the program
and claimed to have obtained an entry level IT job without having any diploma
or degree in the field. He also claimed to have attended a 2-year program with
Nordic College and obtained a social degree/diploma in “whatever” and started
his own IT company. He claimed to have registered for a 3-year software
engineering program as well as a pre-nursing program but had not completed
either due to his charges before the court.
[18]          
M.B. stated that he had been a recipient of the Ontario Disability
Support Program (ODSP) since 2020 as “[m]y wife made me lose my sight and I
cannot work right now.”
[19]          
M.B. reported no issues with substance abuse.
[20]          
The P&P Officer indicated that M.B. appeared evasive and exhibited a
hostile attitude throughout their interaction.
[21]          
The PSR reviewed ministry records from prior community supervision
following his 2007 conviction which showed him to be resistant to having to
attend counselling.
[22]          
The PSR concluded that M.B. presented with a very relaxed attitude
towards the offence which he categorically denied committing. M.B. stated that
“counselling is not for me.” He insisted on his innocence and suggested that
his wife “did it to me to win the custody war.” He acknowledged no harm done to
the victims nor any indication of remorse. The PSR concluded that M.B.
“demonstrated a lack of sound judgement and blatant disregard for the victims
and the safety of the community.”
[23]          
 The Defence provided a letter of support from Reverend Dwight Richards,
a pastor at Dayspring Christian Church in Brampton, who has known M.B. for the
past 20 years. The letter of support indicated that M.B. had made him aware of
the details of the situation concerning his marriage and his daughters.
However, the letter did not elaborate on those details. The letter also stated
that Reverend Richards had observed “[M.B.] to be a caring and loving father”
but did not indicate when such observations were made or the context.
[24]          
The Crown seeks an 11-year global sentence for M.B.
[25]          
Additionally, the Crown seeks:
[26]          
The Crown presented several authorities to suggest that a custodial
sentence of 11 years is appropriate in the circumstances of this case.
Appellate courts have not specified a particular sentencing range for sexual
offences involving minors, or for offences where the offender is the parent or
stepparent of the victim. However, denunciation and deterrence must be the
primary sentencing considerations: R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9, [2020] 1
S.C.R. 424, at para. 95; R. v. T.J., 2021 ONCA 392, 156 O.R. (3d) 161;
R. v. R.S., 2022 ONSC 4604.
[27]          
The Crown also reminds the court that, under s. 718.3(7)(b) of the Criminal
Code, a sentence of imprisonment for a sexual offence committed against a
child, other than an offence committed under section 163.1 (child pornography),
must be served consecutively to a sentence of imprisonment it imposes for a
sexual offence committed against another child, other than an offence under s.
163.1.
[28]          
The Crown submits that M.B.’s sentencing features a great number of
aggravating factors with no mitigating factors. M.B. is a repeat offender. He
has a 2007 conviction for sexually assaulting a 13-year-old girl. He has now
been convicted of sexually assaulting his biological daughter and a
stepdaughter. He shows no remorse or insight into his criminal conduct, and
there are no pro-social factors such as steady employment. While M.B. did not
force sexual intercourse on the victims, there was a significant violation of
the victims’ bodily and sexual integrity. Further, the duration of abuse on M
was arguably as long as four years when she was between the ages of 8 and 12
years old.
[29]          
The complainants’ victim impact statements refer to lasting damage on
the victims’ lives impacting their ability to trust men, and their sense of
safety and wellbeing. To this day, M.B. continues to deny all wrongdoing,
claiming that his convictions are the result of his wife’s doing in relation to
a custody battle.
[30]          
The Crown also notes that there is nothing reliable in the material
provided by M.B. He appears to walk around with a white cane sometimes. But, as
noted in the PSR, at other times he does not need it. While he has filed a
report from a cardiologist, there is no evidence of how his medical condition
impairs his day-to-day functioning. He claims to have taken courses at
university, including at Harvard, but has presented no documentary proof of
attendance at, or graduation from, any post-secondary institutions.
[31]          
While acknowledging that M.B. is a Black man, the Crown submits that he
has not suggested that he has experienced racism. In terms of the Crown’s
request for a non-communication order, he has not requested to contact his
younger daughter E.
[32]          
The Defence submits that the appropriate sentence for M.B. is a global
sentence of 5 years.
[33]          
The Defence does not take issue with the ancillary orders requested by
the Crown except with respect to the s. 161 non-communication order in respect
of E, M.B.’s younger daughter. The Defence submits that there was no evidence
at trial to suggest that M.B. presents a danger to E, and therefore there is no
need for such a punitive order.
[34]          
With respect to mitigating factors, the Defence asserts that M.B.’s
offences against V were three discrete events and did not take place over many
years. M.B. has not breached any conditions of his bail since his arrest. The
appropriate sentence for M.B. is one that recognizes that this will be his
first custodial sentence. The principle of restraint must be respected.
Finally, the medical documentation filed by the Defence proves that M.B. has
vision and cardiovascular issues.
[35]          
In R. v. M.W., 2024 ONSC 5834, Stribopoulos J. made the following
comments about the sentencing for sexual offences against children:
[36]          
On the facts in M.W., Stribopoulos J. sentenced the offender to a
global sentence of 12 years in circumstances where he was found guilty of 6
charges: two counts of sexual interference, two counts of sexual exploitation,
and two counts of sexual assault – one count of each relating to each of the
two victims. The offender was found to be in a position of trust because he was
entrusted by the victims’ parents to look after them as a religious and
spiritual guide. The offender was 32 years old at the time of sentencing with
no prior criminal record. One adolescent victim was subjected to non-consensual
sexual intercourse on hundreds of occasions. She became pregnant and the
offender arranged an abortion. The other victim, also an adolescent, was
subjected to non-consensual sexual intercourse somewhere between 60 and 100
times. Stribopoulos J. would have sentenced the offender to 17 years based on 9
years in respect of one victim, and 8 years in respect of the other served
consecutively but, applying the totality principle, reduced the overall
sentence to 12 years.
[37]          
In R. v. C.B., 2021 ONSC 187, the offender was convicted by Woodley
J. of sexual assault, sexual interference, and invitation to sexual touching
with respect to his biological daughter when she was between 13 and 16 years
old. He received a global sentence of 5 years. The abuse consisted of digital
penetration, oral sex performed on the victim, manual stimulation of the
offender’s penis, and repeated attempts by the offender to engage the victim in
sexual intercourse. C.B. was 43 at the time of sentencing. He did not accept
responsibility for his actions and placed the blame entirely on the victim.
C.B. had no prior criminal record and had been continuously employed at a high
level for most of his adult life. He had experienced mental health issues and
had made significant efforts to obtain counselling.
[38]          
In R. v. Andress, 2022 ONSC 1496,
Arrell J. sentenced the offender to 7 years after he was found guilty of three
counts of sexual interference by sexual touching of three children under 16.
The abuse took place while Mr. Andress and his wife were serving as babysitters
for the victims. The abuse on one victim, which consisted of sexual assaults
short of intercourse, lasted five years and occurred “almost daily” or on “most
weekends”. The offender attacked another victim multiple times the week she
stayed at his home, and he attacked the third victim on multiple instances for
over a year. The offender did not show any remorse.
[39]          
In R. v. R.S., 2022 ONSC 4604, a jury
found a father guilty of sexual assault, invitation to sexual touching, and
incest, in relation to his daughter. Roberts J. imposed a sentence of 11 years
on the 53-year-old offender.
[40]          
In R. v. A.S., 2023 ONSC 983, the offender was sentenced to seven
years in prison for the abuse of a minor between the ages of six and twelve
years old. The defendant was a close family friend of the victim, was seen as a
father figure, and occupied a position of trust. The abuse included touching
the victim’s vagina and anus underneath her clothing, kissing the victim’s
vagina, and sucking the victim’s breasts. The duration and frequency of the
abuse was considered an aggravating factor by the court.
[41]          
In R. v. N.K., 2024 ONSC 2761, the offender was sentenced to
seven years in prison for sexual assault, sexual interference, and invitation
to sexual touching of his stepdaughter. The abuse occurred from when the victim
was in grade three to grade six and included touching the victim’s breasts both
over and under her clothing, touching her vagina under her clothing, attempting
intercourse, forced masturbation, and showing the victim explicit materials
online. The defendant was a first-time offender, but the victim’s age, the
duration and frequency of the abuse, and the fact that the abuse occurred in
the victim’s home were considered aggravating factors in this case.
[42]          
In R. v. A.P., 2021 ONSC 6647, the offender received a total
sentence of 9 years following a trial for sexual abuse of his niece and nephew
35 years earlier when they were young children between the ages of about 4 and
7. The sexual abuse included anal penetration and fellatio including
ejaculation, and having the children play with each other’s private parts and
perform oral sex on each other. The offender had no criminal record at the
time, but subsequently acquired one, including for sexual assault. He had a
sporadic work history.
[43]          
On the aggravating side, M.B.’s crimes involve a grave breach of trust.
He violated one of the cardinal norms of our society by sexually abusing his
own stepdaughter M and then, years later, his biological daughter V. With M, he
did so repeatedly over a three-to-four-year period. He took advantage of
children in their own home or in their second home for his sexual
gratification.
[44]          
M.B. is a repeat offender, having sexually assaulted his former
girlfriend’s 13-year-old niece in 2007.
[45]          
M.B. was uncooperative and hostile in his PSR interview with the P&P
officer. He appears to have made up his mind that counselling is not for him.
[46]          
He blames his separated wife, the victims’ mother, for all that has
befallen him.
[47]          
There do not appear to be any mitigating circumstances. I note that M.B.
has complied with his bail conditions.
[48]          
M.B. has shown no remorse and is completely unwilling to acknowledge the
profound harm his conduct has had and will continue to have on the two victims
and their families.
[49]          
I place no weight on the single letter of support from Reverend Richards.
The letter provides no details of what M.B. told the pastor of “the situation
concerning his marriage and his daughters.”
[50]          
With respect to the medical note from Dr. James Cherry, a cardiologist,
I note that the letter is dated November 15, 2023. Given that the medical note
is over a year old, I question its value. Secondly, the letter contains
specialized medical terminology, and I am in no position to interpret its
meaning without expert evidence. There was nothing in the letter about how M.B.’s
cardiac issues impact his day-to-day activities or health. In fact, I note that
under “recommendations”, Dr. Cherry states that M.B. “will continue being
active in the gym going and doing cardio workouts 3 times a week.” The letter
concludes with, “I will see how he is doing in a year’s time.” The Defence
provided no evidence that M.B. had a follow-up visit with Dr. Cherry.
[51]          
The Defence also provided a medical note from Dr. Yau and submitted that
Dr. Yau was an “eye doctor”, which I take to mean an ophthalmologist, although
this is not clear from the note itself. The note documented a visit on December
12, 2023, with the purpose of the visit being a follow-up “evaluation for
bilateral maculopathy.” I place very little value on this medical note as there
was no reference in the note itself about what it means for M.B.’s vision, health,
or day-to-day activities.
[52]          
I am guided by the principles
of sentencing that are set out in ss. 718, 718.1, and 718.2 of the Criminal
Code. The sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and
degree of responsibility of the offender. An appropriate sentence is one that
reflects a realistic appraisal of the offender’s prospects for rehabilitation,
his individual and family circumstances, and the principle of restraint.
[53]          
I find that a global sentence of 10 years is just for the following
reasons.
[54]          
M.B. sexually abused M, his stepdaughter, when she was between the ages
of 8 and 12 years old, and then years later, physically and sexually abused V,
his biological daughter. He did so when the children were at their primary or
secondary home. He took advantage of the inherent trust that the victims’ mother
and society placed in him to protect the children from harm. The crimes involve
an extreme breach of trust.
[55]          
The duration and frequency of sexual violence against M are significant.
It appears that the abuse took place over a period of as long as four years.
Multiple acts of sexual violence, albeit not of oral sex or intercourse,
occurred.
[56]          
The severity of the physical violence against V, which included choking,
should not be diminished.
[57]          
The impact on the victims has been devastating.
[58]          
M.B. is not a first-time offender. He was convicted of sexual assault of
a 13-year-old, his girlfriend’s niece, in 2007.
[59]          
The likelihood of reoffence is unclear.
[60]          
M.B. has not shown any remorse for his criminal conduct.
[61]          
Given his repeat offending, the multiple victims, his blaming his
separated wife, his complete lack of acknowledgment of his crimes, and his refusal
to attend counselling, his prospects of rehabilitation are very low.
[62]          
He should serve a just and serious sentence, but the sentence should not
be crushing.
[63]          
 With respect to the appropriate sentence in respect of the offences
against M, I find that the appropriate sentence is 7 years. This is consistent
with the sentences in A.S. and N.K. where the offender was found
guilty of sexual abuse short of intercourse. I also find this sentence
consistent with the 5-year sentence in C.B. where, unlike M.B., the
offender was a first-time offender with significant mitigating factors.
[64]          
With respect to the appropriate sentence regarding the offences against
V, I find that the appropriate sentence is 5 years in total, with primary
consideration going toward the sentence to be served for sexual assault. I have
considered Defence counsel’s submission that the offences against V were
relatively discrete consisting of three separate events: assault with a book,
choking, and shaving of her vaginal area. That may be true, but I note the
Supreme Court of Canada’s direction in Friesen that “mid-single digit penitentiary terms for sexual offences
against children are normal.” I also note that in R. v. Shilling, 2021
ONCA 916, the Court of Appeal upheld a sentence of 4-1/2 years where an
offender with a prior conviction for sexual assault committed two serious acts
of sexual interference when the victim was a child between 11 and 14 years old.
[65]          
Cumulatively, M.B.’s sentences in respect of
the offences against M and V would total 12 years when served consecutively as
they should be. However, the totality principle requires a judge who imposes
consecutive sentences for multiple offences to ensure that the cumulative
sentence does not exceed the overall culpability of the offender. The aggregate
sentence must be just and appropriate: M.W., at para. 91, citing R.
v. M (C.A.), 1996 CanLII 230 (SCC), [1996] 1 S.C.R. 500 (S.C.C.).
[66]          
I find that a 12-year sentence for M.B. would
be unduly harsh given that the offender in M.W. received a 12-year
sentence in circumstances that were worse. M.W. had forced sexual intercourse
on both his victims up to hundreds of times.
[67]          
My sentencing decision must also reconcile the sentencing decision in A.P.
where Roberts J. sentenced the offender to 9 years following a conviction for
sexual abuse of his niece and nephew 35 years earlier. On the one hand, the
nature of the sexual abuse in A.P. involving anal penetration and
fellatio including ejaculation was more serious than in M.B.’s case. However,
A.P. was a first-time offender who subsequently acquired a criminal record,
including for sexual assault. I find that a 10-year sentence appropriately
balances the various sentencing considerations including restraint.
[68]          
With respect to the ancillary orders, the parties agree, except the
Defence objects to the inclusion of his youngest daughter E in the s. 743.21(1)
non-communication order.
[69]          
I find that the youngest daughter E should be included in the s. 743.21(1)
non-communication order because she is the biological sister of the victim and
the daughter of S.E. It would be very unwise to permit M.B. to communicate with
E, when this is precluded with respect to the two victims and S.E. M.B. has
shown no acknowledgement of his crimes, he blames everything on S.E., and I am
concerned what he may say to E.
[70]          
In conclusion, M.B. is sentenced:
[71]          
I also order that M.B. be subject to: