[1]              
Pursuant to the final order of Gareau J. dated
December 15, 2017, N.L. (the “Daughter”) and H.L. (the “Son”) live with Mr.
Greg Lidstone (the “Father”).  Ms. Chrystal Simonar (the “Mother”) seeks to
change that final order.
[2]              
There are three discrete issues at play:
[3]              
The parties have been before the court for approximately
eight years.
[4]              
A number of orders have been made regarding this
matter, the vast majority of which are orders dismissing motions brought by the
Mother.
[5]              
Ms. Barbara Simonar (the “Grandmother”) also brings
an application wherein she seeks to have defined parenting time with the children.
[6]              
The children were represented by the Office of the
Children’s Lawyer (“OCL”) in this matter.  Evidence was called by the OCL and
the children made submissions to the court through counsel.
[7]              
I hereby order that the Father shall retain
decision-making authority for the children on a final basis.  The children will
reside with the Father on a final basis.  I also hereby order that the children
shall have parenting-time with the Mother and the Grandmother at the children’s
discretion, all on a final basis.  I also dismiss the Mother’s motion to force
the children to attend  mandatory reunification.
[8]              
The Mother and the Grandmother’s motions are
dismissed.
[9]              
The mother shall seek leave of the court prior
to filing any motions.
[10]          
This matter has a tortured history, some of
which I will reproduce in order to give background to my decision.  Tragically,
the file has an eight-volume continuing record.
[11]          
The Mother hails from Cold Lake, Alberta.  She
was working in Fort MacMurray in the late 2000’s when she met the Father.  The
daughter was born in Sault Ste. Marie in 2008.  The son was born in Cold Lake
in 2012.
[12]          
The parties’ relationship failed in the
mid-2010’s and they separated.  They consented to a final order before Gareau
J. on December 15, 2017 wherein the parties agreed that they would have joint
custody of the children, the children would reside in Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario,
and they would reside equally with either parents on a week-about basis.
[13]          
The Mother was not able to make this arrangement
work.  Less than seven months after Gareau J’s final order, the Mother brought
a motion to change the final order, seeking sole custody and permission to move
the children to Alberta.
[14]          
On May 27, 2019, Chiappetta J. released reasons
after days of trial.   Chiappetta J. held that it was in the children’s best
interests to remain in Sault Ste. Marie and to reside with the Father on a
primary basis.
[15]          
In August 2021, the parties agreed to permit the
Mother to take the children to Alberta for a two-week vacation.  After the two-week
vacation, the Mother did not return the children to Sault Ste. Marie.  The
Father brought an emergency motion to have the children returned to his care
and, on September 24, 2021, I granted an  emergency motion suspending the
Mother’s parenting time.  I ordered that the children had to be returned to
Sault Ste. Marie.
[16]          
On September 28, 2021, the Mother advised the
Father that she would not comply with the court order and would not return the children
to Sault Ste. Marie.
[17]          
On October 5, 2021, a high-conflict situation
occurred at the Athabasca Children and Family Services office when the Mother
refused to hand the children over.
[18]          
She took the children to a hotel.
[19]          
On October 6, 2021, the RCMP and the local Fire
Services forced entry into the hotel and retrieved the children.
[20]          
The parties have previously agreed that this
incident was highly traumatic to the children.
[21]          
The children were returned to Sault Ste. Marie. 
The Father retained primary residence and the Mother has had very limited
access to the children ever since.
[22]          
By my count, the Mother has brought five motions
to change my order rescinding the Mother’s parenting time.  These motions
resulted in some increased access, but said access has fallen short of the
week-about access sought by the mother.  On September 8, 2022, Stothart J. denied
the Mother’s motion for increased parenting time.  The Mother had claimed that
the Father had unreasonably withheld access to the children either by missing
supervised access times at the access centre, or by unreasonably rejecting
third-parties to act as supervisors for said access.
[23]          
Since that time, the Mother has had another
child.  The children therefore have a young sister.
[24]          
On August 26, 2022, the Grandmother filed an
application seeking parenting time for herself.  In her materials, she
described her relationship with the children as being strong, but now more
distant since the Father has engaged in parental alienation.  The Father has
allegedly driven a wedge as between the children and the Mother and the
Grandmother.  He engaged in abusive conduct such as denigrating the Mother
and/or Grandmother thereby causing the children to not wish to see either
woman.
[25]          
In her submissions, the Grandmother described
the children’s indigenous heritage.  As a result of the Grandmother’s submission,
the children would appear to be eligible for Metis status.
[26]          
The Mother filed considerable affidavit evidence
in this matter.  She deposed that she no longer wishes to move the children to
Alberta.  Rather, she would like to see the children on a week-about basis and
have joint-decision making authority with the Father.  She deposed that the children
have, on a number of occasions, been with the Mother without supervision and
that these visits have gone well.[1] 
As such, the Mother believes that it is in their best interests to have a
mandatory week-about parenting schedule so that the children can maximize time with
both parents in an attempt to ensure the best emotional development of the children.
[27]          
The Mother filed an affidavit describing the
evidence of a social worker.   The clinician effectively indicated that
the family would benefit from reunification therapy wherein the family acted as
the client, as opposed to the individuals within the family serving as clients. 
In other words, the therapist in such therapy has the ability to force the children
and the Father to engage in therapy irrespective of their individual wishes which
will hopefully foster a better mother/child relationship.
[28]          
The Mother also filed evidence suggesting that
the children have missed a number of school days since they began residing with
the Father.  The Mother specifically pointed to the fact that the Father has
signed the Daughter out of numerous Grade 9 classes, which is not a good
phenomenon.  There are a total of 197 such missed classes.
[29]          
The Mother filed evidence and made submissions
that the children are being alienated by the Father’s actions.  She deposed that
the Father has attempted to turn the children as against the Mother by twisting
words and withholding access that would otherwise be in the children’s best
interests.
[30]          
The Father filed evidence indicating that the children
have largely maintained a solid routine and that he meets their needs as best
he can.
[31]          
The Father minimized the issues about the children
missing school by indicating that the school records “missed classes” multiple
times per day, thereby artificially  increasing the number of missed classes.
[32]          
Finally, the Father denied ever unreasonably withholding
access from the Mother.
[33]          
Mr. Jason Millward is a clinician with the OCL. 
He prepared a report and testified before me.  He indicated that he met with
the children on thirteen occasions and that their views and preferences are
clear and consistent.
[34]          
Mr. Millward indicated that the children have a
good level of maturity, are articulate and have insightful views of their
respective situations.  The Daughter would rather not attend at the OCL.  The Son
is more “happy go lucky” but presented solid levels of insight.
[35]          
They both wish to have a meaningful relationship
with the Mother but they do not want a set schedule for parenting time.  They wish
to have a flexible schedule, set at their discretion.
[36]          
With respect to reunification therapy, the children
do not wish to participate.  The Daughter would consider individual therapy for
herself.
[37]          
The children were clear that they do not wish to
have discrete parenting time with the Grandmother, although they would be
content that the Grandmother be present for the Mother’s parenting time.
[38]          
With respect to parental alienation, Mr.
Millward indicated that he saw no evidence of same.  In fact, the children
voiced concerns that in fact it was the Mother and the Grandmother who were
speaking ill of the Father, and not vice versa.
[39]          
The Mother cross-examined Mr. Millward about his
visits, his opinions and the gathering of relevant documents but this cross-examination
did not yield relevant evidence.
[40]          
Pursuant to section 29(1) of the Children’s
Law Reform Act¸ a court shall not make an order that varies a parenting order
or contact order unless there has been a material change in circumstances that
affects or is likely to affect the best interests of the child who is the subject
of the order.
[41]          
In Gordon v. Goertz, 1996 2 S.C.R. 29 at
paras. 10 and 13, the Supreme Court of Canada set out a two-stage test to be
applied in determining whether an existing order should be altered.  That test is:
[42]          
In Persuad v. Garcia-Persuad, 2009 ONCA
782 at paragraph 4,  the Ontario Court of Appeal held that a material change
is:
[43]          
The court’s primary consideration in determining
whether a parenting order or contact order should be varied is the best
interests of the child.  In considering the best interests of the child the court
is to consider all factors related to the circumstances of the child, giving
primary consideration to the child’s physical, emotional and psychological safety,
security and well-being.
[44]          
Given the age of the children, their views and
preferences need to be considered and given appropriate weight.
[45]          
I am also required to consider the children’s
need to be engaged with their indigenous culture.
[46]          
Although the rules allow for a grandparent to
seek parenting time with a child, such relief is not presumptive:  see Chapman
v. Chapman, (2021) D.L.R. (4th) 493 (ONCA) at para. 22.
[47]          
The Mother and the Grandmother’s applications
fail for a number of reasons.
[48]          
No evidence was filed indicating that there has
been a material change.  Accordingly, the motion is dismissed.
[49]          
Even if I am wrong in that regard, and irrespective
of the need to prove a material change as per Gordon v. Goertz, week-about
parenting, joint-decision making, and reunification therapy are not in the children’s
best interests.
[50]          
First, I accept the evidence of the OCL
clinician that the children do not want a change from the status quo. 
Given the ages of the children, this position must be given meaningful weight,
especially when I consider the file’s unfortunate history.
[51]          
Second, I accept the OCL’s evidence that it is
the Mother and the Grandmother that have engaged in parental alienation by speaking
negatively of the Father.  This finding is consistent with the Mother’s
forceful parenting actions.
[52]          
Given the foregoing, it must also be noted that
the children have been subjected to never-ending court proceedings, OCL
interviews and the like.  This is surely something that has taken a toll upon
the children such that their resilience is constantly being challenged.  I feel
for the children in that no young person should ever have to be involved in a stream
of court-ordered processes.
[53]          
The genesis of this court-ordered intrusion into
the children’s young lives is the fact that the Mother consistently comes
before the Court despite the fact that her unwillingness to abide by a final
order led to an unnecessary and traumatic event in Alberta.  The trauma
associated with this event must be incredibly high, and forcing the children to
repeatedly engage in court proceedings, court-ordered therapy and the like
would not be in their best interests as it will undoubtedly exacerbate the pre-existing
damage caused by the Mother’s obstinance.
[54]          
The children do not wish to participate in
reunification therapy and they do not wish to live with the Mother.  Given the
Mother’s conduct in this protracted litigation, this is not surprising.  The children
are teenagers.  They are beginning to become adults.  They do not need to have
therapy forced upon them in a situation where they may not be ready to deal
with the trauma caused by the Mother’s actions.  The children’s opinions in
this regard are consistent with common sense and are to be afforded weighty consideration
given their age and maturity.
[55]          
They have good reason not to want to live with
the Mother.  Her conduct has damaged the children’s emotional and psychological
stability.  Thus, and notwithstanding the other issues that I must consider
(the need to learn about their Indigenous heritage, the need to develop a
family bond with their youngest sister, etc.), the overriding concern in this
matter has to be the fact that the Mother’s conduct may have caused serious psychological
and emotional damage to the children, irrespective of whether she feels that
she has justification for her conduct.  Living with the Mother when the
children do not wish to do so would undoubtedly cause the children more harm in
that their mental and emotional stability will be threatened.
[56]          
Much the same rationale applies to the
Grandmother’s application.  The children do not wish to have devoted parenting
time with the Grandmother because they have indicated through the OCL that the
Grandmother speaks ill of the Father while in the children’s presence.  Given
the considerable damage that was undoubtedly done to the children’s psyche during
this court process, it would behoove both the Grandmother and the Mother to
refrain from engaging in speaking ill of the Father as he appears to be the primary
source of stability in the children’s lives.
[57]          
Therefore, and without belabouring the point,
the best interests of the children are clear and obvious:  They should reside with
the Father, the Father should have exclusive decision-making authority for the children,
the Mother will have parenting time at the discretion of the children, the
children are not to partake in any therapy unless they so choose and the
Grandmother can enjoy parenting time with the children when the children choose
to see the Mother.
[58]          
Any other result focusses on the needs of the
adults, and not the needs of the children.
[59]          
Rule 14(21) of the Family Law Rules states:
[60]          
In this case, the Mother has used the court
system not to advance the children’s best interests, but to pursue her vision
of what she would like.
[61]          
The Mother’s litigation history suggests that
she will continue to file motions at an elevated rate.
[62]          
As such, the Mother will seek leave of the court
prior to filing any further motions in this matter because:
[63]          
I note that Rasaiah J. has previously made such
an order.  I hereby make that order on a final basis.
[64]          
The Mother and the Grandmother’s applications
are dismissed.
[65]          
The children shall reside with the Father.
[66]          
The Father shall have decision-making
responsibility for the children.
[67]          
The children shall have parenting time with the
Mother at their discretion.  The Grandmother may be present for same, but will
not enjoy defined parenting time of her own.
[68]          
The Mother will seek leave prior to bringing any
future motions.
[69]          
The parties will schedule a one-hour appearance
before me to deal with costs and any support issues that remain outstanding.