[1]        
On
October 15, 2024, I heard argument of the Plaintiffs’ motion for summary
judgment as against the Defendant Maria Mousavi (“Mousavi”).  The Defendant RE/MAX
Escarpment Realty Inc. did not participate in the summary judgment motion as
they are simply holding the deposit and will pay it out as the court orders.  On
October 15, 2024, I reserved my decision.
[2]        
The
Plaintiffs are seeking damages from Mousavi as a result of an agreement of
purchase and sale of a residential property entered into by the Plaintiffs as
vendor and Mousavi as purchaser. This transaction did not close.
[3]        
The
Plaintiffs were the owners of a property municipally known as 6388 Cedar
Springs Road, Burlington, Ontario, L7P 0K9 (the “Property”).
[4]        
On or
about December 6, 2021, the Plaintiffs entered an agreement to list the
Property for sale with Re/Max.
[5]        
In
early 2022, the Plaintiffs were approached by Mousavi, through her real estate agent,
with an interest in purchasing the property.  On or about February 8, 2022, the
Plaintiffs received two offers for the Property.  Mousavi initially offered
$1,270,000.00, while another prospective purchaser offered $1,360,000.00 for
the Property, with a closing in May of 2022.  Mousavi increased her offer to
purchase the Property on the same day to $1,350,000.00, with an extended
closing date.  Mousavi’s offer had no conditions.
[6]        
On or
about February 9, 2022, the Plaintiffs accepted Mousavi’s offer and entered
into an Agreement of Purchase and Sale with Mousavi (the “APS”) regarding the
Property.  The APS included the following provisions:
[7]        
The
APS did not contain or include any conditions that needed to be waived, and in
particular did not include a financing condition. The APS did not contain a force
majeure provision.
[8]        
On or
about July 7, 2022, during Mousavi’s first of her two visits to the Property,
she verbally raised with the Plaintiff, Donald Liddell, her request for a
three-month extension of the Closing Date.  The Plaintiffs declined this
request.
[9]        
On or
about July 20, 2022, Mousavi attended the Property once again and attempted to
obtain from the Plaintiffs an extension of the Closing Date.  The Plaintiffs
did not agree with this.
[10]     On or about July 21, 2022,
Mousavi’s real estate agent advised the Plaintiffs’ broker that Mousavi was in
a desperate situation financially which prevented her from closing, and which
necessitated her request for an extension.
[11]     On the Closing Date, the
Plaintiffs received correspondence from their lawyer handling the closing, that
Mousavi had just retained a lawyer for the transaction, Mousavi was requesting
a 45-day extension of the closing, and that without an extension Mousavi would
not be able to close.  The Plaintiffs declined the request for an extension.
[12]     The Plaintiffs were ready
and willing to close on the Closing Date.  Mousavi did not complete the
transaction.  She did not deliver the balance of the purchase funds required on
closing.
[13]     On or about July 25, 2022,
the Property was relisted for sale by the Plaintiffs.
[14]     The Property was relisted
for sale from July 25, 2022 through until January 16, 2023.  The Plaintiff only
received one offer.  This was on November 29, 2022.  The offer was for under
$1,000,000.00, which offer the Plaintiffs rejected.
[15]     In the period of January
to March of 2023, the Plaintiffs exchanged offers with two potential buyers. 
The offers were in a range of $1,050,000.00 to $1,125,000.00.  These offers did
not lead to a binding agreement due to either a lack of agreement on price or
because conditions were not waived.
[16]     On or about March 18, 2023,
the Plaintiffs entered into a new Agreement for Purchase and Sale with a
potential buyer.  On or about April 20, 2023, the sale was completed.  The
purchase price was $1,100,000.00.
[17]     It is the Plaintiffs’
position that this is an appropriate case for summary judgment as the defence
raises no genuine issue requiring a trial. The Court is in a position to make
the necessary findings of fact and apply the legal principles based on the
materials filed for the motion.
[18]     Mousavi entered into an
unconditional Agreement of Purchase and Sale for the Property.  The sale was
not completed because Mousavi did not have sufficient funds to complete the
transaction.  Mousavi breached the APS when she failed to tender the closing
funds on the date of closing.
[19]     It is the Plaintiffs’
position that they took immediate and reasonable steps to mitigate their
damages and relisted the Property for sale.  Due to a downturn in the market,
it took them eight months to sell the Property for a reasonable price.
[20]     The Plaintiffs seek
damages in the amount of $250,000.00 based on the difference in the sale price
in the APS with Mousavi and the ultimate sale price.  They also seek $30,739.28
in carrying costs in regard to the Property between July 22, 2022 (the Closing
Date) and the date of the ultimate sale.  They seek the release of the deposit
held by Re/Max to be applied to these damages.
[21]     The Plaintiffs claim that
Mousavi cannot rely on a force majeure argument, as the APS did not
contain a force majeure provision.  The Plaintiffs also submit that the
APS was not frustrated by Mousavi’s inability to utilize funds held in the Afghanistan
International Bank for the down payment.  Lastly, with regard to mitigation, it
is the Plaintiffs’ position that they had no obligation to grant Mousavi an
extension of the closing.
[22]     It is the Defendant’s
position that this matter is not appropriate for summary judgment as the Court
is required to consider the force majeure factors raised by Mousavi in
her affidavit.
[23]     It is the Defendant’s
position that the Plaintiffs are not entitled to damages, and she requests an
order that the deposit be returned to her.
[24]     The Defendant claims that
she should be relieved of her obligations under the APS pursuant to the
doctrines of force majeure and/or frustration.
[25]     Mousavi alleges that she
intended to use funds held for her in the Afghanistan International Bank, in
Afghanistan.  She claims that as a result of the ongoing war/conflict in
Afghanistan and the subsequent withdrawal of American forces, which created a
power vacuum and led to Taliban control, the banking system was suspended.  She
was unable to get the funds, and this frustrated the APS as these events were
out of Mousavi’s control.
[26]     Mousavi states that she
inherited $565,592.00 USD in Afghanistan.  It was these funds she intended to
bring to Canada to purchase the Property.
[27]     The Defendant also claims
that the APS was frustrated because an agreement of purchase and sale that she
had entered into to sell another property, which she owned in Hamilton, fell
through and she did not have money from that sale to close the APS in regard to
the Property.
[28]     Mousavi also claims that
the Plaintiffs failed to mitigate as they did not agree to her request to
extend the closing date so she could make alternative financial arrangements. 
She acknowledges that the Plaintiffs did agree to an extension but only with
conditions that Mousavi states she could not fulfill.
[29]     In regard to damages, the
Defendant says the Plaintiffs resided at a rental premises during the period in
which they tried to re-sell the Property, even though the Property was vacant.
[30]     The issues are as follows:
[31]     Rule 20 of the Rules of
Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194 provides for summary judgment
motions.  As set out in Rule 20.04(2)(a), the Court shall grant summary
judgment “if the court is satisfied that there is no genuine issue requiring a
trial with respect to a claim or defence.”
[32]     The approach to be taken
on a motion for summary judgment is set out at para. 66 of Hryniak v.
Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7:
[33]     As set out at para. 50 of Hryniak,
the issue is whether summary judgment will provide a fair and just
adjudication:
[34]     The parties on a summary
judgment motion have an obligation to put their best foot forward: Colonna
v. Fellin, 2024 ONCA 224, at para. 58.
[35]     Rule 20.02 provides the
following in regard to evidence on a summary judgment motion:
[36]     In S.M. Waddams, The
Law of Contracts, 8th Edition, at para. 380 (pg. 262), the
following describes force majeure clauses:
[37]     This excerpt refers to a
clause included in a written contract.  The Parties agree that there was no
such clause in the APS.
[38]     Neither counsel provided
me with any case where a force majeure clause was an implied term of a
contract.
[39]     In Consolidated Fastfrate
Inc. v. 2516295 Ontario Ltd., 2023 ONSC 1005, A.J. Robinson determined that
there is no common law right to claim relief from payment obligations by reason
of force majeure and that it is a contractual remedy that turns on the
specific wording of a contract. Paragraph 35 of Consolidated Fastfrate
provides as follows:
[40]     The historic principle of
frustration dates back to 1863, and arises where a supervening event renders a
contract unable to be performed.  It has long been held that to successfully
raise a claim of frustration, a party must showcase that the condition
incapable of performance was foundational to the contract: Taylor v.
Caldwell (1863), 3 B. & S. 826, 122 ER 309, as cited in Stephen
Waddams, Cases and Materials on Contracts, 6th ed. (Toronto: Emond,
2018), at p. 818-820.
[41]     Canadian jurisprudence
later found that the doctrine of frustration can apply to contracts for the
sale of land.  However, the Court of Appeal for Ontario found that a party will
not be able to rely on the doctrine for such matters if the supervening event
was the result of a voluntary act, or if the possibility of the event arising
during the term of the contract was contemplated and provided for in the
agreement: Capital Quality Homes Ltd. v. Colwyn Construction Ltd.,
(1976) 1975 CanLII 726 (ON CA), 9 O.R. (2d) 617, at para. 31.
[42]     The doctrine of
frustration in a contract for sale of property has more recently been interpreted
in the case of FSC (Annex) Limited Partnership v. ADI 64 Prince Arthur L.P.,
2020 ONSC 5055.  Here the respondent and applicant had entered into a
partnership to develop property.  The respondent elected to purchase the
applicant’s interest in the partnership but was not able to complete the
transaction by the closing date.  The respondent was unable to obtain financing
for the transaction, and claimed to be frustrated by unforeseeable circumstances
of the COVID-19 pandemic.  In determining that the respondent could not rely on
the doctrine of frustration, Koehnen J. stated at paras. 15-32:
[43]     The doctrine of
frustration was considered in Paradise Homes North West Inc. v. Sidhu,
2019 ONSC 1600, at paras. 18-22 as follows:
[44]     A party claiming that a
contract has been frustrated has the onus of establishing that performance of
the contract, as originally agreed, would be impossible: Gerstel v. Kelman, 2015
ONSC 978, at para. 46.
[45]     The measure of damages
with regard to an agreement of purchase and sale that did not close and the
obligation to mitigate are described at paras. 26-33 of Paradise Homes:
[46]     The Defendant referred to
a case where the court on an application determined that an agreement of
purchase and sale was binding, that the respondent breached the agreement, and
that the respondent was liable for damages.  The application judge ordered that
the quantification of damages proceed to trial (see Shaghayagh Chiti Zadeh
v. Alireza Khaibari also known as Alireza Khibari And Homelife Landmark Realty
Inc., Brokerage, 2018 ONSC 4667).  Paragraphs 48-50 of Zadeh
provide as follows:
[47]     The Defendant also
referred to portions of 100 Main Street Ltd. v. W.B. Sullivan Construction
Ltd. (1978), 1978 CanLII 1630 (ON CA), 20 OR (2d) 401 (ONCA).  The relevant portions are from pages
33 and 34 (pages and paragraphs are not numbered):
[48]     The Court of Appeal has
found that where a prospective buyer is unable to close a transaction for the
sale of land and seeks an extension because they are unable to obtain
financing, the seller is entitled to refuse an extension of time to close the
transaction: Nguyen v. Zaza, 2023 ONCA 34, at para. 16:
[49]     For the reasons set out
below, I have determined that there is no genuine issue requiring a trial. The summary
judgment process, particularly the affidavits filed on this motion, provide the
evidence required to fairly and justly adjudicate the dispute. Most of the
facts are undisputed. Where the facts were within the knowledge of one side,
the other side has not filed any opposing evidence. I am able to find the
necessary facts. The summary judgment process has provided an affordable and
proportionate procedure for resolution of this case.
[50]     There is no dispute that
the parties entered into a binding APS and that Mousavi did not tender the
funds to close on the Closing Date.
[51]     I find that the doctrine
of force majeure does not apply to relieve Mousavi of her obligations
under the APS. It is uncontroverted that there is no force majeure
clause in the APS in this case.
[52]     Neither counsel provided
me with any case where such a clause was an implied term of a contract. I agree
with A.J. Robinson in Consolidated Fastfrate Inc. that force majeure
is not a common law right and depends on the specific wording of a contract.
[53]     In the absence of a force
majeure clause in the APS, Mousavi cannot rely on this doctrine to be
relieved of her obligations under the APS.
[54]     Mousavi claims that the
doctrine of frustration applies in two ways:
[55]     It is clear in the case
law that the doctrine of frustration can apply to a contract for the sale of
land. However, for the following reasons I have determined that it does not
apply in this case to relieve Mousavi from her obligations under the APS:
[56]     Further, the party
claiming that the contract was frustrated has the onus of proving the
constituent elements necessary to establish frustration. Mousavi has not done
this. In this regard, I have considered the following, in the context that in a
summary judgment motion a party has an obligation to put their best foot
forward:
[57]     There was a binding APS. Mousavi
breached the APS when she did not close the transaction. The Plaintiffs are
entitled to damages.
[58]     The onus is on Mousavi to
demonstrate that the Plaintiffs failed to mitigate. Mousavi has not pointed to
anything that she says the Plaintiffs ought reasonably to have done to mitigate,
except for their not accepting her request for an extension.
[59]     I am satisfied that the
Plaintiffs made all reasonable efforts to mitigate. Their efforts are detailed
in the Affidavit of Donald Liddell sworn February 9, 2024. They relisted the
Property within three days of the Closing Date. They considered one offer in
November of 2022 and explain why they were unable to conclude an agreement.
They considered two offers in March of 2023 and these offers failed to end in a
binding agreement.
[60]     Mousavi argues that the
Plaintiffs’ failed to mitigate as they refused to agree to her request to
extend the closing date. As set out in Nguyen, the seller is entitled to
refuse an extension of time to close. Further, the Plaintiffs did agree to an
extension, with conditions, that I find were reasonable in the circumstances. Mousavi
would not agree to these conditions.
[61]     The Plaintiffs are
entitled to the “normal measure” of damages which is the difference between the
contract price and the resale price – in this case $250,000.00.
[62]     The Plaintiffs have claimed
additional damages in the total amount of $30,739.28 which are additional expenses
the Plaintiffs incurred to carry the Property in the eight months it took to
sell the Property after the Closing Date. The Plaintiffs have provided
supporting invoices and proof of payments. These expenses are detailed at
paragraph 21 of Donald Liddell’s Affidavit sworn February 9, 2024. Mousavi did
not question any of these expenses save to argue that it was unreasonable for
the Plaintiffs to move out when the Property did not close. I accept the
evidence of the Plaintiffs. They rented a place to live anticipating the sale
of the Property. The Property therefore was vacant between the Closing Date and
the ultimate sale. The expenses they have claimed were in addition to their
regular living costs, as they lived elsewhere. Therefore, I find that the Plaintiffs
are entitled to these damages.
[63]     The Plaintiffs are
entitled to summary judgment as follows:
[64]      The Parties are
encouraged to settle the issue of costs. If they are unable to, the Plaintiff
shall serve and file brief written submissions as to costs (2 pages, double
spaced, with only a Bill of Costs and any offers attached) within 20 days of
today. The Defendant shall serve and file brief written responding submissions
as to costs (2 pages, double spaced, with only a Bill of Costs and any offers
attached) within 40 days of today. There shall be no reply costs submissions.