[1]         
This is a trial of issues raised in a Motion for
Directions brought by the Estate of the Late John Maltman, the (“Estate”),
against John’s daughter, Jacquelyne Playter (“Jackie”). The parties agree that
the issues to be determined on this trial are as follows:
[2]         
The Estate filed affidavits from Joanne Maltman,
Deborah Maltman and the estate solicitor, Paul Beyer, and they were
cross-examined. Joanne and Deborah also testified at the hearing. Jackie filed
an affidavit and was cross-examined. She also testified at the hearing. Jackie
also relied on an affidavit from David Clark, at one time John’s investment
advisor, and he testified at the hearing. It was agreed that I could rely on
all of this evidence in reaching my decision.
[3]         
The parties also entered into an extensive
Agreed Statement of Facts which was, to a large extent, based on a review of
the evidence in an endorsement of McGee J. on a motion for directions. This
captures almost all of the relevant evidence in the affidavits and
cross-examinations, and so I will make little reference to them. As did the
parties, for ease of reference I will refer to individuals by their first
names.
[4]         
The parties agreed to
the facts as follows:
[5]         
The BMO October 11,
2005 Client Account Agreement signed by John had a “right of survivorship”
provision which required a choice between:
[6]         
John chose (b), evidencing clearly that his
intent was that Jackie, on his death, be entitled to the investment account to
the exclusion of the Estate.
[7]         
Mr. Clark was the BMO investment advisor at the
time. Jackie and her husband were clients of his, and that is how it came about
that he was introduced to John. Mr. Clark testified that John wanted Jackie to
have the funds he inherited from Aunt Sammy, as Jackie was particularly close
to her. Mr. Clark asked John if he might need the funds, and Jackie expressed
concern that the funds should be available to John if he needed money. This
discussion concluded that it made sense to have the account in joint names with
a right of survivorship. This would allow John to access the funds during his
lifetime, with the remaining funds going to Jackie on his death.
[8]         
Mr. Clark had health issues and retired in 2012.
John transferred the investment account to TD, pursuant to an agreement dated
November 2, 2012. The TD agreement provided that “ownership” of the account was
“joint with right of survivorship.” Mr. Clark testified that he returned to the
industry in 2017, and now leads a team at TD that has over one billion dollars
in client investments.
[9]         
Mr. Beyer stated in his affidavit, and in his
cross-examination, that John never mentioned the investment account to him. While
John may not have used the words “investment account,” his May 3, 2019 note
lists as an asset:
[10]      
Mr. Beyer’s April 17,
2020 note of his meeting with John states:
[11]      
The siblings were, at
one time, close. Deborah and Jackie have not spoken since soon after their
mother’s death in April 2018. Joanne and Jackie had a falling out after Joanne
advised Jackie that John had named Joanne’s daughter, Christine, as the sole
beneficiary of his life insurance policy.
[12]      
In Joanne’s affidavit,
she states that, “…both Dad and Jacquelyne told me, on several occasions before
Dad passed away, that the only reason why Dad added Jacquelyne’s name to his
assets was because Jacquelyne told him that would reduce the estate’s probate
expenses.” In her testimony, Joanne stated that she knew about the investment
account. Jackie never told her that the investment account was to be hers,
given her relationship with Aunt Sammy. Joanne testified that Jackie told her
that what was left in the investment account was to be split equally among the
children, but that at the rate John was spending the money, there might not be
anything left.
[13]      
Deborah’s affidavit
indicated that Jackie told her “years back” that she wanted John to put her
name on accounts to save probate fees, and that this is what had been done with
their mother’s accounts. Deborah testified that in or about 2012, Jackie
explained that her name was on accounts to avoid probate fees, as had been done
with their mother. In cross-examination, she agreed that she had never
discussed the accounts with her father, and that the discussion with Jackie was
general in nature, without referring to the names or numbers of accounts.
[14]      
Jackie denied telling
her sisters that the reason why any accounts or properties were in joint names
was to reduce probate fees.
[15]       Both sides relied upon the legal principles as set out in Calmusky
v. Calmusky, 2020 ONSC 1506, in which, Lococo J. provided a helpful summary
of the legal principles as follows:
[16]       In Pecore, the Supreme Court of Canada recognized that the court
could find, “after weighing the evidence that the transferor intended to retain
exclusive control over the jointly-held funds until his or her death, at which
time the transferee would be beneficially entitled to the remaining funds by
survivorship” (paras. 45-53). The court also noted, “the traditional rule that
evidence adduced to show the intention of the transferor at the time of the
transfer ought to be contemporaneous (or nearly so) to the transaction” (para.
55). Finally, the court noted banking documents may provide strong evidence of
the intentions of the transferor if the documents contain specific language
suggesting the transferor’s intent regarding the beneficial interest in the
account (para. 61).
[17]      
Animosity and the
passage of time can significantly affect the perception and recollection of
events. I, therefore, start with evidence that I consider to be relatively
independent and highly reliable.
[18]      
John was a retired OPP
officer. John met with his lawyer, Paul Beyer, five times from May 3, 2019 to
April 28, 2020. Mr. Beyer confirmed that John was sharp, cogent, had capacity,
and understood the nature of his assets and liabilities. I accept that
evidence.
[19]      
The BMO investment
account agreement entered into in 2005 clearly indicates that John’s intent was
that Jackie, and not his Estate, receive the funds on his death. The conclusion
that this was his intent is supported by the evidence of Mr. Clark that John
wanted Jackie to have the beneficial interest. To Mr. Clark, Jackie is a
relatively small client he has not dealt with in the past 12 years. He had no
reason to tailor his evidence one way or the other, and I accept his evidence.
The TD investment account agreement in 2012 evidences that John continued to
have the same intent.
[20]      
Tracking the language
in Pecore, the banking documents supported by the evidence of Mr. Clark
provide very strong evidence of John’s intention that Jackie would be
beneficially entitled to the remaining funds in the investment account on his
death. This clear and contemporaneous evidence must be given much greater
weight than somewhat vague statements by John, made at uncertain times, as
referred to in the evidence of Joanne. I, therefore, find as a fact that on
November 2, 2012 when the TD account was opened, John’s intention was the same
as it had been on October 11, 2005, when the BMO account was signed, that
Jackie be beneficially entitled to the balance in the investment account on his
death.
[21]      
I would also accept Mr.
Beyer’s evidence that, as of April 17, 2020, John advised him that he intended
that Jackie receive the same amount of money as the other residuary
beneficiaries. His note of that meeting, however, also makes clear that John
was not sure who was the beneficiary on an account which Mr. Beyer referred to
as his “RIF.” Recall also that on May 3, 2019, Mr. Beyer noted “$130,000-RIF_bene?”
I find that John was, on April 17, 2020, referring to the investment account
and indicating, in essence, that he would ascertain who was the beneficiary and
“handle it.”
[22]      
The execution of the
Will on April 20, 2020, could not and did not alter the transfer John made on
November 2, 2012, as evidenced by the TD banking documents. If John’s intention
as related to Mr. Beyer on April 17, 2020 continued, then he did not “handle
it” by changing the beneficiary designation prior to his death on July 10,
2020. Jackie is, therefore, entitled to the funds in the TD investment account.
[23]      
Jackie acknowledges
that she owes the Estate money that was in a TD chequing account when John
died. The only issue is whether she is entitled to deduct some, or all, of the
$9,923.18 that her husband Norm charged for his services in preparing the
Meaford home for sale.
[24]      
Jackie’s evidence was
that there was an “overwhelming” number of items on the property that needed to
be sorted, cleaned, made ready for sale at auction, or recycled. This evidence
was not contradicted or otherwise challenged. The Estate does not take issue
with the $621.13 in disbursements that Norm charged but submits that others in
the family provided assistance to John and did not expect or receive
compensation. While that is correct, the evidence did indicate that some family
members provided assistance to John at reduced rates.
[25]      
Jackie’s affidavit
indicates that Norm had, for many years, had a business that involved helping
people downsizing or moving to sell or dispose of property, and that he charged
only two-thirds of what he would have charged a non-family member. He charged
for his labour at $30 per hour.
[26]      
The Estate did not take
issue with the fact that Norm did a lot of work. Norm did not file an affidavit
or testify, so while his notes indicate the type of work he did, it is
difficult to make an assessment as to whether the hours spent are reasonable. As
a result, and while I acknowledge it is a rough and ready assessment given the
paucity of evidence, I find that it is fair that Norm be paid $5,000 plus the
agreed disbursements for his work.
[27]      
Jackie shall,
therefore, pay to the Estate, the balance in the TD chequing account less
$5,621.13.
[28]      
These findings should
allow the parties to agree as to the form and content of a judgment. I will,
however, remain seized to deal with any outstanding issues.
[29]      
If the parties cannot
agree on costs and interest, the Estate is to make written submissions within
20 days. Jackie is to respond within ten days of receipt of the Estate’s
submissions. Reply, if any, within a further five days.