[1]              
Antler et al. (the "Tenants," or "Appellants,")
appeal the decision of the Landlord and Tenant Board (the "LTB" or
the "Board") under s. 210 of the Residential Tenancies Act,
2006, S.O. 2006, c. 17 (the "Act").
[2]              
Section 210 of the Act provides that a litigant has the right to
appeal a decision of the Board to the Divisional Court, but only on a question
of law.
[3]              
The Applicants brought a motion at the commencement of the appeal to
introduce fresh evidence by way of a new affidavit. The Applicants want to use
the new affidavit to inform the court of what occurred during the hearing and
to support their position that there was a lack of procedural fairness.
However, the transcripts of the hearing were filed as part of the appeal
record. The Court had the benefit of the transcript and does not need separate
affidavit evidence to know what occurred during the hearing.
[4]              
The documents that were not part of the LTB's proceeding can only be
considered on appeal if they meet the criteria for fresh evidence on appeal as
explained in Palmer v. The Queen, 1979 CanLII 8 (SCC), [1980] 1 S.C.R. 759 ("Palmer"):
[5]              
In this case, the Applicant is seeking to adduce new evidence, not fresh
evidence. Regardless, the Palmer test still applies: see Barendregt
v. Grebliunas, 2022 SCC 22.
[6]              
The transcripts are both more credible and reliable than an affidavit
informing the court what occurred during that same hearing. The affidavit
serves no other purpose. The new evidence fails the third part of the Palmer
test.
[7]              
The motion for fresh evidence is dismissed.
[8]              
There is a lengthy history in this case. I am only going to provide the
basic facts to understand the appeal before this Court.
[9]              
The original owners of land in Northern Ontario rented part of their
property to the Appellants. The original owners of the land then sold the
property to the Respondents. The Respondents initially permitted the Appellants
to remain on the property, and then they did not. Litigation ensued.
[10]          
The Appellants filed a T2 Application About Tenant Rights with the LTB.
On May 5, 2023, the LTB heard the application. The Appellants submitted that
they had a leasehold interest in the property and their residence on the land
is not seasonal or temporary, and therefore they are protected by the Act.
[11]          
The Appellants and their Legal Representative attended the original
hearing. The Respondents were not present. On May 15, 2023, the LTB issued an
order and granted the Appellants' application.
[12]          
On May 30, 2023, the Respondents requested a review of the order,
submitting, among other things, that they did not receive the notice of
hearing. On June 1, 2023, the LTB issued an interim order, resulting from the
preliminary review the Respondents requested. The interim order stated that the
May 15, 2023, order should be stayed. The LTB directed the matter to a review
hearing.
[13]          
At the review hearing, the LTB granted the Appellants' review request,
and as a result, a de novo hearing was held to consider the application.
[14]          
The question before the LTB was whether the Act applied to this
case, because s. 5(a) specifically provides that the Act does not apply
to:
[15]          
The Respondents submitted that the lease was for a parking spot for the
Appellant's motor home for the summer. Thus, the Act did not apply.
[16]          
The Appellants submitted that the exemption did not apply because the
property rented was more than just a seasonal rental or vacation home. The
Appellants had leased the property for a period of ten years.
[17]          
In the decision, dated December 11, 2023, the LTB found that the Act
did not apply as a result of s. 5(a), and therefore, they did not have
jurisdiction to hear the matter.
[18]          
The Appellants requested a review of the decision. A preliminary review
of the Appellants' request was conducted without a hearing. On March 18, 2024,
an order was released denying the Appellants' request. The LTB was not
satisfied that there was a serious error in the hearing or the proceedings.
[19]          
The Appellants appeal this decision.
[20]          
The Appellants submit that:
[21]          
The appeal is dismissed based on the following findings:
[22]          
The threshold issue determined by the LTB was whether the Act
applied to the case. The Board found that the Act did not apply to the
case. As such, the LTB did not have the jurisdiction to hear the matter.
[23]          
The threshold question before the Divisional Court is whether the Court
has jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
[24]          
Section 210 of the Act provides that a party can only appeal a
decision on a question of law.
[25]          
This Court does not have the jurisdiction to hear an appeal from an LTB
order on a question of fact or mixed fact and law: see Solomon v. Levy,
2015 ONSC 2556 (Div. Ct.), at paras. 31-33; Devenne v. Sedun, 2020 ONSC
6141 (Div. Ct.), at para. 26-37; Smith v. Youthlink Youth Services, 2022
ONCA 313, at paras. 16, 31; and Ieraci v. Parsons, 2024 ONSC 2013 (Div.
Ct.), at para. 45.
[26]          
The distinction between questions of law, fact, and mixed fact and law
was explained in Canada (Director of Investigation & Research) v.
Southam Inc., 1997 CanLII 385 (SCC), [1997] 1 SCR 748, at para. 35 as follows:
[27]          
The LTB identified the correct legal test. The issue before this Court
is whether the facts satisfy the legal test.
[28]          
The Court has repeatedly found that the LTB's determination of whether a
specific exemption listed in s. 5 of the Act applies to a rental unit is
a question of mixed fact and law, and cannot be raised on appeal, absent an
extricable error of law: Wong v. Hsiao, 2022 ONSC 3253 (Div. Ct), at
para. 8; Zeta Psi Elders Association of Toronto v. Kavanaugh, 2022 ONSC
4142 (Div. Ct), at paras. 2-4; and McKnight v. Kirk, 2022 ONSC 3617
(Div. Ct), at para. 17.
[29]          
The LTB determined that the Act does not apply to the
relationship between the parties. Rather, the parties' agreement concerned a
parking space used by the Appellants for their motorhome on a temporary basis,
which is subject to an exemption contained in s. 5(a) of the Act (set
out in paragraph 14 above). As a result, the LTB found that it lacked
jurisdiction to consider the Appellants' Tenant Rights (T2) Application filed
against the Respondents.
[30]          
The LTB's finding is a one of mixed fact and law. The Appellants do not
have a right to appeal this decision on the application of s. 5. This appeal
must be dismissed.
[31]          
The Appellants submit that they were denied procedural fairness because:
[32]          
The Supreme Court of Canada confirmed in Law Society of Saskatchewan
v. Abrametz, 2022 SCC 29, 470 DLR (4th) 328 that, on a statutory appeal,
appellate standards of review apply to questions of procedural fairness. The
standard of review on questions of procedural fairness is correctness.
[33]          
The content of the duty of fairness is based on the factors from Baker
v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), 1999 CanLII 699 (SCC), [1999] 2 S.C.R. 817
("Baker") which include:
[34]          
The requirements of procedural fairness are context-specific and
incorporate respect for the LTB's choice of procedure. The LTB has the
authority to control its own process in accordance with s. 25.0.1 of the Statutory
Powers Procedure Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S.22 ("SPPA") and
its Rules. The Act permits the LTB to conduct inquiries it considers
necessary before, during, or after a hearing and to question any person
concerning the dispute. The Act does not restrict the LTB's ability to
control its process, other than to direct that the LTB adopt the most
expeditious procedures that allow for a fair process.
[35]          
If there are multiple procedural options that all meet the minimum
requirements of fairness, this Court should not interfere with the LTB's choice
from among those options. Absent an extricable question of law, this Court
should also not interfere with the LTB's findings of fact that underlay its
conclusion on procedural fairness.
[36]          
The Appellants were given an opportunity to cross-examine the
Respondents' daughter. The LTB only interfered to keep the questioning focused
on the issues before the Board. The LTB is entitled to control its own process
and is entitled to deference in exercising its discretion on procedural
matters.
[37]          
The LTB's authority to control its own process includes the ability of
its members to ensure that its hearings, in accordance with s. 183 of the Act,
proceed as expeditiously as possible without compromising fairness. This
includes a member's ability to interrupt a party, provide direction to ensure
that the hearing is conducted in an efficient manner, define, and narrow the
issues to be decided, limit the evidence and submissions on any issue where
there has been full disclosure, and question parties to focus the issues and
the related evidence on relevant matters: See the SPPA, and the Act.
[38]          
The Member advised the parties that she did not need to hear from them
further because she could make her findings by relying on the evidence from the
Appellants. The answer was self evident on the Appellants' own testimony. I
find there was no denial of procedural fairness by limiting the Appellants'
cross-examination or their ability to make legal argument in these circumstances.
[39]          
The Appellants submit the Board erred in law by not considering the Matthews
case. In that case, the Ontario Court of Appeal addressed the interpretation of
s. 5(a). However, the facts of that case are easily distinguishable from the
case before this Court. In Matthews, the tenants erected cottages that
were used as year-round second homes. The case is easily distinguishable, and I
find no error in law.
[40]          
Even if the Board errored in failing to consider the case, the Ontario
Court of Appeal has held that errors that are inconsequential or do not result
in a substantial wrong or miscarriage of justice are insufficient to justify a
rehearing.
[41]          
I find that there was no denial of procedural fairness.
[42]          
The Appellants submit that they were denied a fair hearing because the
Member hearing their request for a review was biased.
[43]          
The test for a reasonable apprehension of bias requires a "real
likelihood or probability of bias": Hazelton Lanes Inc. v. 1707590
Ontario Limited, 2014 ONCA 793, at paras. 58-65. It is not bias for an
adjudicator to interpret evidence or make decisions adverse in interest to a
litigant. It is well established that "[b]y itself, an adverse decision
does not rebut the strong presumption of impartiality": Taucar v. Human
Rights Tribunal of Ontario, 2017 ONSC 2604 (Div. Ct), at paras. 84-85.
[44]          
The grounds for finding bias or a reasonable apprehension of bias must
be substantial and require cogent evidence to rebut judicial impartiality's
strong presumption.
[45]          
Having reviewed the transcript of the hearing, as well as the decision
from the Board, there is no evidence of bias.
[46]          
The Appellants were offended that the Member referred to their motor
home as a brown bus, but that does not come close to meeting the level needed
to show bias.
[47]          
The Appellants were offended by the way the Member told people in the
virtual courtroom that they were not permitted to speak, but again, I see no
evidence of bias.
[48]          
Neither the LTB nor the Appellants are seeking costs of the motion.
[49]          
The Respondents are seeking costs in the sum of $10,000. However,
contrary to the Practice Direction, the Respondents failed to upload a bill of
costs prior to the hearing.  I am therefore not prepared to make an order in
the sum of $10,000.
[50]          
The Appellants shall pay the Respondents the costs of the appeal in the
sum of $5,000 inclusive.