[1]          Mr.
Samuels and Mr. Minott both entered guilty pleas before me on November 26, 2024
to the offence of manslaughter in relation to the shooting death of 25-year-old
Osman Bangura on October 6, 2022. Mr. Bangura was shot by both men in the
course of a struggle over a gun.
[2]          The Crown
submitted that a sentence of eight years’ imprisonment was appropriate for both
offenders before credit for pre-sentence custody.
[3]          Counsel
for Mr. Samuels submitted that a six-year sentence would be appropriate before
credit for presentence custody.
[4]          Counsel
for Mr. Minott also submitted that a sentence of six years’ imprisonment was
appropriate for Mr. Minott before credit for presentence custody.
[5]          In these
reasons I will outline the circumstances of the offence, including the impact
on the family of Mr. Bangura before turning to the individual circumstances of
each of the two men.
[6]          The circumstances
underlying the offence are set out in the Agreed Statement of Facts filed on
the guilty plea.
[7]          Mr.
Samuels and Mr. Minott became engaged in a verbal altercation with Mr. Bangura.
A physical altercation ensued between Mr. Samuels and Mr. Bangura. In the
course of the struggle, Mr. Bangura fell over. A loaded handgun fell to the
ground from Mr. Bangura. Mr. Samuels retrieved the gun and ran away with
it. He was pursued by Mr. Bangura. Mr. Minott followed the two men. Mr. Bangura
caught and tackled Mr. Samuels. While Mr. Bangura and Mr. Samuels struggled on
the ground, Mr. Minott shot Mr. Bangura and fled. Mr. Samuels then rose
from the ground and shot Mr. Bangura using the gun over which they had been
struggling.
[8]          Both Mr.
Samuels and Mr. Minott fled from the scene. Neither gun that was used that day
was ever recovered.
[9]          As set out
in the Agreed Statement of Facts:
[10]      The parties agree that the conduct
of both Mr. Minott and Mr. Samuels in shooting Mr. Bangura exceeded the
scope of self-defence as set out in s. 34 of the Criminal Code, R.S.C.,
1985, c. C-46.
[11]      Victim impact statements were
filed in this case.  The statements describe the devastating effect of this
offence on the mother, spouse and siblings of Mr. Bangura.
[12]      Mr. Bangura’s mother described him
as a kind, loving and generous young man. She experienced the unimaginable trauma
of watching her son lose his life in front of her. His spouse and two children
continue to suffer from his loss. His wife gave birth to their youngest child
without him. She struggles with her grief while also struggling to raise two
children alone.
[13]      His sister and brother continue to
suffer and grieve the loss of their brother.
[14]      I have considered the impact of
the offence as disclosed by the Victim Impact Statements in determining the
appropriate sentence. I recognize, however, that the pain of this family will
not be relieved by any sentence that is imposed.
[15]      Mr. Samuels is 25 years old. He
was 22 at the time of the offence. He has two sons aged three and five years.
He was involved with his children before his arrest and incarceration. Before
this offence he lived with his mother and his siblings. He is very close to his
family. He was raised by his mother who worked at multiple jobs to support her
children. The family struggled financially. Mr. Samuels had no real
relationship with his father who dropped into his life only sporadically. Mr.
Samuels is a young Black man. He grew up in an underserved community that was
rife with gun violence. He heard gunshots often, even as a very young child. He
witnessed shootings. He has lost seven close friends to gun violence.
[16]      Mr. Samuels struggled in school
and dropped out by grade 10. Since he has been incarcerated, he has completed all
but one of his high school credits.
[17]      Mr. Samuels has a youth record with
entries in 2016 and 2017 for possession of a Schedule I substance for the
purpose of trafficking, possession of property obtained by crime, failing to comply
with a recognizance, and possession of a prohibited device or ammunition.
[18]      Mr. Samuels has been incarcerated
at the Toronto South Detention Centre for 784 days. He spent about 36% of his
time in lockdown. He was triple bunked for several months.
[19]      There is no question that the
conditions at the detention centre during Mr. Samuels’ incarceration have been
extremely harsh. Being locked in a small cell for extended periods of time without
access to phones or showers is inhumane. It has been pointed out in many cases,
but bears repeating, that these conditions are completely unacceptable. Lockdowns
deprive prisoners of access to family support and lawyers. Lockdowns force
prisoners to urinate and defecate in front of their cellmates and in the same
area where they eat. Lack of access to basic hygiene makes it all the more
difficult for prisoners to be locked together in a small area. It raises
tension in the jail. Lockdowns prevent prisoners from engaging in even minimal
exercise.
[20]      I accept that these conditions
have impacted on Mr. Samuels and that his present detention has been
particularly onerous.
[21]      Mr. Minott is 23 years old now and
was 21 years old at the time of the offence. He left school without completing
grades 11 and 12. He pursued a music career and was very successful. He has
multiple videos and two albums, and he has performed widely. Mr. Minott helped
to support his mother and siblings before his arrest.
[22]      Before his conviction for this
offence, Mr. Minott had no criminal or youth record. The conviction for this
offence will likely have a significant effect on his music career by
restricting his ability to travel.
[23]      Mr. Minott is also a young Black
man. He was raised by a single mother in an underserved neighbourhood where gun
violence was common. He was shot in the leg in a random shooting in 2020.
[24]      Mr. Minott has been engaged with a
community organization called ‘Royalty Helping Hands’ in a writing program. He
has expressed through his writing, a desire to understand his choices and make
changes. Since his incarceration, Mr. Minott has participated in and completed
13 programs and he has worked towards completing his high school education. Mr. Minott
continues to have the support of his family and other community members.
[25]      Mr. Minott has been incarcerated
in the Toronto East Detention Centre and the Toronto South Detention Centre for
a total of 564 days. During that time, he was locked down for 90 days and
triple bunked for 26 days. As with Mr. Samuels, I accept that the lockdowns and
triple-bunking had an impact on Mr. Minott and that they were unduly harsh.
[26]      In determining an appropriate
sentence I have considered the principles and objectives established by the Criminal
Code and the case law.
[27]      I have considered the aggravating
and mitigating circumstances relating to the offence and the offenders.
[28]      Aggravating factors are:
[29]      There are also mitigating factors.
[30]      The fundamental principle of
sentencing set out in s. 718.1 of the Code is that the sentence should
be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility
of the offender.
[31]      The purpose of sentencing as set
out in s. 718 of the Criminal Code, is to “contribute …to respect
for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by
imposing just sanctions that have one or more of the following objectives:  (a)
to denounce unlawful conduct; (b) to deter the offender and other persons from
committing offences;  (c) to separate offenders from society, where necessary; (d)
to assist in rehabilitating offenders; …and (f) to promote a sense of
responsibility in offenders and acknowledgement of the harm done to victims and
to the community”.
[32]      Deterrence and denunciation are generally
the dominant sentencing objectives in sentencing for manslaughter.
[33]      Mr. Samuels and Mr. Minott are
both youthful offenders. Mr. Minott is a first offender. Mr. Samuels has never
received a custodial sentence.
[34]      The Court of Appeal has held that
where a penitentiary sentence must be imposed on a youthful first offender, the
sentence should be as short as possible.[1] 
The Court of Appeal has held that sentences at the lower end of the range of what
constitutes an appropriate sentence may be appropriate for youthful offenders
with good prospects for rehabilitation.[2]
[35]      Courts are also obliged to
consider other cases and to impose similar sentences for similar offences and
offenders.[3]
 The circumstances of offenders and offences vary widely.  This is particularly
true in sentencing for manslaughter.  Nevertheless, several of the cases
provided by counsel are instructive in determining the appropriate sentence in
this case.
[36]      In the case of R. v. Young,
2022 ONSC 1143, I imposed a sentence of five years on a youthful first offender
who shot the victim during a struggle. Harsh conditions associated with the
COVID-19 pandemic played a role in reducing the sentence from the otherwise
appropriate sentence of five years and seven months.
[37]      In R. v. Khill, 2023 ONSC
3374, the offender shot the victim who was trying to steal the truck of the
offender. He was sentenced to eight years. However, in an unusual turn of
events, the trial judge later clarified for the Court of Appeal that he had
intended to impose a sentence of six years.
[38]      In R. v. Pintar, [1994]
O.J. No. 1435, an older first offender was sentenced to six years’ imprisonment
for shooting and killing two men who came to his home and threatened him and
his daughter.
[39]      In R. v. Johnson, 2022 ONSC
5689, the offender shot the victim in self-defence but did not intend to kill
him. The offender had a minor criminal record and was sentenced to nine years.
[40]      Sentencing is a highly
individualized process.
[41]      In determining a fit sentence for
Mr. Samuels, I have considered his role in the offence. Although self-defence
was a factor at the outset of the encounter, he shot Mr. Bangura after he knew
him to be disarmed. This is an aggravating factor. However, Mr. Samuels is a youthful
offender. He has good prospects for rehabilitation. He has already taken
important steps towards rehabilitation by pursuing his education. His guilty
plea is highly mitigating. He has taken responsibility for his conduct. Mr.
Samuels has experienced extremely harsh conditions throughout his pre-sentence
custody. These conditions also serve to mitigate the sentence.[4]
Having weighed all of these factors, I have concluded that a sentence of six
years’ imprisonment should be imposed before credit for presentence custody.
[42]      I have reached the conclusion that
the same sentence should be imposed on Mr. Minott. Mr. Minott was carrying a
gun in public on the day of the offence. This is an aggravating circumstance. There
was a strong element of self-defence because Mr. Bangura was not yet clearly
disarmed when Mr. Minott shot him. Like Mr. Samuels, Mr. Minott has pleaded
guilty at an early stage and has taken responsibility for his conduct. He had
no record before this offence and has good prospects for rehabilitation. He has
taken steps towards rehabilitation while in custody and has completed many
programs and pursued his education. He has also experience harsh conditions of
presentence custody. In all of the circumstances, he should receive the same
sentence as Mr. Samuels.
[43]      Therefore, the sentence I impose
on Mr. Samuels is six years’ imprisonment, or 2,192 days, before credit for
presentence custody.  Mr Samuels has spent 784 actual days in presentence
custody.  With credit at 1.5:1 of 1,176 days, this leaves 1,016 days left to
serve (or approximately two years and 9.5 months).
[44]      There will be a s. 109 order
prohibiting Mr. Samuels from possession of any prohibited firearm, restricted
firearm, prohibited weapon, prohibited device and prohibited ammunition for
life.
[45]      Manslaughter is a "primary
designated offence" in s. 487.04, the section of the Criminal Code
dealing with forensic DNA analysis and the securing of DNA samples. As such, s. 487.051(1)
of the Criminal Code makes such an order mandatory. Therefore, I order
that Mr. Samuels provide such samples of his bodily substances as are
reasonably necessary for the purpose of forensic DNA analysis.
[46]      With respect to Mr. Minott, I also
impose a sentence of six years’ imprisonment before credit for presentence
custody. Mr. Minott has spent 564 actual days in presentence custody.  With
credit at 1.5:1 of 846 days, this leaves 1,346 days left to serve (or approximately
three years and 8.5 months).
[47]      I
also make a s.109 order for life and a DNA order with respect to Mr. Minott.