1.                 
The
Applicants bring this motion seeking the following orders:
2.                 
Defined
terms in this Endorsement have the meaning given to them in the motion materials,
including the affidavits of the Chief Restructuring Officer, Randall Benson,
sworn November 7 and December 7, 2024, the 19th Report of the
Monitor dated December 10, 2024 and the Supplement thereto dated December 12,
2024, unless otherwise stated.
3.                 
The
Service List has received the motion materials and the Reports of the Monitor.
The relief sought today is unopposed, and is strongly recommended by the
Court-appointed Monitor as well as the Chief Restructuring Officer.
4.                 
I
am satisfied that the proposed relief should be granted.
5.                 
First,
with respect to the proposed distributions to the PGL Lenders, the Second ARIO
permitted the Pride Entities to sell Surplus Assets under certain conditions
and with the consent of the Monitor, the DIP Agent and any affected secured
lender with the registration under a Personal Property Registry in a Canadian
or United States jurisdiction. Proceeds of such sales were held in segregated
accounts.
6.                 
Surplus
Assets with aggregate net proceeds of $5,916,400 have now been sold. The
amounts are attributable to certain of the PGL Lenders as fully set out in Mr.
Benson’s affidavit and the 19th Report, and I am satisfied that the
Pride Entities should be, and now are, authorized to distribute those
segregated amounts to the relevant PGL Lenders.
7.                 
Similarly,
and pursuant to the Payment
Procedure Agreement, the Pride Entities are now in a position to remit the
Deferred Equipment Payments in the aggregate approximate amount of $5,214,000,
and they are authorized to distribute those amounts to the PGL Lenders.
8.                 
Second,
with respect to the proposed real property transactions, the sales process,
offers solicited and/or received, and particulars of the transaction
in respect of which approval is sought for each property are fully set out in
the materials and the 19th Report. The intended closing date for
each is imminent, and therefore consideration of whether the transactions should
be approved is time sensitive.
9.                 
I
recognize that certain of the properties to be sold (Grand Prairie, Texas;
Dallas, Texas; and Indianapolis, Indiana) are obviously located in the
United States with the result that the Pride Entities will schedule as soon as
possible a motion before the US Court to seek corresponding approvals in the
Chapter 15 Proceedings.
10.             
The
transactions will yield
material net proceeds in respect of the sales given the respective purchase
price for each property and related assets as set out in the agreements, as
follows:
11.             
The
first four of those transactions represent the sale in each case of real
property. The sales process in respect of each is fully described in the
materials, the proposed purchaser in each case is unrelated to the Pride
Entities or any of their principals, and in each case is, to the best of the
knowledge and belief of the Monitor and the CRO, an arm’s-length third-party.
12.             
The
transaction in respect of Sweetwater relates to the sale of the issued and
outstanding shares of Sweetwater. It is a single-purpose Delaware company and
an Applicant in this CCAA Proceeding, the only asset of which is a house
located in Boca Raton, Florida. Sweetwater and one of the principals of the
Pride Entities, Sulakhan Johal, are co-borrowers under a mortgage with RBC
Bank, Georgia, N.A., which holds a registered first charge, the validity and
enforceability of which has been confirmed by the Monitor. The transaction is
structured as a share sale to maintain the mortgage facility and terms. There
is no prejudice to the stakeholders with respect to such a structure, in the
view of the Monitor and CRO.
13.             
Given
the obvious conflict of interest in respect of Sweetwater, the Applicants were
not involved in the sales process conducted and overseen by the Monitor with
the assistance of US real estate brokers. As noted, the first registered
mortgage has been confirmed by the Monitor to be valid and enforceable. Counsel
for the Monitor confirmed to the Court that the proposed purchaser of
Sweetwater is unrelated to the Pride Entities or any of the principals thereof,
and is, to the best of the knowledge and belief of the Monitor and the CRO, an
arm’s-length third-party.
14.             
I
am satisfied that the transactions should be approved, and that in each case,
the factors set out in s. 36(3) of the CCAA as well as the Soundair
Principles have been satisfied. I am further satisfied that the terms of
the proposed approval and vesting order in each case, are appropriate. Each proposed transaction
represents the highest and best offer received for each property and related
assets (or, in the case of Sweetwater, the shares and related assets) and each
transaction represents the highest and best value and is therefore in the best
interests of the Pride Entities, their creditors and other stakeholders.
15.             
Accordingly,
the transactions are approved. The Sweetwater approval and vesting order would also
have the effect of removing Sweetwater as an Applicant in this CCAA
Proceeding, which is appropriate given that Sweetwater is a single-purpose
entity, the only asset of which is the Boca Raton, Florida property.
16.             
I
observe the Foreign Representative also intends to file a motion to dismiss the
Chapter 15 Case in respect of Sweetwater (only) after the closing of that
transaction.
17.             
Third,
the proposed distributions to Roynat are appropriate. Various transactions in
respect of real property subject to mortgages in its favour have already been
approved, including in respect of the following properties: Chehalis,
Washington; Cornwall, Ontario; Abbotsford, British Columbia; and Monroe,
Michigan.
18.             
Security
reviews by the Monitor have now been completed in respect of all of those
properties, except for the Chehalis, Washington property, all as described in
the 19th Report. Accordingly, distributions to Roynat in respect of
the net proceeds related to those properties are authorized and approved. The
Monitor is working diligently to complete its security review with respect to
the Chehalis, Washington property, and counsel for Roynat has expressed, not
for the first time, its strong desire to have those net proceeds distributed as
soon as possible. That approval will be the subject of a future motion.
19.             
Fourth,
the amendments to the Wind-Down Order, principally to address the Mitsubishi
parties, are appropriate and are approved.
Mitsubishi has advised the Monitor that it would like to withdraw from the
Monitor’s Validation Mandate (as defined in the 10th Report), and
that Mitsubishi is content to accept a turnover of the Mitsubishi Repossessed
Assets on the terms of the Wind-Down Order and similar in scope and approach to
that applicable to Bennington Financial Corp. and those assets in respect of
which it has an interest.
20.             
This
requires an amendment to the Wind-Down Order to include Mitsubishi within the
definition of “Recourse Lender” as fully described in the 19th
Report with the effect of extending the successful Recourse Lender
turnover framework to Mitsubishi and eliminate existing uncertainty about the
treatment of Mitsubishi Repossessed Assets.
21.             
Finally
with respect to the Wind-Down Order, and as a more clerical matter, it is
proposed to be amended to ensure that reporting to be delivered by the Recourse
Lenders relating to the receipt of proceeds is delivered to the proper parties
as specified therein. That is also appropriate, practical, and is approved.
22.             
Fifth,
the proposed amendments to the Lien Discharge Order are appropriate to address
ongoing issues faced by the Pride Entities in respect of certain vehicles. In
particular, two complications have arisen since the Lien Discharge Order was
made. First, possessory liens are preventing the Pride Entities from being able
to ascertain the physical units from third parties for the turnover of subject
vehicles in accordance with the Lien Discharge Order. Second, liens registered
against vehicles subject to insurance claims in which the insurance proceeds
cannot be released until the relevant lien is discharged, have also arisen.
23.             
To
address these two scenarios, the Lien Discharge Order is proposed to be amended
to permit the Pride Entities to address the subject vehicles while protecting
the interests of the relevant Lien Claimants. The proposed
amendments do that, and they are approved. I am satisfied that, as recommended
by the CRO and Monitor, the proposed relief represents the most efficient path
forward to continue the sale of vehicles impacted by RSLA Liens that are
otherwise not capable of being sold while preserving lien rights.
24.             
Sixth
and finally, the proposed amendments in respect of the Factoring Order to deal
with the TPine blocked accounts are appropriate, principally for the
reasons set out in the 19th Report at paragraphs 53 – 56 and the
CRO’s affidavit filed in respect of this motion.
25.             
In
addition to the jurisdiction found in s. 36(3) of the CCAA and informed
by application of the Soundair Principles in respect of the real
property dispositions described above, I am satisfied that this Court has the
jurisdiction to grant all of the above relief pursuant to the discretion found
in s. 11 of the CCAA.
26.             
Orders
to go in the form signed by me today to give effect to the above relief. The
orders are effective immediately and without the necessity of issuing and
entering.