[1]    
   On
October 4th, 2024, I heard a motion by the Respondent seeking an
order that the matrimonial home be listed for sale.  On October 22nd,
2024, I released reasons (2024 ONSC 5863) in which I granted the Respondent’s
motion.  It is now time to fix the costs for this motion.
[2]    
  The
Respondent seeks substantial recovery costs payable from the Applicant to her on
the basis that she made “the equivalent of a Rule 49 offer and is entitled to
costs on a substantial indemnity basis.”  The amount of costs sought is
$8,418.50.
[3]    
  The
Applicant seeks costs on a partial recovery basis on the basis that he was
partially successful in this motion in that he successfully resisted some of the
ancillary orders being sought by the Respondent.  He is seeking the sum of
$3,992.33.  In the alternative, the Applicant argues that each party should
bear their own costs.
[4]    
  The
governing rules of modern costs principles are set out in Serra v. Serra
2009 ONCA 395 as follows:
[5]    
    The
Court of Appeal has also dealt with costs in its decision in Beaver v. Hill
2018 ONCA 840, (2018) 143 O.R. (3d) 519.  That decision concludes that
the ‘close to full recovery’ approach adopted in some case-law is, in most
cases, inconsistent with the Family Law Rules express contemplation that
full recovery costs would only be paid in specific circumstances.  Therefore,
costs are generally awarded on a partial recovery basis.
[6]    
  There
are exceptions to these principles.  First, if a party engages in bad faith
conduct, then costs are payable on a full recovery basis, and are payable
immediately.  Second, if a party does as well as or better than their offer to
settle, then they may be entitled to substantial indemnity costs.
[7]    
  With
those principles in mind, I now turn to the issues in this case.
[8]    
  The
first question that must be answered is who is the successful party in this
motion?  There is a detailed discussion of the issue of success in Scipione
v. Scipione 2015 ONSC 5982.  In determining success, the key question to
ask is who got what they wanted?
[9]    
  In
this case, the Respondent has been seeking an order permitting her to sell the
matrimonial home and obtain the proceeds for several years.  In the motion
before me, she was successful in obtaining that relief.  The fact that she did
not get all of the terms that she wanted in relation to the sale does not
change the basic fact that she obtained the key relief that she was seeking. 
Her lack of success on a couple of ancillary points would only entitle the
Applicant to a very modest deduction in the costs that he would otherwise be
expected to pay.
[10]    
   In
that respect, I reject the Applicant’s submission that he “is deserving of
costs for successfully defending against the Respondent’s demands that he
vacate the home immediately….”. The fact is that the Applicant has been
delaying the sale of this property for years.  When the motion was determined,
he was unsuccessful in his primary position that the property should not be
sold at all.  Therefore, he should pay the successful party their costs.
[11]    
   This
brings me to the question of whether the Respondent should be entitled to
substantial indemnity costs on the basis of her offer to settle.  This offer to
settle was served on October 2nd, 2024.  Given that the motion was
heard on October 4th, 2024, the offer to settle is a valid offer within
the provisions of Rule 18(14) of the Family Law Rules.
[12]    
   The
Respondent argues that she has done better than her offer to settle because
that offer contained a proposal that the house would be sold and that she would
set aside the sum of $100,000.  The Respondent argues that my decision not only
did that, but also required the Applicant to set aside the sum of $25,000.  The
problem with this submission is that the Respondent’s offer to settle required
the Applicant to set aside the sum of $100,000 from the proceeds of the sale of
the matrimonial home as well.  I did not require him to set aside that much
money from the proceeds of sale and, as a result, the Respondent has not met or
bettered her offer to settle. Costs are, therefore, to be determined on a
partial indemnity basis.
[13]    
   This
brings me to the quantum of costs.  The Applicant suggests that partial
indemnity costs in the sum of $3,992.33 are a reasonable amount of costs for
him to be awarded on the basis of his success in this matter.  I have already
explained why I have rejected the Applicant’s submission that he should be
entitled to costs for this motion.  However, the fact that the Applicant
suggests this amount is an excellent indicator of what the reasonable
expectations of the losing party would be in this case.
[14]    
   More
generally, the time spent by the Respondent’s counsel does not appear to be
unreasonable.  This is especially true when the procedural history of this
matter is considered.  It must be remembered that the parties had a procedural
motion before Chozik J. prior to the motion on the merits before me.  That
procedural motion would have taken time, and the Respondent is entitled to be
compensated for that time.
[15]    
   When I
step back and consider the matter as a whole, I am of the view that the
Applicant should be required to pay the Respondent costs in the sum of
$4,000.00 inclusive of HST and disbursements.
[16]    
   For
the foregoing reasons, I order the Applicant to pay the Respondent costs in the
sum of $4,000.00 inclusive of HST and disbursements.
[17]    
   Counsel
for the Respondent sought to have these costs paid within thirty (30) days.  I
disagree.  I am of the view that the costs should be paid out of the
Applicant’s share of the proceeds of the matrimonial home when the matrimonial
home is sold, and I so order.