[1]         
The applicant, Jack Densmore, (“Densmore”), stands
charged with various offences, including sexual assault, voyeurism and
distribute intimate images without consent, contrary to their respective
provisions in the Criminal Code, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46 (the “Code”).
[2]         
The applicant requests production of certain
records related to the complainant and held by the third party, the Hamilton
Spectator, a division of Metroland Media Group Ltd., (“the Spectator” or the “Third
Party”). The Spectator is a daily newspaper published and circulated in
Hamilton, Ontario, and surrounding areas.
[3]         
The applicant’s subpoena details the records being
sought that are related to the above-noted criminal matter and all notes, statements,
and correspondence of Ms. Susan Clairmont, a well-known and respected
journalist for the Spectator.
[4]         
Specifically, the applicant seeks production
and disclosure of all correspondence (including emails and text messages)
between anyone at the Spectator and the complainant and/or the other witnesses;
all notes of any reporters with respect to meetings with the complainant or the
other witnesses; and all video or audio recordings of interviews with the
complainant and/or the other witnesses.
[5]         
While none of the records can be classified as
counselling or therapeutic records, there is no dispute that these documents
are "records" as defined by the Code. Prior
to the submissions of the parties, I had not seen the documents, nor had the
Crown attorney or counsel for the applicant.
[6]         
In this case, there is a fundamental dispute as
to the statutory regime or legal analysis/process that applies to govern this specific
application.
[7]         
This case raises somewhat novel issues as to
the scope of journalistic privilege and productions of records as may be applicable
to the Journalistic Sources Protection Act, S.C,
2017, c. 22 (the “JSPA”) as codified in s. 39.1 of
the Canada Evidence Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-5 (“the CEA”). There
are some conflicting trial court decisions that have addressed the nature and
scope of this issue. These decisions are discussed further in these reasons.
[8]         
On October 22, 2022, the Spectator published a
story co-authored by Ms. Clairmont entitled “Notorious YouTuber known as Jack
Denmo charged with sexually assaulting Mac student.” The article included
details of the allegations against the applicant, whose aliases include “Jack
Denmo” or “Denmo”, and his arrest for sexual assault on March 23, 2021.
[9]         
Following publication of this story, a woman
(“Source 1”) reached out to Ms. Clairmont and indicated that she had also been
sexually assaulted by the applicant. Ms. Clairmont interviewed Source 1. She
subsequently interviewed two more sources (“Source 2” and “Source 3”) who
Source 1 had confided in at the time of the alleged assault.
[10]       A
follow-up story was written by Ms. Clairmont and was published in print, and
online on November 11, 2022. The
title of the story was: “Notorious Hamilton YouTuber under investigation for
second sexual assault allegation.”
[11]      
The second article contained certain
information, including but not limited to: that the applicant was under police investigation
for an allegation of sexual assault; that the complainant had contacted the
Spectator after seeing its publication the sexual assault charge laid against the
applicant the month prior; that the complainant disclosed to the Spectator that
she too had been sexually assaulted by the applicant; details of this sexual
assault; that the police subsequently confirmed they were conducting an
investigation and that no charges had yet been laid; and that the complainant
had confided in two friends about the allegations and that these witnesses were
contacted and interviewed by the Spectator; one of those
witnesses was interviewed by the police. The Spectator made the decision not to
publish the name of the complainant and no details of the interviews were circulated.
[12]       The
applicant submits that the issues and law in this case have been addressed
in a related decision rendered by Molloy J. - R. v. Lim # 4, 2021 ONSC
45. The applicant says that Lim #4 is directly on point and decided the
same issues as in the case at bar.
[13]       The
applicant contends that neither s. 278.1 of the Code nor the R. v.
Mills, 1999 CanLII 637 (SCC), [1999] 3 S.C.R. 668, “Mills” regime applies in this case and
that this court ought to follow Lim #4, in applying the R. v.
O’Connor, 1995 CanLII 51 (SCC), [1995] 4 S.C.R. 411, “O’Connor” regime as the correct standard.
At the same time, the “O’Connor” regime ought to be applied “in fusion
with” the R. v. Vice Media Canada Inc., 2018 SCC 53, [2018] 3 S.C.R.
374, “Vice Media” case: see Lim #4, at paras. 63-64.
[14]       The applicant
says that the first stage of the O’Connor regime concerns whether the
applicant has established that the material being sought is “likely to be
relevant” at trial. In this context, relevance is whether the information “may
be useful to the defence” and whether there is a “reasonable possibility that
the information is logically probative to an issue at trial”: See O’Connor at
para. 22.
[15]       This
is not an “onerous” burden. The applicant submits that this threshold has
easily been met since there is no reasonable expectation of privacy in the
records. Were there to be a reasonable expectation of
privacy than the Mills "likely relevant" consideration would
apply. Further the impact of the Spectator in producing the
material for review would be minimal and there is no confidential sources or
journalistic privilege that can be claimed. Finally, the complainant came of
her own volition to report the allegations to the media and expected the story
to be published. The facts of this case are thus even distinguishable
from Lim #4, (where the allegations were produced) in that the Spectator
already published the allegations and details. Thus, whatever journalistic
privacy interest that existed was severely diminished by the fact that the
Spectator was able to “scoop” this story before it had even been reported to
the police.
[16]       The
applicant also argues that the “Vice Media” factors bear little weight, on
the current case since there is no potential chilling effect, as the story has
already been fully published. The applicant reiterates that there is no request
for any work product, only the journalist’s notes, and communications, unless
the interviews were otherwise recorded.
[17]       The
applicant says that the documents sought are necessary to allow the applicant
to complete the narrative, which will also impact on the triable issues like the
complainant’s credibility. The applicant submits that he requires these
documents in order to make full answer and defence.
[18]       For
this discrete application, the Crown attorney adopts the submissions advanced
by counsel for the Third Party. The Crown suggests that the applicant has not
argued any specific basis for disclosure of these records, and speculates as to
their utility in respect of the credibility of the complainant. In
determining relevance and probative value, the materials being sought are
“consistent” with what was already been recorded by the police. The
Crown submits that the appropriate regime for the analysis falls under Mills,
per s. 278.31 of the Code.
[19]       Mr.
Manoryk, on behalf of the Third Party, submits that the
information caught by subpoena cannot be provided or disclosed to the Court.
The records consist of information from a journalist’s file identifying confidential
journalistic sources. As such, counsel says that the JSPA,
and included amendments to the CEA at s. 39.1, apply and
therefore the applicant must and cannot meet the relevant threshold test.
[20]       Counsel
for the Third Party submits that Ms. Clairmont is an experienced journalist who
reports on crime, courts, and social justice issues, including instances of
sexual misconduct and abuses of power and trust. Woman reporting on these
sensitive topics rely on confidentiality undertakings from journalists like Ms.
Clairmont to tell their stories. The applicant must establish that it is
necessary and justified to set aside that privilege. In this case, he cannot do
so.
[21]       Moreover,
even if this court did set aside the privilege, Mr. Manoryk argues that the applicant
has not established entitlement to the records in accordance with the Mills
regime, which wholly applies in this case. Finally, if neither of the JSPA
nor the Mills regime apply to bar disclosure in this case, disclosure
should be denied in accordance with the framework established by the Supreme
Court of Canada in Vice Media.
[22]       In
R. v. McNeil, 2009 SCC 3, the Supreme Court articulated the third-party
records disclosures procedure.  Issues of privilege are best resolved at the
outset. The application is brought before the judge seized with the trial. If a
record holder or some other interested person advances a well-founded claim
that the documents are privileged, in all but the rarest of cases, the
existence of the privilege will bar the defence application.
[23]       Section
39.1 of the CEA protects journalist-source privilege. Section 39.1 was
added to the CEA by the JSPA in 2018 to provide robust statutory
protection for journalistic sources and promote the freedom of press as
considered by s. 2(b) of the Charter.
[24]       In Denis
v. Côté, 2019 SCC 44, [2019] 3 S.C.R. 482, the Supreme Court considered
this legislation for the first time. The Court explained that “[w]hereas the
applicability of the journalist source privilege was the exception in the
former scheme, it has now become the rule.” The change was intended “to afford
enhanced protection to the confidentiality of journalistic sources in the
context of journalists’ relations with those sources”: at paras. 28, 34.
[25]       In Denis,
at paras. 55-57, the Supreme Court identified a three-part test for
establishing and displacing journalist-source privilege under s. 39.1 of the CEA:
[26]       A
party raising an objection under the JSPA bears the burden of
demonstrating that there is a journalist and a journalistic source, as defined
under the CEA. Once that has been established, the records sought are
presumptively privileged, and the burden of proof shifts to the party seeking
disclosure to displace that privilege.
[27]       Subsection
39.1(1) of the CEA defines “journalist” as “a person whose main occupation
is to contribute directly, either regularly or occasionally, for consideration,
to the collection, writing or production of information for dissemination by
the media, or anyone who assists such a person.”
[28]       “Journalistic
source” is also defined in s. 39.1(1) as “a source that confidentially
transmits information to a journalist on the journalist’s undertaking not to
divulge the identity of the source, whose anonymity is essential to the
relationship between the journalist and the source.
[29]       The
applicant submits that the JSPA does not apply in this case as the
Spectator has not satisfied their burden under both segments of the s. 39.1 two-part
threshold. The applicant contends that it is impossible to reconcile Ms.
Clairmont’s affidavit evidence with what transpired as there was never any
promise or undertaking of anonymity or confidentiality either on the record or
referenced in the article itself. The complainant was, in effect, not a
“journalistic source”. The applicant further contends that the JSPA does
not apply in the current case, as record disclosure is being sought by an
individual, rather than the state.
[30]       I
note that the JSPA establishes two discrete tests that must be
satisfied, before journalist sources are to be produced. The first applies
where production is ordered under s. 488.01 of the Code (e.g., search
warrants, production orders, and wiretaps). The JSPA is responsible for
the addition of s. 488.01 to the Code. The second applies where
disclosure is requested outside of the Code, in the context of civil and
other proceedings, pursuant to s. 39.1 of the CEA. Section 2 of the CEA
denotes that it “applies to all criminal proceedings and to all civil
proceedings and other matters whatever respecting which Parliament has
jurisdiction.”
[31]       It
is the presence of these two distinct tests/branches, and more importantly the
distinction between the two, that may explain the apparent contradiction
between Lim #4 and the subsequent case of R. c. Mund, 2024 QCCQ
5149.
[32]       Where
an application is made for disclosure of journalistic source documents,
pursuant to the JSPA’s Criminal Code provision, such may only be
brought by a state actor (i.e., only a peace officer or public officer has the
authority to apply for a warrant under s. 487.01 or an authorization under s.
184.2, etc.). Thus, in turn, s. 488.01 of the Code only applies to state
actors (as held in Lim #4). However, where an application is made for
disclosure of journalistic source documents under the JSPA’s addition to
the CEA provision, then the JSPA applies more broadly – to
individuals/whoever is bringing the application (as held in Mund). Such
is true, as long as the individual has brought their application before a body
with the appropriate authority. The above distinction rests on the fact that
the CEA poses no procedural requirement, like that in the Code,
that a state actor be bringing about the disclosure request. Section 39.1 of
the CEA states that “A person who request the disclosure has the burden
of proving the conditions set out in subsection (7) are fulfilled.” “Person” is
not qualified or defined in any way within this provision.
[33]       However,
there is a slight, albeit important qualification in this dual-branch interpretation.
The first branch, the Code branch, as written in s.488.01(2) as only
relating to certain Code provisions – of which s. 287.3 is not:
[34]       No
case law affirms this point. On the face of s. 488.01(2), it is clear to me
that the Code branch of the JSPA does not apply to s. 278.3. If
the CEA branch (of the JPSA) were similarly deemed to not apply
to s. 278.3, a gap in the JSPA’s protection of journalist sources would
ensue.
[35]      
In
Lim #4, Molloy J. states, at para. 39,
[36]       From
the above passage, I understand Molloy J. to have applied the Code branch
of the JSPA, rather than the CEA branch, to her decision in Lim
#4, despite s.488.01(2)’s restrictive language. It is in the proper JSPA
branch to apply to a s.278.3 request for disclosure where I disagree with my
learned colleague. I instead adopt the analysis of Compagnone J., in Mund.
Mund also dealt with an application for production under s.278.3 of the
Code. However, in Mund, at para. 11, the court deemed the CEA to
be the proper scheme through which to realize the rights conferred by the JSPA:
[37]       The
CEA test/branch is as follows:
[38]       The
application before me is brought by an individual to obtain material in the
hands of the media, whereas the JSPA applies only to applications by the
state.” The missing contextualization is that it is the JSPA, in
relation to the Criminal Code, that applies only to applications by the
state.
[39]       At
paras. 33-55 of the Mund decision, the CEA test/branch is
applied. The facts in Mund are very similar to those at bar, in that the
accused was facing two charges, regarding sexual offences allegedly committed
in 1997 towards a person under the age of fourteen. The accused sought to
obtain access to the entire record of the third-party record holder, Canadian
Jewish News, regarding an interview given by the complainant to one of its
journalists.
[40]       The
Spectator, just like in Mund, objects to the disclosure of the
information request by the applicant on the grounds that such identifies a
journalistic source. The Third Party invokes s.39.1(2) of the CEA to
make out this objection, as opposed to any provision of the Code. Section
39.1(2) of the CEA reads as follows:
[41]       The
reference to “court, person or body” is broad enough to include not only
judicial proceedings, but also proceedings before federal boards, commissions
and other administrative agencies or tribunals, (s. 37(3).
[42]       It
seems that because s.278.1 had been pleaded in Lim #4 that Molloy J. applied
the Criminal Code version of the JSPA provisions (rather than the
CEA).
[43]       In
sum, I find that the JSPA’s CEA provisions may apply beyond the state
and to anyone bringing an application in similar circumstances. I agree with
Molloy J. in Lim #4, that the JSPA only applies exclusively to
state actors where disclosure of journalist sources is sought under a specified
provision of the Code (i.e., by practice of warrant, production order,
authorization). However, as such is not the current case, the JSPA’s CEA
provisions govern (irrespective of whether the s. 278.3 regime or the common
law O’Connor regime applies). Hence, I cannot adopt the interpretation
in Lim #4, specifically to the brief reference to s. 278.3. In my
opinion, the JSPA may apply in this case, contingent on the following
steps begin satisfied.
[44]       In
this case, I accept Ms. Clairmont’s affidavit evidence without reservation or
qualification.
[45]       Ms.
Clairmont is an investigative reporter employed full-time by the Spec.  She
interviewed the sources as part of her investigation and reporting process for
the Spectator.
[46]       Each
of Sources 1, 2, and 3 fall within the definition of a “journalistic source.” In
the course of interviewing each source, Ms. Clairmont made a promise to protect
their identities and not to disclose them in her reporting.  She took steps to
protect the sources’ confidentiality. In her subsequent article detailing the
allegations published on November 11, 2022, she did not use any of the source’s
names or identify them in any way. Since publication of the second article, Ms.
Clairmont has continued to hold the sources’ identities in confidence.
[47]       Unlike
the facts in Lim #4, Ms. Clairmont made express promises of anonymity to
each source, as the JSPA requires, - and anonymity was essential to her
relationship with each of these journalistic sources.
[48]       The
fact that Source 1 requested confidentiality after she initially spoke to Ms. Clairmont
is, in the Third Party’s submission, irrelevant. The purpose of the JSPA
is “to afford enhanced protection to the confidentiality of journalistic
sources in the context of journalists’ relations with those sources.” Denying
that protection on the basis of the timing of the request would frustrate and
undermine the purposes of the JSPA.
[49]       In my
view, confiding in a journalist, under the ambit of anonymity, can take several
forms, as long as the journalist is careful not to reveal the identity of the subject.
[50]       I
turn to s. 39.1(7)(a) of the CEA, which sets out the reasonable necessity
requirement:
[51]       The
Supreme Court in in Globe & Mail c. Canada, 2013 SCC 41, [2010] 2
S.C.R. 592, at para. 63, has said that “[i]f relevant information is available
by other means and, therefore, could be obtained without requiring a journalist
to break the undertaking of confidentiality, then those avenues ought to be
exhausted.” Requiring a journalist to breach a confidentiality undertaking with
a source should be done only as a last resort: Denis, at para 40.
[52]       Much
of the information the applicant seeks can be produced by other reasonable
means. The applicant’s factum indicates that both the complainant and another
witness were interviewed by the police before he was arrested on November 22,
2022. The contents of those police interviews were disclosed by the Crown.
[53]       The
applicant has not demonstrated any basis for a belief that the contents of Ms. Clairmont’s
interviews are unique or different from the police interviews. He has not
pointed to any information (such as the allegations published in the article)
that would suggest the contents of Ms. Clairmont’s interviews differ from those
given to police. I am persuaded that there is no basis to breach
journalistic-source privilege because the information is already available to
the defence.
[54]       The
Third Party acknowledges that the interview with the third source did not
result in an interview by police. The information contained in this interview
is therefore not reasonably available to the applicant. I agree that the
necessity threshold is met with respect to Source 3. However, I find that this
does not rebut the presumptive privilege over the records. It only allows me to
proceed to the balancing exercise.
[55]       Section
39.1(7)(b) of the CEA is “the heart” of the JSPA (at least on the
CEA branch) - it requires that the court decide whether “the public
interest in the administration of justice outweighs the public interest in
preserving the confidentiality of the journalistic source” in question.
[56]       Under
s. 39.1(7)(b), the court must take into account: (i) “the importance of the
information… to a central issue in the proceeding” before it; (ii) “freedom of
the press”; and (iii) “the impact of disclosure on the journalistic source and
the journalist”.
[57]       First,
as per Denis, at para. 44, it is necessary to determine whether the
records being sought are important to a central issue in the proceeding. This
requires a determination of relevance, as information that is not relevant
“cannot be characterized as important.” The standard at this stage is arguably
higher than at the third party records application, (at least within the O’Connor
regime) where the accused must show that “there is a reasonable possibility
that the information is logically probative to an issue at trial or the
competence of a witness to testify.” The JSPA imposes an additional
requirement that the records in question be “important” to an issue that is
“central” to the proceedings, as opposed to one that is “peripheral or “whose
consequences for the proceeding are limited.”
[58]       Again,
it bears repeating that the applicant has not identified any issue of central
importance to which the records he seeks are relevant. The sole basis proffered
in his submissions is the assertion that Ms. Clairmont’s interview is “[t]he “very
first time” that the complainant has
discussed her allegations against the applicant
and that this “is essentially ‘first disclosure’ and ‘public account’” of those
allegations.
[59]       In my
view, the claim of “first disclosure” is not borne out on the facts. As the
November 11 article makes clear, the complainant did “confide in two friends”
at the time of the assault in late 2018. Whether or not this is probative or
even relevant at trial, statements provided to Ms. Clairmont four years later
in 2022 cannot be said to be “first disclosure”.
[60]       Further,
I agree with the Third Party that even if the interview with Ms. Clairmont was
the first account of the allegations, this does not establish those records’
importance to a central issue in the proceedings. The applicant’s assertions
amount to an argument that the mere existence of the records establishes their
relevance. The mere fact of a prior statement does not even suffice to
establish relevance, let alone importance.
[61]       Premised
on the arguments advanced in writing and during submissions in court, in my
opinion, the applicant has not established the importance of the information he
seeks to a central issue in the proceeding. He has in fact not “gone beyond
speculative assertions of relevance” or even “drawn a specific line between the
records sought and one or more live issues for trial: see R. v. Brazier,
2022 ONSC 3807, at para. 17.
[62]       Moreover,
Ms. Clairmont has deposed that her work relies in significant part upon
establishing trust with her sources. She has testified that confidentiality is
critical to her work, as it gives her the freedom to collect information
broadly without the fear that such information will be turned over to the state
or the public. She has also testified to her belief that people in vulnerable
positions
“rely on promises of anonymity and confidentiality” to tell
their stories in the first place and “will be less likely to come forward if
they do not believe their identities and privacy are safe”.
[63]       Ordering
disclosure of a journalist’s file impacts both the
public’s confidence in their ability to perform their work and the journalists’
confidence in their ability to perform their work without state interference.
As Bourque J.  recognized
in CBC/Radio
Canada v. Arsenault,
2020
QCCS 2898, at para. 340, ordering a journalist to hand over unpublished
material “sends the message to the population that the journalist has no real
independence.”
[64]       Ms. Clairmont’s
evidence speaks to the exact concerns raised by the Supreme Court in Denis.
These are not abstract fears, but direct and foreseeable consequences described
by an experienced journalist. These impacts militate strongly against setting
aside the privilege over the records.
[65]       In
enacting the JSPA, Parliament “made a conscious choice to
impose on the applicant (i.e. the person who wishes to obtain the source’s
identity) the burden of proving that the impact of disclosure will be minimal
or insignificant,” in recognition that disclosing such information “will
generally have an adverse impact on the source as well as the journalist”: Denis,
at para. 50.
[66]       The
applicant cannot demonstrate that the impact on the journalist is
insignificant. I accept Ms. Clairmont’s evidence that being forced to disclose
journalistic source documents would make it more difficult to perform her work
and compromise her ability to report on information of public interest.
Confidential sources would be less likely to trust her and disclose information
to her. Disclosure would have a direct chilling effect on her ability
to conduct investigative journalism in the future.
[67]       The
Third Party has established a basis for the JSPA’s protection to apply
in this case. In my opinion, the relevant journalist’s documents are privileged.
I agree with Mr. Manoryk and find that the applicant has not successfully met or
rebutted the JSPA test for production of the records.
[68]       If
I am in error in my interpretation of s. 39.1 of the JSPA CEA regime, as
it applies to this case, then I turn to my alternative analysis.
[69]       The
court in McNeil, at paras. 31 and 32, outline key differences between
the O’Connor and Mills regimes:
[70]       The
relevant provisions of the Code on this point are referenced by the
Supreme Court of Canada as noted above. The statutory provisions themselves
were enacted by Parliament following the decision of the Supreme Court of
Canada in O’Connor.  Further, the Court of Appeal, in R. v. Batte
(2000), 2000 CanLII 5751 (ON CA), 49 O.R. (3d) 321, considered the import of the s. 278/Mills provisions,
and the appropriate tests to be considered by a trial judge in determining
whether documents should be ordered to be produced.
[71]       Section
278 of the Code provides for a complete code and procedure for
production of third party records in cases involving sexual offences. The
relevant provisions are found in s 278.3.
[72]       It
is clear that there is no duty on third parties whose records are not part of a
criminal investigation to disclose them to an accused. Where there exists a
reasonable expectation of privacy in the sought-after records, there exists
competing constitutional rights – an accused’s s.7 Charter right to a
fair trial including the right to make full answer and defence, and a third
party’s right to privacy as protected by the same constitutional regime. Such
competing interests are applicable to the Mills analysis. Although the
court’s obligation is to balance those rights within the factual context of a
specific prosecution, fair trial interests may require intrusion upon privacy. At
para. 94, the Supreme Court held:
[73]       As
has been alluded to above, while the Mills and O’Connor regimes
both inquire as to the likely relevance of the records requested for
production, the Mills regime (at s. 278.5(1) sets out a more onerous
standard at this ‘first stage’. See Mills, at para. 126:
[74]       Therefore,
I must consider the balance of the statutory criteria in s. 278 and determine
which regime applies (i.e., Mills or O’Connor), as such may be
determinative of whether the “likely relevant” test is ultimately made out.
[75]       The
starting point of the Mills regime (s. 278.2 of the Code) is that
certain records, for which the complainant retains a reasonable expectation of
privacy, should not be produced. More specifically, s. 278.2 prohibits the
disclosure of certain types of records to the defence, where the accused is
charged with one or more enumerated sexual offences, unless disclosure has been
applied for through the process described in ss. 278.3 to 278.91.
[76]      
The
Mills test for production is founded on the following principles:
[77]       Once
the disclosure materials are believed to be captured by the definition of
“records”, under s. 278.1. the trial judge must determine whether the
application, for disclosure of the enumerated records, is “likely relevant” and
in the “interests of justice” (s. 278.5(1)). The judge must also determine
whether the relevance of the requested records outweighs their privacy
interest, in which case release will be ordered as necessary (s. 278.6).
[78]       The
applicant’s submission that the O’Connor regime applies, is largely
based on the reasons in Lim #4. Justice Molloy, in turn, relies in large
part on the British Columbia case of R. v. Hughes, [1998] B.C.J. No.
1694 (S.C.).
[79]       The
facts of Hughes are as follows, a complainant in a pending sexual
assault trial approached a journalist and provided him with information about
the accused having assaulted her. Three additional women subsequently contacted
that journalist, disclosing similar allegations. The accused sought production
of material in the possession of the journalist relating to his interviews with
these women. Justice Romilly held that the issue should be decided under the O’Connor
framework rather than the s. 278.1 (Mills) regime, because the women
gave their interviews to the journalist with a view to it being made public and
they therefore had no reasonable expectation of privacy in the material.
[80]       Coming
to a similar conclusion, as that in Hughes, Molloy J. states that as
there is no reasonable expectation of privacy in the disputed records, the O’Connor
regime naturally applies. Justice Molloy recognizes that the relevant records
no doubt contain personal information, and that the s.278.1 enumerated classes
do not form a closed list (and thus could, in effect, include interviews given
to a journalist).
[81]      
However,
it is ultimately held in Lim #4 at para. 53 that:
[82]       In the
current case, the applicant asserts that, like in Lim #4, there is no
reasonable expectation of privacy in the records sought, and thus the statutory
regime does not apply. It was the Spectator that made the decision not to name
the complainant, as in the event that police were  to lay charges, then a publication
ban would likely go into effect. The applicant asserts that in all respects,
the Spectator conducted their own investigation prior to the police being made
aware of the allegations or beginning their own investigation into the applicant,
and the Spectator published the story of the allegations before charges had
been laid.
[83]       The applicant’s
position is that there is no indication anyone interviewed by the Spectator
wanted to remain anonymous or confidential. Instead, the only indication is
that the complainant wanted to make her allegations available for public
consumption. This appears to be a bald assertion. The only relevant piece being
the accusation that it was the Spectator who made the decision not to name the
complainant. However, such is not backed up on any evidentiary basis before me.
[84]       Drawing
on Ms. Clairmont’s Affidavit, I accept those facts contained therein, which are
markedly different from those in Lim #4. For example, in the current
case, Sources 1, 2, and 3 did not agree to be publicly identified in the
Spectator’s reporting. None of the three sources told their story in front of a
camera, and while some of the information each source provided was intended to
be made public, this was not necessarily true of all the information.
[85]       To
this point, I accept Ms. Clairmont’s evidence wherein she detailed that while
sources never have final say over what is published, they do expect that some
of the information they provide will be kept private. In her Affidavit, she also
explained that which necessitated the protection of the source’s identities: 
Source 1 indicated the very same day she first spoke to Ms. Clairmont regarding
the allegations, that she was having second thoughts about her name being used
in reporting. Source 1, a few days later, specifically asked Ms. Clairmont not
to use her name in any Spectator reporting as she was fearful of threats to her
safety. Ms. Clairmont ultimately agreed.
[86]       Source
2 and 3, both from the start, indicated they would only be comfortable speaking
to Ms. Clairmont on the condition of anonymity and her agreement not to use
their names in her reporting. Ms. Clairmont also described the process in which
she solicits information from sources and assures confidentiality, as the case
may be.
[87]       That
being said, the Mills test takes its definition of “record” from s.
278.1 of the Code. As mentioned, ‘journalist records/sources’ do not fit
into this scheme in any obvious manner. However, s.39.1(2) of the CEA links
journalistic sources with notions of confidentiality and anonymity.
[88]       More
specifically, the JSPA (and by amendment to the CEA) defines a journalistic
source at s. 39.1(1) to mean “a source that confidentially transmits
information to a journalist on the journalist’s undertaking not to divulge the
identity of the source.” While the applicant criticizes the timing of such an undertaking
in this case, it is clear to me that such was afforded the source prior to any
publication.
[89]       Having
concluded that JSPA, through s. 39.1(2) of the CEA is applicable
to this case, and on the evidence raised during this hearing, I would go on to
find that the Mills regime also applies- and not O’Connor - as a
reasonable expectation of privacy has been made out.
[90]       Having
decided that Mills properly applies, the test to order the production of
records requires the applicant to satisfy me on a balance of probabilities that
the records are likely relevant to an issue at trial and their production is
necessary in the interests of justice.
[91]       As
mentioned, the documents to be reviewed are not what one would typically find
under a s. 278 application. None are journal entries, counselling, or
therapeutic records. However, the applicant must still demonstrate through
evidence that production of the records is necessary in the interests of
justice.  Even if I conclude that there is a nexus to the allegations of sexual
crimes and are likely relevant to other issues, is the production of the
records in the interests of justice, applying the factors enumerated in s.
278.5(2).
[92]       If
at the end of this balancing process I am not certain as to whether or not to
order production or there is a danger that the accused's right to make full
answer and defence will be violated, the interests of justice require that I
err on the side of production: Mills, at paras. 132 and 137.
[93]       As
noted by O’Connor J. in R. v. L.F. (2006), 2006 CanLII 1024 (ON SC), 37 C.R. (6th) 152
(Ont. S.C.), the accused often finds himself or herself in a dilemma, simply
because he or she does not know what the records contain and is thus hampered
in his or her ability to demonstrate likely relevance. However, it is clear
from the cases interpreting the legislative provisions, that the applicant must
demonstrate likely relevance through evidence, and not through speculation or
assumptions. In Batte, at para. 53, Doherty J.A. stated: “The likely
relevance of the records to an issue at trial, a witness’ credibility or the
competence of a witness to testify is a prerequisite to an order compelling
production of the records to the judge.” Moreover, “the onus is on the accused
to establish likely relevance. In doing so, the accused cannot rely on
speculative assertions”.
[94]       Further,
in Batte, Doherty J.A. opined that it is not sufficient that a record might
assist in cross-examining a complainant. It must contain something that has
impeachment value.  At para. 77, he stated:
[95]       Ultimately,
in accordance with Mills at para. 124, the test for “likely
relevant" in s. 278.5(1) is whether there is a reasonable possibility that
the information is logically probative to an issue at trial which can include
the credibility of witnesses and the reliability of evidence. This requires
case-specific evidence or information to show that the record in issue is
likely relevant to an issue at trial.
[96]       In
sum, the “likely relevance” threshold requires that the presiding judge be
satisfied that there is a reasonable possibility that the information is
logically probative to an issue at trial or the competence of a witness to
testify.  Section 278.3(4) of the Code sets out a number of assertions
by the accused that are “not sufficient on their own to establish that the
record is likely relevant to an issue at trial or to the competence of a
witness to testify”. Many of the applicant’s assertions fall within this list.
[97]       In
my opinion, the applicant’s materials do not disclose grounds to establish that
the materials sought are likely relevant at stage one. The nexus between the
applicant’s claims of relevance and those factors listed in s. 278.3(4)
demonstrate that the interests of justice do not favour production.
[98]       On
this alternative basis, the application can be dismissed. However, for the sake
of completeness, I now turn to the final segment of my analysis.
[99]       Where
the JSPA or Mills regimes do not apply to bar disclosure, the
framework established by the Supreme Court in Vice Media may
nevertheless apply to prevent disclosure of the records sought.
[100]   Paragraph
49 from Lim #4, goes to the point that the analysis within Vice Media, does not replace O’Connor or
Mills and instead must be considered alongside these tests (whichever is
chosen as appropriate).
[101]   Further,
the relevant passage in Arsenault, as referred to above, states that the
second step of Vice Media, is actually decided on whether the test in Mills
or O’Connor (whichever is relevant) has been met: Arsenault, at
para. 378:
[102]   I agree with the Third Party’s submission wherein it is
postulated that where an application for third party production is governed by
the Mills regime, satisfying the disclosure requirements of that regime is
a precondition to disclosure under Vice Media. If an accused has failed
to meet its disclosure requirements, this is determinative within the Vice
Media framework. However, in the event a court finds that the accused has
complied with the requirements of the Mills regime, it is necessary to
proceed to the balancing analysis.
[103]   In this case, the parties essentially agree that step two of Vice
Media requires a determination as to whether the Mills or the O’Connor
regime applies. The parties disagree as to which regime actually applies – Mills
or O’Connor – with the Crown supporting the Third Party’s assertion
of Mills. The applicant argues that since the O’Connor
regime (rather than the Mills regime) applies, Lim #4 should be
adhered to strictly and the O’Connor regime should be “fused” with Vice
Media: at para. 64:
[104]   Notably,
the ruling in Vice Media divided the Supreme Court five to four. Justice
Moldaver wrote for the majority, stating at para. 105:
[105]   It
is clear from both the majority and dissenting opinions in Vice Media,
that any application of the framework cannot skim over the rights of the
journalist/media/press, as they are deserving of protection.  Even under the Lim
#4 “fusion approach”, the interests of the media would need to be given due
consideration. As such, the s.7 Charter rights of an accused, in making
full answer and defence, would be considered alongside the “rights of a journalist(s)”
and the privacy rights of their sources (where appropriate).
[106]   I
accept the submissions from the Third Party, largely contingent on their
application of Mills, rather than O’Connor. While claiming that
the discussion in Lim #4 is erroneous and ought not be followed, the Third
Party aligns itself with both Arsenault and Mund). I observe that
in Lim #4, the jurist considered Arsenault, ultimately making the
following conclusion at para. 50:
[107]   As
it stands, given the discussion and analysis in Lim #4, one cannot reconcile
the approach in that case with Arsenault.
[108]   While
Arsenault and Mund are out-of-province lower court decisions, my
preference is the reasoning found within both of these Quebec cases.
[109]   I
also acknowledge the following statement that flows from the authorities for
the purposes of my analysis.
[110]   As
intimated earlier, I adopt the reasoning in Mund. The court in Mund
described the approach taken in Arsenault as the “adapted Vice Media
test”. In the circumstances of this case, such is not to be confused with the “fusion”
O’Connor/Vice Media approach.
[111]   In
the realm of Arsenault/Mund, “adapted” simply means that in addressing Vice
Media, the Supreme Court was concerned with claims for disclosure made by
the state (i.e., police seeking disclosure). In Arsenault (and later in Mund)
it was an accused who sought disclosure from a journalist. As such, some of the
Vice Media language became less relevant and the ‘adapted framework’ was
borne. See Mund at para. 171:
[112]   As
was contemplated in Arsenault, to adapt the Vice Media regime
to accused’s application, the analysis must be carried out by replacing at each
stage of the analysis the state's interest in investigating crimes and
prosecuting their perpetrators with the right of the accused to full answer and
defense.
[113]   While
neither the court in Arsenault nor Mund specify a framework for a
Mills/Vice Media fusion approach, they also do not engage in a full Mills,
then Vice Media analysis.
[114]   Again,
I am persuaded by the reasoning advanced in Mund. The court - modeling
their decision off of Arsenault, affirmed Mills as the proper
approach, and then considered its requirements within the Vice Media
framework, as referenced below in the paragraphs from the decision.
[115]   As
under the JSPA, the balancing exercise is the heart of the Vice Media
analysis. Justice Moldaver listed numerous non-exhaustive factors to consider
in balancing the rights of the accused against the media’s right to privacy in the
gathering and disseminating of the news. While rather repetitive, each factor
is referenced and addressed in turn below; following the guidance of the court’s
decision in Arsenault and expanded upon in Mund.
[116]   This
factor does not relate solely to the publication of the article in question.
Journalists and journalism suffer from a “chilling effect” when sources are
afraid to speak for fear that their identity or their communications might be
revealed. The same is true when journalists are forced to worry that they may
be compelled to reveal the identities of their sources (and the content of
their communications) to the authorities. Ultimately, forced disclosure may
discourage sources from speaking out and journalists from performing an important
role in our democracy of informing the public. Ms. Clairmont’s evidence
supports the existence of a chilling effect in this instance. This criterion
militates against disclosure.
[117]   The
scope of the records sought by the application is extremely wide. It covers all
exchanges between Ms. Clairmont and her sources, regardless of the subject to
which they relate. Courts have been clear that such applications are correctly
characterized as thinly veiled fishing expeditions. This criterion therefore
militates against disclosure.
[118]   Again,
as referenced earlier in these reasons, I am persuaded that the applicant has
not demonstrated any probative value in the records being sought. This factor therefore
militates against disclosure.
[119]   As mentioned
earlier, much of the information, (aside from Source 3) that the applicant
seeks production of, can be obtained through sources other than Ms. Clairmont’s
journalistic files. I am informed that the police did not obtain a statement
from the third individual. In any event, this criterion militates against
disclosure.
[120]   The
important role of the media, while stated above, was addressed by the court in Mund,
at paras. 218-220.
[121]   As was
the case in Mund, this case arises in the context of alleged sexual
assault survivors and their reluctance to come forward to report instances of
abuse. This criterion therefore militates against disclosure.
[122]   Where
records sought pertain to a complainant’s identity as a sexual abuse victim,
disclosing such information can be detrimental to the complainant and any other
person who might want to come forward, whether such information is eventually
published or not. This factor has repeatedly been recognized by various courts when
conducting such a balancing exercise.
[123]   In my
opinion, the overall guidance arising from Vice
Media, viewed and analyzed either independently or “in fusion” with the
relevant Code provisions militates against production.
[124]   For
all of the aforementioned reasons, I find that the JSPA, as codified
through s. 39.1 CEA, applies in this case.
[125]   Thus,
the impugned journalist records are privileged. In the alternative, the
applicant has not satisfied his onus under the requisite s. 278/Mills regime
or through the application of the Vice Media factors. for production of any
of Ms. Clairmont’s notes, records, or related materials. The application is dismissed.