[1]              
This was a motion brought by the applicant
husband for parenting time with the parties’ two children, S., a daughter, age
6, and J., a son, age 2. The husband has not had any parenting time since
August 16, 2024. He seeks a temporary, without prejudice, order for parenting
time every Saturday, from 9:00 a.m. to Monday morning at school and every
Wednesday, from after school to 7:00 p.m. The respondent wife opposes the
husband having any unsupervised parenting time.
[2]              
The issues for me to decide are:
[3]              
I find that it is in the children’s best interests
to have supervised parenting time with the husband for the next four weeks,
pursuant to the schedule described below. The parties shall then return before
me with the benefit of supervision notes with a view to expanding the husband’s
parenting time.
[4]              
By way of background facts, the parties were
married in Pakistan on February 6, 2015, pursuant to an arranged marriage.
[5]              
The husband sponsored the wife, and about a year
after marriage, the wife immigrated to Canada in November 2016.
[6]              
The parties’ two children, S., a daughter, age
6, and J., a son, age 2, were both born in Canada.
[7]              
The parties lived in a matrimonial home in North
York, which is owned by the husband and the paternal grandparents, who the wife
named as third parties in this action.
[8]              
Throughout the marriage, the husband’s brother
resided in the matrimonial home in the basement unit and contributed to the
mortgage on title to the house.
[9]              
At one point, the wife’s sister was married to
the husband’s brother. They have since divorced.
[10]          
The parties separated on July 30, 2024, when the
husband was charged criminally with two counts of sexual assault and one count
of assault against the wife.
[11]          
As conditions of his release, the husband is not
permitted to have contact with the wife, directly or indirectly, except through
a mutually agreeable third party to arrange for parenting time. He is also
prohibited from being within 100 metres of the wife and cannot attend at the
matrimonial home.
[12]          
The wife describes a relationship of coercive
control on the part of the husband, including him taking possession of her
identification documents, not permitting her to drive or work, financially
controlling her, and perpetrating family violence toward her psychologically,
physically and sexually. The husband denies all such allegations.
[13]          
After being charged criminally, the husband
moved into his parents’ condominium and his parents moved into the basement
unit of the matrimonial home with the husband’s brother.
[14]          
The wife deposes that she is being mistreated
and subject to harassing and abusive behaviour by the husband’s parents and the
husband’s brother, both during the marriage and post-separation. One example of
this which concerned the Court relates to the wife’s request to use the laundry
room in the basement of the matrimonial home after separation. The husband’s
counsel acknowledges that the wife’s request to use the laundry room in the
basement of the matrimonial home is problematic because she asked to use it
from 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on a Saturday without the husband’s parents or
brother being present. No alternative was offered to the wife in terms of an
agreeable time for her to use the laundry machine. Instead, the husband’s
parents have suggested she go to a laundromat. The wife has been doing laundry
for both children and herself by handwashing. She does not have a driver’s
licence or use of a car. The husband deposed that no one has “forced” the wife
to wash the children’s clothing by hand. However, I find that this response is
disingenuous. The husband’s suggestion that the wife use a laundromat for her
laundry and for the two young children is not a reasonable suggestion in my
view nor is it child-focused. This incident demonstrates the high level of
conflict between not only the parties but the husband’s extended family and the
wife. This is not in the children’s best interests, particularly, when the wife
is asking to use the laundry machine to clean the clothing of two young
children.
[15]          
The test the court is required to consider when
determining parenting time is the best interests of the child: s. 16(1) of the Divorce
Act.
[16]          
Primary consideration is to be given to the
children’s physical, emotional and psychological safety, security and
well-being: s. 16(2) of the Divorce Act, and Pierre
v. Pierre, 2021
ONSC 5650 (SCJ).
[17]          
It is also in a child’s best interests when
making a parenting order that his or her caregiver be physically and
emotionally safe.  Q.M.S.Q. v. S.Q. 2021 ONCJ 334 (OCJ); N.S.
v. A.N.S. 2021
ONSC 5283 (SCJ).
[18]          
Section 16(3) sets out the list of factors for
the court to consider in determining the circumstances of a child and
determining best interests.
[19]          
The court is required to undertake a broad
analysis of each child’s specific situation:
[20]          
 I agree with Pazaratz, J. in Dayboll v.
Binag, 2022 ONSC 6510 (CanLII) at para., 19 that
[21]          
The wife maintains that it is in the children’s
best interests to have supervised parenting time with the husband.
[22]          
The written record before me is conflicted. The
wife describes a marriage and relationship replete with family violence and the
husband denies all such allegations. Although the record has not been tested
and cannot be without viva voce evidence, there are some conclusions that can
be drawn from the affidavits filed by each party.
[23]          
A party who seeks to reduce normal parenting time will usually be
required to provide a justification for taking such a position.
[24]          
The wife’s position is that supervision of the
husband’s parenting time is justified for the following reasons:
[25]          
Based on the above, the wife has legitimate
fears for the safety of the children and seeks supervision of the husband’s
parenting time.
[26]          
The husband’s position is that the wife has not
demonstrated any reason for his parenting time to be supervised. He argues that
the Children’s Aid Society (“CAS”) has been involved with the family and
supervised parenting time was not recommended by them or the police. Finally,
the husband submits that the criminal charges are based on false allegations
and have nothing to do with the children and, therefore, should not result in
him having supervised parenting time with them.
[27]          
Moreover, the husband takes the position that
the wife is preventing  and restricting him from having parenting time. While
the husband acknowledges that he saw the children twice, on August 10th
and 16th, 2024, when his sister arranged the parenting time with the
wife, he does not explain why no further parenting time was arranged. Neither
does he provide any reason why he did not arrange supervised parenting time
between August and now, even if he did not agree that such supervision was
necessary. If the husband’s priority was to have parenting time with the two
children, one would have thought that he ought to have taken whatever steps
necessary to spend time with them, even if supervised, to at least resume
spending time with them.
[28]          
The wife submits that after the August 16, 2024
visit, she noticed that J. came home with bruises. When the wife asked the
husband’s sister about the bruises, she emailed the wife on August 17, 2024 and
cancelled the next parenting visit that had been scheduled for the husband.
Thereafter, the wife was agreeable to the husband having parenting time on
supervised basis. She completed the intake form at Brayden Supervision Centre
and advised the husband of this. Despite this, the husband did not take the
necessary steps to exercise parenting time on a supervised basis.
[29]          
I find that the wife has met the onus of
demonstrating that on a balance of probabilities, it is in the children’s best
interests for their parenting time with the husband to be supervised, at least
for a period of time.
[30]          
The CPIN Disclosure demonstrates that the
daughter recalls that the husband slapped her once, but she didn’t know why;
she recalled being with her brother on the couch and seeing her father push her
mother to the ground and drag her by the leg to the bedroom. She also reported
that her uncle yelled at her mother and she saw two new locks on the door where
her uncle lives.
[31]          
While it is possible that the wife has
influenced the daughter, it is just as probable, if not more probable that the
child has been exposed to parental conflict and conflict between the husband’s
parents and his brother toward their wife. This is not in the children’s best
interests.
[32]          
The husband swore two affidavits in support of
the relief he is seeking. The first affidavit sworn by the husband was dated
September 18, 2024 and contained 40 paragraphs. The second affidavit was sworn
by the husband on November 6, 2024 and contained 24 paragraphs. The husband did
not include any details, whatsoever, of his involvement with the children in
either affidavit, demonstrating that he was integrally involved in their care
in either affidavit. Rather, he made vague statements such as:
[33]          
For example, the father did not name the
daughter’s teacher, or the children’s doctors, or discuss what his typical
routine with the children was. Nor did the father express any details of the
children’s attachment to him. There was no mention of things the children like
to do with him (other than taking them to Downsview Park), the children’s
bedtime or bath routines, or their meal and feeding routines.
[34]          
In answer to a question from the Court, when
asked what the father’s plan was in terms of reinstating his parenting time
given that J. is only two years of age and had not had any parenting time in
almost 3 months, instead of going to immediate overnight parenting time, the
husband’s counsel advised that it would be in the court’s discretion which is
why he sought parenting time as he proposed or whatever temporary, without
prejudice, regular parenting time as this Honourable Court deems appropriate.
Again, one of would have expected the husband to have thought about what
graduated, step-up plan, would have been in his children’s best interests,
given his familiarity with them and their respective temperaments, instead of
leaving it entirely to the court.
[35]          
Giving primary consideration to both children’s
physical, emotional and psychological safety, J.’s young age and both
children’s need for stability and consistency, I find that it is in the
children’s best interests to have supervised time with the husband for a period
of time.
[36]          
A parenting schedule that will be
developmentally supporting of J., age 2, in particular, is one where both
children will be safe, comforted by both parents and the children will be
protected from harmless levels of stress and conflict. Accordingly, supervised
parenting time by Brayden Supervision Services will provide both the children
and the husband with an opportunity to resume spending time together in a
protected manner and provide regular opportunities for the husband to be
involved with their direct care, such as playing, teaching, soothing, settling,
routines and transitions. With the benefit of obtaining the supervision notes,
the father’s parenting time can begin to take place on an unsupervised basis
with some assurances that the children will be able to manage overnight time
with him.
[37]          
The supervision of the husband’s parenting time
is not intended to be a long-term remedy. Rather, it is meant to occur on a
temporary and time-limited basis designed to resolve the current parental
impasse over parenting time and more importantly, to ensure that the children
reconnect to the husband in a sensitive and gradual basis, focused only on
their needs.
[38]          
Accordingly, this court makes the following order: