[1]              
Cary Kaplan moves to dismiss OZ Merchandising
Inc.’s claim against him. OZ Merchandising opposes the motion; it contends the claim
against Mr. Kaplan requires a trial.
[2]              
The claim for oppression against Mr. Kaplan
personally for punitive damages – the only claim against Mr. Kaplan – cannot
succeed. The claim against Mr. Kaplan is also statute-barred under the Limitations
Act, 2002, S.O. 2002, c. 24, Sch. B. Mr. Kaplan’s motion is granted and the
claim against him is dismissed, with costs.
[3]              
A brief review of the procedural history is
necessary to explain the timing of this motion and the limited basis on which
it was argued.
[4]              
OZ Merchandising’s claim against certain
defendants, but not Mr. Kaplan, was initially commenced in 2004. In December 2012,
the claim was amended to seek relief under the oppression remedy provisions of
the Business Corporations Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. B.16, s. 248, and the Canada
Not-for-profit Corporations Act, S.C. 2009, c. 23, s. 253.  Mr. Kaplan was
added as a defendant at that time. OZ Merchandising alleges that by ceasing to
operate the Canadian Professional Soccer League Inc. (“CPSL”) and transferring CPSL’s
business to the Canadian Soccer League Inc. (“CSL”) and the CSL Association
Inc. (“CSLA”), the CPSL, CSL, CSLA, and the personal defendants (defined in the
claim as the “Directors”), including Mr. Kaplan, conducted the business of
these corporations in an oppressive manner. At the motion hearing, OZ
Merchandising confirmed that the only relief sought in the statement of claim
against Mr. Kaplan is for punitive damages, in the amount of $100,000. Mr.
Kaplan was the former Commissioner and Chairman of the CPSL and then a director
of the CSL.
[5]              
 In April 2019, the claims against the Canadian
Soccer Association, Eastern Ontario District Soccer Association, and The
Ontario Soccer Association – which did not include claims of oppressive conduct
– proceeded to a trial before a jury. Mr. Kaplan had previously been noted in
default. At the outset of the trial, Mr. Kaplan moved for an order setting
aside the noting in default against him. I granted Mr. Kaplan’s motion, set
aside the noting in default against him, and ordered that he would be permitted
to file written submissions on the law relating to the claims made against him
in the claim. The claim against Mr. Kaplan did not proceed before the jury in
April 2019 because issues of fact and the assessment of damages in respect of a
claim for equitable relief must be tried without a jury: Courts of Justice
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, s. 108(2).
[6]              
In my reasons for judgment dismissing the claims
against the Canadian Soccer Association, Eastern Ontario District Soccer
Association, and The Ontario Soccer Association, I directed that I would remain
seized for purposes of addressing the claims against the remaining defendants,
including Mr. Kaplan: OZ Merchandising Inc. v. Canadian Professional Soccer
League Inc., 2019 ONSC 5017, at para. 179. Mr. Kaplan filed his written
submissions on this motion in November 2022, after OZ Merchandising’s appeal to
the Court of Appeal for Ontario was dismissed[1]
and after its application for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada
was dismissed.[2]
[7]              
This motion was originally returnable in
February 2023. On the original return date, I dismissed the plaintiff’s motion
that I recuse myself from hearing Mr. Kaplan’s motion to dismiss. The plaintiff
also asked that Mr. Kaplan’s motion be “linked” with the plaintiff’s proposed
motions for default judgment against certain defendants and, as a consequence,
delayed. I declined to do so. Some of OZ Merchandising’s submissions on this
motion that a trial is required to address the issues raised echo its prior
request to link Mr. Kaplan’s motion to the proposed default judgment motions.
[8]              
  I adjourned Mr. Kaplan’s motion to April 2023.
OZ Merchandising filed its written submissions in March 2023 and Mr. Kaplan
filed reply submissions in April, prior to the scheduled return date. The
motion was again adjourned because OZ Merchandising advised it was seeking
leave to appeal to the Divisional Court from my dismissal of the motion that I
recuse myself.
[9]              
In April 2024, counsel for OZ Merchandising
confirmed he had no instructions to proceed with the motion in Divisional Court
seeking leave to appeal. In June 2024, OZ Merchandising renewed its request
that I “link” Mr. Kaplan’s motion to any motions for default judgment brought
by OZ Merchandising. No motions for default judgment had been filed.[3] I denied the request and
set the date of October 4, 2024 for the return of Mr. Kaplan’s motion.
[10]          
In these reasons I treat OZ Merchandising’s
request to amend the claim as a preliminary issue; however, it is important to
note that the request was made at the hearing only after the submissions
on behalf of Mr. Kaplan were completed. Inexplicably, there was no prior notice
given to Mr. Kaplan or to the court that an amendment to the statement of claim
would be requested. I denied the request to amend the claim, with reasons to
follow. These are my reasons.
[11]          
Paragraph 33 of the statement of claim reads:
[12]          
OZ Merchandising proposed the following
amendment:
[13]          
Paragraph 33 of the statement of claim appears
in an 8-paragraph section headed “Conduct of the CPSL, CSL, CSLA and the
Directors – Oppression Remedy.” This section is the only section of the claim
in which oppressive conduct is alleged on the part of the CPSL, CSL, CSLA and
the personal defendants, including Mr. Kaplan. The gravamen of OZ
Merchandising’s oppression claim is that the CPSL became judgment-proof because
of the alleged decision to “abandon” the CPSL in favour of the CSL. To remedy that oppression, OZ Merchandising requests an
order directing the CSL and/or the CSLA to pay to OZ Merchandising any damages
awarded against the CPSL in the action.[4]
OZ Merchandising further alleges that the conduct of the CPSL, CSL, CSLA and
the personal defendants was “so arbitrary, reckless, capricious, malicious, and
high-handed, that the Plaintiff is entitled to an award of punitive or
exemplary damages as against these Defendants, in the amount of $100,000.”[5]
[14]          
Amending the claim in the manner proposed would
expand the oppression claim to include all conduct alleged against the CPSL,
CSL, and CSLA in the statement of claim, including the claims against these
entities for misrepresentation, “breaches of legal duties”, and intentional or
negligent interference with OZ Merchandising’s economic interests. To expand OZ
Merchandising’s oppression claim in such manner at this late stage would result
in prejudice to Mr. Kaplan that could not be compensated for by costs or an
adjournment. The oppression claim as pleaded was included in the claim 12 years
ago. Five years ago, I set aside the noting in default against Mr. Kaplan, and
ordered that he would be restricted to filing submissions on the law in respect
of the claim as pleaded against him. Mr. Kaplan filed his written submission on
this motion two years ago. At no time during any of the case conferences or
adjournment requests associated with this motion did OZ Merchandising provide
notice that it would be seeking to amend the statement of claim in the manner
now proposed or at all. OZ Merchandising did not even do so at the outset of
the motion; instead, OZ Merchandising waited until counsel for Mr. Kaplan had
completed his submissions before raising the issue.
[15]          
It is, quite simply, far too late for OZ
Merchandising to seek to amend its claim.
[16]          
Finally, I note OZ Merchandising’s confirmation
at the hearing that the only claim against Mr. Kaplan is for punitive damages as
set out in paragraph 36 of the claim. This paragraph, too, uses the “as
described above” language to describe the impugned oppressive conduct. It is a
clear reference to the conduct described in the 8-paragraph oppression remedy
section of the claim. OZ Merchandising’s admission that this is the only claim
against Mr. Kaplan cannot be reconciled with the request to broaden the scope
of the oppression claim in the manner proposed.
[17]          
For these reasons, I denied OZ Merchandising’s
request to amend the statement of claim.
[18]          
The CSL formally admitted in
May 2015, in response to a Notice to Admit delivered by OZ Merchandising, that
it was a successor corporation to CPSL and would be responsible for CPSL’s
liabilities in the action, if any: OZ Merchandising Inc. v. Canadian
Profession Soccer League Inc., 2016 ONSC 352, at para. 1.
[19]          
I agree with Mr. Kaplan that
by this admission, any alleged oppression caused by “rendering the CPSL into a
non-operating business” has been rectified. If OZ Merchandising is entitled to
damages against the CPSL, the CSL is liable for those damages. Through this
admission by the CSL that it is the successor corporation to the CPSL, OZ
Merchandising has secured the very remedy it was seeking to rectify the alleged
oppressive conduct.
[20]          
The nature and scope of the “fit order” a court
may impose under s. 248 of the OBCA is
circumscribed by the requirements that the order “rectify the matter complained
of” and address only the aggrieved parties’ interests as corporate
stakeholders: Budd v. Gentra, 1998 CanLII 5811 (ON CA), at para. 33,
citing Naneff v. Con-Crete Holdings Ltd. (1995), 1995 CanLII 959 (ON CA), 23 O.R. (3d) 481 (Ont.
C.A.), at pp. 489-90.
[21]          
In this case, the alleged
oppressive conduct has been rectified; there is nothing left to remedy through
an order under s. 248 of the OBCA.
[22]          
A director or officer may be personally liable
for a monetary order – the only relief sought against Mr. Kaplan – under s. 248
of the OBCA,
[23]          
The court must determine: (i) whether there are
acts pleaded against specific directors or officers which, taken in the context
of the entirety of the pleadings, could provide the basis for finding that the
corporation acted oppressively; and (ii) whether there is a reasonable basis in
the pleadings on which a court could decide that the alleged oppression could
be properly rectified by a monetary order against a director or officer
personally: Budd, at para. 47.
[24]          
OZ Merchandising argues that a trial is required
to determine Mr. Kaplan’s involvement in the delay in CSL’s admission that it
was a successor corporation to CPSL. OZ Merchandising contends that paragraphs
31 and 32 of the statement of claim incorporate delay as an aspect of the
alleged oppressive conduct.
[25]          
This argument is without merit because there is
nothing in either paragraph of the claim that touches on the issue of delay. The
only oppressive conduct alleged is “rendering the CPSL into a non-operating
business” (paragraph 31 of the claim). In relation to reasonable expectations,
OZ Merchandising pleads at paragraph 32 that,
[26]          
There is nothing in paragraph 32 of the claim
that raises the issue of delay as an aspect of the alleged oppressive conduct.
[27]          
In any event, the consequences of delay were
addressed by Hackland J. in his endorsement dealing with “costs thrown away” in respect of OZ Merchandising’s “wasted and unnecessary
time” in pursuing the successor company issue against the CPSL and CSL, up to
the point when the CSL “finally formally admitted their successor status and
their resultant responsibility for the actions of CPSL which are sought to be
impugned in this action”; Hackland J. fixed costs thrown away in the total
amount of $30,000: OZ Merchandising Inc. v. Canadian Profession Soccer
League Inc., 2016 ONSC 4272, at paras. 5 and 12.
[28]          
OZ Merchandising’s oppression claim against Mr.
Kaplan founders for three reasons. First, as discussed, the alleged oppression
caused by the CPSL ceasing operations has been rectified by CSL’s admission that
it is the successor corporation and would be responsible for CPSL’s liabilities
in the action, if any.
[29]          
Second, there is no reasonable basis in the
pleadings that would allow me to find that the alleged oppression – if it had
not already been rectified – could be rectified by an award of punitive and
exemplary damages against Mr. Kaplan. Punitive damages are intended “to give a
defendant his or her just dessert (retribution)’, to deter the defendant and
others from similar misconduct, and to denounce what has occurred: Whitten
v. Pilot Insurance Co., 2002 SCC 18 (CanLII), [2002] 1 S.C.R. 595, at para. 94. Achieving these
objectives through an award of punitive damages would do nothing to rectify the
oppressive conduct alleged in this case.
[30]          
Third, if Mr. Kaplan were instrumental in the decision
to wind down the CPSL and start up the CSL while the lawsuit against the CPSL
was ongoing, this conduct did not amount to “high-handed, malicious, arbitrary
or highly reprehensible misconduct that departs to a marked degree from
ordinary standards of decent behaviour” such that an award of punitive damages
would be justified: see Whitten, at para. 94.
[31]          
The oppression claim against Mr. Kaplan fails.
[32]          
The alleged oppressive
conduct was not of an ongoing nature. An oppression remedy claim under the OBCA
is subject to the general two-year limitation period prescribed by s. 4 of the Limitations
Act, 2002: Maurice v.
Alles, 2016 ONCA 287, at
para.43.
[33]          
OZ Merchandising raises the issue of
discoverability in support of its position that the claim against Mr. Kaplan is
not statute-barred. OZ Merchandising contends that the issue of its knowledge
that Mr. Kaplan “engaged in some conduct that was tortious on its own which
took the director out of the role of a directing mind” is an issue that can be
better tested at trial with a full evidentiary record.
[34]          
I disagree. OZ Merchandising has not pleaded
that Mr. Kaplan should be held personally liable for tortious conduct that took
him out of the role of a directing mind; to the contrary, the only basis on
which OZ Merchandising seeks to impose personal liability on Mr. Kaplan is
under the oppression remedy in his capacity as a director or officer of the
corporation. This is expressly acknowledged by OZ Merchandising in its
submission that, “[a]s Commissioner of the CPSL and then the CSL, the
oppressive conduct in shutting down the CPSL in the face of litigation and
transferring over all of its operations and assets to CSL can clearly be
attributed to Kaplan as head of both leagues.” Mr. Kaplan was added to the
action more than five years after the CSL was created and the alleged
oppressive conduct occurred. The claim against him is statute-barred.
[35]          
The claim against Mr. Kaplan is dismissed, with
costs.
[36]          
Mr. Kaplan has provided his costs outline; OZ
Merchandising has not. In the event the parties are unable to agree on costs, Mr.
Kaplan may provide any additional submissions, not to exceed three pages, by December
12, 2024. OZ Merchandising is to provide its costs outline and submissions,
also not to exceed three pages, by December 23, 2024.