[1]              
On July 22, 2021, Police Constable Kyle Bakker
(“PC Bakker”) of the Chatham-Kent Police Service (“CKPS”) conducted a traffic
stop in the municipality of Chatham-Kent for a silver Kia with an obstructed
license plate.
[2]              
The driver was the accused, Amy Pineo-Fisher
(“Pineo-Fisher”). The accused Frank Duquette (“Duquette”) was sitting in the
front passenger seat. A third individual, Trisha Nahmabin (“Nahmabin”), was
sitting in the back seat.
[3]              
Pineo-Fisher was the vehicle’s registered owner.
[4]              
During the traffic stop, PC Bakker observed, in
plain view, an orange cap covering the needle of a syringe and suspected
illicit drugs inside an unzipped pouch of a backpack that was on the passenger
floor of the vehicle at or between Duquette’s feet. PC Bakker placed Duquette
under arrest for possession of a Schedule I substance contrary to the Controlled
Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 1996, c. 19 (“CDSA”).
[5]              
During the investigation, PC Bakker discovered
that Duquette and Pineo-Fisher were not allowed to associate with each other
pursuant to an undertaking. Both were then placed under arrest for failing to
comply with that undertaking.
[6]              
A search of the backpack led to the discovery of
a large quantity of methamphetamine and fentanyl. As a result, all three
passengers were arrested for possession for the purpose
of trafficking a Schedule I substance, namely methamphetamine and fentanyl.
[7]              
The total fentanyl seized amounted to 26.5
grams. The total powdered methamphetamine seized amounted to 49.4 grams and
0.95 millilitres in liquid form. Seized later from Duquette was $745 in
Canadian currency.
[8]              
As a result of the investigation, Duquette and
Pineo-Fisher were charged with two counts of possession
for the purpose of trafficking in a Schedule I substance, namely
methamphetamine and fentanyl, all contrary to the CDSA.
[9]              
The backseat passenger, Nahmabin, was ultimately
released from custody with no charges.
[10]          
The defence admitted the following evidence on this
blended voir dire/trial:
[11]          
The applicant, Duquette, brought an application
alleging breaches of his ss. 8, 9, 10(a) and 10(b) rights under the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms (“Charter”).
[12]          
Four CKPS Police Constables testified at the
blended voir dire/trial: PC Jeff Teetzel, PC Jason Williams, PC Bakker,
and PC Eric Kuczko.
[13]          
Neither accused elected to testify at the trial.
[14]          
At the conclusion of the trial, I dismissed all
charges against the co-accused Pineo-Fisher. For brief oral reasons provided, I
found that the Crown had failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that
Pineo-Fisher had knowledge of the illicit substances that were discovered by
the police in a backpack located at or between Duquette’s feet.
[15]          
For similar reasons, I have concluded that the
Crown has failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused Duquette
knowingly possessed the methamphetamine and fentanyl. For this reason, I do not
need to consider the applicant’s Charter application as my assessment of
the testimony of PC Bakker is dispositive of this issue.
[16]          
PC Bakker has been with the CKPS for
approximately three years. At 3:04 p.m. on July 22, 2021, he was on general
patrol driving his cruiser down Gillard Street in Wallaceburg, Ontario. At this
time, he observed a silver Kia parked on the side of the road facing the wrong
direction. He considered this odd, although not illegal, as he had never seen a
vehicle parked in this area before. He observed no occupants in the vehicle.
[17]          
He continued down the road some distance before
turning his cruiser around to investigate the matter further. By the time he
arrived back at the scene, the vehicle had left but was located a short
distance away. PC Bakker pursued the vehicle and noticed that the rear license
plate was covered and obstructed. Since this was an infraction under the Highway
Traffic Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. H.8 (“HTA”), he proceeded to stop
the vehicle and initiated an HTA investigation.
[18]          
PC Bakker attended the driver’s side of the
vehicle and observed Pineo-Fisher in the driver’s seat, Duquette in the front
passenger’s seat, and Nahmabin in the rear seat. He requested and received
vehicle related paperwork from Pineo-Fisher and then attended the passenger’s
side of the vehicle and ran the plates through the radio.
[19]          
During the investigation, PC Bakker testified
that he did not recall several key parts of the alleged interactions that he
may have had with the occupants of the vehicle. For instance, PC Bakker did not
specifically recall the following:
[20]          
As PC Bakker was waiting for the results of a Canadian
Police Information Centre query, he testified that from where he was “standing
on the side of the passenger side” he looked in the passenger side window and
observed a “large” grey Adidas backpack at Duquette’s feet. From that position,
he observed a large compartment in the backpack that was zipped closed and
another smaller compartment that was unzipped and open. “Inside” the “small compartment”,
he observed an orange tip or cap covering the needle of what he believed to be
“a syringe”, although he could not see the whole syringe. He also observed a clear
bag containing “kind of a clear substance”.
[21]          
At about this time, PC Bakker received
information from dispatch that Pineo-Fisher and Duquette were both subject to
undertakings with conditions not to associate.
[22]          
PC Bakker subsequently removed Duquette from the
vehicle and at 3:10 p.m. arrested him for possession of a controlled substance
contrary to the CDSA and failure to comply with an undertaking. He
provided Duquette with his s. 10(b) rights (i.e., right to counsel or “RTC”),
handcuffed him, and sat him down on a nearby curb.
[23]          
At 3:11 p.m., PC Bakker attended the driver’s
side of the vehicle and arrested Pineo-Fisher. He subsequently provided
Pineo-Fisher with her RTC and placed her in the rear of his cruiser.
[24]          
After seizing the backpack, PC Bakker “pulled
out” three syringes and a baggie of suspected methamphetamine from the small
compartment. PC Bakker searched the bag further and discovered a quantity of
illicit substances that was concealed within the larger compartment of the
backpack. The items seized from the backpack included the following:
[25]          
No photographs were taken of the obstructed
license plate.
[26]          
No photographs were taken of the backpack, and PC
Bakker did not know what he did with it after the search was completed.
[27]          
No items were fingerprinted or subjected to DNA
testing.
[28]          
The backpack contained nothing to suggest that
it belonged to any specific person including any one of the three occupants who
were in the vehicle at the time of the stop.
[29]          
At 3:17 p.m., PC Bakker provided Duquette with
his RTC based on the new charges of possession for the purpose of trafficking
methamphetamine and fentanyl.
[30]          
Eventually other officers arrived, and all three
individuals were transported to the CKPS Headquarters.
[31]          
A further search resulted in the discovery of
cell phones from both Duquette and Pineo-Fisher as well as $745 in Canadian
currency from Duquette’s person.
[32]          
At the station, PC Bakker issued an HTA
citation to Pineo-Fisher for obstructed plates.
[33]          
The defence argues that no direct evidence and
insufficient circumstantial evidence exists to demonstrate beyond a reasonable
doubt that Duquette knew the illicit substances were in the backpack. First, it
is not known when the bag was placed in the vehicle, who owned the bag, or
whether the accused was in a position to observe what PC Bakker allegedly
observed in the small compartment of the backpack. Finally, most of the illicit
substances were hidden out of sight inside the bag.
[34]          
Accordingly, the defence submits that the Crown
has failed to demonstrate knowledge and therefore possession of the drugs and on
that basis he ought to be acquitted of all charges.
[35]          
The Federal Prosecutor asserts that the evidence
demonstrates that the accused had knowledge and control and therefore possession
of the illicit drugs. The backpack was at his feet, right in front of him, with
the orange syringe cap and baggie containing a clear substance in plain view
and readily visible from a compartment that was unzipped and open. Further, $745
was also discovered on his person. When the evidence is considered in its
totality, the only inference is that the accused Duquette knew of and had
control over the illicit substances contained within the backpack at his feet.
[36]          
According, the Crown asserts that the accused
should be found guilty on all counts in the indictment.
[37]          
To convict a person accused of a crime, the
Crown must prove every element of each offence charged beyond a reasonable
doubt. In accordance with the guidance provided by the Supreme Court of Canada
in R. v. Lifchus, 1997 CanLII 319 (SCC), [1997] 3 S.C.R. 320, at para. 39, I instruct myself on
the criminal standard of proof.
[38]          
The credibility and reliability of a witness are
two distinct concepts. Simply, credibility relates to whether a witness was
telling the truth, and reliability is whether a witness, although apparently
honest, provides the court with inaccurate evidence: see R. v. Morrissey (1995),
1995 CanLII 3498 (ON CA), 22 O.R. (3d) 514 (C.A.), at p. 17.
[39]          
With all the above in mind, I will now consider
the evidence of the witnesses.
[40]          
When personal possession is alleged, the
knowledge element consists of two components. An accused must be aware that
they have physical custody of the thing alleged. And an accused must be aware
of what that thing is. These elements of knowledge must co-exist with an act of
control: see R. v. Lights, 2020 ONCA 128, 149 O.R. (3d) 273, at para. 45.
[41]          
The vehicle owned by Pineo-Fisher was observed
by PC Bakker parked on the side of the road and unoccupied a short time before he
initiated an HTA stop. After the stop and during the HTA
investigation, he observed a backpack at the feet of Duquette - the front seat passenger.
It is unknown how long that backpack was in the vehicle before the stop. It may
have been in the vehicle at the feet of Duquette for only a brief period (ie. someone
may have placed it there shortly after PC Bakker first observed the vehicle on
the side of the road), or it could have been placed there well before that time.
It is also unknown who may have placed the backpack in the vehicle. I may have
have been placed there by Pineo-Fisher or Duquette, or even Nahmabin.
[42]          
All that I know is that the backpack, which
could have belonged to anyone, was in Pineo-Fisher’s vehicle for an unknown
period of time before the police observed it at Duquette’s feet. Because it was
at the feet of Duquette is, in these circumstances, of no significance. An entirely
possible scenario is that Pineo-Fisher placed the backpack on the passenger
seat floor of her vehicle well before Duquette was an occupant – and that
Duquette may have first entered the vehicle just before the police stop.
[43]          
Of significance is the fact that Duquette may
not have been in a position where he could have observed the illicit items in
the small open compartment of the backpack. PC Bakker testified that he
observed in plain view the orange cap of what he believed to be a syringe and a
baggie containing a clear substance. But PC Bakker was in a very different position
from Duquette. PC Bakker was standing upright and looking down at the backpack
from the side of the vehicle. Duquette, on the other hand, was in a seated
position with the backpack located in front of him and at or between his feet.
The evidence is that the items observed by PC Bakker were located inside a
small compartment of the backpack, while the other substances were concealed
elsewhere, out of sight, inside the backpack.
[44]          
Based on the evidence, I have no idea how deep inside
the small open compartment the items were situated, the size of the opening to
the compartment, and finally, but most importantly, in what direction the
opening of this compartment was facing. The opening of this compartment could
very well have been facing away from Duquette and towards where PC Bakker was standing
at the side of the vehicle. Again, I do not have enough evidence to satisfy
myself that Duquette was in a position to observe any of the items that were located
inside this small compartment.
[45]          
The testimony of PC Bakker also raises real
concerns with respect to the reliability of his evidence, including his
observations of the backpack. I have already outlined those areas where PC Bakker
did not recall what he did or said during the investigation. While I do not
fault PC Bakker for having little to no recollection as it relates to some of
these areas, his poor memory regarding significant parts of the investigation, including
those areas having material importance to the investigation as a whole, cannot
be ignored.
[46]          
For instance, PC Bakker did not recall, and in
fact admitted, that he may have told Pineo-Fisher that the reason he stopped
the vehicle was because he observed her leaving from a known drug house. In my
view, this is such an important area that there is no reason why PC Bakker
would not have recollected whether he said this to Pineo-Fisher even years after
the event. While this one area in and of itself is troubling, when it is coupled
with his failure to recollect a significant number of other details central to the
very nature of the HTA/drug investigation, I am left with serious
concerns regarding the overall reliability of PC Bakker’s testimony, including
his initial observations regarding the backpack at or between Duquette’s feet.
[47]          
Lastly, the fact that Duquette had $745 in
Canadian currency on his person does not, in and of itself, assist with respect
to establishing the knowledge component of possession by Duquette in respect to
the drugs found in the backpack.
[48]          
In sum, I am not satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt, based on all the evidence, including that of PC Bakker, that the accused
had both knowledge and control and therefore possession of the illicit
substances found in the backpack.
[49]          
Accordingly, I find the accused not guilty on counts
one and two as set out in the indictment.