[1]    
The Applicant wife, S.P., moves to amend her
Application issued in May 2021. The Respondent husband, D.D., opposes the
relief being sought and, in the alternative, asks for a sizeable costs award
($170,000.00) against S.P. if the motion is granted.
[2]    
The proceeding is getting stale. Multiples
conferences have been held, and several motions too, but efforts to have the
case finally tried have failed.  A trial was to take place during the blitz
sittings in March/April 2024, however, it was adjourned (not on consent) at the
request of S.P.  It was then expected that a trial would occur during the blitz
sittings in October 2024, but that did not happen either because this motion,
and the leave application that necessarily preceded it, effectively adjourned
the hearing.
[3]    
The parties have two children who are now in
their mid-twenties. As originally constituted, the proceeding commenced by S.P.
was all about support, child and spousal, and property issues.
[4]    
S.P.’s motion to amend her pleading seeks to do
two things. First, to add four respondents to the proceeding – D.D.’s brother,
T.D., and his other brother, M.D., and two further persons, D.B. and G.B., who
are/were business associates of the husband and who loaned money in the past to
the wife. Second, to plead the tort of conspiracy and to claim damages arising
therefrom. The theory underlying the said cause of action is that the husband
and the four persons sought to be added as respondents have engaged in a
concerted effort to conceal the income and the assets of D.D., resulting in
damages to S.P. in excess of six million dollars.
[5]    
 This Court shall (that language is
mandatory) give permission to S.P. to amend her pleading as requested unless
the amendment would disadvantage D.D. in a way for which costs or an
adjournment could not compensate – 11(3) of the Family Law Rules.
[6]    
The test set out in subrule 11(3) is not an
onerous one.  To the contrary, the test “strongly favours permitting amendments
unless prejudice is demonstrated”, and thus, it is not wrong for the motion
judge to ask whether the party responding to a request to amend a pleading (here,
D.D.) has demonstrated prejudice that should preclude S.P. from amending her
Application as requested.  Studley v. Studley, 2022 ONCA 810 (CanLII),
at paragraph 15.
[7]    
Where, as here, the proposed amendments include
the pleading of a new cause of action (the tort of conspiracy), the draft
amended pleading must be read generously, and the amendment must be granted
unless it is “plain and obvious” that it discloses no reasonable claim in law.
In other words, even if accepted as true, do the material facts pleaded support
the new claim being advanced?  Smith v. Smith, 2021 ONSC 1990 (CanLII),
at paragraph 22; Bouzanis v. Bouzanis, 2021 ONSC 5330 (CanLII), at
paragraph 24.
[8]    
During the hearing of the motion, this Court
asked counsel for S.P. whether she agreed with the summary of the law of
conspiracy outlined at paragraphs 50 and 51 of the factum filed on behalf of
D.D., and counsel for S.P. replied in the affirmative. Paragraphs 50 and 51 of
the husband’s factum are set out below.
[9]    
 This Court takes no serious issue with what was
submitted on behalf of the husband in those two paragraphs. I would prefer,
however, to quote from the decision of Justice Goudge, for the Court of Appeal
for Ontario, in Agribrands Purina Canada Inc. v. Kasamekas, 2011 ONCA
460 (CanLII), at paragraph 24, where Goudge J.A. refers to the seminal
authority in Canada on the tort of civil conspiracy, the decision of the
Supreme Court of Canada in Canada Cement Lafarge Ltd. v. British Columbia
Lightweight Aggregate Ltd., 1983 CanLII 23 (S.C.C.). Paragraph 24 of the
decision in Agribrands, supra is set out below.
[10] In my opinion,
[11] On the first point, the amended pleading alleges the following:
[12]  The above alleged facts must be taken as a whole. If that is done,
and if the alleged facts are assumed to be true, then I am of the opinion that
they are capable of supporting the new cause of action being put forward by
S.P., whether it be the respondents’ intentional conduct predominantly designed
to cause injury to S.P. (the first category of the tort of civil conspiracy
recognized in Canadian law) or unlawful conduct conspiracy (the second
category).
[13]  Put another way, it is not “plain and obvious” that the amended
pleading advanced by S.P. discloses no reasonable claim in law.
[14]  It must be highlighted that D.D., in my respectful view, has
contributed to an appearance of a lack of transparency in terms of disclosure.
One example will suffice, something that arose during the hearing of the motion
being decided herein. This one example operates as a microcosm of the
obfuscation on the part of D.D. when it comes to disclosure.
[15]  On December 13, 2023, the parties appeared before Chang J. Among
other things, Justice Chang ordered that D.D. shall disclose “the applicable
statement of defence in the civil action involving [his] brother”. That order
was made on consent.
[16] Along with other items of disclosure ordered to be produced by Chang
J. that have not been produced by D.D., that specific order with regard to the
Toronto court proceeding has not been complied with.
[17]  As this Court was preparing for and hearing S.P.’s motion, I was
concerned as to why such a seemingly simple matter remained outstanding. I then
discovered that there is, in fact, no “statement of defence” in the Toronto
court proceeding because that proceeding commenced by M.D. is an application
and not an action.
[18]  Of course, that would have been known to D.D. when he
consented to the order made by Justice Chang. It would have been known
that S.P., her counsel, and Chang J. were under a misapprehension about the
nature of that court proceeding in Toronto.  It would have been known
that what S.P. really wanted was disclosure of what was filed in response to
M.D.’s claims, and it would have been known that the order being
consented to would go no distance to achieving that objective because no
“statement of defence” existed.
[19]  During the hearing of S.P.’s motion, this issue arose. I asked
counsel about it. Both counsel addressed it.  Both counsel were advised by this
Court that I thought it was advisable to obtain a transcript of the proceeding
before Justice Chang. Neither side objected to that. The transcript was
obtained, and copies were provided to both counsel for their review and for
their further submissions, if any.
[20]  During the hearing of S.P.’s motion, I was left with the clear
impression on behalf of D.D. that Justice Chang knew at the time that the order
was made that it would, or at least might, not be able to be complied with, and
that is why His Honour spoke about the potential for an affidavit by D.D.
explaining that a specified document cannot be produced because it simply does
not exist.
[21]  At the time, I thought that it would be very strange for a judge to
order that something like a “statement of defence” be disclosed if the judge
knew or even suspected that such an order could not be complied with because
the document simply did not exist.
[22]  So, I read the transcript of the court proceeding before Justice
Chang on December 13, 2023.     That review proved to be very discouraging.
[23]  There is nothing in that transcript that supports any
submission that Justice Chang had any reason to believe that the order for
production of the “statement of defence” in the Toronto court proceeding may
not be able to be complied with. There is nothing in that transcript
that supports any submission that Justice Chang had any reason to believe that
the said order might be the subject of the affidavit that His Honour referred
to as being a tool to be used where a document cannot be produced because it
does not exist. There is nowhere in that transcript that Chang J. was
advised that the court proceeding in Toronto was actually an application and,
therefore, there would be no “statement of defence” available.
[24]  If this is how D.D. approaches a very basic request for disclosure,
then I have serious concerns about how cooperative he has, or has not, been
about disclosure generally.
[25]  The most basic obligation in family law, a requirement that is both
immediate and ongoing, is the duty to disclose financial information. Roberts
v. Roberts, 2015 ONCA 450 (CanLII), at paragraph 11.
[26]  S.P. alleges that D.D. has failed miserably in adhering to that
obligation, and the conspiracy that she now alleges is linked to that alleged
intentional failure. This Court has no hesitation in concluding that a prima
facie case for conspiracy has been demonstrated.
[27]  On the second point, disadvantage or prejudice to D.D., there is
none. He will have plenty of time to sufficiently respond to the amended
pleading to be delivered on behalf of S.P. He will have lots of time to
question S.P. about her allegations of a conspiracy and to adequately prepare
for trial.  He will have at his disposal all of the litigation tools that he
needs to try to defeat the conspiracy claim, whether at trial or pretrial,
including a motion for summary judgment that may or may not raise an issue
about a limitation period. He will have the comfort of knowing that S.P. faces
a serious risk of paying significant costs if she is unsuccessful in her claim
for conspiracy, akin to a situation, for example, where fraud is alleged but
found to be without merit.
[28]  The trial that was scheduled to proceed this year has already been
adjourned. There are no fixed trial dates set. And, further, I have decided to
not make any order for costs in favour of S.P. even though she has been
completely successful on her motion.
[29]  The motion ought to have been brought much sooner than it was
brought.  By S.P.’s own affidavit evidence filed in support of the motion, she
knew about D.D.’s alleged financial disclosure avoidance, his tendency to
hinder the free flow of financial information between the parties, and his
business relationships with the four to-be-added respondents long before October
2024, when she finally decided to bring the within motion. In delaying the
bringing of the motion and effectively forcing another adjournment of the
trial, which trial was marked peremptory on her, S.P. acted unreasonably. She
is, therefore, to be deprived of the costs that she is otherwise presumptively
entitled to receive - 24(4) of the Family Law Rules.
[30]  The postponement of the trial, the costs decision made herein, and
the tools available to D.D. going forward, are sufficient compensation in the circumstances
of this case.
[31]  Finally, as for the request by D.D. for costs in the amount of
$170,000.00, which I gather is based on the notion that those costs were
incurred in preparation for a trial that has now been adjourned twice and will
now be wasted because the nature of the proceeding has changed significantly in
light of the conspiracy claim, I decline to make any such award.  If S.P. ends
up being successful on the conspiracy claim, then any such award made by this
Court today would be absurd. Further, the costs incurred by D.D. in having his
counsel prepare for trial previously will not be wasted.  They will be put to
good use in trying to defeat all of the claims advanced by S.P. in her original
pleading, which claims all still exist.
[32]  For the above reasons, S.P.’s motion is granted. She may amend her
Application in accordance with the draft attached as Exhibit “B” to her
affidavit sworn on October 21, 2024 (see the document on Case Center at page
Master A1000).
[33]  On costs, I have already decided that S.P. will not receive any
costs for the motion.  D.D. will not receive any costs thrown away for anything
that preceded the motion. I am not inclined to order costs of the motion in
favour of D.D., however, it would be procedurally unfair for me to decide that
insular issue in the absence of receiving submissions by counsel.
[34]  If D.D. wishes to pursue such an order under 24(4) of the Family
Law Rules, then he shall serve and file written submissions. Two pages
maximum, excluding necessary attachments. The filing deadline is January 10,
2025 at 4:00 p.m. S.P.’s response is due within ten calendar days after her
counsel’s receipt of D.D.’s submissions. No reply by D.D. is permitted.