[1]              
The Law Office of Martin Diegel (the “Firm”)
acts for the defendants in this action. Martin Diegel is the Firm’s principal.
At times material to the events that give rise to the parties’ dispute, another
lawyer, Jacob-Charles Diegel, also worked for the Firm.
[2]              
The plaintiffs bring this motion at an early
stage in the litigation for an order removing Martin Diegel as “counsel of
record” for the defendant. It is asserted that Mr. Diegel has a conflict of
interest because he will be a necessary witness at trial on the issue of the
forfeiture of corporate property under the Forfeited Corporate Property Act,
R.S.O. 2015, S.O. 2015, c. 38, Sched. 7 and the subsequent transfer of the
subject property to the defendant, Kelly Alarie. Further, or alternatively, the
plaintiffs say that two of the three defendants are potentially adverse in
interest to the other defendant, and that the Firm cannot represent them all.
[3]              
The plaintiff Mark Geoghegan owns the shares in
the other plaintiff, a numbered company, 629692 BC Ltd. (“BC Ltd.”), which had
previously been a part owner of a property located at 1397 Anderson Road,
Sharbot Lake, Ontario (the “Property”). His stepmother, the defendant Carol
Geoghegan, became the President of BC Ltd. on 7 May 2004. The company was
involuntarily dissolved on 26 November 2007 as a result of the failure to file
ongoing annual reports with the Province of British Columbia. Mr. Geoghegan
says that he only became aware of the demise of BC Ltd. in February 2020. He
has since taken steps to have the company restored to good standing.
[4]              
In the meantime, however, Mr. Geoghegan’s
sister, Ms. Alarie, who already held the other two-thirds interest in the
Property, made an application to have the one-third interest previously held by
BC Ltd. (which, by virtue of its dissolution and the operation of the Forfeited
Corporate Property Act, had vested in the Crown in right of Ontario),
transferred to her. Carol Geoghegan was given notice of that application, but Mr.
Geoghegan says that he was not. The application, which was not opposed, was
successful. Title to the Property is now held by Ms. Alarie and her husband,
Gilles Alarie.
[5]              
At the outset, it is important to note that the
Firm has never acted for the plaintiffs. The Firm did, however, act for Ms.
Alarie when she instructed them to represent her in the application to the Ontario
Ministry of Government and Consumer Services Realty Management Branch for the
transfer to her of the one-third interest in the title to the Property (previously
held by BC Ltd. prior to its dissolution). According to Ms. Alarie,
Jacob-Charles Diegel was the lawyer at the Firm who assisted her with the
application.
[6]              
In the present action, the Firm acts not only
for Ms. Alarie but, also, for the other defendants, Gilles Alarie (her husband)
and Carol Geoghegan (her stepmother, and the former President of BC Ltd.)
[7]              
The material filed in support of the application
under the Forfeited Corporate Property Act included an affidavit of
service by Jacob-Charles Diegel, attesting to him having served notice of the
application on Carol Geoghegan, as the sole listed director and officer of the
dissolved corporation at her home address. The affidavit of service was
commissioned by Martin Diegel.  Mr. Diegel also commissioned the affidavit
sworn by Ms. Alarie in support of her application.
[8]              
The plaintiffs claim that the application under
the Forfeited Corporate Property Act was a violation of an agreement
between Mark Geoghegan and his two sisters, Karen Reiss and the defendant Ms.
Alarie, in, and following, a meeting to discuss the unintended dissolution of
the numbered company, whereby it is alleged that Ms. Alarie and Ms. Reiss
confirmed that:
[9]              
Mr. Geoghegan asserts that he was not given
notice of his sister’s application but, as the owner of all of the company’s
shares, he says that he should have been. After finding out about the transfer
of the Property to Ms. Alarie, Mr. Geoghegan made a request under the Freedom
of Information and Protection of Privacy Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. F.31, to
obtain copies of the application made by Ms. Alarie and other documents and
information pertaining to the application. This yielded a number of documents,
including an email from Jacob-Charles Diegel to the Ministry describing Carol
Geoghegan as the “sole director, officer, and shareholder” of the numbered
company.
[10]          
Mr. Geoghegan also asserts that the
representation made to the Ontario Ministry on Ms. Alarie’s behalf, that Carol
Geoghegan was the sole shareholder of BC Ltd., was false and that at all
material times he was the sole shareholder. In support of that assertion (which
is uncontested), he has produced a corporate resolution evidencing the issuance
of 100 common shares of the numbered company to him.
[11]          
Mr. Geoghegan alleges that the lack of notice to
him was intentional, that the Ontario Ministry was deliberately misled, and
that these “bad faith efforts” constituted a “crucial part” of Ms. Alarie’s bad
faith scheme to effect the forfeiture of his one-third interest in the Property.
[12]          
Against the defendant Carol Geoghegan, the
plaintiffs allege that she breached her fiduciary duties and trust obligations
owed to the plaintiffs in relation to the Property, and specifically that:
[13]          
To the extent that there may be a conflict of
interest on Mr. Diegel’s part, justifying his removal as lawyer of record for
the defendants, it is said to arise from:
[14]          
The plaintiffs rely on Rule 5 of the Rules of
Professional Conduct (Relationship to the Administration of Justice) and,
in particular, Rule 5.2, which deals with “The Lawyer as a Witness”. Rule 5.2-1
provides:
[15]          
Part of the Commentary to that rule states:
[16]          
The plaintiffs acknowledge that a lawyer or law
firm’s ability to represent a client in litigation is not necessarily precluded
by that lawyer or firm merely having a degree of prior involvement and
familiarity with that client’s affairs, including developments giving rise to
the particular dispute to be litigated: Andersson v. Aquino, 2018 ONSC
852, at para. 33.
[17]          
However, the plaintiffs argue that the situation
is different when what that lawyer or law firm may, or may not, have done or
witnessed lies at the substantive heart of a litigation dispute between the
parties, or when evidence of the lawyer or firm realistically may be very
relevant, necessary or decisive in resolving critical and contentious factual
issues. In such circumstances, the lawyer or law firm should be removed as
lawyer of record: Andersson, at paras. 37-40, 50 and 51.
[18]          
In the present case, the plaintiffs say that the
legitimacy of the transfer of the plaintiffs’ one-third interest in the
Property to Ms. Alarie is at the substantive heart of this litigation. Because
the Firm assisted Ms. Alarie with the transfer, the plaintiffs submit that Mr.
Diegel’s evidence is relevant, necessary, and potentially decisive on that
issue.
[19]          
I pause to note that throughout the arguments
made on this motion, the terms “lawyer” and “counsel” have been used
interchangeably. In Ontario, we have a fused legal profession, where lawyers
are both called to the bar as barristers, and admitted to the roll of
solicitors. In other common law jurisdictions where barristers and solicitors
have traditionally had distinctive roles within the legal profession, the term
“counsel”, depending on the context, is used to denote a lawyer acting as an
advocate or a specialist adviser (usually, but not always, a barrister).
[20]          
Rule 15 of the Rules of Civil Procedure,
R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 184, deals with “Representation by Lawyer” and embraces the
concept of a “lawyer of record”. Earlier incarnations of the Rules used
the term “solicitor of record”. The lawyer of record acts as a litigant’s
representative for the purposes of conducting the litigation. Service of
notices and documents on, and by, a litigant is effected through the litigant’s
lawyer of record. A lawyer of record for a litigant is responsible for the
representation of the litigant at any hearings or other court processes during
the course of a proceeding. However, the advocate who represents a litigant at
a hearing does not have to, and will often not, be the lawyer of record. The
advocate may be a partner, associate or articling student from a firm of
lawyers that the lawyer of record belongs to. Or the lawyer of record may arrange
for an outside lawyer – or “counsel” in the more traditional sense of that term
– to appear. Indeed, even a self-represented party can be represented by a
lawyer as “counsel” without the lawyer getting on the record as lawyer of
record (see, generally, Morden & Perell, The Law of Civil Procedure in
Ontario, 5th ed. (Toronto: Lexis Nexis Canada, 2024), at ¶2.33.
[21]          
The plaintiffs’ motion seeks the removal of Mr.
Diegel as lawyer of record, precluding him from further conduct of the
litigation in any capacity, not just in his role as advocate at trial.
[22]          
It is beyond contest that Mr. Diegel cannot be
an advocate at trial and simultaneously be a witness. However, when a lawyer is
compelled to testify against the “other” side in a lawsuit, it does not always
automatically follow that the lawyer's firm must be prevented from acting in
the lawsuit: Essa (Township) v. Guergis; Membery v. Hill (1993),
1993 CanLII 8756 (ON SCDC), 15 O.R. (3d) 573 (Div. Ct.), at 582. Depending on the circumstances,
particularly where the likelihood that a party’s lawyer will be called as a
witness only crystallises at trial, or immediately before trial, it may be
permissible for another member of the lawyer’s firm, or for an advocate
retained as counsel, to conduct the trial, or part of the trial, in the lawyer
witness’s stead. That is a judgment which will usually be best left to a trial
judge. But it is a relevant consideration on a motion such as this, where there
are genuine issues as to whether the lawyer will, in fact, end up being a
witness and, if he does, whether the lawyer’s evidence will be substantive or
peripheral.
[23]          
The principles applicable to “lawyer as witness”
motions to have an adverse party’s lawyer removed from the record are
summarised by Leach J. in Andersson, at para. 19:
[24]          
Having considered all of these factors, I am not
persuaded that it is appropriate to disqualify the Firm or Mr. Diegel from
acting for the defendants. My reasons for coming to this conclusion assume that
this matter will be tried by a judge (no jury notice has been filed and
pleadings are closed) and that the plaintiffs would seek to call Mr. Diegel as
a witness. They further assume that while the defendants’ choice of legal
representative should be respected, the disqualification of the Firm at this
juncture would not be unduly prejudicial to their interests.
[25]          
The motion is brought at an early stage of the
litigation. Pleadings have closed, but discovery has yet to take place. The
plaintiffs justify the timing of their application on the basis that removing
Mr. Diegel now will minimise the risk of prejudice to the defendants arising
from their chosen lawyer’s disqualification to act for them in this proceeding.
[26]          
The only evidence before the court is that contained
in the motion records.
[27]          
In Essa (Township), O’Brien J. said, at
582:
[28]          
In the same case, O’Brien J. also said that a
motion to remove a lawyer should not be made until it is certain there is a
problem.
[29]          
As I have already suggested, often the trial
judge will be best positioned to make these determinations. But even if it
might be regarded as prudent to deal with concerns about the lawyer as witness
well before trial it will, in all but the most obvious of cases, and where
there is no other potential conflict of interest, be premature to disqualify an
opposite party’s lawyer unless and until it is clear that evidence
appropriately sought by a party can only be obtained by examining that lawyer
(and that such evidence can be obtained without encroaching upon, or obtaining
a waiver of, lawyer-client privilege).
[30]          
As I go on to discuss, at this stage of the
litigation, there are a number of reasons to view the plaintiffs’ motion as
premature at best, and ill-founded at worst.
[31]          
For a start, I do not accept the assertion by
the plaintiffs that Martin Diegel’s evidence will be the best available
evidence on the issue of whether the transfer of BC Ltd.’s interest in the
Property to Ms. Alarie was “legitimate”.
[32]          
The evidence obtained so far indicates that the
lawyer who handled the application was Jacob-Charles Diegel. Furthermore, the
contents of the lawyer’s file and any communications between the lawyer and Ms.
Alarie are presumptively privileged. The plaintiffs have already obtained the Ontario
Ministry’s file relating to the application though the Freedom of Information
process.
[33]          
Even accepting for the purposes of this motion,
that Jacob-Charles Diegel, acting on Ms. Alarie’s part, did inaccurately (or,
as Mr. Geoghegan would have it, falsely) represent to the Ontario Ministry that
Carol Geoghegan was the sole shareholder of BC Ltd., no authority has been
provided to me that such (mis)representation would void Ms. Alarie’s
solicitor-client privilege with Jacob-Charles Diegel or the Firm. Ms. Alarie is
prima facie bound by any representations or misrepresentations made on
her behalf by her lawyer and agent, Jacob-Charles Diegel.
[34]          
In oral submissions, the plaintiffs argued that Kelly
Alarie waived her solicitor-client privilege as a result of the following
paragraph in her affidavit:
[35]          
As the excerpted paragraph makes clear, Ms.
Alarie was aware that her dealings with Jacob-Charles Diegel are privileged,
and that only she can waive that privilege. To the extent that she discloses
what might otherwise be regarded as privileged information, it is her receipt
of Mr. Diegel’s advice that anything other than documents already in the public
domain would be subject to privilege.
[36]          
In my view this would not result in an implicit
waiver of privilege pertaining to the entire application to transfer the
Property to Ms. Alarie. There is no disclosure of, or reference to, what advice
was offered, or actions taken, by Mr. Diegel, or the Firm, in relation to the
application. Specifically, none of the advice that Jacob-Charles Diegel or
anyone else at the Firm may or may not have given in relation to the Property
is disclosed or alluded to in paragraph 26.
[37]          
This is not a situation in which it would be
unfair to the plaintiffs to permit Ms. Alarie to selectively claim privilege
over some documents or information, but not others. In such circumstances,
implied waiver could be found to have occurred (see, for example, Ranger v.
Penterman, 2011 ONCA 412). Nor is it a case where Ms. Alarie has put the
advice she received from the Firm and her reliance on that advice in issue (as,
for example, in Pytka v. Pytka Estate (2010), 57 E.T.R. (3d) 245, leave
to appeal dismissed, 2010 ONSC 2549 (Div. Ct.))
[38]          
Rather, the advice disclosed by Ms. Alarie is
only what Martin Diegel told her in relation to his own examinability at trial.
Since there is no disclosure of what advice or assistance Ms. Alarie was given
in relation to the Property, there is not an issue of fairness that requires a
finding that privilege pertaining to the Firm’s advice in respect of the transfer
application or the Property was waived.
[39]          
Finally, and as observed in Essa (Township),
as a proceeding progresses, concessions or admissions may be made which will
obviate the need to call the lawyer as a witness at all.  Furthermore, the
evidence the lawyer could give may be readily obtainable from other witnesses.
[40]          
The “likelihood of being a witness” factor
weighs against the removal of the Firm.
[41]          
It is a reality that not all motions to remove a
lawyer of record are brought with “the purest of motives”: Essa (Township),
at 583.
[42]          
In the present case, it is evident that Mr.
Geoghegan considers himself to have been badly wronged by his sister, Ms.
Alarie, and there is a clear animus between them.
[43]          
The defendants invite me to find that the
plaintiffs’ motion is tactical. While I can understand why they may suspect
that to be the case, I decline to make a finding to that effect on the record
presently before the court.
[44]          
While Ms. Alarie could presumably be questioned
on discovery and at trial about her application, including the accuracy of any
representations made on her behalf, I have difficulty conceiving of many admissible
and relevant questions that could properly be asked of Jacob-Charles Diegel,
which would not encroach on solicitor-client privilege, beyond confirming what
is already in the public record, whether he was retained by Ms. Alarie, and
whether he was acting in the course of that retainer in his dealings with the
application.
[45]          
On the core issue of whether the application to
transfer the Property, and its outcome, were “legitimate”, that would seem to
me to be a determination for the court to make on all of the evidence, most, if
not all, of which will come from the documents and the parties themselves. At
this early stage, what can be said with some confidence is that such evidence
will likely include what, if any agreement or understanding existed between the
parties, and whether the pertinent notice requirements of the Forfeited
Corporate Property Act were complied with.
[46]          
Even if Martin Diegel were to ultimately be
deemed a relevant and compellable witness at trial, the plaintiffs have failed
to make a strong case, at this stage of the litigation, that his evidence would
be of any significance. Indeed, to the extent that any lawyer could be a
relevant witness, it would be Jacob-Charles Diegel, formerly a lawyer at the
Firm, and not Martin Diegel.
[47]          
This factor also weighs against removal of the Firm.
[48]          
As lawyer to the defendants, Mr. Diegel would of
course owe them a duty of loyalty. But as an officer of the court, he would
also owe a duty to the court. As O’Brien J. noted in Essa (Township), in
the course of litigation an honest witness is often compelled to give evidence
which will assist a party that witness feels is “opposite”.
[49]          
I would regard the likelihood that Mr. Diegel’s
evidence would be “tainted” as a neutral factor.
[50]          
In conclusion on the “lawyer as witness” issue,
it may well be that Martin Diegel is not a necessary and proper witness at all.
Even if he is, his removal as lawyer of record is not an automatic consequence
of him being summoned as a witness, although if compelled to testify he would,
as the Rules of Professional Conduct indicate, at a minimum, have to
arrange for another lawyer to conduct all or part of the trial. But that
possibility lies well down the path of this litigation.
[51]          
This is not a case where it can be said at this
stage that it is both clear that Mr. Diegel will be a necessary and proper
witness and, if he is, that he or the Firm must be disqualified.
[52]          
The plaintiffs rely on the Law Society of
Ontario’s Rules of Professional Conduct in support of their contention
that the Firm and, in particular, Martin Diegel, should not be permitted to act
as lawyer of record for the defendants. Rule 1.1 defines a conflict of interest
as:
[53]          
Although courts are not bound by the codes of
professional conduct that lawyers must adhere to, an expression of a
professional standard in a code of ethics relating to a matter before the court
should be considered an important statement of public policy: Rice v. Smith,
2013 ONSC 1200, at para. 17.
[54]          
The so-called “Bright Line Rule” developed by
the Supreme Court of Canada provides that a lawyer may not represent one client
whose interests are directly adverse to the immediate interests of another
current client – even if the two mandates are unrelated – unless both clients
consent after receiving full disclosure (and preferably independent legal
advice), and the lawyer reasonably believes that he or she is able to represent
each client without adversely affecting the other. The Bright Line Rule applies
when clients are adverse in legal interest: R v. Neil, 2002 SCC 70, at
para. 29; Canadian National Railway Co. v. McKercher LLP, 2013 SCC 39,
at para. 39.
[55]          
The plaintiffs argue that the immediate
interests of Kelly Alarie and Gilles Alarie are adverse to the immediate
interests of their co-defendant, Carol Geoghegan. Because Carol Geoghegan, as
President of BC Ltd. arguably breached her fiduciary obligations to both the
company and its sole shareholder when she failed to execute her administrative
duties, which led to BC Ltd.’s unintentional dissolution, and then failed to
provide Mr. Geoghegan with notice of Ms. Alarie’s Forfeited Corporate
Property Act application, Kelly Alarie and Gilles Alarie would plausibly
have a crossclaim against Carol Geoghegan for the value of BC Ltd.’s one-third
interest in the Property in the event that it is found that the transfer of the
Property was improper and BC Ltd.’s interest is restored.
[56]          
The theoretical possibility that the Alaries
could sue Carol Geoghegan is not a basis for parties adverse to the defendants
to obtain the removal of the Firm as the defendants’ lawyers.  Should an actual
conflict between the defendants arise, and the defendants not waive the
conflict, then the representation of the defendants in this litigation would,
of course, need to be examined, most likely at the behest of one or more of the
defendants. But unless and until such a conflict becomes manifest, it does not
lie in the wheelhouse of the plaintiffs to ask the court to interfere with the
defendants’ choice of lawyers.
[57]          
For the foregoing reasons, the motion to have Martin
 Diegel and the Firm removed as lawyer of record is dismissed, without
prejudice to a further application being made at a subsequent stage of this
litigation if new evidence comes to light which would warrant such application.
[58]          
The parties have agreed that, subject to any offers
to settle that may be pertinent, the unsuccessful party on the motion, in this
case the plaintiffs, should pay the successful party’s costs of the motion,
fixed in the all-inclusive amount of $9,900.
[59]          
If the opportunity to make further submissions on
the issue of costs is sought, the party seeking a different disposition of
costs should serve and file a written submission of no more than three (3)
pages in length (plus a copy of any offer that was made) within 14 days of the
release of these reasons; any response, also not to exceed three pages in
length, to be served and filed no more than 14 days thereafter.