[1]              
This is an action to enforce the terms of a
mortgage debt. The plaintiff, Marper Holdings Limited (“Marper”) moves for
summary judgment on the claim, and the defendants by counterclaim, Marper and
“Mr. and Mrs. Gilbert Kuiper” move for an order dismissing the counterclaim.
[2]              
Marper seeks judgment in the sum of
$2,361,348.51 against all of the defendants - Foxpark Development Corporation
(“Foxpark”), Carl Strand and John Strand - on a joint and several basis. Carl
Strand is the president of Foxpark and John Strand is his adult son.
[3]              
Marper also seeks post-judgment interest at the
contractual interest rate of 12% per annum, as well as an order for possession
of the mortgaged property and leave to issue a writ of possession immediately.
[4]              
The mortgaged property, the legal description of
which is contained in the notice of motion and charge, is municipally known as
77 Fox Street, Penetanguishene, Ontario (the “Property”), and comprised of
seven parcels. The Property is development land which, the court surmises from
the submissions, was intended to be developed into residential housing for
seniors, and currently stands vacant.
[5]              
The statement of claim is straightforward. It
alleges a $2 million loan made by Marper as lender to Foxpark as borrower,
secured against the Property and guaranteed by the individual defendants Carl
Strand and John Strand, a default, and failure to remedy the default. It seeks
the contractual remedies available to Marper arising from the default.
[6]              
The statement of defence and counterclaim was
drafted by Carl Strand, who is not a lawyer. It claims $34 million in damages
from the defendants by counterclaim. It references Marper’s claim as being a
“vindictive and malicious legal action”.
[7]              
The counterclaim to the added party, Spetter
Zeitz Klaiman PC Barristers & Solicitors (who are Marper’s lawyers), was
dismissed by order of Justice Sutherland dated July 25, 2024, whose endorsement
states “upon my review of the counterclaim, I see no cause of action”.
[8]              
The statement of defence and counterclaim has
never been served on Martin Price and Mortgage Intelligence. Pursuant to Rule
27.04 (2)(a), that pleading was to have been served 30 days after issuance, and
leave has never been sought from the court to extend the time for service. Mr.
Price appeared today to observe the proceeding and made brief submissions. None
of his submissions have been considered in my deliberations, as Mr. Price sought
to introduce facts not in evidence.
[9]              
The remaining defendants to the counterclaim are
Marper and “Mr. and Mrs. Gilbert Kuiper”. Gilbert Kuiper and his spouse
Jennifer Marley are the shareholders of Marper and presumably are the
defendants by counterclaim referred to as “Mr. and Mrs. Gilbert Kuiper”.
[10]          
Even reading the claim most generously and
broadly, its narrative does not disclose any recognizable legal cause of action
against the defendants by counterclaim. As noted by Justice Sutherland, it
alleges collusion on the part of the “defendant” to use the legal process to
cause damage to Foxpark and the Strands. It seeks to have the court declare the
mortgage “null and void” along with an award of “costs both direct and punitive
for the obvious utilization of the legal system in a vindictive and malicious
manner, and collusion for an unwarranted financial gain”. It is difficult to
tell which allegations are being made against a particular defendant to the
counterclaim. The facts pled outline why Carl Strand believes that he has been
unfairly dealt with by Marper, and suggests that the Kuipers are too wealthy to
need their loan repaid and are motivated by greed, but contains no real defence
or basis to claim damages from the defendants by counterclaim.
[11]          
The pleading does, however:
[12]          
The statement of defence and counterclaim also denies
that Carl Strand is a guarantor. The evidence proves that he is.
[13]          
None of the defendants/plaintiffs by
counterclaim have filed sworn evidence for the purpose of this motion. A
document that purports to be a factum of the defendant Carl Strand has been
uploaded to Case Center, attaching various documentation. The court must
disregard this document in its entirety, as it is not evidence, attaches
documents not in evidence, and contains no legal argument.
[14]          
Accordingly, the evidence of the
plaintiff/defendants by counterclaim is before the court on an unopposed basis.
Cross examinations on their evidence were not undertaken.
[15]          
It is important to note that two case
conferences were held in this matter by Justice Charney. Following the first,
which was heard in writing on September 24, 2024, Justice Charney set out a
litigation schedule which set a deadline of October 4, 2024 for delivery of the
defendants’ responding motion records for this motion, and delivery of a motion
record by Carl Strand or another director or officer of Foxpark to seek leave
to represent Foxpark as a non-lawyer, or alternatively, for a lawyer to go on
record. The defendants were permitted to cross-examine Gilbert Kuiper as a
representative of Marper on or before October 25, 2024. None of that occurred.
[16]          
At a second case conference held on October 9,
2024, Carl Strand was given until November 1, 2024 to serve his notice of
motion and any supporting affidavits to seek leave to represent Foxpark. That
did not occur.
[17]          
All of the procedural issues related to this
motion have been thoroughly canvassed at both case conferences, including the
representation of Foxpark and delivery of material, including factums.
[18]          
Accordingly, Foxpark did not have proper
representation at the motion, but it is too late at this point to grant an
adjournment to Foxpark. The plaintiff has been waiting a long time to obtain
judgment in what should have been a simple mortgage enforcement action, but
complicated by having to deal with a self-represented individual who has not
complied with court orders. On inquiry from the court, Carl Strand advised that
the other director, William Carley, generally knows about this litigation but
has never seen the statement of claim. Mr. Carley has not appeared today. In
the result, the court made clear to Carl Strand that any submissions that the
court received from him were to be given in his own personal capacity and
related to his guarantee, and not made on behalf of Foxpark.
[19]          
John Strand was also present for the hearing but
deferred to his father to represent his position to the court.
[20]          
The applicable principles that guide a summary
judgment motion derive from Hryniak v. Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7.
[21]          
With respect to when summary judgment may be granted, Karakatsanis J. stated, at para. 49:
[22]          
At para. 50, the Court defined the
overarching issue to be “whether summary judgment will provide a fair and just adjudication.”  Karakatsanis J. went on to say that “the
standard for fairness is not whether the procedure is as exhaustive as a trial,
but whether it gives the judge confidence that she can find the necessary facts
and apply the relevant legal principles so as to resolve the dispute.”
[23]          
In terms of the approach to a motion for summary
judgment, Hryniak directs at para. 66 that the judge should first
determine if there is a genuine issue requiring a trial based only on the
evidence before her, without using the new fact-finding
powers.  If there appears to be a genuine issue requiring a trial, she should
then decide if the need for a trial can be avoided by using the new powers
under rules 20.04(2.1) and (2.2) of the Rules of Civil Procedure.  These
powers may be used by the motion judge in her discretion provided that their
use is not against the interest of justice.  Their use will not be against the
interest of justice if they will lead to a fair and just result and will serve
the goals of timeliness, affordability, and proportionality in light of the
litigation as a whole.
[24]          
The evidence adduced on a summary judgment
motion need not be equivalent to that at trial. A documentary record may be enough,
if it allows the motion judge to have confidence that she can fairly resolve
the issues: Hryniak, at para. 57.
[25]          
The law from the Ontario Court of Appeal is clear that
the court must take a hard look at the evidence on a motion for summary
judgment to determine whether there is a genuine issue
requiring a trial and may freely canvas the facts and law in doing so.  No
party is entitled to rely on the prospect of additional evidence that may be
tendered at trial; all parties have an obligation to put their best foot
forward on a summary judgment motion: Switzer v. Petrie, 2024 ONCA 474,
at para. 8. The motions judge is entitled to assume that the record contains
all the evidence which the parties will present if there is a trial.
[26]          
The requirement to put one’s best foot forward
means that although the onus is on the moving party to establish the absence of
a genuine issue requiring a trial, there is an evidentiary burden on the
responding party, who may not rest on the allegations or denials in the party’s
pleadings, but must present specific facts showing that there is a genuine
issue for trial. This requirement was discussed in Cuthbert v. TD Canada
Trust, 2010 ONSC 830, at para. 12 and confirmed in Sanzone v. Schechter,
2016 ONCA 566, at para. 30 and Broadgrain Commodities Inc. v. Continental
Casualty Company, 2018 ONCA 438, at para. 7.
[27]          
Marper is an Ontario business corporation.
Gilbert Kuiper and his spouse Jennifer Marley are the shareholders of Marper.
Foxpark is a federal business corporation whose directors are Carl Strand and
William Carley. Mr. Carley was not a director at the time of the mortgage
transaction.
[28]          
Foxpark is the registered owner of the Property.
Foxpark is in the process of developing the Property by constructing
residential units on the land. Currently the construction is incomplete and no
one resides on the Property.
[29]          
Marper agreed to provide a $2 million loan to
Foxpark pursuant to the terms of a commitment letter dated January 4, 2023,
signed by Gilbert Kuiper on behalf of Marper and John Strand on behalf of
Foxpark. Foxpark was authorized to enter into the loan and grant the mortgage
when Carl Strand executed the “Resolution of the Sole Director of Foxpark
Development Corporation” dated January 17, 2023. The loan was secured by a
first mortgage against the Property.
[30]          
Foxpark granted a first charge on the Property
to the plaintiff on January 18, 2023 to secure the principal sum of $2 million,
registered as instrument no. SC 1958297. The interest rate on the mortgage is
12% with monthly payments of $20,000 commencing February 13, 2023, with the
balance due date of December 13, 2023. It was agreed that the interest would be
due and payable on the first day of each month, and post-dated cheques provided
to Marper were dated for the first day of each month following a 6-month
prepayment period.
[31]          
Both John and Carl are identified as being
guarantors of the indebtedness on the face of the mortgage. Foxpark’s
indebtedness is secured by two guarantees provided by Carl and John, which
provide an unlimited personal guarantee of each with respect to Foxpark’s
obligations to Marper under the mortgage.
[32]          
John received independent legal advice when he
provided his unlimited personal guarantee and provided a certificate of independent
legal advice.
[33]          
Foxpark defaulted on November 1, 2023, when its cheque
was dishonoured and payment was not made. The cheque was not replaced.
[34]          
No further loan payments have been made by
Foxpark to Marper, and accordingly the loan is in default under the terms of
the loan and the mortgage.
[35]          
Marper, through its lawyers, made demands upon
Foxpark, Carl and John pursuant to their respective obligations by
correspondence dated November 13, 2023, and enclosed a notice of intention to enforce
security pursuant to s. 244 of the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act.
[36]          
The defendants have not paid the amount due and
owing and interest has continued to accrue at the contractual rate of 12% per
annum.
[37]          
Upon its maturity on December 13, 2023, the
mortgage was not repaid, which constitutes a second default.
[38]          
Pursuant to the evidence of Gilbert Kuiper
contained in his supplementary affidavit sworn February 18, 2025, as the date
the motion was argued, total accrued interest is $361,348.51. This amount is
due and owing by Foxpark, in addition to the principal amount of the loan.
[39]          
Schedule A to the mortgage states that the sum
of $1,000 will be due and owing for payments not made. Foxpark has failed to
pay 2 months of interest payments in November and December 2023 and
accordingly, the sum of $2,000 is due and owing to Marper. Marper seeks to have
the court assess interest on that amount at the 12% interest rate, totaling
$306.05. I agree that section 8 of the Standard Charge Terms that govern this mortgage
applies to have the $2,000 considered a charge upon the land with interest at
the rate provided for in the mortgage.
[40]          
Further, paragraph 8 of the Standard Charge
Terms provides that Foxpark is liable to pay Marper’s legal fees.
[41]          
Paragraph 10 of the Standard Charge Terms state
that upon default Marper is entitled to quiet possession of the Property.
[42]          
The issues to be decided by this court are as
follows:
[43]          
There is no need for a trial in this case. The
evidence led by Marper clearly establishes that a debt is owed by the Defendants
under the mortgage, and that Marper is entitled to the accrued interest and
penalties pursuant to the charge. These obligations and the debt have been
personally guaranteed by the individual Strand defendants. Under the terms of
the charge, these amounts become due and owing upon default and Marper is
entitled to possession of the property.
[44]          
In not filing any responding evidence, the
defendants have entirely failed to meet the evidentiary burden required to show
that there is a genuine issue requiring a trial.
[45]          
During submissions neither of the Strands
contested the interest calculation prepared on behalf of Marper, or the costs
being sought.
[46]          
While Carl Strand submitted that this claim
should proceed to trial because there was a genuine issue for trial, his
submissions indicated that he believes there is a genuine issue about whether
he will be able to secure financing to satisfy the debt owed to Marper. This of
course does not raise the sort of genuine issue about the issues on this
motion: whether the debt is owed, its quantum and who is obligated to pay it.
As noted by Mr. Quigley, a monetary judgement does not prevent the defendants
from redeeming the mortgage if financing can be obtained.
[47]          
Carl Strand is obviously in a precarious
financial position and has advised this court that his wife is very ill and
that he has power of sale proceedings pending for his personal residence. While
Mr. Strand may have my sympathies as an individual, as a judge I must set aside
all sympathy and deliver a judgment based only on the evidence and the law.
[48]          
I have confidence that a proper determination
can be made on the record before me. Granting summary judgment on this
evidentiary record is a fair and just result and will serve the goals of
timeliness, affordability, and proportionality, as it is assumed that no
further or better evidence is available to the defendants, and the statement of
defence and counterclaim does not raise a recognizable defence to the statement
of claim.
[49]          
According, there being no issue requiring a
trial, the court must grant summary judgment pursuant to Rule 20.04(2).
[50]          
The evidence supports the claims made. Although
the defendants have admitted through their pleading that the $2M loan was
advanced, there is also a trust ledger in evidence that shows receipt of the
money.
[51]          
There is no evidence refuting the two non-negotiable
cheques. There is no evidence refuting the calculation of interest and Gilbert
Kuiper’s interest calculation is unimpeached.
[52]          
Judgment should be rendered against all of the
defendants on a joint and several basis, requiring them to pay Marper the sum
of $2,361,348.51, plus post-judgment interest at the rate of 12% per annum
compounded monthly on the first day of each month, in accordance with the terms
of the mortgage.
[53]          
Additionally, in accordance with Schedule A of
the mortgage, the sum of $2000 plus interest, being the sum of $2306.05, is to
be paid by the defendants to Marper on a joint and several basis, plus
post-judgment interest at the rate of 12% per annum compounded monthly on the
first day of each month, in accordance with the terms of the mortgage.
[54]          
Marper is entitled to possession of the Property
under the terms of the mortgage. As the Property is not inhabited and any
structures only partially built, it is an efficient use of judicial resources
to allow Marper to immediately apply for a writ of possession.
[55]          
The signed guarantees are in evidence. John
Strand obtained independent legal advice before signing the one that binds him;
the certificate of the attesting lawyer has been produced.
[56]          
The guarantees provides:
[57]          
No evidence has been adduced as to why these guarantees
would not be enforceable, or would not bind the individual defendants.
[58]          
In the result, judgment should be rendered
against Carl and John Strand on their guarantees.
[59]          
The counterclaim should be dismissed. There is
no evidence to prove any allegations made therein, and as previously stated,
the pleading does not disclose any recognizable legal cause of action against
the defendants by counterclaim.
[60]          
Mr. Quigley has filed the costs outline. His
clients seeks costs on a full indemnity basis in the amount $28,215.50. It is
his submission that this scale is permitted by section 8 of the Standard Charge
Terms. In the alternative, he submits that the defendants’ behaviour in this
case, and particularly their conduct in commencing a frivolous and vexatious
counterclaim, merits costs on the highest scale.
[61]          
While reasonable people could disagree on this
point, it is my view that the term “legal fees (as between solicitor and
client)” allows for costs on what is now known as the substantial indemnity
scale.
[62]          
Costs on the highest scale being sought by the Marper parties require
exceptional circumstances that go beyond those that would merit an award of
substantial indemnity costs. In cases in which full indemnity costs have been
ordered, the “overriding common thread … is the strong sentiment that the
matter, or the issue at least, should never have been brought before the court
in the first place, leading to a reaction that the innocent party should not
have had to pay a penny toward the cost of litigation”: Envoy
Relocation Services Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General), 2013 ONSC 2622, [2013] O.J. No. 1999, at para. 116.
[63]          
The type of considerations that have attracted full indemnity costs are
summarized at paragraph 125 of Envoy, as follows:
[64]          
The conduct of the defendants does not rise to
this level. The defendants by counterclaim have not had to expend significant
time or costs related to the counterclaim; it is Marper’s claim that has been
the focus of this proceeding and certainly of this summary judgment motion. Including
Marper’s lawyers as a party to the counterclaim was ill-advised at best, but
even Justice Sutherland, in dismissing the counterclaim against that party, did
not order costs.
[65]          
Accordingly, I order that the defendants Foxpark,
Carl Strand and John Strand jointly and severally pay the costs of this action
to the Plaintiff on a substantial indemnity scale, fixed in the amount of
$25,509.15.
[66]          
For the foregoing reasons, this court orders: