[1]              
On this motion, the plaintiffs seek:
[2]              
In their notice of motion, the plaintiffs seek
an order compelling the defendants to produce certain categories of
non-privileged documents listed in Schedule “B” to the “Cadwalader” list of
documents, or, in the alternative, an order requiring the defendants to produce
to the Court for inspection exemplar documents to be agreed upon from certain
categories of non-privileged documents listed in the Cadwalader Schedule B for
the purpose of determining the validity of the claims of privilege.
[3]              
The motion was not argued with submissions with
respect to each document or question in dispute.
[4]              
At the hearing, counsel for the plaintiffs asked
for directions with respect to six questions that, it was submitted, would
resolve the bulk of the refusals given during examinations for discovery. The
six questions were addressed at the hearing and provided in writing by counsel
for the plaintiffs in a letter dated December 9, 2024. The defendants do not
accept that directions with respect to these six questions will be sufficient
to address the issues that arise on this motion.
[5]              
I have addressed these questions in this
endorsement.
[6]              
In General Accident Assurance Company et al.
v. Chrusz et al. (1999), 1999 CanLII 7320 (ON CA), 45 O.R. (3d) 321, Carthy J.A., writing for the
majority of the Court of Appeal, addressed the general principles that apply to
litigation privilege. Carthy J.A. confirmed that the purpose underlying
litigation privilege is related to the needs of the adversarial trial process
and for a protected area to facilitate investigation and preparation of a case
for trial by the adversarial advocate. Carthy J.A. confirmed, at para. 33, that
the document over which litigation privilege is claimed must have been created
for the dominant purpose of litigation, actual or contemplated.
[7]              
Doherty J.A. confirmed, at para. 98, that the assessment
of a claim to solicitor-client privilege must be contextual. Doherty J.A. held
that the applicability of solicitor-client privilege to third party
communications in circumstances where the third party cannot be described as a
channel of communication between the solicitor and client should depend on the
true nature of the function that the third party was retained to perform for
the client. Doherty J.A., at para. 120, held that if the third party’s retainer
extends to a function which is essential to the existence or operation of the
solicitor-client relationship, then the privilege should cover any
communications which are in furtherance of that function and which meet the
criteria for solicitor-client privilege.
[8]              
In Prosser v. Industrial Alliance Insurance,
2024 ABKB 87 (CanLII), 2024 ABQB 87, at para. 60, the Court held that information concerning the
existence and nature of a solicitor-client relationship, including the fact and
nature of a lawyer’s retainer; the identity of the lawyer; the client’s legal
concerns, objectives or strategies; and the thought processes, strategies, or
objectives of the lawyers are matters that are protected from disclosure by
solicitor-client privilege.
[9]              
The following principles also apply with
respect to solicitor-client privilege: (i) solicitor-client privilege must
“remain as close to absolute as possible” (R. v. Fink, 2002 SCC 61, at
para. 36); (ii) solicitor-client privilege protects confidential communications
between a client and a lawyer in which legal advice is sought or offered (R.
v. McClure, 2001 SCC 14 (CanLII), [2001] 1 S.C.R. 445, at paras. 36-37); (iii) solicitor-client
privilege extends to communications that disclose whether lawyers were retained
and, if so, for what purpose (Prosser v. Industrial Alliance Insurance,
2024 ABKB 87 (CanLII), 2024 ABQB 87, at para. 60); (iv) solicitor-client privilege also protects not
only the legal advice provided, but communications passing between lawyers and
clients in support of the provision of legal advice (Wintercorn v. Global
Learning Group Inc., 2022 ONSC 4576, at para. 45(viii)); (v) the identity
of who is paying the defendants’ legal fees is privileged (Kaiser (Re),
2012 ONCA 838, at para. 30); and (vi) solicitor-client privilege extends to
documents, information, and communications shared or created in a continuum of
communications for the purpose of obtaining legal advice and includes documents
that are a “necessary step” in the process of receiving legal advice and
documents that are incidental to obtaining and giving legal advice and/or that,
if produced, would tend to reveal that advice (Wintercorn, at para.
45(viii); Landry et al. v. HMQ, 2021 ONSC 1297, at para. 14).
[10]          
The relevant legal principles with respect to common interest
privilege were summarized by Gluestein J. in Wintercorn, at para. 160.
[11]          
The plaintiffs submit that to sustain a claim
for litigation privilege, two facts must be established for each document over
which privilege is claimed: (1) that litigation was ongoing or was reasonably
contemplated at the time the document was created; and (2) that the dominant
purpose of creating the document was to prepare for that litigation.
[12]          
The plaintiffs cite Gichuru v. British
Columbia (Information and Privacy Commissioner), 2014 BCCA 259, at para.
32, as authority for their submission that to establish “dominant purpose”, the
party asserting the privilege will have to present evidence of the
circumstances surrounding the creation of the communication or document in
question, including evidence with respect to when it was created, who created
it, who authorized it, and what use was or could be made of it.
[13]          
In Grand Rapids First Nation v. Canada,
2014 FCA 201, Dawson J.A., writing for the panel of the Federal Court of Appeal,
addressed Canada’s assertion of litigation privilege in circumstances where Canada
had not adduced affidavit evidence about the dominant purpose for the creation
of any individual document over which privilege was claimed. In that case, the motion
judge relied on his review of the documents and found their dominant purpose “quite
clear on their face”. The motion judge held that as regards the documents in
question, the dominant purpose for which each document was produced probably
was to seek legal advice or to aid in the conduct of the litigation.
[14]          
In the decision on appeal, Dawson J.A., at para.
32, agreed that it is possible for the content of a document to establish the
purpose for which the document was created. Dawson J.A. wrote that he reviewed
each of the non-disclosed documents over which Canada claimed privilege and based
on his review, he was not satisfied that the contents of these documents establish
that it is more likely than not that each document was prepared for the
dominant purpose of seeking legal advice or aiding the conduct of litigation.
Dawson J.A. concluded that the evidence before the motion judge was
insufficient to demonstrate on a document by document basis that each of the
undisclosed documents was created for the purpose of seeking legal advice or
aiding in the conduct of the litigation.
[15]          
The plaintiffs argued that directions in
relation to six questions to be answered (addressed at the hearing and provided
again in a letter from counsel for the plaintiffs dated December 9, 2024) would
enable the parties, working cooperatively, to determine which specific
questions require answers and which can be maintained as proper refusals.
[16]          
The plaintiffs rely on evidence given by
Mohammed Aljabri on his cross-examination that Mr. Wainwright acted as a
director of corporate defendants such as the New East (US) companies, Ten
Leaves, and Golden Valley Management and that he functioned as a director and
not as a lawyer in his work for these companies. Mohammed Aljabri was asked
whether Mr. Wainwright functioned as a lawyer for New East International
Limited and he responded that he was unable to say, one way or the other,
whether Mr. Wainwright did so.
[17]          
The defendants rely on evidence from the
Associate General Counsel at Cadwalader who affirmed that the members of the
Aljabri family (their names are specified in the affidavit) are all clients of
Cadwalader as are corporate defendants.
[18]          
The first issue raised by the plaintiffs on this
motion relates to the defendants’ affidavits of documents. The plaintiffs
submit that the defendants have not produced a detailed Schedule “B” to their
affidavits of documents that identifies the specific documents that they object
to producing and on what grounds.
[19]          
The defendants have undertaken to produce a
detailed Schedule “B” by February 15, 2025. If they have not already done so, I
direct that they do so without delay.
[20]          
The second issue raised by the plaintiffs
relates to Schedule “B” from the list of documents from the files of
Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft LLP (“Cadwalader”) over which the defendants
claim privilege (a total of 17,497 documents are so listed).
[21]          
In paragraph (b) of their notice of motion, the
plaintiffs seek an order requiring the defendants to produce approximately
4,000 documents (out of the total population of 17,497 documents over which
privilege was claimed) as listed in the Cadwalader Schedule “B” delivered to
the plaintiffs on February 22, 2024. In their notice of motion, the plaintiffs
group the documents requested into two categories of documents from this
Schedule “B”:
[22]          
The plaintiffs submit that privilege appears to
have been asserted over documents that cannot be privileged including (a)
non-privileged attachments attached to potentially privileged correspondence,
and (b) correspondence with third parties (such as financial advisors, bankers
or accountants) outside of any possible solicitor-client relationship between
any of the defendants and Cadwalader.
[23]          
The defendants have agreed to produce
non-privileged attachments to emails by March 14, 2025. I direct them to do so.
[24]          
With respect to other documents, the plaintiffs
submit that the defendants have chosen not to provide evidence of the capacity
in which Mr. Wainwright and members of the Cadwalader firm were acting in
relation to the remaining documents at issue on this motion and, therefore,
they have failed to provide any evidentiary foundation for their claims of
privilege. The plaintiffs submit that, as a result, the asserted claims of
privilege must fail.
[25]          
The defendants rely on evidence from the
Associate General Counsel at Cadwalader who affirmed that Saad Aljabri and the
members of the Aljabri family (their names are specified in the affidavit) are
all clients of Cadwalader, as are corporate defendants.
[26]          
With respect to correspondence with third
parties, the defendants submit that not every document sent to a third party
becomes non-privileged. As noted by Doherty J.A. in Chrusz, where the
third party’s retainer extends to a function which is essential to the
existence or operation of the solicitor-client relationship, then the privilege
should cover any communications which are in furtherance of that function and
which meet the criteria for solicitor-client privilege.
[27]          
The defendants submit that the documents
requested include communications to and from (i) financial advisors, (ii) tax
advisors; (iii) banks; and (iv) other similar professionals who fall within the
category of third parties providing information to lawyers for the purpose of
obtaining legal advice.
[28]          
The defendants rely on the documents themselves
as evidence that shows the role played by third parties. They submit that it is
not practical for them to tender affidavit evidence with respect to each of the
4,000 documents in question without waiving privilege.
[29]          
As I have noted, in Grand Rapids First
Nations, the Federal Court of Appeal confirmed, at para. 32, that when a
court determines on a document by document basis whether litigation privilege
was properly claimed, it is possible for the content of the document to
establish the purpose for which the document was created. Both the motion judge
on the underlying motion and the appellate court reviewed each of the non-disclosed
documents over which the party that withheld production had claimed privilege.
Based on the review by Dawson J.A., he concluded that the party claiming
privilege had not established that it is more likely than not that the dominant
purpose for creation of the documents was seeking legal advice or aiding in the
conduct of litigation.
[30]          
The defendants have agreed to review again the
Cadwalader Schedule “B” documents and produce any communication that was sent
or copies to a third party except those where the third party was providing
information to the client or legal counsel for the purpose of counsel providing
legal advice or where the third party was otherwise acting as an agent or
conduit for privileged communications between lawyer and client. They will
produce such documents by March 14, 2025.
[31]          
I direct the defendants to do so. If, after this
review, the plaintiffs do not agree with assertions of privilege over
particular documents, they are not precluded from seeking further directions or
an order for production which may require review by the court of documents over
which privilege is claimed.
[32]          
The third issue on this motion relates to
refusals to answer questions asked on examinations for discovery of defendants
or their representatives on the ground of privilege.
[33]          
In their notice of motion, the plaintiffs seek
an order compelling the defendants to answer questions improperly refused
during their respective examinations for discovery, as detailed in Appendix “E”
to the notice of motion. These questions were asked on the examinations for
discovery of Saad Aljabri, Mohammed Aljabri, Jonathan Wainwright, Khalid
Aljabri, Nadyah Al Jabbari, and Hissah Saad Al Jabri Almuzaini.
[34]          
In their factum for this motion, the plaintiffs propose
three categories of questions that, they submit, were improperly
refused. They ask for directions in respect of these categories which, they submit, will enable the parties to agree on questions
that are required to be answered, rather than seeking a ruling on each refusal.
[35]          
The plaintiffs submit that the defendants have
improperly refused to answer questions about how they have paid for their
living expenses in the face of Mareva orders and questions asking for
disclosure of communications among defendants in relation to funding of living
expenses since January 2021.
[36]          
In my decision released on December 2, 2024 on
the plaintiffs’ motion for an order directing certain defendants to answer
questions that were refused on cross-examinations, I directed that for purposes
of the motions to vary, questions (a) regarding how the moving defendants and
the non-moving defendants have been meeting their ordinary living expenses and
how they intend to meet those expenses going forward, and (b) regarding the
non-moving defendants’ assets and their ability to pay for legal fees, living
expenses and costs awards, should be answered.
[37]          
The defendants assert privilege over information
surrounding living expenses and communications about payment of living expenses
and the underlying facts, which were necessitated by the Mareva order.
The defendants submit that communications about how to respond to and comply
with a court order made in the context of ongoing litigation is privileged because
the communications were created for the sole purpose of addressing the
litigation.
[38]          
In support of these submissions, the defendants rely
on Ramdath v. George Brown College of Applied Arts and Technology, 2012
ONSC 2747. In Ramdath, Strathy J. (as he then was) described how
litigation privilege applies in the context of litigation and held that common
interest privilege is an extension of litigation privilege. Strathy J. held, at
para. 35, that common interest privilege “applies to communications between
parties who have a common interest in litigation and it enables them to
communicate, or exchange information, for the dominant purpose of informing
each other of the facts and issues in the litigation:” [citation omitted].
[39]          
The principle expressed by Strathy J. in Ramdath
with respect to common interest privilege as an extension of litigation
privilege applies on this motion. The defendants have a common interest in this
litigation. Answers to discovery questions which, on the face of the question, call
for disclosure of communications among the defendants, made for the dominant
purpose of informing each other about how to comply with the Saad Mareva
Order, including in relation to funding of living expenses, or otherwise created
for the dominant purpose of the litigation, would be protected from disclosure
by common interest privilege as an extension of litigation privilege.
[40]          
I direct that the defendants are not required to
answer such questions.
[41]          
This direction does not affect the direction
made in my December 2, 2024 endorsement in respect of questions regarding the
matters described in the endorsement, over which no claim of privilege was
asserted on the motion. Questions directed to be answered by my December 2,
2024 endorsement must be answered.
[42]          
The plaintiffs assert that there is no valid
assertion of privilege in relation to this question.
[43]          
The defendants have not filed evidence in
respect of this question. The question on its face does not call for disclosure
of information subject to solicitor-client privilege or litigation privilege.
[44]          
If the defendants rely on the document or
documents themselves as evidence supporting the assertion of privilege, it may
be necessary for the court to review the documents over which privilege is
asserted to determine the validity of the claim for privilege.
[45]          
The plaintiffs submit that questions which ask
for answers and production of documents in relation to the engagement of
non-legal services and functions provided by Mr. Wainwright, his paralegal,
Allison Overgaard, and the Cadwalader firm are not protected from disclosure by
solicitor-client privilege.
[46]          
The plaintiffs submit that it is not open to the
defendants to assert that because Mr. Wainwright provided legal services
to Saad Aljabri, members of his family, and some corporate
defendants, all communications with him are privileged. The plaintiffs submit
that the defendants were required to tender affidavit evidence that shows how
the engagement of Mr. Wainwright and the Cadwalader firm relates to the
particular communications or information at issue. They submit that the
defendants have failed to tender evidence in this respect and, therefore, they
have failed to meet their burden of showing that the refusals call for
disclosure of information which is privileged. On this basis, the plaintiffs
submit that the documents they seek production of should be produced.
[47]          
The defendants respond that they tendered
evidence from the Associate General Counsel of the Cadwalader firm, Gillian Burns, to prove that Mr. Wainwright
and the Cadwalader firm acted as legal counsel for Saad Aljabri and his family
members, and certain named corporate defendants. Ms. Burns affirms that
Cadwalader was retained by Saad Aljabri on March 6, 2013 to represent the
Aljabri family in connection with U.S. corporate and tax advice. She affirms
that on February 19, 2021, Cadwalader was retained by Mohammed Aljabri, New
East (US) Inc., New East 804 805 LLC, New East Back Bay LLC and New East DC LLC
to provide advice and certain services in connection with litigation
proceedings that had been commenced in Ontario. Ms. Burns affirms that Cadwalader
has accrued time and expenses on behalf of the corporate defendants and the
Aljabri family in connection with the Ontario litigation.
[48]          
The defendants submit that they are not required
to tender affidavit evidence in relation to each question asked, or each
document requested to be produced. The defendants submit that this is so
because the question on its face, or the document on its face, shows that the
question or request calls for disclosure of information that is protected by
privilege.
[49]          
As I have noted, this motion was not argued on
the basis that a ruling would be made on each refusal. I was directed by each
side to some questions as examples. The plaintiffs submitted that the defendants
had not met their burden on this motion. Alternatively, they sought directions
that would enable the parties to determine which, if any, questions were
improperly objected to on the basis of privilege.
[50]          
I accept the plaintiffs’ submission that (i) requests
for information and documents on discovery that relate to Mr. Wainwright’s
provision of non-legal administrative and financial services is not protected
from disclosure by solicitor-client privilege, and (ii) communications by Mr.
Wainwright with third parties outside of the solicitor-client relationship where
the third party’s retainer did not extend to a function which is essential to
the existence or operation of the solicitor-client relationship, as described
by Doherty J.A. in Chrusz, are not protected from disclosure by
solicitor-client privilege.
[51]          
I do not accept the plaintiffs’ submission that the
defendants were required to tender affidavit evidence of the capacity in which
Mr. Wainwright or other advisors acted in relation to each of the many questions
that were refused. If the question on its face calls for an answer that would require
disclosure of information properly subject to solicitor-client privilege, or
litigation privilege, the defendants cannot be said to have failed to prove
that the requested information is privileged where they have not tendered
affidavit evidence, for a given question, in respect of Mr. Wainwright’s role and
function in relation to the information sought.
[52]          
If, for example, a question calls for provision
of information or production of documents created by Mr. Wainwright acting as a legal advisor for his
clients, Saad Aljabri or his family members, as opposed to information he
created in his role as a director of companies, the defendant would have shown
that the question calls for provision of information that is properly protected
from disclosure by privilege.
[53]          
If a document on its face shows that it is
properly subject to solicitor-client privilege or litigation privilege, the
defendants cannot be said to have failed to show that the document is
privileged because affidavit evidence was not provided of the capacity in which
Mr. Wainwright was acting when each of the many documents in dispute was
created. See Grand Rapids First Nation, at para. 32.
[54]          
Where it is apparent from the question or from the
face of the document that is requested that Mr. Wainwright was acting as legal
counsel for Saad Aljabri or his family members or other clients when
information was communicated or a document was created, as opposed to as a
director of corporate defendants, the defendants will have satisfied their
burden of showing that the question calls for an answer that would disclose
privileged information or that the requested document is protected from
disclosure by privilege.
[55]          
Where it is not apparent from the question or
from the face of the document which is requested that the question asks for
privileged information, or the request asks for production of a document that
is privileged, the defendants are directed to answer the question or produce
the document. The standard of proof for each question or document is the
balance of probabilities.
[56]          
The plaintiffs specifically ask for production
of any “compliance package”, including a particular 113 page package, that was
prepared by or received by Cadwalader setting out the source of wealth or source
of funding for Saad Aljabri or any Aljabri family member for any purpose. The
defendants responded that several “Source of Wealth/Source of Funds” documents
were prepared by Cadwalader (and received by Cadwalader) over the course of its
engagement with the Aljabri family and that these documents are included in
Cadwalader’s Schedule B. The defendants refused to produce these documents on
the basis of privilege.
[57]          
With respect to these specific questions, as
with all questions where privilege is asserted and the plaintiffs have moved to
challenge the assertion of privilege, the onus is on the defendants to prove on
a balance of probabilities that these documents are protected from disclosure
by privilege. Documents prepared or received by Cadwalader when Cadwalader was acting
only in an administrative capacity and not in a legal capacity, whether or not
the firm was at the same time acting as legal counsel for the defendants, are
not protected from disclosure by privilege and should be produced.
[58]          
If the plaintiffs do not accept the assertion of
privilege that is maintained after these directions, it may be necessary for
the court to review the documents over which privilege is asserted to determine
the validity of the assertion of privilege.
[59]          
On the examination of Richard Lewis as a
representative of NEIL, he was asked to remove the redactions and, to the
extent that is refused, to advise what the basis of the redaction is. An
undertaking was given and, further to this undertaking, the response was that these
redactions are being reviewed and an update will be provided in advance of the
trial. No further answer was given.
[60]          
At the hearing, counsel for NEIL advised that
NEIL intended to answer the undertaking at Q. 131 by no later than January 31,
2025.
[61]          
The plaintiffs specifically move for an answer
from Mr. Lewis to a question asked in reference to NE0000585 to advise
who the author of the document was and what it is purporting
to record. An undertaking was given, and then counsel for NEIL responded that
this document should have been withheld due to litigation privilege. The
plaintiffs’ position is that the document is not protected from disclosure by
litigation privilege. NEIL’s counsel confirmed at the hearing that NEIL no
longer seeks to clawback this document.
[62]          
Counsel for the plaintiffs confirmed in the
December 9, 2024 letter that as a result of the submissions made by counsel for
NEIL at the hearing, the plaintiffs no longer require directions relating to
these issues.
[63]          
The plaintiffs submit that the defendants have
refused to answer certain miscellaneous questions which do not call for
disclosure of privileged information. These questions fall into three
categories.
[64]          
The first category of such questions relate to
the plaintiffs’ request for production of Saad Aljabri’s imaged iPhone and the
USB key from Majed Almuzaini. The defendants assert privilege over this
hardware. There may also be an objection on the ground of relevance that is not
before me.
[65]          
The defendants submit that they have answered
that all relevant documents from Saad Aljabri’s iPhone and USB key have been
produced. They submit that the plaintiffs are not entitled to production of the
devices themselves from which images were taken.
[66]          
The defendants rely on Merpaw v. Hyde,
2015 ONSC 1053 in support of this submission. In Merpaw, the defendants sought
an order permitting them to access the hard drive and data on the plaintiff’s home
computer, iPad, and iPhone. The motion judge held that relevant and material
information stored on a computer hard drive is subject to production and, only
in exceptional circumstances such as when there is clear and convincing
evidence that a party is intentionally deleting relevant and material
information, will the Court order production of the hard drive for examination.
[67]          
On this motion, I am not asked to determine whether
the requested devices are relevant and should be produced. I am asked to
determine whether an objection to production of these devices on the ground of
privilege is proper.
[68]          
In Merpaw, the motion judge held that the
iPhone and iPad CPUs are equivalent to a filing cabinet. It is open to a party
to assert privilege over electronic documents stored on a CPU. In this case,
the defendants submit that they have produced all relevant and non-privileged
electronic documents from the iPhone and the USB key.
[69]          
The defendants do not assert privilege over the
hardware. Any privilege could only be asserted over information stored on the
devices.
[70]          
If the defendants assert privilege over
electronic documents stored on the iPhone and USB key, it is open to the
plaintiffs to challenge the assertion of privilege and move for production of
documents listed by the defendants as privileged. If any assertion of privilege
is challenged by the plaintiffs, it may be necessary for the court to review
the documents over which privilege is asserted to make a determination of the
validity of the privilege.
[71]          
Subject to assertion of privilege over
electronic documents stored on the hardware, there is no privilege over the
hardware itself.
[72]          
The second category of miscellaneous questions relates
to whether the defendants have met their burden of establishing valid claims of
privilege over Khalid Aljabri’s communications (or his knowledge of other
communications) with reporters and others on social media about this case.
[73]          
The defendants submit that such questions are
irrelevant. They do not assert that the answers to such questions are protected
from disclosure by privilege. If it is determined that questions in this
category are relevant and should be answered, the defendants are not permitted
to refuse to answer such questions on the basis of privilege.
[74]          
The third category within the miscellaneous
questions relates to so-called “Clawback Documents”.
[75]          
In their notice of motion, the plaintiffs seek
an order confirming that the documents listed in Appendix “C” to the notice of
motion which the defendants assert were inadvertently disclosed and are subject
to litigation privilege and/or solicitor-client privilege (the “Clawback
Documents”) are not privileged.
[76]          
There are 23 such documents. The plaintiffs are
moving for production of 7 of these documents which are listed in Appendix “C”.
[77]          
The defendants agree to produce four of these
documents, two with redactions, on the basis that doing so is not a waiver of
any other privilege and without prejudice to their position on privilege in the
litigation. These are numbers 1 (with redactions), 2 (with redactions), 4, and
5 on Appendix “C”.
[78]          
The defendants have not provided the proposed
redactions to documents numbered 1 and 2.
[79]          
The defendants submit that the documents at
numbers 3, 6 and 7 on Appendix “C” are privileged on their face and the documents
and should not be produced. The defendants ask me to review these documents and
rule on whether they are protected from disclosure by privilege.
[80]          
With respect to the email correspondence at
document number 3, this is an email from Mohammed Aljabri to Jonathan
Wainwright and another Cadwalader lawyer, and internal Cadwalader emails
relating to the email from Mohammed Aljabri. Mr. Wainwright was a lawyer
representing the Aljabri family and other corporate defendants. He was also a
director of various companies owned by the Aljabri family. The defendants
submit that this document is correspondence about legal advice and was created
for the dominant purpose of this litigation and is protected from disclosure by
solicitor-client privilege and litigation privilege.
[81]          
The email from Mohammed Aljabri (document number
3 of Appendix “C”) is not clear on its face that it is being sent for the
purpose of seeking legal advice in relation to the Mareva order made
against Saad Aljabri. It appears to be an instruction to Mr. Wainwright in
respect of an action that Mohammed Aljabri asks Mr. Wainwright to take as a
result of this Mareva order. Without additional evidence with respect to
the capacity in which Mr. Wainwright was acting when the email was sent to him,
the defendants have not shown that this email chain is protected from
disclosure by solicitor-client privilege. The email was sent immediately
following service of the Saad Aljabri Mareva Order and I am not
satisfied that on the face of the document, the defendants have shown that the
email correspondence was created for the dominant purpose of actual or
contemplated litigation.
[82]          
With respect to the document at number 6 of
Appendix “C”, this is an email chain that originates with an email dated
September 28, 2017 from a representative of HSBC to Mr. Wainwright and two
other lawyers at Cadwalader. The HSBC email asks questions (after speaking with
“the client”) and the responses from the Cadwalader firm are shown. On its
face, this email correspondence shows that HSBC is acting as a conduit between
the Aljabri clients and their legal counsel, Cadwalader, concerning advice with
respect to the matters identified in the HSBC email. The defendants have shown
that this document is protected from disclosure by solicitor-client privilege.
[83]          
With respect to the document at number 7 of
Appendix “C”, this is an email chain starting with an email dated June 11, 2020
from Khalid Aljabri to a lawyer at Cadwalader with a copy to Mr. Wainwright.
The email attaches a letter and a translated attachment. This letter and the
attachment are not included in the motion materials and I give no directions in
respect of these documents. This email correspondence, on its face, is a
request from Khalid Aljabri for advice from his legal counsel, Cadwalader,
about the matters raised in the email. The defendants have shown that this
document is protected from disclosure by solicitor-client privilege.
[84]          
The plaintiffs have identified 23 records in Appendix “D” to
their notice of motion (the “Appendix ‘D’ Documents”) and one audio recording
from the productions of Dreams which, they submit, contain improper redactions
for privilege.
[85]          
Dreams was an investment vehicle for the Aljabri family. Dreams is
professionally managed by its corporate director, HSBC PB Corporate Services 1
Limited (“HSBC”).
[86]          
The inclusion of Saad or Mohammed Aljabri, current or former
owners of Dreams, does not negate the assertion of solicitor-client privilege
by Dreams. See DBCD Spadina Ltd. et al. v. Norma Walton et al., 2013
ONSC 6251, at para. 29.
[87]          
In response to the plaintiffs’ motion, Dreams filed a motion
record containing an affidavit from Bartlomiej Buczkowski, a Director of HSBC and the corporate
director of Dreams. Dreams also filed a supplementary motion record.
[88]          
Mr. Buczkowski deposes that the redactions of the Appendix “D”
Documents based on privilege arise from claims of solicitor-client privilege
and/or common-interest privilege. He deposes that some of the redactions
contain references to certain legal counsel that provided legal advice to
Dreams. Mr. Buczkowski deposes that some of the redactions contain references
to counsel for Saad Aljabri and/or Mohammed Aljabri, including Cadwalader.
[89]          
With respect to the audio recording, Mr. Buczkowski deposes that
on September 4, 2024, counsel for Dreams produced a call recording that was responsive
to an undertaking from the examination for discovery of the representative of Dreams.
He deposes that during the call between representatives of HSBC and members of
the Aljabri family, references are made to lawyers which he understands were
redacted from the recording pursuant to privilege claims by Saad Aljabri and
Mohammed Aljabri.
[90]          
Dreams filed a supplementary motion record which includes the
affidavit of Virginia Fletcher, a law clerk at the law firm which represents
Dreams. Ms. Fletcher deposes that certain of the documents listed in Appendix
“D” to the plaintiffs’ motion record were inadvertently redacted as
“third-party confidential information” and certain documents were inadvertently
not stamped with the basis for the redactions. Ms. Fletcher re-produced
versions of these records to the parties and she attached a copy of the
reproduced and redacted documents at Exhibit “A” to her affidavit.
[91]          
At the hearing, counsel for Dreams confirmed that only
solicitor-client privilege and common-interest privilege are asserted, not
litigation privilege.
[92]          
Dreams has put the 23 records into four categories:
[93]          
The plaintiffs submit that the defendants who have asserted
privilege over the 23 records have failed to discharge their onus of tendering
evidence that shows that the redacted portions of the records are privileged. The
plaintiffs submit that the redacted documents are not on their face protected
from disclosure by solicitor-client privilege. The plaintiffs submit that the
redacted records and the affidavit evidence tendered by Dreams show only that
the emails contain references to law firms that provided advice to Dreams
and/or Saad and Mohammed Aljabri and that a mere reference to a law firm is not
privileged (citing Canada (National Revenue) v. Revcon Oilfield Constructors
Incorporated, 2015 FC 524; aff’d 2017 FCA 22, at para. 25).
[94]          
The plaintiffs seek production of an unredacted audio recording
of a telephone call between Anthony Hingley (the Head of Global Private Banking
at HSBC) and Rowena Parry (of HSBC) and Saad Aljabri, Mohammed Aljabri, and
Khalid Aljabri in 2017. No legal advisors were present for the call. Mr.
Hingley was involved in the provision of corporate services to Dreams. The
redacted audio recording was produced on September 4, 2024 in response to an
undertaking given on the examination for discovery of Mr. Hingley. Saad Aljabri
and Mohammed Aljabri claimed privilege over certain parts of the recording and
those sections were redacted.
[95]          
As observed by Doherty J.A. in General Accident v. Chrusz,
at para. 98, the assessment of a claim to solicitor-client privilege must be
contextual. Although the defendants have the burden on this motion of showing
that the requested documents are privileged, the burden may be discharged by
the documents on their face. If each of the 23 unredacted records shows on its
face that the redacted portions are protected from disclosure by
solicitor-client privilege or common interest privilege, the defendants will
have met their burden on this motion.
[96]          
I am unable to determine from reviewing the redacted records
alone, in the context of other evidence on this motion, whether the redacted
portions of each record are privileged. I am unable to determine without
hearing the unredacted audio recording or seeing an unredacted transcript whether
the assertions of privilege are valid. The plaintiffs submit that where the
Court has doubt as to the validity of a claim for privilege, it should review
the redactions to ensure that improper and excessively broad claims of
privilege are not permitted.
[97]          
I direct Dreams to review the redactions on the 23 records and
the audio recording having regard to this endorsement and, if proper to comply
with the directions in this endorsement, produce further redacted or unredacted
versions of the 23 records and a further version of the audio recording, only
with redactions for proper claims of privilege. If the plaintiffs disagree that
any redactions are proper, it may be necessary for the court to review the
unredacted versions in order to determine whether the redactions for claims of
privilege are proper.
[98]          
I hereby give directions to the parties as set out in this
endorsement.
[99]          
If there remain disagreements with respect to assertions of
privilege that require a ruling on individual documents or individual
questions, counsel may seek a case conference with me to address the procedure
to be followed for such determinations.
[100]       If
the parties are unable to resolve costs, I may be spoken to.