[1]        The Applicant mother Kadejah Moore (“the Applicant”)
commenced this Application on January 21, 2025, seeking a declaratory order
that the children, Keschawna-Mae Amela-Jana Moore-Mujic, born 26 October 2013,
and Reniyah Natalie-Marie Moore-Mujic, born 19 February 2015, (“the children”) have
been wrongfully removed from Canada and retained by the Respondent father
Mehmed Mujic (“the Respondent”) in Darda, Croatia, since 5 August 2024.
[2]        The Applicant requests relief
pursuant to Articles 3 and 15 of the Convention on the Civil Aspects of
International Child Abduction (“the Hague Convention”).  She also
requests relief pursuant to sections 40 and 46(5) of the Children’s Law
Reform Act (“CLRA”) and Articles 7, 8 and 12 of the Hague Convention.
[3]        The children were both born in Canada and lived in
Cambridge, Ontario until the Respondent took them to Croatia on 5 August 2024
while the Applicant was visiting her family in Jamaica.   The children had
never previously been to Croatia. The Applicant and the Respondent have had a volatile
and troubled relationship and have been separated since 2015.
[4]        The Applicant has had limited opportunity to speak with
the children since the Respondent took them to Croatia.  On 6 January 2025, the
Respondent informed the Applicant that he had no plans to return the children
to Canada.
[5]        The Applicant advises that she commenced a Hague
Application on 17 January 2025.  The matter is now with the Central Authority
in Croatia for review.
[6]        The Applicant seeks a Chasing Order.  On 31 January 2025,
a First Meeting was held before Piccoli J. in respect of the Applicant’s claim
pursuant to Rule 37.2 of the Family Law Rules.
[7]        The Respondent attended that meeting by Zoom.  He
confirmed his correct email address with the Court on that date.  In her
Endorsement dated 31 January 2025, Piccoli J. directed that there would be a
hearing (peremptory) on 21 February 2025.  She directed that the Respondent was
to serve and file responding material on or before 11 February 2025, and that
both parties were to serve and file a statement of law on or before 14 February
2025.  She encouraged the Respondent to seek legal advice.  Justice Piccoli
directed that all materials were to be uploaded to Case Center by 14 February
2025.  At the First Meeting on 31 January, the Respondent indicated that the
children were staying with him in Darda, Croatia.   Justice Piccoli noted in
her Endorsement that the Respondent had been able to understand and answer the
Court’s questions in English during that attendance.  Notwithstanding this, a
Croatian language interpreter was arranged for the hearing to be held on 21
February, and was present waiting to serve in that capacity today.
[8]        The Respondent has not served and filed any responding
materials or statement of law, nor uploaded any to Case Center.
[9]        The Respondent did not appear at the appointed time on 21
February 2025.  I adjourned the matter briefly and requested the Registrar to
send an email to the email address previously confirmed by the Respondent as
his correct email address.  No response was received.  Counsel for the
Applicant also confirmed that the Respondent had not responded to her previous
email communication with him.
[10]      After waiting a reasonable interval to give him an
opportunity to appear or communicate with the Court, which he did not, I
concluded that the Respondent does not intend to participate in this hearing.  I
am satisfied that the Respondent had notice of today’s hearing, yet he failed
to attend by Zoom or to file any responding materials.  I therefore proceeded
with the hearing.
[11]      I have reviewed the Affidavit evidence
provided by the Applicant, which I accept, and heard submissions from her
counsel.
[12]      The legal framework governing this type of
application was comprehensively set out by A. Himel J. in Mar v. Wu Wu,
2023 ONSC 281.  I agree with and adopt Justice Himel’s statement of the law at
paras. 10-11, 13-17, and 24-27 in that case:
[13]     
   The children were
removed from Ontario on 5 August 2024. The mother did not consent to their
removal or any extension of their time in Croatia.
[14]     
   The children’s habitual
residence is unquestionably in Ontario.  They were born in Ontario and had
resided in Ontario with the Applicant for their entire life.  They had never
resided in Croatia.  The focal point of their lives before the wrongful removal
was in Ontario – their home, school, doctor, dentist, activities, friends,
mother and much of their family are all in Ontario.
[15]     
   I declare that the
children were wrongfully removed and have been wrongfully retained in Croatia
since 5 August 2024.  The appropriate remedy is an order for the
children’s immediate return to their habitual residence in Ontario.
[16]     
   The Applicant’s
counsel indicated in her oral submissions that she seeks letters rogatory to
effect service upon the father in Croatia in a manner that will be recognized
by the Croatian Court.  This requested relief was not included in the
Application, nor were any details provided.  Neither was any draft Letter
provided.
[17]     
   Letters rogatory
are requests from a judge to the judiciary of a foreign country for the
performance of an act which, if done without the sanction of the foreign court,
would constitute a violation of that country’s sovereignty.
[18]     
  Letters rogatory are
used when the court in one country requests assistance from the court in
another country for various purposes including effecting service and obtaining
evidence.
[19]          
An Ontario court is
entitled, at its discretion, to give effect to a request for letters rogatory
if the purpose of this request could be achieved by the issuance of letters of
request in Ontario.
[20]      Insufficient details have
been provided by the Applicant’s counsel to give effect to this request at this
time.   If the Applicant wishes to pursue it, then she may submit a 14B motion
in writing to my attention, including a draft of the Letter Rogatory sought and
details regarding to whom she wishes it to be sent.