1.                 
The applicant, Elizabeth Elisa Dormon, and the respondent, Richard
George Dormon, were married for 54 years. Mr. Dormon, who was the primary
breadwinner for the family, amassed significant wealth over the course of the
marriage. He had been talking for several years about leaving Canada for a
country with lower taxes. He told the applicant that it would take him a year
to liquidate his assets and permanently leave Canada.
2.                 
The Dormons separated on December 25, 2023. The applicant’s evidence is
that in the last year of their marriage, it was clear to her that the
respondent was moving funds out of Canada. The respondent now resides full-time
in Panama.
3.                 
After separation, the respondent agreed to voluntarily preserve and
maintain $10,000,000 in two RBC accounts in Canada to secure the applicant’s
equalization, spousal support, and other claims in this proceeding. Despite his
representation that he would preserve and maintain $10,000,000 at RBC, the
respondent surreptitiously transferred millions of dollars out of those
accounts, apparently to Panama. This left only $3,700,000 in the RBC accounts.
The respondent also sold an airplane hangar in Ontario owned by one of his
corporations, removed (and possibly disposed of) numerous pieces of furniture,
art, and clothing from a jointly owned home in Florida, and disposed of all five
of the family’s vehicles.
4.                 
The respondent has not filed an answer to the applicant’s application.
He has not complied with a number of orders made by Nakonechny J. on December
6, 2024.
5.                 
The applicant now brings a motion seeking a number of orders, including:
restraining the respondent Mr. Dormon from depleting his property in Ontario
and requiring him to preserve it; a Mareva injunction restraining the
respondent from depleting his worldwide assets; a finding that he is in
contempt of orders of the court; a finding that he is in breach of orders of
the court; and a number of remedies for his contempt and breach of court orders
under rule 1(8) of the Family Law Rules, O. Reg. 114/99 (“FLR”).
6.                 
For the following reasons, I allow the applicant’s motion in part. I find
that the applicant has met her burden of establishing the following: that
preservation and restraining orders over the respondent’s assets in Ontario
should issue; that a Mareva injunction over the respondent’s worldwide assets
should issue; that the respondent is in breach of court orders; and that as a
result of the respondent’s breaches of court orders, he shall be precluded from
participating in this case in any way and a date for an uncontested trial shall
be set in this matter. I decline to find the respondent in contempt of court
orders, or to order that he pay a monetary penalty.
7.                 
On November 28, 2024, Nakonechny J. heard an urgent motion brought by
the applicant. On that date, Nakonechny J. made a temporary order securing the
applicant’s property and support claims in this proceeding against $10,000,000
held by the respondent in RBC investment account 3864522 and 38724245, and
restraining the respondent from withdrawing, encumbering, transferring, or
otherwise dealing with those funds. She adjourned the matter for a full hearing
before her on December 5, 2025.
8.                 
By the return date, counsel for the applicant learned that the
respondent had transferred a total of $5,675,000 out of his RBC accounts. He
transferred $4,427,000 out of his RBC investment account in several tranches on
November 13, 14, 15, and 25. He transferred $1,248,000 from his RBC RIF on
November 22. On December 5, there was a balance of $3,700,000 in the RBC
accounts.
9.                 
These transfers occurred after the respondent had represented to the
applicant on October 30, through his counsel at the time, that he would
“voluntarily preserve and maintain a minimum of $10,000,000 in the RBC
accounts” pending mediation. Indeed, on November 13, his then counsel sent
applicant’s counsel a screen shot showing a balance of $11,408,374 in the RBC
accounts with a promise of regular updates “as a show of good faith.” That same
day, November 13, the respondent transferred $1,000,000 from the account. Over
the next two days, he transferred out an additional $2,095,000.
10.             
The respondent filed an affidavit in anticipation of the December 5
return of the applicant’s motion before Nakonechny J. He attended the hearing
on that date via zoom.
11.             
The respondent did not deny that he had instructed his lawyer to agree
to preserve and maintain at least $10,000,000 in the RBC account. He did not
advise his lawyer that he had transferred so much money out of his account
until November 25, by which time, the accounts were significantly depleted.
12.             
At the December 5 hearing, the respondent admitted that he took money
from the RBC accounts in November. He claimed that the funds were in locked-in
investments in Panama but provided no proof.
13.             
Nakonechny J. ordered the respondent to provide same day bank account
information and statements to show where he had moved the money. She held the
matter down until 2:00 p.m. that day to enable the respondent to obtain and
provide this information. When the matter returned, the respondent provided a heavily
redacted printout of a bank statement of what the respondent said was his
Panama account. In her December 5, 2024 endorsement, Nakonechny J. found that
the redacted statement provided no reliable information. She was “not satisfied
that this is the only place where funds were transferred or that the funds in
this account are inaccessible to the husband.”
14.             
She further found that the respondent’s actions:
15.             
By order dated December 6, 2024, Nakonechny J. ordered, inter alia:
16.             
On January 21, 2025, the applicant Ms. Dormon brought a motion before me
seeking a number of heads of relief. Given the limited time available to the
court on that day, the applicant argued her motion for two substantive heads of
relief at that time. This included the applicant’s request for an order
directing RBC Dominion Securities to release $200,000 to the applicant pursuant
to the order of Nakonechny J, and for an order for substituted service of the
notice of contempt motion on the respondent via email. Both of these orders
were made in my endorsement and order of January 24, 2025. The balance of the
heads of relief sought by Ms. Dormon were adjourned to be argued before me on
January 30, 2025.
17.             
At the continuation of the motion on January 30, the applicant sought
the following orders:
18.             
The respondent, who now resides in Panama, was served with motion
materials via email (including the notice of contempt motion, as permitted by
my January 24, 2025 order authorizing substituted service by email). The motion
was returnable at 10:00 a.m. on January 30. When the respondent did not attend
at that time, the matter was held down until 10:15 a.m. The respondent did not
appear. The motion proceeded in his absence.
19.             
In her affidavit evidence on this motion, the applicant indicated that
the respondent had not:
20.             
There was no evidence before the court suggesting that the respondent
had done any of these things by the date of this motion.
21.             
In her affidavits filed on this motion, the applicant provided evidence
that the respondent had not paid any spousal support since April 2024. He cut
off her credit cards. In December 2024, he disconnected the applicant’s Microsoft
account, which was tied to her email account. In January 2025, the respondent
disconnected Bell Canada service at the jointly-owned Toronto property where
the applicant resides. This left her without internet, television, or telephone
service.
22.             
On December 16, 2024, the applicant visited the jointly-owned home in
Florida. She found that numerous pieces of furniture, art, her clothing, and personal
documents were removed from or damaged in the Florida house.
23.             
On December 19, 2024, the applicant was advised that the respondent had
sold an airplane hangar owned by his corporation in Ontario. She was told to
remove her possessions that had been stored at the hangar. The applicant was in
Florida at the time, so she could not attend to collect her possessions from
the hangar. They were disposed of.
24.             
On January 10, 2025, the applicant’s 77th birthday, the
Dormons’ daughter-in-law cornered the applicant when she was driving in her
townhouse complex and prevented her from moving the car. Police were called.
When they arrived, the daughter-in-law presented documents showing that the
respondent had transferred ownership of the car to her. The police informed the
applicant that the daughter-in-law was the new owner of the car, and that they
could not assist the applicant further. The applicant was forced to hand over
the car keys. The daughter-in-law drove off with the car. The applicant’s
evidence is that this was the last vehicle she had access to in Ontario or
Florida. It was a vehicle she had been driving for four years. It was one of
five family vehicles, all of which the respondent had disposed of, removed, or
sold since separation.
25.             
The applicant has established that orders restraining the respondent
from depleting all of his assets in Ontario and requiring him to preserve those
assets under ss. 12 and 40 of the FLA should be granted.
26.             
In coming to this conclusion, I have considered whether there will be
assets available to satisfy the likely entitlements of the applicant at the end
of the trial if preservation and restraining orders are not made. This included
consideration of the risk of dissipation of assets by the respondent that could
have the effect of preventing the applicant’s entitlements from being
satisfied. In particular, I considered the following factors:
27.             
I am satisfied that there is a serious issue to be tried in this case.
28.             
This was already recognized by Nakonechny J. in her December 5, 2024
endorsement. Nakonechny J. found, at paras. 24 and 25, that the applicant had
met her onus of demonstrating on a prima face basis that she is likely
to receive an equalization payment such that she had met her onus for an order
preserving funds in the RBC accounts as security for her support and property
claims.
29.             
My review of the evidence on this motion also supports a conclusion that
there is a serious issue to be tried. A quick estimated, or “back of the napkin,”
assessment of the equalization payment owing to the applicant establishes that
there is a prima facie case for the preservation and restraining orders
she seeks. It establishes that the existing preservation and restraining orders
on the RBC Fund will not be adequate to ensure that there are sufficient funds
to satisfy the applicant’s claims if she is successful at trial.
30.             
The respondent’s financial statement (which he marked “N/A – for discussion
purposes”) represents that he has assets worth $19,880,000. The applicant’s
sworn financial statement represents that she has assets worth $3,785,000. Both
parties list the jointly owned home in Toronto and the jointly owned home in
Florida as assets (50% of the value of each property to each), but they
disagree as to the value of these two properties.
31.             
If the jointly owned Toronto and Florida properties are backed out of
both financial statements (because they are on both financial statements, although
at different estimated values), the applicant had assets worth $400,000 and the
respondent had assets worth $9,880,000 on the date of separation.
32.             
A rough calculation of the equalization payment owing to the applicant
would be half of the difference between the respondent’s and the applicant’s
net worth on valuation day, or $4,740,000.
33.             
On December 5, 2024, the respondent’s RBC accounts that were frozen as a
result of Nakonechny J.’s order had a balance of $3,700,000. This is almost
$1,000,000 short of my rough calculation of what the equalization payment owed
to the applicant could be, based on the evidence before me. And that is without
consideration of the applicant’s spousal support claims.
34.             
Of course, this is not, and could not be at this early stage of the
proceedings, the final word on how much the respondent will owe the applicant
as an equalization payment.  Moreover, some or all of the shortfall in what is
available to satisfy the applicant’s entitlement could be realized through sale
of the jointly owned homes. However, there has been no financial disclosure
made by the respondent in support of his financial statement. Indeed, the
respondent did not formally file his financial statement in these proceedings.
Rather, he attached a financial statement that he marked “N/A - for discussion purposes
only” as an exhibit to his affidavit on the December 5 motion. As a result, it
is not yet known whether the respondent has given accurate and full disclosure
of his assets. The respondent may owe the applicant an equalization payment
greater than what I have quickly calculated here.
35.             
In these circumstances, I find that there is a serious issue to be tried
in this case.
36.             
The applicant has established that the harm to the applicant if the
preservation and restraining orders are not granted is greater than the harm or
inconvenience to the respondent if they are.
37.             
In his affidavit filed on the December 5, 2024 motion, the respondent’s
evidence was that he resides in Panama. The redacted bank statement from a
Panama bank account filed by the respondent as Exhibit A at the hearing of the
December 5 motion shows a balance of more than $4,700,000 USD.
38.             
In these circumstances, an order preserving the respondent’s assets in
Ontario will not cause him undue inconvenience. He has substantial assets
available to him in the jurisdiction in which he resides.
39.             
I am aware that the respondent told the court at the hearing of the
December 5 motion that the money he had transferred from the RBC accounts to
Panama was in locked-in investments. However, at para. 23 of her endorsement,
Nakonechny J. did not accept either that the funds in the Panama account were
inaccessible to the respondent, or that that account was the only place to
which funds were transferred. There is no further evidence before me that the
respondent does not have access to funds in Panama. Nor is there other evidence
that the respondent would be meaningfully harmed or significantly
inconvenienced if orders preserving his Ontario assets were made.
40.             
The balance of convenience supports the issuance of the preservation and
restraining orders. Especially when any inconvenience to the respondent is
weighed against the significant harm to the applicant if the orders are not
granted. The respondent has already transferred millions of dollars out of
Ontario, disposed of all of the family’s vehicles, sold his corporation’s
airplane hangar, and disposed of furniture, art, and other possessions in the
Florida home. There are insufficient assets in the preserved RBC accounts to
satisfy the applicant’s equalization and support claims. If orders restraining
the respondent from disposing of Ontario assets and requiring their
preservation are not made, the applicant may never be able to collect what she
is owed. Minimal to non-existent inconvenience to the respondent if the orders
are made is outweighed by the significant harm to the applicant if they are not.
41.             
I am satisfied that there is a risk of irreparable harm if the
preservation and restraining orders are not granted.
42.             
The respondent has already transferred millions of dollars out of this
jurisdiction and transferred or disposed of many assets. There is a real risk
that he will continue to do so if preservation and restraining orders are not
made.
43.             
The applicant has met her onus of establishing that there is a real risk
of significant harm to her and her ability to collect on her claims if the orders
do not issue.
44.             
I find that the applicant has met the test for issuance of a Mareva
injunction preventing the respondent from depleting his assets anywhere in the
world.
45.             
This court has jurisdiction to grant interlocutory injunctions,
including Mareva injunctions, under s. 101 of the Courts of Justice Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, where it is just or convenient to do so.
46.             
A Mareva injunction is an equitable remedy that, as Favreau J. (as she
then was) held at para. 46 of Pavao v. Ferreira, 2018 ONSC 1573, 291
A.C.W.S. (3d) 553:
47.             
In determining whether to order a Mareva injunction over the
respondent’s world-wide assets, I considered the following factors (drawn from Chitel
v. Rothbart, 1982 CanLII 1956 (ON CA), 39 O.R. (2d) 513; Neville v. Sovereign Management Group
Corp., 2022 ONSC 3466, 2022 CarswellOnt 8757, at para. 30; OPFFA v Paul
Atkinson et al, 2019 ONSC 3877, 307 A.C.W.S. (3d) 173, at para. 6):
48.             
I am satisfied that the applicant has a strong prima facie case
for an equalization payment and spousal support.
49.             
The parties were married for 54 years. The respondent was the primary
breadwinner for the family. The applicant is 77 years old. Most of the wealth
accumulated over the course of the marriage is in the respondent’s hands. He
has a self-reported net worth of over $19,000,000. And yet, he has not paid any
spousal support since April 2024. He cut off the applicant’s internet service
and telephone and took away the car she was driving.
50.             
Considering the evidence before her at the December 5, 2024 motion,
Nakonechny J. concluded that “the husband will owe her [the applicant] an
equalization payment and spousal support.” Considering the evidence before me,
I have already concluded on a rough preliminary calculation that that
equalization payment could well be close to $5,000,000, or more. The applicant
has established, based on a preliminary review of the case, that there is a
strong likelihood that she will ultimately succeed at trial in proving the
claims she pleaded, considering both the law and the evidence filed: R. v.
Canadian Broadcasting Corp, 2018 SCC 5, [2018] 1 S.C.R. 196, at para. 17.
51.             
The law traditionally limited the court’s Mareva injunction jurisdiction
to assets within the court’s jurisdiction. However, the caselaw has evolved:
SFC Litigation Trust v. Chan, 2017 ONSC 1815, 137 O.R. (3d) 382, at paras.
29-34.  It is now well-recognized that the court’s jurisdiction to order Mareva
injunctions may extend to worldwide assets, if the legal tests for the issuance
of the injunction are met: SFC, at
para. 38.
52.             
The Mareva injunction is an equitable remedy. As such, it may issue when
the court has in personam jurisdiction over a party, which is “not
dependent, related to or “tied to” a requirement that a defendant has some
assets in the jurisdiction”: SFC, at para. 27.
53.             
The court will have in personam jurisdiction over a party who has
attorned to the court’s jurisdiction. Attornment occurs “where a party has,
through its actions, agreed to submit to the jurisdiction of the court”: Capone
v. Fotak, 2022 ONCA 430, 2022 A.C.W.S. 5473, at para. 14.
54.             
In this case, the respondent has attorned to the jurisdiction of this
court. He filed an affidavit on the December 5, 2024 motion, attended the
hearing of that motion by zoom and participated in it, re-attended the hearing
at 2:00 p.m. the same day and filed a statement from his Panama bank account as
directed by Nakonechny J. Through these actions, the respondent demonstrated
his agreement to submit to the jurisdiction of the court. That he has since
refused to participate or abide by court orders is of no moment. He has already
recognized and agreed to submit to the court’s jurisdiction. The court has in
personam jurisdiction over him. A Mareva injunction may accordingly issue
to restrain his depletion of assets anywhere in the world.
55.             
I find that there is a real risk of dissipation of assets by the
respondent.
56.             
The respondent transferred millions of dollars out of Ontario, depleting
the funds in his RBC accounts to well below $10,000,000. This was after he instructed
his then counsel to represent to the applicant’s counsel that he would
voluntarily preserve $10,000,000 in those accounts as security for the
applicant’s claims. The respondent has sold or transferred five vehicles. He
has sold his corporation’s airplane hangar in Ontario. He has sold or otherwise
disposed of furniture, art, clothing and personal papers and possessions belonging
to the applicant from the jointly owned Florida home.
57.             
The respondent has already disposed of assets, transferred them out of
this jurisdiction, and made them unavailable to the applicant. There is a real
and imminent risk that he will continue to dissipate assets if a Mareva
injunction is not made.
58.             
The applicant has met her burden of establishing that there is a real
risk of irreparable harm to her if the respondent is not prevented from
depleting his worldwide assets.
59.             
“Irreparable harm” in this context means harm to the party seeking the
injunction that cannot be monetarily quantified or which cannot be cured,
typically because the moving party cannot collect damages from the other party:
RJR-MacDonald, at p. 341.
60.             
In this case, the respondent’s actions in transferring and disposing of
assets have harmed the applicant and are predictive of ongoing risk of
substantial and irreparable harm to her. Millions of dollars have been
transferred out of this jurisdiction such that they are now not available to
secure the applicant’s claims or enable her to collect damages from the respondent.
These transfers flew in the face of the respondent’s representation that he
would voluntarily preserve these funds to secure the applicant’s claims, leading
Nakonechny J. to find that the respondent had acted in the “worst kind of bad
faith.”
61.             
Assets in this jurisdiction (such as the airplane hangar and the
vehicles) have been sold or otherwise transferred, and it is unknown where
their proceeds are now.
62.             
Jointly owned property (such as art and furniture in the Florida home)
have been sold or otherwise disposed of. It is not known where the proceeds of
these items are now. As a result of the respondent’s depletion of these jointly
owned possessions, the applicant no longer has use or enjoyment of them.
63.             
Property has been taken from the applicant (such as the vehicle she was
driving, her possessions that were stored in the airplane hangar, and her
personal possessions in the Florida home) such that the applicant no longer has
use or enjoyment of them.
64.             
The respondent appears to be pursuing a systematic course of removing
assets and property from the applicant and this jurisdiction with a view both
to depriving the applicant of their benefit and insulating himself from her
claims in this proceeding. The respondent’s actions appear to reflect
deliberate and calculated efforts to obstruct the applicant’s ability to pursue
and satisfy her claims. In these circumstances, I find that the applicant has
established a real and imminent risk of further dissipation of assets which
would cause her irreparable harm if a Mareva injunction is not ordered.
65.             
I find that the balance of convenience favours the applicant and the
issuance of a Mareva injunction.
66.             
As noted above, the balance of convenience analysis requires an
assessment of which party is likely to experience greater harm as a result of
granting or denying the injunction sought: RJR-MacDonald at p. 342.
The court must determine whether an injunction is just and equitable in all the
circumstances of the case: SFC, at para. 28, citing s. 101(1) of the Courts
of Justice Act; Google Inc. v. Equustek Solutions Inc., 2017 SCC 34,
[2017] 1 S.C.R. 824, at para. 25.
67.             
In this case, orders under ss. 12 and 40 of the FLA may provide
some protection to the applicant by preventing the respondent from dissipating
assets in Ontario. However, the respondent’s actions demonstrate that orders
under the FLA, which only protect assets in Ontario, are inadequate to
safeguard the applicant’s interests.
68.             
The respondent transferred millions of dollars from Ontario to Panama in
November 2024. He had already been in the process of moving his wealth to
Panama at the time of the parties’ separation because, as he told the
applicant, he wanted to reside in a lower tax jurisdiction. He owns a luxury
condominium in the Aqualina Tower, Punta Pacifica, Panama. The respondent
reported in his financial statement that this condominium had a value of $1,640,160
USD on the date of separation. The funds and assets in Panama would not be immune
from further depletion without a Mareva injunction.
69.             
The respondent caused the removal, disposal, and damage of property in
the jointly owned home in Florida. The Florida home and its contents are
vulnerable to further dissipation without a Mareva injunction.
70.             
I can well imagine that there could or would be some inconvenience to
the respondent if his worldwide assets are frozen subject to a Mareva
injunction. However, the respondent had notice that the applicant was bringing
a motion seeking such an injunction. He chose not to file evidence on, attend
at, or participate in, the hearing. As a result, I have no evidence as to
whether an injunction binding his assets would cause him inconvenience or harm;
and if so, how significant or minor that inconvenience or harm would be.
71.             
I infer that the respondent would suffer at least some inconvenience if
he were unable to deal with his worldwide assets. However, in my view, the
evidence of real, significant, and irreparable harm to the applicant if an
injunction is not ordered outweighs the inferred inconvenience to the
respondent resulting from an injunction being ordered. In the absence of
evidence of significant inconvenience or harm to the respondent, which is
absent as a result of the respondent’s choice not to participate in this
motion, I can come to no other conclusion. The applicant has met her onus of
establishing that the balance of convenience favours granting the Mareva
injunction she seeks.
72.             
 Rule 40.03 of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg.
194, requires that a party seeking an interlocutory injunction must provide an
undertaking to abide by any order for damages to the responding party arising
out of the injunction, unless the court orders otherwise.
73.             
In this case, the applicant has indicated her willingness to provide an
undertaking for damages if required. But she urged me to order that she not be
required to do so. I am persuaded that the requirement for an undertaking
should be dispensed with in these circumstances. The applicant’s case is strong
and, although she is not insolvent, she is the far less resourced of the two
parties: Original Traders Energy Ltd. (Re), 2023 ONSC 1887, 2023
A.C.W.S. 1138, at para. 51.
74.             
The applicant submits that the respondent is in breach of court orders.
She seeks remedies for the breaches under the FLR. In particular, the
applicant seeks orders that: the respondent shall not be entitled to any
further notice of any steps in this case; the respondent shall no longer be
entitled to participate in this case in any way; that the court shall deal with
this matter in the respondent’s absence; that a date shall be set for an
uncontested trial in this matter; and that the respondent shall pay a monetary
penalty of $1,000 per day as long as he continues to remain in breach of court
orders.
75.             
I find that the respondent is in breach of court orders, and that the
appropriate remedies are orders that he not be permitted to participate further
in this case in any way, and that a date for an uncontested trial be set. I
have decided not to order the respondent to pay a monetary penalty.
76.             
The evidence establishes that the respondent has not complied with a
number of court orders, as follows:
77.             
The December 6, 2024 order clearly and unequivocally set out what the court
required the respondent to do in plain and accessible language.
78.             
I infer that the respondent had knowledge of the order. He was served
with a copy of the order to his email address richarddormon@gmail.com. He had
previously received and responded to documents and communications in relation
to this proceeding that were sent to the same email address.
79.             
An affidavit of Sima Hashemi, an associate of applicant’s counsel,
indicates that court staff emailed Nakonechny J.’s November 28, 2024 endorsement
to the respondent at richarddormon@gmail.com.
The respondent replied to court staff the same day, confirming his intention to
attend the December 5, 2024 hearing. While the actions of court staff and the
respondent’s response are hearsay from Ms. Hashemi, they are hearsay given on
information and belief. I consider Ms. Hashemi’s affidavit evidence to be a
reliable account of what she must have heard in court that day, either from
Justice Nakonechny or from court staff. The respondent’s email response to the
court evidences that he received the endorsement sent to him by email.
80.             
In addition, paragraph 1 of the respondent’s affidavit filed on the
December 5 motion indicates that he received application materials on November
28, 2024, when he was between lawyers. He must have received the materials via
email to richarddormon@gmail.com,
which form of service was authorized by Nakonechny J.’s November 28, 2024
order.
81.             
This evidence establishes that the respondent must have received the
December 5, 2024 order that was served on him by email to richarddormon@gmail.com.
82.             
In these circumstances, I find that the respondent’s failure to comply
with the December 5, 2024 court orders was knowing and intentional. He received
the order, and he knew what it required him to do. He chose not to do it. This
was willful disobedience of court orders, calculated to frustrate the
applicant’s claims and her ability to see them satisfied.
83.             
Rule 1(8) of the FLR sets out the available remedies for failure
to obey court orders, as follows:
84.             
Rule 1(8) gives the court wide discretion in dealing with a party’s
failure to obey an order. Relief under this rule can be procedural and substantive:
K.M. v J.R., 2024 ONSC 1338, 2024 A.C.W.S. 1029, at paras. 23, 25.
85.             
Rule 2(2) of the FLR establishes that the primary objective of
the rules is to enable the court to deal with cases justly. Dealing with a case
justly, under rule 2(3), includes:
86.             
The court is required to apply the FLR to promote the primary
objective, and parties and their lawyers are required to help the court promote
the primary objective: FLR, rule 2(4).
87.             
The court must be mindful of the primary objective of the rules in
considering remedies for failure to comply with court orders: K.M., at
para. 28. Accordingly, a court is to adopt a “broad and purposeful application
of rule 1(8) . . . to deal with a failure to obey by making any order
that it considers necessary for a just determination of the matter” (emphasis
in the original): K.M., at para. 26; Lamothe v. Ellis, 2021 ONSC
4883, 334 A.C.W.S. (3d) 730, at para. 30.
88.             
The three-step test for determining whether to grant relief under rule
1(8). First, there is a determination of whether there has been a triggering
event, namely non-compliance with a court order. Second, if there has been a
triggering event, the court must then determine whether to exercise its
discretion in favour of the non-complying party. The non-complying party has
the burden of establishing why the court should exercise its discretion in
their favour. Third, if the court decides not to exercise its discretion in
favour of the non-complying party, it is left with very broad discretion as to
the appropriate remedy under rule 1(8): K.M., at para. 31, citing Mullin
v. Sherlock, 2018 ONCA 1063, 302 A.C.W.S. (3d) 356; Van v. Palombi,
2017 ONSC 2492, 278 A.C.W.S. (3d) 789; Lamothe; Raisfrooz v. Dajmar,
2022 ONSC 5382, 2022 A.C.W.S. 3872; Horrocks v. McConville, 2022 ONSC
6885, 2022 CarswellOnt 17625; Hughes v. Hughes, 2007 CanLII 10905 (ON SC), 85 O.R. (3d) 505
(S.C.J.); C.J. v. E.J., 2021 ONSC 4853, 336 A.C.W.S. (3d) 249; Pearce
v. Kisoon, 2019 ONSC 4389, 308 A.C.W.S. (3d) 311; Gordon v. Starr, 2007 CanLII 35527 (ON SC), 160
A.C.W.S. (3d) 304 (S.C.J.); Herman v. Rathbone, 2017 ONSC 4585, 282
A.C.W.S. (3d) 361; Antunes v. Antunes, 2022 ONSC 6450, 2022 CarswellOnt
16488; Bullock v. Bullock, 2017 ONSC 1719, 278 A.C.W.S. (3d) 590; Oliver
v. Oliver, 2020 ONSC 2321, 318 A.C.W.S. (3d) 631; C. v. S., 2023
ONSC 2551, 2023 A.C.W.S. 2342.
89.             
In this case, I have already determined that the respondent has
knowingly and deliberately failed to comply with court orders. This satisfies
the first step of the test for granting relief under rule 1(8), the requirement
that there be a triggering event.
90.             
 At the second step, I have determined not to exercise my discretion in
favour of the respondent. He bears the onus of establishing why the court
should exercise its discretion in his favour. He has not met this burden.
Despite having received notice of the applicant’s motion for remedies under
rule 1(8), the respondent chose not to attend at the hearing of the motion and
not to participate in it. As a result, there is no evidence explaining his non-compliance
that could ground a decision to exercise my discretion not to order remedies
for his breaches of court orders.
91.             
Moreover, when I consider the relevant history of the litigation and the
respondent’s conduct, I am convinced that it is appropriate to exercise my
discretion to make remedial orders as sought by the applicant under rule 1(8): Bullock;
Pearce.
92.             
The respondent has failed to comply with the FLR by not filing
his answer, not filing a sworn financial statement, and not making basic
financial disclosure to support his financial statement. He has conducted
himself in the “worst kind of bad faith” by promising to maintain $10,000,000
in his RBC accounts as security for the applicant’s claims and then transferring
millions of dollars out of that account. He has knowingly and deliberately
breached multiple court orders. He has purposefully transferred funds out of
this jurisdiction and disposed of other assets in an effort to make himself
judgment proof and frustrate the applicant’s claims. And he has behaved
disgracefully toward the applicant, who was his wife of 54 years and is the mother
of his son, by disposing of jointly owned property and personal property
belonging to her, cutting off all sources of funds to her, cutting off basic
utilities and services to her home, and taking away her car. The respondent has
forced the applicant to take extraordinary steps to pursue her claims, at great
expense, frustration, and distress to her. His conduct in relation to these
proceedings and the applicant since the parties separated has been calculated
to leave the applicant without resources. And to frustrate the justice system’s
“goals of efficiency, affordability, proportionality, and fairness, by making
the process slow, expensive, and distressful”: K.M., at para. 30.
93.             
The respondent has not shown himself, either through evidence on this
motion or in his conduct in this case, to be deserving of an exercise of the
court’s discretion to insulate him from the rule 1(8) consequences of his
behaviour.
94.             
Having determined that I should not exercise my discretion in the
respondent’s favour, I turn now to consider the appropriate remedy or remedies
under rule 1(8).
95.             
The applicant seeks remedies under rule 1(8) that would preclude the
respondent from participating in this case further and order that the matter
proceed to an uncontested trial.
96.             
I am satisfied that these are appropriate orders in this case.
97.             
The applicant does not seek to have the respondent’s pleadings struck in
this case. He has not filed an answer, so there are no pleadings of his to
strike. As a result, the orders the applicant seeks that would have the effect
of precluding the respondent from further participation in this matter are not
sought under rule 1(8.4). Rule 1(8.4) establishes that a party whose pleadings
are stuck is not entitled to further notice of steps in the case, nor to
participate in the case, that the court may deal with the case in the party’s
absence, and that a date may be set for an uncontested trial. Rather, I
understand the applicant to be seeking orders precluding the respondent from
further participation of any kind in the case and an uncontested trial under
rule 1(8), which allows the court to make “any order” it “considers necessary
for a just determination of the matter.”
98.             
Although the applicant does not seek to have the respondent’s pleadings
struck, the remedies she does seek would have the same effect as an order
striking proceedings. If I grant the remedies sought, the respondent will be
completely shut out of this case. For this reason, I consider the caselaw
dealing with motions to strike pleadings to be helpful as I consider the
appropriate relief for the respondent’s non-compliance.
99.             
Caselaw considering motions to strike a party’s pleadings holds that
this is a remedy of last resort: Roberts v. Roberts, 2015 ONCA 450, 254
A.C.W.S. (3d) 797, at para. 15. Although striking pleadings is extreme relief,
it is appropriate in some circumstances. Court orders are “not made as a form
of judicial exercise. An order is an order, not a suggestion. Non-compliance
must have consequences”: Gordon, at para. 23. Pleadings should only be
struck in response to non-compliance with orders and rules, “in exceptional
circumstances where no other remedy would suffice”: Lamothe, at para.
30, citing Roberts, at para. 15 and Mullin, at para. 33.
100.         
In Lamothe at paras. 31 and 32, Chozik J. noted that:
101.         
In this case, I am satisfied that the most just, effective, and
proportionate remedy for the respondent’s non-compliance is to preclude him
from further participation in this case in any manner, and to order that the
matter proceed to an uncontested trial.
102.         
The respondent’s non-compliance with court orders is extensive and
persistent. He is in breach of six separate orders of Nakonechny J. He has been
in breach of most of these for two months or longer. He has made no effort to
bring himself into compliance with any of these orders, and has not even
endeavoured to explain his non-compliance or communicate a reasonable timeline
for bringing himself into compliance. The non-compliance is knowing, willful,
and deliberate.
103.         
The relief granted to remedy the respondent’s non-compliance must be
meaningful enough to express disapproval without being disproportionate. It
must also offer relief to the applicant, who does respect the court process, as
she comes to the court with clean hands seeking effective and efficient justice,
without being needlessly punitive to the respondent.
104.         
In my view, preventing the respondent from further participation is
entirely fitting and proportionate in the circumstances of this case. The
respondent has demonstrated through his own actions and failures to act that he
has blatant disregard for court processes and court orders. His conduct has
caused significant expense, inconvenience, and distress for the applicant: Levely
v. Levely, 2013 ONSC 1026, 226 A.C.W.S. (3d) 189, at para. 15. The
respondent should not be permitted to continue to participate in these
proceedings that he has flagrantly flouted and attempted to frustrate. He has
evidenced a clear intention not to participate in these proceedings. It is
fitting that he not be permitted to do so in the event that he changes his mind.
Equally, the respondent should not be permitted to continue to cause expense,
inconvenience, and distress for the applicant by remaining an active
participant in these proceedings, even if only notionally through the
requirement that he receive notice and have participation rights. In all the
circumstances of this case, there is no other relief that would suffice to
remedy the respondent’s non-compliance given his clear intention as expressed
through his conduct not to comply or respect the rules but to continue to
frustrate this process.
105.         
The applicant also seeks a monetary penalty of $1000 per day until the
respondent complies with all court orders, pursuant to rule 1(8) (a.1) of the FLR.
106.         
I have decided not to order a monetary penalty against the respondent in
this case. The orders precluding him from receiving any further notice in
relation to steps in this proceeding and from participating in this proceeding seem
to me to be fundamentally incompatible with a daily monetary penalty until the
respondent complies with court orders. As a non-participant in these
proceedings henceforth, the applicant cannot receive notice of steps in it,
file his answer or other materials, or otherwise participate. It would not make
sense to require him to pay a penalty until he brings himself into compliance when
he is precluded from any further participation. I might have been inclined to
order a monetary penalty if the applicant had sought an order precluding the
respondent from participation unless and until he brought himself into compliance
with court orders. However, the applicant has sought, and I have granted, an
order precluding the respondent from any further involvement with these
proceedings effective immediately. His involvement in this case is done. I will
not order a monetary penalty that cannot now be cured by the respondent because
he is precluded from participation in this case.
107.         
The applicant has asked me to find that the respondent is in contempt of
court orders.
108.         
I have decided to exercise my discretion not to find the respondent in
contempt.
109.         
Caselaw establishes that a civil contempt hearing should be bifurcated
into two parts: the first to determine whether the test for liability for
contempt has been established beyond a reasonable doubt and the second to
determine the sanction: College of Optometrists of Ontario v SHS Optical Ltd.,
2008 ONCA 685, 93 O.R. (3d) 139, at paras. 73-74 and 81; Sabourin v. Sun
Group of Companies, 2011 ONCA 757, 97 W.C.B. (2d) 615, at para. 9. In
practice, a delay between the liability hearing and the sanction hearing gives
the contemnor an opportunity to purge their contempt: Dixon v. Lindsay, (24
February 2024), Toronto 19/996 (Ont. S.C.J.), at paras. 64 – 66.
110.         
In this case, the sanctions the applicant seeks for what she says is the
respondent’s contempt are the same as the remedies she seeks for his breaches
of court orders. A finding of contempt would require an adjournment to allow
the respondent an opportunity to purge his contempt, and a further hearing to determine
the appropriate sanction if he does not purge. Given that the sanctions the
applicant seeks to have imposed for contempt are the same as the remedies she
seeks for his non-compliance with court orders, I see no value in holding off
in granting remedies under rule 1(8) for non-compliance. This is what would be
required in order to follow proper procedures for sanctioning contempt. To do
so would result in a proliferation of proceedings, as well as further expense
and delay. In my view, the primary objective of the FLR can best be met
by granting the applicant the relief she seeks for the respondent’s
non-compliance under rule 1(8) and declining to exercise my discretion to find
him in contempt of court orders.
111.         
The applicant seeks costs for this motion on a full recovery basis. Rule
24(3) of the FLR creates a presumption of costs in favour of the
successful party. The applicant has substantially prevailed in the relief that
she sought from this court. In addition, rule 24(9) establishes that the court
shall award costs against an absent party. This motion was on notice, and the
respondent chose to absent himself from it.
112.         
The unreasonableness of the respondent’s conduct forced the applicant to
pursue this motion to protect her interests and her ability to recover on her
claims. In these circumstances, it is appropriate for costs to be ordered
against the respondent to sanction his unreasonable behaviour and to indemnify the
applicant: Mattina v. Mattina, 2018 ONCA 867, 299 A.C.W.S. (3d) 770.
113.         
In setting the costs amounts, I have considered the reasonableness and
proportionality of each party’s behaviour, the time spent by each party, and
the legal fees incurred by the applicant, as they relate to the importance and
complexity of the issues, as required by rule 24(14). In assessing the
reasonableness of the respondent’s conduct, I have considered that he failed to
comply with court orders and the rules, and that that is what forced the
applicant to have to bring this motion. Rule 1(8) provides that if a person
fails to obey a court order or the rules, the court may deal with the failure
by making an order for costs: M.A.B. v. M.G.C., 2023 ONSC 3748, 2023
W.C.B. 962.
114.         
The unreasonableness of the respondent’s behaviour combined with the
complexity of the issues and the amounts in question on this motion lead me to
a conclusion that costs should be awarded on a full recovery basis.
115.         
The respondent shall pay $48,000 in costs to the applicant within 30
days of the release of this decision.
116.         
The applicant’s motion is granted in part. There shall be orders
restraining the respondent from disposing of any assets in Ontario and
requiring him to preserve those assets under ss. 12 and 40 of the FLA. 
There shall be a Mareva injunction prohibiting the respondent from depleting
his assets anywhere in the world. The court declares that the respondent is in
breach of paragraphs 6, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 of the December 6, 2024 order of
Nakonechny J. As a result of his breaches of court orders, the respondent shall
no longer be entitled to any further notice of any step in this case, shall no
longer be entitled to participate in this case in any way, the court shall deal
with this case in the respondent’s absence, and a date shall be set for an
uncontested trial of this matter. The respondent shall pay the applicant
$48,000 in costs within 30 days.