[1]              
Following a judge alone trial, I convicted Mr. R. of two counts of sexual
assault and one count of fail to comply with his probation order.[1]
[2]              
Mr. R. is now before me for sentencing. Crown counsel has applied for an
order declaring Mr. R. to be a Dangerous Offender. The parties agree that the
criteria are met for Mr. R. to be designated a Dangerous Offender under both s.
753(1)(a)(i) and s. 753(1)(a)(ii) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C., 1985, c.
C-46. The sole issue is the appropriate penalty. Specifically, whether an
indeterminate sentence is the least restrictive measure available in the
circumstances of this case.
[3]              
The Crown argues that an indeterminate sentence is the only sentence capable
of addressing the high risk Mr. R poses. However, in the alternative, the Crown
seeks a total sentence of 15 years’ imprisonment followed by a 10-year
Long-Term Supervision Order (“LTSO”).
[4]              
Counsel for Mr. R. submits that Mr. R’s primary request is for a determinate
sentence equivalent to time served paired with a 10-year LTSO. The time served
to date is a total of 1,450 real days. Mr. R. has been detained in custody since
his arrest on March 4, 2001. However, he incurred two convictions while in
custody for which he was credited with 200 real days. Applying the 1.5 standard
credit to the remaining 1,250 days, it is equivalent to 5 years and 50 days: R.
v. Summers, 2014 SCC 26, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 575. Alternatively, counsel for
Mr. R. urged the Court to impose a determinate sentence that would result in
Mr. R. having a further 2 years of imprisonment, followed by a 10-year LTSO. Counsel
for Mr. R. noted that the conditions of his pre-sentence custody have been
particularly harsh. For instance, Mr. R. went as long as nine days without a
shower, and the chilling temperatures at the Toronto East Detention Centre have
been detrimental to Mr. R.’s overall well-being.
[5]              
Following Mr. R.’s convictions, the Crown applied, pursuant to s. 752.1
of the Criminal Code, to have Mr. R. assessed. On April 21, 2023,
the order was granted on consent.
[6]              
Subsequently, on October 30, 2023, Dr. Alina Iosif provided a 47-page assessment
report in which she opined that Mr. R. is at a “high” risk for future violent recidivism.
This risk becomes “very high” in domestic situations. Dr. Iosif further opined
that Mr. R.’s amenability to eventual control in the community was quite uncertain.
[7]              
On January 4, 2024, the Deputy Attorney General consented to instituting
a proceeding to declare Mr. R. a Dangerous Offender.
[8]              
On June 17, 2024, Dr. Iosif produced an addendum to her report after she
received and reviewed a further three volumes of records (approximately 1,400
pages) from the Crown. These records did not impact her previously stated opinion.
[9]              
At the four-day hearing, the Crown filed 11 volumes of documentary evidence
which included:
[10]          
At the hearing, the victim of the predicate offence, SB, read her victim
impact statement. Her statement was also filed with the Court.
[11]          
The Crown called two witnesses: (i) forensic psychiatrist, Dr. Alina
Iosif; and (ii) Gerald Kiers, from CSC who testified about community
supervision and reintegration programs. Documents detailing such programs were
also filed as exhibits.
[12]          
Mr. R. did not testify at the sentencing hearing. Nor did he call any
evidence. However, he filed, as exhibits, over two dozen certificates confirming
his completion of programs he has recently completed. Also, when given his right
of allocution, Mr. R. expressed his desire to get on with his life.
[13]          
I have extensively reviewed and considered all of the evidence in its
entirety. However, in the reasons that follow, I have not referred to all of
the voluminous material filed.
[14]          
I agree with the parties, that the Crown has proven all of the
constituent elements of ss. 753(1)(a)(i) and (ii) of the Criminal Code
beyond a reasonable doubt. Consequently, Mr. R. must be declared a Dangerous
Offender. He has been convicted of a serious personal injury offence (“SPIO”). He
is a threat to the life, safety, and physical or psychological well-being of
others. Further, the evidence establishes the pattern of
repetitive behaviour as required under s. 753(1)(a)(i) of the Criminal Code.
I am satisfied that it shows a failure to restrain his behaviour and a
likelihood of causing death or injury to other persons, or inflicting severe
psychological damage on other persons, through failure in the future to
restrain his behaviour. In addition, I find that the Crown has proven the
requisite elements of s. 753(1)(a)(ii) of the Criminal Code beyond
a reasonable doubt. Specifically, the Crown has established a pattern of
persistent and aggressive behaviour, including the predicate offences, that shows
a substantial degree of indifference by Mr. R. respecting the reasonably
foreseeable consequences to other persons of his behaviour.
[15]          
With regard to disposition, I am satisfied that nothing short of an
indeterminate sentence in a penitentiary will adequately protect the public from
Mr. R. committing murder, or a SPIO, as required under s. 753(4.1) of the Criminal Code.
[16]          
As I will explain, these findings are based on the circumstances of the
predicate offences; Mr. R.’s criminal history; his history of breaching court
orders; his lack of insight into his offending behaviour; the psychiatric
diagnoses relating to his personality structure (i.e., antisocial
personality disorder and psychopathy); his relational violence; and his polysubstance
use disorder which exacerbates his antisocial conduct.
[17]          
As I will also explain, I reject defence counsel’s position that the
intermediate step of a LTSO is most appropriate as it will prioritize Mr. R.’s treatment
and thereby adequately manage the risk he poses; an approach described as “treat
the man, treat the problem”. In the circumstances of this case, the success of treatment
is highly speculative. Nothing short of an indeterminate sentence is appropriate
in this case.
[18]          
Mr. R. was 38 years old at the time of the offences. I
found that on March 1 and 3, 2021, he sexually assaulted SB. SB believes Mr. R.
to be her biological father; Mr. R. appears not to share this  belief.[3]
[19]          
At the time of the offences, SB was 16 years old. The
offences occurred only days after SB had reconnected with Mr. R. SB grew up in
foster care and was later adopted. In February 2021, prior to her attempted reunion
with Mr. R., SB moved out of her adoptive parents’ home and began
couch-surfing. On February 10, 2021, Mr. R. was released from custody and was
living with his mother and brothers.[4]
By mid-February 2021, Mr. R. invited SB to live with him. SB agreed
and moved into Mr. R.’s basement bedroom room, where she shared his bed.
[20]          
In finding Mr. R. guilty, I accepted SB’s testimony that on March 1, 2021, after an evening of drinking and smoking
weed, Mr. R. licked SB’s vagina and had vaginal intercourse with her. In his
testimony, Mr. R. admitted to licking SB’s vagina and rubbing his penis on her
vagina while masturbating to the point of ejaculation. He denied vaginal
intercourse. I further found that on March 3, 2021, Mr. R. sexually assaulted
SB by sexually touching SB as they laid in bed in a spoon position. Mr. R.
denied any misconduct on March 3, 2021.
[21]          
Both incidents were a serious breach of trust. As a young homeless girl,
SB was particularly vulnerable. Having been placed in foster care as an infant,
SB had hoped to reconnect with the man she believed to be her biological father.
[22]          
Mr. R. has a lengthy criminal record. It spans more than two decades. Most
of Mr. R.’s adult life has been spent in jail. The predicate offences were
committed days after his most recent release from jail.
[23]          
In summary, Mr. R.’s criminal record contains 25 convictions for crimes
of violence, 18 breaches of court orders, and numerous convictions for weapons
and drug offences.
[24]          
The details of Mr. R.’s criminal record are as follows:
[25]          
Mr. R also has a youth record. From the ages of 12 to 17 years, Mr. R
acquired the following findings of guilt:
[26]          
Although his record is extensive, Mr. R. has only received one
penitentiary sentence, nearly 20 years ago.  On November 16, 2005, Mr. R was
sentenced to imprisonment for 4 years and 11 months for 13 offences, including
pointing a firearm; assault with a weapon; and assault cause bodily harm. This
sentence was in addition to 9.5 months of pre-sentence custody for which Mr. R.
was credited with the equivalent of 19 months.
[27]          
All of Mr. R.’s other adult convictions have typically resulted in short
reformatory sentences after pre-sentence custody was credited. His offending
history relates primarily to violence against female domestic partners or
breaches of court orders.
[28]          
On this application, the Crown relies on Mr. R.’s criminal offending
against females with whom he has any relationship, whether intimate or
familial, as well as his disregard for court orders. Mr. R.’s convictions for
offences involving domestic partners can be summarized as follows:
[29]          
Mr. R. has been in custody since his arrest for the predicate offences on
March 4, 2021. While in custody, he has incurred two new convictions.[10]
One of the two new convictions involve the victim of the predicate offence, SB.
On July 17, 2022, Mr. R. pleaded guilty to violating the terms of his detention
order by calling SB eight times during the period of August 17 - 26, 2021. Each
call was seconds in duration because Mr. R. would only say “hello”.
[30]          
The second new conviction relates to a non-intimate partner, Ms. AL. Between
December 3, 2021, and January 12, 2022, Mr. R. wrote three letters to Ms.
L. demanding money and threatening to send his “people” to her home or work if
it was not paid. The letters were intercepted by staff at the Toronto South
Detention Centre (“TSDC”).
[31]          
Mr. R. was born on March 1, 1983. He is now 41 years old. He is a
Canadian citizen. He was baptized Christian and attended Sunday school as a
child. As an adult, he became a Rastafarian.
[32]          
Mr. R’s parents divorced when he was eight years old. His father was a violent
husband who abused alcohol. Mr. R. witnessed this violence, including once when
his mother was punched in the face, resulting in her hospitalization. Mr. R. also
saw his father pull a gun on his mother. Mr. R. recalls being around seven
years of age when he peed his pants out of fear after seeing his intoxicated father
fire a gun off their balcony.
[33]          
Mr. R. had limited contact with his father after his parents separated.
His father died of lung cancer in March 2013.[11]
[34]          
After the divorce, Mr. R.’s mother moved from Jane and Finch to
Etobicoke. By the time Mr. R. was 11 years old, Mr. R.’s mother was in a
common-law relationship with another man with whom she had two sons. Mr. R.
regards his stepfather as a good role model. Mr. R.’s brothers attended college
and have had no involvement with the law. Mr. R. left the family home when he
was 16 years old.
[35]          
Mr. R. has had no contact with his two brothers since his arrest in
March 2021. He believes his brothers are likely disappointed with him. Mr. R.
declined to give permission to Dr. Iosif to speak with his brothers. He did consent
to Dr. Iosif speaking with his mother, with whom he reported a good
relationship. Dr. Iosif twice attempted to contact Mr. R.’s mother but contact
was never made.[12]
[36]          
As far back as Mr. R. attending kindergarten, there are reports of him engaging
in aggressive behaviour, particularly when he did not get his own way.[13]
[37]          
From grade school, Mr. R. was enrolled in special education programs to
address his learning challenges and inappropriate behaviour. Despite special
programming and supports, a 1996 pre-sentence report states that Mr. R.
“continued to disrupt, defy authority, and to pose himself a threat to other
students”.
[38]          
By age 11, Mr. R. had been suspended several times. His 1996 pre-sentence
report attributes the suspensions to “malicious unprovoked aggression toward
both male and female peers”. At 9 years of age, Mr. R. hit a student’s head
against the wall. At 11 years of age, Mr. R. was suspended after he threw an
empty glass juice bottle at a girl as she walked ahead of him and was also involved
in a fight with a male student whose head he repeatedly banged into a brick
wall.
[39]          
From February to April 1996 – when Mr. R. was turning 13 – he was
admitted to the J.D. Griffin residential program at Etobicoke Humber
school. This placement was to provide a period of respite for Mr. R. and his
mother. The 1996 pre-sentence report noted that Mr. R. had “difficulty
adjusting to this intervention”. The placement resulted in “negligible”
treatment gains. The author of the 1996 pre-sentence report described Mr. R.’s
“worrisome and inappropriate behaviour” as reaching “a point that is
unacceptable”.
[40]          
Mr. R. completed grade 9. Mr. R. dropped out of school when he was 15
years old, prior to completing the tenth grade.[14]
[41]          
As an adult, Mr. R. has engaged in some further education. During his
federal incarceration, he engaged in schooling at Joyceville Institution and was
found to have a “positive attitude”.
[42]          
Also, while on federal parole, Mr. R. took an autobody course at Mohawk
College. In an Assessment for Decision dated March 16, 2010, Mr. R.’s motivation
was described as “high”. However, Mr. R. withdrew from the program once his
parole ended.
[43]          
Starting from when he was 15 years old, Mr. R. has had four significant
relationships. His partners, all of whom are victims of his criminal offending
history, are: Ms. AW; Ms. SR; Ms. DW; and Ms. KB.
[44]          
Mr. R. has five children. They range in age from 9 to 20 years old. Ms.
SR is the mother of his two daughters. He has a son with each of the other
three women. Mr. R.’s daughters do not speak with him. Mr. R. maintains contact
with his three sons.
[45]          
Mr. R. informed Dr. Iosif that he has been single since 2020.
[46]          
As part of her assessment, Dr. Iosif spoke with Ms. AW – Mr. R.’s first
intimate partner. Ms. AW denied any violence by Mr. R. and described Mr. R. as
a “good man, good father, doesn’t hurt people, has lots of friends”. Dr. Iosif found
Ms. AW’s information lacked credibility and therefore did not rely on this
collateral information.
[47]          
Mr. R. has a limited and sporadic employment history.
[48]          
During his assessment, Mr. R. told Dr. Iosif that he “always had a job”
after he dropped out of school. However, his last employment ended in 2015. He
spent three years with Max’s Seafood, filleting fish. This was his longest
period of consecutive employment. Since then, he has been on Ontario Works which
he supplements with stints as a DJ and by renting out his stereo equipment.
[49]          
In a pre-sentence report from October 2012 (when Mr. R. was 29 years of
age), Mr. R.’s employment was described as “limited”. The report noted that Mr.
R. worked for a short period of time at a processing plant and
loading trucks. Occasionally, he worked with an uncle laying interlocking
bricks. Mr. R. also supported himself by working as a disc jockey.
[50]          
In a transcript dated May 30, 2016, when Mr. R. pleaded guilty to
offences involving Ms. KB, defence counsel advised the Court that during
the last decade, Mr. R “found it difficult to find steady employment”. His most
recent employment was for six weeks as a delivery person for The Brick. He was
fired when his employer learned of his criminal record. His defence counsel
advised that Mr. R. relied on social assistance to make ends meet until March
2015, when he found employment with Max’s Seafood. A letter from his supervisor
at Max’s Seafood expressed a willingness to welcome Mr. R. back once he was out
of custody. Mr. R. never returned to work after his release. Mr. R. explained
to Dr. Iosif that he was embarrassed that he had been to jail.
[51]          
Substance use has been repeatedly flagged as a core issue throughout Mr.
R.’s criminal history.
[52]          
The correlation of alcohol to Mr. R.’s increased risk for future
domestic violence was noted in a 2006 psychological assessment conducted while
Mr. R. was at Joyceville Institution (i.e., when Mr. R. was 23 years
old). The report reads:
[53]          
Records from June to September 2008, while Mr. R. was still at
Joyceville, noted that Mr. R. attended and successfully completed the
National Substance Abuse Program Moderate Intensity.
[54]          
Subsequently, on February 15, 2013, Mr. R. attended a life skills course
on substance use while at Hamilton-Wentworth Detention Centre. However, in May
2016, during a sentencing hearing, Mr. R.’s counsel argued that the assault of
Ms. KB. was due to Mr. R.’s “untreated drinking problem”.
[55]          
In a November 2018 pre-sentence report, Mr. R. acknowledged that his
alcohol use was a contributing factor to his domestic violence. At that time,
Mr. R. reported that he had abstained from alcohol consumption for the past
four years but continued smoking a “pinner” while incarcerated.
[56]          
When asked by Dr. Iosif if he would consent to abstaining indefinitely
from alcohol and cannabis consumption, Mr. R. replied “no”. He explained that
he smokes cannabis “as meditation … ritual for cleansing.” As for his alcohol
use, Mr. R. described himself as a “moderate” drinker. Although he started
drinking when he was 15 years old, he reduced his consumption in 2015 after
being diagnosed with diabetes.
[57]          
Since his arrest in March 2021, Mr. R. has not consumed alcohol. This has
been his longest period of abstention.
[58]          
In 2015, at 32 years of age, Mr. R. was diagnosed with Type II diabetes.
Mr. R. takes medication twice daily for his diabetes. He is also on medication
for hypertension and atrial fibrillation.
[59]          
During his assessment with Dr. Iosif, Mr. R. reported a head injury from
2019 when the police “stomped” on his head. His institutional records show that
this injury occurred on September 5, 2014. At that time, Mr. R. was
treated at St. Joseph’s Hospital for a bump to his left forehead with mild
discolouration. The injury occurred during Mr. R.’s arrest.
[60]          
During his assessment with Dr. Iosif, Mr. R. reported no family history
of mental illness. Mr. R. denied being impulsive, a risk taker, easily bored, or
manipulative.
[61]          
The records filed show that as a youth, Mr. R. was referred to
counselling because of school behavioural issues. He stopped these sessions
because he had “had enough”.
[62]          
A psychological risk assessment conducted while Mr. R. was at Joyceville
Institution noted that Mr. R. reported two suicide attempts. One occurred at 13
years of age. The second occurred while at Millhaven. The assessment noted that
Mr. R. scored in the “extremely low range with respect to general verbal
intelligence”. The assessment further noted that Mr. R. had a personality style
that involved a “degree of adventurousness, risk taking and a tendency to be
impulsive”. Mr. R. was described as having “limited insight with respect
to issues related to domestic violence. He tended to externalize the blame”. A
June 20, 2006 note from a psychologist at Joyceville Institution stated  that
Mr. R. had been taking antidepressants since January 2006 (i.e., 23
years of age).
[63]          
Between 2019 and 2022, while at Maplehurst Detention Centre, Mr. R.
reported auditory hallucinations and was diagnosed with Psychosis not otherwise
specified and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder.
[64]          
In February 2024, Mr. R. was placed on suicide watch for one day. His
institutional records show a history of suicidal ideation when under stress. Since
his arrest on the predicate offences, Mr. R. has seen a psychiatrist for sleep
issues and stress arising from being separated from his sons.
[65]          
Mr. R. has spent most of his adult life in custody. With one exception,
all of his sentences have been in the reformatory range. During his adult life,
it would appear that Mr. R. has never been out of custody beyond two consecutive
years.
[66]          
Mr. R. has recently completed several programs. Between January 24 and June
11, 2024, Mr. R. received 30 Certificates of Completion in: life skills, anger
management, substance use, stress management, problem solving, loneliness and
anti-criminal thinking. I agree with defence counsel, that Mr. R. is to be
commended on his recent efforts.
[67]          
However, this recent effort stands in contrast to incident reports of
inappropriate conduct while detained on the predicate offences. The records
show that while detained on the predicate offences, Mr. R. has incurred
numerous convictions for misconduct. Some misconduct convictions stem from assaults
on other inmates (including one in the shower that was captured on CCTV). Others
relate to his disregard for females and authority figures. For instance, one
finding of misconduct relates to an incident on March 19, 2022, when Mr. R. called
a female guard a “stupid fucking bitch”.
[68]          
During past periods of incarceration, Mr. R. has participated in programs
for intimate partner violence, anger management, and healthy relationships. His
Certificates of Completion include:
[69]          
A decision sheet from the National Parole Board dated February 12, 2009,
noted that although Mr. R. completed both the Violence Prevention Program and
the High Intensity Family Violence Program “concerning deficits continued to
exist”.
[70]          
In July 2013, Mr. R. was referred to the Partner Assault Response
(“PAR”) Program. In October 2013, Mr. R. completed a telephone intake and was given
an orientation date of November 14, 2013. He failed to appear. He
similarly failed to appear for the PAR orientation session in December 2013 and
February 2014. In March 2014, when asked about his absences, Mr. R. explained “I
don’t want to attend the program that’s why”. When Mr. R. failed to attend a group
session in May 2014, he received a written warning of his pending discharge. He
crumpled up the notice and threw it in the garbage in front of the counsellor, advising
that the group “is not a priority”. On June 18, 2014, Mr. R. received notification
of his discharge from the PAR program.
[71]          
Subsequently, in a case plan dated May 11, 2021, Mr. R. expressed a
willingness to attend programming as directed. Mr. R. said he wanted to make
positive changes for his five children.
[72]          
Mr. R. has a long, well-documented history of failing to comply with
court orders and re-offending while living in the community under supervision.
[73]          
Mr. R.’s record consists of 15 convictions for breach of probation and three
for disobey court orders. Even during his detention on the predicate offences,
Mr. R. breached the terms of his detention order by calling the victim eight
times from the TSDC. This is consistent with his history of attempting to
communicate with intimate partners contrary to court orders.
[74]          
Records from the MCSCS include the following:
[75]          
Dr. Iosif is an experienced and well-recognized expert in forensic
psychiatry. She estimated she has done between 50 to 60 dangerous and long-term
offender assessments. She was retained to provide an assessment report in
relation to the Crown’s application to have Mr. R. declared a Dangerous
Offender.
[76]          
Dr. Iosif produced a forty-seven page report, dated October 30, 2023. On
June 17, 2024, Dr. Iosif provided a four-page addendum confirming her opinion
after receiving and reviewing three additional volumes of materials (i.e.,
Peel CAS records, further medical records, and further provincial correctional
service records). Dr. Iosif also testified before me and was rigorously cross-examined.
[77]          
Dr. Iosif met virtually with Mr. R. three times for a total of approximately
11 hours (i.e., September 11 and 18, and October 25, 2023). At the time
of these interviews, Mr. R. was incarcerated at the TSDC. Dr. Iosif had access
to Mr. R.’s medical, correctional, CAS, police, and court records.
[78]          
Based on her review of the records and her interviews with Mr. R., Dr.
Iosif concluded that Mr. R. meets the diagnosis for the following: Antisocial
Personality Disorder; Psychopathy; Polysubstance Use Disorder (alcohol,
cannabis and opioids)[15]
– in remission in a controlled setting; and, Relationship Problems with Intimate
Partners – Spouse or Partner Violence. Dr. Iosif could not rule out a
sexological diagnosis.
[79]          
 Dr. Iosif found that Mr. R. “amply meets the criteria” for a diagnosis
of Antisocial Personality Disorder, which she defined as follows at page
37 of her report:
[80]          
In making this diagnosis, Dr. Iosif found that there was “a pervasive
pattern of disregard for, and violation of, the rights of others, occurring
since the age of 15”. Dr. Iosif based this on Mr. R. meeting three or more of
the following criteria:
[81]          
Dr. Iosif described the prognosis regarding treatment
for antisocial personality traits, from a psychiatric perspective, as
“guarded”.
[82]          
Dr. Iosif further found that Mr. R. “presents with many of the
characteristics and lifestyle that describe the construct of psychopathy”.
At page 38 of her report, she described psychopathy as follows:
[83]          
Based on her assessment of Mr. R., Dr. Iosif found that Mr. R. has
psychopathic traits. She described this as follows at page 38 of her report:
[84]          
In diagnosing Mr. R. with Polysubstance Use Disorder – In Remission
in a Controlled Setting, Dr. Iosif observed that although alcohol has
contributed to Mr. R.’s criminal history, he has not previously received this
diagnosis. During his assessment with Dr. Iosif, Mr. R. described himself as a
“moderate drinker”; someone who is always the designated driver. Mr. R. did not
express any concern regarding his cannabis consumption. At page 39 of her
report, Dr. Iosif noted the following:
[85]          
With regard to the diagnosis of Relationship Problems with Intimate
Partners – Spouse or Partner Violence, Dr. Iosif noted that Mr. R.’s
criminal history is almost entirely related to violence against females; in particular,
intimate partners. At page 39 of her report, Dr. Iosif noted the following:
[86]          
Dr. Iosif could not rule out a Paraphilic Disorder because of the
sexual nature of the predicate offences and the fact that Mr. R. has refused phallometric
testing.
[87]          
Dr. Iosif concluded that overall, Mr. R.’s risk for recidivism, from
both a clinical and actuarial perspective, is generally “high”. This risk
becomes “very high in a domestic situation”.
[88]          
During her testimony, Dr. Iosif explained that she used several actuarial
tools to assess Mr. R.’s current risk to re-offend. These test results may
be summarized as follows:
[89]          
In addition to the above actuarial risk assessment tools, Dr. Iosif also
conducted a dynamic risk assessment. As explained in her report, dynamic
factors may be important when considering risk management. “A dynamic factor is
a temporally varying personal or situational circumstance that is associated,
positively or negatively, with risk (e.g., use of alcohol or drugs,
compliance with treatment or supervision, delusions of persecution, expression
of antisocial attitudes, education or employment situation, involvement in pro-social
relationships, etc).”
[90]          
For the dynamic risk assessment, Dr. Iosif used the HCR20-V3 which is a
structured guide for the assessment of violence which considers 10 historical
(H) variables, 5 clinical (C) variables, and 5 risk management (R) variables.
The HCR20-V3 assessment captures relevant past, present and future
considerations to provide information about when, not whether someone
is more likely to re-offend. Dr. Iosif described it as a useful tool for risk
management as it can inform decisions about the nature and type of supervision
or treatment needed. Dr. Iosif also used the Structured Assessment of Protective
Factors for Violence Risk (“SAPROF”). The SAPROF is to be used in combination
with a valid risk assessment tool, most often the HCR-20. It is a structured
professional judgment tool specific for the assessment of protective factors
for violence risk in forensic populations.
[91]          
During her testimony, Dr. Iosif rejected the suggestion that her test
results were artificially elevated. Dr. Iosif noted that Mr. R.’s historical
scores on risk assessment tools were consistent with her own findings. Dr.
Iosif detailed these earlier tests as follows:
[92]          
Dr. Iosif’s report paints a grim picture. Dr. Iosif concluded
that Mr. R. poses a “high risk of violent re-offending”. Dr. Iosif summarized
Mr. R.’s “most salient” risk factors as his “personality structure, relational
problems, and substance use disorders”. Dr. Iosif wrote:
[93]          
With regard to treatment and the possibility of
“eventual risk control”, Dr. Iosif considered the following five factors:
[94]          
Dr. Iosif noted that two of three factors, namely Mr.
R’s response to treatment and his motivation to change were unknown. The
remaining three factors did not bode in his favour.
[95]          
With regard to his diagnoses, Dr. Iosif opined that all
three of Mr. R.’s diagnoses require intensive, long-term treatment. Further, treatment
for Antisocial Personality Disorder diagnosis is particularly challenging. At
page 37 of her report, Dr. Iosif wrote:
[96]          
Dr. Iosif concluded at page 45 of her report that Mr.
R’s previous response to supervision has been “mostly poor, from an early age”.
As to supports in the community, Mr. R. has few.
[97]          
At the hearing, Dr. Iosif was cross-examined about the
impact of burnout given that Mr. R. is now in his 40s. Dr. Iosif testified
that “antisocial characteristics tend to wane with the passage of time,
especially after the fourth decade of life”. Dr. Iosif further explained that
“the phenomenon of burnout is not ubiquitous” but Mr. R’s risk was “likely” to
“be attenuated in 20 years”.
[98]          
At page 46 of her report, Dr. Iosif outlined the
following potential risk management plan to address Mr. R.’s high risk of re-offending:
[99]          
The success of the above plan will depend on Mr. R.’s
motivation and insight. Dr. Iosif concluded her report with the following
recommendation:
[100]       During the hearing, Dr. Iosif testified about the treatment challenges
posed by Mr. R.’s diagnoses. For instance, Mr. R.’s conduct disorder issues
date back to before the age of 15. Further, his antisocial personality diagnosis
impacts the risk assessment because for all individuals, one’s “personality is
something that is fairly fixed and fairly predictable” requiring “very
concerted efforts” to change. Also, given that Mr. R. meets the cut-off score
for psychopathy, this suggests that he “will respond more poorly to supervision
and is more likely to re-offend”.
[101]       The
Criminal Code provides a two-stage process for determining whether an individual
can be designated a dangerous offender. The first stage of the process is the designation
stage which relies on an assessment of an offender’s future risk, taking into
account their treatability. The second stage of the process is the
penalty phase which requires a determination of the minimum sentence necessary
to manage the risk.
[102]       Section 753(1) contemplates two categories of dangerousness: (i)
dangerousness resulting from violent behaviour; and (ii) dangerousness resulting
from sexual behaviour: R. v. Boutilier, 2017 SCC 64, [2017] 2
S.C.R. 936, at para. 16. In this case, the Crown submits that Mr. R. meets the requisite
criteria to be designated a Dangerous Offender based on his violent
offending under both ss. 753(1)(a)(i) and 753(1)(a)(ii).[18] See: R. v. A.M., 2024 ONCA 587, 440 C.C.C. (3d)
404, at para. 8, citing R. v. Francis, 2023 ONCA 760, at para. 59. These
provisions read as follows:
[103]       While each route has its own statutory criteria, they share four
conditions precedent: (i) the predicate offence is a “serious personal injury
offence” as defined in s. 752(a) of the Criminal Code; (ii) there is a broader pattern of violence of which the
index offence forms a part; (iii) the violent conduct is intractable; and (iv)
there is a high likelihood of harmful recidivism: A.M., at para. 12; R.
v. Hason, 2024 ONCA 369, at para. 84; Boutilier, at
paras. 26, 33; R. v. Lyons, 1987 CanLII 25 (SCC), [1987] 2 S.C.R 309, at p. 338. The last
three criteria are part of the assessment of the "threat" posed by
the offender with the last two being future-oriented: Boutilier, at
para. 26.
[104]       The onus is on the Crown.
The standard of proof is beyond a reasonable doubt: R. v. Currie, 1997 CanLII 347 (SCC), [1997]
2 S.C.R 260, at para. 42.
[105]       In Boutilier, the Supreme Court of Canada clarified that an
offender cannot be designated a Dangerous Offender under s. 753 unless the
sentencing judge concludes that the offender is a future threat
to the safety of the community: at para. 23. This requires that the sentencing
judge engage in a prospective assessment of the offender’s risk. Prospective
evidence, such as evidence of future treatment prospects, is therefore relevant
at the designation stage. But, “as a matter of practicality, the most that can
be established in a future context is a likelihood of certain events
occurring”: Lyons, at p. 364; Boutilier, at paras. 26, 36; Currie,
at para. 42.
[106]       In Boutilier, the Court found that compelling
treatment prospects may preclude designation even where it might otherwise be
appropriate. As explained by Côté J., for the majority, “offenders will not be
designated as dangerous if their treatment prospects are so compelling that the
sentencing judge cannot conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that they present a
high likelihood of harmful recidivism or that their violent pattern is
intractable”: Boutilier, at para. 45.
[107]       The prospective assessment of dangerousness required at the
designation stage “ensures that only offenders who pose a tremendous future
risk are designated as dangerous and face the possibility of being sentenced to
an indeterminate detention”: Boutilier, at para. 46.
[108]       If the court is satisfied that the statutory criteria have been met
at the designation stage, the Dangerous Offender designation follows. There is
no discretion. Discretion only exists at the penalty stage: Boutilier, at
paras. 41, 58, 60.
[109]       Once designated, ss. 753(4) and 753(4.1) set out the available dispositions.
These provisions direct that the court shall:
[110]       In Boutilier, the Supreme Court identified three important considerations
at the penalty stage.
[111]       First, prospective evidence, such as evidence of treatment
prospects, is relevant. As explained by Côté J., at para. 45, “even where the
treatment prospects are not compelling enough to affect the judge’s conclusion
on dangerousness, they will still be relevant in choosing the sentence required
to adequately protect the public”. Treatability remains an important
consideration at the penalty stage, as the sentencing judge must consider whether “the risk arising from the
offender’s behaviour can be adequately managed outside of
an indeterminate sentence”: Boutilier, at para. 31.
[112]       Second, all of the principles of sentencing — not only the objective
of public protection — are relevant at the penalty stage, including, “an
offender’s moral culpability, the seriousness of the offence, mitigating
factors, and principles developed for Indigenous offenders”: Boutilier, at
para. 63.[19]
[113]       Third, despite the language of s. 753(4.1), there is no presumption
of an indeterminate sentence at the penalty stage. Rather, a ladder approach is
required. In other words, the judge must first consider whether a conventional
sentence will adequately protect the public. If not, the judge must then consider
the appropriateness of a conventional sentence combined with a supervision
order. An indeterminate sentence should only be imposed if all lesser measures
are found to be inappropriate: Boutilier, at paras. 69-70.  In other
words, “an indeterminate sentence must be the least restrictive means by which
to reduce the public threat posed by the offender to an acceptable level”: A.M.,
at para. 14, citing Boutilier, at para. 65, and R. v. Johnson,
2003 SCC 46, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 357.
[114]       The
appropriateness of less restrictive dispositions will turn on whether there is
a “reasonable expectation” of controlling the risk posed by the offender in the
community: Criminal Code, s. 753(4.1). “Reasonable expectation” is
a more stringent standard than “reasonable possibility.” A “reasonable
expectation” is a belief that something will happen, not
something that may happen. A “reasonable expectation” requires more
than a “mere speculative hope” that the offender will be successfully treated within
a specific timeframe: R. v. Carter, 2024 ONCA 898, at para. 25; R. v.
Straub, 2022 ONCA 47, 160 O.R. (3d) 721, at paras. 45, 62-63; R. v. Tynes,
2022 ONCA 866, 165 O.R. (3d) 321, at para. 99.
[115]       In considering the lesser options, the court is not bound by the
sentencing range that would ordinarily be appropriate for the predicate
offences. Rather, a court may impose a longer than usual penitentiary sentence
to avoid imposing an indeterminate sentence, provided the court believes that this
will adequately manage the risk to the community: R. v. Spilman, 2018
ONCA 551, 362 C.C.C. (3d) 415, at para. 32. In this case, the Crown argues that
if I conclude an indeterminate sentence is inappropriate, the sentences imposed
should total 15 years’ imprisonment.[20]
[116]       Based on these legal principles, I will now turn to my analysis.
[117]       The
parties agree that Mr. R. meets the criteria to be designated a Dangerous
Offender under ss. 753(1)(a)(i) and (ii). I agree.
[118]       I find that the Crown has proven the following beyond a reasonable
doubt:
[119]       It
is undisputed that Mr. R.’s convictions for two counts of sexual assault are SPIOs.
I agree.
[120]       Section 752 of the Criminal Code defines a SPIO as an
indictable offence punishable by a sentence of 10 years or more involving: (i) the
use or attempted use of violence against another person; (ii) conduct endangering
or likely to endanger the life or safety of another, or inflicting or likely to
inflict severe psychological damage on another person; or an offence in s. 271
(sexual assault).
[121]       There is no dispute that the offence of sexual assault is a SPIO. It
is an enumerated SPIO. It is also an indictable offence punishable by a maximum
of 10 years that is likely to inflict severe psychological damage on another.
[122]       Counsel
agree (as do I) that the predicate offences are not an isolated occurrence.
Rather, they form part of a pattern of behaviour that is repetitive. The
evidence discloses a pattern of repetitive behaviour coupled with a likelihood
that Mr. R. will commit further violent offences through a failure in the
future to restrain his behaviour, particularly in relation to any female who is
in his life. This poses a high risk of death, injury, or severe psychological
injury to others.
[123]       In
R. v. Brissard, 2017 ONCA 891, 356 C.C.C. (3d) 494, at para. 57, Pardu
J.A., for the Court of Appeal for Ontario, explained what is required to
establish a “pattern of behaviour”:
[124]       As
explained by Tulloch J.A. (as he then was) in Tynes, at para. 67, a pattern does not arise simply from the number of
offences committed. It is also rooted in the elements of similarity in the
offender’s conduct. Similarities can arise from the types of offences committed,
and in the degree of violence or aggression threatened or inflicted.
[125]       However,
as explained in the recent decision of A.M., at para. 19, a “pattern may
be established on the basis of only two incidents although where there are
fewer incidents, they must generally be more similar”.
[126]       In
this case, the predicate offences are two acts of sexual assault. While Mr.
R.’s history of criminal offending as an adult is extensive, his only prior offending
of a sexual nature is as a youth. That, however, does not mean his conduct
lacks a “pattern”. The pattern that is quite evident in Mr. R.’s history of
offending is a failure to control his violent behaviour towards females with
whom he has any sort of relationship – whether intimate, familial, or
acquaintances. Mr. R. has a profound and unrelenting disregard for females. In
all circumstances, Mr. R. minimizes his offending behaviour.
He attributes blame to the victims for having angered him, or otherwise
creating circumstances which, in his mind, justify his behaviour. A risk of
serious harm to a particular type of victim – in this case females, and particularly
current or former intimate partners – will suffice to establish a pattern: R.
v. Eamer, 2024 ONCA 246, at para. 31.
[127]       I
accept Dr. Iosif’s opinion that Mr. R. has shown “no behavioural restraint”.
Dr. Iosif’s opinion is further explained at page 44 of her report:
[128]       Mr. R. has a pattern of subjecting females who come into his life to
violent behaviour. He is a jealous and controlling man who acts without regard
to the severe physical and psychological harm inflicted on his victims. For
instance, when discussing the predicate offences with Dr. Iosif, Mr. R. commented
“if she said no, I would not have pushed myself”. He also told Dr. Iosif that
he “wasn’t looking at it as something wrong”. While Mr. R. continued to deny
vaginal penetration, he admitted to cunnilingus and rubbing his penis against SB’s
privates. Mr. R.’s discussion of the predicate offences with Dr. Iosif showed concern
for his own circumstances of being in jail and away from his sons, without
regard to the psychological harm inflicted on SB. In SB’s victim impact
statement, SB detailed acts of self harm that have resulted in her hospitalization.
Only through her determination and effort, has she graduated from high school
and is pursuing a college studies.
[129]       The
parties also agree (as do I) that Mr. R. meets the test to be designated a
Dangerous Offender under s. 753(1)(a)(ii) of the Criminal
Code. This section requires proof of a pattern of persistent and aggressive
behaviour with a substantial degree of indifference respecting the reasonably
foreseeable consequences of his behaviour to others. It is intended to deal
with an individual who is callous and remorseless.
[130]       I am satisfied that Mr. R.’s conduct demonstrates a pattern of
persistent and aggressive behaviour showing a substantial degree of
indifference of its impact on others. Mr. R. is indifferent to the impact his
conduct has on others. He typically blames his victims for his offending
behaviour. He is lacking in empathy.
[131]       I accept Dr. Iosif’s opinion that Mr. R. has shown a “striking
indifference to foreseeable consequences of his behaviour”. As Dr. Iosif
explains at page 44 of her report:
[132]       The
last factor of consideration at the designation stage is forward looking. The
Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that there is a high likelihood of
harmful recidivism that is substantially or pathologically intractable. As
explained by Molloy J. in R. v. Medford, “[a]lthough these are separate concepts,
they are related in that a finding that a pattern of violent conduct is intractable
leads logically to a conclusion as to the likelihood of recidivism”: 2019
ONSC 5065, at para. 94.
In other words, the focus is not on what Mr. R. has done, but what risks
exist in the future.
[133]       “Intractable” conduct is behaviour
that Mr. R. is unable to surmount: Boutilier, at para. 27. In
determining this issue, the possibility of treatment is an important factor of
consideration. Given that Mr. R.’s criminal offending is rooted in his
personality structure, Dr. Iosif opined that Mr. R.’s treatment is psychological,
not pharmacological in nature. Its success, however, is tied to Mr. R.’s insight
and motivation. To date he has shown neither. Mr. R. lacks insight and, for
most of his life, he has responded poorly to supervision.
[134]       For instance, although
substance use has been flagged as a concern for well over two decades, Mr. R.
denies this is a problem. His denial shows a profound lack of insight given
that most, if not all, of his convictions for domestic violence occurred after alcohol
consumption. The first of the predicate offences also occurred after a night of
drinking. Without insight and a meaningful commitment to address his conduct through
intensive long-term treatment, there is a high likelihood of harmful
recidivism.
[135]       Dr. Iosif pointed to several factors that are likely to limit Mr.
R’s treatment prospects. Mr. R.’s most salient risk factors are his personality
structure, his relational problems, and his substance use disorders. In
particular, Mr. R. meets the criteria for a diagnosis of antisocial personality
disorder. He also presents with psychopathy. Mr. R.’s personality traits are
lifelong and present challenges from both a risk management and treatment
perspective.
[136]       The actuarial risk assessment instruments are also relevant when
determining Mr. R.’s likelihood to re-offend. As Pomerance J. (as she then was)
noted in R. v. McLaughlin, 2014 ONSC 6537, actuarial tools are useful
primarily insofar as they supplement and/or allow for a form of cross-checking
of judgment. The test results provide information about how Mr. R. compares to
other individuals who share certain characteristics. In this case, those tests
show Mr. R. to be a high risk to re-offend violently. This, however, does not
dictate the result. Nor am I bound by Dr. Iosif’s expert opinion, which defence
counsel argues is biased and ought to be viewed with caution. My assessment is
based on all of the evidence concerning the unique circumstances of Mr. R.’s
life.
[137]       I have considered the alleged weaknesses in Dr. Iosif’s opinion that
were raised by defence counsel. However, even in the absence of Dr. Iosif’s
opinion, I would conclude that Mr. R. meets the test to be designated a
dangerous offender. In particular, my conclusion is based on the following:
[138]        On the record before me, I am satisfied that there
is a strong likelihood that Mr. R. will commit further offences of violence in
the future, particularly as it relates to intimate partners. Mr. R.’s
lengthy criminal record discloses a habitual tendency to inflict severe
physical and psychological harm on females. His violent behaviour is
intractable. There is a strong probability that he will continue this pattern
of criminal offending. There is every reason to believe that his offending
conduct will be lifelong.
[139]       I
am satisfied, based on all of the evidence, that the Crown has proven beyond a
reasonable doubt that Mr. R. meets the definition of a Dangerous Offender under
ss. 753(1)(a)(i) and (ii) of the Criminal Code. I therefore declare Mr.
R. to be a Dangerous Offender.
[140]       I
will now turn to a consideration of the appropriate sentence. This was the sole
issue in dispute and the focus of the hearing.
[141]       Having
designated Mr. R. as a Dangerous Offender, I must now turn to the question of penalty
and whether Mr. R. should receive an indeterminate sentence, a determinate
sentence with a LTSO, or a conventional sentence without any ongoing period of supervision.
[142]       A
ladder approach is required when considering which of the three available options
is appropriate. In other words, an indeterminate sentence is only available if
the two lesser restrictive options are found to be inappropriate.
[143]       The
imposition of the least intrusive sentence requires a consideration of the
sentencing objectives set out in ss. 718-718.2 of the Criminal Code: Boutilier,
at paras. 53, 61 and 63. Accordingly, while the protection of the public is an
enhanced sentencing objective for dangerous offenders, all other principles of
sentencing apply and must be considered: Boutilier, at para. 56.
[144]       In
this case, the parties agreed (as do I) that a conventional determinate
sentence is inappropriate. The evidence unequivocally demonstrates that Mr. R.
is in need of intensive long-term treatment. A conventional sentence simply does
not allow for this.
[145]       In
this case, the key issue is whether a determinate sentence followed by a LTSO
is sufficient to manage the significant risk of violent recidivism posed by Mr.
R., or whether an indeterminate sentence is the only option available to
address the risk posed by Mr. R.
[146]       Mr.
R.’s preference is for a sentence of 5 years’ imprisonment with a 10-year LTSO.
This would likely result in Mr. R.’s immediate release on supervision given his
time in pre-sentence custody. During submissions, defence counsel acknowledged the
risks associated with such a sentence and instead urged the court to impose a
term of imprisonment that would result in Mr. R. serving a further two years of
imprisonment in the penitentiary followed by a 10-year LTSO. This position acknowledges
Mr. R.’s need for the programming available only in the penitentiary setting
and give effect to the ultimate objective of “treat the man, treat the
problem”. Mr. R.’s “problem” is alcohol abuse which underlines his history of
criminality. The potential “treatment” is alcohol-inhibiting narcotics (i.e.
Antabuse) and high-intensity programs to address his substance abuse, anger
management and relationship issues. Defence counsel argues that “[w]ith
appropriate medication, reporting conditions and guidance, any danger to the
community can be significantly minimized while affording Mr.  [R] the
opportunity to meaningfully contribute to society”. Further, as Mr. R. is in
desperate need of treatment, an indeterminate sentence will deprioritize
treatment as entry into the high-intensity programs is often governed by an
offender’s pending release.
[147]       The
Crown argues that anything less than an indeterminate sentence is inappropriate,
given the uncertainty in controlling Mr. R’s risk through lesser options.
However, should the Court disagree, the Crown argued that a total sentence of 15
years’ imprisonment, followed by a 10-year LTSO would be appropriate.
[148]       Defence
counsel points to the Crown’s alternative request for a sentence of 15-years’
imprisonment as demonstrative of a systemic approach by the Crown to use the
dangerous offender regime as a “tax on sentencing”: R. v. Gardner, 2016
ONCJ 45; R. v. J.D.S., 2015 ONCJ 226; R. v. Bolduc, 2021 QCCA 257.
[149]       I
recognize that the imposition of an indeterminate sentence will “quite easily
exceed [Mr. R.’s] longest period of incarceration”. Further, the “jump” principle,
along with the principle of restraint and other sentencing principles are
relevant and must be considered. However, the operation of the jump principle is
not a trump card that mandates the intermediate step of a LTSO where the
evidence is otherwise speculative as to treatability and reduction in risk: R.
v. S. (R.), 2020 ONCA 765, 153 O.R. (3d) 185, at para. 46.
[150]       A determination of reasonable expectation of eventual control in the
community must be based on “evidence that an offender can be meaningfully
treated, so that the offender’s risk to the public can be controlled at an
acceptable level, within a determinate period of time”: R. v. Solano,
2014 ONCA 185, 309 C.C.C. (3d) 386, at para. 15. See also: Carter, at
para. 25; Straub, at paras. 45, 62-63; Tynes, at
para. 99. On the record before me, there is no assurance that Mr. R.’s high
risk of violent recidivism has any expiry date.
[151]       Relevant
to the issue of treatability, is evidence of the offender’s amenability to
treatment, treatment avoidance, and any failure to follow through with previous
treatment: R. v. S.M.J., 2023 ONCA 157, 166 O.R. (3d) 567, at para. 27.
[152]       In
this case, there is nothing to indicate that Mr. R. can be effectively treated
within any determinate timeframe. He is currently an unacceptable risk to the
public. There is much uncertainty as to whether his risk can ever be
effectively managed. I find that it is purely speculative and, at best, a mere possibility
that any lesser measure might be successful: R. v. P.N.W., 2024 ONCA
662, at paras. 38-39. To date, Mr. R. has shown no amenability to treatment. At
most, he has expressed some interest. For instance, when being sentenced in May
of 2016, Mr. R. told the sentencing justice that he intended to stop his
criminal behaviour as he was “getting older” and always being locked up was
“starting to get to [him]”. Despite the passage of eight years, little has changed.
While Mr. R. has participated in several programs in recent months, this too
must be viewed through the lens of his personal history. During past periods of
incarceration and community supervision, Mr. R. has participated in programming
only to become non-compliant and re-offend once left to his own devices.
[153]        Defence
counsel vigorously argued that Dr. Iosif’s opinion should be viewed with
caution because it lacks any balance. He submits that Dr. Iosif “fell short” of
providing the court with a “fair and impartial assessment”. In his written
submissions, defence counsel included several excerpts of Dr. Iosif’s testimony
during cross-examination to demonstrate that Dr. Iosif “is or stepped into the
role of an advocate” thereby failing to discharge her duty as an expert witness
by:
[154]       While
I agree that some of Dr. Iosif’s language was needlessly negatively charged, I reject
the defence submission that this, or any of the other challenges, taints her
ultimate diagnosis and risk assessment. Most of the complaints are unfounded.
For instance, while Dr. Iosif is criticized for only spending 11 hours with Mr.
R., Dr. Iosif said that her average time to do a full assessment is 60 to 70
hours. In other words, the eleven hours does not reflect the dozens of hours she
spent reviewing the several thousand pages of materials. I note that in Carter,
the forensic psychiatrist who assessed Mr. Carter met with him for 5.75 hours:
at para. 6.
[155]       As
for Dr. Iosif’s lack of contact with Mr. R.’s mother, Dr. Iosif left two
messages. Given that Mr. R. was living with his mother at the time of his
arrest, his mother is clearly aware of his continued detention. If Mr. R.’s
mother was willing to continue her support of him, I have no doubt defence
counsel would have filed a letter from her. Dr. Iosif did follow-up with Ms. AW,
who “spoke positively” of Mr. R. and described him as a “good father”. Finally,
there is nothing to suggest that Dr. Iosif’s opinion would be any different absent
any of the alleged failings. I am satisfied that Dr. Iosif discharged her
professional obligations as an expert witness. Her opinion is fair and
objective. That it paints Mr. R. in a very negative light is a reflection of
Mr. R.’s character, not a departure in Dr. Iosif’s professionalism.
[156]       An
assessment of Mr. R.’s treatment potential and “eventual risk control in the community”
relies on five key factors. This is explained by Dr. Iosif at page 45 of her report:
[157]       There
can be no doubt that Mr. R.’s diagnoses require intensive long-term treatment.
His serious chronic personality traits are lifelong. The nature of treatment
required falls more in the psychological, not pharmacological domain.
Consequently, Mr. R.’s insight and motivation will be critical to his success.
To date, however, Mr. R. has shown little of either. Moreover, as stated at
page 46 of Dr. Iosif’s report, “the prognosis regarding treatment for
antisocial personality traits is guarded.” Further, Dr. Iosif’s opinion that
Mr. R. presents a high risk of violent recidivism is supported by current and
historical actuarial test results. Mr. R.’s recent participation in programs shows
some motivation but offers little assurance in terms of his long-term treatment
prospects. Indeed, in 2010, Mr. R.’s motivation was described as “high” yet he withdrew
from an autobody course at Mohawk College once his parole ended.
[158]       To
date, Mr. R. has demonstrated that he is resistant to treatment. Mr. R’s
previous response to treatment and community supervision is poor. Perhaps the
best example of this failure is Mr. R.’s continued offending soon after each release
from custody. He is in denial about what is plain to see about the contributing
role his substance abuse plays in his offending behaviour. While this was flagged
as a concern more than 20 years ago, Mr. R. denies this is a problem. Instead,
he typically finds fault with the victim for having created the circumstances
that led to his offending conduct. Mr. R.’s history shows little regard for any
court order. His disregard for court orders continued after his arrest and
detention on the predicate offences. Mr. R. is also an unreliable historian.
[159]       Finally,
Mr. R.’s future prospects regarding employment and supports in the community
are also limited. Through his criminality, Mr. R. has alienated his daughters
and other family members. His employment history is sporadic and dated. Each of
his prior releases from custody have been short lived. If history is any guide,
Mr. R.’s history shows someone who is incapable of conforming to societal norms
of behaviour which thereby endangers intimate female partners and other females
in life. His history fully supports Dr. Iosif’s opinion at page 46 of her
Report, that Mr. R.’s relational issues with women will require “intensive” and
“probably indefinite” treatment.
[160]       While
Dr. Iosif was cross-examined about “burn out” given Mr. R.’s age, the possibility
that Mr. R.’s risk will lessen as he ages, is, at this stage, a mere hope based
on generalities: A.M., at para. 42; R. v. McManus, 2024 ONCA 832,
at para. 15. While not raised during submissions, I find that Dr. Iosif’s
testimony about age-related burnout to be “general and theoretical in nature”: R.
v. Beaudin, 2024 ONCA 732, at para. 9.
[161]       Defence
counsel argued that there is a “reasonable possibility” of eventual control in
the community within the period of supervision available through a 10-year LTSO.
In advancing this position, defence counsel relied on Dr. Iosif’s testimony that
pharmaceutical intervention to address alcohol consumption is effective. As for
Mr. R.’s compliance, defence counsel argues that this is the reason for the
LTSO regime which would reserve the most severe penalty of an indeterminate
sentence should Mr. R. breach the terms of his LTSO. Following from this, he
argues that applying the principle of restraint and the “jump” principle, the
intermediate step of a determinate sentence followed by a 10-year LTSO is most
appropriate. I disagree.
[162]       I
have considered carefully defence counsel’s submission that Mr. R.’s risk of
harmful recidivism can be adequately controlled by treating his alcoholism with
“alcohol-inhibiting narcotics”, combined with supervision with terms that
require:
[163]       As
for the risk to intimate partners, a term could also be imposed that would require
Mr. R. to notify his parole officer of any new intimate partner.
[164]       While
this proposed supervision plan is theoretically sound, it too relies on Mr.
R.’s willingness and ability to comply. Yet, all past attempts to control Mr.
R. through supervision have failed. I have no confidence that this time is any
different. The plan offers no assurances that Mr. R.’s risk can be
effectively controlled after the expiry of the maximum 10-year period of
long-term supervision.
[165]       During
the hearing, it was apparent that counsel for the Crown and defence counsel have
vastly differing views about the effectiveness of the mechanism available to
address any breach of by Mr. R. of the terms of a LTSO. The Crown argues that given
Mr. R.’s high risk of recidivism, a LTSO will compromise public safety. The
defence argues that the breach mechanisms are effective and offer “the
appropriate middle ground” before imposing “one of the harshest and most severe
forms of punishment available”.
[166]       The
mechanism available to CSC officials for addressing breaches was explained
during the hearing by Mr. Kiers who is employed as a supervisor with CSC. Mr.
Kiers testified that if Mr. R. breached a condition of his LTSO, he could be
held in custody for a maximum of 90 days, absent new charges being laid. If new
charges are laid, Mr. R. would return to the community once any sentence for
the breach is completed (assuming he is found guilty of the breach). The LTSO resumes
once any sentence for the breach is served regardless of the risk posed to the
public. In contrast, if Mr. R. receives an indeterminate sentence, the Board
retains the power to actively supervise Mr. R. and can terminate community
living if necessary.
[167]       The
difference in supervision between a LTSO and an indeterminate sentence is
significant in terms of managing the high risk to public safety that Mr. R poses.
Should Mr. R. address his behavioural issues and show progress, the Board has
the ability to ease the supervision in a manner that is consistent with public
safety.
[168]          When
I consider all of the circumstances, I am satisfied that there is no “reasonable
expectation” that Mr. R. can eventually be controlled in the community, even
with a lengthy fixed sentence followed by a 10-year LTSO. In my view, the plan
proposed by defence counsel is speculative. It offers no assurance whatsoever
that Mr. R. will be successfully treated before the expiry of a LTSO. A LTSO is
not a test run for any expression of hope that might exist. While Mr. R. is
advancing in age and his criminality is closely tied to his alcohol abuse for
which a pharmacological treatment option is available, at best this offers some
expression of hope. No doubt, an indeterminate sentence is a significant jump
from Mr. R.’s prior sentences. The same was true in Eamer, where the
offender had a “relatively short criminal record” and had never received a
penitentiary sentence: at para. 31. However, the significant and intractable
risk of harm Mr. Eamer posed to intimate partners was found to warrant an
indeterminate sentence.
[169]       Neither
the jump principle, nor the principle of restraint mandate the intermediate
step of a LTSO at the expense of public safety. While all sentencing principles
must be taken into account in dangerous offender proceedings, the paramount
consideration is the protection of the public: Boutilier, at para. 68.
In this case, there is no reasonable expectation that a sentencing option less
than an indeterminate sentence will adequately protect the public.
[170]       In
my view, given all of the evidence, I have no choice but to sentence Mr. R. to
an indeterminate sentence.
[171]       At
trial, it was not disputed that at the time of the allegations of sexual
assault, Mr. R. was on probation. Consequently, the finding of guilt on the two
counts of sexual assault established that he breached the condition of his
probation order, which required he keep the peace and be of good behaviour.
[172]       Given
my finding on the application to designate Mr. R. a Dangerous Offender, and the
amount of time that Mr. R. has been in pre-sentence custody, I sentence him to
1 day in jail on this charge.
[173]       I
make the following ancillary orders:
[174]      
Finally, as Mr. R. has no means to pay a victim surcharge, the
imposition of the surcharge is waived.