[1]         
This is an appeal from the June 11, 2024 decision of Block J. of the
Ontario Court of Justice at the opening of the trial in this matter staying the
proceedings and finding a breach of the respondents rights under s. 11(b) of
the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
[2]         
For the reasons that follow, I am granting this appeal, vacating the
stay of proceedings entered by Block J. and remitting the matter back to the Ontario
Court of Justice forthwith to fix a new date for trial as soon as possible. 
The trial was delayed due to an erroneous ruling of the initial trial judge on
a third-party records application not made by the Crown.  The consequence of
this was a successful certiorari application by the affected third party
who had not been given an opportunity to make submissions before a ruling
affecting his interests was made.  This was clearly an exceptional circumstance
within the Jordan[1]
framework and there was no basis in the evidence on which to conclude the Crown
had not reasonably attempted to avoid or shorten the delay occasioned by an
erroneous ruling the Crown diligently attempted to warn against.
[3]         
Just over a week prior to the scheduled date of this two-day trial on
June 15, 2023, the Crown disclosed that the arresting officer was on leave and
might not be able to testify at trial.  The Crown’s case could not be made
absent this witness.  After some exchanges between counsel over the following
days, the defence brought an O’Connor[2]
application on short notice to seek disclosure of health records relating to
the officer and the reasons for his being on leave.  The Crown objected to the
defence application as moot because the officer was present and prepared to
testify at the trial opening.  The Crown further advised the trial judge that
the officer had standing on the defence application to disclose his personal
health records and wished to be heard but that his lawyer could not attend that
morning on short notice.
[4]         
The trial judge granted stage one of the defence O’Connor application,
subpoenaed the documents in question and adjourned matters to the following
week without hearing from the officer’s counsel.  The following week the trial judge
declined a second request relayed on behalf of the officer’s counsel by the
Crown to schedule a hearing at which the witness’ counsel could be present,
stating “that ship’s sailed”.  She instead adjourned to a date later in July to
deliver her decision as to whether a stage two hearing would be required
following her review of the health records that had by then already been
produced and were in her possession.
[5]         
Prior to her decision on stage two being rendered, counsel for the
officer brought a certiorari application to quash the decision to
proceed in his absence.  This application was ultimately successful.  The
result was that the trial judge’s stage one O’Connor decision was
quashed and the records disclosure application and the trial were both sent
before a new Ontario Court of Justice trial judge.  The newly-assigned judge (Block
J.) then scheduled and conducted the O’Connor hearing in the presence of
counsel for the officer, granted the defence application in part by ordering production
to the defence of some of the documents requested and scheduled a s. 11(b)
application of the defence immediately prior to the re-scheduled opening of the
trial on June 13, 2024 to consider the impact of the resulting delay of almost
exactly one year.
[6]         
Following the s. 11(b) hearing on June 11, 2024, Block J. granted the
defence application and entered a stay of proceedings.  He found that the delay
in the start of the trial was not a discrete exceptional event and that at all
events the Crown had failed to take “deliberate aggressive steps” to mitigate
the delay by persuading the trial judge to cure the procedural defect that gave
rise to the certiorari application by means of a “consent application”
that no party proposed or consented to.  He also found that the Crown had
“promoted” the error made by the trial judge, suggested that the officer’s
counsel had actually initially consented to the stage one hearing proceeding in
his absence and found that the Crown bore responsibility for the certiorari
application that it did not bring because it failed to persuade the trial judge
“on consent” to correct the “minor error” that gave rise to the certiorari
application before the application was made.
[7]         
 Did Block J. commit a reversible error of law in characterizing the
delay arising from the certiorari application and granting the 11(b)
application?
[8]         
In my view, the decision of Block J. misapplied the “exceptional
circumstances” part of the Jordan framework in assessing the
reasonableness of the delay that occurred in this case.  In Jordan, the
Supreme Court defined exceptional circumstances as circumstances that lie
outside the Crown’s control in the sense that they are reasonably unforeseen or
reasonably avoidable and that Crown counsel cannot reasonably remedy the delays
emanating from the circumstance once they arise (at Jordan, para. 69).
[9]         
The sole cause of the delay to the trial was the decision of the
trial judge to hold a stage one O’Connor hearing without hearing from
the affected party – the officer whose confidential health records were being
sought – or his counsel.  That decision was successfully challenged by the
affected witness in the certiorari application that followed.  The challenged
decision of the trial judge was taken quite expressly against the
representations of the Crown who clearly and unambiguously informed the trial
judge that the witness whose privacy interests were at stake in the defence
application had standing to be heard at the stage one O’Connor hearing
and that his counsel wished to appear but was unable to appear that morning on
short notice.
[10]       Block
J. was under the misapprehension – contradicted quite explicitly by the
transcript of the June 15, 2023 hearing – that counsel for the officer
“apparently did not object to the matter proceeding without him”.  That was a
finding for which the only evidence was to quite the opposite effect.  Counsel’s
request to be heard was relayed by the Crown to the trial judge on June 15 (and
again on June 22) and it was the trial judge’s decision to proceed in
the absence of the affected party or his counsel that was the basis of the certiorari
application that such counsel subsequently brought.
[11]       The
effect of the witness’ certiorari application was to stay further
proceedings in the Ontario Court of Justice until the application was dealt
with.  There is no suggestion that Crown somehow instigated or controlled the
application in any way.  The decision of the trial judge that gave rise to the
application could not have been anticipated and was opposed by the Crown.  In short,
the delay resulting from the certiorari application was something that
lay entirely and quintessentially beyond the Crown’s control nor could such an
error be anticipated.  It satisfies in every conceivable way the first part of
the definition of “exceptional circumstances” in Jordan.
[12]       The
only remaining question is whether there were any reasonable steps that the
Crown ought to have taken but failed to take to mitigate the resulting delay.  I
agree with the Crown that Block J. applied the wrong legal test in assessing
the second part of the “exceptional circumstances” test.  Block J. interpreted
this as calling for “deliberate aggressive steps” to be taken by the Crown, a higher
standard than the “reasonable available steps to avoid and address the problem
before the delay exceeded the ceiling” called for by the Supreme Court of
Canada (Jordan at para. 70).
[13]       Since
the effect of the certiorari application was to remove the matter from
the jurisdiction of the Ontario Court of Justice until the application was
dealt with, the trial could not possibly have been held before January 12, 2024
when the decision granting the certiorari application was released.  While
defence counsel suggested a degree of unhappiness at the celerity with which
the certiorari application was conducted by counsel for the officer,
there is no basis in the evidence before me to suggest that there was any
material delay in that application being scheduled and then heard.  The
application was brought on July 20, 2023 and the hearing conducted on October
25, 2023. The period of time it was under reserve thereafter could not be
anticipated and was of course beyond the control of the Crown.
[14]       After
the certiorari application was filed on July 20, 2023, there is no
serious basis to suggest that the Crown could have taken any steps to
accelerate the timing in any material way.  Indeed, Block J. agreed that the
Crown did all that could be done to mitigate the delay after the certiorari
application was filed.  The Crown (and defence) had arranged for a new trial
date in February 2024, a trial date that was ultimately lost due to the timing
of the release of the decision on the application in mid-January (not leaving
enough time for the defence O’Connor application to run its course prior
to the trial).
[15]       If,
as is clear, the Crown took all reasonably available steps to mitigate the
delay after the application was brought, the only basis to attribute the
resulting delay to the Crown instead of the exceptional circumstance is if the
Crown failed to take a reasonably available step before the application
was brought.
[16]       What
steps could the Crown reasonably have taken prior to July 20?  The decision to
proceed with Step One to the O’Connor hearing was made by the trial
judge on June 15, 2023 despite the clearly stated objection of the Crown that
the witness whose interests were at stake had standing, had retained counsel
and wished to be heard on the matter.  The Crown did not ask the trial judge to
make the ruling she made. She made the ruling, issued the subpoenas for the
requested documents and received them before the next hearing on June
22, 2023.  Nevertheless, on the return of the matter on June 22, the Crown
again relayed the request of the witness’ counsel to be heard which gave rise
to the trial judge’s comment that “that ship’s sailed”.
[17]       The
standard laid down by the Supreme Court of Canada to measure the adequacy of
the Crown’s actions to avoid or mitigate delay is “reasonableness” and not “perfection
in hindsight”.
[18]       Justice
Block found that during the interval between the decision of the trial judge
and the filing of the certiorari application, “steps could have been
taken at [the Ontario Court of Justice] before Her Honour, on consent,
to redeem any minor error, in my view, that might have taken place” (italics
mine).
[19]       With
respect, that counsel of hindsight directed at a party having neither advance
notice of nor responsibility for the certiorari application is a tall
order and at best a highly speculative one.  Crown counsel brought to the trial
judge’s attention the very circumstances – the absence of the affected party
with standing and his counsel – that gave rise to the certiorari
application.  The trial judge made the decision she made.  She declined to revisit
the initial order when the same objection was brought to her attention the
following week.  By then the order had been made and acted upon – the subpoena was
issued and the documents had been received.  There is no basis in the evidence
to presume that the “minor error” was so considered by the affected party who
brought the successful certiorari application or that he would have
consented to proceeding in the manner suggested a year after the fact.  There
is no basis to presume that having already refused to reconsider the matter on
June 22 the trial judge would have scheduled a special hearing to reconsider it
yet again.  The suggestion of a “consent” application heading off a certiorari
application by a third party outside of the Crown’s control is unrealistic in
the extreme.
[20]       The
Crown was effectively a by-stander to the certiorari application and
there is no suggestion that it took a bad faith, frivolous or dilatory position
in relation to it.  The Crown took reasonable steps to mitigate, including
having procured an early trial date that was lost when the certiorari
decision was released too close to the trial date to permit the defence third
party records application to be completed.
[21]       The
entire period of delay resulting from the trial judge’s challenged decision on
June 15, 2023 was clearly an extraordinary circumstances that cannot be laid at
the feet of the Crown for failure to anticipate, avoid or mitigate.  The
decision of Block J. was the product of error and must be reversed.
[22]       The
appeal is granted, the stay of proceedings is vacated and the matter returned
to the Ontario Court of Justice to fix a new trial date as soon as
practicable.