[1]       The accused/Respondent is charged with failing to remain at the
scene of an accident in which the victim died: Criminal Code, s. 320.16(3).
I have been assigned to hear the trial, sitting alone without a jury.
[2]       Lindsay Smith was a passenger in the Respondent’s car when he
allegedly hit the victim. The Crown/Applicant relies on Ms. Smith’s evidence to
prove that the Respondent hit the victim and then failed to stop at the scene
of the accident.
[3]       Ms. Smith and the Respondent were in an intimate partner
relationship at the time of the accident. On September 23, 2023, the accused
pleaded guilty to one count of assault against Ms. Smith. Having already served
60 days in pre-trial custody, he received a suspended sentence and was bound by
a probation order for one year. The probation order prohibited the Respondent
from communicating with Ms. Smith or being within 100 meters of her. It has
since expired and there are currently no conditions restraining contact between
the Respondent and Ms. Smith.
[4]       The Crown now brings an application pursuant to s. 486.2(2) seeking
leave to have Ms. Smith give evidence via closed circuit television (CCTV). 
The Respondent opposes the Crown’s application; he says that Ms. Smith should
testify in open court.
[5]       In support of its application, the Crown adduces evidence from
Alyssa Gill, a Victim Witness Services Worker with the court’s Victim Witness
Assistance Program (VWAP). This type of evidence is widely considered
acceptable on such an application; there is no requirement to file an affidavit
from the proposed witness: R. v Shammo, 2024 ONSC 2614, at para.
21. Ms. Gill states that Ms. Smith is “very anxious and nervous” about giving
evidence, that the thought of seeing the Respondent is “triggering” and makes
her emotional and uncomfortable, that she has ongoing safety concerns in
relation to the Respondent because of the history of “abuse,” and that she
would not be able to candid with the Court because she is still intimidated by him.
Ms. Gill says that Ms. Smith told her that testifying by CCTV would reduce her
anxiety and allow her to stay focused while answering questions.
[6]       The Crown also filed a transcript from the Respondent’s preliminary
inquiry. During that proceeding, the Crown applied to have Ms. Smith’s
videotaped statement to police entered for the truth of its contents pursuant
to s. 540(7) of the Criminal Code. In allowing the Crown’s application,
the preliminary inquiry judge described Ms. Smith’s testimony on the voir
dire as “distraught,” and reasoned that she was a “typical recanting
witness.”
[7]       The Defence argues that Ms. Smith is no longer intimidated or afraid
of the Respondent because she has contacted him since the date of incident. He
relies on Ms. Smith’s police interview from September 2024 in which she
admitted that she had been in contact with the Respondent, and an affidavit
from the Respondent’s surety, Ms. Stephanie McLelland, wherein she indicates
that Mr. O’Leary’s phone received an incoming call from Ms. Smith on January
27, 2025. Ms. Smith told police that she did not recall making such a call and
said that it must have been a “mistake.”
[8]       To decide the Application before me, I must answer the following
questions:
[9]       The answer to both these questions is, yes. The Crown’s application
is granted.
[10]       The
test to allow a witness to testify by CCTV is whether doing so would
“facilitate the giving of a full and candid account by the witness” or
is “otherwise in the interest of the proper administration of justice”: s.
486.2(2). The factors that I am to consider are set out in s. 486.2(3) of the Criminal
Code.
[11]       The law surrounding the application of s. 486.2 is helpfully
summarized by Leach J. in Shammo, at para. 21. The general rule is that capable
adult witnesses are presumed to be able to give their evidence in a public
courtroom: R. v. N.S., 2017 ONCJ 977 at para. 34.
[12]      
While applications under s. 486.2(2) are meant
to be exceptional and not routine, “concerns about the manner of a witness
providing testimony improperly swaying the trier of fact into improper sympathy
towards a complainant or prejudice against an accused are eliminated in a judge
alone trial”: Shoom, para. 21. I would add that this is particularly the
case in the era of hybrid trials where witnesses regularly attend by zoom on
consent of both parties.
[13]       On the evidence before me, I am satisfied that allowing Ms. Smith to
testify by CCTV will “facilitate the giving of a full and candid account” of
the events at issue. While Ms. Smith is a capable adult and presumptively able
to testify in open court, I find that the history of intimate partner violence
between her and the Respondent, her difficulties testifying at the preliminary
inquiry, and Ms. Gill’s evidence about Ms. Smith’s current emotional concerns,
provide a proper foundation to make the order sought by the Crown.
[14]       While this trial does not involve allegations of violence against
Ms. Smith per se, her previous experiences of violence may be relevant
to assessing her credibility and reliability, which will be a central issue at
trial. It is anticipated that the defence will attack Ms. Smith’s credibility
and reliability because her story has shifted over time. It will be important
that Ms. Smith feel comfortable to the explain her reasons for her evolving
story, which may include her previous experiences of violence.
[15]       Despite the Respondent’s submissions to the contrary, the Crown is
not required to produce medical evidence to satisfy the requirements of s.
486.2(2): R v. F.M., 2021 BCSC 1867, at para. 25. To the extent that the
Respondent argues that Ms. Gill’s evidence is little more than a recitation of
Ms. Smith’s “bald assertions,” I find that this ignores the fact that Ms. Gill is
a professional witness who has no interest in the matter, and whose evidence is
grounded in her experience working with countless victims. The Respondent did
not cross-examine Ms. Gill and I am not prepared to discount the credibility or
reliability of her evidence in the absence of any direct challenge to it.
[16]       I specifically reject the Respondent’s argument that there is no
basis upon which to conclude that Ms. Smith is intimidated by the Respondent
because she has been in communication with him recently. First, there is no
evidence that Ms. Smith and the Respondent have communicated since she reported
to the police in September 2024. Moreover, even if she had been in contact with
the Respondent, this is not determinative of whether she is intimidated by him.
I would need further information and details about the communications and their
nature to draw such a inference. Indeed, many victims of intimate partner
violence will maintain contact with their abuser because they believe that
doing so makes them safer.
[17]       I also find that allowing Ms. Smith to testify via CCTV is in the
interest of the proper administration of justice, namely, because it is
consistent with the imperative of encouraging survivors of intimate partner
violence to report offences committed by their abuser (whether they are the
victim or not), and facilitating their participation in the criminal justice
process.
[18]       In 1993, in R. v.  Levogiannis, 1993 CanLII (SCC), Justice
L’Heureux-Dubé discussed the policy rationale underlying the companion section
to the one before me, s. 486.2(1). In finding that that section did not infringe
the accused’s Charter rights, the Court found that the sections were
enacted to enhance the truth-seeking functions of the Court by recognizing that
a child abuse victim’s evidence may be facilitated if they are able to focus
and give attention to their testimony rather than experience difficulties
facing the accused.
[19]       Given the modern recognition of intimate partner violence as an
epidemic, I find that allowing Ms. Smith to testify by CCTV will enhance the
truth-seeking function for the very same reasons articulated by Justice
L’Heureux-Dubé. I certainly do not need medical or expert evidence to find that
survivors of intimate partner violence may find it retraumatizing to testify in
the presence of their abuser, and that being “triggered” might impact make it
harder to focus on their testimony. In this regard, Ms. Smith’s anxiety and
stress go beyond that which is normal for all victims in a criminal trial,
because they are grounded in her past, recent violent experiences with the Respondent
himself: Shoom, para. 43.
[20]       The Crown’s Application is granted.