[1]         
I
have been case-managing this action since late 2023.  The Respondent, Sundri
Rakesh Shewa, is in her early eighties.  Unfortunately, she suffers from
dementia and has for some time.  Even more unfortunately, there have been
issues in the administration of her affairs for some time.
[2]         
Sundri
has three children, Indira (“Indu”), Jagdish (a.k.a. Sean Amani) and Meenu. 
Jagdish has advised that he now uses the name Sean Amani and I will refer to
him by that name throughout these reasons.
[3]         
All
three children have been involved in Sundri’s medical care as well as her legal
affairs for some considerable time.  Both Meenu and Mr. Amani had a power of
attorney for property that was signed back in 2017.  However, in 2024 I found
that none of Sundri’s children were suitable as guardian for property.  As a
result, I appointed the Public Guardian and Trustee (“PGT”) as Sundri’s
guardian.
[4]         
As
part of the various processes that have been before the Court, I also directed
that Mr. Amani was to pass his accounts for the time period in which he was
managing Sundri’s property.  As part of that exercise in passing of accounts,
there are two issues that this decision addresses:  standing to participate in
the passing of accounts and the disclosure of medical information in respect of
Sundri.  I will set out some background to put this decision in context and
then set out my conclusions on each issue in turn.
[5]         
Given
that most of the parties share a last name, I will use first names throughout
this judgment except for Mr. Amani.  As I have indicated in previous decisions,
no disrespect is intended by this.
[6]         
Sundri
Shewa is in her early 80’s.  She immigrated from India many years ago and
raised her family in Canada with her husband.  I understand that her husband
has been deceased for more than twenty years.  She has, until a couple of weeks
ago, lived on Bell Harbour Drive in Brampton.  That property has been sold, and
the proceeds from the property are being addressed as part of the case
management activities.
[7]         
Sundri
has three children, two daughters and a son.  Up until a couple of weeks ago, Sundri
was living with her eldest daughter, Indu, and her grandson Dev in the Bell
Harbour Drive property.  Since the sale of the property, Sundri has moved to
live with her second eldest daughter, Meenu and her husband.
[8]         
Sundri’s
son is the youngest child.  His original name was Jagdish Shewa.  Jagdish has a
series of aliases that he has used over the past number of years.  As noted
above, he has indicated that he wishes to be referred to as Sean Amani.
[9]         
Sundri’s
physical and mental health has been deteriorating over the past fifteen to
twenty years.  She has had her family managing her property.  This has led to
litigation, and to the appointment of the Public Guardian and Trustee (“PGT”)
to manage Sundri’s affairs.
[10]      There
has been litigation in this matter for nearly ten years.  I do not intend to
review the whole history of that litigation.  Instead, I will review the key
points that are necessary to understand the disposition of the two issues
before me.  My summary of the facts is based on the information that I have and
is not binding on the judge hearing the passing of accounts or any other judge
who is required to find facts in this matter.
[11]       As a
result of some issues that it is not necessary to review, Indu became the owner
of seventy-one (71) percent of the Bell Harbour property in 2017.  Sundri
retained title to twenty-nine (29) percent of that property as well as a life
interest that allowed her to continue living at that property until she died.  Sundri
continued to live at the property with Indu.  Indu also had the right to borrow
against her interest in the property.
[12]      On or
about April 29th, 2017, Sundri signed a Power of Attorney for Property
and a Power of Attorney for personal care, giving those powers to Meenu and to
Mr. Amani.
[13]      There
is also a second Power of Attorney for Property and Personal Care that names
Mr. Amani as the sole attorney.  There are allegations that this document was
forged.  I am not addressing those allegations in this endorsement.
[14]      Mr.
Amani and Meenu managed Sundri’s property until the spring of 2023, when Indu
brought an application seeking to have herself appointed as Sundri’s guardian
for property and personal care.  She was also seeking an order terminating the
Powers of Attorney held by Meenu and Mr. Amani.
[15]      The
matter first came before me in the fall of 2023.  I informally case-managed it
for some period of time and then Ricchetti R.S.J. appointed me as
case-management judge.
[16]      By way
of an order of October 11th, 2023, I terminated the powers of
attorney and appointed Indu as the temporary guardian for personal care.  I
also appointed Mr. Patel as section 3 counsel.  Although no challenge was made
to the interim guardian appointment at that time, submissions received from Mr.
Amani in the last few weeks state that I did not have the jurisdiction to make
that appointment and arguing that Indu has never been legally responsible for
Sundri’s care.  I will return to that argument below.
[17]      In the
fall of 2023, as I was case-managing this matter, it came to my attention that the
mortgage that Indu had placed on the property on Bell Harbour Drive was in
arrears, and that the mortgagee had begun power of sale proceedings.  It also
came to my attention that Indu had not paid the property taxes for some time,
which was her responsibility under the ownership agreement with Sundri.
[18]      As a
result, considerable time has been spent in this matter addressing the issue of
the Bell Harbour Drive property.  I case managed those issues, and efforts were
made to try and secure a reverse mortgage so that Sundri could remain in the
property.  Those efforts were unsuccessful and ended in August of last year.
[19]      In the
meantime, the PGT was appointed as Sundri’s guardian for property.  Based on
the litigation in this matter and the alleged conduct of Sundri’s three
children, I determined that none of them were suitable as her guardian for
property.
[20]      The
PGT has appointed Mr. Patel, who was section 3 counsel, as counsel for all
matters except the passing of accounts.  For the passing of accounts, the PGT
has appointed Ms. Choi and her firm, Walker Head.  Two counsels have been
appointed, in part, because Mr. Amani’s counsel has indicated that they would
object to Mr. Patel conducting the passing of accounts because he was section 3
counsel.
[21]      While
we have been managing the sale of the property, I have also been moving the
passing of accounts towards a hearing.  Timetables for that matter have been
set and I am anticipating that the hearing will be concluded before the summer
of this year.
[22]      I had
originally ordered the passing of accounts to take place last year, with Mr.
Amani to deliver his materials by the beginning of April of 2024.  Those
materials were not delivered in a timely way, and there have been considerable
delays in the passing of accounts.
[23]      In
order to continue to move the matter forward, there are two issues that must be
addressed.  First, Indu and Meenu are both seeking standing to participate in
the passing of accounts.  In addition, Mr. Patel is seeking to participate in
the passing of accounts as counsel.
[24]      Second,
Mr. Amani has asked for medical documentation to be produced.  Mr. Patel has
obtained the clinical notes and records from the family physician and, in
accordance with the process we discussed at our last case management
conference, I have reviewed those documents and have provided some of them to
the parties who have standing.
[25]      I will
now set out detailed reasons for my disposition of each issue.
[26]      Indu
seeks standing on several grounds, as follows:
[27]      Meenu
also seeks standing on similar grounds.  In addition, Meenu points out the
following:
[28]      Mr.
Amani argues that the passing of accounts is essentially a court supervised
audit of a fiduciary’s management of the principal’s property.  As a result,
the only necessary and proper parties are Mr. Amani and the PGT.  While there
is provision at law for the Court to exercise its’ discretion and grant leave
to participate to other parties, in this case Mr. Amani argues that there are
no other proper parties.
[29]      He
also argues that I should not exercise my discretion to grant standing to
anyone else because the case-law does not support that request, the involvement
of Meenu and Indu “seems to be motivated by their personal grievance with their
brother” and that no orders are sought as against either Meenu or Indu and, as
a result, they will not be prejudiced if they are not added as parties.
[30]      Given
the need to move this matter along, as the case management judge, I determined
that the issue of standing should be addressed by way of written submissions. 
I invited submissions from the parties seeking standing, which were due in
mid-January.  Any party opposing a request for standing was to provide their
submissions by February 4th, 2025.
[31]      Once I
received and reviewed the submissions, it came to my attention that there was
one issue in respect of who the Power of Attorney for Personal care was that
needed to be addressed.  I invited the parties to provide submissions on that
specific issue by February 10th, 2025.
[32]      I
received submissions from Mr. Amani’s counsel and Mr. Patel in accordance with
my deadline.  I was also advised that Mr. Woloshyn was travelling out of the country
until February 18th, 2025.  I extended the deadlines until the end
of the day on February 19th, 2025.  I received additional
submissions on this issue from Mr. Woloshyn and Mr. Patel.
[33]      I now
turn to the analysis of the issues.
[34]        The
starting point for the analysis in this case is section 42 of the Substitute
Decisions Act, 1992, S.O. 1992 c. 30 (“SDA”).  That section states,
in part:
[35]          
The analysis begins
with the observation that Indu has been involved in Sundri’s care for a long
period of time, and that Meenu has taken over that care.  As a result, there is
a question of whether one or the other of them is Sundri’s attorney for personal care.  That person appears to have the
right to apply for a passing of accounts.  Having identified this issue, I
requested submissions from the parties as described above.
[36]      I
start with an analysis of the authorities referred to by Mr. Amani’s counsel. 
Chief among them is BMO Trust Company v. Childs, 2019 ONSC 2637.  In
that decision, the Court was faced with very contentious family litigation
involving an incapable person and her four children.  Two of the children had
previously challenged both the conduct of one of the children, who was the
litigation guardian, and BMO Trust, who was the guardian for property.  Those
appeals had previously been dismissed as being meritless.
[37]      The
motions judge dismissed the request of one of the children to participate in
the passing of accounts, stating (at para. 12):
[38]      In BMO
Trust, the Court went on to grant standing on the passing of accounts to
the one applicant who was the incapable person’s attorney for personal care. 
In that case, the Court stated (at para. 16) that it would be important for the
attorney for personal care to have standing.  It does not appear to me that the
argument of whether the attorney for personal care had standing as of right.
[39]      However,
counsel for Mr. Amani acknowledges, properly in my view, that the list that
appears in section 42(4) of the SDA allows those persons to participate
as of right.  As a result, given that Meenu was one of the guardians of both
property and personal care from 2017 to 2023, I am of the view that she has the
right to participate in this proceeding as a party.
[40]      This
brings me to the question of whether Indu is entitled to participate in this proceeding
as of right.  In his submissions, counsel for Mr. Amani argues that the SDA
does not permit the appointment of a non-PGT person as a temporary guardian of
personal care (see sections 62(2)-(3.1).  Counsel goes on to state:
[41]      Having
reviewed the provisions, I am not sure that counsel’s submission is legally
supported for two reasons.  First, section 62(3.1) requires the PGT to investigate
any allegation that a person is incapable of personal care and that “serious
adverse effects” are occurring as a result.  In short, the section requires the
PGT to take certain steps.  It does not, on its face, prohibit the Court from appointing
a temporary guardian in an emergent situation.  Second, the Court has its’ parens
patriae jurisdiction.  It would probably require express language to oust
the Court’s inherent jurisdiction and I do not see such language in this
section.
[42]      However,
I was unable to find any cases that were directly on point, and this issue has
not been fully argued.  Therefore, given my view that I should exercise my
discretion to permit Indu to participate in the passing of accounts, it is not
necessary for me to finally decide this issue and I leave it for another day.
[43]      However,
even if I am wrong in my conclusion that Meenu is entitled to participate in
this proceeding as of right, there are other reasons why I am of the view that
both Meenu and Indu should be given standing in this matter.  I acknowledge
that some of the points raised by both Meenu and Indu can be addressed through
their testimony and the submissions of the PGT.  For example, the cost of renovations
to the Bell Harbour property raised by Indu is a point that can be addressed by
the PGT through evidence, including the evidence of Meenu.
[44]      Counsel
for Mr. Amani makes the point that there have been no other cases where a party
not listed in section 42 has been added to a passing of accounts.  Other than Childs,
I have not been able to find a case directly on this point either.  It is a
discretionary decision.  In exercising that discretion, I am of the view that a
number of factors may be relevant.  Those factors could include:
[45]      I now
turn to the facts before me.  In this case, there are issues that will be
determined that affect the interests and rights of Meenu and Indu more
directly.  In that respect, I note the following points:
[46]      Mr.
Amani directs my attention to Ontario Federation of Anglers and Hunters v.
Ontario (Minister of Natural Resources and Forestry), 2015 ONSC 7969,
(2015) 128 O.R. (3d) 501 for the proposition (at para. 10) that a party is
necessary to a proceeding if they are likely to be affected or prejudiced by
the order being made.
[47]      In
this case, I have noted in paragraph 45 the bases on which findings may be made
against each of Indu and Meenu.  On that basis alone, I am of the view that I
should exercise my discretion and allow them to participate in this passing of
accounts.  To put it another way, in his September 16th, 2024 Affidavit,
Mr. Amani states that his record keeping is “far from exemplary” and that it
was “largely due to my reliance on our family’s informal arrangements with
money and the ownership of property.”  These informal arrangements mean that
all three siblings were involved in the management of Sundri’s affairs and that,
on the passing of accounts the Court may make findings that adversely affect
all three of them.
[48]      Put
another way, Mr. Amani states in his own submissions that “both Meenu and Indu
have been accused of inappropriate dealings with [Sundri’s] property.”  
Findings in respect of those allegations may be made against Meenu and Indu in
the passing of accounts.
[49]      Having
concluded that the record keeping was informal, that the parties seeking
standing have significant knowledge of the events, and that they may have
adverse findings made against them, both Indu and Meenu’s requests for standing
should be granted.
[50]      There
is one further reason why I am of the view that Indu should be given standing. 
In BMO, the daughter who was power of attorney for personal care was
given standing.  In that decision, the Court noted (at para. 16) that it would
be “very important” to have the child with the power of attorney for personal
care involved in the passing of accounts, given “the nature and closeness of
the relationship.”  In this case, although Indu and Sundri are no longer living
together, they lived together for more than twenty years.  In those
circumstances, I am of the view that it would be important for the Court to
have Indu as a party.
[51]      Mr.
Amani also argues that the objections filed by Meenu and Indu are sweeping
generalizations and should not be allowed.  I acknowledge that the objections
need to be particularized: Vano (Re), 2012 ONSC 262.  However, that
claim is not a basis to deny someone standing to participate in a proceeding. 
The question is not whether their complaints are sufficiently particularized. 
It is a question of whether, inter alia, their rights are affected.
[52]      Finally,
I should address Mr. Amani’s argument that both Indu and Meenu are seeking
standing because of their personal grievance against Mr. Amani.  While that may
be true, Mr. Amani’s Affidavit in support of his passing of accounts seems to
suggest that he will be blaming them for certain events as well.  They are
entitled to defend themselves against those allegations as parties.
[53]      For
all of these reasons, Indu and Meenu are granted standing to participate in the
passing of accounts.
[54]      Mr.
Patel’s submissions raise separate issues.  Mr. Patel points out that the PGT
is entitled to fully participate in the passing of accounts.  Mr. Patel argues
that it will be in Sundri’s best interests for him, as one of the PGT’s
counsel, to participate in the passing of accounts.  He points out that the
passing of accounts should not be a hermetically sealed process.
[55]        Counsel
for Mr. Amani argues that Mr. Patel is not the PGT’s solicitor of record for
the passing of accounts.  He argues that the PGT could have appointed Mr. Patel
as counsel and chose not to.  Counsel acknowledges that the PGT likely made
that decision because Mr. Amani would have objected to Mr. Patel’s appointment.
[56]      In the
circumstances, I am not persuaded to make any changes to the orders that have
previously been made.  Those orders appear to me to provide Mr. Patel with
sufficient entitlement to participate in the hearing of the case to ensure that
Sundri’s interests are protected.  Further having more than one counsel in a
speaking role at a hearing can be difficult for the Court to manage.  I note
that this order can be varied by the judge hearing the passing of accounts.
[57]      For
those reasons, Mr. Patel’s request is denied.
[58]      The
issue of Sundri’s capacity is likely to be raised during the course of the
passing of accounts.  At some point, Sundri became incapable of managing her
affairs.  The question will be when.  To that end, Mr. Amani has sought various
medical documents.
[59]      During
the course of the case-management conference on February 3rd, 2025,
I heard argument about the appropriate procedure for addressing medical
documents.  In my endorsement of the same date, I explained the procedure that
I adopted and why I adopted it.  I will briefly summarize my conclusions.
[60]      The
approach I am using is to have Mr. Patel submit the medical documents to me.  I
will then review those documents and determine whether there are documents that
should be disclosed to the other parties.  I will then provide those documents
to the other parties.  I will also provide a general description of the
materials that I have received.
[61]      Once
the parties have reviewed the documentation, they may seek to have me disclose
additional documentation.  That will require either an expert report explaining
what additional documents are relevant or an evidentiary basis to disclose the
documentation.  Those requests can be made at the next case conference, and the
issue of medical disclosure will be added to the issue agenda.
[62]      In the
meantime, I will note that I did not adopt Mr. Amani’s approach to medical
disclosure.  That approach was either to produce everything or to have each
side retain an expert and have the experts review everything and determine what
should be produced.  In deciding what medical information should be produced, I
am cognizant of the fact that the parties need disclosure to address the issue
of when Sundri became incapacitated.  However, I am also cognizant of the fact
that what is sought is medical information, which is some of the most private
and personal information that exists about a person.  Given Sundri’s
vulnerabilities, I must balance the need for disclosure with the need to
protect her privacy and dignity.  Those principles are the overriding points
that are guiding my decisions in respect of production.
[63]      At
this point, I confirm that I have received a bundle of 234 pages of medical
records from Sundri’s family doctor, Dr. Graham.  I have had an opportunity to
review that bundle of records and can confirm that it contains the following
general types of items:
[64]      In
reviewing this documentation, I determined that some general points should
apply to the disclosure, as follows:
[65]      The
documents that are being disclosed are the ones that have been provided to Indu
and to counsel for Meenu and Mr. Amani with the e-mailed version of these
reasons.  They are being provided to these parties because they all have
standing on the passing of accounts.  Until, and unless, those documents are
produced in open court during the passing of accounts, they remain
confidential.  They cannot be disclosed to anyone who is not counsel, a party
or a retained expert without further Order of the Court.
[66]      Finally,
while I am adding the issue of medical documentation to the list of issues for
our next case conference on March 4th, 2025, I do not expect the
parties to wait until then to address the issue.  In that respect, if Mr. Patel
needs assistance in obtaining documentation from Trillium Health Care, he is to
advise me and I will provide the necessary orders.  I understand that he
requested that information, paid the fees in December, and was told that it
would be provided within thirty (30) days and it has yet to be received.
[67]      Similarly,
if Mr. Amani’s counsel wishes to have me consider producing additional
documentation on the basis of either the documents I have produced or on the
basis of expert reports that they are willing to produce, I am prepared to
consider those requests.  I do not want this issue lingering and/or causing the
hearing into the passing of accounts to be delayed.  As a result, if a party
does not assert their position on this issue in a timely way, I may determine
that they have lost the right to assert their position.
[68]      For
the foregoing reasons, I am ordering as follows:
[69]      In
terms of costs, both Meenu and Indu have been successful in their request for
standing at the passing of accounts.  Similarly, the PGT was unsuccessful in
having me expand Mr. Patel’s role in this matter beyond what was previously
ordered.  Costs normally follow the event and should normally be fixed at the
first opportunity.
[70]      However,
I am of the view that the costs of this portion of the Application for Passing
of Accounts should be determined by the judge conducting the hearing.  That
judge will be in a better position to determine whether the involvement of Indu
and Meenu was of value to the process.  Similarly, that judge will be in a
better position to determine whether the limits that have been placed on Mr.
Patel resulted in the proceeding being longer and/or more cumbersome.
[71]      In
addition, the medical documentation is being addressed in a cooperative
manner.  It is also difficult to know whether the costs associated with the
production of those documents are justified.  As a result, any costs in respect
of the medical documentation are deferred to the passing of accounts.
[72]      As a
final reminder, counsel (and Indu) are reminded to ensure that all of the
materials that were served and provided to me in this matter are filed with the
Court office and uploaded to CaseLines.
[73]      I
remain seized of this matter as the case management judge.