[1]              
These
reasons follow a two-day trial that proceeded by Simplified Procedure, on
November 12 and 13, 2024.
[2]              
Richard
Doemel and Norma Doemel (the “personal defendants”) were the owners and
operators of RNR Doemel Enterprises, which operated a seasonal general store (the
“Suomi General Store”) on or near Whitefish Lake in the district of Thunder
Bay. The 19 acre property included a store, an ice cream parlour, cabins, and
it sold fuel.  There was an above ground fuel tank on the property.
[3]              
The
Suomi General Store, land, and related structures (the “Property”) was listed
for sale in October 2019, when Jacqueline Brousseau and her colleague were
driving in the area of Whitefish Lake and noted that the property was for sale.
[4]              
The
Plaintiff’s representative, Jacqueline Brosseau, was the principal actor on
behalf of the Plaintiff in all matters relating to the purchase of the
Property.  Over the course of two months the parties negotiated the purchase of
the Property by the Plaintiff for $389,900.
[5]              
The
Plaintiff paid a $50,000 deposit, prior to the parties signing the Agreement of
Purchase and Sale (the “Agreement”) on February 24, 2020. The intended closing
date was April 6, 2020.
[6]              
The
transaction was never completed after the Plaintiff discovered that there were
outstanding work orders relating to the removal of an underground fuel tank,
and the installation of an above ground fuel tank, which had been outstanding
since the prior year.
[7]             
The
Plaintiff now seeks:
[8]              
The
Defendants counterclaimed for:
[9]              
The
issues raised in the pleadings and on the evidence are as follows:
[10]          
For
the reasons that follow, I find that the Defendant RNR Doemel Enterprises
repudiated the Agreement. I find that the repudiation was accepted by the
Plaintiff, and both parties thereafter understood that the Agreement was
terminated. As a result, the Defendant RNR Doemel Enterprises is required to
return the $50,000 deposit to the Plaintiff.
[11]          
I
find that Richard and Norma Doemel were unjustly enriched by their personal receipt
and use of the deposit, and as such are jointly and severally liable to return
the $50,000 to the Plaintiff.
[12]          
I
find that, even if the Defendant had not repudiated the Agreement, it made false
representations to the Plaintiff, of such significance to fundamental
conditions of the Agreement, that the Plaintiff would have been entitled to
equitable rescission of the Agreement, despite the existence of a whole
agreement clause.
[13]          
All
other claims, by either party, are dismissed.
[14]          
Many
of the facts between the parties are not at issue.
[15]          
Both
parties, in coming to and documenting the Agreement, acted without
representation from lawyers or real estate agents. After negotiations, the
Plaintiff paid a $50,000 deposit. At the request of the Defendants, the deposit
was in the form of a cheque made payable to the personal defendants.
[16]          
Following
payment of the deposit, the parties entered into the Agreement, in writing, on
February 24, 2020. The Agreement was set out on a standard Ontario Real Estate
Association (“OREA”) form.
[17]          
Despite
the Agreement requiring that the deposit be held in trust (as per the OREA
standards), it was not contested that the funds were spent prior to the
anticipated closing date, and that the parties both understood this to be the
intention. What is at issue between the parties, is whether the defendants made
use of the deposit personally.
[18]          
Clauses
8 and 10 of the Agreement allowed for the Plaintiff to make requisitions
regarding work orders, and to make demands that any outstanding orders be
remedied. The Agreement did not provide a final date for the making of
requisitions. As such, the default deadline, under the OREA standards, was five
days prior to the closing date.
[19]          
The
Agreement included no inspection clause and it included an “entire agreement”
clause.
[20]          
The
Agreement also included some additional handwritten terms. Most notably, it
included a requirement that the fuel tank located on the property be
“painted/reconditioned by seller as per legal requirements”, as well as a
provision that a specified list of contracts – which included “gas” – would be
in good standing upon sale.
[21]          
The
parties also agreed that the Plaintiff would be permitted to enter the premises
to commence some painting and renovation work on the store, prior to the
closing date. It was off season and the store was operating on winter hours.
Thus, the Plaintiff’s work could largely be done during the store’s closed
hours.
[22]          
The
Plaintiff exercised its right to examine the state of the contracts and
obtained authorization from Richard Doemel to permit the Technical Standards
and Safety Authority (the “TSSA”) to disclose information in relation to the
fuel tank.
[23]          
Prior
to the closing date, a representative of TSSA made the Plaintiff aware that
there were nine work orders outstanding in relation to the fuel tank dating
back to June 2019 (the “Orders”). The Orders necessitated a variety of work to
be performed, some of which is described as follows:
[24]          
The
Orders indicate that non-compliance could result in significant penalties and
fines, and that the gas license could be suspended.
[25]          
Upon
becoming aware of the Orders, on March 23, 2020, Jacqueline Brosseau attended
at the Property and asked the Defendant Norma Doemel to sign a proposed
amendment to the Agreement. The so-called amendment sought to have the
Defendants acknowledge in writing that there would be compliance with the
outstanding Orders by the closing date or that, in the alternative, the
Plaintiff’s $50,000 deposit would be refunded (the “Proposed Amendment”).  I
take a moment here to point out that in fact, I find that the Agreement as
signed by the parties would have required both of these things to occur in any
event.
[26]          
The
Defendant Norma Doemel refused to sign the Proposed Amendment. No Defendant
responded to the Proposed Amendment thereafter. The Defendants did not suggest
alternate wording for the Proposed Amendment or an extension of the closing
date to allow them to comply with the outstanding Orders. They did not offer to
indemnify the Plaintiff for any costs relating to the completion of the Orders.
They did not offer a holdback from the purchase price. In fact, the Defendants
never communicated with the Plaintiffs again, until after the closing date,
when they received a demand letter from the Plaintiff’s lawyer.
[27]          
The
Plaintiff’s evidence is that on March 23, 2020, the date that Norma Doemel
refused to sign the Proposed Amendment, the Plaintiff removed from the store
all of the tools and supplies that were being used for the start of
renovations. The Plaintiff did not return to the store again, as it understood
that the Defendants were refusing to meet the terms of the Agreement, and as
such understood that the Agreement was at an end.
[28]          
In
particular, the parties made no further attempt to communicate with one
another, at all, after March 23, 2020. Richard Doemel testified that he did not
seek legal counsel or retain a lawyer for the purpose of closing the deal, as
he understood that the deal was off the table.
[29]          
The
sale did not close on April 6, 2020. On April 7, 2020, the Plaintiff’s counsel
sent a demand letter for the return of the $50,000 deposit.
[30]          
At
trial, the Defendants agreed that they were not in compliance with any of the
Orders on the closing date. As of the date of trial, in November 2024, the
original Orders have been complied with, resulting in a requirement that a Phase
II Environmental Site Assessment (“Phase II Assessment”) and any potential
remediation resulting from that assessment be completed. The Defendants’
evidence is that no standard bank financing will be available to any purchaser
until the Phase II Assessment is completed.
[31]          
The
Property has been listed for sale since the failed April 6, 2020, closing date.
There have been multiple failed offers. The purchase price has been reduced by
$40,000. The Defendants’ evidence is that one of the issues for any prospective
purchaser has been the inability to obtain standard financing, as a result of
the outstanding environmental assessment.
[32]          
The
Plaintiff ask for recission, and the Defendants argue that the Plaintiff
repudiated the contract. In considering these arguments, I have referred to Guarantee Co. of North America v. Gordon Capital Corp.,
1999 CanLII 664 (SCC), [1999] 3 S.C.R.
423,
at para. 40, wherein
the Supreme Court explained the difference between rescission and repudiation:
[33]          
The
distinction between these two concepts is crucial, as the available remedies
differ. Notably, recission is an ‘act’ undertaken by the innocent party
following a misrepresentation (or other essential error) made by the
‘non-innocent party’. Where the ‘act’ is carried out properly (i.e.,
unequivocally) and such is based on a proper vitiating event, the contract is
rescinded (is void ab initio). No further election is required. The
process surrounding repudiation is different; it requires the innocent party to
elect whether to accept the breaching party’s repudiation/intention not to be
bound: see Brown v. Belleville (City), 2013 ONCA 148, 114 O.R. (3d)
561. Only upon election is the contract either terminated or upheld.
[34]          
As
per Guarantee Co, at
para. 42, where
the court deems a party to have alleged rescission in place of a proper claim
for repudiation, and vice versa, the court has the power to remedy such
irregularity:
[35]          
The
legal principles of repudiation were described in Ching v. Pier 27 Toronto
Inc., 2021 ONCA 551, at
paras. 31 - 33:
[36]          
The acceptance of repudiation may be oral,
written, or inferred from the conduct of the innocent party in the particular
circumstances of the case.
[37]          
In detailing that repudiation can occur where
one party indicates an intention not to fulfill any future obligations under a
contract, the court in Guarantee Co. left open the idea of anticipatory
repudiation. Such was well set out in Pompeani v.
Bonik Inc. (1997), 1997 CanLII 3653 (ON CA), 35 O.R. (3d) 417, (C.A.), at paras. 39-42:
[38]          
The
Plaintiff presented the Proposed Amendment to the Agreement, in person to Norma
Doemel on March 23, 2020, immediately after the Plaintiff became aware of the
existence of the Orders. The April 6, 2020, closing date was exactly two weeks
away.
[39]          
Norma
Doemel refused to sign the Proposed Amendment. The wording of the document was
not much more than asking the Defendants to confirm their continued intention
to be bound by the existing terms of the contract, and a form of requisition
that defects be remedied. By that point in time, only two weeks before closing,
having become newly aware of the other Orders, I find that it was reasonable
for the Plaintiff to conclude that when the Defendants refused to sign the
document, they were neither able nor willing to comply with the Orders, and to
meet the terms of the Agreement of Purchase and Sale. I find that the Plaintiff
appropriately concluded that the Defendants had repudiated the agreement.
[40]          
The
Defendants admit that Norma Doemel refused to sign the Proposed Amendment, and
that they did not address the Proposed Amendment in any way after it was
presented and rejected. Richard Doemel testified that he always intended to
continue to be responsible for the outstanding Orders and their associated
costs. However, I heard no evidence as to how and when Mr. Doemel articulated
this intention to the Plaintiff, and therefore on what basis the Plaintiff
would have had any comfort in this position. Mr. Doemel testified further that
he intended to seek legal advice on the issue of the Proposed Amendment, before
he signed it. I reject all of this evidence as it is not supported in any way,
even by Richard Doemel’s own evidence. According to him, he never spoke to the
Plaintiffs about the Orders after March 23, 2020 and he never did seek the
advice of legal counsel to discuss the amendment or any aspect of the sale, prior
to the anticipated closing date.
[41]          
I
find that as of March 23, 2020, the Defendants knew that they were not in a
position to comply with the Orders. They knew that they required an extension
of the closing date, or to propose some alternate amendment that would have
permitted the sale to close, while leaving them responsible to comply with the
Orders. I find that Norma Doemel’s refusal to sign the Proposed Amendment was a
clear communication of the fact that the Defendants did not intend to comply
with the terms of the Agreement and that they had therefore repudiated the Agreement.
[42]          
When,
on the same date as the refusal, the Plaintiff packed up their tools and
supplies and left, it was understood by all parties that the Agreement was “off
the table”. I find that the Plaintiff anticipated the Defendant’s intention to
repudiate the agreement. Neither party ever communicated again, up to and
including the scheduled closing date. I find that the Plaintiff’s actions in
packing up their materials and leaving were sufficient evidence of their acceptance
of the Defendant’s anticipated repudiation.
[43]          
I
find that refusing to address compliance with the Orders amounted to a
fundamental breach of a condition of the Agreement as per 968703
Ontario Ltd. v. Vernon, (2002), 2002 CanLII 35158 (ON CA), 58 O.R. (3d) 215 (C.A.), particularly
insofar as the Agreement included gas contracts and fuel tank provisions.
[44]          
The
Plaintiff was entitled to consider this refusal as depriving them of the
substantial benefit of the contract, because in all of the circumstances, they
were not able to assess the possible cost of compliance with the Orders and any
costs or obligations that may have followed compliance.
[45]          
To
highlight this point, I note that the Defendants testified that they eventually
complied with the Orders, and that as a result they are now required to have a
Phase II Assessment completed. Richard Doemel indicated that the cost of the Phase
II Assessment was quoted to him at $12,000, and that any remediation costs
which could follow the assessment remain unknown. He agreed that the
remediation costs could be very high.
[46]          
Richard Doemel also
testified about the difficulty that the Defendants are now having in trying to
sell the property, because another result of the outstanding Phase II
Assessment is that purchasers are unable to obtain financing.
[47]          
I
find that the repudiation was based on the inability or unwillingness to
execute on a condition of the contract which was fundamental to the entire
contract. The Defendants agreed that they knew that the Plaintiff considered
the Agreement to be terminated, and at no time thereafter did the
Defendants communicate an intention to return the Agreement into good standing.
[48]          
I
find that a return of the deposit is in any event required under the terms of
the Agreement signed by the parties. Pursuant to para. 10 of the Standard OREA Agreement
terms:
[49]          
The
Defendants argue both that no requisition was made and that they were not given
an opportunity to purchase insurance to address the work orders, as per para.
10. I find that the Proposed Amendment was a requisition in writing, which was
sufficient to put the Defendants on notice that the purchasers required them to
remedy the Orders.
[50]          
It
is notable that on the Defendants’ own evidence, they were aware that it was
not possible for them to be in compliance with the Orders by the closing date,
even at the time that they signed the Agreement on February 24, 2020. I reject
the submission of the Defendants that they intended to purchase insurance, or
that they could have in fact purchased insurance against the costs of the Orders.
I do not accept that such insurance would have been available for purchase. No
evidence was called on this issue and no communication of such intention was
ever made.
[51]          
I
find that, had the Plaintiff not walked away when it anticipated the
Defendant’s repudiation, the Defendant would not in any event have been in a
position to close the transaction, as it did not, and could not have, complied
with the Orders in time.
[52]          
The
Defendants suggested, without any evidence to show for their claim, that the
Plaintiff did not close because it did not have access to funds needed to
complete the transaction. Without evidence to the contrary, I accept the
Plaintiff’s evidence that it had access to the funds necessary to complete the
transaction, but did not move to complete the transaction because it accepted
the Defendants’ repudiation, and understood that the Defendant had not complied
with the Orders.
[53]          
I
reject the argument of the Defendants that, pursuant to the terms of the
Agreement, the $50,000 deposit became non-refundable upon the Plaintiff entering
the property before the closing date and starting its renovation work. There is
no evidence to corroborate this position.  The Agreement specifies that the
deposit would be returned upon the occurrence of certain events, which I have
found occurred.
[54]          
The
parties each makes claims for damages arising out of the renovation work which
was commenced by the Defendants.  It is agreed that the Defendants left the
work in an unfinished state. The Defendants claim they are entitled to damages
for the cost of repairing the premises after the Plaintiffs left unfinished
work.
[55]          
The
Plaintiff does not claim that they improved the Property, but they make a claim
for $3,768.02 in special damages in relation to the money spent on their
beginning renovation work. I did not hear sufficient evidence with respect to
the Plaintiff’s claim for special damages. I am not able to determine the quantum
spent and lost, and in particular there was no evidence as to what portion of
the amount could not be mitigated and/or recovered.
[56]          
The
Defendants referred me to Isabelle v Lahie, Canlii 56484 ONSC, wherein
the court found that a landowner who invited another to expend money on his
land is liable to the person who expended the money, but that the onus is on
that person to prove the amount by which the property was improved.
[57]          
There
was no evidence to suggest that the property was improved by the Plaintiff’s
partial renovations.  There was some evidence produced of amounts spent by the
Plaintiff when they entered the Property and commenced work. There was no
evidence produced regarding the Plaintiff’s attempt to mitigate the loss of the
renovations, such as attempts to return some of the items purchased. I note
that there were some receipts provided that had a 90-day return policy, which
would have been available to the Plaintiff well after the aborted closing date.
[58]          
It
was at their own peril that the Plaintiff chose to begin work while they were
still making inquiries and not yet owners in possession of the Property. There
was some evidence that when they left quickly on March 23, 2020, there was
unfinished work which cost the Defendants some amount to put back in order. The
Defendants claim $10,000 in costs associated with restoring the Property to its
original condition. The only evidence presented was the affidavit evidence of
Richard Doemel, wherein he estimated that he spent $5,000 on materials to
restore the premises.  The Defendants permitted the work to be done in advance
of closing, also at their own peril. There was no evidence that the parties
discussed what the outcome would be in relation to costs incurred, or caused,
by the Plaintiff’s assumption of work prior to closing, in the event that the
sale did not close. Neither party presented evidence upon which I could
properly assess their claims.
[59]          
I
decline to order special damages to the Plaintiff in relation to the work they
did, or damages to the Defendants in relation to any costs incurred from the
Plaintiff’s aborted renovations.
[60]          
The
personal defendants argue that the Agreement was between the two corporate
entities and that they are not personally liable. The Plaintiff argues that the
personal Defendants were unjustly enriched.
[61]          
This
is not a situation of piercing the corporate veil.  I accept the Plaintiff’s
evidence that the personal Defendant Richard Doemel asked that a cheque be made
to him and his wife personally.  Acting on behalf of the Corporation, he directed
the purchaser to pay him and his wife the deposit personally.  The cashed
cheque in the names of Richard and Norma Doemel is in evidence.
[62]          
Despite
acknowledging that the deposit cheque was made out to Richard and Norma Doemel
personally, at their request, Richard Doemel testified that the $50,000 deposit
cheque was deposited into his corporate account. He testified that he knew this
because his corporate account is the only bank account he has had for several
decades. This evidence did not accord with his sworn evidence in examinations
for discovery, where he testified that he did have a personal account, or with
the affirmed evidence of Norma Doemel at this trial, when she testified that
the $50,000 was deposited into a joint bank account held by herself and Richard
Doemel.
[63]          
Despite
providing a defence stating that they were improperly named in this action, the
personal Defendants refused to produce evidence during discovery to show where
the deposit funds were deposited. They provided no evidence at trial, to show
either which account the funds were deposited into, or what use was made of the
funds.
[64]          
At
the time of providing the cheque, the Plaintiff indicates that it was aware
that the personal Defendants intended to spend the money before closing, and
the Plaintiff did not take issue with this. Neither party was represented by
counsel, and at the time they entered into the Agreement, neither believed that
there was any reason that the sale would not close.  I do not infer from this
that the Plaintiff intended to forfeit the deposit even if the sale was not
completed.
[65]          
I
draw an adverse inference from the failure of the personal Defendants to provide
documentary evidence in relation to a known contentious issue, which was within
 entirely within the control of the Defendants and presumably would have been
simple to produce. No explanation was provided for the failure to provide this important
evidence which might have been conclusive on some of the issues.
[66]          
“The
doctrine of unjust enrichment provides an equitable cause of action that
retains a large measure of remedial flexibility to deal with different
circumstances according to principles rooted in fairness and good conscience.”  The test for unjust
enrichment has three elements: (1) an enrichment of the defendant; (2) a
corresponding deprivation of the plaintiff; and (3) an absence of juristic
reason for the enrichment: Pacific National Investments Ltd. v. Victoria
(City), 2004 SCC 75, at paras 13, 14.
[67]          
I
find on a balance of probabilities that Norma and Richard Doemel asked for the
cheque to be made to them personally, with an intention to use it personally,
and that they derived a benefit from the deposit money, either entirely
personally, or jointly with the corporate defendant. As such, I find that the
personal defendants were enriched.  The Plaintiff is now owed $50,000 and has
suffered a deprivation.  I have found that the Agreement mandates a return of
the deposit, and that Defendants have no other lawful claim to the funds.  The
elements of unjust enrichment are all present. I find that the personal
defendants are jointly and severally liable with the corporate Defendant for
the Plaintiff’s losses and to repay the deposit, and for the costs of this
action.
[68]          
As
noted above, recission of contract may be the remedy to the innocent party, where
there is some form of misrepresentation, fraud, or essential error that is
“substantial” or “goes to the root of” the contract: see Guarantee Co, at para. 44.
[69]          
I
accept also that parties to a contract have a duty of good faith, as stated by
the Court in
[70]          
In
my view, the precontract negotiations are also subject to the duty of good
faith. I accept the Plaintiff’s evidence that Richard Doemel intentionally made
pre-contract misrepresentations, specifically surrounding the fuel tank and
outstanding Orders. The Plaintiff asks me to find that, despite the existence
of an “entire agreement” clause, the Plaintiff was entitled to rely on the
misrepresentations in seeking rescission, as it was the misrepresentations
themselves that informed the drafting of the Agreement. The Plaintiff relied on
the misrepresentations in deciding which conditions it included in the
Agreement. Housed within this argument is an assertion that these misrepresentations
went to the core of the contract.
[71]          
 I
accept that the Plaintiff included the fuel tank clause (regarding
painting/reconditioning) and no other “gas contract” requirement specifically in
the Agreement because the Defendant stated that this was the only issue in
relation to the gas service. I reject the Defendant’s evidence that they
disclosed all the Orders and issues to the Plaintiff, or that Richard Doemel
ever told Jacqueline Brosseau that he intended to remain personally responsible
for compliance with the Orders “at any cost”, and that the Plaintiff thereafter
elected to include only the requirement for the painting/reconditioning of the
above ground tank. I find that the Defendants failed in their duty to act in
good faith, and could not thereafter rely on the “entire agreement” clause to
their advantage.
[72]          
I
find that the Defendants’ silence as to the outstanding Orders amounted to a
misrepresentation: 1000425140
Ontario Inc. v. 1000176653 Ontario Inc., 2024 ONCA 610.
[73]          
The
cost of addressing the Orders is yet unknown, but the Defendants agree that it
could be very significant, and testified that the unresolved environmental
assessment is currently preventing them from selling the property.  Non
compliance with the Orders risked a loss of the right to sell gas.  I find that
the Orders were latent defects that the Defendants deliberately concealed, and
that the Plaintiff reasonably relied on the Defendants’ representations to her:
Krawchuk v Serbank, 2011
ONCA 352. In any event, the distinction between latent and patent defect is
immaterial here, since the Plaintiff found the defects, and asked the
Defendants to address them, and the Defendants refused.
[74]          
As
indicated at the outset of these reasons, I would have granted equitable
rescission in this case, despite the existence of the “entire agreement”
clause. However, the remedy would be the same. As such, I have relied instead
on the Defendant’s repudiation of the contract, which has the same result in
the particular circumstances of this case, where the Agreement was never
concluded.
[75]          
I
find that the Defendant repudiated the Agreement. I find that the Plaintiff
accepted the repudiation.
[76]          
If
the Defendants had not repudiated the contract, upon all of the evidence heard
and the facts I found here, I would have allowed the Plaintiff’s claim for
recission.
[77]          
Given
my other findings, the Defendants’ counterclaim is dismissed in its entirety,
as are the Plaintiff’s remaining claims. I am not persuaded that punitive damages
are warranted in these circumstances.
[78]          
The
Defendants are jointly and severally liable to the Plaintiff for $50,000, plus
pre and post judgment interest pursuant to the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43.
[79]          
I
would urge the parties to agree on the issue of costs. If they are unable to do
so, then costs submissions may be made as follows:
[80]          
If
no submissions are received within the timelines specified the parties will be
deemed to have no submissions to make, or to have resolved the issue of the
costs and costs will not be determined by me.