1.                 
There
are three motions before the Court.
2.                 
The
Receiver wishes to make an interim distribution of recovered funds to
Unitholders, net of certain reserves, and wishes to do so based on its
calculation of entitlements. The Receiver proposes to treat the claims of Unitholders
and creditors equally. The Receiver also seeks approval of its report and activities.
3.                 
The
Unitholders, through their Representative Counsel, support an interim
distribution, but disagree with the Receiver’s calculation, and bring their own
motion for a declaration that the funds are subject to a constructive trust in
their favour, with the result that the claims of Unitholders would be paid in
priority to the claims of creditors.
4.                 
One
of the creditors who has filed a claim in the claims process, Cerieco, opposes
both motions and takes the position that while an interim distribution may be
appropriate, the reserve for its claim should, pending a determination of that
claim, be sufficient to cover the claim in full.
5.                 
Another
group of associated creditors, the BlackRock Parties, settled their claim with
the Receiver the night before the hearing of this motion. They support the
distribution motion of the Receiver and the calculations on which it is based,
provided that the settlement of its claim is approved, failing which they support
the position advanced by Cerieco. Accordingly, the Receiver also seeks
authorization to make a distribution to the BlackRock Parties in accordance
with the settlement.
6.                 
For
the reasons that follow, the interim distribution to Unitholders (and ancillary
relief) is approved, but the proposed quantum of the distribution must be
reduced to hold back a sufficient reserve until the Cerieco Claim is
determined. The BlackRock distribution is approved. The motion for a
constructive trust is deferred to be considered if and as necessary, following
a final determination of the Cerieco Claim.
7.                 
The
ancillary relief (approval of the Receiver’s report activities) is unopposed,
and is also approved.
8.                 
Defined
terms in this Endorsement have the meaning given to them in the motion
materials unless otherwise stated.
9.                 
On
the first motion, PricewaterhouseCoopers Inc. (“PwC”), in its capacity as
Receiver and Manager of the Property of each of the Respondents, seeks:
10.             
On
the second motion, the Receiver seeks an order:
11.             
On
the third motion, Representative Counsel for the Unitholders of the Bridging
Funds seeks a Constructive Trust Order providing that:
12.             
As
part of the first motion, the Receiver seeks to implement the proposed partial
interim distribution in a manner that treats certain Unitholder Claims and
Disputed Bridging Fund Claims on a pari passu basis. In the third motion,
the constructive trust sought to be imposed by Representative Counsel over the
Subject Bridging Funds would grant a priority to Unitholders over
non-Unitholders. The orders sought in each of these two motions are therefore
inconsistent with one another.
13.             
Moreover,
the relief sought in both of those two motions is opposed by Cerieco Canada
Corp. (“Cerieco”). Cerieco’s position is supported by BlackRock unless the
settlement of BlackRock’s claim is approved, in which case BlackRock supports
the position of the Receiver.
14.             
As
further described below, Cerieco asserts a pre-receivership claim against
Bridging Income Fund LP (“BIF”) in the principal sum of $213 million pursuant
to an alleged guarantee said to have been executed by BIF in 2017. The claim of
Cerieco is one of the Disputed Bridging Fund Claims referenced above.
Accordingly, Cerieco:
15.             
The
position of the Receiver is also supported by the University of Minnesota
Foundation (a Unitholder) and by the SMA2 Unitholders.
16.             
The
Receiver relies on the 24th Report and the First and Second Supplements thereto,
dated January 31, 2025 and February 2, 2025, respectively, each together with
Appendices. Representative Counsel relies on the Sixth Report of Representative
Counsel dated November 27, 2024, together with Appendices thereto. Cerieco
relies on the Affidavit of Melissa Ferrari affirmed December 20, 2024 and the
responses to written interrogatories requested of and received from the
Receiver. No other party filed materials (save for a compendium of previously
filed materials from the SMA 2 Unitholders. Those Unitholders support the
Receiver and oppose substantive consolidation of the Bridging Funds.).
17.             
I
observe that the first motion was originally returnable before the Court on
December 9, 2024, at which time the Chief Justice granted the 2024 Permitted
Transfers Order and adjourned the balance of the relief sought, including
issues involving the proposed Interim Unitholder Distribution and the Interim
Distribution Calculation and approval of the 24th Report and related
activities, in order to give affected stakeholders a full opportunity to
respond, as they have now done.
18.             
The
background to, and context for, these motions is described in the Reports of
the Receiver and earlier Endorsements of this Court made in this complex
proceeding.
19.             
For
the purposes of these motions, it is sufficient to observe that the Bridging
Funds were managed by Bridging Finance Inc. (“BFI”) and marketed through their
Offering Memoranda as stable investment vehicles focused on asset-backed
lending to midmarket Borrowers. They attracted significant investor interest.
Today, there are approximately 26,000 Unitholders who own units in the Bridging
Funds. The net asset value (“NAV”) of the Bridging Funds was approximately $2
billion by April, 2021.
20.             
The
Ontario Securities Commission commenced an investigation that ultimately
revealed that representations in the Offering Memoranda were materially
inaccurate. The 24th Report notes that the OSC concluded that the
Offering Memoranda omitted critical information about significant risks,
unauthorized use of assets held by the Bridging Funds, and fraudulent and other
improper acts by the principals of Bridging. As a result, the OSC sought and
obtained on April 30, 2021, the appointment of the Receiver pursuant to s. 129
of the Securities Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S.5.
21.             
The
Receiver is of the view that it is appropriate to make the proposed interim
distribution now since cumulative cash on hand in the Bridging Funds (net of
costs and a prior distribution to the SMA 2 Unitholders) totalled approximately
$698 million as of October 31, 2024. The Receiver anticipates further
recoveries from remaining Loans and other Assets, with the result that
additional funds can be distributed at a later date.
22.             
This
Court previously approved a Claims and Unit Holdings Identification Procedure
pursuant to which three Claims against the Bridging Funds (in addition to
Unitholder Claims) were identified:
23.             
All
three of these Claims were disallowed by the Receiver and were, until very
recently, in the process of being adjudicated pursuant to the Claims
Adjudication Process Order.
24.             
The
Cerieco Claim was disallowed on the basis that the underlying alleged guarantee
was made in secret, was never disclosed to BIF Unitholders, was not properly
authorized and personally benefited Bridging principals Natasha Sharpe and
Jenny Coco, since BIF had no interest in the One Bloor Project.
25.             
On
February 5, 2024, Cerieco filed a Notice of Dispute in response to the
disallowance of its claim. The Claims Adjudication Process Order grants the
appointed Claims Officer the power to determine Disputed Bridging Fund Claims
(which include the Cerieco Claim) and establishes the basis for appeals from
final determinations of the Claims Officer.
26.             
The
Cerieco Claim has not yet been determined by the Claims Officer. It is
anticipated that a determination on the merits will be made this year.
27.             
The
BlackRock Claim was disallowed on the basis that, among other things, MMF was
not unjustly enriched since the books and records of Bridging reflect that the
MMF Repayment included certain amounts that had previously been misappropriated
from MMF by principals of BFI.
28.             
As
noted above, just prior to the hearing of this motion, the Receiver and the
BlackRock Parties reached an agreement in principle, supported by
Representative Counsel, to resolve the BlackRock Claim. That is discussed
further below since relief with respect to the BlackRock Claim is requested on
these motions.
29.             
The
disallowance of the Canning Claim by the Receiver was disputed by the Canning
Claimants, and following a hearing before the Claims Officer, the Canning Claim
was dismissed. The Canning Claimants filed an appeal from the decision of the
Claims Officer, but as set out in the Supplement to the 24th Report
of the Receiver, an agreement was reached between the Canning Claimants and the
Receiver, in consultation with Representative Counsel, resulting in the Canning
Settlement.
30.             
The
Canning Settlement provides that the Canning Claimants are required to choose
one of two mutually exclusive settlement payment options by March 28, 2025, in
full and final satisfaction of the Canning Claim: the payment of a fixed amount
in cash; or the purchase by the Canning Claimants of certain security held by
Bridging on the Maidstone Property and the indebtedness secured thereunder.[1]
31.             
The
Supplement to the 24th Report states that the Receiver understands
that the Canning Claimants intend to elect the Loan Purchase Option. Court
approval of the Canning Transaction was granted on January 27, 2025: see Ontario
Securities Commission v. Bridging Finance Inc., 2025 ONSC 539.
32.             
The
principal terms of the settlement of the BlackRock Claim are these:
33.             
As
noted above, settlement of the BlackRock Claim is recommended by the Receiver
and is supported by Representative Counsel to the Unitholders. It is unopposed,
although I address this further below given the short service.
34.             
In
determining whether to approve a settlement in the context of a receivership or
insolvency proceedings, courts generally consider the following factors:
35.             
It
is also appropriate, in the context of a motion for settlement approval in a
receivership proceeding, for the Court to consider the Soundair Principles:
36.             
The
Receiver submits that the amount of the BlackRock Distribution is reasonable
having regard to the assessment by the Receiver of the risk that the Unjust
Enrichment Claim would succeed. The settlement eliminates the costs and delay
associated with the adjudication of the Unjust Enrichment Claim, provides
finality and certainty for all stakeholders of MMF, and eliminates the need to
hold back any funds on account of the Unjust Enrichment Claim from the proposed
Interim Unitholder Distribution to MMF Unitholders.
37.             
The
Receiver is satisfied in its business judgment that the BlackRock Settlement
Agreement resolves the Unjust Enrichment Claim on terms that provide the best
income for the Respondents and their stakeholders in the circumstances.
38.             
The
BlackRock Settlement was reached only the night before the hearing of this
motion, with the obvious result that the Service List and affected parties were
short served and have had very little practical opportunity to consider their
position and oppose the motion if they wished to do so.
39.             
The
proposed Approval Order seeks to address this by providing that any party may
object to the relief by notifying the Receiver within a seven-day period. If no
objections are received, the Approval Order shall automatically become
effective. If an objection is received within that period, the Approval Order
shall not take effect subject to further order of the court and the Receiver
shall not carry out the MMF Interim Distribution pending further order of the
Court. The Receiver shall advise the Service List forthwith following the
Effective Time as to whether or not it has received any objection.
40.             
I
am satisfied that the Maple Bank factors and the Soundair Principles
have been satisfied, such that the BlackRock Settlement should be approved
pursuant to s. 129(5) of the Securities Act. I accept the business
judgment of the Receiver that the proposed settlement represents the best
income for the stakeholders, and that the terms are reasonable in all the
circumstances, balancing the proposed quantum to be paid against the benefits
to stakeholders of certainty and finality now, the minimization of further
professional fees, and the delay in litigating the BlackRock Claim.
41.             
While
not determinative, the support of the Unitholders through their Representative
Counsel, is a factor that further weighs in favour of settlement approval.
42.             
Finally,
I am satisfied in the circumstances that the proposed seven day objection
period gives other stakeholders an opportunity, albeit not a lengthy one, to
oppose the relief if they wish to do so, and if that occurs, the settlement
will not be effective and the Interim Distribution in respect of MMF
Unitholders will not be made pending further order of the Court. I observe that
this same approach was endorsed by the Chief Justice earlier in this proceeding
in respect of the 2024 Permitted Transfers Order: 2024 ONSC 6832.
43.             
For
all of those reasons, the settlement of the Unjust Enrichment Claim and the
BlackRock Distribution are approved.
44.             
As
a result of its recovery efforts, the Receiver has realized on 28 Loans. In
addition, the accumulation of foreign exchange gains and interest income, net
of disbursements incurred and net of a previously approved distribution to
unitholders of SMA 2, cumulative cash on hand in the Bridging Funds totalled
approximately $698 million as of October 31, 2024.
45.             
The
Receiver provided in its 18th and 22nd Reports, an update
on the Distribution Matters that would need to be resolved, in whole or in
part, prior to an interim distribution to Unitholders. The status of each of
those Distribution Matters is set out in the motion materials and the 24th
Report. Among other things, the following Distribution Matters have been
completed or are proposed to be addressed on this motion:
46.             
Given
the progress with respect to the Distribution Matters, and the significant
amount of cash on hand, the Receiver is of the view that it is appropriate to
make the proposed Interim Unitholder Distribution now.
47.             
No
party opposes the proposed interim distribution in principle. I am satisfied
that an interim distribution at this time is appropriate. The whole point of
this receivership proceeding is to realize on assets of the Bridging Funds for
the benefit of Unitholders. Provided that the interests of other stakeholders
(such as creditors) are addressed, there is no reason not to authorize the
distribution to those Unitholders entitled to receive it, particularly given
the significant amount of cash that the Receiver has on hand.
48.             
The
Receiver was appointed pursuant to s. 129 of the Securities Act. Section
129(5) provides that a receiver so appointed has the authority to wind up or
manage the business and affairs of the person or company and has all powers
necessary or incidental to that authority. The power to distribute the proceeds
of the property is necessary and incidental to the administration of the
Receivership Proceeding.
49.             
This
Court has approved distributions to stakeholders in receivership proceedings
under the Securities Act. See, for example: Whitehouse v. BDO Canada LLP, 2020 ONSC 144, 149 OR (3d)
85, at para. 55; Distribution
Order of Hainey J. (June 20, 2019) in Ontario Securities Commission
v Paramount Equity Financial Corporation et al., Court File No.
CV-17-11818- OOCL; and Distribution
Order of Conway J. (March 27, 2023) in Ontario Securities Commission
v Money Gate Mortgage Investment Corporation, Court File No.
CV-18-00608086-00CL.
50.             
Accordingly,
I am satisfied that the Court has jurisdiction to authorize and direct the
Receiver to carry out the Interim Unitholder Distribution, and that it is
appropriate to exercise that jurisdiction at this time.
51.             
Several
elements of the proposed Interim Unitholder Distribution require specific
approval. Most are unopposed. Some critical elements of the Interim
Distribution Calculation are, however, opposed.
52.             
The
Receiver proposes to hold back funds for various Reserves as fully described in
the motion materials and the 24th Report in respect of the Disputed
Bridging Funds Claims, and also to fund certain future expenses and contingent
liabilities.
53.             
The
proposed Reserves have been sized based on historical run rates and the
Receiver’s estimate of the costs that will be incurred to complete the
Receivership Proceeding. While the proposed quantum of the Reserves is
certainly significant, I am satisfied that they are appropriate, subject to the
terms of this decision. I am further satisfied that the proposed allocation is
appropriate.
54.             
The
Reserves for General Receivership costs ($24 million), General Operating
Expenses ($10 million) and Fund Specific Expenses ($1.1 million) are allocated
to the Bridging Funds in the same manner as the costs to which each of those
Reserves relates.
55.             
The
Litigation Costs Reserve ($45 million), the Loan Expenses Reserve ($5 million)
and the Contingent Reserves ($24.6 million) are allocated based on
Proportionate Allocation, as the amount of the costs to which each of those
Reserves relates that will be allocable to each. Bridging Fund is currently
unknown. The allocation of such costs will be addressed by the Receiver once
that information is known.
56.             
The
Disputed Bridging Funds Claims Reserves are allocated based on the Direct
Allocation methodology, and, as adjusted, relate only to the remaining Disputed
Bridging Fund Claim (i.e., the Cerieco Claim).
57.             
I
am satisfied that, as submitted by the Receiver, the proposed quantum of the
Reserves, with the exception of the Disputed Bridging Funds Claims Reserve as
further discussed below, is appropriate. I am also satisfied that the proposed allocation
of the Reserves, which is consistent with the Cost Allocation Methodology set
out below, is fair and equitable in the circumstances at this time.
58.             
I
am satisfied that the interest stops rule should be applied to the calculation
of the Disputed Bridging Funds Claims Reserves by accruing interest only to the
Date of Appointment.
59.             
As
observed by the Court of Appeal for Ontario in Nortel
Networks Corporation (Re), 2015 ONCA 681, 127 OR (3d) 641, it is
well settled that the pari passu principle applies in insolvency
proceedings, to the effect that “the assets of the insolvent debtor are to be
distributed amongst classes of creditors rateably and equally, as those assets
are found at the date of insolvency” (see para. 23).
60.             
The
Court of Appeal further observed that the primary purpose behind the common-law
interest stops rule is fairness to creditors, and that another purpose is to
achieve the orderly administration of an insolvent debtor’s estate. The
interest stops rule has been consistently applied in bankruptcy and winding up
proceedings (and indeed is codified in those statutes), in receivership
proceedings, and, as confirmed in Nortel, CCAA proceedings.
61.             
I
am satisfied that the same principles apply in this Securities Act
receivership proceeding. It would be unfair for a claimant to gain an advantage
from delays caused by court proceedings. All funds recovered and realized by
the Receiver should be applied equally and proportionately to debts as they
existed at the date of the winding up, with no allowance for interest accruing
after that date. This approach ensures fairness and practicality.
62.             
The
proposed Asset Allocation Methodology is appropriate. It allocates Asset
Recoveries based on the proportionate interest of each Bridging Fund in the
particular Loan or other Assets from which the proceeds were derived.
63.             
The
Receiver recommends, and I accept, this approach since the books and records of
Bridging reflect the proportionate interest of each Bridging Fund in a
particular Asset. Moreover, the proposed Methodology is consistent with
reporting made by the Receiver during the Receivership Proceeding pursuant to
which Asset values have been allocated to individual Bridging Funds.
Accordingly, the proposed Asset Allocation Methodology is also consistent with
the expectations of stakeholders.
64.             
The
proposed Cost Allocation Methodology is fair and equitable in the circumstances
of this case. It would allocate costs as follows:
65.             
This
Court has previously set out the general principles applicable to the
allocation of the costs of a receiver as set out below. See: Royal Bank of
Canada v. Atlas Block Co. Limited, 2014 ONSC 1531, at para. 43:
66.             
I
am satisfied that the proposed Cost Allocation Methodology satisfies these
factors. It ensures that each Bridging Fund pays only for costs that are
directly attributable to it, related to recoveries from Assets in which that
Bridging Fund has an interest, or are otherwise proportionate to the Bridging
Fund’s economic interest in the activities of the Receiver that have been
undertaken for the benefit of all Bridging Funds. It is also consistent with
allocation of costs to the Bridging Funds prior to the Date of Appointment.
67.             
I
am satisfied that the proposed NCI Methodology is appropriate as a mechanism to
determine the amount to be distributed to each Unitholder. Such amounts are
based on net cash invested (i.e., cash invested, net of cash distributions
received by each Unitholder).
68.             
In
this case, I accept the judgment of the Receiver that, given the difficulty in
quantifying the damages resulting from the various claims of each Unitholder
against the Bridging Funds (i.e., statutory and common law claims for
rescission, damages and other remedies), the NCI Methodology is an appropriate
proxy for such claims that most accurately represents the proportionate
economic interest of each Unitholder in the Bridging Funds. It also fairly
accounts for Unitholders that have already recovered their NCI prior to the
Date of Appointment by excluding them from the proposed Interim Unitholder
Distribution.
69.             
The
proposed Interim Unitholder Distribution necessarily requires approval of the
underlying proposed calculation by the Receiver of the amount to be distributed
by Unitholders.
70.             
I
am satisfied that substantive consolidation of the Bridging Funds is not
appropriate for the purposes of the Interim Unitholder Distribution.
71.             
In
Redstone Investment Corporation (Re), 2016 ONSC 4453 at paras. 47 and 78,
this Court set out the factors to be considered in a determination of whether
consolidation is appropriate:
72.             
Only
three Elements of Consolidation are present here. The others are absent.
73.             
First,
as to profitability of consolidation at a single location, BFI managed the
Bridging Funds from the same location, and it was solely responsible for
sourcing and managing the Loan Portfolio.
74.             
Second,
as to a co-mingling of assets and business functions, and although the interest
of each Bridging Fund in a particular Asset is separately recorded in the books
and records (and were therefore not co-mingled), any interest of a Bridging
Fund in the Loan was, as is observed by the Receiver, often partially or wholly
transferred to another Bridging Fund at the sole discretion of BFI.
75.             
Each
such transfer took place at the face value of the loan interest and, in the
view of the receiver, was likely overvalued in many instances.
76.             
Third,
with respect to the transfer of assets without observance of corporate
formalities, BFI, as manager of Bridging Funds, effectively negotiated with
itself when allocating and transferring loan interests between Bridging Funds.
It is not clear to the Receiver (which observation is not challenged by any
party), how this process accounted for or protected the interests of
Unitholders in each Bridging Fund.
77.             
As
to whether the benefits of consolidation outweigh the prejudice to particular
creditors, and as fully set out in the 24th Report and the
Supplements, the amount to be distributed to Unitholders would decrease by approximately
$17 million due to an increase in the amount of the Disputed Bridging Funds
Claims Reserves (which is the combined impact of the Canning Settlement and the
BlackRock Distribution). Substantive consolidation would benefit BIF and BIF
RSP, while it would be to the detriment of the other Bridging Funds.
78.             
I
accept the submission of the Receiver that substantive consolidation of the
Bridging Funds in the context of the proposed Interim Distribution Calculation
would not be fair and reasonable in all the circumstances. In this regard, I
observe that:
79.             
For
all of these reasons, and considering all of the Redstone factors, in my
view, substantive consolidation of the Bridging Funds for the purposes of the
Interim Unitholder Distribution is not appropriate.
80.             
In
the main, the Interim Distribution Calculation for which approval is sought
includes the following:
81.             
The
settlement of the Canning Claim necessarily requires updates and adjustments to
the proposed Interim Distribution Calculation set out in the 24th Report. In
particular, the amount of $12 million reserved for the Canning Claim as part of
the Disputed Bridging Fund Claims Reserve can now be removed, resulting in a
corresponding increase in the Cash Available for Distribution in BIF. The
Receiver has made those adjustments as set out in the Supplement, and
corresponding adjustments in respect of the BlackRock Settlement.
82.             
Given
my determinations above with respect to those factors indicated, the issues
that remain are whether:
83.             
The
Receiver submits that the Disputed Bridging Funds Claims Reserves (as adjusted
to reflect the settlements of the Canning Claim and the BlackRock Claim)
establish the amount that would otherwise be distributed now on account of the
Cerieco Claim, if that claim was finally determined to be valid. This is
accurate, if one assumes that the Cerieco Claim enjoys no priority as a
creditor claim over claims of equity.
84.             
The
Receiver submits that since this is a receivership commenced pursuant to the Securities
Act, the definitions of “equity interest” and “equity claim” found in each
of the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. B-3 (“BIA”),
and in the Companies’ Creditors Arrangement Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-36
(“CCAA”), do not apply.
85.             
There
are no equivalent provisions found in the Securities Act. Moreover, the
object of the Securities Act is to provide protection to investors from
unfair, improper fraudulent practices and to foster fair and efficient capital
markets and confidence in those capital markets (s. 1.1).
86.             
It
follows, the Receiver submits, that since the BIA and CCAA do not
apply to this Receivership Proceeding, and since the Securities Act does
not address the relative priority of Unitholder Claims and the Disputed Bridging
Fund Claims, the relative priority of each should be determined with reference
to the law in effect before the 2009 amendments to the BIA and CCAA
that added the definitions of “equity interest” and “equity claim” and related
provisions.
87.             
Over
a hundred years of corporate law stands for the general proposition that
shareholders are not entitled to recover from assets until after all ordinary
creditors have been paid in full.
88.             
However,
the Receiver submits that the pre-2009 jurisprudence under the BIA and CCAA
(i.e., in our Canadian bankruptcy and insolvency regimes) does not universally
apply this ancient corporate law principle, and that in certain circumstances,
the characterization or nature of the claims of each of shareholders and creditors is such that the claims of shareholders ought
not to be automatically subordinated to claims of creditors.
89.             
Clearly, there are examples in the case law of situations in which
the relative priority of claims of shareholders and creditors requires a more nuanced analysis. See, for example: Royal Bank of Canada v.
Central Capital Corp., 1996 CanLII 1521 (ON CA), 132 D.L.R. (4th) 223
(Ont. C.A.) (“Central Capital”); Blue Range Resource Corporation,
2000 ABQB 4, 259 AR 30, at paras. 17, 22 and 23; National Bank of Canada v. Merit Energy Ltd., 2001 ABQB
583, 294 AR 15, at paras. 55-56; Menegon v. Philip Services
Corp., 1999 CanLII 15004 (ON SC), at para. 29; and I. Waxman & Sons Limited (Re) (2008),
2008 CanLII 8791 (ON SC), 89 O.R. (3d) 427 (S.C.), at para. 25.
90.             
As observed by the Court of Appeal for Ontario in Central
Capital, the pre-2009 case law was clear that subordination of shareholder
claims to creditor claims was not automatic and the “true nature” of claims
advanced by a shareholder is also relevant in considering the priority of those
claims relative to claims of “ordinary creditors”.
91.             
The Receiver relies on the decision of this Court in Ontario (Securities
Commission) v. Consortium Construction, 1993 CarswellOnt 908 (OCJ
(Gen. Div) (Comm. List)) (“Consortium”) as an example of a Securities
Act receivership proceeding (and one that pre-dated the 2009 amendments to
the BIA and CCAA).
92.             
In Consortium, the Court considered a situation where a
sale of securities by Consortium without a prospectus was found to have
violated the relevant provisions of the Securities Act. As a result, and
since the prohibition on the sale of securities without a prospectus is central
to achieving the policy of investor protection, those contracts were void for
illegality, with the further result that the investors had a restitutionary
right to recover their investments since Consortium had been unjustly enriched.
It followed that this restitutionary right conferred upon all investors the
status of creditors, regardless of what their status might otherwise have been
(see paras. 45 – 55).
93.             
Applying the ratio of Consortium to the present case, the
Receiver submits that violations of the policy objectives of the Securities
Act (as have already been found by the Capital Markets Tribunal), support
the treatment of Unitholder claims on an equal basis with other creditor claims
in the context of a distribution.
94.             
The Receiver points to the findings of the Capital Markets
Tribunal that the Securities Act has been violated, and that the principals
of the Bridging Funds misappropriated monies from the Bridging Funds that
belonged to those Funds or to Unitholders. The Receiver submits that these
facts, together with misrepresentations made in the BIF and MMF Offering
Memoranda, and as a result of fraudulent and wrongful acts, trigger (among
other things), statutory rights for Unitholders of BIF and MMF to claim
rescission or damages.
95.             
The Receiver submits that pursuant to the BIF and MMF Offering
Memoranda, Unitholders in British Columbia and Québec, or Unitholders in
Alberta who purchased Units under an “accredited investor” exemption, are
granted contractual rights of action for damages or rescission that are the
same as, or similar to, the misrepresentation rights provided under s. 130.1 of
the Securities Act.
96.             
For all of these reasons, the Receiver submits that subordinating
BIF and MMF Unitholder Claims to the Disputed Bridging Fund Claims for the
purpose of the Interim Distribution Calculation is not supported by the
provisions of the Securities Act, and would undermine the protective
purpose of that statute. It would do so by subordinating claims (i.e., the
Cerieco Claim) that arise from the very type of misconduct that the Securities
Act seeks to prevent.
97.             
The Receiver further submits that if the Cerieco Claim specifically is determined to be valid (which is denied by
the Receiver), the argument summarized above would be directly applicable: the
reasoning of the Capital Markets Tribunal (applicable to the BlackRock Claim)
would apply equally to the Cerieco Claim. The result would be that such use of
investor money in BIF would be contrary to the stated objectives of BIF as
disclosed to its Unitholders, and nothing in its Offering Memorandum would
suggest to a reasonable investor that their investment would be used to support
an outside investment by the principals of Bridging.
98.             
This, together with other alleged representations (see factum of
Receiver at para. 37), would give rise to claims by Unitholders for rescission
or damages in accordance with s. 130.1 of the Securities Act, as well as
rescission, damages and other remedies available at common law. The Receiver
submits: “In the Receiver’s view, it is reasonable to assume, for the purpose
of the Interim Unitholder Distribution, that BIF and MMF Unitholders would be
able to prove that they relied upon misrepresentations in the Offering
Memorandum for each of BIF and MMF.
99.             
Finally, the Receiver relies upon the recent decision of this
Court reflected in the Endorsement of Steele J.
(June 24, 2024) in Chief Executive Officer of the Financial Services
Regulatory Authority of Ontario v. First Swiss Mortgage Corp, Court File
No. CV-23-00696362-00CL (“First Swiss”), where the Court endorsed a pari
passu treatment for investors and creditors, emphasizing the need for
equitable treatment where not doing so would produce unfair results.
100.         
The Court concluded in First Swiss that strict legal
application of trust principles would unfairly reward certain investors over
others based on timing or chance, and that courts have consistently allowed
pooled and ratable asset distribution in cases requiring equitable treatment,
particularly where strict legal applications would otherwise lead to unjust
results (paras. 18 – 22).
101.         
The Receiver submits that application of the same principles here
militates in favour of treating Unitholder Claims
against BIF and MMF and the respective
Disputed Bridging Fund Claims against BIF and MMF on a pari passu basis.
102.         
The challenge for me on this motion is that while the proposed
treatment of Unitholder Claims against BIF and MMF and the respective Disputed Bridging Fund Claims against BIF and MMF on a pari
passu basis may ultimately be the fair, equitable and appropriate result
consistent with the objectives of the Securities Act, such a conclusion
is premature today.
103.         
The fundamental problem is that the Cerieco Claim has not been
finally determined, as is acknowledged by all parties. The disallowance by the
Receiver is the subject of a pending hearing on the merits to be conducted by
the Claims Officer this year. An appeal from any decision of the Claims Officer
lies to this Court.
104.         
That entire process, which is far from completed, is proceeding
pursuant to the earlier Claims Adjudication Order made by this Court in this
Receivership Proceeding. That order was made not only with the consent of the Receiver, but at its request. It was also supported
by Representative Counsel for the Unitholders. The order provides that
Representative Counsel has a right to participate in the hearing before the
Claims Officer and any appeals thereafter.
105.         
The claims process, already well underway, needs to be completed,
and the validity of the Cerieco Claim finally determined, before the assumptions of the Receiver, while made in
good faith, can be properly tested.
106.         
The straightforward yet fundamental problem with the position of the Receiver that, for the purposes
of the Interim Unitholder Distribution, the Cerieco Claim should not be
considered to be an “ordinary creditor claim” entitled to be paid in full
before claims of Unitholders (i.e., equity claims), is that this position
assumes the Receiver (and Representative Counsel for the Unitholders) are successful
on the Cerieco Claim.
107.         
As set out above, the Receiver submits on this motion that the
Cerieco Claim is based on a secret, undisclosed guarantee of Cerieco’s loan to facilitate construction of the One Bloor Project
for the benefit of certain principals of Bridging, to the detriment of the
Bridging Funds and their Unitholders, who received no consideration or benefit
for such a guarantee.
108.         
It is that assertion that underpins the entire submission that the
Cerieco Claim should not be treated as an ordinary course creditor claim paid
in priority to Unitholder claims, since to do so would reward the very
wrongdoing and misconduct that the Securities Act is intended to
prohibit.
109.         
Cerieco denies all of this and maintains that the guarantee, and
therefore its Claim, are valid.
110.         
The submission of the Receiver may one day be entirely correct.
But to accept it today, while the claims process (to which all parties agreed and in which all will participate) remains ongoing,
would be to circumvent that entire claims process and assume, prematurely, that
the Cerieco Claim cannot succeed or that if it does so, the corresponding
Reserve will not be sufficient to pay it in full. That is not appropriate.
111.         
The Receiver submits that the Cerieco Claim results from
“fraudulent and wrongful acts” that it submits resulted in the granting of what it describes as “the secret guarantee”. The
problem today is that that the Unitholder Claims are based (as summarized
above) on the same fraudulent and wrongful acts - misrepresentations, and
misuse of investor money in the Bridging Funds – that resulted in the loss of
Unitholder investments, and the proposed relief requires me to assume that
Unitholder Claims succeed and the Cerieco Claim does not (or at least does not
succeed for the full quantum claimed).
112.         
Accordingly, I decline, for the purposes of the Interim Unitholder Distribution only, to approve the Interim
Distribution Calculation on the basis that Unitholder Claims against the
respective Disputed Bridging Fund Claims should be treated on a pari passu basis.
113.         
To be very clear, it may well be that they should be treated on a pari
passu basis, but that decision should be made and appropriate adjustments
implemented at the time of a subsequent distribution once the Cerieco Claim has been finally determined.
114.         
I recognize that this means that Unitholders in MMF, who have
already waited a significant period of time for recoveries on their
investments, will have to wait longer. However, the prejudice of that further delay is mitigated by the fact that investment income and
interest continue to accrue on the funds held in trust by the Receiver, and
such income will enure to whichever party or parties are ultimately held to be
beneficially entitled to the funds.
115.         
On the other hand, if the Interim Distribution is approved on the
proposed pari passu basis today, and the Cerieco Claim is ultimately
finally determined to be valid and ultimately determined to be paid in full as
a creditor claim against the Bridging Funds in priority to claims of
Unitholders, it will not, however, be capable of being paid as such because the
funds will have been distributed.
116.         
It is common ground between the Receiver and Cerieco that if the
Receiver’s motion were granted today, it would reduce the maximum entitlement
of Cerieco, even if it succeeded on its Claim, to approximately 22% of the
value of its filed Claim. The Cerieco Claim, exclusive of interest and costs,
is based on the value of its filed Claim of $213 million. The Receiver’s
proposed Reserve for the Cerieco Claim is $49.2 million, or approximately $163.8
million less than the value of the Claim as filed.
117.         
For all of these reasons, and while the proposed Interim
Distribution to Unitholders is appropriate and should be made at this time, it
should be made based on the Interim Distribution Calculation approved as proposed
save and except for the pari passu treatment of the Cerieco Claim, and Unitholder Claims with respect only to those affected
Bridging Funds (i.e., BIF and BIF RSP).
118.         
I direct the Receiver to make such adjustments to the Interim
Distribution Calculation as are necessary to give effect to these reasons
before the Interim Distribution to Unitholders is made.
119.         
Given my decision above, it is unnecessary for me to address the
other arguments advanced by Cerieco, including that the BIF Limited Partnership Agreement clearly provides that the
net assets of the funds shall be distributed first to creditors and thereafter
to Unitholders; or that the Limited Partnerships Act also provides for
creditor priority in these particular circumstances.
120.         
Representative
Counsel for the Unitholders seeks the imposition of a constructive trust over
the subject Bridging Funds (which would include the proceeds of BIF). As noted
above, Representative Counsel amended the scope of relief being sought at the
hearing of these motions to withdraw its request for a constructive trust to
the extent that such amendment was necessary to give effect to the BlackRock
Settlement. Subject to that exception, however, it seeks the imposition of the
constructive trust today.
121.         
The
Receiver submits that if the relief sought by Representative Counsel in the
form of the imposition of a constructive trust on the assets of the Bridging
Funds for the benefit of Unitholders is granted, the Interim Distribution
Calculation would need to be further revised to reflect the fact that
Unitholders would receive a higher amount than currently contemplated.
122.         
In
the circumstances, the Receiver therefore submits that the motion of
Representative Counsel for the imposition of a constructive trust should be
deferred, since any increase in the amount to be distributed to Unitholders can
be addressed as part of a subsequent distribution.
123.         
Cerieco
submits that the constructive trust motion should be dismissed, since it would
eliminate its ability to recover on its claim at all.
124.         
In
my view, the constructive trust motion should be deferred as proposed by the
Receiver and addressed if and as necessary in connection with the subsequent
distribution.
125.         
Once
the Cerieco Claim is finally determined, being the only remaining Disputing
Bridging Claim still outstanding, the issue of whether a constructive trust
should be imposed on either of the two principal grounds relied upon by
Representative Counsel for the Unitholders (unjust enrichment and wrongful
conduct) can be addressed as necessary. There are no other outstanding Disputed
Bridging Claims (and Representative Counsel consented to the settlement of each
of the Canning Claim and the BlackRock Claim, as discussed above).
126.         
I
do note the submission of Cerieco that the constructive trust motion should
also be dismissed on the basis that it is res judicata, and that the
decision of the Court of Appeal for Ontario made in this proceeding in
connection with the 2022 Unitholder Priority Motion (2023 ONCA 769) determined
that there was no legal or equitable basis to impose a constructive trust or
recognize any priority.
127.         
Representative
Counsel submits that the issue before the Court of Appeal, and in respect of
which it made a determination, was whether a constructive trust ought to be
imposed in favour of Unitholders who had Potential Statutory Rescission Claims,
such that they had priority over General Unitholder Claims. Representative
Counsel submits that the issue determined was therefore one of relative
priority between and among Unitholders, and there was no determination about
relative priority between Unitholders on the one hand and those parties
asserting a Disputed Bridging Claim on the other hand.
128.         
In
my view, this issue also can and should be determined if necessary, following a
final determination of the Cerieco Claim. That would satisfactorily address the
argument of Cerieco that if a constructive trust were imposed, it would amount
to a collateral attack on the Claims Adjudication Order and would result in a
situation where Cerieco was unable to recover any value from BIF even if it
were ultimately successful in in its Claim.
129.         
Approval
of the 24th Report, the Supplements and the activities of the
Receiver described therein is unopposed. While I have declined to approve the
Interim Distribution calculation insofar as it affects the Cerieco Claim and
directed the Receiver to make necessary adjustments for the reasons set out
above, I am satisfied that the activities of the Receiver should be approved.
130.         
Those
activities are consistent with the mandate given to the Receiver in the
original appointment order. I am satisfied that in this extremely complex Securities
Act receivership, the activities of the Receiver as set out in the 24th
Report and the Supplements were undertaken in good faith, are reasonable,
appropriate and have been accretive to the progress achieved to date for the
benefit of Unitholders and other stakeholders.
131.         
This
Court has previously observed that periodic requests to approve reports of a
monitor in a CCAA proceeding or a receiver appointed pursuant to the Bankruptcy
and Insolvency Act or the Courts of Justice Act are appropriate and
that there are good policy and practical reasons to grant such approvals which
include allowing the Court officer to move forward with the next steps in the
proceeding. See, for example, Target Canada Co, (Re), 2015 ONSC 7574, at
paras. 2 and 23. In my view, there is no reason why the same principles ought
not to apply to a receivership proceeding commenced pursuant to the Securities
Act.
132.         
For
these reasons, the 24th Report, the Supplements and the activities
of the Receiver set out therein are approved, subject to the required adjustments
to the Interim Distribution Calculation as set out above.
133.         
For
all of these reasons, the motions of the Receiver are granted in part.
134.         
The
Interim Unitholder Distribution is approved, but the Interim Distribution
Calculation must be adjusted such that the Reserve in respect of Disputed
Bridging Fund Claims (i.e., the Cerieco Claim) is maintained in an amount
sufficient to satisfy the Cerieco Claim until it has been finally determined.
135.         
The
BlackRock Settlement is approved, and the acceptance of the Unjust Enrichment
Claim against MMF is approved, and the BlackRock Distribution is approved in
full and final satisfaction of the Unjust Enrichment Claim.
136.         
Subject
to the above, the 24th Report and the activities described therein
are approved.
137.         
The
constructive trust motion of the Unitholders is deferred to be determined if necessary,
following a final determination of the Cerieco Claim.
138.         
Orders
to go to give effect to these reasons.