[1]              
The accused Patrick King has been convicted of
the offences of mischief and counselling mischief, counselling obstructing of
police, disobeying a court order and counselling to disobey a court order.
These charges arose in the context of Mr. King’s participation in the Freedom
Convoy which was a protest occupying downtown Ottawa for a 3 week period, from
January 28 to February 20, 2022. The court’s reasons for these convictions may
be found at R. v. Patrick King, 2024 ONSC 6458.
[2]              
In terms of the mischief charges, Mr. King was
found to have planned from before the arrival of the Freedom Convoy in Ottawa
and following his arrival, accompanied by hundreds of large trucks and other
vehicles, to gridlock downtown Ottawa and to cause distress to residents, merchants
and workers by continuous honking of truck horns, blocking streets and other
disruptive activities and to prolong this occupation indefinitely until the groups’
political demands were addressed to their satisfaction by the government.
[3]              
The court also found Mr. King’s continuing
online presence throughout the Freedom Convoy and his comments prior to
arriving in Ottawa justified a finding that he was an organizer and a leader of
a significant component of the convoy. He encouraged his followers to use their
vehicles to blockade downtown streets and counselled them to “hold the line” in
the face of efforts by the police to encourage protesters to leave the city.
The court found he was “a leader, an organizer, and on-line influencer” of the
Freedom Convoy and in that capacity aided and abetted and was part of a joint
purpose of Freedom Convoy participants to commit mischief.
[4]              
In addition, the court found King counselled his
on-line followers to continue to honk their horns in contravention of a civil
injunction issued by the Superior Court of Justice and encouraged his followers
to resist certain police actions and to continue to “hold the line”.
[5]              
Mr. King made it clear in his online remarks
that the Freedom Convoy’s mission was to pressure the government to abandon
vaccine mandates and to achieve this result by occupying downtown Ottawa and
continuing the occupation until the government acted on their demands. The
occupation of downtown Ottawa was not simply a result of the Freedom Convoy
growing out of control after its arrival. It was, at least in part, a result of
King’s and other convoy organizer’s admonitions to protesters, before they set
out for Ottawa in their vehicles to, in King’s words, encircle and “peacefully
bear hug” the city. In other words, in relation to the mischief which ensued, there
was an element of planning and premeditation on Mr. King’s part.
[6]              
The Crown’s position is these convictions
warrant the maximum 10 years imprisonment, due to the mischief being of a
uniquely serious nature, less a total period of about 9 months to be credited
to Mr. King for pre-sentence custody and strict pre-trial bail conditions. The
10 years for mischief is actually reduced to 9 years plus one year consecutive
for counselling breach of a court order, once one applies the totality principle,
according to the Crown. The defence position is that a proper sentence, given
the pre-sentence credit of about 9 months, would be time served, plus 3 years probation
or a conditional sentence order, plus probation. Clearly the positions of the
Crown and defence are remarkably far apart.
[7]              
The objectives of sentencing are set out in
section 718 of the Criminal Code, which are, in relevant part:
[8]              
A sentence must be proportionate. Section 718.1
of the Criminal Code states:
[9]              
Section
718.2 of the Criminal Code requires a sentence to be increased on
account of aggravating factors:
[10]          
Notably,
the circumstances of this case do not implicate these aggravating factors, nor
any of the others mentioned in section 718.2 (such as spousal violence, abuse
of minors, and breach of trust in relation to the victim). This should be kept
in mind when assessing the Crown’s submission that this is the “worst case of
mischief” and thus deserving of a uniquely severe punishment.
[11]          
The parties accept that the court, in passing
sentence, must focus on these objectives as well as the principal of
proportionality and the principal of totality.
[12]          
The Crown acknowledged in argument and in oral
submissions that there is no precedent for the length of sentence (ten years)
the Crown seeks on the counts of mischief and counselling mischief. However,
the Crown explains in its memoranda:
[13]          
The Crown suggests there is a very strong need
for general deterrence to prevent crimes as a method for achieving political
change, particularly in the nation’s capital. It is suggested that the sentence
“must serve as a powerful deterrent… those that attempt to disrupt democratic
processes and undermine societal order through unlawful actions will face
consequences that ensure such behaviour is not repeated”. The Crown suggests
the circumstances of this case were unique: “there is no sentence precedent for
a similar offender who committed the offensives in similar circumstances… there
has never been an occupation of downtown Ottawa, or any city in Canada, for
three weeks, where the organizer and leader of the mischief has also counselled
disobeying a court order and obstruction of police”.
[14]          
The Crown’s position here seems to be not only
is general deterrence the governing sentencing objective in the circumstances
of this case but also that it is not necessary or possible to seek parity with
sentence ranges reflected in other cases involving politically motivated
demonstrations in which mischief was committed.
[15]          
In the court’s view the circumstances of this
case and Mr. King’s actions in counselling and committing mischief do indeed
call out for a sentence emphasizing the objectives of general deterrence and
denunciation. However, in determining a fit and just sentence the court must
also respect the fundamental objective of proportionality by considering the
sentencing ranges applied in comparable cases. And indeed there are comparable
cases, as I will discuss. Section 718.2 of the Criminal Code requires that,
“a sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for
similar offences committed in similar circumstances.”
[16]          
The Freedom Convoy gave rise to several cases in
which Convoy protesters were convicted of mischief. In many of the videos in
evidence in the present case Mr. King is seen in the company of his friend George
Billings who is driving the truck in which he and King are riding around Ottawa.
They can be observed keeping up a dialogue designed to encourage their on-line
listeners and to report on ongoing events concerning the Freedom Convoy and at
one point live-streaming their ‘slow role’ to the Ottawa Airport. Mr. Billings worked
very closely with King throughout the 3week protest so far as can be observed
in the various videos. Billings was charged for his role in the Freedom Convoy
and plead guilty to one count of counselling mischief contrary to s. 464(a) of
the Criminal Code. He received an agreed upon sentence of 6 months time
served (reflecting pre-sentence custody) followed by 6 months probation
requiring him to keep the peace and be of good behavior. No doubt Billing’s
sentence was mitigated by his guilty plea.
[17]          
Of greater assistance are the ‘Coutts Border Crossing
blockade’ cases, which are very recent and highly relevant, in the court’s
view. In R. v. Van Huigenbos and Janzen, 2025 ABKB 14 (Yamauchi J.) the
accused were convicted of mischief by a jury for their participation in the
Coutts border crossing blockade. They were convicted of aiding or abetting
mischief for activities supporting the demonstrators. This was a highway
blockade at a border crossing at the U.S.- Canadian border lasting two weeks. The
court found the blockade to be potentially dangerous and had a serious impact
on the community and caused considerable inconvenience. The 2 accused aided the
principal offenders in various ways and Van Huigenbos eventually assumed a
leadership role in the blockade. The court sentenced Huigenbos to
4 months imprisonment. Mr. Janzen received a conditional sentence of 90 days
duration.
[18]          
In Huigenbos at para. 23 the court made
these comments, which are equally relevant to the present case:
[19]          
In R. v. Pawlowski, ABCJ (unreported,
September 18, 2023), Krinke J. sentenced Mr. Pawlowski to 60 days incarceration
for attending at a saloon near the Coutts border crossing blockade to give a
short speech on one occasion to encourage the protesters to continue with the
protest and inviting others to join in. Pawlowski did not personally
participate in the blockade.  Krinke J. found that Pawlowski committed mischief
by inciting the protesters to continue the blockade, noting at p.19, “the
significant number of people affected by the blockade, and the time period over
which the blockade continued, extended the potential harm and therefore the
gravity of the offence”.  Justice Krinke also observed:
[20]          
An appeal to the Alberta Court of Appeal was
dismissed, see R. v Pawlowski, 2024 ABCA 342. Slatter J.A. observed (at
para. 107):
[21]          
Another Coutts border crossing blockade case is R.
v. Olienick and Carbert (September 9, 2024) ABKB (Labrenz J.) Both
offenders were sentenced to 6 months incarceration. This sentence was
concurrent with 6 year sentences on serious weapons charges. On the mischief
charges Olienick was a principal offender, blocking the highway with his dump
truck. Carbert was found to have exercised a leadership role.  This was a
blockade lasting 2 weeks and involving a large number of protesters. The
court recognized Highway 4 as a vital economic corridor between Canada and the
United States and said the protestors “held the highway hostage”. Justice Labrenz
J. observed at pages 34-35:
[22]          
In R. v. Soranno, 2022 BCSC 1795, groups of
individuals were protesting the treatment of pigs in an animal rights context.
They entered pig farmers’ property uninvited, along with media, and occupied
the barns in which pigs were located, over the objections of the farmers. The
accused were convicted of mischief and sentenced to a brief jail sentence and
probation. However, the Court of Appeal substituted a 120 day conditional
sentence order. The trial judge Verhoeven J. made the following observations
(at paras. 5-7) in terms applicable to the present case:
[23]          
In R. v. Deboer, 2023 ONCJ 510, Deboer was
involved in an effort to shut down the Ambassador Bridge in Windsor to protest
vaccine mandates. Mid-trial, he pleaded guilty to mischief. Deboer’s
involvement consisted of carrying a large sign that read, “Police stand down.”
The disruption of commercial traffic caused by the actions of those involved in
the blockade was found by the court to have been significant. The trial judge
declined to accept a joint submission for 12-month conditional discharge and instead
suspended the imposition of a sentence and placed Deboer on probation for 12
months. On appeal, the Ontario Superior Court imposed the jointly submitted
12-month conditional discharge.
[24]          
The court received a helpful pre-sentence report
concerning Mr. King. Mr. King is 47 years of age. He grew up in a small city in
Northern Ontario. His father died when he was six and he had a difficult
upbringing which he nevertheless views in a positive light. He had several convictions
in Youth Court for minor property crimes. As an adult he had 3 convictions in
the 1996-1999 time period for possession of stolen property under $5,000. So,
for the last 25 years he has had no criminal convictions and has maintained a
continuous work record. He suffered a leg amputation below the knee some years
after experiencing a serious fall at a construction work site. He has a
prothesis and experiences significant chronic pain.   He has his grade 12 and
obtained a diploma in workplace health and safety, a field in which he has been
employed. He is divorced and maintains a good relationship with his two sons.
He has a relationship with a partner in Montreal and hopes to relocate there to
be with her following the conclusion of his current legal proceedings. The
probation officer felt Mr. King accepted minimal responsibility for his
involvement in the Freedom Convoy protest, commenting, “while he recognized
some of the harm caused, he projected blame onto city officials, local police
and other organizers”. The probation officer recommended Mr. King seek
psychological counselling in a community setting and made a number of other
useful suggestions for inclusion in a Community Supervision Order.
[25]          
At the conclusion of sentencing submissions, Mr.
King asked to address the court. He delivered an emotional and in the court’s
view, a sincere apology to the people of Ottawa for the harm they were
subjected to in the Freedom convoy protest. He went on recount the extremely
challenging time he endured in the 161 days he spent in the Reginal Detention
Centre, during Covid, including dealing with a serious infection in his leg, frequent
lockdowns, a period in isolation, being bunked with a violent criminal,
harassment and mockery from other prisoners, and isolation from his family,
particularly his sons. His funds have been frozen, he is in strained financial
circumstances with an inability to pay his legal fees. He closed his remarks by
observing he would “absolutely not ever do this again… I don’t want anything to
do with protesting…I don’t want anything to do with politics”. He added “I want
to go hide out and never see another protest again…I’m done…I’m absolutely done…
and “you will never see me in the city of Ottawa other than for court.”
[26]          
There would appear to be no dispute that Mr.
King spent a total of 161 days incarcerated in the Ottawa Carleton Regional
Detention Centre. It is the practice of this court to calculate the credit for
pre-sentence custody at the rate of 1.5 times the days actually served in
institutional custody. This results in Mr. King being credited with 8 months
time served. The parties have also been able to agree there should be an
additional credit of 30 days to recognize Mr. King has been on restrictive bail
terms since his initial release on bail. In the circumstances of this case, the
court is of the view that Mr. King will receive a total credit of 8 months for
pre-sentence custody plus an additional month to reflect his restrictive bail
terms. In other words, a total of 9 months credit.
[27]          
This court is of the view a fit and just
sentence for Mr. King must send a message of denunciation for his conduct and
as a warning to others who seek to force their views on government by
pressuring downtown residents and workers. At the same time adherence to the
fundamental principle of proportionality must be respected. An accused must
receive a sentence that can be seen to be similar to sentences imposed on
similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances. As
noted, I respectfully disagree with the Crowns contention that there are no
appropriate comparators for the criminal conduct in the present case. I do not
see this as “the worst case of mischief” on a scale of seriousness and moral
culpability, as the Crown has submitted, or that there is any other aspect of
the conduct of Mr. King that warrants a sentence of 10 years imprisonment.
[28]          
In summary, the Freedom Convoy cases, including
the highly relevant Coutts border blockade cases all speak of harm to the rule
of law from political protests in which serious mischief is occasioned for the
purpose of forcing protesters’ political views on government. The right to
demonstrate and to protest are democratic values protected by the Charter but
when the conduct crosses the line into criminal mischief a sentence reflecting
the principles of denunciation and deterrence is warranted. As noted
previously, the Freedom Convoy protests in the Coutts border crossing blockade
cases resulted in sentences of three and four months to the perpetrators in R.
v. Huigenbos and six months in R. v. Olienick and Carbert. The
principles of proportionality required by s. 718.1 of the Criminal Code
invite reference to those cases.
[29]          
I recognize the circumstances of the current
case are markedly more serious than those of the Alberta cases arising from the
Coutts border protests. In the present case the protests were longer lasting
and broader in scope. The Freedom Convoy protesters in the present case blockaded
downtown Ottawa for a period of three weeks, involved thousands of protesters
and hundreds of commercial trucks which targeted the civilian population living
and working in the downtown area. It went well beyond blocking streets and
included incessant honking of truck horns intended to harass the public and
disrupt businesses. This had a particularly insidious effect on vulnerable
parts of the population – people with disabilities, children, the elderly,
those in shelters and dependent on food banks.
[30]          
Mr. King bears a significant element of
responsibility for this turmoil as he was an organizer and one of the
leadership group. His personal involvement is an important measure of his
culpability. However, there are mitigating aspects to his personal involvement
and an absence of aggravating features which also should not go unnoticed. I
note these factors in particular:
[31]          
Respectfully, the court does not accept the
Crown’s characterization of Mr. King’s role in the Freedom Convoy as ‘the worst
case of mischief on a sliding scale of seriousness and moral culpability’. In
the court’s opinion there is a social harm to unduly elevating the sentencing
goals of denunciation and deterrence in the context of political protests, to
result in punitive sentences at the top of the sentencing range. The risk is
that an overly severe sentence of imprisonment in the context of legitimate
constitutionally protected activity can have the effect of creating a chill or
a fear of participation in political expression such as demonstrations or
protests, for fear that some persons may cross the line into conduct
constituting mischief with resultant severe sentences for all involved. The
Freedom Convoy protest was about expressing opposition held by some to
perceived government overreach in the form of Covid 19 mandates and other
vaccine issues, which continue to be matters of legitimate public discourse and
shifting opinions and policy approaches. The Freedom Convoy was not an attack
aimed at, for example, promoting violence or intimidation of racial or
religious minorities or other vulnerable groups. Rather, the Freedom Convoy
began as a lawful constitutionally protected form of protest that unfortunately
grew out of control and was allowed to go on and on and morphed into criminal
activity (in the form of mischief and related offences). But in the court’s
opinion neither the Freedom Convoy nor Mr. King’s role in it constituted the
worst case of mischief.
[32]          
Mr. King, as noted, you will receive 9 months of
presentence credit. That will be marked against count #1 (counseling mischief).
In my view, a further 3-month conditional sentence is required in addition to the
9 month presentence credit to adequately address the sentencing objectives of
denunciation and deterrence. I am satisfied that a conditional sentence will
not endanger the safety of the community and can satisfactorily address the
principles of sentencing, particularly given the presentence custody that
you’ve served and the conditions in which you served it. A concurrent 3-month
conditional sentence will be imposed on the remaining counts.  Concurrent
sentences are in my view appropriate given that the offences all arose from the
same ongoing transaction and have a close factual and legal nexus. Your
sentence totals 12 months, 9 months represents the presentence credit I have
just explained and the additional 3 month conditional sentence, the terms of
which I will now explain.
[33]          
The terms of your conditional sentence are the
following:
[34]          
Upon completion of this conditional sentence you
will be subject to a 12 month period of probation, during which you will keep
the peace and be of good behaviour, appear before the court when required to do
so by the court; and notify the court or the probation officer in advance of
any change of name or address, and promptly notify the court or the probation
officer of any change of employment or occupation. I see no reasonable basis to
order a weapons prohibition, nor will the court require you to provide a sample
of your DNA.
[35]          
You will pay the applicable victim surcharge.
[36]          
That is the court’s sentence. I invite counsel to
suggest any modifications to the conditional sentence which you consider
appropriate.