[1]              
This action involves allegations of fraud in
connection with a series of mortgage loans taken out by the Plaintiff at the
request of her aunt, the Defendant Antonella Moretto. It is alleged that Ms.
Moretto told the Plaintiff she needed money, urged the Plaintiff to re-mortgage
her home to secure loans for Ms. Moretto’s own benefit, and never paid the
Plaintiff back, leading to the Plaintiff defaulting on her mortgage in 2020. The
Plaintiff describes the alleged fraud as a conspiracy that involved all of the
Defendants, in various roles. She seeks damages and other relief for “breach of
contract, negligent and fraudulent misrepresentation, fraud, conspiracy, unjust
enrichment, breach of fiduciary duty, negligence and/or breach of duty of good
faith”.
[2]              
The Defendants Natalie Cammalleri, Paul
Cammalleri, 2196022 Ontario Inc. (“219”), and Giuseppe Geraci (together, the
“Moving Defendants”) bring this motion. Natalie Cammalleri, Paul Cammalleri, and
219 are among the private lenders alleged to have made the mortgage loans to
the Plaintiff. Mr. Geraci is an officer and director of 219. The Moving
Defendants describe the alleged mortgage fraud as centred around Ms. Moretto.
They seek to strike the Statement of Claim under rules 21.01(1)(b) and 25.11 of
the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, without leave to
amend, on the basis that it discloses no reasonable cause of action against
them and is frivolous, vexatious, and an abuse of process.
[3]              
For the reasons below, I grant the rule
21.01(1)(b) motion in part. I strike the claims of negligent misrepresentation,
fraudulent misrepresentation, fraud, breach of fiduciary duty, and negligence,
without leave to amend. I strike the claim against Mr. Geraci personally, with
leave to amend. I do not strike the remaining claims. I dismiss the rule 25.11
motion.
[4]              
An issue arose during the hearing regarding
supplemental motion materials that the Plaintiff filed and wished to rely on.
The materials consisted of judicial decisions that, in her view, demonstrated
that the Plaintiff’s claims are not frivolous or vexatious. The materials were
served mere days before the motion hearing and well after facta were filed.
They were also served over a year after the deadline had passed for serving
motion records.
[5]              
I allowed counsel for the Plaintiff to make
narrow submissions relying on the supplemental motion materials for the
purposes of the rule 25.11 branch of her motion only, and advised her that I
would rule on their admissibility thereafter. I also heard submissions in reply
from the Moving Defendants regarding the materials, during which I learned of
the late service of the materials. I advised the parties that I would provide
my ruling on the materials in my reasons on the main motion. I do so now.
[6]              
In my view the supplemental motion materials are
improper and inadmissible. They were delivered over a year after a
court-ordered deadline. No explanation for this extreme tardiness was provided.
Court-imposed timetables are there for a reason and ought not to be departed
from so lightly. Furthermore, the materials are not relevant. They do not
assist me in evaluating whether the pleadings are proper – an issue that turns
on the express language of the pleadings and nothing more. Indeed, this is why rule
21.01(2)(b) precludes the use of evidence on rule 21.01(1)(b) motions. Here,
the arguments underlying the rule 21.01(1)(b) and rule 25.11 motions are the
same: that the pleading lacks material facts, contains bare allegations, and is
frivolous and vexatious as a result. It follows, therefore, that evidence
should not be admitted for either motion. Additionally, I have concerns about
the materials being prejudicial, as they consist of unproven allegations of
wrongdoing advanced by and against some of the Defendants.
[7]              
I therefore do not admit the Plaintiff’s
supplemental motion materials.
[8]              
An issue also arose during the hearing over an Amended
Statement of Claim served by the Plaintiff only a few days before this motion
was heard, and well over a year after the motion was brought. The Moving
Defendants submitted before me that a pleading that is the subject of a motion
to strike may only be amended with leave of the court, that the Plaintiff did
not seek leave to amend the pleading, and that the Amended Statement of Claim
is therefore improper. Having said that, they framed their submissions before
me primarily in relation to the Amended Statement of Claim and were prepared to
proceed with the motion on the basis of the Amended Statement of Claim.
[9]              
After hearing both parties’ submissions, I ruled
that the Plaintiff was required to obtain leave to file the Amended Statement
of Claim, based on this court’s reasons in Vale Canada Limited v. Solway
Investment Group Limited et al. 2021 ONSC 7562. I advised that I would
provide additional reasons with my reasons on the main motion. I do so now.
[10]          
Vale is dispositive
of the issue before me. In Vale, the defendants brought motions to
strike a claim under r. 21.01(1)(a) and (b), in response to which the plaintiff
delivered an amended Statement of Claim that the defendants characterized as a
“nullity” because it had been delivered after their motion was brought. Justice
Koehnen considered the “potential conflict” between rule 21.01, which allows for
a pleading to be struck on the ground that it discloses no reasonable cause of
action of defence, and rule 26.02(a), which allows a party to amend its
pleading without leave before the close of pleadings unless the amendment
involves adding, deleting, or substituting a party.
[11]          
Koehnen J. concluded that “a party that wishes
to amend its claim in the face of a motion to strike should seek leave to do so
even if the amendment is sought before the pleadings are closed.” He reasoned
(at para. 8; also see paras. 16-53):
[12]          
The court’s reasons in Vale readily apply
here. I therefore find that the Plaintiff was required to seek leave to file the
Amended Statement of Claim.
[13]          
After providing my ruling on this issue, I invited
the parties to make submissions on whether such leave should be granted. The
Plaintiff made submissions seeking leave to amend. The Moving Defendants took
no position. I advised that I would provide my decision on the motion for leave
to amend together with my decision on the main motion. I do so now.
[14]          
Rule 26.01 is explicit that the court “shall
grant leave to amend” a pleading unless the amendment would result in prejudice
that could not be compensated for by costs or an adjournment.
[15]          
In my view, the amendment of the original Statement
of Claim into the Amended Statement of Claim does not prejudice the Moving
Defendants in a way that is not compensable by a costs award. For example, there
is no prejudice to them in the form of any foregone limitation period defence,
examination for discovery, or documentary discovery. Additionally, the
mortgages at issue are still registered against the Plaintiff’s property.
[16]          
That said, the Moving Defendants originally conceived
of, and advanced, this motion based on the original pleading, not the amended
version served on them by the Plaintiff late in the day. The Moving Defendants
did, to their, credit, “pivot” so that they could address the amended pleading
in oral argument. Indeed, the amended version formed the focus of their
submissions. Yet it is certainly unfair that they had to deal with a moving
target for the purposes of this motion. In my view, this prejudice can and
should be compensated by way of a costs award.
[17]          
For these reasons, and recognizing the mandatory
language of rule 26.01, I grant leave to amend the original Statement of Claim
into the Amended Statement of Claim delivered by the Plaintiff shortly before the
hearing (the “Claim”). The Claim accordingly forms the focus of my reasons below.
[18]          
The causes of action advanced in the Claim are breach
of contract, negligent and fraudulent misrepresentation, fraud, conspiracy,
unjust enrichment, breach of fiduciary duty, negligence and/or breach of duty
of good faith.
[19]          
The facts pleaded in the Claim may be summarized
as follows:
[20]          
The Claim goes on to address the various causes
of action, remedies sought, and damages claimed, including the depletion of the
full equity of the Plaintiff’s property, the actual and anticipated demands for
repayment of the loans, the risk of the Plaintiff’s property being sold
pursuant to power of sale, and harm to the Plaintiff’s credit rating.
[21]          
In a motion to strike under rule 21.01(1)(b),
the test is whether, reading the Statement of Claim generously, and assuming that
the facts in it can be proved, it is plain and obvious that there is no
reasonable prospect that the action can succeed (Frank v. Legate, 2015
ONCA 631, 339 O.A.C. 359, at para. 36; Hunt v. Carey Canada Inc., 1990 CanLII 90 (SCC), [1990]
2 S.C.R. 959, at p. 980).
[22]          
The facts pleaded in the Statement of Claim “are the firm basis upon which the possibility of
success of the claim must be evaluated” under rule 21.01(1)(b); a party
must plead all the facts that it must prove to establish a cause of action (Floryan v. Luke et al., 2023
ONSC 5108, at para. 8) .
[23]          
All allegations of fact pleaded are generally
assumed to be true for the purposes of this analysis. However, this principle
does not apply if the pleaded factual allegations are patently ridiculous or
manifestly incapable of proof (R. v. Imperial Tobacco Canada Ltd., 2011
SCC 42, [2011] 3 S.C.R. 45, at paras. 21-22).
Nor does it apply to bald conclusory statements of fact unsupported by
material facts (Castrillo v. Workplace Safety and Insurance Board, 2017
ONCA 121, 136 O.R. (3d) 654, at para. 15; Trillium
Power Wind Corporation v. Ontario (Natural Resources), 2013 ONCA 683, 117
O.R. (3d) 721, at para 31). In
this vein, the Court of Appeal has upheld a lower court’s decision to strike a
portion of a pleading where “the brief reference to [the] tort in the pleading
was so vague that a defendant who read it would have no idea what conduct was
being alleged against them” (Frank, at para. 84).
[24]          
The court is to read the impugned pleading
generously to allow for drafting deficiencies and the plaintiff's lack of
access to key documents and discovery information (Transamerica Life Canada
Inc. v. ING Canada Inc. (2003), 2003 CanLII 9923 (ON CA), 68
O.R. (3d) 457 (C.A.), at para. 38; Rausch
v. Pickering (City), 2013 ONCA 740, 313
O.A.C. 202, at para. 34).
[25]          
The Claim alleges that the Defendants had an
obligation to act in good faith in their dealings with the Plaintiff with
respect to the registration of the mortgages. As a result of the “scheme” they
carried out and the misrepresentations made to her, each of the Defendants
breached this duty of good faith and breached their contractual obligations to
her arising from the mortgages, including by never truly advancing the funds to
register the mortgages, and/or by the advance being repaid to them through the
recycling of funds.
[26]          
The Moving Defendants assert that a breach of
contract claim is improper because it fails to plead the necessary elements of
such a claim: the relevant terms of any contract, the terms that were allegedly
breached, and the conduct giving rise to the breach (Nanra v. NRI Legal
Services, 2017 ONSC 4503, at para. 19).
[27]          
I do not agree. In my view, these elements of
the breach of contract claim are pleaded.
[28]          
The Claim identifies all the relevant terms of
the loan and mortgage agreements and discusses each mortgage agreement and
underlying loan arrangement with some granularity, as discussed above. The
relevant terms pleaded include the amounts being loaned by the Moving Defendants
to the Plaintiff, that the loans were being secured through a charge on her
property, the amount of that charge, and that the funds were being received for
Ms. Moretto.
[29]          
The conduct giving rise to the breach is pleaded.
The Claim alleges that the Defendants breached their contractual obligations to
the Plaintiff by never actually advancing the loans and/or receiving repayment
of the loans they advanced. It is pleaded in respect of various mortgages that
the Plaintiff “did not receive any funds, cheque and/or other payment
evidencing the purported advance of any monies”. The alleged “scheme” that
enabled this alleged breach is also pleaded in some detail, as discussed below.
[30]          
The description of the alleged breach makes
clear what terms of the agreements are alleged to have been breached: the terms
regarding the advancement and repayment of the funds. This is not made express
in the Claim, but is manifestly clear when the Claim is read as a whole.
[31]          
The breach of contract claim is therefore adequately
pleaded.
[32]          
The Moving Defendants assert that the Claim
fails to specify which good faith doctrinal duty was allegedly breached by the
Defendants. They submit that if it is alleged that the duty of good faith and honesty
in contractual performance was breached, the Claim must identify the manner in
which those terms were breached, the contractual terms breached, and the
damages that flow from the breach (Tribute (Cogan) Limited v. Township of
Adjala-Tosorontio, 2021 ONSC 4746, at para. 13).
[33]          
I agree that the Claim does not expressly invoke
the good faith duty of honesty. It would be preferable if it did. However, when
the Claim is read as a whole and construed liberally, as it must be for the
purposes of this motion, it is clear that the allegation of breach of duty of
good faith relates to the duty of honesty in contractual performance. The Claim
alleges that the Moving Defendants breached their duty of good faith through
the “scheme” they carried out and the misrepresentations made to the Plaintiff.
Accepting the allegations of a “scheme” as true, as I must for the purposes of
this motion, it is clear that the alleged “scheme” involved dishonesty on the
part of the Moving Defendants, who did not actually advance the funds to
register the mortgages (a dishonest act) and/or received repayment of the
advanced funds via the recycling of funds (a dishonest act). As such, the duty
of good faith pleaded to have been breached is duty of honesty.
[34]          
The other required elements – the manner in
which the terms of the mortgage agreements were allegedly breached, the
contractual terms alleged to have been breached, and the damages alleged to
flow from the breach – are all pleaded, as discussed above.
[35]          
The Claim asserts that Sabina and Ms. Moretto
made misrepresentations to the Plaintiff negligently, fraudulently, and
intentionally, with the intent to induce her to grant the mortgages to obtain
the funds sought by Ms. Moretto. The misrepresentations were made with the
knowledge and acquiescence of all the Defendants, who worked together and knew
the misrepresentations were false and would induce the Plaintiff to grant the
mortgages, to her detriment.
[36]          
Claims
of fraud and fraudulent misrepresentation require the defendant to have made a
false representation of fact to the plaintiff (Paulus v. Fleury, 2018
ONCA 1072, 144 OR (3d) 791, at paras. 8-9). Claims of negligent
misrepresentation require the defendant to have made a representation that is
untrue, inaccurate, or misleading (Queen v. Cognos Inc., 1993 CanLII 146 (SCC), [1993] 1 SCR
87, at p. 110).
[37]          
The Claim does not allege any such false,
untrue, inaccurate, or misleading representations by any of the Moving
Defendants. To the contrary, the only alleged misrepresentations are said to
have been made by the Defendants Sabine and Ms. Moretto. The Moving Defendants are
alleged to have known about, acquiesced to, and benefited from such
misrepresentations, but that does not mean that they actually made the
misrepresentations, which is what these causes of action require.
[38]          
The Plaintiff suggests that the Moving Defendants
need not have made the misrepresentations themselves for this cause of action
to properly be advanced against them. She suggests that once a conspiracy is
asserted, as has been here, it is sufficient for another alleged co-conspirator
to have made the misrepresentations. No authority is cited to me in support of
this proposition. It is clear at law that a conspirator is not vicariously
liable for what someone else does: they are liable for having participated and
contributed to the conspiracy (Fasteners & Fittings Inc. v. Wang, 2020
ONSC 1649, at para. 156). I therefore do not accept this submission.
[39]          
The allegations of negligent misrepresentation,
fraudulent misrepresentation, and fraud against the Moving Defendants are
improper and cannot be remedied. The Moving Defendants are not alleged to have
made any misrepresentations of fact, and on the facts do not appear to have
made any misrepresentations of fact. Theses causes of action against them are
to be struck.
[40]          
The Claim pleads that the Defendants knew each
other and together “intentionally, maliciously, and recklessly” “devised,
conspired, and/or agreed to carry out” a “scheme” to wrongfully appropriate
funds from the Plaintiff. They “fabricated a story” that Ms. Moretto “needed
money so as to misappropriate funds from” the Plaintiff. Through this alleged “scheme,”
Ms. Moretto and Sabine made misrepresentations to the Plaintiff for the purpose
of securing the mortgages. The other Defendants purported to advance funds to
Ms. Moretto, and those “purported advanced funds would be recycled and/or paid
back amongst the Defendants, so no money was actually advanced and/or due and
owing pursuant to the mortgages”. The mortgages were registered against the
Plaintiff’s property, Ms. Moretto would default on them, and the Defendants
would then demand payment from the Plaintiff and enforce the mortgages against
her property. The Defendants “worked in concert and collectively, with the
specific purpose of wrongfully eliciting funds from” the Plaintiff “for their
own personal benefit and to the detriment and harm of” the Plaintiff.
[41]          
A pleading of conspiracy must specify the
following: (a) who the parties are and their relationship with one another; (b)
the agreement between the defendants to conspire and the purpose or object of
that agreement; (c) the overt acts done by the conspirators in furtherance of
the conspiracy, which should be “described with clarity and precision” “so that
each defendant can know” what they are alleged to have done as part of the
conspiracy”; and (d) the damages occasioned as a result of the conspiracy (Fasteners
& Fittings Inc., at para. 156).
[42]          
The Moving Defendants assert that the Claim does
not plead the contents of the alleged agreement between the Defendants; when
the alleged agreement was formed, between whom, and what was agreed upon; the
means that the Moving Defendants used to injure the Plaintiff; and the specific
acts the Moving Defendants are alleged to have carried out in furtherance of
the alleged conspiracy. Relatedly, they submit that it fails to plead the
unlawful conduct at the root of the conspiracy, because even if the Defendants
recycled the funds among one another, that does not disclose unlawful conduct..
[43]          
I am unable to agree. The contents of the
agreement – that is, the substance of the “scheme” allegedly agreed to – are
described in some detail in the Claim. The parties to that alleged “scheme” are
identified. The specific acts the Moving Defendants are alleged to have taken
in furtherance of the conspiracy are pleaded. The Claim describes the actions
of the Moving Defendants, all of whom were private mortgage lenders (or, in the
case of Mr. Geraci, the directing mind of a lender corporation), including that
they allegedly did not advance funds they purported to advance, or did receive loan
repayments that they claimed not to have received. Additionally, it identifies
which specific loans the individual Moving Defendants advanced or purportedly
advanced to the Plaintiff and provides information about those loans. In my
view, this is sufficient.
[44]          
While the Claim does not expressly plead a date
or time frame when the alleged agreement was formed, that is not in fact a
requirement for a proper pleading, based on the case law. In any even, the Claim
clearly conveys that Ms. Moretto approached the Plaintiff in August 2016, and
the first of the loans was arranged in September 2016. Presumably, the alleged
agreement among the Defendants was entered into sometime before then. In my
view, this provides sufficient particularity as to the time frame.
[45]          
I am unable to agree that no unlawful conduct
has been disclosed by the Claim. The Claim alleges that by recycling the funds
with one another, the Defendants received repayment of the funds they advanced,
but nonetheless claimed not to have received such repayment. In other words,
they fraudulently claimed they were not repaid the funds, and sought to enforce
the mortgages and commence power of sale proceedings on that basis. This is the
unlawful conduct disclosed by the Claim: not simply that they recycled money
among one another, but that they did so to conceal that they had in fact been
repaid the loans.
[46]          
The Claim asserts that the Plaintiff received no
funds or consideration from the mortgages, and that the Defendants knew this
and nonetheless worked together to carry out the “scheme” and register the
mortgages against the Plaintiff’s title. They were accordingly unjustly
enriched to the corresponding detriment of the Plaintiff. The money purportedly
advanced for the mortgages was either never truly advanced and/or any purported
advance was repaid to the mortgagees through the recycling of funds. There is
no juristic reason for this enrichment and deprivation.
[47]          
The Moving Defendants state that the allegation
of unjust enrichment is deficient because it does not specify how the Moving
Defendants have been enriched.
[48]          
I do not agree. The Claim asserts that the Moving
Defendants were enriched by purporting to loan money to the Plaintiff without
actually doing so, and/or asserting that they were not paid back for the loans
when they were in fact paid back for them, and then seeking to enforce payment
of the loans by enforcing the mortgages against the Plaintiff. This is clear
from the Claim read as a whole, and particularly from the portions of the Claim
detailing the alleged “scheme” and the alleged wrongdoing with respect to the
loans. Indeed, the Plaintiff pleads that efforts are now underway to sell her
property under power of sale. Enrichment to the Moving Defendants is clearly
pleaded.
[49]          
The Geraci Defendants further allege that the
Plaintiff fails to plead why the mortgage agreement does not constitute a
juristic reason for the enrichment.
[50]          
I cannot agree. Read as a whole, the Claim
clearly alleges that the Moving Defendants did not comply with the terms of the
mortgage agreement and underlying loan arrangement, by not advancing the loans
they were supposed to, and/or by claiming those loans were not repaid to them
when in fact they were “recycled” among the Defendants and paid back. If the
mortgage agreement’s terms were not honoured, they cannot form a juristic
reason for the enrichment.
[51]          
The Claim pleads that Sabine had a fiduciary
duty to the Plaintiff and knew the Plaintiff relied on the misrepresentations she
and Ms. Moretto made to her. Additionally, Sabine and/or Diamond Financial
acted as agents for the Defendants in respect of the mortgages, including when
the misrepresentations were made to the Plaintiff, and as a consequence the
Defendants had a fiduciary relationship with the Plaintiff.
[52]          
The allegation that Sabine and/or Diamond
Financial acted as agents for the Defendants in respect of the mortgages is
unexplained and unsupported. It is a bald assertion and inadequately pleaded.
Even if this allegation were properly advanced, it would not help the
Plaintiff. Whether there was a fiduciary relationship or duty care between the
Plaintiff and the Moving Defendants turns on the relationship between them, not
on the relationship between Sabine (or Diamond Financial) and them.
[53]          
In any event, this claim is not tenable as a
matter of law. The Moving Defendants are the Plaintiff’s creditors. The relationship
between a creditor and debtor is governed by contract and there is no duty of
care in connection with the making of the loan (XPG v. Royal Bank, 2017
ONSC 2598, at para. 356, citing Canada Trustco Mortgage Co. v. Pierce, 2005
CanLII 15706 (ON CA), at para. 27 and Baldwin v. Daubney, 2006 CanLII
32901 (ON CA), at paras. 13-14). The relationship between a financial
institution lender and its customer borrower has similarly been found to be a
“purely commercial relationship” that does not give rise to a fiduciary duty
absent some special relationship or exceptional circumstance (Canada
Trustco, at para. 27). No such special relationship or exceptional
circumstances is argued before me. As such, the relationship between the
Plaintiff and the Moving Defendants does not to give rise to a duty of care or
fiduciary duty, as a matter of law.
[54]          
It is therefore plain and obvious that the
Plaintiff’s claims in negligence and breach of fiduciary duty against the Moving
Defendants cannot be successfully made and should be struck.
[55]          
The Moving Defendant Giuseppe Geraci seeks to
have the claim against him struck on the basis that it discloses no basis for
personal liability against him as the director or officer of the Moving
Defendant 219. The Claim makes various allegations against Mr. Geraci, together
with the other Defendants. Although certain paragraphs of the Claim address
only the “Mortgagee Defendants,” which include 219 but not Mr. Geraci
individually, in general the allegations discussed above are made against all
the Defendants collectively, including Mr. Geraci.
[56]          
In Libfeld v. Patica Corporation, 2018
ONSC 3373, this court, observing that the courts “have set a high bar”
for piercing the corporate veil to allow actions against individual directors,
considered the requirements for pleading claims against corporate
representatives. It held that for a corporate officer or employee to be found
personally liable for a tort asserted against the company, “there must be a
basis for alleging that” they “dominated and directed the company to engage in
wrongful conduct, which conduct was a kin to fraud, deceit, dishonesty or want
of authority” (at para. 16).
[57]          
As such, a pleading against a corporate officer
or employee must support a finding of such domination and direction by the
corporate representative (Libfeld, at para. 16). It can plead that the
corporation was used as a sham from the outset, or that the representative
acted outside the scope of their duties or contrary to the best interests of
the corporation in a manner that harmed the plaintiff, or acted in furtherance
of their duties but their acts themselves are tortious (at para. 17). It must
plead “specific, identified acts or omissions” by the representative and the
facts giving rise to personal liability. A separate claim must be stated
against the individual in their personal capacity (at para. 18).
[58]          
The Claim alleges that Mr. Geraci “is an
officer, director, and controlling mind of” 219 and that at all material times
he “authorized and directed” 219 “to carry out the wrongful actions of” 219
described in the Claim. In my view, this is adequate to support a finding of
domination and direction of 219 by Mr. Geraci.
[59]          
The Claim further alleges that Mr. Geraci “authorized
and directed” 219 to engage in the “scheme” described in the Claim. That
alleged “scheme” required 219 to either purport to loan money to the Plaintiff
but not actually loan it to her, or claim that it was not paid back for the
loan when it in fact was, and to then seek to enforce payment of the loan. In
my view those actions are “wrongful conduct … a kin to fraud, deceit,
dishonesty or want of authority.”
[60]          
The suggestion appears to be that the dishonest
nature of these alleged actions places them outside the scope of Mr. Geraci’s corporate
duties. It is difficult to see how one could construe such dishonest actions as
being consistent with his duties to 219. To the extent that these dishonest
acts were purportedly carried out in furtherance of his duties to the
corporation, they are tortious acts, carried out in furtherance of a pleaded
conspiracy. Thus, Mr. Geraci’s alleged actions were either outside the scope of
his corporate duties or tortious acts, either of which would support the claim
of personal liability against him.
[61]          
However, this is not pleaded expressly. It
should be. Mr. Geraci should be able to readily identify the basis on which his
acts are alleged to have fallen outside the scope of his duties. As currently
drafted, the Amended Statement of Defence does not enable him to do so.
[62]          
Additionally, the Claim does not expressly
articulate a separate claim against Mr. Geraci in his personal capacity outside
of its introductory language. It should. It makes a generally worded allegation
that he directed 219’s acts and is therefore personally liable for them. It
then describes those acts and the alleged “scheme”. However, having described the
alleged “scheme” and the various causes of action against the Defendants
collectively to which it gives rise, the Claim does not return to the issue of
Mr. Geraci and further explain the claim against him personally, against the
backdrop of the now-articulated allegations against 219 and the other
Defendants. As a consequence, the claim requires Mr. Geraci to thread together
various strands of the Claim to try to appreciate the claim against him. The
claim against Mr. Geraci personally is therefore struck.
[63]          
Having identified these deficiencies in the Claim,
I must now consider whether, once those pleadings are struck, leave to amend
them should be granted.
[64]          
The jurisprudence is clear that pleadings
“should not lightly be struck without leave to amend” and that such leave
“should only be denied in the clearest of cases when it is plain and obvious
that no tenable cause of action exists on the alleged facts and there is no
reason to expect that” amending the pleading can cure its deficiencies (Burns
v. RBC Life Insurance Co., 2019 ONSC 6977, at para. 21). Whether the defendant
would be prejudiced is a factor to be considered when deciding whether to grant
leave to amend a pleading (South Holly Holdings Limited v. The
Toronto-Dominion Bank, 2007 ONCA 456, at para. 6).
[65]          
On the alleged facts, it is plain and obvious
that no tenable causes of action of negligent or fraudulent misrepresentation or
fraud exist against the Moving Defendants. The Moving Defendants are not
pleaded to have made any negligent or fraudulent misrepresentations to the
Plaintiff. The only misrepresentations referred to in the Claim were allegedly
made by other Defendants, not the Moving Defendants. A claim of negligent misrepresentation
is rooted in an alleged misrepresentation. So is a claim of civil fraud or
fraudulent misrepresentation. There is no such misrepresentation here. As such,
it is plain and obvious that no cause of action for negligent or fraudulent
misrepresentation exists. There is no amendment that could be made to the Claim
that would save it. These claims are therefore appropriately struck without
leave to amend.
[66]          
It is similarly plain and obvious that there is
no tenable cause of action of breach of fiduciary duty or negligence. The
Moving Defendants owed no duty of care or fiduciary duty to the Plaintiff, as a
matter of law. They cannot be found to have breached duties they did not have.
This, too, is not a deficiency that can be cured through amendment.
[67]          
By contrast, it is not plain and obvious that,
on the alleged facts, there is no tenable cause of action for personal
liability on the part of Mr. Geraci. The Claim does articulate the basis for
such a claim against him, although it does so too obliquely. I am therefore of
the view that amending the pleading of the claim against Mr. Geraci personally could
cure its deficiencies. If the Claim were amended so as to expressly and clearly
identify the basis on which Mr. Geraci’s acts are alleged to have fallen
outside the scope of his duties as a director, and to set forth a separate
claim against him personally after pleading the alleged “scheme” and the role
of the various Defendants in it, this would, in my view, cure the deficiencies
discussed above.
[68]          
I am also of the view that no prejudice would
result to the Moving Defendants if amendments to the Claim were permitted. The
Moving Defendants claim no such prejudice and there is no evidence before me of
such prejudice.
[69]          
The Moving Defendants submit that the Plaintiff
has already had two “kicks at the can” to deliver a proper pleading, and should
not be afforded another one. While the Plaintiff has already had two
opportunities to regularize the pleading, in my view, in the totality of the
circumstances, it is appropriate to allow her another such opportunity. The
deficiency in the pleading of personal liability against Mr. Geraci is not
fatal or even serious. It is simply that, while the Claim contains the required
elements, they are scattered and implied throughout the document. The Plaintiff
needs to make clearer and more explicit what is already there. In these
circumstances, it is not plain and obvious that there is no tenable cause of
action. There is a strong presumption in favour of allowing amendments except
where the “plain and obvious” threshold is met. I therefore find that amendment
is appropriate.
[70]          
The rule 25.11 motion is substantively identical
to the rule 21.01(1)(b) motion to strike. It is predicated on the position that
the Claim is devoid of material facts and is therefore frivolous, vexatious,
and scandalous.
[71]          
For the reasons discussed above, I do not agree
that the Claim is devoid of material facts. To the contrary, it adequately
pleads several causes of action and provides detail on the alleged “scheme”
that lies at the root of the various causes of action.
[72]          
Natalie Cammalleri and Paul Cammalleri further assert
that the Claim will prejudice the fair trial of the action within the meaning
of rule 25.11(a) because the Plaintiff “is employing a ‘shot gun’ approach to
naming defendants in a lawsuit,” which will complicate the litigation and “make
it impossible” for them to know the case to meet. This argument was not
advanced in oral argument. In any event, it lacks merit. The Moving Defendants
were all lenders of the mortgages at issue, or, in the case of Mr. Geraci, the
directing mind of the corporate mortgage lender. They are all alleged to have
participated in and benefited from the alleged conspiracy. I fail to see how naming
them amounts to a “shot gun” approach.  Nor can I accept the claim that these
defendants do not know the case to meet given that the pleading is adequate in
most respects.
[73]          
On the rule 21.01(1)(b) motion, I make the
following order:
[74]          
I dismiss the rule 25.11 motion.
[75]          
The parties are to attempt to work out the issue
of costs together, bearing in mind my comments in paragraph 16 of this
Endorsement. If the parties are not able to agree on costs by March 24, 2025,
they may advise me through my judicial assistant, and I will provide a
timetable for written costs submissions.