[1]              
The
Applicant, Ms. Reshetnikova (“Elena”), and the Respondent, Mr. Rawlins
(“Wayne”), were married July 2, 2018, and separated March 30, 2020. The parties
resided at 261 Prescott Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M6N3G9 (“Prescott property”),
the matrimonial home. This property is solely registered in Wayne’s name. Elena
and Wayne each brought a motion for the sale and partition of the property and terms
regarding its sale.
[2]              
The
Respondent, Mrs. Rawlins-Singh (“Joan”) is Wayne’s mother. She filed a
cross-motion claiming a 100% beneficial interest in the Prescott property.
[3]              
I
have opted to use the first names of the parties, and wish to be respectful,
however several members of the Rawlins family testified, and this will ensure
completeness and no confusion.
[4]              
The
motions were scheduled for August 17, 2023. The evidence in support of Joan’s
claim was largely viva voce and the court would need to make
determinations regarding credibility. Pursuant to Rule 14(7) of the Family
Law Rules, Brownstone, J. ordered the motions relating to the Prescott
property proceed as a trial of an issue with viva voce evidence and
cross-examination.
[5]              
The
trial was scheduled to proceed February 21 and 22, 2024. Joan sought and was
granted an adjournment for several reasons, and the trial was rescheduled to
proceed June 3 – 4, 2024, and was peremptory on all parties. Elena sought costs
against Joan for the adjournment, Wayne did not. Written submissions were received,
and the issue of costs was reserved to trial.
[6]              
The Court
heard evidence June 3, 4, 7, 10, 11, and July 22, 2024, followed by submissions
on that date and July 29, 2024.
[7]              
I
have not considered or relied on any materials and/or documents filed/uploaded
to Case Center that were not admitted into evidence as exhibits at the hearing.
[8]              
Elena
resides in the matrimonial home at 261 Prescott Avenue, Toronto, with her two
children. Wayne is the father of the youngest child, S.R. On November 19, 2020,
Akbarali, J. granted Elena exclusive possession of the matrimonial home on a
without prejudice temporary, temporary basis, effective immediately. On the
return of the ex-parte motion, Kraft, J. granted Elena temporary exclusive
possession of the Prescott property.
[9]              
The
Prescott property was first purchased by the Rawlins-Singh family March 31, 1993.
It was obtained through a power of sale from Paul Segal for $185,000. Joan’s
friend, David Duncan, and Wayne were registered on title. A charge in the
amount of $180,143.75 was registered in favour of the Royal Bank of Canada.
[10]          
Title
of the Prescott property was transferred to Joan and her husband, Rudolph
Singh, on October 9, 1998. The purchase price of the home was noted as $249,000,
and a charge in favour of SunLife Trust Co. was registered in the amount of $245,240.62.
Joan and Rudolph took possession of the property as tenants in common, with 99%
interest to Joan and 1% interest to Rudolph.
[11]          
On
June 13, 2005, title of the Prescott property was transferred back to Wayne but
with Kenisha Campbell, a former girlfriend of Michael Singh, another of Joan’s
sons. Wayne and Kenisha took title of the home as tenants in common. Wayne’s
interest was registered as 99% and Kenisha’s interest was 1%. The “sale price”
of the home was noted as $295,000. A charge in the amount of $289,358.12 was
registered on title in favour of the Scotia Mortgage Corp.
[12]          
On
February 25, 2020, Wayne bought Kenisha’s interest in the Prescott property,
making him the sole registered owner on title.
[13]          
Joan
has resided in the Prescott property from 1993 until Elena obtained exclusive
possession in November 2020. Wayne claimed to have lived there from 1993 to
1998, and again from 2014 until March 30, 2020. He has solely maintained the
mortgage, property taxes, and insurance from 2014 to the present.
[14]          
  Wayne
holds legal title to the Prescott property, also the matrimonial home. Joan claims
he holds legal title only for her sole benefit. Wayne has acknowledged his
mother has some beneficial interest but not 100%.
[15]          
Joan
claims she has a 100% beneficial interest in the Prescott property, and Wayne
held title solely for her benefit, by way of a resulting and/or constructive
trust. Joan never intended for Wayne to have an ownership interest in the
property and Wayne made little or not contribution to the property. Wayne’s
payment of the mortgage, taxes, and insurance was in lieu of rent.
[16]          
Wayne
does not dispute his mother has an interest in the Prescott property, but it
does not exceed 50%. Wayne has not stated what percentage of an interest Joan
has in the Prescott property but maintains his interest is not less than 50%.
[17]          
Elena
claims Joan has no interest in the Prescott property, and it is owned solely by
Wayne. She argued Joan and Wayne and other family members are colluding to
prevent and interfere with her ability to obtain corollary relief, including obtaining
an equalization of property.
[18]          
The
ownership of the Prescott property must be determined first, namely, does Joan
Rawlins-Singh have an interest in the Prescott property? If so, what is her
interest? If the court finds Joan has a 100% interest in the Prescott property,
all other issues are moot.
[19]          
If
the court finds Joan does not have a 100% interest in the Prescott property,
should the Court order its partition and sale?
[20]          
If
the court orders the sale of the Prescott property, what terms should be
imposed?
[21]          
Costs
of the February trial adjournment.
[22]          
I
have endeavoured to summarize the evidence of all witnesses including their viva
voce and affidavit evidence. It is important to fully understand the foundation
which leads to the analysis and conclusions in this matter.
[23]          
It
is Joan’s position she is the sole beneficial owner of the Prescott property
and that her son, Wayne held her interest in trust. Wayne was only added on
title for mortgage purposes.
[24]          
Joan
claimed the Prescott property has been her primary residence since it was first
purchased in 1993.
[25]          
Since
then, Joan’s children and grandchildren have lived in the home at different
times. Due to financial circumstances, Joan has refinanced the property on
multiple occasions to keep up with expenses.
[26]          
The
home was purchased with her late husband, Rudolph Seepersaud for approximately
$180,000. She used her personal savings and an $8000 loan from her daughter,
Lorraine, for the deposit. Although she put down the deposit for the home,
title was registered in her son, Wayne, and a family friend, David Duncan,
names. A copy of the Transfer/Deed of Land was introduced in support.
[27]          
Joan
worked as a cook at the Toronto Rehab until 2010, when she retired after 38
years of service. To assist with her daily living expenses, she provided catering
services within the community. Her primary source of income is WSIB, government
pension, and old age security. Without the catering, this totals approximately
$2,300 per month. In addition, Joan relies upon the financial support and loans
from family and friends to make ends meet.
[28]          
Joan
relied on her 2022 Notice of Assessment from Revenue Canada to establish her
annual income of $26,267 that year.
[29]          
Joan
testified she was forced out of her home with nothing but the clothes on her
back in the late fall of 2020, after Elena obtained an order for exclusive
possession of the home. All her personal belongings and property remained in
the home, including the ashes of her late husband.
[30]          
Joan
has asked on several occasions to be granted access to the home which was
denied.
[31]          
Joan’s
position is much of her documentation regarding expenses she has paid towards
the home were stored in her bedroom. This included receipts for appliances and
materials purchased for the home, Hydro, Enbridge, and other monthly bills plus
all the real estate documents including transfers and refinancing of the home.
[32]          
In
her October 31, 2023, affidavit, Joan explained title of the Prescott property
was registered in Wayne and David’s name because she did not qualify for a mortgage.
She was unable to recall the specific reason but believed it was because she
was on title for the Dufferin Street property. Due to her income, and that
mortgage, she would have been overextended.
[33]          
Joan
produced a Transfer/Deed of Land and Charge/Mortgage of Land to demonstrate she
is the sole legal owner of 1916 Dufferin Street. At the time she purchased that
property, she was a tenant. She lived there with Wayne, Michael, Angela, and
Angela’s two children.
[34]          
The
owner had defaulted on the mortgage and the property was sold under a Power of
Sale. With encouragement, Joan purchased the home with the understanding Angela
wanted to retain the property for herself and her children. Angela could not
qualify for a mortgage due to her credit history and income. Joan went on title
as a joint tenant with her friend David Duncan. Since then, Angela has been
responsible for the mortgage, utilities, insurance, and property taxes. The
insurance payments are withdrawn from Joan’s account and Angela reimburses her.
[35]          
Upon
the purchase of Prescott, Joan moved into the home with Michael. Wayne remained
in Angela’s home, occupying the basement. Joan believed Wayne had just
completed his education and was in the early stages of his career.
[36]          
David
Duncan was a close friend of Joan’s who lived down the street. He volunteered
to assist with the financing of the Prescott and Dufferin properties.
[37]          
The
initial mortgage for the Prescott property was subject to renewal in March
1998. The property was transferred to Joan and her late husband Rudolph October
9, 1998. No consideration was provided to Wayne or David for the transfer
because they had not financially contributed to the home and were not the true
owners. Joan swore she paid all the monthly carrying expenses and utilities for
Prescott, including the mortgage of $1,485.64 per month.
[38]          
Title
to the property was registered for Joan and her husband as tenants in common
with Joan owning 99% interest. The value of the property was $249,000. A
mortgage was obtained for $245,420.62.
[39]          
Between
October 1993 and 2004, Joan and Rudolph were responsible for the monthly
mortgage payments, property tax, and insurance. They conducted all repairs and
maintenance of the property which led to financial difficulties. A second loan
was taken out against the property on several occasions to keep up with
expenses.
[40]          
Joan
indicated, although her and Rudolph were legally married, they did not live
together. Rudolph had a separate residence but assisted with the upkeep of the
home and assisted Joan financially when needed. Once his health began to
deteriorate, he started to spend time at Prescott.
[41]          
The
mortgage at this time was $1,642.40 plus $100 per month for a second mortgage
held by Computer Share Trust Company. The second mortgage was due May 6, 2005.
Joan was not able to obtain financial approvals. She stated the only way for
her to qualify for a mortgage was to transfer title to Wayne and Michael’s
former girlfriend, Kenisha.
[42]          
Joan
claimed, prior to title being transferred, it was agreed Wayne and Kenisha
would have no interest in Prescott; Joan would retain full beneficial interest
and continue to pay all carrying costs and expenses of the home; and neither
Wayne nor Kenisha would be entitled to live in the home as owners.
[43]          
Title
to the property transferred on or about June 13, 2005, with Wayne and Kenisha
holding title as tenants in common. Wayne held 99% and Kenisha held 1%
interest. A mortgage was registered against the property in their names in the
amount of $289,358.12. The term of the loan was five years and was renewable
July 1, 2010. The monthly payment was $1,641.98.
[44]          
The
mortgage was renewed in 2010, and 2015, and the monthly payments were $2,005.43
and $2,000.59 per month respectively. Joan stated she was responsible for and
paid cash to Wayne each month to cover the mortgage before its due date. Lorraine
assisted by receiving cash from Joan or Michael and giving it to Wayne who was
living in Lorraine’s home at 342 Harvie Street.
[45]          
Between
the initial purchase date of the property and 2013, Wayne had not contributed financially
or otherwise to Prescott. During that time, Wayne rented elsewhere including
from Angela and Lorraine, his sisters.
[46]          
Wayne
had been added on title to other properties owned by family members to assist
with obtaining financing. Joan referred to the Dufferin property that Angela
owns, which Joan is solely on title for currently. Over the years, Wayne and
Joan have been on title together and separately and held interest in trust of
the property for Angela.
[47]          
Similarly,
Lorraine was the original or initial family member to own the property on
Harvie. At different times, Wayne and/or Michael have been on title with Lorraine
for mortgage purposes. When Lorraine passed in 2013, it was registered to Lorraine
and Wayne as joint tenants. Lorraine left her interest in Harvie to Michael.
Michael subsequently purchased Wayne’s interest in the Harvie property for
$165,579.
[48]          
According
to Joan, she was unaware that she could enter into a written trust agreement to
set out the terms of the arrangement and confirm her ownership interest. At the
same time, she did not believe a written agreement was needed as she was
dealing with family and made similar arrangements with other family members.
[49]          
Wayne
moved into Prescott in 2013, after a fire in the Harvie address. Joan was
having financial troubles and Wayne agreed to pay the mortgage which included
the property tax in lieu of rent. Joan was responsible for all other household
expenses, including groceries, and the upkeep of the house.
[50]          
In
2014, Joan was notified the mortgage was in arrears of $10,535.14 and Wayne had
failed to make payments. Joan received funds from Michael to pay off the
arrears. Michael also assisted in replacing the roof, renovated the basement in
2005 and 2013, renovated three bathrooms; fixed the driveway; built a retaining
wall in the front; paved the backyard; and re-laid sod in the front. Joan
believes these improvements cost approximately $75,000. Michael did not seek
reimbursement for these repairs and upgrades. Joan did not ask for receipts as
she had agreed to gift him the property in her will.
[51]          
As
further evidence that Wayne did not have an interest in the home, he sought
Joan’s permission for Elena to move into the home. Wayne asked Clifton to speak
with Joan to help persuade her to agree.
[52]          
In
February 2020, Wayne bought Kenisha’s 1% interest in the home. Joan was unaware
of the arrangement between them. The funds Kenisha received were to cover her
legal bills to be removed from title on the Prescott property.
[53]          
Joan
discussed an arrangement she had come to with Wayne and Michael in 2018, where
each would hold a 1/3 interest in the property. After further thought, Joan
thought this was unfair to Michael who had put more into the home and advised
Wayne it would be 25% interest to Wayne and Michael and Joan would hold the 75%
together. The parties were unable to resolve the issue and in 2020, Joan
offered to buy Wayne’s interest in Prescott for $350,000. Joan relied on an
agreement which she had signed but Wayne had not.
[54]          
In
anticipation of Wayne accepting her offer, Joan had secured financing approval
with her grandson, Tristan Rawlins. The transaction did not move forward as
Elena refused to sign the legal documents. The mortgage owing at that time was
$147,738.88.
[55]          
Since
that date, Wayne secured a line of credit against Prescott without Joan’s
knowledge of $397,000. Joan argued Wayne is solely responsible for this loan
and it should not be deducted from her share of the property.
[56]          
In
cross examination, Joan could not remember how much she received from Lorraine
as a loan, but believed it was between $5,000 to $8,000. She agreed Lorraine
may have given her the whole down payment she needed to purchase the home.
[57]          
When
asked if anyone else helped her with the down payment, she replied Wayne
assisted by providing funds so she could buy furniture and different things for
the house. She was adamant that any funds provided by Wayne were not used
towards the down payment of the home. Upon further questioning, Joan admitted
she was could not remember how the down payment was paid.
[58]          
Joan
told the court she paid for the renovations, and explained she paid after Michael
gave her the money. The money was a gift because they are family and were
helping each out, it was a family affair.
[59]          
Joan
was confident the only repairs to the home were in the basement. She was
unaware of any heater or gas repairs being made to or within the home.
[60]          
In
1998, Joan and her husband, Rudolph went on title as tenants-in-common. Joan
held a 99% interest and Rudolph held 1%. Joan was unable to remember why Wayne
was removed from title nor could she explain why she did not go on title in
1993. The only explanation she had was that her son and best friend, David
Duncan were willing to go on title for her because she could not cover the
costs. She did not discuss Rudolph going on title with her in 1993.
[61]          
Joan
agreed Wayne paid for a hot water tank and the installation of air conditioning
in the home. Although he moved in with her in 2013, he did not begin paying
rent until 2014. In exchange for living at the Prescott property, Wayne agreed
to pay the mortgage and the property taxes as rent. Joan was responsible for
all other bills until the following year when Wayne also took over the property
insurance.
[62]          
 Counsel
for Wayne asked Joan further questions regarding the proposed property transfer
of 2018 that did not ultimately occur. Joan explained she was trying to get her
life in order regarding who gets what, as she did not have a will. Joan, Wayne,
and Michael were each to go on title for a 1/3 interest. She testified the lawyer
told her it was better if Wayne only had 25% and her and Michael had a 75%
interest.
[63]          
After
the above arrangement fell through, Joan claimed she argued with Wayne, and he
offered to buy her out. In her anger, she told him she would buy him out and
sought assistance from Tristan to obtain financing. This was said in anger as
she just wanted out of the situation and despite what she said, both her and
Wayne know the home is hers and only hers. Wayne is trying to take advantage of
her. Joan was very upset by his words as she had worked for 38 years, and he
was treating her like an imbecile or a little baby. She had recently buried a
husband, a daughter, and retired.
[64]          
She
agreed she offered to buy him out for $350,000. Wayne would receive $290,000
upon transfer and the additional $60,000 within 60 days. This offer was made in
2020. It never happened, because Elena was living in the home at that time, and
she refused to sign any documents because Wayne refused to put the monies in a
joint bank account with her.
[65]          
Joan
confirmed she has not made any payments towards the property since Elena and
Wayne separated in March 2020. This includes the mortgage, property taxes,
utilities, insurance, repairs, and maintenance.
[66]          
Joan
came to Canada in the 1970s. She entered Canada using the name Orinthea Klass
but is also known as Joan Rawlins.
[67]          
Joan
agreed she had previously filed for bankruptcy but could not remember the year
and/or the month. A copy of a document entitled “In the matter of the
bankruptcy of Joan Urint Singh (Rawlins Singh)” stamped December 4, 1995, was
to put to her to assist in refreshing Joan’s memory, she replied, “it did not”.
Joan testified she recalled declaring bankruptcy but disputed the dates
suggested without having the original documents.
[68]          
When
asked questions by the court regarding this document and the named trustee of Cyril
Sapiro & Co Ltd, Joan was unable to remember the name of the trustee but
recalled going to one. She was asked if the bankruptcy was due to the breakdown
of her marriage and over extension of consumer credit, and she agreed her
marriage had broken down. Joan was unable to recall the approximate date of
when she declared bankruptcy, nor could she remember if she owned any
properties at the time of declaring bankruptcy. Joan responded, “you’re asking
me to go back years. At my age, my memory is not 100”.
[69]          
Joan
was referred to the Statement of Affairs sworn to on February 17, 1993, and
asked if it was her signature. She advised the court “it looks like my
signature”. She agreed this assisted her in refreshing her memory that this was
probably the timeframe when she filed for bankruptcy.
[70]          
Joan
disagreed that Wayne had provided the initial down payment for the home in 1993.
Any monies she received from Wayne were a loan and were repaid long ago.
Further, monies received from Wayne were not used for the purchase of the home
but to furnish it. She disagreed that Wayne had loaned her less than $5,000 and
recalled “it’s more like the $10,000”. She was adamant only monies loaned to
her from her daughter Lorraine were used towards the purchase of the Prescott.
[71]          
Joan
confirmed she had lived at 1916 Dufferin Street, Toronto, in 1993. It was
suggested she still lived there in 1994 as her son, Michael Singh’s school
record, listed 1916 Dufferin Street as his home address. Joan explained they
had not completed an address change. She did not remember having the phone
number listed on his school records.
[72]          
Joan
was asked about a receipt dated in 1996 in the name of Orinthea Klass for $450.
Joan identified the receipt and testified it was for Wayne paying her rent not
for her paying him rent. She was asked if she recognized a document from Remco
Home Inspection Services and whether she purported or was renting the basement
of Prescott for $425 per month. Joan disagreed with both suggestions.
[73]          
Joan
was asked to identify an income tax return for 1997 filed in her name with her
date of birth of May 14, 1942. She agreed the signature looked like hers and
the home phone number was her number. Joan was referred to the Declaration for
property tax credit that listed i) Joan’s address as 261 Prescott; ii) number
of months resident in 1997 as 12 months; iii) rent paid in 1997 as $14,400; and
iv) the name of her landlord was David Duncan. Joan disagreed that she paid any
rent and testified she did not do her taxes at the time, it was her son,
Clifton Rawlins, who did her taxes for her.
[74]          
Joan
maintained that Wayne did not contribute anything to the house expenses at 261
Prescott between 1993 to 1998. Joan was shown a receipt for a street allowance
permit dated January 5, 1994, with Wayne’s name on it for $52. Joan agreed it
was likely Wayne paid that because he was the registered owner, and it may have
been necessary to show proof at the government office, however, she would have
reimbursed him.
[75]          
Joan
and Rudolph were living separately when they bought 261 Prescott from Wayne and
David Duncan. Joan stated Rudolph only moved into the home after he had a
stroke and after the house had been transferred to Wayne and Kenisha.
[76]          
Joan
denied Kenisha ever lived at 261 Prescott Avenue. She was shown an insurance
application for the home dated September 23, 1998, that listed the adult occupants
of the home as Joan Singh, Rudolph Seepersaud, and Kenisha Campbell. Rudolph
was listed as Joan’s spouse, and Kenisha was identified as a relative. Joan was
unable to explain who filled out the document or why the Rudolph and Kenisha
were listed as occupants.
[77]          
Joan
was referred to a Property Assessment Notice for 1916 Dufferin Street with an
effective date of January 1, 2001. The document listed Orinthea Klass and David
Duncan as the owners of the property with the Dufferin Street address. The
occupants were listed as Joan Rawlins, Rudolph Seepersaud, and Clifton Rawlins.
Joan denied living at Dufferin Street in 2001.  She explained the family was
going to both properties, and both address, 1916 Dufferin and 261 Prescott were
being used. Joan disagreed that she had two homes and moved back to the Dufferin
Street address for a time. Joan denied renting a house during this time.
[78]          
It
was suggested that Joan had collected some of her documents from the Prescott house,
but Joan was adamant that no documents had been obtained or removed.
[79]          
Joan
was shown a handwritten document that suggested the water bill had not been
paid between 1998 to 2005 when Joan owned the home. Joan was unable to provide
any information as she was unaware whether it had been paid.
[80]          
A
receipt from Allstate Insurance dated May 27, 2011, for payment of $275 made by
Kenisha Campbell was shown to Joan. She maintained she was the one who paid the
bill, but the receipt was in Kenisha’s name because she was the owner of the
property at 261 Prescott. Joan reiterated she paid for everything regarding 261
Prescott, but the title was in Kenisha and Wayne’s names.
[81]          
Joan
had testified due to ill health and financial issues; the home was transferred
to Kenisha and Wayne in 2005. Joan was asked how it was possible, given her
health, that she was paying the mortgages for both 261 Prescott and 1916
Dufferin Street. Joan stated Angela Rawlins, her daughter, was paying for
Dufferin Street. Although Joan’s name was on title, it was never her house.
[82]          
Joan
was asked if the house was never Joan’s house, why Wayne transferred it to her
for $2.00 and not to Angela Rawlins. Joan explained because Angela had never
been on title, it could not be transferred to her.
[83]          
Joan
agreed she had an accident at her workplace in 2004 and slipped in the freezer.
She required knee replacement surgery which occurred May 3, 2006. She received
WSIB and used her sick days during that time. She retired when she was 70 years
old.
[84]          
A
series of receipts reflecting monthly rent payments of $2,000 for 261 Prescott
received from Joan Singh and payable to Kenisha Campbell were shown to Joan.
She denied paying rent to Kenisha Campbell.
[85]          
Joan
identified pages of her 2008, 2015, 2016, and 2017, income tax returns. She
denied paying $24,000 rent for 12 months in each of the respective years for
261 or 260 Prescott Avenue. Joan maintained her son would complete her income
tax returns and submit them electronically. She stated she knows nothing about
computers, he would just tell her and send it. She confirmed she would receive
a refund.
[86]          
Joan
was asked why Kenisha Campbell was listed as her landlord on her income tax
return for 2012. Joan was unable to provide an explanation. Joan did not
recognize the handwriting.
[87]          
Joan
confirmed her income for 2015 was $19,809. When asked questions regarding the
monthly mortgage payments for that year, she testified 2015 was the year Wayne
began paying the mortgage.
[88]          
 Joan
testified between 2008 up to and including 2023, she did not complete her
income tax returns herself. Clifton Rawlins did her taxes every year except 2013,
when Lorraine died, and her taxes were done by a tax preparer.
[89]          
Joan
was asked why her name did not appear as an occupant on the property assessment
notice for 261 Prescott dated January 1, 2006, and had no explanation.
[90]          
Joan
confirmed documents drafted for her to buy Wayne’s share of the home for
$350,000 in March of 2020. She denied she was involved in or had anything to do
with Elena obtaining independent legal advice.
[91]          
Joan
confirmed in re-examination that she and Wayne had an argument and they each
offered to buy the other’s interest in the property.
[92]          
Clifton
Rawlins is one of Joan’s sons. He was born in 1963 and lives in Mississauga
with his wife. He has been employed as a transport truck driver since 1998.
[93]          
He
believed that Joan has always been the sole owner of 261 Prescott Avenue. He remembered
living with her at this address in or around 1995. He contributed approximately
$300 per month as rent, although he was not asked or required to do so. During
his time staying with Joan, he was able to save money as a deposit on his
current home. Joan never asked any of her children to pay expenses because she
was working and able to cover the bills on her own.
[94]          
Clifton
moved back into the Prescott address with two of his sons in 2002/2003. Joan
looked after his sons Tristan and Tyler, before and after school while Clifton
was at work. Tristan was approximately 14 or 15 at that time.
[95]          
Prior
to his mother being forced to move out of the Prescott property, Clifton would
regularly attend there on weekends to visit and help Joan out with errands. In
addition to relying on Clifton, Michael, and Tristan, Joan relied heavily on
Angela and Lorraine.
[96]          
Michael
often lived at the Prescott property and was a large support to Joan. He
assisted her with managing the household expenses and maintained the property.
Clifton assisted Tristan and Michael to complete projects around the house
including building a retaining wall, a deck, and renovations to the basement.
To his knowledge, Michael paid for all the supplies.
[97]          
Clifton
recalled that Wayne never assisted in any of the home renovations or repair
projects in any capacity. He stated it was rare for Wayne to come around the
house to help and if he did, it was to occasionally cut the grass. Wayne only
moved into the Prescott property when Lorraine’s home burned, and he needed a
place to live. It was only then that he lived at the Prescott address on a
full-time basis.
[98]          
Clifton
was aware the Prescott property had been refinanced several times to assist his
mother keep up with her expenses and debts. This included adding Kenisha
Campbell, Michael’s former girlfriend, to the title at one point to secure financing.
Clifton believed Kenisha did not live in the home, made no payments toward the
property, and did not purchase an interest in the home. She attended Sunday
dinners and other special occasions and that was the extent of her involvement.
[99]          
Clifton
explained the family had a practice of assisting one another in qualifying for
mortgages. As an example, he pointed to his sister Lorraine going on title for
his current home so he could qualify for a mortgage. Lorraine did not
contribute financially to the home in any way but was there in name only.
[100]       Wayne was only put on
title of the Prescott property for the sole purpose of Joan securing a mortgage
after his late stepfather, Rudolph Seepersaud became ill and was unable to
work. It was Clifton’s understanding that Wayne did not have an interest in the
property despite being on title. Wayne was often added to title of properties
to assist with financing because he was the higher income earner in the family.
Clifton believed Wayne has been on title to Angela’s home at 1916 Dufferin
Street, and Lorraine’s home 542 Harvie Street, prior to Lorraine’s death.
[101]       Clifton remembered
conversations he had with Wayne and Joan that Wayne was responsible for paying
the mortgage and Joan was responsible for all other household expenses,
including utilities, phone line, cable, internet, and food.
[102]       Clifton also believed Wayne
did not have an interest in the Prescott property because Wayne asked for
Clifton’s help to convince Joan to allow Elena to move into the home. If he had
an ownership, he would not have needed to obtain Joan’s consent.
[103]       The Prescott property is
his mother’s home and remains her home to this day. Clifton stated Joan has
spent her entire life in that home and paying off the mortgage.
[104]       Clifton stated in his
affidavit of October 31, 2023, that he has helped Joan with her taxes for the
last seven to eight years. In oral testimony, Clifton testified he has prepared
his mother’s income tax returns for approximately twenty years.
[105]       In cross-examination,
Clifton agreed there was an occasion where he drove his mother to a lawyer because
there was paperwork to assign the house equally between Michael, Joan, and
Wayne. Each would be a 1/3 owner. He believed this was six to eight years ago,
likely 2018. The agreement was not followed through because it permitted one
party to will their portion to another as opposed to it being equally shared
between the survivors on title.
[106]       There was a time he was
off work for about two years, and he would go to his mom’s house almost daily.
After the fire at Lorraine’s house, Wayne moved in with Joan. Wayne was
responsible for the mortgage and Joan paid the utilities.
[107]       Joan relied on Angela
and Lorraine to assist with running errands and about 90% of Joan’s financial
assistance came from Michael. He believes this because when Clifton built the
retaining wall, finished the driveway, the deck at the back, and the hardwood
upstairs, Michael paid for the material. Clifton was unaware if Michael
assisted with the total cost of her living expenses including the mortgage,
insurance, and utilities.
[108]       Clifton’s knowledge of
the house at Prescott and the bills came from his conversations with Joan.
Aside from monies he was personally aware that Michael used to cover costs of
materials, any information received was from conversations and things his
mother Joan told him.
[109]       Clifton was aware of an
occasion where Wayne went on title of a condo that Michael purchased in 2011
because Michael did not have good credit. Clifton knew this because he was
present during the conversation between Wayne and Michael.
[110]       Clifton testified that
Wayne had acknowledged to him that Wayne knew he was not the true owner of the
total property. Upon further questions, Clifton agreed Wayne had mentioned he
was not the true owner of the Prescott property.
[111]       Clifton offered Wayne a
place to stay in 2020 when he had to move out of 261 Prescott Avenue.
Initially, Wayne stayed without charge, however, sometime in 2021, Wayne
insisted on giving some money to Clifton and began paying $500 per month.
[112]       Clifton confirmed in
cross-examination that he completed his mother’s income tax and he put down
that she was paying rent so she could benefit from any government tax and/or
rebate including the Trillium benefit. Despite claiming Joan paid rent on her
income tax returns, Clifton confirmed his mother, Joan, never paid rent.
[113]       Clifton was shown an
income tax return of Joan’s for 1997 and identified his handwriting on the
document. He was asked if Joan paid rent in the amount of $14,400 to David
Duncan for that year. Clifton testified Joan did not pay rent to David Duncan.
Clifton entered that on her income tax return so Joan could benefit from
obtaining a rebate. He acknowledged his mother was not entitled to the benefits
he claimed on her behalf. Clifton confirmed the signature on the income tax
return itself was Joan’s.
[114]       Clifton was referred to
Joan’s income tax return for 2008, where it declared Joan paid rent of $24,000
that year. Clifton confirmed he entered that amount and Joan was not paying
rent but was paying the mortgage. Clifton acknowledged lying to the government
by filling out the income tax returns in this manner for all the years he
completed her income tax returns.
[115]       Tristan is Clifton’s son
and Joan’s grandson. For as long as he can recall, Joan lived at the Prescott
house. He was unaware until this litigation that “her home” is legally owned by
his uncle, Wayne Rawlins. This information came as a surprise to him.
[116]       He is confident the home
belongs to his grandmother as he would always visit it as a child for holidays
and school break. He described the Prescott property as a home base for their
large family, where Joan would host Sunday dinners and other family events.
[117]       In approximately 2008, when
Tristan was 20, his grandmother acted as a surety, and he was required to
reside with her at the Prescott address. He believed she used the Prescott
property to establish she had sufficient funds if he breached his bail. He was
unable to locate or obtain a copy of these documents in advance of the trial.
[118]       While staying with Joan,
his uncle Michael Rawlins (Singh) also lived there. His grandma and Michael
covered all his day to day needs and he was not required to contribute to expenses
or pay rent. Different members of the family have stayed at the home with Joan
on occasions when they needed assistance. There was never any suggestion the
home belonged to anyone other than his grandmother, Joan.
[119]        After Tristan moved out
in 2009, he continued to attend the property to help with chores such as
cutting the grass. He recalled an occasion in approximately 2011 or 2012, when
his uncle Michael coordinated an effort to fix up his grandmother’s home. Due
to her age and health, she was struggling to maintain the property on her own.
[120]       It is his belief that
Michael covered the costs of all materials and tools needed to renovate and
repair inside and outside the home.
[121]       Tristan recalled that
Wayne lived with his aunts Angela and Lorraine at different times. Wayne moved
into his grandmother’s home after a fire at his aunt Lorraine’s.
[122]       In 2020, Joan asked
Tristan for assistance to obtain a mortgage for the Prescott property as she
would not qualify financially. Tristan agreed to go on title of the Prescott
property, solely for purposes of obtaining the mortgage. They were jointly
approved for a mortgage up to $500,000 with Home Trust. The transfer of the
property never took place.
[123]        In cross-examination by
Wayne’s counsel, Tristan confirmed he did not see all the receipts for expenses
Michael paid for, and agreed he does not know exactly what Michael covered
other than receipts Tristan was reimbursed for himself.
[124]       Tristan clarified had
the transaction in 2020 gone through, his sole purpose was to be the
co-borrower and Joan would retain 100 percent ownership in the home. He
understood the responsibility of a co-borrower and the liability should Joan not
make a payment.
[125]       Tristan understood the
reason Joan needed the loan was to buy Wayne out of his interest in the home.
He believed Joan and Wayne had agreed upon $360,000 for that purpose.
[126]       Tristan was clear that
Joan was not being forced or under duress during that time. He agreed she was
stressed and, in his words, “nobody was bending her arm or breaking it”.
[127]       Tristan believed his grandmother,
Joan, would be financially able to cover the monthly mortgage and property
taxes of approximately $3,000 with her pension. When it was pointed out Joan
only received $21,000 a year and the yearly fees would be roughly $36,000,
Tristan testified he would be responsible for the shortfall. He would not let
his grandma lose the family home.
[128]       Wayne and Elena began a
relationship in February 2018, and moved into 261 Prescott Avenue where Joan
lived. Wayne and Elena married July 2, 2018. That fall, Elena travelled back to
Russia and did not return to Canada until February 2019. In March, their
daughter, S.R. was born. Elena returned to Russia in June 2019, as she had a
child from a previous relationship that was there. Elena returned to Canada
with S.R. and her other child, A.R. January 15, 2020. The parties separated two
months later in March 2020.
[129]       The property at Prescott
was purchased in 1993 with funds from Wayne’s OSAP grant and loan. Wayne was
initially on title. At some point he was removed from the title but was added
back on title in 2005 with Kenisha Campbell. Between 2005 to 2013, despite
being on title, Joan was responsible for the mortgage and all carrying costs of
the Prescott property. Wayne did not live there during that time, although the
mortgage was withdrawn from his account.
[130]       Since Wayne moved back
in the home in 2014, he has been solely responsible for the mortgage. Joan was
responsible for the utilities from that date until she was removed from the
home. Wayne also paid the insurance on the home.
[131]       Wayne disputes that
Michael has contributed substantially to renovations at 261 Prescott Avenue.
Wayne maintains while he lived at the property, he made sure to complete the
necessary upkeep and repairs to the home.
[132]       On February 25, 2020,
Wayne bought out Kenisha’s interest in the property for $7,000. The property
was registered solely in his name. Despite this, Wayne acknowledged that Joan
has an interest in the home, just not 100%. Wayne denies that Joan is the sole
beneficial owner.
[133]       Since the date of
separation, Wayne has been solely responsible for all costs of 261 Prescott
Avenue without assistance. He has resided elsewhere since March 2020. Wayne
seeks an order for the sale of the property.
[134]       Wayne agreed he was on
title for 1916 Dufferin Street with Joan Rawlins, however the property was
never beneficially owned by him. He believes the property has always been
Joan’s.
[135]       Wayne confirmed he is
employed as a refrigeration mechanic for Aircon Mechanical Systems since 2011.
Prior to that he worked for Synergy Mechanical Systems for three years. Wayne
attended George Brown around 1993 to become an air conditioner mechanic.
[136]       Wayne lived at 261
Prescott Avenue from 1993 to 1998, when he moved to live with a girlfriend. He
later moved to 1916 Dufferin Street and lived in the basement with his wife at
that time and paid rent to his sister, Angela. After this, Wayne moved to 342
Harvie Avenue. Wayne believes he moved to Harvie in the mid-2000s. He thinks he
paid rent to his sister Lorraine for close to $1,000 per month.
[137]       Wayne moved back to 261
Prescott in 2014 and lived there until 2020 when he moved into Clifton’s home.
[138]       Wayne agreed that Joan
lived at 261 Prescott Avenue in 1993 as well. They both lived there during that
time. Wayne believes he has a minimum 50% interest in the home with Joan and
agreed Joan owns 50% as well.
[139]       Wayne explained his
belief in the percentage of ownership from when the home was first purchased. He
stated his mother suggested he use his OSAP funds as a down payment on the
house. Joan had been looking at properties in the neighbourhood. Wayne paid for
his tuition and the rest he gave to Joan for the purchase of the home. It was
agreed that Wayne would put the money for the down payment, and they would
split the property between the two of them. Joan agreed to pay the mortgage
while he attended school.
[140]       Wayne agreed this was
the first time he was sharing this information with the court, and it was not
set out in any of his affidavits. Wayne maintained his 50% interest in the home
is based off the approximately $9,000 he gave to his mom to purchase the property
in 1993, because the house could not have been purchased without the money and
the financing.
[141]       Wayne disagreed with the
suggestion that he only went on title because Joan could not qualify for a
mortgage. He further disagreed with the suggestion that Joan wanted the house
for herself. He stated the home was partially hers.
[142]       Wayne agreed he resided
at his sister Lorraine’s until the fire and afterwards he asked Joan if he
could move into the Prescott property. He explained this was because she was
living in the house at the time and all the belongings in the house were hers.
Joan is still his mother, and he respects her.
[143]       Wayne advised that prior
to 2014, he had replaced the hot water heater in the house and helped with
repairs when he could.
[144]       Wayne agreed the family
referred to the Prescott property as “granny’s house” or “mom’s house”,
however, he still maintained an interest in the home and did not broadcast or
correct others regarding his interest. He did not see the point in correcting
them or contradicting Joan.
[145]       Shortly after Wayne
resumed living at Prescott, Michael moved in with his children. Wayne indicated
Joan did not want Michael and his children moving into the house, but Wayne
persuaded her because Michael had no where to go, and the basement was empty.
[146]       Wayne discussed Elena
moving into the Prescott home with Joan. Joan had misgivings and was initially
not agreeable. Wayne agreed that Clifton helped Joan see Wayne’s point and she
ultimately agreed to Elena moving in.
[147]       Wayne acknowledged being
on title for 1916 Dufferin Street. His sister Angela had lived there for the
past thirty years. Wayne was on title to assist in obtaining financing for the
home. Wayne understood the home was supposed to be for Angela and Michael.
[148]       Wayne confirmed Lorraine
owned the property at 342 Harvie Avenue and left the home to Michael and Wayne
when she passed. Wayne was on title of the property with Lorraine to assist her
in securing financing. Michael is currently the sole owner of the Harvie
property.
[149]       Wayne agreed he had gone
on title at different times for Angela and Lorraine’s homes, but he did not
have a financial interest in either home until a conversation with Lorraine
regarding Harvie. Wayne disagreed that he was solely on title of Prescott to assist
Joan in obtaining financing. Wayne expressed that he had provided the down
payment for Prescott and disagreed the funds were a loan to Joan to purchase
furniture.
[150]       Wayne testified when the
property was transferred from his name and David Duncan’s in 1998 to Joan and
Rudolph Seepersaud, he did not receive any consideration. Again, in 2005, when
he went back on title of the home, no consideration was paid to Joan. Wayne
described both occasions as refinancing.
[151]       Wayne agreed Kenisha
wanted off title of the property in 2018. This was before Joan raised sharing
the home equally between Michael, Wayne, and Joan. Despite the discussions,
Kenisha was not removed from title until February 2020, and Joan, Michael, and
Wayne failed to come to an agreement and have the property transferred into all
three names. At one point, Wayne offered to buy out Joan, but she refused and
offered to buy out Wayne’s share in the property.\
[152]       Wayne testified that
Clifton owed him money in 2020. Rather than pay rent to Clifton, he applied the
monies he was owed towards rent that he should have paid to Clifton. This
formed the basis of the rent amount set out in his financial statement sworn
January 15, 2021. Wayne was not able to pay rent to Clifton due to his obligations
to maintain the mortgage and carrying costs of 261 Prescott and pay spousal
support.
[153]       Wayne denied
misrepresenting his monthly expenses to the court.
[154]       It was suggested that
Wayne also earned income from a pet business that Michael and Clifton were
involved with. Wayne denied this and stated he had dealings with the business
prior to their marriage but he never worked there.
[155]       Wayne agreed the
estimated market value of 261 Prescott on the date of marriage was $851,570; on
the valuation date was $978,493; and on January 25, 2022, was $1,229,646. Wayne
acknowledged his financial statement of that date set out his net family
property value as $473,647.65. He identified 1916 Dufferin Street as a property
that he had title to but had no interest in and indicated $0 for the date of
marriage, valuation date, and current date. Wayne denied agreeing to split the
value of 261 Prescott with Elena equally.
[156]       Wayne was referred to an
updated financial statement of July 2023 and to explain why the values for the
property at 261 Prescott all stated “TBD” (to be determined). Wayne responded
Joan has an issue with ownership of the Prescott property and her interest
needs to be determined before he can indicate his interest and value in the
property. Also, there had been no actual assessment of the value of the home at
that time.
[157]       It was suggested this
was done to mislead the court to obtain an order for the sale of the home.
Wayne disagreed with the suggestion.
[158]       Wayne was asked
questions about the quantum of his student loan in 1993. He explained there
were two components, a loan and a grant, that totalled approximately $9,000
after paying his fees for his courses.
[159]       Wayne clarified the
house was bought for him and Joan. David Duncan was only on title to obtain the
financing for the mortgage.
[160]       Wayne confirmed his
handwriting on a receipt for receiving rent from Orinthea Klass for the months
of August and September 1996. He has no knowledge whether Joan paid rent to
Kenisha or anyone else based on the receipts.
[161]       Wayne maintained that
Joan has an interest in the Prescott property but not 100% as Joan claims.
Elena believes that Wayne is the sole owner of this property, but he disagrees
which is why this trial of an issue is before the court.
[162]       Wayne confirmed he
transferred title solely to Joan for the property at Dufferin Street for $2
because he did not have a financial interest in the property but was only on
title for purposes of obtaining financing. Wayne advised he did not pay any
money for the purchase of the Dufferin property when he went on title.
[163]       Wayne was asked
questions regarding a condominium on Spadina Avenue. He was asked if he
purchased it; if it was an investment; or if he bought it. Wayne testified that
he was on title for the property. He denied buying the property and maintained
he was only on title.
[164]       Further questions were
put to Wayne regarding the condominium purchase and his previous testimony at a
criminal proceeding related to his brother. He agreed he had previously
testified that he was the owner of the condo. He also testified at those
proceedings that the down payment came from Wayne’s savings, and he bought the
condo as an investment.
[165]       At these proceedings, he
was asked who besides him had an interest in the condo, and he replied, “my
brothers”.  There was no written agreement between them as family. He was asked
if Michael had an interest in the property, and he said no. Michael had brought
the condo to his attention, but Michael was not on title, only Wayne owned the
condo. Wayne went on to try and explain there were other considerations in the
purchase of the condo because they did other business together. Wayne denied
that Michael gave him any money for the purchase of the condo but agreed at one
time Michael rented and leased it out.
[166]       When asked why Wayne
would be renting the condo to Michael for $3,000 per month. Wayne explained
Michael worked in a business that belonged to both Wayne and another brother,
and the rental of the condo was part of Michael’s payment.
[167]       Wayne told the court
there was a difference between his ownership of the condo and 1916 Dufferin
Street because he had no interest in the latter. Wayne testified he did not put
any money towards Dufferin Street, he never paid the mortgage, never paid the
bills, and when he lived there, he paid rent. Wayne did not pay the down
payment for Dufferin Street; he did not use any of his own money. He may have
been on the insurance because he was on title, but he did not pay it.
[168]       Elena suggested the
reason Wayne claims he started paying the mortgage in 2014 is because bank
records are not retained for more than seven years, and he will not have to
produce records prior to that date that confirm he has always paid the
mortgage. Wayne denied this suggestion.
[169]       Wayne confirmed he was
the legal owner of the condominium property, but he was not the 100% beneficial
owner. There was a verbal agreement between himself and Michael. The property
was sold in either 2015 or 2016 prior to his having met and subsequently
marrying Elena.
[170]       Wayne did not recall
receiving any rent from Joan. In 1993, he was attending school and had no
income. Wayne did not pay nor contribute to the mortgage at that time. He was
unable to explain why he would have given Joan a rent receipt.
[171]       Elena came to Toronto in
December 2017, on a visitor’s visa. She met Wayne in February 2018, and they
began dating. Shortly after, Elena moved into Wayne’s home at 261 Prescott
Avenue. Joan also lived at this address. Title to this property is solely in
the name of Wayne.
[172]       Elena and Wayne married
July 2, 2018. Following their marriage, Wayne commenced a sponsorship
application for Elena and her daughter, A.R., born August 2, 2010. Elena
returned to Russia after the marriage but came back to Toronto in February 2019,
prior to the birth of the parties’ daughter, S.R. on March 29, 2019, in
Toronto. When S.R. was three months, Elena went back to Russia to await her
permanent residency approval. She returned to Toronto with both children on
January 15, 2020.
[173]       After her return, Wayne
requested Elena sign documents transferring 261 Prescott Avenue from Wayne to
Joan. Wayne brought Elena to a lawyer’s office for this purpose. Elena did not
understand the purpose and was instructed to obtain independent legal advice. Elena
refused to sign the documents. This led to several arguments and a physical
altercation on an earlier occasion. Ultimately, on March 30, 2020, Elena called
the police and Wayne was charged criminally and not permitted to return to the
home.
[174]       In addition to owning
the Prescott property, Wayne was also on title with Joan Singh for a second
property, 1916 Dufferin Street. This is a residence where his sister, Angela
Rawlins resides. A week after the parties’ separated, on April 6, 2020, Wayne
transferred his interest in the Dufferin property solely to Joan for $2.00.
[175]       Throughout these
proceedings, Wayne has been charged as follows:
[176]        Wayne has conditions
not to contact me directly or indirectly, and not attend at 261 Prescott
Avenue, the matrimonial home. All parenting time must be arranged through a
third party.
[177]       In June 2020, Elena
discovered that Wayne had refinanced the matrimonial home with Scotiabank for
$397,000 without Elena’s consent or knowledge. His financial statement dated
July 11, 2023, failed to show this, and revealed only a mortgage owing of
$101,854 and a line of credit of $16,039.14. Elena believes the Prescott
property is worth more than $1,000,000, leaving substantial equity.
[178]       Joan remained in the
home. Her youngest son, Michael Singh, who is Wayne’s brother moved into the
Prescott property in June 2020, after his release from jail. Joan and Michael
engaged in a campaign of harassment to force me to leave the Prescott property
and sign it over to Joan. The living conditions became unbearable for Elena and
the children. Police were called on at least six occasions. Joan was
aggressive, cut off electricity, yelled at the children, refused to permit us
to use furniture and/or appliances in the home. Throughout, Wayne had refused
to provide child and/or spousal support and Elena had no funds to purchase
groceries or meet the necessities of life.
[179]       Elena brought an ex
parte motion for exclusive possession of the matrimonial home on November
19, 2020, which was granted. Joan and Michael were ordered to move out of the
residence immediately.
[180]       Since being evicted from
the Prescott property, Joan has alleged she has property and/or materials
stored at the home that she needs to assist her with her case. Through
different court orders, Joan has been provided access to the home in the
company of the police or a third-party security provider. Joan attended on one
occasion but refused to take anything with her. On two other occasions, Joan
sent other family members on her behalf.
[181]       Elena is adamant that
Joan has no interest in the Prescott property, and Joan is colluding with Wayne
and other family members to lie and deceive the court that Joan has an interest
to prevent an equalization payment owed to Elena.
[182]       Elena relies on the Land
Transfer documents to establish that Joan sold her legal interest in the
Prescott property to Wayne and Kenisha Campbell on June 6, 2005, for $295,000.
It is Elena’s position that Joan was paid for her interest in Prescott. On
February 25, 2020, Wayne bought Kenisha Campbell’s 1% interest in the Prescott
property for $9,893.58, making him the sole owner. Elena produced a trust
ledger statement for the sale of Prescott to Wayne and Kenisha which reflected
the sum of $290,127.38 paid to Joan and Rudolph Seepersaud on closing.
[183]       Elena has seen no
evidence that Joan was on title post June 13, 2005, nor where the funds received
for the sale of Prescott went. Elena believes Joan was a tenant at Prescott
post sale and paid rent to Kenisha. She relied on Joan’s income tax returns
claiming rent paid and receipts signed by different parties confirming receipt
of funds from Joan for rent.  Elena testified these and other documents
establish that Joan was a tenant and not an owner of Prescott and she has no
beneficial interest in the home.
[184]       Elena disputed claims
that Joan was responsible for the utilities and property taxes based on a
statement she found in the Prescott property. The statement she sought to rely
upon was a handwritten note or message regarding unpaid utilities prior to the
2005 purchase. The author of the letter was not identified nor was the
handwriting.
[185]       Elena found documents in
the Prescott property that showed Joan using different names during the same
time frames. Joan has used the names Joan Rawlins, Joan Rawlins-Singh, Joan
Singh, and Orinthea Klass. Joan filed her income terms as Joan R. Singh,
however, also used the name Orinthea Klass for other purposes.
[186]       Elena believes that when
Prescott was first purchased in 1993, Wayne contributed his student loan
towards the down payment. Elena also believes Joan, using the name Orinthea
Klass paid rent to Wayne in 1996 of $450 per month based on receipt stubs she
located in the home.
[187]       Elena produced documents
relating to the bankruptcy of Joan Urint Singh (Rawlins-Singh). The trustee of her
estate was managed by Cyril Sapiro & Co. Ltd.
[188]       Elena swore a supplemental
affidavit on February 9, 2024, in which she advised she had located additional
documentation after her November 28, 2023, affidavit was sworn. These documents
will provide further support for her position that Joan Rawlins Singh had no
beneficial ownership in the matrimonial home, located at 261 Prescott Avenue as
of the date of separation, and she was not the sole beneficial owner of 1916
Dufferin Street.
[189]       Elena filed a further
affidavit sworn April 25, 2024, in response an affidavit of Joan’s sworn April
12, 2024. Elena stated she has located additional documentation since her
November 28, 2023, affidavit was sworn that supports her position that Joan had
no beneficial ownership in the Prescott property nor was she the sole
beneficial owner of 1916 Dufferin Street.
[190]       Throughout the
litigation, Joan has claimed there are documents in the Prescott home that will
support Joan’s claims title was in Wayne’s name for her sole benefit and she
has 100% interest in the home. Elena disputes this and has provided Joan with
several opportunities to obtain any documents.
[191]       Elena stated Michael
Singh attended on November 27, 2020; Angela Rawlins and Huda (Clifton’s wife)
attended April 16, 2021; and Joan and Huda attended June 4, 2021. On the third
occasion, Joan gathered her tax returns but then attempted to take sunflower
oil, toilet paper, and detergent. Ultimately, she did not take any belongings
with her. In correspondence with Elena’s counsel, Joan referred to documents
retrieved from the home that assist in demonstrating her ownership. To date,
none of the documents referred to were disclosed to Elena or her counsel.
[192]       Joan was provided with
further opportunities to attend the Prescott property to collect her documents.
Brownstone, J. set October 26, 2023, as a date. Joan did not attend, nor did
she contact Elena’s counsel to advise she would not be attending.
[193]       Joan sought and obtained
an adjournment regarding the trial of an issue pertaining to whether Joan has a
trust claim in the Prescott property on the first date set for the hearing,
February 26, 2024. In requesting an adjournment, Joan again claimed the
documents confirming her interest in the property were inside the home. It was
agreed Joan could attend on either February 15 and/or 16, and if those two days
did not work, Joan must ensure she has attended prior to March 22. Joan did not
attend. Joan did not contact Elena’s counsel until after the March 22 date had
passed.
[194]       Elena advised she sent a
package to Joan on March 25, 2024, containing all the paper possessions she
refused to take with her on June 4, 2021. Elena was advised that three separate
Canada Post notifications were sent to Joan, but she never picked up the
package.
[195]       Elena confirmed her date
of birth and country of origin including when she came to Canada on a visitor’s
visa. Prior to coming to Canada, Elena worked in a bank for a short period and then
at her brother’s firm as a manager.
[196]       Elena agreed prior to
the marriage to Wayne she had assets of approximately $265,000 in Russia. Elena
explained she did not disclose these assets in her November 18, 2020, financial
statement as the believed it was limited to what she owned in Canada.
[197]       Elena confirmed Wayne’s
child and spousal support were reduced and applied to the carrying costs of the
mortgage of Prescott but not the utilities. Elena explained gas was cut off for
four months as no one had paid the utilities.
[198]       Since obtaining
exclusive possession of the home, Elena moved into the room previously occupied
by Joan, but now her eldest daughter uses that room. It was suggested Elena
broke the lock which she disagreed with.
[199]       Elena advised any
important items had been moved by Joan to the basement and were locked away. Elena
agreed she had no respect for Joan because Joan had struck her children and
Elena as well. Joan would not allow them to eat and when they did, Joan would
spray stuff that interfered with their ability to breathe.
[200]       Elena confirmed she had
gone through all the documents left in the Prescott property by Joan and copied
them. She further agreed she included documents that assisted her case but
qualified her answer by stating she did not see any documents confirming Joan
paid the mortgage for Prescott. Elena did find documents regarding payment of
the Dufferin mortgage and chose not to include those in her materials.
[201]       Elena went on to explain
that Prescott was Wayne’s home from the outset. He allowed Joan to rent from
him as he had no children or family. In response to questions, Elena confirmed
she was in Russia during the 1993, 1998, and 2005 transactions. She further
agreed she was not present for discussions or things that happened prior to
meeting Wayne in 2018.
[202]       Elena clarified she went
back to Russia in the fall of 2018 and returned to Toronto before the end of
the year as she would not have been permitted to travel due to her pregnancy. She
remembered having Christmas with Wayne at the Prescott property.
[203]       Elena agreed she was not
part of any discussions regarding the ownerships of the Prescott and Dufferin
properties. It was suggested that the Rawlins-Singh family had a pattern in
place regarding the properties that exited long before Elena met Wayne. Elena replied,
“The Rawlins family are all out for themselves”.
[204]       Elena was asked if she
was trying to extract whatever financial gain possible from the Rawlins family.
She responded that the relationship deteriorated not by her doing, she was
threatened with death, her bank accounts were frozen, and she was entitled to
her fair share.
[205]       Elena was asked about
the visit to the lawyer to transfer title to Joan. Elena received advice it was
not in her interest to sign the papers. She disagreed with the suggestion that
Wayne wanted to look for a different home for them, meaning Wayne, Elena, and
the two children.
[206]       Elena was asked
questions regarding opening mail directed to Joan after November 20, 2020, when
Joan was required to exit the premises. After clarification, Elena agreed she
made copies of the document and has taken photographs of materials for her
case. She stated Michael Singh had been given access to the house on one
occasion and he chose what documents to take and what to leave behind.
[207]       Elena confirmed she is
not currently working because she is taking courses to upgrade her math and
chemistry skills. Elena attends classes daily between 10 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. It
takes approximately one hour each way on public transportation.
[208]       Elena confirmed S.R. has
had daycare in place since the summer of 2022. Elena normally drops her off by
10 or 11 a.m. Elena has an injury that impacts her ability to lift anything
more than 5 Kg, she is hopeful to get into a nursing program as opposed to the
PSW program she initially sought to complete.
[209]       Elena confirmed to her
knowledge Wayne paid the mortgage and the property insurance based on his
assurances to her.
[210]       In reply Elena requested
to tender an opinion from a proposed expert regarding handwriting. The evidence
sought to be adduced was to establish the handwriting on Joan’s income tax
returns claiming a property tax credit was the same as on receipts received for
rent paid by Joan and the handwriting was Joan’s herself.
[211]       Elena asked that a
letter, which was not an official report, be marked as an exhibit. Elena argued
the letter demonstrates Joan was lying when she testified she did not recognize
the handwriting on the rent receipts and the income tax returns. Clifton also
lied when he testified the handwriting on the income tax returns was his. Elena
seeks an explanation from Joan, Wayne, and Clifton, why they all lied in court.
[212]       Elena advised the court
she had attended the expert’s office after June 11. She explained the costs
were a factor in her not requesting the examination sooner. She was unable to
fund the report at that time and retained the proposed expert around July 8 or
9, 2024. Elena argued that the Court had also refused her request on two prior
occasions to adjourn the matter to provide her an opportunity to obtain further
evidence. Elena advised she received the expert report on July 15, 2024.
[213]       Counsel for both
Respondents were opposed to the admission of the letter including no notice of
an expert, the proposed expert had not been qualified, prepared a report, or
tendered for purposes of cross-examination.
[214]       After hearing
submissions from counsel, I examined the proposed document. It was not a
report, but a letter that specifically stated, “This communication does not
represent an official notarized forensic report, and thus should not be
used or relied upon for that purpose. If you require an official forensic
report which can be used in court please contact DOCUFRAUD, a Canadian
company”.
[215]       The author of the letter
was not the person who examined the handwriting. I refused to admit the letter
into evidence as an exhibit. Elena requested an adjournment to obtain a resume
and have the proposed expert available to testify. Elena had four years to
pursue this evidence, this was the second trial date, Elena was the last witness
and was almost finished her testimony.  The request to adjourn the proceedings
was refused and she was ordered to continue her reply evidence.
[216]       Elena offered no further
evidence in reply.
[217]       A determination of the
issues before this court are largely based on the credibility and reliability
of the witnesses. Credibility concerns the veracity of a witness; reliability
involves the accuracy of the witness’s testimony. In this case, where relevant
to a particular finding, I will address the credibility and reliability of the
parties directly.
[218]       Joan claims the Prescott
property is held in trust for her based on a resulting trust, or alternatively,
a constructive trust.
[219]       In the leading case of Pecore
v. Pecore, 2007 SCC 17, from the Supreme Court of Canada, the majority
decision written by Rothstein, J. held as follows:
[220]      
 In
my view the presumption of a resulting trust does not apply as I find Joan and
Wayne each gave value for the Prescott property and had a common intention to
jointly own the property as demonstrated below.
[221]      
I find
that Wayne used his remaining OSAP funds towards the down payment of the
Prescott property and he obtained approval for financing with David Duncan. I
accept his evidence that when the Prescott property was purchased it was for
the benefit of him and Joan. Despite not contributing to the mortgage in the
early years, it was his down payment and approval for financing that enabled
the purchase of the property.
[222]      
Joan
explained title of the Prescott property was registered in Wayne and David’s
names because she would not qualify for a mortgage. She was unable to recall
the specific reason but believed it was because she was on title for the
Dufferin Street property. Due to her income, and that mortgage, she would have
been overextended.
[223]      
Joan
testified regarding her purchase of the Dufferin Street property. She advised
she was a tenant and resided there with Wayne, Michael, her daughter Angela,
and Angela’s two children. The owner of the property had defaulted on the mortgage,
and she purchased it under a power of sale in November 1992.
[224]      
Joan
acknowledged she came to Canada under the name Orinthea Klass. She legally
changed her name to Joan Rawlins-Singh in 2003.
[225]      
Contrary
to submissions of counsel on behalf of Joan, I do not accept the viva voce
evidence that she made the down payment for the Prescott property with the
assistance of her daughter Lorraine, and Joan was unable to take title of the
property herself as she was already on title for Dufferin Street. It was not a
case of Joan being overleveraged but rather she had recently filed for
bankruptcy under the name Joan Urint Rawlins-Singh. Just prior to filing for
bankruptcy, the house at 1916 Dufferin had been sold under power of sale. The
owner who had defaulted on the mortgage was Joan herself. The Dufferin property
had been registered to Joan Rawlins Singh and her late husband Rudolph Singh
when the bank foreclosed on the mortgage in late 1992. Joan purchased the home
under a power of sale using her other name, Orinthea Klass, unbeknownst to the
bank or the bankruptcy proceedings.
[226]      
I
have concerns regarding Joan’s evidence and looked for corroboration from other
sources. It became clear from the outset, that Joan’s evidence was tailored to
suit her narrative and purposes, was self-serving and simply not credible when
considered alongside several documentary pieces of evidence filed by the
parties.
[227]      
The
documentary evidence on this case demonstrated the following issues of
credibility regarding Joan’s testimony:
[228]      
There
is no independent evidence to corroborate Joan’s assertion that prior to title
being transferred to Wayne and Kenisha in 2005, the parties agreed Wayne and
Kenisha would have no interest in the property and were not entitled to live in
the home as owners. I do not accept this evidence. I do, however, accept that
Joan would continue to hold a beneficial interest in the home by continuing to
pay for carrying costs and household expenses. There was no dispute in the
evidence that Joan was responsible for the mortgage. Where the funds or monies
came from is neither here nor there, as Joan is entitled to receive the credit
for those payments in addition to any additional financing required to cover
the increased debt that accumulated.
[229]      
I
also have difficulty with the evidence regarding the October 2018, agreement to
register the property in the names of Joan, Wayne, and Michael. Joan asked the
court to accept this was part of her estate planning. She indicated initially
the agreement was to register the property as tenants in common with 1/3
assigned to each. Advice from legal counsel was to register 75% in Joan and
Michael’s name and the remaining 25% in Wayne’s name. I do accept that
arrangements were being made with the assistance of the lawyer to make changes
to how the title of the Prescott property was held, but I do not accept all
parties agreed. Hence, it was never signed.
[230]      
It
is clear Elena had moved into the Prescott property in the early spring of 2018
and had married Wayne July 2, 2018. In the fall of 2018, Elena had returned to
Russia. This was not estate planning but a mechanism to transfer the
matrimonial home out of Wayne’s name in the event the marriage was not
successful or to limit his exposure to a division of assets should the marriage
fail.
[231]      
I
find it difficult to believe that Joan was unaware of the arrangement for Wayne
to purchase Kenisha’s interest in the Prescott property.
[232]      
In
early 2020, when it was clear Elena and Wayne’s marriage was in trouble, Joan
and Wayne sought to revisit the transference of the property from Wayne to
Joan. It can be inferred the purpose was to protect the property from family
court litigation. Each offered to buy the other out with the final agreement
for Joan to buy Wayne’s interest. Joan argued she said this in frustration and
anger, however, Tristan testified she did not seem under duress or pressure,
and no one was forcing her to make these arrangements.
[233]      
Wayne
took Elena to the lawyer’s office to sign the documents. Elena was advised to
obtain independent legal advice (“ILA”) and subsequently refused to agree to
the title transfer. Documents introduced to establish Elena consented to the
transfer were in fact documents that confirmed she received ILA.
[234]      
Tristan
and Clifton testified to support Joan’s claims that she was the beneficial
owner of the Prescott property. Much of Clifton and Tristan’s testimony was
hearsay based on conversations with Joan and was admitted as part of the
narrative. Their beliefs regarding ownership of the Prescott property, relied
on Sunday dinners, family celebrations hosted by Joan, and information provided
by Joan. This is an insufficient basis upon which to determine interest in the
property. Both testified to Michael’s repairs, renovations, and payment for
same, but that does not diminish or erase Wayne’s interest in the property.
[235]      
Clifton
testified that Wayne was often used to assist family members in purchasing
properties and to qualify for financing. This did not give Wayne an interest in
any of these other properties. He was merely on title for convenience’s sake.
[236]      
In
oral testimony, Clifton advised he had prepared Joan’s tax returns for the past
twenty years. This contradicted his affidavit sworn October 31, 2023, where he
stated he assisted with her tax returns for the past eight years. When shown
copies of Joan’s income tax returns, he identified the handwriting as his
except the signature which was Joan’s. He told the court he had deliberately
put false information on Joan’s tax returns claiming rental payments so she
could derive a further tax credit/benefit. He stated this was done without
Joan’s knowledge and Joan had never paid rent.
[237]      
I
have great difficulties with Clifton’s evidence. Receipts for rent received
from Joan payable to Kenisha Campbell were tendered in evidence. The signature
purporting to be that of Kenisha Campbell matched or looked identical to the
handwritten name of Kenisha Campbell on Joan’s income tax returns. On Joan’s
2012 return, Kenisha’s first name is misspelled as “Keshia”. I do not for a
moment believe Kenisha Campbell received rent or monies from Joan Singh. I also
do not believe Kenisha Campbell signed or provided the rental receipts. I am
unable to conclude if the receipts were written by Joan for her own benefit or
by one of her children including Clifton who testified he completed her tax
returns. Notably, there is a signature purportedly by Kenisha Campbell on a
direction to Scotia Mortgage Corporation which does not match the signatures of
other documents purportedly signed by Kenisha Campbell.
[238]      
Other
names used as Joan’s landlord included her best friend, David Duncan. This too
strongly resembled the handwriting of other years tax returns. I don’t accept
Clifton’s evidence that the handwriting on the tax returns is his. To do so, I
would also have to find he filled out years of fake rent receipts. Either way,
Joan and Clifton were involved in defrauding Revenue Canada, and may have
directly affected Kenisha’s own tax filings without her knowledge.
[239]      
I am
very troubled by the implications of filing false tax returns and the alleged
income earned by the purported “landlords”. I understand David Duncan is now
deceased, however, there could be significant tax implications and funds owed
by his estate and Kenisha Campbell for income they were unaware were attributed
to them.
[240]      
 I
do not accept Elena’s arguments that Joan paid rent throughout her time living
in the Prescott property. I do not believe Joan paid any rent to anyone during
that time. I do find there was a scheme to defraud Revenue Canada and provide
Joan with benefits she was not entitled. In some years, her total income was
less than what she claimed to have paid in rent, leaving no funds for daily
essential needs. It does not make sense that Joan was a tenant.
[241]      
As I
previously concluded regarding the scheme to defraud Revenue Canada, the
transfer of properties within the family for purposes of “refinancing” is also
a scheme of sorts and very evident. I find that several members of the family,
including Joan, Wayne, and Clifton, and likely Michael and others, have been
complicit in circumventing proper channels to maintain properties in their name
and obtaining funds illegally where available. As housing or property values
increased, property was sold or transferred to another family member for little
or no consideration and significant credits or gifts to be applied towards the
down payments. This permitted the new financing regime to pay off existing
mortgages and creditors without an influx or outlay of funds by the new
purchasers. In some cases, Joan transferred or bought properties from herself
using her other name, Orinthea Klass. Based on the documentary evidence filed,
a summary of the title transfers for 261 Prescott Avenue, 1916 Dufferin Street,
and 342 Harvie Street are set out in Appendices A, B, and C attached to this
decision.
[242]      
 In
the alternative, Joan seeks a claim for unjust enrichment and the remedy of a
constructive trust given she contributed more to the Prescott property than
Wayne.
[243]      
A
finding of a constructive trust is a remedy that may be available to a claimant
if they can successfully prove a claim for unjust enrichment. Kerr v.
Baranow, 2011 SCC 10. The doctrine of unjust enrichment seeks to restore a
benefit to a party where justice does not permit one to retain it. To establish
a right to recovery, a party must prove something was given and received and retained
without juristic reason: Kerr v. Baranow, paragraph 31.
[244]       The relevant and legal
principles related to a finding of a remedy for a constructive trust are:
[245]       As previously stated, I
have concerns with the credibility and reliability of Joan and Clifton. I found
their evidence to be evasive, selective, and self-serving, in respect of
aspects of the history and timing of transfers of other properties, which has a
direct impact on my findings regarding the Prescott property.
[246]       I also have concerns
with the evidence of Wayne. It is clear he has been on title for several
properties owned jointly or held for someone else’s benefit. What is not clear,
is his financial interest or benefit in each of the properties. The goal posts
change depending on the team taking the field. In 2005, in less than fourteen
days, Wayne went on title for the Prescott property, and the property “owned”
by Lorraine at 342 Harvie Street. He was already on title for the Dufferin
Street property since April 24, 2003.
[247]       Evidence was adduced he
held no interest in these other properties. However, Wayne indicated at some
point Lorraine spoke with him and agreed he was entitled to a 50% interest in
her property. Lorraine passed in 2013. Title was registered as tenants in
common. Lorraine left her interest in the property to Michael. Ultimately, Wayne
sold his interest to Michael, demonstrating Wayne did have a financial interest
in the Harvie Street property, which Michael now owns solely.
[248]       Evidence was also
introduced that Wayne had purchased a condo for the benefit of Michael. Wayne
maintained he was only on title. Wayne testified in a separate proceeding that
it was Wayne’s condo purchased with Wayne’s savings as an investment and he
merely rented the premises to Michael. He denied Michael had an interest in it.
[249]       On April 6, 2020, a week
after Wayne and Elena separated, Wayne was removed from title of the Dufferin
Street property. Joan is reflected as the sole owner. Wayne testified the
property has always been Joan’s. He tried to explain there was a difference
between the ownership of the condo and the property at Dufferin Street. Joan
testified the Dufferin Street property is Angela’s. Her explanation for why
Angela can’t go on title is due to her poor credit. Since transferring title
solely to Joan, significant mortgages have been placed against the property,
and funds reallocated to Michael’s property on Harvie Street. Like Joan,
Wayne’s evidence tends to be self-serving and malleable depending on the
outcome at stake when testifying. Where I accept Wayne’s evidence, it is on
non-contentious issues, or I am satisfied based on other evidence to support
his position.
[250]       While I found Elena’s
evidence to be credible, her evidence regarding the history of the transfer of
the properties is largely speculative or conclusory and contrary to other
available conclusions she refused to consider.
[251]       I was not provided with
a mathematical breakdown of what each party contributed financially and
therefore do not find an unjust enrichment. From an objective standpoint, Joan
would not have been able to purchase or keep the Prescott property without
Wayne’s support. Further, the proposed agreement reached by Joan and Wayne in
2020 is indicative that each saw the other as a 50% owner. Therefore, I have
concluded Joan and Wayne have an equal interest in the Prescott property for
reasons summarized below:
[252]       Wayne and Elena seek the
sale of the Prescott property pursuant to section 2 of the Partition Act,
R.S.O. 1990. C. P .4.
[253]       In Dhaliwal v
Dhaliwal 2020 ONSC 3971 at paragraph 16, Justice Pazaratz, summarized the
applicable legal principles as follows:
[254]       The onus is on the party
resisting partition or sale to demonstrate sufficient reasons for refusal: Davis
v. Davis, 1953 CanLii 148 (ONCA); Silva v. Bettencourt, [2002] O.J.
No. 1878 (SCJ). Courts have a very limited discretion to refuse an application
for partition or sale. Only in exceptional circumstances will a joint tenant or
tenant in common be denied his or her request that a property be partitioned or
sold. The court’s discretion to refuse is narrow, and there must be malicious, vexatious,
or oppressive conduct to justify the refusal to grant partition and sale.
[255]       In this case, Wayne and
Elena have a prima facie right to the sale of the Prescott property.
Joan has not met the onus to demonstrate why the property should not be sold nor
has she shown a sufficient reason why the home should not be sold.
[256]       I am not satisfied that
the request for the partition and sale of the Prescott property is based on
malicious, vexatious, or oppressive conduct. Rather, it is based on an
inability to continue the financial upkeep and carrying costs. Joan’s argument
that she has lived in the home for over thirty years is not a sufficient basis
to not permit the sale. There is nothing to prevent Joan from making an offer
to purchase the home, however, the Court lacks the authority to make such an
Order.
[257]      
In Brienza
v. Brienza, 2014 ONSC 6942, Perell J. summarized the law at paras. 37 and
38:
[258]       The request for an order
for the sale of the Prescott property is granted.
[259]        Wayne requests an order
granting the following terms for the sale of the Prescott property:
[260]       Elena seeks the
following terms regarding the sale of the Prescott property:
[261]       Joan requested the
following regarding the Prescott property:
[262]       It is evident from this
hearing, there is a lack of respect between Elena, Joan, and Wayne. The parties
are unable to communicate effectively and completely mistrust each other. It is
understandable in the circumstances. I am not prepared to dispense with Elena’s
consent regarding the sale of the Prescott property. There is nothing to
suggest, with the property co-listed, Elena will not cooperate.
[263]       I am not prepared to
make an Order that would bar Joan from making an offer to purchase the Prescott
property.
[264]       Elena has requested an
advance of $100,000 from any net proceeds of sale to be applied against
equalization of property. Wayne is opposed. The marriage was less than two
years, these proceedings have been before the courts for over four years. It is
unclear what Elena will ultimately be entitled to. Wayne has indicated an
intention to seek an unequal division of net family property.  I am prepared to
order $10,000 be paid from any net proceeds of sale to Elena to be apportioned
later.
[265]       Wayne has requested
access to the property to assess any work that may need to be done to prepare
the property for sale. The real estate agents may videotape and/or take photos
of the property and share with the parties to determine any cosmetic fixes.
[266]       The following terms are
ordered:
[267]       This matter was
initially scheduled for a two-day trial beginning February 21, 2024. On that
day, Joan requested an adjournment for several reasons, i) she wished an
opportunity to retain counsel; ii) Elena had recently served a 69 page supplemental
affidavit dated February 9, 2024, that relied upon documentation found within
the Prescott property subsequent to her affidavit of November 28, 2023; iii)
Joan had requested opportunities to access the Prescott property to look for
and retrieve documentation to prove her interest in the property and Elena had
set terms and barriers that interfered with Joan’s ability to do so; and iv)
Joan required an opportunity to properly respond to the content of the
supplemental affidavit.
[268]       The adjournment request
was granted. Wayne advised the Court he was not seeking costs for the
adjournment. Elena requested costs payable by Joan on a full indemnity basis of
$8,904 inclusive, or in the alternative, on a substantial indemnity basis of
$6,678.30 inclusive for fees thrown away paid to counsel for preparation and
attendance at the hearing.
[269]       Joan argued she was the
successful party on the adjournment, and each party should be responsible for
their own costs, as it was Elena’s actions that necessitated the adjournment in
part. Failing which, the issue of costs should be addressed by the Judge who
presides over the focussed hearing/trial.
[270]       I reserved on the issue
of costs pending the hearing to determine: i) whether Joan retained counsel;
ii) if Joan complied with the Order to make arrangements with a security firm
to attend at the house on March 15 or 16, 2024, and if either of those dates
did not work, to find a mutually agreeable date no later than March 22, 2024; iii)
Joan’s response to the February 9, 2024, affidavit; and iv) what, if any, costs
were thrown away by Elena for work duplicated by counsel.
[271]       At the hearing, Joan had
retained and was represented by counsel. Joan presented a reply affidavit to
Elena’s February 9, 2024 affidavit.
[272]       Joan contacted a
security firm as directed but did not contact Elena until March 21, 2024, to
arrange access to the Prescott property. The dates proposed by Joan were after
the deadline set in my Order of March 22, 2024. Joan explained in her April 12,
2024, affidavit extenuating circumstances why she was unable to attend on March
15 or 16, 2024. No efforts were made to request an extension from the court,
but Joan did make inquiries with Elena to find a mutually agreeable date and
followed up with a further email on March 26, 2024. Joan alleged Elena arranged
for delivery of three garbage bags through a private courier company. Joan
claimed the bags were addressed to a “Sarah”, so delivery was not accepted.
[273]       Elena provided an
affidavit with photographs of a Canada Post package to be delivered to “Joan
Rawlins Singh, 342 Harvie Avenue, Toronto ON M6E4L5 with an email that matches
the one used by Joan in correspondence to the court and to Elena and Wayne.
Elena advised a USB key was included in the package which was available for
pick up until April 12, 2024. Joan did not pick it up.
[274]       Elena retained the
services of a private courier company, Rocket Couriers and sent Joan’s belongings
to the Harvie address. The name on the delivery was to “Sarah”. The driver’s
comments were “Recipient refused to pickup and was notified package will be at
our office for 7 business days.
[275]       Through the hearing,
Elena continued to upload documents regularly. Some materials were replicated
from her exhibit book for ease of reference; however, other documents were of
items not disclosed to the other parties prior to the upload. Elena has control
of any/all documents found in the Prescott property and has made digitalized
copies of everything she located. What is unclear is why copies of these
materials were not provided to Wayne and Joan much earlier in these
proceedings. When I refer to “much earlier” I mean in 2021, not in 2024.
[276]       Elena was
self-represented at these proceedings so there is no evidence of duplication of
legal work but she is out of pocket for her legal fees for the first hearing
date.
[277]       Modern costs rules are
designed to foster four fundamental purposes (1) to partially indemnify
successful litigants; (2) to encourage settlement, (3) to discourage and sanction
inappropriate behaviour by litigants, and (4) to ensure that cases are dealt
with justly under subrule 2 (2) of the Family Law Rules. See: Mattina
v. Mattina, 2018 ONCA 867.
[278]       Subrule 24(1) of the Family
Law Rules creates a presumption of costs in favour of the successful party.
Consideration
of success is the starting point in determining costs. Sims-Howarth v.
Bilcliffe 2000 CanLII 22584 (ON SC), [2000] O.J. No. 330 (SCJ-
Family Court).
[279]       In Oduwole v. Moses,
2016 ONCJ 653, Sherr, J., held that a costs award should always reflect what
the Court views to be fair and reasonable.
[280]       I have considered the
factors set out in Rule 24(5) which provides criteria for determining the
reasonableness of a party’s behaviour in a case. Rule 24(12)(a)(i) provides
that the Court shall consider the reasonableness of each party’s behaviour when
setting the amount of costs.
[281]       Costs awards are
discretionary. Two important principles in exercising discretion are
reasonableness and proportionality. Beaver v. Hill, 2018 ONCA 840. Costs need to be
proportional to the issues and amounts in question and the outcome of the case.
[282]       The court should also take
into consideration the ability of a party to pay costs. See: MacDonald v.
Magel (2003) 2003 CanLII 18880 (ON CA), 67 O.R. (3d) 181 (Ont. C.A.). Although difficult financial
circumstances are a factor, it is not always a reason to deprive a successful
party of costs or to reduce the amount of costs. See: Beaulieu v. Diotte,
2020 ONSC 6787.
[283]       In this case, the delay in
providing disclosure of the documents found in the Prescott property and the
late filing of Elena’s affidavit prior to the initial hearing were contributing
factors to the granting of the adjournment. The request to have counsel was of
less import at the time of the request as there were plenty of opportunities
for Joan to retain counsel.
[284]       The Respondent, Joan
Rawlins-Singh is ordered to pay the Applicant Elena Reshetnikova costs of $4,000
inclusive within thirty (30) days.
[285]       Each party had some level
of success on this hearing. The parties are encouraged to discuss the issue of
costs. If the parties are unable to agree on costs, written submissions may be
filed with the Family Trial Office no later than Monday, March 10, 2025, before
4:00 p.m. and not to exceed three typed double-spaced 12-point font, with any
offers to settle and bill of costs attached.