[1]              
The issues in the within Application arise from
the parties’ separation following a six-year relationship which included two
years of marriage.
[2]              
At the commencement of their relationship, the
parties signed a Cohabitation Agreement (“Agreement’). The Agreement purports
to prohibit either party from asserting a claim against the other for support or
to make a claim against the other’s property in the event there is a breakdown
in the relationship.
[3]              
The Applicant, Ginette Marie Rolande Baillargeon
(“Baillargeon”) asks, as part of the relief sought by her in this proceeding,
that the Agreement be declared void. She also makes a claim for spousal
support, for an equalization of the parties’ net family properties, a claim in
equity for unjust enrichment and she asks for an order finding that she has a
constructive or resulting trust in the residence which had been occupied by the
parties at the date of separation as their matrimonial home.
[4]              
The Respondent, William George Nesbitt
(“Nesbitt”), by this motion is asking for, among other things, an order
bifurcating the issue of the validity of the Agreement and ordering that that
issue proceed to trial prior to the determination of the other issues in this
proceeding.
[5]              
There was additional relief requested as part of
this motion. That relief, unrelated to the bifurcation issue, was not contested and I made an order relating to
that relief on February 4, 2025.
[6]              
This is my ruling with respect to the request
for bifurcation.
[7]              
The parties met through a dating app in April
2016.
[8]              
They married on April 23, 2022. They separated
two years later, on April 12, 2024.
[9]              
Baillargeon is 66 years old.  Her marriage to
Nesbitt is her third marriage.  She has three adult children from another
relationship.
[10]          
Nesbitt is 82 years old.  This is his second
marriage.  He has four adult children from his prior marriage.
[11]          
Nesbitt owned a very successful gravel pit
business, Nesbitt Aggregates Ltd., which had been in operation for over 50
years. Nesbitt also owned, personally and through certain corporations,
numerous real properties. The residence, which became the parties’ matrimonial
home, is located on one of those properties.
[12]          
When the parties met, Nesbitt was in the midst
of a divorce proceeding with his former wife, and all financial issues
(equalization and spousal support) were being litigated.
[13]          
Nesbitt asserts that the parties began to
cohabit in May 2016 and that they resided in Nesbitt’s home in Renfrew. Nesbitt
asserts that when the parties began to cohabit, he first required that the
parties enter into the Agreement.
[14]          
Neither party disputes that the Agreement was
prepared and signed by both of them in May 2016.
[15]          
Baillargeon disputes the date when the parties began to
cohabit.  She denies that they began to cohabit in May 2016.  Rather, Baillargeon
maintains that the parties began to cohabit in 2018 based upon Nesbitt’s
promise, at that time, that the parties would get married and build a home
together.
[16]          
Baillargeon asserts that she signed the Agreement in
2016 because Nesbitt had told her it would assist him with his divorce from his
prior spouse.  She asserts that Nesbitt assured her that she “just needed to
sign” and that it would have no repercussions for her.
[17]          
Baillargeon claims that when the
parties began to cohabit in 2018, her relationship with Nesbitt had “evolved
significantly” and that it had evolved even more so by the time they were
married on April 23, 2022.
[18]          
Baillargeon further maintains that during the relationship she
contributed an estimated $600,000 in labour and
materials to renovate the matrimonial home.  She asserts that she increased its
value by approximately $700,000.
[19]          
Baillargeon also claims that she managed and expanded the Respondent’s
storage rental business, including advertising, client management, and
maintenance.  She claims that she contributed approximately 9,600 hours of
unpaid labour valued at $816,000 for maintaining and improving the matrimonial home
and the Respondent’s business.
[20]          
According to Nesbitt, he retained the services of Phillip Augustine in
April 2016 to negotiate and draft the Agreement on his behalf.  Mr. Augustine
was also representing Nesbitt in his divorce proceeding with his former spouse.
[21]          
Baillargeon retained Kevin Kavanagh to represent her in the negotiation
and execution of the Agreement.
[22]          
The Agreement, by its terms, purports to provide, among other things,
that:
[23]          
Schedule A and B to the Agreement listed the assets and liabilities of
the parties respectively. Nesbitt disclosed a net worth of $7,820,000 and
Baillargeon disclosed a net worth of $501,000.
[24]          
Baillargeon asserts that the Agreement should be found to be “null and
void”.
[25]          
To support this, Baillargeon claims that she did not participate in
negotiating the Agreement and that she was not provided “proper” independent
legal advice.  She also asserts that the Agreement is invalid due to “coercion,
lack of disclosure, and inequity”. In this respect, Baillargeon maintains that
she did not receive full financial disclosure from Nesbitt. She maintains that
she was induced to sign the Agreement in order to assist Nesbitt in resolving the
outstanding issues with his former spouse. She asserts that Nesbitt represented
to her that there would be no repercussions to her if she signed it.  She
asserts that the parties were not in fact cohabiting at that time and that it
was not their intention to actually govern themselves by the terms set out in the
Agreement.
[26]          
Nesbitt disputes this. He asserts that Baillargeon understood the terms
of the Agreement, that he required this Agreement as a precondition to their
cohabiting and that Baillargeon received effective independent legal advice
prior to agreeing to the terms as confirmed by the Certificate of Independent Legal
Advice appended to the Agreement.  Nesbitt asserts that both parties exchanged
full disclosure prior to signing the Agreement.
[27]          
Among other things, the Applicant claims the following relief in this
proceeding:
[28]          
Nesbitt asks that the issue of whether the Agreement is valid be determined
first  and prior to Baillargeon’s remaining claims. If the Agreement is upheld,
he submits, this will effectively bring the remaining claims advanced by
Baillargeon to an end.
[29]          
Baillargeon opposes the request to bifurcate this proceeding. She
submits that it is premature and procedurally improper to grant the bifurcation
and that Nesbitt’s attempt to isolate the validity of the Agreement is merely a
tactic to delay the proper adjudication of the substantive issues raised by her
and is aimed at avoiding financial accountability.
[30]          
Baillargeon points out that, for instance, subparagraph 25(j)(iv) of the
Agreement states: “Subject to any trust declaration relating to the matrimonial
home, property held in the name of one party will be deemed to be owned by that
party.”  She argues therefore that aspects of her claims could proceed
regardless of whether the Agreement is found to be valid.
[31]          
Baillargeon submits that even if the Agreement is valid, which she
denies to be the case, it would still be necessary for Nesbitt to provide full financial
disclosure. She therefore argues that a separate trial would add unnecessary
time and complexity to this case rather than simplify it.
[32]          
There is no issue that multiplicity of proceedings should generally be
avoided, and all issues should be determined in one trial. However, there are
instances where the interests of justice are served by bifurcation of the
issues as long as no prejudice is caused to either party.
[33]          
Section 12(5) of the Family Law Rules provides:
[34]          
Quigley J. in Simioni v. Simioni, 2009 CanLII 934 (ON SC), [2009]
O.J. No. 174, 74 R.F.L. (6th) 202, 2000 CarswellOnt 258 at paras. 15-17
(S.C.J.) provides a helpful analysis of the legal principles with respect to
bifurcation. This analysis and framework has been followed in many subsequent
decisions such as Grossman v. Grossman, 2014 ONSC 2090, Klasios v.
Klasios 2015 ONSC 1173, Schulman v Ganz, 2015 ONSC 3254:
[35]          
In my view, the issue of whether the Agreement is valid in this instance
is a discrete issue. There will be relatively few witnesses needed to testify to
make that determination and the evidence will be focused on the circumstances
surrounding the execution of the Agreement including what financial information
was disclosed by the parties at the time of the execution of the Agreement.
[36]          
I agree that if the Agreement is upheld, this will prohibit most if not
all of the substantive claims additionally being advanced by Baillargeon.
[37]          
Baillargeon did not dispute that if the Agreement is found valid, this
would prevent her from making a claim for spousal support and equalization of the
parties’ net family properties.
[38]          
Baillargeon submits that in the event the Agreement is valid, she is nonetheless
entitled to bring her claim for equitable relief based upon the wording of subparagraph
25(j)(iv) of the Agreement (see paragraph 30 above).
[39]          
I disagree with Baillargeon’s interpretation of this provision.
[40]          
In my view, the Agreement expressly prohibits the bringing of equitable
claims based upon the provisions set out in subparagraph 25(i) of the Agreement.
Subparagraph 25(i) states the following:
[41]          
In this respect, and in my view, subparagraph 25(j)(iv) should not be
interpreted as permissive of the bringing of an unjust enrichment claim or
other claim for equitable relief.  In my view, the reference to “subject to any
trust declaration” is referencing subparagraph 25(j)(i) which provides:
[42]          
As such, if the Agreement is found to be valid, Baillargeon’s claim for
equitable relief, would also be prohibited.
[43]          
However, I point out that whether subparagraph 25(j)(iv) of the
Agreement would permit Baillargeon to assert a claim for unjust enrichment or
not, is an issue of contract interpretation which would be secondary to the
determination of whether the Agreement is valid or not.   The evidence, if any,
needed to determine that issue is separate and distinct from the evidence which
needs to be first considered when determining the validity of the Agreement.
[44]          
Additionally, the evidence relevant to whether the Agreement is valid is
not the same as or pertinent to the evidence that needs to be adduced to
support the remaining claims in this proceeding. The evidence which will determine
the issue of the Agreement’s validity seems relatively straight forward. It
will consist of the testimony of the lawyers who represented the parties detailing
the nature and extent of their involvement, what if anything occurred with
respect to the exchange of financial disclosure, and the negotiation of the
terms of the Agreement. That evidence may possibly include the verification of
the financial disclosure made at that time but even so, such disclosure will
relate to the parties’ assets as at the date of the Agreement.  This evidence
is not relevant to the other claims made in this proceeding.
[45]          
The nature of the evidence which will be required to support Baillargeon’s
remaining claims (ie. for spousal support, equalization of net family
properties, and equitable relief) will be significantly more complex and voluminous
in its scope.  The valuation of assets will require appraisals  based upon
values at the date of marriage and the date of separation. The value of the
parties’ assets as at the commencement of the parties’ cohabitation may also be
relevant.  This is further complicated by the fact that Nesbitt asserts that
the date of cohabitation was in May 2016 whereas Baillargeon asserts that the
date of cohabitation was not until sometime in 2018.  Nesbitt will likely need
to also retain tax experts to assist in the valuation process.
[46]          
Significant evidence would also be needed to trace the financial
transactions which occurred during the relationship if Baillargeon wishes to
advance her claims for unjust enrichment and a constructive or resulting trust.
Evidence pertaining to the roles assumed by both parties throughout the
relationship would also have to be led.
[47]          
Given that the evidence that would be required to support the remaining
claims is not required to determine the validity of the Agreement, there could
be, in my view, considerable cost and time saved by the parties if the validity
of the Agreement is first determined.
[48]          
The issues are not so interwoven as to require the determination of all
issues at the same time. I conclude the opposite. The first trial would deal
with the validity of the Agreement. If a second trial, dealing with the
remaining claims is necessary, that evidence is distinct from the evidence needed
to determine the validity of the Agreement.
[49]          
If the issues in this proceeding are not bifurcated, and this matter proceeds
in the normal course to one trial instead, the trial will be significantly
larger in scope and significantly more complex.  In this event, I do not see
concessions being as readily made by the parties to increase the likelihood of settlement
prior to a trial given their significantly disparate positions on the issues.
[50]          
On the other hand, addressing the validity of the Agreement first would
likely prompt settlement discussions as the validity of the Agreement will
greatly impact the scope of any claims Baillargeon is entitled to advance.  An
early determination of the issue of whether the Agreement is valid could promote
a quicker resolution of the remaining issues and thereby reduce the costs that
would be incurred by both parties.
[51]          
At this stage in the proceedings, no significant disclosure or questioning
has taken place. The motion for bifurcation has been brought early in the
proceedings. Bifurcating the proceedings at this time has the potential to save
the parties from incurring significant time and money on issues which Baillargeon
may not be permitted to advance. There have not been steps already taken which
would mitigate against the argument that this route would promote cost savings
for the parties as well as the most effective use of court resources.
[52]          
I do not see that either party would be prejudiced in the event the
bifurcation is ordered. In my view, Baillargeon has not demonstrated she would
suffer prejudice in the event that a bifurcation order is made. To the contrary,
Baillargeon’s exposure to a cost award is significantly minimized by having
this issue determined first.  Once the issue is determined, knowing whether the
Agreement is valid provides both parties with the ability to better assess the
merit of Baillargeon’s remaining claims prior to the parties expending
significant time and money litigating those issues.
[53]          
A trial on the validity of the Agreement can likely be obtained within a
four- to six-month period. It will not be lengthy, and the parties should be
able to have the matter prepared to proceed to trial within
that timeframe. Thus, having this issue determined first will not cause undue
delay to either party.
[54]          
If the Agreement is declared void, having this issue first determined will
not, in my view,  result in a duplication of effort or costs to the parties.   While
a second trial might then be required to determine the remaining claims, these
are distinct issues requiring different evidence.
[55]          
Baillargeon relied upon Smith v. Torelli, 2013 ONSC 1936 (CanLII)
(“Smith”) as standing for the position that the onus is upon the party
seeking bifurcation to establish, on a balance of probabilities that severance
will lead to the just, expeditious, and least costly resolution of the
proceeding on its merits.  That case concerned an issue of retroactive child
support. The moving party sought to sever the determination of the issue of
entitlement to support from the secondary issue of the payor’s ability to pay
which would necessitate the production of
financial disclosure for the years in question.  I note that Nelson J. in
reviewing the case law specifically distinguished that case from cases where a
party sought to bifurcate the determination of the validity of a separation
agreement prior to the determination of any consequent claims in the event that
the separation agreement was found to be invalid.  At paragraph 50 he states:
[56]          
The factual situation in this case is, however, likewise distinguishable
from the factual situation in Smith. Rather, the circumstances in this case
fall far more squarely in line with the circumstances arising from the cases severing
the issue of the validity of a separation agreement. The validity of the
Agreement is a threshold issue which requires a determination of a separate
factual circumstance and the application of different legal principles than what
would be required to determine the remaining issues. As such, while the I agree
with the principles of law Smith sets out as applicable, this case is
factually more aligned with the cases which have granted bifurcation requests.
[57]          
I conclude, considering the relevant factors as set out above, that
Nesbitt has established on a balance of
probabilities that an order bifurcating the issues, so that the issue of the
Agreement’s validity is determined first, will lead to the most just,
expeditious, and least costly resolution of this proceeding on its merits.
[58]          
For the above reasons, I order the following:
[59]          
If the parties are unable to agree on the issue of costs for this
motion, Nesbitt may serve and file his submissions concerning costs on or
before March 14, 2025.  Baillargeon may serve
and file her submissions concerning costs on or before March 21, 2025.  Cost
submissions shall be no more than three pages in length, plus any offers to
settle and bills of costs.