[1]              
On this motion, the defendants Peter William Ellis ("Bill
Ellis"), Sharon Ellis, Cathleen Ellis, Brad Ellis, David Ellis and the
trustees of The Ellis Family Trust 2020 seek an order removing Stikeman Elliott
LLP ("Stikeman") as counsel for the plaintiffs. They also seek an
order requiring the plaintiffs to destroy all documents in their possession
that contain the defendants' solicitor-client privileged documents.
[2]              
The defendants contend that Stikeman improperly handled and reviewed the
defendants' solicitor-client privileged communications and that the plaintiffs
have not rebutted the presumption of prejudice that arises. The defendants
submit that the only appropriate remedy is the disqualification of Stikeman as
counsel for the plaintiffs.
[3]              
For the following reasons, the defendants' motion is dismissed.
[4]              
Since 1983, the Ellis family had owned and operated a group of companies
(the "Ellis Group") that engaged in the manufacture of folding and
paperboard packaging. As of 2021, the Ellis Group included (a) Ellis Packaging
Limited ("Ellis Packaging"), (b) Ellis Paper Box Inc., and (c) Ellis
Packaging West Inc.
[5]              
On September 29, 2022, Max Solutions Inc. ("Max Solutions"),
through 1000256165 Ontario Inc. (identified in the SPA as the “Purchaser”),
acquired the shares of the Ellis Group from the defendants (identified in the
SPA as the “Sellers”) under the terms of a Share Purchase Agreement
("SPA"). The Purchaser was formed by Max Solutions for this
transaction.
[6]              
Prior to this acquisition, the shares of the Ellis Group were
beneficially owned (through holding companies) by Bill Ellis, Sharon Ellis, The
Ellis Family Trust 2020, along with Bill and Sharon's children: David,
Cathleen, and Brad. The trustees of The Ellis Family Trust 2020 are Sharon
Ellis, Bill Ellis and I. Blair Mackenzie (the Ellis Group and family's
accountant).
[7]              
After closing, the Purchaser amalgamated with the companies in the Ellis
Group, continued as "Ellis Packaging Limited", and continued to own
the assets of the business.
[8]              
The allegedly privileged emails were exchanged between John Morley, the defendants,
and Mark Mickleborough of Mickleborough Lawyers. When these emails were sent
and received, Mr. Morley was the VP of Finance of Ellis Packaging. He had held
this position since 2010 and he remained in the position following closing.
[9]              
Approximately one year after completion of the sale transaction, Max
Solutions and Ellis Packaging brought an action seeking damages against the sellers
for breach of contract and fraudulent misrepresentation in connection with
certain representations and warranties in the SPA. Stikeman Elliott LLP
represents the plaintiffs as counsel. Mitchell Fournie of the firm Crawley
MacKewn Brush LLP ("CMB") represents the defendants.
[10]          
In November 2023, Mr. Morley coordinated the process of gathering the
plaintiffs' documents for the purposes of making documentary discovery in the
litigation. With Stikeman's assistance, the plaintiffs delivered a ShareFile
link with their documentary production accompanied by an unsigned draft
affidavit of documents. Stikeman provided the first ShareFile link to the
plaintiffs on July 19, 2024, and then to defendants' counsel on July 22, 2024.
Among the documents accessible through the ShareFile link were the
Mickleborough/Morley emails.
[11]          
On August 6, 2024, the defendants served a notice of motion seeking to
permanently stay the plaintiffs' action. In the notice of motion, the defendants
noted that the production set included emails that were subject to
solicitor-client privilege.
[12]          
Upon receipt of the notice of motion, Stikeman immediately stopped
reviewing all emails and by August 12, 2024 the firm had removed access to the
entire production set and all other documents received from the plaintiffs
pending the outcome of this motion. Stikeman confirmed that the plaintiffs had
not reviewed and would not have access to the production set or source
documents. The relevant email server is decommissioned and currently
inaccessible.
[13]          
The defendants move for relief pursuant to an amended notice of motion
dated November 4, 2024.
[14]          
The defendants submit that the proper analysis to be followed to
determine the issues raised on this motion is established by Celanese Canada
Inc. v. Murray Demolition Corp., 2006 SCC 36 and Continental Currency
Exchange Canada Inc. v. Sprott, 2023 ONCA 61. This analysis includes three
stages:
[15]          
The plaintiffs' first submission in response to this motion the
defendants motion fails at the first stage of the analysis because Mr.
Mickleborough jointly represented the defendants as sellers and the companies
in the Ellis Group throughout his retainer, and, therefore, the privilege in
the emails and other documents at issue on this motion is jointly held.
[16]          
I first address whether there was a solicitor-client relationship
between Mr. Mickleborough and the companies in the Ellis Group when the
allegedly privileged emails and other documents were sent and received.
[17]          
In Trillium Motor World ltd. v. General Motors of Canada Limited,
2015 ONSC 3852, the trial judge, at paras. 411-413, set out the principles that
apply to determination of whether a solicitor and client relationship exists:
[18]          
The defendants submit that the Mickleborough Lawyers acted exclusively
for them, the sellers. In support of this submission, the defendants rely on
affidavit evidence given by Bill Ellis.
[19]          
Bill Ellis' affidavit evidence is that following receipt of an initial
draft of a term sheet provided by Max Solutions to the Ellis family, his family
and the trustees of The Ellis Family Trust 2020 retained Mark Mickleborough of
Mickleborough Lawyers to provide them with legal advice related to the sale of
their shares. Bill Ellis deposes that from mid-February 2022 to the eventual
closing of the SPA on September 29, 2022, Mr. Mickleborough acted as the sellers'
lawyer and provided them with legal advice related to the sale of their shares.
He deposes that during this time, he and some other members of his family used
their Ellis Packaging email accounts to communicate with Mr. Mickleborough and
each other in relation to the sale. He deposes that they have used these email
addresses for over 25 years, and they were their primary email addresses for
business related communication at the time.
[20]          
Bill Ellis deposes that all of his family members' communications with
Mr. Mickleborough were for the purpose of requesting and receiving legal advice
related to the sale of their shares. Bill Ellis deposes that Mr. Mickleborough
had not acted for any of the sellers or their companies prior to being retained
in February 2022 for the purpose of representing them on the sale of their
shares.
[21]          
In correspondence from Mr. Rose of Stikeman to Mr. Fournie dated August
12, 2024 (appended as an exhibit to Mr. Rose's affidavit), after the defendants'
notice of motion was served, Mr. Rose advised of his clients' position that the
communications in question on this motion were between the target companies and
their legal counsel on the basis that the companies in the Ellis Group and the sellers
jointly retained Mr. Mickleborough.
[22]          
When he was cross-examined on his affidavit, Bill Ellis gave the
following evidence:
[23]          
The Confidentiality Agreement and the Term Sheet were marked as exhibits
to Bill Ellis' cross-examination.
[24]          
The Confidentiality Agreement provides for restrictions on the use of
Ellis Packaging's confidential information as well as non-solicitation
provisions. The Term Sheet included provisions imposing obligations on the
companies in the Ellis Group (defined in the Term Sheet as the
"Company") including that it shall enter into 3 separate leases on
closing on specified terms. The Term Sheet imposed exclusivity and
confidentiality obligations on the Ellis Group companies, and required the
Ellis Group companies to continue to operate in the ordinary course of
business, consistent with past practice, and subject to specified limitations.
[25]          
The defendants refer to the Confidentiality Agreement and the Term Sheet
and submit that Bill Ellis' execution of these documents as a signing officer
of the companies in the Ellis Group does not support a finding that Mr.
Mickleborough acted on a joint retainer with the sellers and the companies as
clients. The defendants submit that where solicitors are instructed to perform
work in which the good or ill of the company is not the prime object, then
those solicitors are retained not by the company but by the individual who
instructs them. The defendants submit that both documents were ancillary to and
executed in furtherance of the sellers selling their shares, noting that none
of the Ellis Group companies were parties to the SPA.
[26]          
In support of this submission, the defendants rely on Salmond, Linge,
Re, 1983 CarswellBC 90. In Salmond, the motion judge was called on
to decide whether an individual, who was the "voice" of a company,
retained a firm of solicitors himself or for the company. This issue arose in
the context of a taxation of the solicitors' bill. The company was to be a
member of a limited partnership to be formed to raise capital for a real estate
development and the solicitors were retained to advise and provide such legal
services as were required to get the project underway. The motion judge found
that the legal work involved was to be done in consequence of a decision by the
individual to promote a partnership to raise capital for the development
venture and that the legal work was not directed primarily to the preservation
or enhancement of the company or its assets. The motion judge found that had
the venture come to fruition, the company would have received some benefit as
an investor from the legal work, but this benefit would have been only
indirectly and coincidentally the result of that work. The motion judge found
that it was the individual, and not the company, that retained the solicitors.
[27]          
The decision in Salmond was made on the particular facts of that
case. Unlike in Salmond where, from the report of the decision, there
was no legal document signed by the company, the executed Confidentiality
Agreement and Term Sheet contain provisions conferring rights and imposing
obligations on the Ellis Group companies. On the evidence before me, I am
unable to find that the benefits received by the Ellis Group companies from
legal services provided by Mr. Mickleborough only indirectly and coincidentally
resulted from that work.
[28]          
The evidence given by Bill Ellis on his cross-examination that Mr.
Mickleborough was retained by and provided legal advice to the Sellers and to
the companies of the Ellis Group was clear and unqualified.
[29]          
At the hearing of this motion, the defendants, after relying on Salmond,
submitted that Bill Ellis' evidence given on cross-examination that Mr.
Mickleborough represented both the Sellers and the target of the share
transaction, the Ellis Group, throughout his entire representation up to the
closing of the transaction, was ill-considered, imprecise and incorrect, and
should not be accepted.
[30]          
I do not accept this submission. Given Mr. Rose's August 12, 2024 letter
that was sent to Mr. Fournie and appended as an exhibit to Mr. Rose's
affidavit, when Bill Ellis was cross-examined, the question of whether the
Ellis Group companies had retained Mr. Mickleborough jointly with the sellers
had clearly been raised and was a central basis for the plaintiffs’ opposition
to this motion. There is no reasonable evidentiary basis for me to find that
Bill Ellis was taken by surprise by the questions asked of him about Mr.
Mickleborough's retainer by the Ellis Group companies, or that his answers were
not properly considered before he gave them.
[31]          
Whether a solicitor-client relationship existed between the companies in
the Ellis Group and Mr. Mickleborough is a question of fact. Bill Ellis
retained Mr. Mickleborough, and he would reasonably be expected to know whether
he retained Mr. Mickleborough to represent both the defendants as sellers and
the companies in the Ellis Group. There was no evidence tendered, including
from Mr. Mickleborough, that conflicts with the evidence given by Bill Ellis on
his cross-examination.
[32]          
When I consider the evidentiary record before me, I am satisfied that a
reasonable person with knowledge of the facts in evidence, including Bill
Ellis' affidavit evidence, the evidence given by Bill Ellis on
cross-examination, the SPA, the Confidentiality Agreement, and the Term Sheet,
would reasonably form the belief that Mr. Mickleborough was, throughout his
engagement, acting on a joint retainer for both the defendants as sellers and
for the companies in the Ellis Group. I so find.
[33]          
When parties consult a solicitor on matters towards which they each have
an interest, the communications are not privileged as between such parties.
Each party is expected to share in and be privy to all communications passing
between each of them and their solicitor. See R. v. D., 1982 CanLII 3324
(ON CA), at para. 56.
[34]          
In Dente et al. v. Delta Plus Group Inc. et al., 2023 ONSC 3376,
there was a completed share purchase agreement and an issue arose as to whether
electronic records of the company whose shares were sold were privileged after
closing in the hands of the company. The motion judge found that there was no
joint privilege by the sellers of the shares and the company with the lawyer
who negotiated and prepared the SPA and acted on the sale and, therefore, there
was no privilege to be passed on to the purchaser of the shares of the company.
The motion judge, at para. 60, confirmed that "[s]olicitor-client
privilege that is held by an original owner passes to a successor-in-title to
the business, and is then held by the subsequent owner".
[35]          
In Dente, the motion judge, at para. 61, noted that it is
possible for the seller of shares of a company to retain ownership of records
over which a joint privilege is claimed:
[36]          
The SPA does not contain such a provision.
[37]          
In NEP Canada ULC v. MEC OP LLC, 2013 ABQB 540, the application
judge was called on to decide a question concerning allegedly privileged
records in the context of a completed share purchase agreement. After the
purchase of the shares, the purchaser amalgamated with the company whose shares
were purchased and the amalgamated company continued to do business under the
name of the purchaser. In the course of closing, the seller of the shares
transferred a significant amount of electronic data to the company to allow for
ongoing operations. After closing, the seller asserted privilege over a number
of these records. The issue on the application was whether the seller can claim
privilege over electronic records which are in the possession or control of the
amalgamated company. The application judge found that the seller and the
company whose shares were being sold sought and received legal advice from
lawyers and shared information between themselves in the common interest of
negotiating the SPA and its closing. The application judge, at para. 44, held
that the seller and the amalgamated company held a common privilege over the
contested records and, accordingly, the seller cannot claim privilege over
these records as against the amalgamated company.
[38]          
I conclude, on the authority of Dente and NEP, that the
amalgamated company continues to hold the privilege in the emails in question
on this motion, jointly with the defendants. The privilege asserted by the
defendants does not operate to prevent Ellis Packaging Limited, the amalgamated
company, from having access to the documents at issue on this motion.
[39]          
These conclusions are sufficient to dispose of the defendants' motion.
[40]          
It is not necessary for me to decide whether, if I had found that there
was no solicitor-client relationship between Mr. Mickleborough and the
companies in the Ellis Group, (i) the defendants waived privilege over the
emails in question, or (ii) the inclusion of Mr. Morley on the emails in
question means that the communications were not sent and received on a
confidential basis, such that no privilege arises. It is also not necessary for
me to make determinations concerning the second and third stages of the Celanese
analysis.
[41]          
For these reasons, the defendants' motion is dismissed.
[42]          
If the parties are unable to resolve costs, they may make written
submissions in accordance with a timetable (and reasonable page limits) to be
agreed upon by counsel and approved by me.