[1]                  
A century home was destroyed by fire before its
agreement of purchase and sale was scheduled to close. The applicant purchaser
wanted to proceed with the sale, subject to the respondent vendor’s guarantee of
the minimum amount of insurance proceeds available to indemnify the loss. The agreement
did not close as scheduled. The respondent claimed the applicant repudiated the
agreement, thereby terminating the sale and forfeiting the deposit.
[2]                  
The applicant seeks a declaration the respondent
breached an agreement of purchase and sale and requests an order of specific
performance requiring the sale to close. In the alternative, the applicant
seeks relief from forfeiture and the return of his deposit.
[3]                  
At issue is whether the applicant’s requirement
for a guaranteed amount of insurance proceeds was a repudiation of the
agreement that allowed the respondent to terminate the agreement and retain the
deposit.
[4]                  
The applicant submits he fulfilled his
obligations under the agreement. Subject only to reaching agreement on the
terms of the assignment, he was ready, willing, and able to close the sale. The
applicant contends the respondent breached the agreement because of the
untimely disclosure of the proposed assignment of insurance proceeds and an
unreasonable refusal to accommodate a brief extension to allow the parties to
reach agreement on the terms of the assignment. The respondent should not be
able to rely on the time of the essence clause. The applicant submits the
equities favour specific performance of the agreement as the property is unique,
the applicant had otherwise fulfilled his obligations under the agreement, and
damages would be an inadequate remedy. In the alternative, he submits these are
circumstances where it would be unconscionable for the respondent to retain the
deposit.
[5]                  
The respondent submits the circumstances
unquestionably demonstrate the applicant repudiated the agreement through the
insistence of varying its terms to include the respondent’s guarantee of the
insurance monies payable for the loss. The respondent acted reasonably in
agreeing to an extension of the closing date to allow for more particulars of
the insurer’s settlement position. However, the applicant was otherwise not
entitled to require the respondent to guarantee the specific amount of
insurance owing. The assignment proposed by the applicant did no more than
reflect the applicant’s obligations under the agreement and the respondent was
not required to accept the applicant’s terms for the assignment. The respondent
was therefore entitled to treat the agreement as terminated and to retain the
deposit. In any event, the respondent submits these facts do not favour
specific performance of the agreement. The century home was destroyed and all
that is at issue is a vacant property. Moreover, specific performance would
have the effect of providing the applicant with a windfall where he was
previously not motivated to close the sale. Finally, the applicant is not
entitled to relief from forfeiture. This was a straightforward real estate
transaction with no inequality of bargaining power. It is not unconscionable
for the respondent to retain the deposit in accordance with the clear terms of
the arms length agreement.
[6]                  
These reasons shall explain why the court finds
the application must fail. The weight of appellate authority leads to the
conclusion that the applicant was not ready, willing, and able to close the
sale in accordance with the agreed upon terms. The respondent was only required
to give the applicant a reasonable amount of time to consider whether to elect
to terminate the agreement or to take the insurance proceeds and close the
sale. The respondent did so. The applicant’s attempt to require the respondent
to guarantee the minimum insurance funds payable amounted to a refusal to
complete the agreement as written and entitled the respondent to accept the
repudiation, terminate the agreement and retain the deposit. In any event, the
court is not persuaded that the equities favour specific performance. Any
uniqueness to the century home vanished with its destruction in the fire. The
record is otherwise scant on evidence that demonstrates the property is otherwise
objectively or subjectively unique or that damages would be an inadequate
remedy. The agreement defined the consequences of a breach. The circumstances
are not exceptional and do not justify relief from forfeiture of the deposit.
[7]                  
The application proceeded on a written record,
with no cross-examinations on the affidavits. The parties agreed there are no
material facts in dispute and that the court can make the necessary findings
based upon the law of contract and governing authorities. While the parties
invite the court to interpret certain of the facts in a different light, I
agree there is no impediment to the court’s ability to fairly and justly
interpret the agreement on this record.
[8]                  
The applicant entered into the agreement of
purchase and sale on May 2, 2024 to buy the residential property at 144141
Hawkins Road, Tillsonburg, Ontario from the respondent estate for $775,000,
including a deposit of $25,000. The property consisted of a rural century home
on a mature two-acre lot. The deal was to close on August 12, 2025.
[9]                  
The parties used the Ontario Real Estate
Association’s (“OREA”) standard form agreement of purchase and sale. The standard
form provisions included clauses addressing the entire agreement and that time
shall be of the essence.
[10]              
The agreement also included an “insurance
clause” that provided the terms on which the property would remain at the
respondent’s risk until closing. In the event of substantial damage, the
purchaser would have the option to elect either to terminate the agreement with
a refund of the deposit or to take the proceeds of any insurance and complete
the sale:
[11]              
A fire destroyed the home on May 22, 2024. There
is no dispute that this event engaged the insurance clause.
[12]              
On July 19, 2024, the applicant’s lawyer
notified the respondent’s lawyer that the insurance clause was invoked and
requested details of the insurance available to respond to the loss. On August
2, 2024, respondent counsel provided a copy of the insurance policy. The
respondent confirmed the policy was valid and that the insurer was in the
process of obtaining quotes in respect of the loss, which might not be
available until after the scheduled closing date of August 12, 2024. On August
12, 2024, the respondent provided the closing documents; however, the parties also
formally agreed to extend the closing date to August 28, 2024, to allow for
receipt of more information about the available insurance.
[13]              
On August 26, 2024, the respondent received and
forwarded the insurer’s offer to settle the insurance claim. The contractor’s
rebuild quote totalled $973,813.94. The insurer proposed the respondent could
either hire a contractor to rebuild the house or take a cash settlement of
$749,375.37, being the rebuild quote less overhead, profit and taxes.
[14]              
On August 27, 2024, the applicant requested a
one-month extension in order to consider the insurer’s proposal. The respondent
would only agree to a brief extension of a couple more days. On August 28,
2024, the parties agreed to extend the closing date to August 30, 2024, at 5:00
pm.
[15]              
On August 29, 2024, applicant counsel raised
concern about the sufficiency of the insurer’s settlement offer and repeated
his request for a one-month extension of the closing date. That same day,
respondent counsel advised that the insurer had already given a definite
commitment of the amount payable under the policy and that the respondent would
not agree to any further extensions of the closing date. The respondent also
advised the estate would execute an assignment of the insurance proceeds to the
applicant.
[16]              
Closing day arrived on August 30, 2024. The
respondent tendered the closing documents and included an assignment of
insurance proceeds by the estate to the purchaser. The applicant forwarded the balance
of the funds due on closing and a direction authorizing the estate to transfer the
property to the applicant. However, the applicant did not register the transfer.
Respondent counsel made several inquiries throughout the day as to the status
of the registration.
[17]              
Shortly before the 5:00 pm closing deadline, the
applicant provided a revised assignment to the respondent and advised the
purchaser would close the sale subject to the respondent’s guarantee of the
minimum insurance proceeds payable for the loss. The closing deadline of 5:00
pm passed without the registration of the transfer. By follow up communication later
that evening, applicant counsel proposed that the estate trustees execute the revised
assignment with an extension of the closing date to September 3, 2024, with
adjustments to remain as at the closing date of August 30, 2024, and with time
to remain of the essence.
[18]              
By responding letter of September 3, 2024,
respondent counsel advised that the applicant had repudiated and terminated the
agreement through its insistence on the guarantee of the insurance proceeds.
The respondent returned the sale proceeds less the $25,000 deposit, taking the
position the applicant had forfeited the deposit through breach of the
agreement.
[19]              
The applicant commenced this application within
a few weeks of the failed closing and brought a motion for a certificate of
pending litigation. The parties resolved the motion on the respondent’s
undertaking the estate would not assign, sell, or encumber the property pending
final disposition of this matter.
[20]              
The reasons of the Supreme Court of Canada in Wile
v. Cook, 1986 CanLII 27 (SCC), [1986] 2 S.C.R. 137 are dispositive of this matter. Wile
concerned an insurance clause in an agreement of purchase and sale similar to,
although not the same as, the OREA insurance clause in issue. Nevertheless, the
Court of Appeal has accepted that this clause is substantially similar to the OREA
insurance clause, such that Wile applies in this context:  Bilotta v.
Booth, 2020 ONCA 522 at paras. 17-18.
[21]              
The insurance clause alleviates the harshness of
the common law which would otherwise require a purchaser to go through with a
purchase when the property is damaged and pay the full purchase price. The
provision requires the property to remain at the risk of the vendor until
closing. In the event of damage to the premises, the purchaser may either take
the insurance proceeds and complete the purchase or cancel the agreement and
have the deposit returned. However, the clause does not set forth a specific
amount of insurance. The clause only provides for the purchaser to be entitled
to receive whatever insurance proceeds may be owing, but “does not give the
purchaser any guarantee that the insurance money is necessarily collectible”:
Wile, at 143. While the purchaser is entitled to be granted time to
obtain the details of insurance coverage from the vendor and to consider his
election, the clause does not accord the purchaser the right to wait and see if
the insurer will pay. The purchaser has the option to cancel the agreement if
he is concerned about the insurance:  Wile, at 143.
[22]              
The applicant purchaser had the same option in
these circumstances. Consistent with the court’s advice in Wile, the
respondent recognized that sufficient details of the insurance proceeds would not
be available in advance of the original closing date and agreed to a two-week
extension, in which time the insurer’s settlement offer materialized. In my
view, the respondent was not required to do anything further. If the applicant
was concerned that the insurance payout was insufficient or uncertain, then his
option was to cancel the agreement and have the deposit returned.
[23]              
I do not accept the applicant’s contention that
the respondent “sprung” the terms of the assignment on the applicant and that
the respondent is therefore disentitled from relying on the time of the essence
in the agreement. The applicant was aware of the extent of the destruction, the
existence of the insurance policy, and the insurer’s offer. The closing date
was extended to permit the applicant an opportunity to receive and consider the
insurer’s settlement position. The assignment presented by the respondent did
no more than give effect to the OREA insurance clause, which obliged the
respondent to hold “any” proceeds of insurance in trust for the applicant. The
omission of the specified amount of insurance proceeds to be paid is entirely
consistent with the insurance clause and the holding in Wile.
[24]              
However, the applicant’s requirement that the
respondent execute an assignment that guaranteed a minimum of insurance monies
to be recovered went beyond the agreement and amounted to a variation of its
terms which the respondent was not obliged to accept.
[25]              
While the applicant may have intended to close
the sale, he was not “ready, willing and able” to close the agreement on its original
terms. He may have tendered the balance of the purchase funds and a direction
authorizing the transfer of the property, but he did not register the transfer.
This was deliberate and significant, as the applicant intended that the amount
of insurance monies to be paid was to be confirmed as a condition of closing
the sale. This is evident from the applicant’s communications to the respondent
on the closing date: “…we are prepared to close this transaction subject to
execution of the Assignment of Insurance Proceeds document.”
[26]              
The applicant may have misconstrued in good
faith his contractual right to know the specific amount of insurance to be paid
as a condition of closing and he may nevertheless have intended to close the
sale. However, this honest error does not mean that the applicant did not
repudiate the agreement through his insistence on the respondent’s guarantee of
the insurance proceeds. The Court of Appeal has previously recognized that Wile
is the governing authority rather than those cases which hold that an honest
but mistaken view of one’s contractual rights may not constitute repudiation:  Weenies
Inc. v. 364558 Ontario Ltd, [1988] O.J. No. 1805 (C.A.).
[27]              
I have considered the principles relevant to considering
whether specific performance is an appropriate remedy:  Semelhago v.
Paramadevan, 1996 CanLII 209 (SCC), [1996] 2 S.C.R. 415; Paterson Veterinary Professional
Corporation v. Stilton Corp. Ltd., 2019 ONCA 746; Lucas v. 1858793
Ontario Inc. (Howard Park), 2021 ONCA 52. I am not persuaded that the
equities favour specific performance as a remedy in these circumstances. I will
accept that the property had both objectively and subjectively unique qualities
given that the residence was a century home on mature rural acreage and that
the applicant is a contractor who specializes in century home restoration.
However, those unique qualities were removed by the fire loss. Specific
performance would merely achieve transfer of the vacant property with the
proceeds of insurance, which was the original bargain. There is no explanation
as to how damages are insufficient in that context. Further, for the reasons
just explained, the applicant was not ready, willing, and able to close the
sale. While he urges that he had substantially completed all that was required
to close the sale, it remains the fact that he did not as he sought the
guaranteed insurance recovery as a condition of the closing.
[28]              
In the alternative, the applicant submits that
forfeiture of the $25,000 deposit is disproportionate and unconscionable
because the applicant tendered the balance of the funds on closing such that
the respondent had not suffered any damages. I find that this is not one of
those exceptional circumstances where it would be unconscionable to enforce the
forfeiture clause:  Redstone Enterprises Ltd. v. Simple Technologies Inc.,
2017 ONCA 282. This was a straightforward and arms-length real estate
transaction with no inequality of bargaining power. As I have found the
applicant repudiated the agreement, the terms provide that the applicant
forfeits the deposit.
[29]              
The application is therefore dismissed for the
foregoing reasons.
[30]              
The parties filed bills of costs but required an
opportunity to make submissions. For example, the applicant raised that costs
of the motion for the certificate of pending litigation should not be included
in the respondent’s bill of costs.
[31]              
If the parties are unable to resolve costs, the
respondent shall file its written submissions by March 14, 2025, and the
applicant his written submissions by March 21, 2025. Written submissions are
limited to two pages excluding the bills of costs already filed. There will be
no reply without leave.