[1]              
Five
members of the Zuccarini family are embroiled in litigation regarding the
estate of the late family patriarch, Landino Zuccarini (“the Estate”) and the
management of the defendant corporations.  The plaintiffs and the defendant,
Anthony Zuccarini, are siblings; they are the children of the late Landino
Zuccarini and his widow, the defendant, Domenica Zuccarini.
[2]              
The
plaintiffs allege that, prior to his death, Landino was subject to undue
influence by Anthony.  The plaintiffs also allege that Domenica was
historically, and continues to be, subject to undue influence by Anthony. 
Last, the plaintiffs question Domenica’s capacity to make decisions regarding
the management of her property.
[3]              
The
plaintiffs assert that Anthony’s alleged undue influence is relevant to their 
challenge to the validity of a will executed by Landino in January 2019 (“the
Will”).  Domenica executed a will at the same time; its terms mirror those of
the Will.[1]
[4]              
The
2019 Wills provide that if one of the Zuccarini parents predeceases the other,
the residue of the deceased parent’s estate goes to the surviving parent.  In the
2019 Wills, each of the testators names Anthony as the sole, alternate
residuary beneficiary of the subject estate.  The plaintiffs assert that the
2019 Wills represent a marked departure from their parents’ historical stated
intention to distribute the parents’ collective estate amongst the four
children.
[5]              
The
plaintiffs also make a claim for an oppression remedy regarding the management
of the defendant corporations.  The plaintiffs and Anthony hold preferred and
common shares in the defendant corporations; Domenica holds common shares
only.
[6]              
The
plaintiffs assert that Anthony’s undue influence over the parents is relevant
to the oppression remedy claim.  Prior to his death, Landino was a director of
the defendant corporations.  Domenica was also a director of the defendant
corporations prior to Landino’s death; she remains a director of the defendant
corporations.
[7]              
The
plaintiffs allege that, in their respective capacities as directors of the
defendant corporations, Landino and Domenica breached their fiduciary
obligations to the shareholders.  The plaintiffs allege that Landino and
Domenica did so by using corporate funds, to benefit Anthony to the detriment
of the other shareholders.  The plaintiffs assert that the parents’ conduct in
that regard is the result of Anthony’s exertion of undue influence over the
parents.
[8]              
All
the defendants are represented by the same lawyers of record: Raymond H. Gouin,
a sole practitioner, and Gowling WLG (Canada) LLP (“Gowlings”).
[9]              
On
their motion, the plaintiffs seek two forms of relief.  First, the plaintiffs ask
the court to remove the defendants’ lawyers of record and require that the
defendants be separately represented.  The plaintiffs ask the court to find
that there is a conflict of interest between the defendants, such that they
require separate and independent counsel.  The plaintiffs’ position is that the
removal order is required to protect public confidence in the administration of
justice.
[10]          
Second,
the plaintiffs seek leave to amend their statement of claim.  The proposed
amendments include the addition of,
[11]          
In
response, the defendants’ position is that the plaintiffs’ motion reflects the
plaintiffs’ scorched-earth approach to the litigation.  Regarding the request
for a removal order, the defendants submit that the plaintiffs’ motion is a
veiled attempt to substantially interfere with the defendants’ respective
rights to retain counsel of their choice.
[12]          
The
defendants oppose the plaintiffs’ request for leave to amend the statement of
claim.  The defendants submit that the proposed amendments include more than
the pleading of a different factual basis in support of existing relief.  The
defendants’ position is that (a) the proposed amendments include requests for
additional relief, and (b) some of the proposed amendments constitute new
claims, for which the applicable limitation period has expired.
[13]          
The
defendants ask the court to dismiss the plaintiffs’ motion in its entirety.
[14]          
The
defendants also respond with a notice of motion for an order striking an
affidavit upon which the plaintiffs rely—the affidavit of Dr. Blum sworn on
June 20, 2022 (“the motion to strike” and “the Blum affidavit”, respectively). 
The Blum affidavit is the first of two affidavits from Dr. Blum upon which the plaintiffs
rely in support of their submissions regarding Anthony’s alleged undue
influence over Domenica.  The defendants’ position is that the Blum affidavit
constitutes advocacy and does not meet the test for admission as expert
evidence.
[15]          
The
plaintiffs ask the court to dismiss the motion to strike on the grounds that it
was never properly constituted and that it was, or should be deemed to be,
abandoned.  On the substantive issue, the plaintiffs submit that Dr. Blum’s
evidence meets the test for admission at the threshold stage of the evidentiary
analysis.
[16]          
The
following issues are determined on the motion:
[17]          
The
defendants request an order striking the Blum affidavit from the plaintiffs’
motion record.  That affidavit is the first of two affidavits from Dr. Blum
upon which the plaintiffs rely.
[18]          
The
second affidavit from Dr. Blum forms part of the record delivered by the
plaintiffs in reply to the defendants’ responding record.  This second
affidavit is not a subject of the motion to strike.
[19]          
The
second affidavit from Dr. Blum is based on a report he prepared in response to
a report prepared by one of the expert witnesses retained on behalf of the
defendants.  The latter report is an exhibit to an affidavit from that exhibit
and included in the defendants’ responding record.
[20]          
The
plaintiffs submit that the motion to strike was never properly constituted and
should be dismissed as abandoned.  The plaintiffs highlight that the defendants’
notice of motion is found at Tab 29 (of 29 tabs) in the defendants’ four-volume
responding record (“the responding record”).
[21]          
The
plaintiffs submit that the defendants failed to take any of the steps required to
set the motion to strike down for a hearing.  For example, the defendants did
not (a) serve their notice of motion as a discrete document; (b) serve a motion
record related exclusively to the motion to strike; or (c) pay a filing fee for
the motion to strike.
[22]          
The
plaintiffs describe the defendants’ conduct regarding the motion to strike as
“laying in the weeds”.  The plaintiffs submit that the defendants did not
utilize the opportunities available to them to ensure that the plaintiffs and
the court were aware that the defendants intended to proceed with the motion to
strike (i.e., regardless of the procedural deficiencies in setting the motion
to strike down for a hearing).
[23]          
Last,
the plaintiffs rely on the prejudice they would suffer if the Blum affidavit were
struck at this stage of the proceeding—as opposed to the practical consequences
for the parties, and for the court, if the evidentiary issue had been
determined prior to the hearing of the plaintiffs’ motion.
[24]          
The
defendants’ position is that their pursuit of the motion to strike should have
come as no surprise to the plaintiffs.  The responding record was served in the
summer of 2022.  For approximately 1.5 years prior to the hearing of the
plaintiffs’ motion, the plaintiffs were aware of the existence of the
defendants’ notice of motion.
[25]          
The
defendants submit that the motion to strike the Blum affidavit is analogous to
a motion at trial to disqualify an expert witness or to strike an expert’s
report; for either scenario, the evidentiary issue is determined as part of a
“larger process”.  The defendants’ position is that it was not necessary, prior to the hearing of
the plaintiffs’ motion, for the defendants to both pursue the motion to strike
and obtain a determination on the evidentiary issue.
[26]          
The
parties did not want the hearing of the plaintiffs’ motion delayed because of
the dispute as to whether the defendants abandoned or should be deemed to have
abandoned the motion to strike.  The parties agreed to proceed as follows:
[27]          
The
parties agreed that proceeding in the manner described above is efficient and
cost-effective: see Zuccarini v. Zuccarini (July 8, 2024), Ottawa, CV-28-84343 (Ont. S.C.).
[28]          
If
the court determines that the motion to strike was abandoned or is deemed to be
abandoned, then it is not necessary to determine the issues on the motion to
strike.  If the court determines that the motion to strike was not abandoned
and is not deemed to be abandoned, then the court will determine the motion to
strike.  If any portion of the Blum affidavit is struck, the court will, when
determining the plaintiffs’ motion, disregard the evidence and submissions,
from all parties, related to that evidence.
[29]          
I
turn to Rule 37 of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194 (“the Rules”) and the procedure on motions.
[30]          
Rule
37 governs the procedure on motions; it covers many topics, including abandoned
motions (r. 37.09); the material for use on motions (r. 37.10); and
confirmation of a motion (r. 37.10.1).  Each of rr. 37.09, 37.10, and 37.10.1
is relevant to the outcome of Issue No. 1.
[31]          
For
the reasons set out below, I find that the defendants are deemed to have
abandoned the motion to strike.
[32]          
I
start with the ways in which the defendants failed to comply with r. 37.10,
regarding material for use on motions.  As the moving parties on the motion to
strike, the defendants failed to file a motion record: see r. 37.10(1).  The
defendants were required to file a motion record that includes a table of
contents, followed by their notice of motion, and thereafter by the supporting
affidavits and other documents upon which the defendants intended to rely in
support of the motion to strike: see r. 37.10(2).
[33]          
The
defendants filed a single, four-volume record in their capacity as responding
parties on the plaintiffs’ motion (i.e., the responding record).  The
responding record is titled “Respondents Domenica and Anthony Zuccarini’s
Motion Record (For a Motion Scheduled to be Heard on November 16, 2022)”.[2]  The responding record consists of 28
affidavits at Tabs 1-28.  The notice of motion for the motion to strike is at
the final tab in the responding record—Tab 29.
[34]          
First,
the title on the cover page of the responding record is somewhat misleading because
the defendants are not “Respondents” in the proceeding; the defendants are the
“Responding Parties” on the plaintiffs’ motion.  In the title of their
responding record, the defendants refer to “a” motion, singular; they do not
refer to more than one motion (including, for example, the motion to strike).  As
of the date on which the defendants served the responding record, only the
plaintiffs’ motion was set for the November 16, 2022 hearing date listed in the
title of the responding record.
[35]          
Based
on the title of the responding record, I draw an inference and find that the
defendants intended that record to be their responding parties’ motion record
pursuant to r. 37.10(3); the defendants did not intend the responding record to
be their moving parties’ record, for the motion to strike, required pursuant to
r. 37.10(2).
[36]          
Second,
based on the contents of their notice of motion, the defendants were required,
in their capacity as the moving parties, to serve a motion record, consisting
of their notice of motion and the two items listed therein as the documents
upon which the defendants intend to rely: (a) the Blum affidavit; and (b) the
July 29, 2022 affidavit of Justin Tremblay.  Mr. Tremblay is a lawyer with
Gowlings.  His affidavit is found at Tab 24 of the responding record.  The Blum
affidavit is not found in the responding record; it is found only in the
plaintiffs’ motion record.  I find that the defendants did not comply with r.
37.10(3).
[37]          
Third,
prior to the commencement of the hearing of the plaintiffs’ motion, the defendants
did not take any steps to bring their notice of motion and the motion to strike
to the attention of the court’s administrative staff or any judicial officer. 
For example, the defendants did not file a moving parties’ motion record,
together with the requisite filing fee, and request a return date for the
motion to strike.  As another example, the defendants did not address the
motion to strike when participating in any case conference regarding the
logistics for and scheduling of the plaintiffs’ motion.
[38]          
Neither
the plaintiffs nor the court were given the opportunity to consider the impact
that the motion to strike, if pursued, would have on the judicial resources
required for that motion; the time required to hear that motion; the time
required before a decision would be released on that motion; and scheduling a
return date for the plaintiffs’ motion.
[39]          
When
the responding record was served in 2022, the plaintiffs were represented by
counsel other than the counsel by whom they are now represented.  Regardless of
the change in the plaintiffs’ representation, between the date on which the
defendants served the responding record and the hearing of the plaintiffs’
motion, it was not incumbent on the plaintiffs to follow up with the defendants
regarding the motion to strike.  It was the defendants’ responsibility to take
the steps necessary to secure a hearing date for the motion to strike.
[40]          
Fourth,
a single motion confirmation form was filed on December 8, 2023—approximately one
week prior to the date on which the hearing of the plaintiffs’ motion was
scheduled to commence.  Plaintiffs’ counsel filed the confirmation form.
[41]          
The
confirmation form lists 12 items to which the presiding judge will be referred. 
Four of those 12 items are records.  Items 1 to 3 are the plaintiffs’ motion
record, the responding record, and the plaintiffs’ reply record, respectively. 
Item 6 is a record filed by the defendants and titled, “Supplementary
Respondents’ Motion Record (for a motion to be heard on December 13, 2023)”[3] (“the defendants’ supplementary
record”).  The balance of the materials listed in the confirmation form are
facta, books of authorities, and compendia.
[42]          
Nothing
in the defendants’ supplementary record suggests that it relates in any way to
the motion to strike.  The defendants’ supplementary record includes an
affidavit from each of Anthony and Domenica; both affidavits were sworn in
October 2022.  The other documents in the defendants’ supplementary record are
transcripts from cross-examinations conducted of each of the three plaintiffs
in October 2022, and transcripts of two recordings.  One of the recordings was
made in September 2019 and the other was made in December 2020.
[43]          
In
the introductory paragraph of the confirmation form, plaintiffs’ counsel states
that she has “conferred or attempted to confer with the other parties and
confirm that the Motion to be heard on December 13, 2023 will proceed on the
following basis”.  Only one motion is mentioned.  In a later paragraph in the
confirmation form, plaintiffs’ counsel provides an estimate of “the time
required for the Motion”—a half day for the moving party and a full day for the
responding parties.  Again, only one motion is mentioned.
[44]          
I
find that (a) the confirmation form filed by plaintiffs’ counsel relates
exclusively to the plaintiffs’ motion, and (b) the defendants failed to file a
confirmation form related to the motion to strike.  Rule 37.10.1(4) stipulates
that, “If no confirmation form is given under subrule (1), the motion shall not
be heard and is deemed to have been abandoned, unless the court orders
otherwise.”  Rule 37.10.1(4) alone is sufficient to support a finding that the
defendants are deemed to have abandoned the motion to strike.
[45]          
Rule
37.09(2) also supports a finding that the defendants are deemed to have
abandoned the motion to strike.  That subrule stipulates that, “A party who
serves a notice of motion and does not file it or appear at the hearing shall
be deemed to have abandoned the motion unless the court orders otherwise.”
[46]          
The
defendants’ position is that they filed their notice of motion, even if it was
part of the responding record.  The defendants assert that they filed the
notice of motion, together with an affidavit of service (as required by r.
37.08(1)), by filing the affidavit of service related to the responding record.
[47]          
Based
on Rule 37, read it in its entirety, I find that the steps taken by the
defendants are not sufficient to comply with r. 37.08(1).  The defendants were
required to file the notice of motion as a discrete document, with an affidavit
of service regarding service of the notice of motion.
[48]          
I also
consider the prejudice to the plaintiffs if the defendants are permitted to
proceed with the motion to strike.
[49]          
On
December 16, 2023, prior to plaintiffs’ counsel beginning their submissions on
the plaintiffs motion, defendants’ counsel did not raise the motion to strike
as a preliminary matter; nor did defendants’ counsel inform plaintiffs’ counsel
or the court that they intended to make submissions on a motion to strike as
part of their responding submissions on the plaintiffs’ motion.  As of day one
of the hearing of the plaintiffs’ motion, neither the court nor plaintiffs’
counsel had any indication that the defendants’ position was that they were
entitled, at the hearing stage, to pursue the motion to strike.
[50]          
It
is not surprising, then, that plaintiffs’ counsel made submissions in which
they relied on the Blum affidavit.  The plaintiffs submit that they rely
“extensively” on Dr. Blum’s evidence.
[51]          
To
permit the defendants to proceed with the motion to strike as part of their
responding submissions would result in prejudice to the plaintiffs that cannot
be compensated for by an adjournment or costs.  Adjourning the plaintiffs’
motion, at the conclusion of the submissions of plaintiffs’ counsel, for the
court to hear the motion to strike, would have resulted in significant delay of
the completion of the plaintiffs’ motion.
[52]          
Such
an adjournment might also result in the plaintiffs being deprived of the
opportunity to obtain another report from Dr. Blum and prepare another
affidavit in his name (i.e., to replace the original affidavit if it were
struck in whole or in part).  Had the defendants pursued the motion to strike
in a timely manner, the plaintiffs would not have been prejudiced in the
preparation and delivery of materials in support of their motion.
[53]          
Not
only do the plaintiffs rely on the Blum affidavit that is the subject of the
motion to strike; they rely on a second affidavit sworn by Dr. Blum.  The
latter affidavit is based on a second report prepared by Dr. Blum, specifically
as part of the plaintiffs’ reply to the contents of the responding record.
[54]          
To
permit the defendants to proceed with their motion to strike, as part of their
responding submissions, would wreak havoc on the logistics for and timing of
the completion of the hearing of the plaintiffs’ motion.  The time for the
defendants to bring their motion to strike was possibly at the commencement of
the hearing of the plaintiffs’ motion and likely well before that point in the
proceeding.
[55]          
Last,
I reject the defendants’ submission that a motion to strike the contents of an
affidavit from an expert filed in support of a motion is analogous to the
determination, at trial, of an expert witness’ qualifications to give opinion
evidence or as to the scope of the expert witness’ evidence.  The procedural
and substantive requirements on a motion to strike part or all of an affidavit
from an expert witness differ from the procedural and substantive requirements relevant
to expert evidence at trial.
[56]          
To
find other than that the defendants are deemed to have abandoned the motion to
strike would be to render the requirements of Rule 37 meaningless.
[57]          
In Modern Glass & Mirror Ltd. v.
Chicanda Ltd. (1999), 46 C.L.R. (2d) 316 (Ont. Gen. Div.), at para. 13, Quinn J.
discusses r. 37.09(2) and says that it “does not provide a closed list of the
ways in which deemed abandonment may take place.”  As an example of a means by
which a party may be deemed to abandon their motion, Quinn J. identifies when a
moving party appears at the hearing and does not argue a part of his or her
motion.  Justice Quinn concludes, “that part could rightly be deemed to be
abandoned.”
[58]          
In
the matter before this court, based on the defendants’ conduct regarding the
motion to strike, including the conduct that falls within the scope of rr.
37.09(2) and 37.10.1(4), I find that the defendants are deemed to have
abandoned the motion to strike.  As a result of that conduct and the prejudice
to the plaintiffs, which arises from that conduct, the defendants are not
entitled to an order, pursuant to r. 37.09(2), relieving them of the
consequences of the deemed abandonment of the motion to strike.
[59]          
The
answer to the question posed as Issue No. 1 is “yes”.
[60]          
In
light of the answer to Issue No. 1, it is not necessary to decide Issue No. 2.
[61]          
The
plaintiffs’ position is that the outcome of the balancing exercise, described
in para. 64, below, when applied on the motion before this court, weighs in
favour of granting the removal order and requiring that the defendants be
separately represented.  The plaintiffs request that there be complete
disassociation from the file of the defendants’ counsel of record to date—meaning
that the defendants’ counsel be prohibited from continuing to represent any one
of the defendants.
[62]          
The
defendants’ position is that the plaintiffs’ allegations of conflict of
interest are based on one or both of speculation and circumstances that are
inconsequential to the issues to be determined in the proceeding.  The
defendants submit that a thorough consideration of the facts in this matter
supports a conclusion that there is no real and substantial risk of a conflict
of interest warranting the removal of the defendants’ counsel.
[63]          
The
defendants submit that Domenica has, in any event, waived any conflicts of
interest.  In reply, the plaintiffs submit that, in the circumstances of this
case, the evidence does not support a conclusion that the requirements for a
fully-informed waiver are met.
[64]          
On a
motion for the removal of an opposing party’s counsel of record, the court is
required to balance two competing principles.  The two principles are
described, as follows, in para. 8 of the decision in Dempster v. Dempster, 2008 CarswellOnt 408 (S.C.) (“Dempster No. 1”): “The first is that a party should be
entitled to be represented by counsel of his choice.  That fundamental
principle of our justice system should only be overridden where the
administration of justice or just as importantly, the public’s perception
thereof, would be damaged by that counsel remaining on the record.”
[65]          
A
removal motion is determined on an objective standard—that of a reasonably
informed member of the public.  The personal feelings of the litigant who may
be required to retain new counsel are but one of the elements in the
application of that objective standard: Everingham v. Ontario (1992), 1992 CanLII 7681 (ON SC), 8 O.R. (3d) 121 (Gen. Div.), at p.
126.
[66]          
In MacDonald Estate v. Martin, 1990 CanLII 32 (SCC), [1990] 3 S.C.R. 1235, at p. 1265, Cory J.
(concurring) says that “the integrity of the judicial system is of such
fundamental importance to our country and, indeed, to all free and democratic
societies that it must be the predominant consideration in any balancing” of
the factors considered on a removal motion.
[67]          
In
their factum, the plaintiffs include a chart in which they summarize what they
submit are seven actual, potential, or perceived conflicts of interest as
between the defendants.  In the same chart, the plaintiffs also summarize the
alleged conflicts for defendants’ counsel in representing all the defendants.
[68]          
Rather
than reproduce the chart, I summarize below the seven alleged actual,
potential, or perceived conflicts of interest between the defendants:
[69]          
The
plaintiffs submit that, for the following five reasons, the defendants’ counsel
are in conflict with their clients:
[70]          
The
record before the court on the plaintiffs’ motion is in the thousands of
pages.  The submissions on the plaintiffs’ motion consumed five days of court
time.  In the context of a ruling on a removal motion, it is not possible to
review, or even summarize, all of the evidence.  It is not necessary for the
court to make findings of fact on the many issues reviewed and to ultimately be
determined by the trial judge.
[71]          
In
the analysis section below, the circumstances of the case are considered from
the perspective of a reasonably informed member of the public.
[72]          
The
circumstances in the matter before this court are similar to those in Dempster No. 1 and Dempster v. Dempster Estate (2008), 45 E.T.R. (3d) 139 (Ont. S.C.) (“Dempster No. 2”).  A son was concerned that his 92-year-old
father was subject to the influence and control of a grandson (the son’s
nephew).
[73]          
A
distinguishing feature between the matter before this court and Dempster[4] is that, in Dempster, there was no allegation  that the
elderly family member (i.e., Domenica) was incapable.  As summarized at para.
12 of Dempster
No. 1,
the concerns raised by the son were that the grandson “has apparent control of
both the physical wellbeing and financial affairs of his grandfather.”
[74]          
In Dempster No. 1, T.M. Wood J. summarized why the
grandson and the grandfather could not be represented by the same counsel and
why the lawyer representing them both had to cease representing either family
member:
[75]          
Subsequent
to the removal order being made, the grandfather died.  A motion was made for
an order reinstating, as counsel for both the grandfather’s estate and the
grandson, the lawyer who was the subject of the earlier removal order (“Mr.
Daly”).  The moving parties submitted that, with the grandfather deceased,
there would no longer be a concern for conflict of interest (i.e., between the
grandfather’s estate and the grandson); nor could there be any need to protect
the grandfather from possible undue influence: Dempster No. 2, at para. 8.
[76]          
Justice
M.P. Eberhard refused to reinstate Mr. Daly as counsel for either the
grandfather’s estate or the grandson.  At para. 14 of Dempster No. 2, M.P. Eberhard J. reiterates the two possibilities
identified in para. 13 of Dempster No. 1 (and quoted in para. 74, above): innocent
conduct versus an individual manipulated by a caregiver upon whom the former
had become dependent.
[77]          
In
refusing the request to reinstate counsel, M.P. Eberhard J. did not rely on any
suggested impropriety.  To the contrary, at para. 19, M.P. Eberhard J. expressed
confidence that Mr. Daly, “having taken instruction from [the grandfather, he]
would properly perceive his role as part of a continuing duty of loyalty to
advocate those instructions.”
[78]          
Critical
to the outcome in Dempster No. 2 was the conclusion expressed by M.P. Eberhard J.,
at para. 19, regarding the significance of Mr. Daly’s prior role as counsel for
both the grandfather and the grandson:
[79]          
The paragraph quoted immediately above can, in
its constituent parts, be applied to the matter before this court.
[80]          
I start with the topic of undue influence.  In
the proceeding before this court, the issues to be determined at trial will
require the trial judge to make findings of fact as to whether either of
Landino or Domenica was unduly influenced by Anthony.  The trial judge will
likely hear evidence from the parties, lay witnesses familiar with the elder
Zuccarinis, and health professionals involved in the care of one or both of
them.
[81]          
The trial judge will likely also be asked to
qualify expert witnesses to provide opinion evidence on the topic of undue
influence, including whether Landino or Domenica were subject to undue
influence from Anthony.  The record before the court on the plaintiffs’ motion
includes affidavits from physicians who prepared reports and expressed opinions
on the topic of undue influence.
[82]          
It is nothing short of perplexing that, in the
circumstances of the matter before this court, any counsel would take
instructions from Anthony, the Estate, and Domenica—doing so on a premise that
the elder Zuccarinis were acting, and that Domenica continues to act, free of
undue influence from Anthony.  The defendants’ counsel fail to recognize the
significance of the allegations of undue influence may have on the outcome in
the proceeding.  The defendants’ counsel have “become enmeshed in the disputed
fact” (i.e., the existence or not of undue influence): see Dempster No. 2,
at para. 19.  The information that the defendants’ counsel receive from Anthony
and from Domenica, as well as the duty counsel owe to one individual distinct
from the duty owed to the other, cannot be disentangled.
[83]          
In their factum, the defendants make minimal
mention of undue influence.  Instead, the defendants focus on evidence of
Domenica’s capacity over time and on the approach defendants’ counsel have
taken and continue to take to potential or actual conflicts of interest between
the defendants.
[84]          
The trial judge will be required to make
findings of fact about Domenica’s capacity, or lack thereof, over time is a
matter.  I refer to that issue solely to identify that the defendants’ counsel
approach Domenica’s capacity in the same way they approach undue influence—on
the basis of a premise, namely that Domenica has, at all times, had the
requisite capacity to make decisions.  The problems which arise for defendants’
counsel because of their reliance on that premise are analogous to the problems
which arise from the premise upon which they rely regarding undue influence
(see para. 82, above).
[85]          
The approach taken by defendants’ counsel to actual
or potential conflicts of interest between Anthony and Domenica is relevant to
the outcome of the plaintiffs’ motion.  Evidence as to that approach is found
in Domenica’s affidavit sworn on July 27, 2022 and in the transcript from
cross-examination of Domenica on that affidavit.  The approach is summarized at
paragraphs 33-40 of the defendants’ factum.  The contents of those paragraphs,
prepared by defendants’ counsel, are sufficiently telling that I repeat them in
their entirety (except for footnotes identifying the source paragraph in
Domenica’s July 2022 affidavit):
[86]          
The extent to which defendants’ counsel delegated,
and continue to delegate, to their clients, the responsibility of identifying
existing or potential conflicts is beyond troubling.  The delegation of that
responsibility is also addressed at paragraphs 53-55 of the defendants’ factum. 
Once again, the contents of those paragraphs, drafted by defendants’ counsel,
are sufficiently telling to justify inclusion of the relevant paragraphs in
their entirety in this ruling:
[87]          
The conclusory statement made in paragraph 55,
quoted immediately above, says it all about the extent to which defendants’
counsel rely on as yet unsubstantiated premises.  In continuing to act for
Anthony and Domenica (to say nothing of the Estate and the defendant corporations),
the defendants’ counsel are enmeshed in more than one of the disputed facts.
[88]          
The trial judge may determine that all the
events upon which the plaintiffs’ claims are based are entirely innocent, in
accordance with Landino’s wishes, in accordance with Domenica’s wishes, and
absent of any conflict of interest.  At this stage of the proceeding, however, the
events upon which the plaintiffs rely in support of their claims are “entirely
consistent with the all too familiar scenario of [two] old and vulnerable
individual[s] being manipulated by a caregiver [i.e., their son] upon whom
[they have] become dependent”: see Dempster No. 1, at para. 13.
[89]          
No reasonably informed member of the public
looking objectively at the events upon which the plaintiffs rely in support of
their claims would conclude that this court can discover the truth with Anthony
and Domenica (again, to say nothing of the Estate and the defendant
corporations) represented by the same counsel.  To permit defendants’ counsel
to represent the defendants—or even one of them—would result in damage to the
public’s perception of the administration of justice.
[90]          
The multitude of events on which the plaintiffs
rely in support of their claims are too numerous to mention.  I provide the
following examples of events that would cause concern for a reasonably informed
member of the public looking objectively at the bases for the plaintiffs’
claims:
[91]          
I return to para. 19 of Dempster No. 2
and consider the practical implications of the defendants’ counsel continuing
to act for all the defendants in this proceeding.  One of the practical
implications identified by M.P. Eberhard J. is the inability of defendants’
counsel to assess, “in the detached manner required, what may be relevant to
the dispute about his (and others’) involvement with the [numerous] clients and
what might attract privilege as between them.”
[92]          
A second practical implication, also identified
in para. 19 of Dempster No. 2, is that the death of the elder family
member (in the matter before this court, Landino), does not free defendants’
counsel from the potential for conflict of interest.  If anything, Landino’s
death adds to the potential for conflict of interest because Anthony is named
as the sole estate trustee of the Estate.  Anthony’s application for
appointment in that capacity is opposed; at present, there is no one named in a
representative capacity for the Estate in this litigation.  How the defendants’
counsel are obtaining instructions on behalf of the Estate is unclear to the
court.
[93]          
The practical implications arising from
defendants’ counsel continuing to act for all defendants extend beyond those
identified in Dempster No. 2.  The practical implications extend to the
defendant corporations, the capacity in which the parties are respectively
involved in those corporations (as shareholders and, for the elder Zuccarinis,
as directors), the oppression remedy claim, and the consideration of fiduciary
obligations owed by directors.
[94]          
The defendants’ counsel are enmeshed in many
disputed issues because of their representation of the Estate, Domenica,
Anthony, and the corporate defendants.  The defendants’ counsel cannot possibly
disentangle themselves from the obligations owed to the corporate entities and
to the individuals in their respective personal capacities and corporate
capacities.
[95]          
The subject of a representative for the Estate
for the purpose of this action is addressed in a later section of this ruling.
[96]          
Given my findings regarding the nature and
extent of the conflicts of interest between the defendants, I only briefly
address the defendants’ position on waiver.
[97]          
First, it is important to remember that to
determine the issues in dispute between the parties, the trial judge will be
required to consider Domenica’s conduct personally and in her capacity as a
director of the defendant corporations.  There is no evidence before the court
to suggest that Domenica signed a waiver.  If such a waiver existed, it would
have to address not only the potential for conflict of interest between
Domenica, personally, and Anthony, but between (a) Domenica personally and all
other defendants, and (b) Domenica, in her capacity as a director of the
defendant corporations, and (i) the Estate, and (ii) Anthony.
[98]          
I question whether it would be possible to draft
a waiver to sufficiently address the totality of the potential (and real)
conflicts for Domenica in this proceeding.
[99]          
Second, the plaintiffs’ concerns about
Domenica’s capacity and vulnerability to undue influence by Anthony go beyond
mere speculation.  Numerous experts’ reports have been exchanged by the parties
on the issue of undue influence.  It would be unreasonable for the court, at
this stage of the proceeding, to make a finding regarding Domenica’s capacity
to waive a conflict (whether in writing or otherwise) and whether the waiver,
if found to have been made, was made freely and without undue influence from
Anthony.
[100]      
Third, the defendants ask the court to find that
Domenica has waived any conflict; yet the defendants do not rely on either a
written waiver executed by Domenica or even, at a minimum, a certificate of
independent legal advice.  Whether or not Domenica has waived conflict is yet
another example of the defendants’ counsel “becom[ing] enmeshed in the disputed
fact”: see Dempster No. 2, at para. 19.
[101]      
In summary, based on the existing record, and in
the circumstances of this proceeding, I decline to find that Domenica has
waived any real or potential conflicts of interest.
[102]      
In their factum, the defendants emphasize that a
removal order is the last resort.  The defendants ask the court to consider
whether there is even a “trace of a conflict of interest between Anthony,
Domenica and/or any of the Defendants”.  The defendants highlight that unless
it is abundantly clear that a conflict of interest exists, then the court must
consider a remedy short of removal of counsel to “cure the problem”: see Celanese
Canada Inc. v. Murray Demolition Corp., 2006 SCC 36, [2006] 2 S.C.R. 189,
at para. 56.
[103]      
The defendants suggest, for example, that the
court make an order requiring each defendant to obtain independent legal advice;
based on that advice, each party would then determine whether they require
separate representation from the other defendants.  That solution is neither
practical nor would it “cure the problem”.  If only one of the defendants chose
to be represented by separate counsel, it would be incumbent upon the defendants’
counsel to cease to act for all of the other defendants.
[104]      
For the reasons given, it is abundantly
clear that conflicts of interest exist between the defendants and that nothing
short of a removal order would “cure the problem”.  Each of the defendants is required to be separately
represented in the proceeding.  The order made at the
conclusion of this ruling requires that there be complete disassociation from the file of the
defendants’ counsel of record to date.
[105]      
The evidence before this court suggests that the
two defendant corporations are no longer in operation and may have no assets.  The
status of those corporations may have practical implications when it comes to
retaining counsel.  It will be up to the directing mind(s) of those
corporations and the lawyers whom they seek to retain to address those
implications.
[106]      
It is also necessary for the Estate to be
separately represented.  It will be up to the individual identified to
represent the Estate for the purpose of this proceeding to retain counsel to
represent the Estate.  If the parties are unable to resolve the issue of the
amendment to the title of proceeding related to representation of the Estate,
one of the parties must bring a motion for the requisite relief.
[107]      
I turn next to the plaintiffs’ request for leave
to amend the statement of claim.
[108]      
The
statement of claim was issued in September 2020.  Pleadings closed in early
2021.
[109]      
At a
case conference conducted on May 30, 2022, the plaintiffs first gave notice of
their intention to seek leave to amend the statement of claim.  I refer to the
draft amended statement of claim proposed at that time as “Version One”.  Subsequent
to May 2022, the plaintiffs provided the defendants with a revised draft
amended statement of claim (“Version Two”).
[110]      
Both
Version One and Version Two are before the court on the plaintiffs’ motion for
leave to amend the statement of claim.  The plaintiffs request leave to amend
their pleading in accordance with Version Two.  If the court does not grant the
plaintiffs leave to make an amendment proposed only in Version Two, then the
plaintiffs request leave to amend their pleading in accordance with the subject
amendment as it appears in Version One.
[111]      
The
plaintiffs propose two types of amendments to their pleading.  First, the
plaintiffs propose to expand paragraph 2 by including in it additional forms of
relief they wish to pursue as against Anthony and Domenica.  The relief claimed
against Anthony and Domenica is distinct from the relief the plaintiffs seek in
the context of the oppression remedy claim (set out in paragraph 1 of the
statement of claim).
[112]      
Second,
the plaintiffs seek leave to amend substantive paragraphs in the body of their
pleading.
[113]      
The text
of the proposed amendments to paragraph 2 of the statement of claim is set out
below.  Text that appears in both versions is in Times New Roman font; grey
shading is used to identify the text of the proposed amendments that appear
only in Version Two:
[114]      
The
defendants oppose the amendments proposed to paragraph 2 of the pleading—the
additional relief requested.
[115]      
The
defendants consent to the following proposed amendments to the substantive paragraphs,
as they appear in Version Two:
[116]      
I
move on to the parties’ respective positions regarding proposed paragraphs
2(d)-(j), set out above.
[117]      
The
plaintiffs rely on the mandatory language of r. 26.01 of the Rules of Civil Procedure.  The plaintiffs’ position is that, if
they are granted leave to amend their pleading as set out in Version Two, the
defendants will not suffer any prejudice for which they cannot be compensated
in an adjournment or costs.
[118]      
The
plaintiffs highlight the timing of their motion; the action has not yet
proceeded to the documentary discovery stage or to examinations for discovery.
[119]      
At
para. 69 of their factum, the plaintiffs submit that the proposed “amendments
expand on issues relating to Domenica’s capacity and the undue influence
perpetrated by Anthony, which has become further discoverable throughout the
action.”  Although the plaintiffs address the concept of discoverability in
their factum, in neither version of the proposed amended statement of claim do
the plaintiffs address discoverability within the meaning of s. 5 of the Limitations Act, 2002, S.O. 2002, c. 24, Sched. B.
[120]      
In
their oral submissions, the plaintiffs rely on item “(h)” in the list of relief
set out in their notice of motion: “such further and other relief as to this
Honourable Court may [s]eem just.”  The plaintiffs ask the court to grant them
leave to add to Version Two the paragraph or paragraphs required to address
discoverability.
[121]      
The plaintiffs
submit that the defendants will not be prejudiced regarding any potential
limitation defences (whether based on discoverability or otherwise) if leave to
amend is granted without prejudice to the defendants to rely on the limitation
defences available to them.
[122]      
The
plaintiffs address the distinction between the additional declaratory relief
proposed (which the defendants do not oppose) and consequential relief, if any,
proposed (which the defendants oppose).  The plaintiffs submit that leave to
amend could be granted without prejudice to the defendants to (a) distinguish
between declaratory and consequential relief, and (b) address that distinction
as part of the defence at trial.
[123]      
The defendants’
position is that they should not be put to the expense of defending claims that
have no chance of success—whether the lack of any chance of success arises
because of the expiration of a limitation period or the distinction between
declaratory and consequential relief.
[124]      
The
plaintiffs assert that the proposed amendments to paragraph 2 are nothing more
than particulars of additional relief claimed.  The defendants’ position is
that at least some of the proposed amendments involve an expansion of the
factual matrix to obtain the additional forms of relief.  The defendants submit
that the expanded factual matrix includes claims that are barred by reason of
the expiration of a limitation period.
[125]      
Regarding
the potential expiration of a limitation period, the defendants highlight that
Version Two was provided to them on May 5, 2023.  For the amendments that
appear in Version Two alone, that date should be relied on for the purpose of
any limitation period defence.  The clock for those claims did not stop running
in June 2022, when the plaintiffs produced Version One.
[126]      
For
the purpose of the motion for leave to amend in the context of this proceeding,
and at this stage of the proceeding, I read r. 26.01 together with r. 1.04 and
r. 2.01.  In determining whether the plaintiffs are granted leave to amend the
statement of claim,
[127]      
I
also keep in mind that this is a pleadings motion.  It would be an unreasonable
use of the court’s resources for the court, on a pleadings motion, to wade into
limitation period issues based on materials that number in the thousands of
pages.
[128]      
For
the court to attempt to distinguish between declaratory and consequential
relief on the basis of a paper record creates the risk of inconsistent findings
of fact between the motion judge and the trial judge.  At trial, the presiding
judge will have the opportunity to hear from the witnesses and assess their
respective credibility and reliability.  The trial judge may also benefit from
documents made available through the documentary discovery process and
cross-examination based on transcripts from examinations for discovery.
[129]      
 The
defendants will not be prejudiced in terms of any limitation defences available
to them.  First, leave is granted to the plaintiffs to amend their statement of
claim in accordance with Version Two, without prejudice to the defendants
raising potential limitation period defences.  Second, if, at a later stage of
the proceeding, the defendants are confident in one or more limitation
defences, it remains open to the defendants to bring a motion for summary
judgment.  Such a motion, if pursued, would be focussed on limitation defences—with
the evidence  narrowed to the specific issues and in written and oral
submissions focussed on those issues.
[130]      
I
agree with the defendants that it is necessary to identify two dates on which
the clock stopped running for the purpose of limitation period defences.  For
the proposed amendments that appear in both Version One and Version Two, the
clock stopped running in 2022.  For the proposed amendments that appear only in
Version Two, the clock stopped running in 2023.  If the parties are unable to
agree upon the precise dates in 2022 and 2023, the parties shall arrange to
make additional submissions to the court.
[131]      
Last, I
address the plaintiffs’ request, made for the first time during oral
submissions, for leave to amend Version Two to include substantive text
addressing discoverability within the meaning of s. 5 of the Limitations Act.
[132]      
I
start by highlighting that the plaintiffs do not address the concept of
discoverability in either Version One or Version Two.  In their notice of
motion, the plaintiffs list 29 substantive grounds which they rely upon in
support of the relief they request.  The plaintiffs do not address
discoverability in the grounds in support of their motion.
[133]      
In
only one of the 29 itemized grounds do the plaintiffs even deal with the
request for leave to amend their pleading.  At item 29, the plaintiffs say,
“The Plaintiffs are entitled to amend the Statement of Claim as there would be
no prejudice to the Defendants.”  The grounds upon which the plaintiffs rely
include, at item 30, r. 26.01.  The plaintiffs do not rely on s. 5 of the Limitations Act.
[134]      
As
noted above, at paragraph 69 of their factum, the plaintiffs describe the
proposed amendments as expanding “on issues relating to Domenica’s capacity and
the undue influence perpetrated by Anthony, which has become further
discoverable throughout the action.”  That allusion to discoverability is not
sufficient to support leave being granted to the plaintiffs to amend their
pleading, with particulars as yet unspecified, to address discoverability.
[135]      
It
would be entirely unfair to the defendants to proceed as the plaintiffs suggest
on this issue.  To proceed as the plaintiffs suggest would result in the
defendants being denied the right to make fulsome response to the motion and
fulsome oral submissions on the issue.
[136]      
If
the plaintiffs wish to do so, they may bring a further motion for leave to
amend their pleading (Version Two, with additional paragraphs addressing
discoverability).  If the plaintiffs decide to bring such a motion, it will be
incumbent on them to provide the requisite evidence in support of the proposed
amendments.
[137]      
If
the plaintiffs pursue a further motion for leave to amend, the defendants will
have the opportunity to respond to the factual issues related to
discoverability for the purpose of any limitation period defences, including
with cross-examination of individuals whose affidavits are filed in support of
the motion.
[138]      
It will
also be also open to the plaintiffs to consider whether to consider the
specific limitation defences plead by the defendants and whether, in reply, to
address discoverability.  In that regard, I refer to the decision of the Court
of Appeal for Ontario in Collins v. Cortez, 2014 ONCA 685.  At para. 10, the Court
of Appeal for Ontario says the following as to when a plaintiff, relying on the
discoverability principle, may plead the relevant facts material to
discoverability:
[139]      
See
also Canadian Real Estate Association v.
American Home Assurance Company, 2015 ONCA 389, at
para. 1; and Lee v. Chang, 2024 ONSC 580, at para. 150.
[140]      
Based
on the materials before the court, the plaintiffs are not entitled to leave to
amend their pleading in an unspecified manner to address discoverability. 
Based on the decision in Collins, the plaintiffs are not required to plead
discoverability in their amended statement of claim; they are entitled to
address discoverability in their reply.
[141]      
The plaintiffs
are granted leave to amend their statement of claim, in accordance with the
draft amended statement of claim described in this ruling as “Version Two”,
subject to the following terms:
[142]      
The
final topic that I address is the status of the proceeding in light of the fact
that there is no representative named for the Estate.
[143]      
Rule
9 of the Rules
of Civil Procedure addresses proceedings by or against an estate or a
trust.  Anthony has applied for a certificate appointing him as the estate trustee
of the Estate.  The plaintiffs oppose that application.  The court is not aware
of any steps being taken, other than Anthony’s application, for the appointment
of a representative of the Estate—generally, or for the purpose of this
proceeding.
[144]      
Pursuant
to r. 9.03(2), the fact that the Estate is named without reference to a
personal representative does not render the proceeding a nullity.  In addition,
the court has the discretion to order that the proceeding be continued against
“the proper executor or administrator of the deceased or against a litigation
administrator appointed for the purpose of the proceeding”.  If such an order
is made, then the title of proceeding must be amended accordingly.
[145]      
It
is important that a representative of the Estate for the purpose of this proceeding
be identified as soon as possible.  Pursuant to r. 9.03(6), because of the
manner in which the Estate is named  the title of proceeding, “No further step
in [the proceeding] shall be taken until it is properly constituted and, unless
it is properly constituted within a reasonable time, the court may dismiss the
proceeding or make such other order as is just.”
[146]      
At
the conclusion of the hearing of the plaintiffs’ motion, the parties provided
the court with a consent and draft order for an order amending the title of
proceeding to identify Anthony as the personal representative of the Estate.  The
fact that the parties consent to such relief does not require the court to sign
the order.
[147]      
It
would not be reasonable to sign the proposed order.  In light of the real and
potential conflicts identified as between the Estate and the other defendants,
including Anthony, it is not possible to have Anthony represent the Estate in
this proceeding.  A litigation administrator must be appointed for the Estate.
[148]      
Pursuant
to r. 9.03(6), the action is stayed save and except for the parties being
granted leave to take the following steps:
[149]      
Prior
to bringing the motion for removal of the defendants’ lawyers of record and
leave to amend their statement of claim, the plaintiffs served a motion record
for a motion in which they seek injunctive relief.  That motion was adjourned,
pending the outcome of the matters now before the court.  If the plaintiffs
intend to pursue the motion for injunctive relief, they will not be able to do
so until such time as the proceeding is properly constituted as against the
Estate and the stay of proceeding is lifted.
[150]      
For
the reasons set out above,
[151]      
I
conclude this ruling by turning to the issue of costs of the plaintiffs’
motion.
[152]      
The
parties did not file costs outlines.  If the parties are unable to resolve the issue of
costs, written submissions shall be made in accordance with the following
requirements and timetable:
[153]      
If
the plaintiffs’ costs submissions are not delivered within the timeframe
specified in para. 152(f)(i), above, there shall be no order as to costs of the
motion.