[1]    
     The
plaintiffs in two related libel actions move for summary judgment, as directed
by the case management judge. They claim they have been libeled by the
defendant and are entitled to general, aggravated, punitive, and exemplary
damages, as well as costs.
[2]    
     The
defendant, Mr. Webster, denies that he libeled the plaintiffs and contends that
these proceedings should be heard by a jury. He argues that the actions are not
suitable for summary judgment proceedings.
[3]    
     Mr.
Webster submits that a jury should determine the “reasonable person” test, not
a judge on a summary judgment motion.
[4]    
     Are
these actions suitable for determination in a summary judgment motion?
[5]    
     Rule
20 of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, sets out the
parameters of the summary judgment rule. Rule 20.04(2) provides that the court
shall grant summary judgment if,
[6]          Rule
20.04(2.1) provides that,
[7]    
     In Hryniak
v. Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 87, the Supreme Court of Canada
considered the application of the summary judgment rule. It concluded the
following at paras. 49–50:
[8]    
     In Skafco
Limited v. Abdalla, 2020 ONSC 136, 62 C.C.L.T. (4th) 14, Justice McLeod
reviewed the history of procedure in libel actions. At para. 44, he concluded
that summary judgment is available in some defamation actions where the motions
judge has been able to conclude that there is no genuine issue for trial and
the affidavit evidence is sufficient.
[9]    
     At
para. 45, Justice McLeod explains,
[10]    
 Mr. Webster submits that
this is a novel case. He submits that the test for defamation is not met
because there is no evidence that the impugned words lowered the plaintiffs’
reputations in the eyes of reasonable people.
[11]    
 He contends that credibility
is an issue that only a jury fulfilling the function of “reasonable persons”
can assess, including determining the impact of the words in the community and
assessing damages. He also argues that an alternate meaning is available to
understand the terms “grooming” and “groom”, as used in the impugned posts on
the Internet (“the posts”). The defendant also pleads fair comment.
[12]    
 In this case, the individual
parties in both actions have filed a fulsome record containing affidavit
evidence from the parties and their experts, as well as cross-examinations of
the deponents. The evidence includes the social context of the alleged
defamatory words, and inferences to be drawn from the posts.
[13]    
 As well, the documentary
evidence establishes that the defendant was the publisher of the impugned
internet posts; that the posts were published to at least one other person; and
that the individual plaintiffs appear in the posts. The plaintiffs’ documentary
evidence also shows that the posts refer to them, and discusses the allegation
that they are defamatory based on the actual words used, and on expert
evidence.
[14]    
 Issues of law, including the
sufficiency of the pleadings, the standing of the Rainbow Alliance Dryden to
advance a claim, and the availability of the defence of fair comment are
discussed in detail and supported by caselaw.
[15]    
 I do not agree that these
cases are unsuitable for summary judgment. As I have said, Rule 20.04(2.1)
permits the court to weigh evidence, evaluate credibility, and draw inferences,
as well as apply the law applicable to defamation. The summary judgment
procedure is a proportionate, more expeditious, and less expensive means to
achieve a just result, given the nature of the case before me.
[16]    
 The parties have filed
voluminous materials to allow the court to make the necessary findings of fact
and apply the law in these cases. The plaintiffs have also filed caselaw in
support of their claim for damages. I conclude that there is a complete record
from which I will be able to consider the claims made by the plaintiffs and the
defences advanced by the defendant, comparable to what could be presented at
trial. For these reasons, I find these motions are entirely appropriate for
summary judgment.
[17]    
 Where an individual in these
proceedings has expressed a preference in the use of personal pronouns, I will
refer to them using those pronouns. For example, Caitlin Hartlen identifies as
non-binary and prefers the pronouns they/them. Felicia Crichton identifies as a
pansexual woman. Her preferred pronouns are she/her. John-Marcel Forget
identifies as two-spirit; his preferred pronouns are he/him. Dr. Mason’s
preferred pronouns are they/them.
[18]    
 The witnesses and intervenor
in this proceeding use different acronyms to refer to those who identify as
sexually diverse and those having varying gender expressions and gender
identities. For example, the plaintiffs use the acronym 2SLGBTQIA+, which
refers to individuals who identify as two-spirit, lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transsexual, queer, intersex, and asexual. Caitlin Hartlen explains in their
affidavit that,
[19]    
 By contrast, the intervenor,
Egale Canada (“Egale”), prefers the acronym 2SLGBTQI, meaning two-spirit,
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transsexual, queer, and intersex.
[20]    
 The plaintiffs’ expert
witness, Dr. Cameron Crookston, uses the acronym LGBTQ2+, and explains why at
the first footnote in his affidavit:
[21]    
 Dr. Corinne Mason is also an
expert witness for the plaintiffs. They adopts the acronym, LGBTQ+, meaning lesbian,
gay, bisexual, trans, and queer, and explains at the first footnote in their affidavit,
[22]    
 In these reasons, while
inconsistent, I will use the acronym that is used by the witness or intervenor
to whom I refer. However, whatever acronym is used, it is intended that the
acronym apply inclusively to those who identify as part of a sexual and gender
diverse community.
[23]    
 There are two plaintiffs in
the Kenora action. The Rainbow Alliance Dryden (“RAD”), a federal,
not-for-profit corporation that serves the Dryden area 2SLGBTQIA+ community.
Its objectives are to advocate on behalf of the 2SLGBTQIA+ community, raise
public awareness, and educate the community about sexual and gender diversity
and inclusion through local events and initiatives.  RAD was founded in 2017
and incorporated on January 17, 2023.
[24]    
 Caitlin Hartlen resides in
Dryden and works for an Indigenous child and family services agency. Mx.
Hartlen is currently the co-chair of RAD and has been closely involved with
organizing RAD’s events. They have previously been active in establishing a
Pride organization in the Fort Frances area and served on the board of Canada’s
national Pride organization, Fierté Canada Pride. Currently, they serve on the
board of the Northwest Community Legal Clinic.
[25]    
 Mx. Hartlen performs as a
drag king under the alias of “Jack D” when they are before an audience
comprised of all-ages. When performing before an adults-only audience, Mx.
Hartlen’s stage name is “Jack Doff.” They have no criminal record and have
never been charged with any sexual or violent offence or accused of engaging in
criminal or predatory conduct.
[26]    
 The defendant, Brian
Webster, currently resides in Calgary, Alberta, where he is employed in
construction. He indicates that he does citizen journalism and commentary in
his spare time.
[27]    
 Mr. Webster admits to being
the administrator of a Facebook page known as “Real Thunder Bay Courthouse –
Inside Edition (“Courthouse Page”) and to writing the impugned post in the
Kenora action.
[28]    
 There are also two
plaintiffs in the Thunder Bay action. Felicia Crichton is a long-time resident
of Thunder Bay, Ontario, and is the married mother of four children between the
ages of 6 and 14. In addition to her drag activities, she works as a painting
instructor.
[29]    
 Like Mx. Hartlen, Ms.
Crichton has no criminal record. She has never been charged with any sexual or
violent offence or accused of engaging in criminal or predatory conduct.
[30]    
 Ms. Crichton’s interest in
theatre began in high school. She began attending drag performances in the
early 2010s and created her drag character in 2014, mentored by her
co-plaintiff, John-Marcel Forget. Her first drag performance was in 2015. She
performs as a drag queen under the stage name, “Mz. Molly Poppinz.”
[31]    
 Ms. Crichton explains that,
consistent with drag culture, her stage name incorporates puns, pop culture
references, and innuendo. Her character speaks with a British accent. “Molly”
is an homage to the mother character, Molly Weasley, in Harry Potter. She
acknowledges that some might identify her character with the British nanny
character, Mary Poppins.
[32]    
 She indicates that adults
may recognize the innuendo from her stage name, “Molly Poppinz” as referring to
“popping molly,” a slang for consumption of a club drug. Ms. Crichton emphasizes
that she does not use drugs and does not refer to “popping molly” during her
performances.
[33]    
 Ms. Crichton explains that
story time with drag performers are part of the evolution of drag, now offered
in cities across North America. She and Mr. Forget have been doing drag story
hour in partnership with the Thunder Bay Public Library since 2018. The story
time program includes children’s stories, crafts, and singing, with a goal of
“fostering acceptance and an appreciation of diversity.”
[34]    
 Ms. Crichton indicates that
the defendant’s post is,
[35]    
 The second plaintiff,
John-Marcel Forget, is also a Thunder Bay resident and a farmer in the area. He
has performed in drag for more than 20 years and, as a senior member of the
drag community, he has mentored many who are interested in drag performance.
Both these plaintiffs make an income from their drag performances.
[36]    
 Mr. Forget’s drag queen
character is “Lady Fantasia La Premiere.” He describes the character’s name as
a reference to fantasy. When entertaining children, he tells them that Lady
Fantasia is the “Princess of Love, Peace, and Pride” from “Glamazonia, a
fictional place that values inclusion and belonging.”
[37]    
 Like Ms. Crichton, when he
is before an audience of children, his drag costume is more conservative, using
colourful clothing and simple makeup. With an adult audience, such as in a bar,
he uses more provocative dress and makeup.
[38]    
 Mr. Forget has never been
criminally charged with child pornography offences, sexual abuse or misconduct,
or any other offence related to the endangerment or abuse of children or young
people.
[39]    
 The defendant in this action
is Mr. Webster, whom I have previously identified. He admits to being the
administrator of the Courthouse Page previously referred to and the author of
the impugned post in the Thunder Bay action. He states that he did not say that
these particular drag queens are pedophiles.
[40]    
 In September 2022, RAD
planned a weekend of drag events in Dryden, including a ticketed drag show for
adults, a ticketed drag brunch for all ages, and a free drag story-time for all
ages at the public library. Mx. Hartlen was scheduled to perform at the drag
show for adults, but not at the other events. This was not Dryden’s first drag
event.
[41]    
 Posters advertising the
events were shared on social media and put up in the community. The posters
featured pictures of the drag performers and their stage names. Mx. Hartlen’s
name and photo appeared on the posters.
[42]    
 A few days before the
events, Mx. Hartlen was interviewed on CBC Radio’s Superior Morning
about the coming drag events. This was a region-wide broadcast. After the
broadcast, a person complained to the Ontario Provincial Police that the drag
story-time at the library was an effort to “groom” children. The police
investigated.
[43]    
 The investigation was
reported by the CBC’s regional journalist, Jon Thompson, on September 16, 2022.
His article was titled, “Dryden, Ont. was all set to host a weekend drag event.
Then police responded to an unfounded prank call.”
[44]    
 On September 17, 2022, Mx.
Hartlen discovered a Facebook page titled “Real Thunder Bay Courthouse – Inside
Edition (“Courthouse Page”) that contained a photograph of the Thunder Bay
Courthouse. It claimed to be a “media/news” company.
[45]    
 The post published
screenshots of Mr. Thompson’s article in which the plaintiffs’ names are
clearly identifiable. Mx. Hartlen’s image also appears along with other drag performers
depicted at a drag event held in Fort Frances in 2019. This unrelated photo
included the image of a child being held by her parent, dressed as a drag
performer.
[46]    
 The screenshots were
followed by text posted by the page administrator (capitals in original) that
said:
[47]    
 Following the initial post,
Mr. Webster edited the text of the post to add one sentence. The amended post
then read as follows:
[48]    
 This post was publicly
available on the internet, including to anyone with a Facebook account, and to
all Facebook users, regardless of whether they “liked” or “followed” the
Courthouse page. It was published on or about September 17, 2022.
[49]    
 Mx. Hartlen deposes that
around the time this post was made, the Courthouse Page had around 4,400
“likes” and 6,500 “followers.” During this litigation, Mr. Webster indicated
that he had been “locked out” of his Facebook page.
[50]    
 Mr. Webster admits that the
post was published to third parties. He also admits that he had no personal
knowledge that the people depicted in the photograph were performing drag for
children.
[51]    
 The plaintiffs’ factum
observed that these third parties responding to the posts stated, or implied,
that the plaintiffs and others associated with them and their events were,
[52]    
 Mr. Webster endorsed many of
these third-party comments with “likes” and laughing emojis. He was served with
the plaintiffs’ notice of libel on October 27, 2022.
[53]    
 On December 1, 2022, the
plaintiffs in the Thunder Bay proceeding promoted an event on their Facebook
page called “Story Time with TBay Drag Queens.” The event was planned for
December 10, 2022, at a branch of the Thunder Bay Public Library.
[54]    
 The plaintiffs’ post
contained details of the event, headshot photos of Ms. Crichton and Mr. Forget
as their drag characters, and text that identified them by their drag names. It
was also posted on the library’s internet page.
[55]    
 On December 10, 2022, Mr.
Webster published the plaintiffs’ promotional image from their Facebook page on
his Courthouse Page with the following text (capitals in original):
[56]    
 The links to online articles
identified individuals who had allegedly been charged with child pornography
offences. They were not associated with the plaintiffs or with their event.
[57]    
 Mr. Webster admits that he
never attended the drag story events or any of the plaintiffs’ performances. He
admits that his post was published to third parties. The impugned post
generated responses from third parties stating or implying that the plaintiffs
were pedophiles, were mentally ill, that the drag story time events constituted
pedophilia or sexual abuse of children, or that their event was sexually
exploitive of children, grooming them or endangering young people.
[58]    
 Mr. Webster was served with
a notice of libel on January 13, 2023. The post was available for viewing online
until January 18, 2023.
[59]    
 In Grant v. Torstar Corp.,
2009 SCC 61, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 640, at para. 28, the Supreme Court of Canada
summarized the elements of proof required in a defamation action:
[60]    
 The Supreme Court added, at
para. 29, that “[i]f the plaintiff proves the required elements, the onus then
shifts to the defendant to advance a defence in order to escape liability.”
[61]    
 At its core, the issue in
both actions is whether the terms “groomers” or “grooming” are defamatory. The
plaintiffs contend that these terms are a slur that implies that the plaintiffs
influence and manipulate children for purposes of sexual exploitation – in
other words, that the plaintiffs are pedophiles.
[62]    
 In their affidavit, Mx.
Hartlen commented on the defamatory meaning of the post. At para. 43 of their
affidavit, Mx. Hartlen stated their understanding of the term, “grooming” as
follows:
[63]      At para. 42 of their affidavit, Mx.
Hartlen commented that the post,
[64]    
 At para. 41 of their
affidavit, Mx. Hartlen reacted to the post:
[65]      Ms. Crichton’s affidavit was to
similar effect: that “grooming” was a slur on 2SLGBTQIA+ individuals or members
of the drag community born out of homophobia or transphobia: see para. 47.
[66]    
 She observed, at para. 44 of
her affidavit,
[67]      Ms. Crichton indicated that she
was significantly distressed to see her work as a performer smeared in this
manner, stating or implying that she is one of the “local drag queens who have
been criminally charged with child pornography”: see para. 42. She added that,
[68]      At para. 39 of her affidavit, she
concluded:
[69]      Mr. Forget adopted the contents of
the Hartlen and Crichton affidavits. At para. 12 of his affidavit he concludes,
[70]      The defendant’s affidavits filed
in both proceedings indicate he believes that the “disguised people” in the
photo have an “agenda” for Drag Queen story hour, which he defines as grooming
children to “live queerly.” Mr. Webster indicates that “grooming”, by
definition, is the “practice of preparing or training someone for a particular
purpose or activity.”
[71]    
 The defendant describes this
as “drag pedagogy,” a term he has adopted from an academic article published in
Curriculum Inquiry, 2021, Vol. 50, No 5, pages 440–461. The article is authored
by Harper B. Keenan, assistant professor of Gender and Sexuality Research in
Education at the University of British Columbia and Lil Miss Hot Mess, who is a
drag queen performer, author, board member for Drag Queen Story Hour, and a PhD
candidate in Media, Culture and Communication at New York University.
[72]    
 For the following reasons, I
do not accept the evidence about drag pedagogy, incorporated by reference into
Mr. Webster’s affidavit. These are not his opinions. He purports to explain and
justify his actions with academic commentary without identifying or qualifying
the authors as experts. Unlike the plaintiffs’ expert reports filed in these
proceedings, the authors do not acknowledge their duty to the court as experts.
[73]    
 Furthermore, the opinion
evidence offered as expert evidence about drag pedagogy is not included in an
affidavit; indeed, it is not evident that the authors are aware that their
academic writing has been used in this proceeding. These opinions have not been
tested by cross-examination. This is purely self-serving material attached to
Mr. Webster’s affidavit for the purpose of justifying his posts ex post
facto.
[74]    
 In the Thunder Bay
proceeding, Mr. Webster draws attention to Ms. Crichton’s stage name, “Molly
Poppinz,” and the allusion “Molly” makes to the illicit drug, commonly known as
“ecstasy.”
[75]    
 In this litigation, Mx.
Hartlen produced to the defendant several stories that are read to children at
Drag Queen Story events. Each of these stories deal with gender identity issues
told in age-appropriate language with age-appropriate illustrations. They
contain no reference to drug use or sexual practices; instead they focus on
identity, self-worth, and acceptance.
[76]    
 In his affidavit, Mr.
Webster also attaches images of Lady Fantasia, which he described as
“discoverable by the public”, and which show Mr. Forget in various degrees of
undress. He states that “[t]he pictures of Lady Fantasia are another way of
teaching “living queerly” to anyone with access to a computer or a phone.”
[77]    
 In cross-examination, Mr.
Webster stated that he retrieved these photos from Mr. Forget’s Instagram
account. This material was not appended to the notices for Drag Queen Story
Hour. There is no evidence that Mr. Forget invited children at story hour to
view his Instagram account.
[78]      Mr. Webster indicated that while
he has no knowledge of how Mr. Forget dresses for drag story hour, he guesses
that the library does not let him appear in a state of undress.
[79]      I
find that there is no evidence that these images were available to children in
the promotion of drag story hour at the library. Rather, I conclude these
materials are intended to justify Mr. Webster’s message for self-serving
reasons.
[80]      Mr. Webster deposes that his post
described the behaviour of drag queens as deviant “because it departs from
social norms.” He also states,
[81]      Mr. Webster also stated in his
affidavit,
[82]    
 Mr. Webster’s remarks are
disingenuous. By attaching a link to a story about a person sentenced for
possession of child pornography in Thunder Bay, a person who has no association
with the plaintiffs, Mr. Webster clearly intended to connect the plaintiffs
with this individual, even though he was not a drag queen nor a participant in
the plaintiffs’ story hour. To create a false association was enough to amplify
the slur.
[83]      Readers of his post reacted to the
coded message associating drag queens with pedophiles with some of the
following responses:
[84]      Mr. Webster’s post in the Kenora
proceeding produced a similar and, I conclude, an intended response. Readers
comments included the following:
[85]      Mr. Webster amplified his message
with signs of approval such as emojis that would have been understood by his
audience in that light. By doing so, he created an echo chamber for hate
speech, where like-minded persons reinforced each other based on the power of
suggestion.
[86]    
 The plaintiffs in both
proceedings and the defendant have filed affidavit evidence from experts to
assist the court. Rule 4.1.01 of the Rules of Civil Procedure discusses
the duty of an expert as follows:
[87]    
 Rule 53.03(2.1) requires an
acknowledgement of the expert’s duty, signed by the expert, to be included in
the expert’s report.
[88]    
 The plaintiffs’ experts have
acknowledged their duty within their affidavits; the defendant’s expert has
not.
[89]    
 The plaintiffs submit that
only their expert evidence assists the court and should be considered. The
defendant disputes the admissibility of the plaintiffs’ expert, Dr. Cameron
Crookston, on the grounds of relevance.
[90]    
 The defendant’s expert, Dr.
Cantor, argues that Dr. Crookston’s evidence about the history of drag is
irrelevant to current culture and does not relate to “the sudden and dramatic
changes accompanying social media, which have no precedent in history at all.”
[91]    
 I do not agree with this
submission. Dr. Cantor’s objections to Dr. Crookston’s evidence is an attempt
to reframe the evidence in this case to fit his theory that sexual identity can
be influenced by exposure to influences available on social media.
[92]    
 Dr. Crookston has a
doctorate in drama, theatre and performance, and sexual diversity studies from
the University of Toronto. His doctoral dissertation discussed the role of drag
performance in queer cultural memory. Presently, he lectures in the Department
of English and Cultural Studies at the University of British Columbia Okanagan.
His curriculum vitae is replete with peer-reviewed journal articles and book
chapters, edited volumes and journals, conferences, presentations, and other
related work.
[93]    
 Dr. Crookston’s evidence on
the history of drag places drag culture in an historic context through the
centuries, up to the present. He details the history of drag as performance
art, central to queer cultural expression since the late 19th
century.
[94]    
 Originally, drag began as an
underground activity. However, Dr. Crookston explains that over the last
hundred years, drag has become a symbol of queer resistance and activism. In
the 21st century, drag has had a visible presence in Gay Pride
marches, protests and demonstrations, as well as in mainstream entertainment
such as television, theatre, and film.
[95]    
 His discussion about the
history and purpose of Drag Queen Story Hour also describes the values of
literacy and inclusion implicitly associated with reading at the library, not
only in Dryden and Thunder Bay, but globally.
[96]    
 Dr. Crookston detailed the
history of Drag Queen Story Hour, an event that prompted the defendant’s posts.
He says that an award-winning author, Michelle Tea, began the story hour in San
Francisco in 2015. As a queer parent, Ms. Tea was interested in creating
positive and diverse educational activities for her child.
[97]    
 Dr. Crookston explains at
para. 47 of his affidavit,
[98]    
 Dr. Crookston notes that
Drag Queen Story Hour has become a vehicle for inclusion for LGBTQ2+ families, when
their lived experience is reflected in mainstream community events.
[99]    
 This evidence is beyond the
scope of the court’s knowledge and will be accepted as expert opinion evidence
in accordance with the Rules of Civil Procedure.
[100]    
 The plaintiffs’ second
expert is Dr. Corinne Mason. Their affidavit explains how the slurs “groomer”
and “grooming” developed, and how sexual and gender diversity have pejoratively
come to be associated with sexual deviance. They also discuss the impact of
targeting drag performers with this type of hate rhetoric.
[101]    
 Dr. Mason has a doctorate
from the Institute of Feminist and Gender Studies at the University of Ottawa. They
are a professor in Women’s and Gender Studies at Mount Royal University, in
Calgary, Alberta. Dr. Mason has been teaching and researching in gender and
sexuality studies since 2013.
[102]    
 Dr. Mason has a special
interest in the study of sexualized and gendered violence, LGBTQ+ rights,
equity, diversity and inclusion in post-secondary institutions, and
reproductive justice. Their teaching experience focuses on the identities and
experiences of gender and sexually diverse communities. Dr. Mason’s curriculum
vitae includes peer-reviewed journal articles, books, edited books and
journals, and book chapters (including textbooks), among other professional
work.
[103]    
 Dr. Mason uses the term,
“sexual diversity” to represent all non-heterosexual identities including, but
not limited to, lesbian, gay, bisexual, asexual, and drag.
[104]    
 At para. 22 of their
affidavit, Dr. Mason adopts the definition used by Egale Canada for homophobia:
[105]    
 As well, Dr. Mason adopts
Egale Canada’s definition of transphobia:
[106]    
 Dr. Mason indicates that since
the 1970s, anti-LGBTQ+ advocates promoted the notion that children were at risk
from individuals who were part of the LGBTQ+ community and opposed their human
rights protections in the workplace. Gays and lesbians were suspected of
recruiting youth: since they could not reproduce, they were left to recruit. It
was thought that being gay or lesbian was a choice and, therefore, that
children could be trained to become gay. It was considered a matter of
contagion.
[107]    
 Anti-gay stigma grew during
the height of the HIV/AIDS epidemic in the 1980s, when gay men were
particularly seen as a threat to children. Consequently, individuals lost employment,
lost custody cases, and had their familial relationships disrupted.
[108]    
 Between the 1960s to the
1990s, an estimated 9,000 individuals lost federal employment in Canada, losing
their jobs in policing, the armed forces, and the public service. These
dismissals were accompanied by loss of pensions and benefits, severance, and/or
opportunities for advancement. In 2017, the Prime Minister apologized on behalf
of the Government of Canada for systemic discrimination toward LGBTQ+
Canadians.
[109]    
 Dr. Mason notes that the
history of drag as an art form is linked to safe places where LGBTQ+ do not
experience discrimination and, therefore, drag is often and incorrectly
associated with adult content, even when drag performances are not intended for
purely adult audiences.
[110]    
 Dr. Mason explained that,
[111]    
 Dr. Mason describes the
“false and harmful narrative” of children being exposed to LGBTQ+ individuals
and ideas about sexual orientation and gender identity as recruiting them into
transgender ideology. They point to a rise in internet hate speech since 2022
using the term, “groomer” and attacks on queer and trans communities globally.
[112]    
 They reference a warning
from Canada’s intelligence agency, CSIS, in 2024 that extremists could “inspire
and encourage” serious violence against LGBTQ+ communities in the coming year.
[113]    
 Dr. Mason deposed that,
[114]    
 Dr. Mason concluded that
“groomer” slurs are widely used in hate rhetoric to target LGBTQ+ communities,
especially drag performers and performances.
[115]    
 The defendant’s expert, Dr.
James Cantor, is a clinical psychologist registered to practice in Ontario by
the College of Psychologists of Ontario with a specialty in sexual behaviour
research. He holds a doctorate from McGill University and is currently the
Director of the Toronto Sexuality Centre.
[116]    
 Dr. Cantor’s curriculum
vitae also contains multiple research papers, including those discussing pedophilia,
gender dysphoria, and sexual deviance. He has studied biological and
non-biological influences on sexuality ranging from pre-natal brain development
to old age. The focus of his research has been the development of asexual
sexualities, including sexual orientation, gender identity, pedophilia, etc.
[117]    
 Dr. Cantor argues that Dr.
Mason’s opinion evidence should be excluded on the grounds that their evidence
is not within the bounds of their expertise. He contends that because they have
“no background, education or experience in psychiatry, mental health or
illness, clinical science, or health care policy,” they are not a qualified
expert. As Dr. Cantor’s academic training is in clinical psychology, and not
psychiatry, it is surprising that he should object to Dr. Mason’s lack of
expertise in psychiatry.
[118]    
 Dr. Cantor also contends
that Dr. Mason incorrectly identified the American Psychiatric Association as
apologizing to the LGBTQ+ community for characterizing “homosexuality” and
“transvestism” as deviant behaviour associated with pedophilia when the apology
was issued by the American Psychoanalytic Association. If he is correct, I do
not find this misnomer material to the thrust of Dr. Mason’s evidence: that
stigma has resulted from associating these terms with pedophilia.
[119]    
 Likewise, Dr. Cantor
criticizes Dr. Mason’s use of acronyms that differ from Dr. Crookston’s choice
of acronyms. In view of the evolution of language and culture relating to these
groups, this criticism is petty and not at all helpful to the court, given the
issues before it.
[120]    
 Dr. Cantor uses a medical
model as the lens against which to evaluate Dr. Mason’s opinion, whereas the
issue for the court to determine is whether the posts by the defendant were
defamatory as understood by the legal construct of the “reasonable person.” The
court is not engaged in a diagnostic exercise but must make its determination
in a social context.
[121]    
 I accept the expert opinion
of Dr. Mason to the extent that it deals with their stated purpose: to help the
court understand the slurs “groomer” and “grooming” and the impact of hateful
rhetoric against LGBTQ+ individuals. This evidence is beyond the scope of the
court’s knowledge and will be accepted as expert evidence in accordance with
the Rules of Civil Procedure.
[122]    
 The defendant submits that
Dr. Cantor is the best proxy to stand in for the hypothetical “reasonable
person.” Respectfully, this misconceives the role of an expert witness, which
is to enhance the court’s understanding of an issue beyond the court’s
expertise but within that of the expert witness. As the rules prescribe, the
opinion is to be offered in a non-partisan manner. It is not the role of the
expert to become a substitute decision-maker, determining the issue before the
court.
[123]    
 Dr. Cantor indicated that
the defendant sought his opinion on the following questions:
[124]    
 With respect to question 1,
Dr. Cantor observes that in general language, grooming refers to preparing for
a future activity or role. However, he opined that there are multiple
connotations for the terms, “groomer” and “grooming” depending upon the
context. He acknowledged that,
[125]    
 Dr. Cantor’s opinion does
not arise from his area of study or experience. Accordingly, it does not assist
the court in understanding the context of the slur, “groomer” when directed at
the drag community. Rather the question invites the answer which is given
without any foundation: that there can be more than one meaning to the term,
“groomer.”
[126]    
 With respect to question 2,
Dr. Cantor commented that,
[127]    
 He opines that “ubiquitous
attention” is being paid to,
[128]    
 The plaintiffs argue that
Dr. Cantor, is not properly qualified because his opinions on the prevalence of
gender dysphoria in young people are not grounded in a clinical practice that
treats these children. They contend that he has never administered
gender-affirming care and that his clinical practice involves patients whose
average age is 30.
[129]    
 In my view, Dr. Cantor’s
opinion about gender dysphoria may be grounded in his special research
interest, but it is not helpful to the court’s understanding of the issues. The
plaintiffs’ complaint is that the defendant’s posts link them to pedophilia,
not to gender dysphoria. Dr. Cantor’s opinion is offered as an ex post facto
justification for the defendant’s posts.
[130]    
 Dr. Cantor also expressed
that “[a]lthough less frequently,” he has seen the term, “grooming” refer to
children “becoming desensitized by premature or excessive exposure to sexually
explicit material.”
[131]    
 In this case, there is no
evidence that the children attending the plaintiffs’ story hours have been
exposed to sexually explicit material. Indeed, the evidence, based on the
curated story books in evidence, is to the contrary.
[132]    
 Dr. Cantor’s answer to
question 3 about the origin of the connotation of the terms “groomer” and
“grooming” when associated with drag story hour is similarly unhelpful as it
does not arise from a properly qualified expert. It is an opinion outside his
expertise. Dr. Cantor’s education and experience is not grounded in the study
of drag culture but rather sounds as a personal rather than a professional
opinion.
[133]    
 For these reasons, I attach
little weight to Dr. Cantor’s evidence.
[134]    
 Egale Canada was granted
intervenor status on these motions by order of Justice Nieckarz. It makes three
submissions.
[135]    
 First: Egale argues that
allegations of grooming children serve to recycle old anti-2SLGBTQI tropes and
contributes to increasing hate speech and violence against the 2SLGBTQI
community. It points to drag as an expression of 2SLGBTQI identity and cultural
expression.
[136]    
 In Hansman v. Neufeld,
2023 SCC 14, 481 D.L.R. (4th) 218, at paras. 84–86, and 89, the Supreme Court
of Canada recognized that transgender and gender non-conforming individuals
have been historically disadvantaged and marginalized in society, facing
stereotypes, prejudice, disadvantage, and vulnerability.
[137]    
 While in recent times, drag
story time has allowed children to experience a normalized gender and sexually
diverse family experience, it has also become a target of anti-2SLGBTQI hate,
based on the unfounded stereotype that 2SLGBTQI individuals and culture are
dangerous and harmful to children.
[138]    
 Egale also submits that drag
performers, especially those engaged in drag story time, have increasingly
become the target of harassment and threats of violence. As well, story time
has attracted protests and even cancellations, leaving 2SLGBTQI at risk of
violence.
[139]    
 The Supreme Court of Canada
recognized the harms that occur when 2SLGBTQI individuals are characterized as
pedophiles, dangerous sex offenders, and deviant criminals who prey on
children, thus perpetuating harmful and pervasive myths and stereotypes: see Saskatchewan
(Human Rights Commission) v. Whatcott, 2013 SCC 11, [2013] 1 S.C.R. 467, at
para. 45.
[140]    
 Egale submits that Canadian
courts have accepted that allegations of grooming perpetuate the harmful
age-old myth of sexual predation against children and refers to the anti-SLAPP
decision of Justice Nieckarz in Rainbow Alliance Dryden et al. v. Webster,
2023 ONSC 7050, para. 20, in which the court defined the term “groomer” as a
slur referring to a person who manipulatively develops a relationship or a
connection with a child in order to exploit and abuse them.
[141]    
 In Bagwalla v. Ronin et
al., and Ronin v. Ronin et al., 2017 ONSC 6693 at paras. 12, 23 and
28, the Divisional Court held that,
[142]    
 The court concluded that the
allegation in that case was clearly defamatory.
[143]    
 Egale submits that alleging
that 2SLGBTQI individuals have an agenda to groom children implicitly leads to
fear-mongering about pedophilia and child pornography. Egale submits that this
conclusion is borne out by the audience reaction to the posts in this case.
[144]    
 Furthermore, Egale submits
that falsely accusing the 2SLGBTQI community of grooming is harmful because it
perpetuates the marginalization of these individuals, causes harm to their
reputations, and exposes them to hatred, fear, and violence. In other words, it
has a dehumanizing effect with a predictable loss of dignity.
[145]    
 It notes that hate crimes
motivated by sexual orientation is on the rise in Canada by 388% between 2016
and 2023.
[146]    
 The second argument Egale
makes is that falsely labelling 2SLGBTQI individuals as groomers cannot be a fair
comment because perpetuating harmful myths and stereotypes about vulnerable
members of society is not a matter of public interest.
[147]    
 In WIC Radio Ltd. v.
Simpson, 2008 SCC 40, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 420, at para. 28, the Supreme Court
of Canada determined that a defence of fair comment must meet the following
criteria:
[148]    
 Egale submits that
allegations that 2SLGBTQI persons are “groomers” or have an agenda to abuse
children is not recognizable as comment because a comment includes a
“deduction, inference, conclusion, criticism, judgment, remark or observation
which is generally incapable of proof”: see WIC Radio, at para. 26.
[149]    
 On the other hand, a
statement of fact, such as allegations of grooming, refers to criminal conduct
which is verifiable and can be proven or disproven based on underlying facts: see
Bernier v. Kinsella et al. 2021 ONSC 7451, 73 C.P.C. (8th) 280, at para.
50.
[150]    
 In the Hansman case,
the Supreme Court of Canada observed that “context is essential in
distinguishing comment from fact”: see paras. 108–109. Egale submits that the
context in the case at bar,
[151]    
 The honest belief test, an
element of the defence of fair comment as described in WIC Radio at
paras. 40, 49, and 63, is whether “any [person could] honestly express that
opinion on the proved facts, however prejudiced he may be, however exaggerated
or obstinate his views.”
[152]    
 Egale submits that the test
for “objective honest belief” underpinning the defence of fair comment is not
made out here because the defendant did not know anything about the individuals
targeted by his posts, nor what happens at drag story time, when he accused
them of having an agenda to abuse children. The unfounded allegation of
grooming children for sexual exploitation during story hour has no nexus
between the opinion and the proved facts: see Baglow v. Smith, 2015 ONSC
1175 at para. 236.
[153]    
 Finally, Egale submits that
the impugned posts accusing 2SLGBTQI individuals of being sexual predators was
motivated by malice.
[154]    
 In Hill v. Church of
Scientology of Toronto, 1995 CanLII 59 (SCC), [1995] 2 SCR 1130, at para. 145, the Supreme Court
of Canada held that malice is made out if the defendant publishes a defamatory
expression either 1) knowing it was false, 2) with reckless indifference
whether it be true or false, 3) for the dominant purpose of injuring the
plaintiff because of spite or animosity, or 4) for some other purpose which is
improper or indirect.
[155]    
 Proof of malice may arise
from the language of the assertion itself or from the circumstances surrounding
the publication of the comment: see Bent v. Platnick, 2020 SCC 23, [2020]
2 S.C.R. 645, para. 136.
[156]    
 In the circumstances of this
case, Egale submits that, at the very least, Mr. Webster’s allegations
constituted a reckless disregard for the truth amounting to malice.
[157]    
 Egale also contends that the
defendant’s motivation to repeat heinous and false allegations against members
of a vulnerable minority group and expose them to hatred was not accidental. He
intended to perpetuate hate by accusing drag performers of having an agenda to
groom children for sexual exploitation and was therefore malicious.
[158]    
 The first element the
plaintiffs are required to prove is that the words are defamatory in the sense
that they would tend to lower the plaintiff’s reputation in the eyes of a
reasonable person.
[159]    
 Mr. Webster argues that the
plaintiffs’ reputations were not lowered in the eyes of reasonable people. In
support of his argument, he points to pay raises, promotions, participation on
a board of directors, and positive publicity. He believes that since none of
the plaintiffs lost work or income or any social standing in their communities,
their reputations were not lowered.
[160]    
 The courts have recognized
that falsely labelling someone as a pedophile or a sexual predator or sexual
groomer is defamatory. See, for example Hosseini v. Gharagozloo, 2023
ONSC 2469, where the court held at, para. 82,
[161]    
 As Egale notes, in Bagwalla,
at paras. 12, 23 and 28, the Divisional Court held that,
[162]    
 In this case, the scurrilous
responses of the readers to each post confirm that the plaintiffs have been
lowered in their estimations. Mr. Webster posted these materials targeting the
plaintiffs before an audience of his choosing; it does not now lie in his mouth
to say that members of his intended audience were not reasonable people.
[163]    
 Mr. Webster deposes in his
affidavits that the plaintiffs did not appreciate that he intended an alternate
meaning to the terms “groom” and “grooming”, which he defines as “the practice
of preparing or training someone for a particular purpose or activity.” He
rejects the plaintiffs’ contention that “grooming” constitutes a slur in that
it implies an adult is engaged in manipulative behaviour engaged in by sexual
abusers to gain access to children.
[164]    
 Mr. Webster’s explanation is
not credible. In the Kenora action, he was at pains to link children to drag
queen performance. The post contains the inference that drag queens are
grooming children for purposes of sexual abuse. He describes this as an agenda.
[165]    
 Mr. Webster intentionally
called into question the legitimacy of the plaintiffs’ motives, asking why
these people (i.e. drag queens) need to perform for children. Implicit in
the messaging is that the drag queens have an improper purpose for associating
with children. By highlighting the child in the photo with drag queens, he
implies that there is an illicit connection between children and drag queens,
stating “[j]ust look at the face of the one child in the photo. Tells you all
you need to know.” In fact, this child was in the arms of her parent.
[166]    
 The readers of this post
readily understood the intended slur – that drag queens are pedophiles – and
responded accordingly with hate speech directed at the 2SLGBTQIA+ community,
characterizing them as pedophiles who are mentally ill and who sexually exploit
children. In short, Mr. Webster’s language was a dog whistle to like-minded
individuals.
[167]    
 Likewise, Mr. Webster’s
contention that the plaintiffs in the Thunder Bay action misunderstood his
intended meaning about “grooming” is not credible. It is an ex post facto
justification that seeks to avoid liability for his defamatory post.
[168]    
 In the Thunder Bay action,
Mr. Webster’s post on the internet was carefully crafted to elicit the response
that he in fact achieved: that drag queen story hour promotes deviant behaviour
and that drag queens are a risk to children for which they face child
pornography and pedophilia charges. He poses the question, “Why do drag queens
need an audience of children?” and emphasizes the word, “grooming” with capital
letters.
[169]    
 While the plaintiffs are not
required to show intent, I find that Mr. Webster intended to create revulsion
directed at the drag queens hosting the story hour, counselling people to keep
their children away from the event. Predictably, his readers responded with
hate speech, claiming that the plaintiffs were mentally ill pedophiles who
exploit and sexually abuse children. Mr. Webster then approved of their hate
speech with smiling emojis and other signs of approval.
[170]    
 I find that, in each case,
on a balance of probabilities, Mr. Webster’s posts were defamatory because they
lowered the plaintiffs’ reputations in the eyes of reasonable persons.
[171]    
 Do the posts identify the
plaintiffs? The caselaw establishes that the plaintiffs need not be named in a
publication so long as they are clearly identifiable: see Hosseini, at
para. 125.
[172]    
 In the Kenora post, the
plaintiffs submit that Mx. Hartlen and RAD are clearly identified, for the
following reasons:
[173]    
 This evidence was not
challenged. I therefore conclude, on a balance of probabilities, that RAD and Mx.
Hartlen are identified in the post in the Kenora action.
[174]    
 Does the Thunder Bay post
refer to the plaintiffs, Ms. Crichton and Mr. Forget?
[175]    
 The plaintiffs submit that
they are identified for the following reasons:
[176]    
 This evidence was also not
challenged. I also conclude, on a balance of probabilities, that Ms. Crichton
and Mr. Forget are identified in the Thunder Bay posts.
[177]    
 The defendant admits that,
in each action, the impugned posts were published by him under the heading,
“The Courthouse Page,” and that they were published on the internet to at least
one other person. I conclude, on a balance of probabilities, that publication
has been proven in each case.
[178]    
 As the Supreme Court
determined in Grant, if the plaintiff proves the foregoing required
elements of proof of defamation on a balance of probabilities, the onus shifts
to the defendant to advance a defence in order to avoid liability.
[179]    
 As the plaintiffs submit,
there are eight recognized defences in defamation actions. These are summarized
at para. 19 in Roy v. Ottawa Capital Area Crime Stoppers et al., 2018
ONSC 4207, 142 O.R. (3d) 507, at para. 19:
[180]    
 Pleading in defamation
actions is very exacting. The plaintiffs submit that the defendant has not
properly pleaded defences in either action. Rule 25.06(1) of the Rules of
Civil Procedure requires that,
[181]    
 As well, Rule 25.07(3)
provides that,
[182]    
 Here, the statements of
defence in each action are scant, lacking in a concise statement of material facts
as required under the Rules.
[183]    
 In the Kenora proceeding,
the defendant challenges the standing of RAD to sue in defamation because it
was not incorporated at the time of the alleged defamation and only
incorporated after the statement of claim was served.
[184]    
 Although this issue was
pleaded in the statement of defence and addressed in the plaintiffs’ factum, it
was not dealt with in either the defendant’s factum or in his oral argument. I
conclude that the defendant abandoned this defence during the motion for
summary judgment.
[185]    
 However, if I am wrong in
this regard, RAD was incorporated while the Kenora post continued to be
published on the internet. RAD was identified with the members of the
unincorporated collective, including the plaintiff, Mx. Hartlen.
[186]    
 The plaintiffs amended their
statement of claim after the incorporation of RAD and after notice of libel was
served.  Accordingly, the defendant was on notice of RAD’s change in legal
status, and its continuing claims in libel. The defendant did not move to
strike out RAD’s claim.
[187]    
 I conclude that RAD has
standing to sue.
[188]    
 As well, Mr. Webster pleads
in his statement of defence in the Kenora action that he has never met Mx.
Hartlen and “never typed her name in any social media post.” He denies that his
post is defamatory of Mx. Hartlen, as his comments are “specific to the
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation and their reporter.”
[189]    
 Having found that Mr.
Webster’s post identifies Mx. Hartlen and is defamatory of them, I conclude
that this defence is not made out.
[190]    
 In the Thunder Bay action,
the defendant failed in the anti-SLAPP motion that would have provided him a
defence. He pleaded that he had no knowledge of the plaintiffs, who are not
named nor identified. Having concluded that Mr. Webster’s post identifies the
plaintiffs and is defamatory of them, this defence is not made out.
[191]    
 Mr. Webster pleads that the
post was deleted on January 18, 2023. That fact does not afford him a defence
to defamation.
[192]    
 The only defence that he
does plead is the defence of fair comment, alleging that the post criticizes
the Thunder Bay City Council and local taxpayer subsidized media, rather than
the plaintiffs. No facts are pleaded with respect to the plaintiffs.
[193]    
 In WIC Radio, at
para. 28, the Supreme Court of Canada summarized the defence of fair comment, which
must,
[194]    
 The plaintiffs challenge
this defence on five grounds:
[195]    
 In Grant, at para.
105, the Supreme Court defines the parameters of public interest as follows:
[196]    
 The Court clarified in the
same paragraph that “mere curiosity or prurient interest is not enough.”
[197]    
 In Hudspeth v. Whatcott,
2017 ONSC 1708, 98 C.P.C. (7th) 40, at para. 183, the court concluded that
“hate speech is by its nature not in the public interest and hate speech
interferes with public discourse and debate.”
[198]    
 Further, in Paramount
Fine Foods v. Johnston, 2018 ONSC 3711, 142 O.R. (3d) 356, at para. 45, the
court observed that,
[199]    
 The plaintiffs argue that
the impugned posts relate to local events in which the drag performers and
organizers are depicted as “groomers” who put children at risk of sexual
exploitation.
[200]    
 Mr. Webster contends that
the public interest is in the use of taxpayer dollars to sponsor or promote
drag events at the library. The court’s decision in Paramount Fine Foods
applies in this case. Mr. Webster was not engaged in political commentary when
he made these posts. While the vehicle for the posts may be complaints about
public libraries, the CBC, or City Council, the thrust of his posts was to
identify the drag performers as “groomers,” and cloak them in hate speech.
[201]    
 As Egale put it in its
submission, falsely labelling 2SLGBTQI individuals as “groomers” cannot be fair
comment because perpetuating harmful myths and stereotypes about vulnerable
members of society is not a matter of public interest. I agree.
[202]    
 Thus, I do not accept that
the public had an interest in Mr. Webster’s posts. This aspect of Mr. Webster’s
defence fails.
[203]    
 Secondly, fair comment must
be based on fact. In Hansman, the Supreme Court of Canada held, at para.
99, that,
[204]    
 The Court explained at para.
100 that,
[205]    
 As Egale argued, a statement
of fact, such as an allegation of grooming, refers to criminal conduct which is
verifiable and can be proven or disproven based on underlying facts: see Bernier
v. Kinsella et al., 2021 ONSC 7451, 73 C.P.C. (8th) 280, at para. 50. In
the case at bar, there is no factual basis for the defendant’s assertion that
the plaintiffs “groom” children. None of them have been charged with or
convicted of offences involving children.
[206]    
 Accordingly, I find that Mr.
Webster’s posts are not based on fact.
[207]    
 Are Mr. Webster’s posts
recognizable as comment? I conclude they are not. In the Hansman case,
the Supreme Court of Canada observed that “context is essential in
distinguishing comment from fact”: see paras. 108–109.
[208]    
 Mr. Webster’s posts claim
that the plaintiffs have an agenda to “groom” children and put them at risk of
sexual abuse: they ask “[w]hy do drag performers need to perform for
children?”. These statements are expressed as statements of fact, rather than
statements of opinion. Therefore, his posts are not recognizable as fair
comment.
[209]    
 The plaintiffs also submit
that Mr. Webster’s honest opinion could not be expressed on proved facts. They
contend that there is no evidence that any of the plaintiffs have an agenda to
groom children for sexual abuse, nor that they have engaged in predatory
conduct. I accept this submission. The plaintiffs’ evidence is uncontradicted
that, in their experience, drag story hour is a safe and inclusive environment
for people of all ages and gender expression. Mr. Webster, on the other hand,
admits that he has never attended a drag story hour.
[210]    
 Finally, the plaintiffs
submit that Mr. Webster was actuated by malice, accusing 2SLGBTQIA+ individuals
of grooming children for the purpose of sexual exploitation, thereby exposing a
vulnerable group to hatred.
[211]    
 I agree. When cross-examined
on his affidavit, Mr. Webster testified that he had never attended a drag story
time event, had no knowledge of any of the plaintiffs and had no basis to
believe that their events involved pedophilia or child abuse. He also admitted
in cross-examination that he had no knowledge of whether any of the
individuals, including Mx. Hartlen, depicted in the Kenora post, performed for
children at the Dryden drag weekend about which Mr. Webster wrote.
[212]    
 His conduct fits the
definition of malice in the case of Hill: he published the posts knowing
that they were false, with at least reckless indifference as to the truth of
his statements, for the purpose of injuring the plaintiffs because of spite or
animosity, and for an improper purpose.
[213]    
 At the time the Kenora post
was made in September of 2020, the Courthouse Page, published by Mr. Webster,
had about 4,400 “likes” and 6,500 “followers” who accessed the page on the
internet. There is no information on this page identifying the administrators
of this page.
[214]    
 Mx. Hartlen states in their
affidavit that previous and subsequent posts on the Courthouse Page demonstrate
hateful materials and attacks on 2SLGBTQIA+ individuals. They cite four
examples of these posts. While there is no proof that Mr. Webster is the author
of those posts, they appear in a publication for which he admits sole
responsibility.
[215]    
 In my view, it is
particularly damaging that these posts were published as “The Courthouse Page,”
which depicts an image of the Thunder Bay Court House. In the absence of
information about the page administrator, a reader may believe that the
publication had the imprimatur of the courts. This impression would have been
reinforced by the links connecting the post to reports of a sentence imposed on
a sexual offender.
[216]    
 I therefore conclude, on a
balance of probabilities, that in each action, Mr. Webster was motivated by
malice.
[217]    
 The plaintiffs each claim
general damages of $75,000.
[218]    
 The defendant submits that
the quantum of damages flows from the severity of the libel. He argues that the
damages claimed are excessive since the plaintiffs have not been accused of
sexually abusing children. The defendant also submits that the cases cited by
the plaintiffs are not comparable.
[219]    
 It is settled law that a
plaintiff in a libel case is not obliged to prove actual loss or injury; rather,
damages are “at large” since damage is presumed once defamation is found: see Rutman
v. Rabinowitz, 2018 ONCA 80, 420 D.L.R. (4th) 310, at para. 62.
[220]    
 The plaintiffs point to
general damages in the case law ranging from $20,000 in Oliveira v. Oliveira,
2019 ONSC 4400, at para. 56, to $125,000 in Vanderkooy v. Vanderkooy,
2013 ONSC 4796, at para. 225, all before inflation is considered.
[221]    
 In Oliveira, the
court awarded what it acknowledged was a lower award than in other cases of
false allegations of pedophilia because there was “no internet sharing or
publication on large websites or any broadcast within a community”: see para.
56.
[222]    
 In Vanderkooy, the
defendants alleged that their uncle had sexually abused them as children and
the plaintiff sought to defend himself within his family circle.
[223]    
 In Clancy v. Farid,
2023 ONSC 2750, at para. 98, the court awarded general damages of $90,000 for
multiple postings defaming a lawyer with allegations of sexual deviance, sexual
predation, prostitution, as well as dishonesty and other allegations damaging
to her professional reputation.
[224]    
 In Zall v. Zall, 2016
BCSC 1730, paras. 92 and 94, the court awarded $75,000 in general damages when
the defendant made baseless allegations of sexual impropriety to thwart a
custody application.
[225]    
 In my view, the general
damages requested by the plaintiffs are reasonable. The defendant intended to
smear the reputations of the individual plaintiffs and RAD with the message
that they used their drag queen/king persona and activities to groom children
for sexual abuse. There could hardly be a more damning message than that,
spread across the Internet. The message was clearly understood by Mr. Webster’s
readership: he called the plaintiffs pedophiles.
[226]      In
Montour v. Beacon Publishing Inc., 2019 ONCA 246, an anti-SLAPP motion,
the court did not differentiate between the corporate and individual
respondents. It concluded at para. 41, that,
[227]    
 The court declined to screen
out the action by one plaintiff but not the other.
[228]    
 I conclude that the
corporate plaintiff is also entitled to damages. As a grass-roots organization,
trying to build bridges between the queer community and the larger community,
RAD’s reputation is also deserving of protection from the slurs that may lead
the community to distrust the persons and events identified with RAD.
[229]    
 I consider that after Mr.
Webster was served with a libel notice in the Kenora action on October 27,
2022, he made a second publication on December 10, 2022, with similar
allegations in the Thunder Bay action, a post that remained on the internet
until January 18, 2023. I can only conclude that he did so with a sense of
impunity.
[230]    
 As well, Mr. Webster’s
Courthouse Page showed a pattern of previous posts that were homophobic in
nature. While Mr. Webster is not identified as the author of these posts, they
were available on the Courthouse Page over which he had sole control.
[231]    
 The plaintiffs, Rainbow
Alliance Dryden, Caitlin Hartlen, Felicia Crichton, and John-Marcel Forget
shall have summary judgment against the defendant, Brian Webster, in the amount
of $75,000 each for general damages.
[232]    
 The plaintiffs in both
proceedings also claim aggravated damages in the amount of $20,000 each, to
show the court’s condemnation of the defendant’s conduct. The defendant
disputes that his conduct has been high-handed, oppressive, outrageous, or
malicious such that aggravated damages are warranted.
[233]    
 The principles that apply to
aggravated damages in defamation cases were set out in the Hill v. Church of
Scientology at paras. 188–190. They may be summarized as follows:
[234]    
 I am of the view that
aggravated damages are warranted in this case for reasons I have already alluded
to.
[235]    
 Mx. Hartlen has been a drag
performer for about eight years, employed in a child and family services agency,
and active on a community legal clinic and in volunteer roles in the community,
including producing and hosting a podcast about queer and trans issues.
[236]    
 Mx. Hartlen was deeply upset
and offended by Mr. Webster’s post, fearful about their personal safety and
that of others. At para. 45 of their affidavit, Mx. Hartlen states that they
have never been charged with or accused of predatory sexual behaviour, adding:
[237]    
 Mx. Hartlen also worries
about their professional reputation and standing in the community, potentially
exposing them, their spouse, and RAD volunteers or event attendees to violence
or harassment, making them a target. As well, Mx. Hartlen worries that the
defamatory impact of Mr. Webster’s post in future may never be known.
[238]    
 At para. 27 of Montour,
the Court of Appeal cited Walker et al. v. CFTO Ltd. et al., (1987), 1987 CanLII 126 (ON CA), 59
O.R. (2d) 104 (C.A.) at p. 113, which recognized that injury to a corporation
in a libel case may not be confined to loss of income but that its goodwill may
also suffer. Mr. Webster cared little about RAD’s loss of goodwill.
[239]    
 Ms. Crichton acknowledges
that she was aware of the longstanding homophobic/transphobic slur directed at
the 2SLGBTQIA+ community falsely associating it with pedophilia. She stated, “[i]t
has caused me significant distress to see my work as a performer smeared in
this manner.”
[240]    
 Ms. Crichton worries that
the post will impact her professional reputation, her income, her standing in
the community, her personal safety and that of her family, as well as those
attending drag story time or other drag events. Beyond that, she worries that
the full defamatory impact of the post in future may never been known to her,
depriving her of opportunities.
[241]    
 Mr. Forget’s affidavit
discloses that as a young person, he did not fit in. He had things thrown at
him from cars and slurs yelled at him in public, such that he dropped out of
school to avoid the bullying he experienced.
[242]    
 Mr. Forget described the
creative outlet he has enjoyed as a drag performer for more than twenty years
and the satisfaction he has from mentoring other drag performers. He expressed
the pride he feels in the difference his drag persona has made to other members
of the 2SLGBTQIA+ community.
[243]    
 Since Mr. Webster has not
attended any of the events involving the individual plaintiffs and is not
personally acquainted with any of them, I conclude that the freedom he has felt
to malign their reputations as a common bully is high-handed.
[244]    
 There is a pattern of
homophobic/transphobic conduct by the defendant’s publication, both before and
after the offending posts. Mx. Hartlen highlights these at para. 58 of their
affidavit:
[245]    
 I have already commented on
Mr. Webster’s defamatory post targeting the Thunder Bay plaintiffs with similar
allegations after being served with a libel notice in the Kenora action.  The
Thunder Bay post remained on the internet until January 18, 2023. I can only
conclude that Mr. Webster made the second post with a sense of impunity.
Undoubtedly, he felt that no one would call him out on his views.
[246]    
 As I have previously
observed, it is particularly offensive that these posts were published as “The
Courthouse Page,” which depicts an image of the Thunder Bay Court House and
links the page to other legal stories about sexual offenders.
[247]    
 Mr. Webster chose this image
carefully, in the expectation that his readers would believe that the
publication had some official status with the imprimatur of the courts. Mr.
Webster intended this effect: that his posts might seem more credible while they
fostered disinformation and hate.
[248]    
 In addition, the defamatory
posts were published in the same geographic area of Ontario, with the
cumulative effect of targeting the drag community in this area.
[249]    
 It is evident that the
defendant’s posts have increased the plaintiffs’ mental distress by his
high-handed, spiteful, malicious, and oppressive conduct. I find that, on a
balance of probabilities, Mr. Webster was motivated by actual malice toward the
plaintiffs who were members of a vulnerable community.
[250]    
 The court condemns this
conduct.  It was hate speech. In my view, aggravated damages are warranted to
denounce Mr. Webster’s conduct.
[251]    
 The plaintiffs, Rainbow
Alliance Dryden, Caitlin Hartlen, Felicia Crichton, and John-Marcel Forget
shall also have aggravated damages against the defendant, Brian Webster, in the
amount of $20,000 each.
[252]    
 The plaintiffs are entitled
to their costs in each action. They shall serve and file written submissions,
not to exceed five pages, in addition to bills of costs and any offers to
settle, within 20 days, and the defendant shall serve and file his response 10
days thereafter.
[253]    
 I extend my thanks to
counsel for Egale Canada whose submissions as intervenor were of great
assistance to the court. Since Egale does not seek its costs, none are ordered.