[1]              
On October 16, 2024, Ronald Joseph pleaded guilty to four offences
arising from his involvement in an attempt to defraud insurance companies. Mr.
Joseph, a police officer with the Toronto Police Service (TPS), claimed damages
for alleged vehicle thefts or accidents that, in reality, he had staged. The fraud
scheme was ultimately foiled by insurance companies, who conducted their own
extensive internal investigations that identified his illegal activities, and generally
resulted in pay-outs not being made.
[2]              
The Crown seeks a conditional sentence of two years less a day with
appropriately punitive terms. The Defence seeks a conditional discharge and
probation for two years. The parties agree on the ancillary terms.
[3]              
I find that Mr. Joseph was the lynchpin of a fraudulent scheme and motivated
entirely by greed. He broke the very laws that, as a police officer, he was
entrusted to enforce; this conduct represents a breach of public trust. For the
reasons that follow, I conclude that a conditional sentence of two years less a
day is appropriate.
[4]              
Mr. Joseph was charged with eight offences and the matter was set for an
8-week trial commencing on October 16, 2024. On the first day of trial, just before
the Crown’s opening address, Mr. Joseph pleaded guilty to three counts of
attempted fraud over $5,000, and one count of public mischief.
[5]              
The four counts that Mr. Joseph plead to read as follows:
[6]              
The parties entered into four separate Agreed Statements of Facts (ASFs)
that detail admissions regarding Mr. Joseph’s criminal conduct.
[7]              
Mr. Joseph pleaded guilty to public mischief in circumstances where one
of his associates, Roger Tigree, called 911 three times on February 1, 2020 to
report that a Mercedes Benz that he rented from Mr. Joseph had been stolen from
a parking lot in Toronto. Subsequently, the same vehicle was involved in a
“minor collision” with a Ford Focus. The occupants of the Mercedes failed to
remain on scene. The two occupants of the Ford Focus were taken by ambulance to
a local hospital after complaining about neck and body pain. In reality, Mr.
Tigree’s calls were part of a scheme among Mr. Joseph, Mr. Tigree, Kevin Lima,
Markus Dookie, and Kris Kattick to stage an accident and make a fraudulent
insurance claim.
[8]              
PC Jacqueline Onyskiewicz and another officer were dispatched to the
parking lot where the Mercedes was allegedly stolen. They saw a different white
Mercedes in the lot. Mr. Tigree got out of the passenger side and another male,
who turned out to be Mr. Joseph, remained seated and initially refused PC
Onyskiewicz’s request to step out and provide a statement. Eventually, when Mr.
Joseph got out he asked the officer who she was, and then identified himself as
a police officer at 22 Division. As PC Onyskiewicz could smell the odour of an
alcoholic beverage, she called for an on-duty supervisor to assist. Mr. Joseph
was prevented from driving home in the Mercedes. Mr. Joseph ended up providing
a false statement to PC Onyskiewicz about his Mercedes being stolen from the
parking lot. Following extensive insurance and police investigations, Tigree,
Kattick, and Dookie pleaded guilty to various charges associated with the
fraudulent scheme. Location Based Services (LBS) tracking data demonstrated
that Mr. Joseph met his associates before the alleged theft and minor
collision.
[9]              
On March 1, 2020, Kevin Lima called the Toronto police to report a 2018
Dodge Ram 3500 tow truck stolen from near 100 Emmett Avenue in Toronto. In
reality, the tow truck had never been parked in or stolen from the area and Mr.
Lima and Mr. Joseph planned in advance to make a knowingly fraudulent insurance
claim over its theft. In the course of the deception, Mr. Joseph provided a
voluntary videotaped statement to an insurance adjuster claiming that he
believed the tow truck was stolen and outstanding.
[10]          
Aditya Persaud and Kevin Lima pleaded guilty to attempted fraud of CAA
Insurance by manufacturing damage to Persaud’s Cadillac that was involved in a
minor collision with a Staples delivery truck. On April 3, 2020, telephone
intercepts and text messages captured Persaud calling Mr. Joseph to advise that
his Cadillac had been struck by the delivery truck. Despite Persaud stating the
vehicle was drivable, Mr. Joseph told Persaud not to drive it and to call for a
tow truck and to state (falsely) that there were fumes coming into the car’s
cabin. An insurance investigation subsequently revealed a very minor collision
between the Cadillac and the Staples delivery truck. Instead, police video
surveillance caught Mr. Lima deliberately backing the Cadillac into another
vehicle three times, causing further damage to the rear of the car.
[11]          
On April 29, 2020, Arnold Jaglal and Mr. Lima went to a collision
reporting centre and reported that a Ford Escape vehicle that he rented had
been struck by another vehicle in the St. Clair and Dufferin area of Toronto.
He claimed that the collision caused extensive front-end damage. The vehicle is
owned by a numbered company where Mr. Joseph is the sole director. A TD
Insurance investigation and police investigation revealed that Mr. Joseph, Mr.
Lima and Mr. Jaglal together concocted the story about the collision. In fact,
the Ford Escape had suffered extensive damage from an August 2019 accident involving
a chain of collisions with a TTC bus.
[12]          
Mr. Joseph has no criminal record or outstanding charges and is
currently 52 years old.
[13]          
He was born in Trinidad, immigrated to Canada in 2007, and became a
Canadian citizen. He is married and has one child who is presently in high
school. His wife works at a factory and earns minimum wage.
[14]          
Mr. Joseph comes from a large family. He has four surviving sisters and
two surviving brothers. He financially supports his mother in Trinidad.
[15]          
He has been employed with the TPS since 2008 and is currently ranked as
a First-Class Police Constable.
[16]          
Defence counsel provided three letters of support from Mr. Joseph’s Hindu
mandir (temple) and other religious organizations.  The letters describe Mr.
Joseph’s volunteerism at the mandir where he assists congregants and has made a
$4,000 financial contribution.
[17]          
I accept that Mr. Joseph has made a positive contribution to his
community through his involvement in religious and spiritual organizations. The
letters of support were written shortly after Mr. Joseph’s conviction and, save
for one exception, do not clarify whether the authors are aware of the charges
or conviction. To be fair, one letter states, “he came to me and told me about
this case which he is charged in.” However, the next sentence, somewhat incongruently
states, “Ronald has shown to be honorable and thoughtful towards others,
especially the less fortunate people in society.” Another letter makes no
reference whatsoever to Mr. Joseph’s charges and states, “In my experience, he
has always been an honest, hardworking, and responsible individual.” Notwithstanding
the lack of clarity, I accept that the letters demonstrate some pro-social
conduct by Mr. Joseph.
[18]          
Defence counsel also provided a letter from Dr. Minella de Souza, Mr.
Joseph’s neuropsychiatrist. Dr. de Souza indicates that Mr. Joseph has been his
patient since September 15, 2022 and that he typically sees him once a month. 
The letter states that when Dr. de Souza first saw Mr. Joseph, he met the
criteria of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) – a condition that arose from
a work-related incident in February 2016. The letter proceeds to opine about how
decision-making skills may be altered in patients with PTSD. The letter also mentions
that Mr. Joseph’s trust with his police colleagues was altered as he felt he
was falsely accused. The letter does not clarify the circumstances in which
this statement was made. I place minimal weight on Dr. de Souza’s letter because
the language in the letter is very unclear. In any event, Defence counsel expressly
agreed that Mr. Joseph was motivated by greed and did not suggest that Mr.
Joseph’s criminal conduct was related to his PTSD, or his feelings of being
falsely accused by fellow officers.
[19]          
At the conclusion of the sentencing hearing, Mr. Joseph apologized for
his criminal conduct and stated that it will never happen again. I accept that
Mr. Joseph has expressed some remorse for his conduct.
[20]          
The Crown forwarded four Community Impact Statements provided by TD
Insurance, Co-Operators Insurance, CAA Insurance, and SGI Canada Insurance
Services Ltd. Collectively, the letters state that insurance fraud significantly
impacts all Canadians by driving up costs and leading to higher insurance
premiums. Fraud and the associated investigations consume resources that could
otherwise be devoted to supporting customers with legitimate claims. Many
fraudulent schemes jeopardize the safety of innocent parties – particularly staged
accidents that occur on public roadways. One insurance company described the experience
of having a police officer implicated in fraud as “extremely bewildering.” Another
explained that it had retained an engineering firm, private investigators, and
independent adjusters to investigate the circumstances of the claim. It also
incurred legal fees in excess of $12,000 and recovered $2,500 from the insured.
[21]          
The Crown’s takes a global position on sentence and seeks a Conditional
Sentence Order (CSO) of two years less a day, allocated as follows:
[22]          
The Crown proposes that Mr. Joseph is confined to house arrest with GPS
monitoring for the first 12 months. For the following 6 months, the Crown
submits that a curfew (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.  daily) with GPS monitoring is
appropriate, and that during the final 6 months less a day, he is subject to
statutory terms (pursuant to s. 742.3(1)) with no GPS monitoring.
[23]          
The house arrest and curfew terms would be subject to certain exceptions
to permit Mr. Joseph to purchase personal necessities and attend medical,
religious, and other appointments as permitted by his conditional sentence
supervisor.
[24]          
Additionally, the Crown seeks:
[25]          
The Crown acknowledges that, in terms of mitigating factors, Mr. Joseph
is a first-time offender and that he pleaded guilty – thereby saving the
necessity of a trial. However, the Crown emphasizes that Mr. Joseph was the architect
of an elaborate fraudulent scheme that necessitated the insurance companies and
police to conduct multiple investigations. These investigations were resource
intensive and entailed accident reconstruction and engineering reports, wiretap,
and surveillance efforts. As a police officer, Mr. Joseph breached the public
trust and actively misled another police officer about his true activities.
[26]          
The Crown submitted that none of the jurisprudence was directly on
point, but relied upon several authorities to suggest that a CSO of 2 years
less a day is an appropriate sentence in the circumstances of this case.
[27]          
The Defence submits that the appropriate sentence for Mr. Joseph is a
conditional discharge and two years of probation. The Defence proposes that the
sentence is broken down as follows: 18 months for the attempted fraud charges,
and 6 months less a day on the public mischief charge.  In the alternative, the
Defence proposes a suspended sentence and a two-year term of probation with
terms that mirror the conditions requested by the Crown.
[28]          
The Defence advises the court that the imposition of a CSO would
automatically disqualify Mr. Joseph from his profession as a police officer.
However, a conditional discharge would give him the opportunity to advocate for
his continued employment through the police professional discipline process.
[29]          
The Defence submits that the most important sentencing principle in this
case is parity and emphasizes the fact that Mr. Joseph did not commit his crimes
while on duty.  The principle of parity would suggest that since Mr. Lima received
a conditional discharge, Mr. Joseph should receive a similar sentence for
essentially the same conduct.
[30]          
The Defence does not take issue with the ancillary orders requested by
the Crown.
[31]          
The Defence distinguished the cases relied upon by the Crown in support of
its conditional discharge sentence.
[32]          
I am guided by the principles of sentencing that are
set out in ss. 718, 718.1, and 718.2 of the Criminal Code. The sentence
must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and degree of
responsibility of the offender. An appropriate sentence is one that reflects a
realistic appraisal of the offender’s prospects for rehabilitation, his
individual and family circumstances, and the principle of restraint.
[33]          
Mr. Joseph pleaded guilty to attempted fraud on Counts 5, 6 and 8 under ss.
380(1) and 463(b) of the Code.
[34]          
The Criminal Code does not explicitly refer to the offence of
“attempted fraud.” Rather, s. 380 refers to fraud “whether ascertained or not”
and s. 463 is the section on attempts and accessories.
[35]          
The other applicable sentencing provisions are ss. 380.1(1), 380.1(2),
and 380.1(3):
[36]          
If Mr. Joseph used his status or circumstances as a police officer in
the commission of his offences, s. 380.1(2) prohibits the court from considering
his employment or reputation as a police officer as a mitigating factor in his
sentencing.
[37]          
It is not disputed that Mr. Joseph meets the statutory criteria to be
considered for a conditional sentence.
[38]          
A conditional sentence is a “meaningful alternative to incarceration for
less serious and non-dangerous offenders”: R. v. Proulx, 2000 SCC 5, [2000]
1 S.C.R. 61, at para. 21.
[39]          
Conditional sentences can provide a significant amount of denunciation,
particularly when onerous conditions are imposed, and the term of the sentence
is longer than would have been imposed as a jail sentence. Generally, the more
serious the offence, the longer and more onerous the conditional sentence
should be: Proulx, at paras. 99-106.
[40]          
While aggravating circumstances relating to the offence or the offender
increase the need for denunciation and deterrence, a conditional sentence may
be imposed even if such factors are present: Proulx, at paras. 114-115.
[41]          
In R. v Pitman, 2014 ONSC 5091, the accused drove his vehicle to
a remote location. Two friends accompanied him in a separate car. He
deliberately caused his unoccupied vehicle to crash and it rolled down a hill
and struck a bridge. He falsely reported to police and his insurer that his
vehicle had been stolen. The scam was uncovered and following a jury trial, he was
convicted of public mischief, attempted fraud over, and obstruct police. The
accused was 21 and a first-time offender. At the time, a conditional sentence
was not available. The judge gave the offender a sentence of 30 days in jail
plus one year of probation. I find that Mr. Joseph’s criminal conduct was
considerably more serious than Mr. Pitman’s. It involved more planning,
deliberation, and involvement of associates in the deceptive scheme. Pitman was
also much younger and did not occupy a position of public trust.
[42]          
In R. v. Wisniewski, 2002 MBCA 93, 166 Man. R. (2d) 73 the
Manitoba Court of Appeal reversed a trial judge’s sentence of a conditional
discharge in a case of public mischief and attempted fraud. The offender was 25
and had no criminal record. He falsely reported that his car had been stolen after
he pushed it into a river. The Manitoba Court of Appeal concluded that a
substantial fine was appropriate rather than a discharge, notwithstanding the
collateral consequence that a conviction might have had on the offender’s
immigration status. In Mr. Joseph’s case, I do not consider a fine to be a
meaningful sentence for Mr. Joseph’s criminal conduct. The imposition of a fine
may improperly suggest that restitution is sufficient in the face of an attempted
fraud with a number of aggravating factors.
[43]          
Another case provided by the Crown – R. v Akinyemi, 2014 ONCJ 278
– is of limited assistance. The offender was convicted after a five-day trial
of public mischief, attempted fraud over $5,000, and perjury. He falsely
reported the theft of his motor vehicle for the purpose of defrauding an
insurance company. The sentencing judge found that, due to the perjury, the
principles of denunciation and deterrence required a jail sentence of 90 days.
The sentence for the remaining counts was suspended, so it is difficult to
extrapolate the sentence in Akinyemi to Mr. Joseph’s case.
[44]          
In R. v. MacNeil, 2017 NSPC 57, the accused pleaded guilty to
public mischief and the Crown and Defence jointly submitted that an 18-month
conditional sentence was appropriate. The accused had lied about who was
driving at the time of the collision and a passenger had gotten trapped and
died in the incident. The accused repeatedly claimed that one of the other occupants
was driving. After a two-month police investigation, the accused admitted that
he was the driver. In Mr. Joseph’s case,  defence counsel argued that there
were a number of co-accused involved in the insurance fraud scheme but Mr.
Joseph did not try to implicate anyone else. While that is true, Mr. Joseph
appears to have strung the authorities along for far longer than the offender
in MacNeil. Mr. Joseph created and executed several different fictitious
scenarios to generate false insurance claims. He was simply motivated by greed.
This caused multiple insurance companies and the police to undertake complex investigations
to unearth what actually transpired. In my view, these aggravating
circumstances suggest that Mr. Joseph should receive a longer sentence than the
18-month CSO imposed in MacNeil.
[45]          
In R. v. Mohebtash, the offender received a jail sentence of
eight months for attempting to defraud a bank and uttering a forged document
using a forged Power of Attorney document: 2006 BCSC 944, at para. 35, aff’d 2007
BCCA 427. The offender was attempting to commit a $400,000 fraud. The offender
was 59 years old and a permanent resident. He had previously been convicted
under the Tobacco Act. The court rejected the Defence request for a
conditional sentence. The sentencing judge held that “[t]hose who embark on
schemes to defraud large sums of money must know they face significant
consequences, regardless of whether their scheme succeeds”: at para. 34. Since
the Crown in this case is not seeking a custodial sentence, the sentence in Mohebtash
is not particularly instructive, but I agree that significant consequences
should follow regardless of whether a fraudulent scheme is successful.
[46]          
With respect to the impact of a guilty plea, I accept the parties’
submission that it is always a mitigating factor. However, a guilty plea that
arrives on the eve of trial, after the trial has begun, or in circumstances
where the Crown’s case is overwhelming, will be treated differently than an
early guilty plea, or a guilty plea in the face of a weak Crown case: R. c.
Barrett, 2013 QCCA 1351, at paras. 19-22; R. v. Martineau, 2021 ABCA
401, at paras. 28-29; R. v. Cassanova-Alman, 2023 ONSC 1470, at paras.
46-48.
[47]          
Mr. Joseph was charged on February 19, 2021. A trial that was set to
last 8 weeks commenced on October 16, 2024. Mr. Joseph pleaded guilty to a
subset of charges just prior to the Crown’s opening and calling of its first
witness. In my view, the Crown’s case against Mr. Joseph was very strong.  Two
of Mr. Joseph’s associates who had participated in the fraudulent scheme were
prepared to testify on behalf of the Crown; in particular, Roger Tigree
provided a statutory declaration stating that Mr. Joseph planned the story of a
theft and a collision, neither of which actually took place. The Crown’s case against
Mr. Joseph included wiretap, surveillance, and location-based-service data
culled from Mr. Joseph’s phone that contradicted his explanations. Various
insurance companies had also undertaken extensive investigations that determined
that Mr. Joseph was implicated and central to the fraudulent scheme. In these
circumstances, Mr. Joseph’s guilty plea is a mitigating factor, but the degree
of mitigation is weak.
[48]          
The parties discussed the relevance and impact of Mr. Joseph’s status as
a police officer but disagree on whether Mr. Joseph committed a crime while
engaged in his duties as an officer.
[49]          
The ASFs contain an admission that Mr. Joseph knowingly made a false
report to PC Onyskiewicz, knowing that she was a police officer, about his
activities on the evening of February 1, 2020. He intended to mislead her so
she would commence an investigation into the theft of a motor vehicle that he
knew at the time had never occurred. He knew that the entire event was staged
to look like a theft. However, it does not appear that, during the incident
with PC Onyskiewicz, Mr. Joseph was engaged in his official duties.
[50]          
However, on another occasion in connection with Count 8 when Arnold
Jaglal reported damage to a 2017 Ford Escape, Mr. Joseph was on police duty.
ASF Exhibit #4 states that:
[51]          
In R. v. Quinn, 2024 ONSC 1073, at paras. 23-25, Penman J.
explained that:
[52]          
I recognize that Mr. Joseph was not charged or convicted of breach of
trust, but his crime represents a breach of the public trust: R. v. Doering,
2020 ONSC 5618, at para. 25.
[53]          
A case that I find relatively on point is R. v. Lam, 2000 BCPC 20.
Lam was a 25-year-old RCMP officer who started a side business cashing of cheques. 
He made a large number of Western Union money orders payable to himself and
thereby misappropriated $118,000 from six financial institutions on Vancouver
Island. The Crown requested an 18-month jail term and the Defence requested a
conditional sentence. He received an 18-month CSO and was ordered to pay
$118,000 in restitution.
[54]          
In terms of aggravating factors, the court noted that: Lam was a police
officer when he committed the fraud; he used his status as a member of the RCMP
to facilitate the fraud; the scheme, while not particularly sophisticated, was
carefully planned and executed; and no reparations for the final loss were
made. The mitigating factors included: Lam had no criminal record; he entered
an early guilty plea; he did not commit the crimes in the course of his duties
as a police officer; he was thoroughly ashamed by his own actions and for
disgracing his family and the police force; and he returned to Canada from abroad
voluntarily to face his charges.
[55]          
There are some important distinctions between Lam and Mr.
Joseph’s case. First, Lam was convicted for fraud, whereas Mr. Joseph was
convicted of attempted fraud. Second, Lam entered an early guilty plea whereas
Mr. Joseph entered a late guilty plea, just before the Crown’s evidence
commenced. Third, although they are both first time offenders, Mr. Joseph is
double Lam’s age. Fourth, whereas Lam used his status as a police officer to
facilitate fraud, he did not commit crimes in the course of his police duties –
yet, there is at least one instance where Mr. Joseph did. Finally, given that
Lam committed fraud, he was ordered to pay restitution. Since the insurance companies
did not pay out funds to Mr. Joseph, no restitution is involved. Taking all the
circumstances into account, I find that Mr. Joseph’s sentence should be greater
than the one Lam received.
[56]          
The principle of parity is codified in section 718.2(b). It provides
that “a sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders
for similar offences committed in similar circumstances”.
[57]          
Focusing on Mr. Lima, who received a conditional discharge and two
years’ probation, the Defence argues that since Mr. Joseph and Mr. Lima
essentially committed the same set of crimes, Mr. Joseph should also receive a
similar sentence. I agree with the Crown that parity is but one of the
important sentencing objectives. However, even if I were to focus only on
parity, I find that Mr. Joseph should receive a greater sentence than Mr. Lima
for four reasons:  Mr. Joseph is a police officer, Mr. Lima is not; Mr. Joseph
did not plead guilty early in the criminal process; Mr. Joseph is 52 and
considerably older than Mr. Lima who was 30; and, Mr. Lima made a restitution
payment of $12,000 and submitted to a deposition process. These are important
differences between the two cases. The principle of parity suggests that Mr.
Joseph should receive a harsher sentence than Mr. Lima.
[58]          
I have already referred to the aggravating factors above, however, I
review some of the significant factors here. Mr. Joseph is a police officer
who, motivated entirely by greed, concocted a multi-participant scheme to
defraud multiple insurance companies.  He actively misled PC Onyskiewicz, a
colleague from his own police division.  While on duty at a crime scene, he
took a phone call that furthered his criminal scheme. Some of the staged accidents
located on public streets or parking lots posed a risk to public safety. The complexity
and degree of planning of the attempted fraud was significant, as it involved
multiple vehicles, associates, and insurance companies.
[59]          
The mitigating factors are that Mr. Joseph comes before the court as a first-time
offender.  He pleaded guilty thereby saving a lengthy trial. He apologized for
his conduct and has shown some remorse. He has engaged in pro-social behaviour through
his volunteer work with religious organizations. He is the breadwinner for his
family and contributes financially to his mother in Trinidad. If Mr. Joseph
receives a CSO, he will face collateral consequences such as being unable to
continue as a police officer, a profession that he has enjoyed for 17 years. At
52, he will likely have difficulty finding similarly remunerative employment.
[60]          
For the following reasons, I find that a conditional sentence of two
years less a day to be served in the community is a just sentence.
[61]          
First, under s. 742.1 of the Criminal Code, the
court may impose a jail sentence of less than two years to be served in the
community if the offence is not one on the excluded list of offences and does
not have an attached minimum sentence.
[62]          
Mr. Joseph’s offences fit those criteria and a conditional sentence is
therefore available.
[63]          
 Second, a conditional
sentence must not endanger the safety of the community and it must be
consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing as set out
in ss. 718 to 718.2.
[64]          
Regarding conditional sentences and the fundamental purpose of
sentencing, the Supreme Court stated in Proulx, at para. 22:
[65]          
Mr. Joseph committed attempted fraud and public mischief. Serving his
sentence in the community will not endanger its safety. Such a sentence remains
consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing.
[66]          
Focusing on denunciation and deterrence, a two-year less a day CSO is a
significant sentence that properly reflects Mr. Joseph’s circumstances –
including the fact that he is a police officer who breached the public trust. The
collateral consequences raised in this case, namely, that Mr. Joseph would be disentitled
from contesting his termination from the police service, are not unjust in
light of his conduct. Mr. Joseph’s sentence must be more severe than an
ordinary person who commits the same offence: Quinn, at para. 24. Yet,
Mr. Joseph is a first-time offender who did ultimately plead guilty.
[67]          
A two-year less a day CSO is consistent with the jurisprudence. In Lam,
a much younger RCMP officer misappropriated funds. MacNeil involved a driver
who had tried to implicate another occupant in a motor vehicle fatality and pleaded
guilty early into the police investigation. Both Lam and MacNeil received
18-month CSOs.
[68]          
Neither party sought any form of pre-sentence credit.
[69]          
In conclusion, Mr. Joseph is sentenced to:
[70]          
Accordingly, I impose a sentence of imprisonment of two years less
a day, to be served in the community, as a conditional sentence.
[71]          
The conditional sentence of two years less a day shall have the
following terms: in addition to the statutory conditions in s. 742.3 which I
impose, Mr. Joseph shall reside at Unit 1404, 420 Mill Road, in Toronto, or at
such address as approved by his supervisor. He shall be under house arrest subject
to GPS monitoring. For the first twelve months of the conditional sentence, he shall
only be permitted to leave the house to attend appointments with his
supervisor, legal appointments, to attend counselling, to attend medical
appointments for himself or members of his immediate household, to obtain
necessities once each week for 3 hours, and for any other reason that his
supervisor approves. After the first 12 months, and for 6 months
thereafter, his house arrest is lifted but his GPS monitoring shall continue, and
he will be subject to a curfew and be in the house between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. each day for seven days each week. For the final period
of 6 months less a day, his curfew and GPS monitoring are lifted, and he shall
only be subject to the statutory terms under s.742.3(1).
[72]          
I do not order any probationary period to apply.
[73]          
I also order that Mr. Joseph is subject to: