[1]         
The Law Society asks the court to appoint it as
trustee for the respondents’ law practice to preserve and distribute client
property and wind up the business. It expressly disclaims any obligation to operate
or manage the law practice.
[2]         
The Law Society moves to be appointed trustee on
three statutory grounds under s. 49.45 of the Law Society Act, RSO 1990
c L.8:
[3]         
The Law Society accepts that this is an
application for a final order. It is not a motion. Hearsay evidence on
contentious matters is not admissible under Rule 39.01 (5) of the Rules of
Civil Procedure, RRO 1990, Reg 194.
[4]         
Virtually the entire case made by the Law
Society is that the respondents’ law practice must be taken into trusteeship
and wound up because the respondent Mr. Mazaheri has been suspended from the
practice of law on an interlocutory basis pending a formal conduct hearing
before the Law Society Tribunal some time in the future.
[5]         
In my view, simply pointing to the interlocutory
decision of the Law Society Tribunal does not provide an acceptable evidentiary
basis to impose the trusteeship sought in this case.
[6]         
The issue before the tribunal was whether it
ought to suspend the lawyer’s licence under s. 45.27 (2) of the statute,
because there were “reasonable grounds for believing that there is a
significant risk of harm to members of the public, or to the public interest in
the administration of justice, if the [suspension] order is not made.”
[7]         
The issue before the tribunal was, essentially,
whether Mr. Mazaheri acted without instructions by releasing clients’ trust
funds to facilitate a fraud by notorious fraudster Arash Missaghi or whether
Mr. Mazaheri was wilfully blind or being a dupe for Mr. Missaghi and his
associates in a fraudulent scheme. The issue on the merits resolved to who
attended and what was or was not said at a particular meeting.
[8]         
The tribunal found against Mr. Mazaheri based
largely on hearsay evidence before it. In preferring the evidence of the
client, the tribunal necessarily impugned the evidence and character of the
respondent.
[9]         
The tribunal found:
[10]      
I am not called upon to reconsider the
tribunal’s finding; nor would it be at all proper for me to consider doing so.
The tribunal’s findings and rationales were clear. The tribunal was not called
upon to decide the actual merits of the fraud claim. Rather, it looked at
whether there were reasonable grounds for the concerns expressed to require or
support a suspension of Mr. Mazaheri’s licence so as to protect the public
pending the final hearing.
[11]      
But does the fact that Mr. Mazaheri was
suspended on an interlocutory basis pending his final hearing mean that his
practice must be wound down and his trust accounts closed and distributed right
now before the charges against Mr. Mazaheri are determined on their merits?
[12]      
There is evidence before me that Mr. Mazaheri
has been suspended. So, the precondition to a trusteeship order under s. 49.45
(b) is met. But the Law Society trusteeship proposed is not an interim
protection for Mr. Mazaheri’s clients while the charges are reviewed. The
trusteeship proposed is expressly not to carry on the business of the law firm.
Rather, it is capital punishment to the law practice.
[13]      
The Law Society submits that the public interest
requires it to take control of the trust accounts and pay out the proceeds to
those beneficially entitled to them now.
[14]      
Why? The fact that Mr. Mazaheri is suspended
pending a future hearing does not answer that question.
[15]      
There is over $1 million in Mr. Mazaheri’s trust
account. Ms. Anello’s submits there is a trust shortfall. But her submission
somehow omitted to mention that Mr. Mazaheri has already provided details to
her and to her colleagues in the Compliance Dept. showing that the “missing”
funds were in a different TD bank account and had been frozen there by the
tribunal’s interim order in August, 2024. No funds are missing or unaccounted
for.
[16]      
Moreover, in this case, the suspension is just a
temporary one pending the outcome of the conduct hearing. What happens if Ms.
Mazaheri wins that proceeding? The outcome is not a foregone conclusion. At the
main hearing of the charges, rather than proving “reasonable grounds to
believe,” the Law

Society will have to prove its allegations on the merits. Moreover, the hearing
will proceed on somewhat more exacting evidentiary requirements than those
applicable at the interlocutory stage. Why must the law practice be closed down
and liquidated while a contested hearing on the merits is not yet even scheduled?
[17]      
What happens if funds are in trust with Mr.
Mazaheri or his firm due to requirements of an escrow agreement or are being
held pursuant to litigation settlements? The Law Society will not run the
practice. Rather, it proposes to pay the trust funds to the beneficial owner.
Will it put the clients in breach of their agreements? Ms. Anello says that the
process of determining what to do with trust funds is a complex, delicate, and
exacting one. It calls for a stiletto not a butcher knife. But there is exactly
zero evidence before me about why there needs to be a trustee to return trust
funds and files now. Nor does the Law Society give any evidence as to how it
proposes to take such carefully nuanced steps. It is clear that it will not be
functioning as a receiver. It will neither operate nor manage the business. It
proposes to be a liquidating trustee. Yet it offers no evidence at all as to
why this law practice requires liquidation and cessation now, how it can be
accomplished without managing the law practice to protect client positions, or
what happens if Mr. Mazaheri is exonerated at the conduct hearing.
[18]      
The Law Society has had Mr. Mazaheri and his law
practice under investigation for almost a year. Yet it adduces no evidence of
any review of the trust funds to provide some understanding of the amounts
being held in trust and why or how various accounts must be paid out now to
protect the clients or the public interest. There is no evidence that there is
any need to wind up the law practice now to prevent Mr. Mazaheri from
wrongdoing that is not sufficiently covered by his suspension. He is apparently
dealing with the Law Society regularly. The Law Society has not adduced any
evidence of any default in his performance while under suspension or a risk to
provide reasonable grounds for requiring the immediate winding up of his law
practice.
[19]      
Ms. Anello complains that there has been no
change to the respondents’ trust fund since October 29, 2024 apart from a bank
adjusting entry. That could be a problem if Mr. Mazaheri was required to do
something since then. Instead, he was precluded from doing anything. Ms. Anello
relied on her technical accounting “shortfall” to say that he has failed to fix
the trust account since October. But there is no affidavit from the Compliance
department to say that he has taken any step contrary to his obligations under
the tribunal’s orders or the Law Society’s by-laws.
[20]      
The fact that there has been no change to the
trust accounts since Mr. Mazaheri was suspended actually cuts the other way. In
the past six or so months, Mr. Mazaheri has done nothing to destabilize the
clients’ trust funds.
[21]      
Ms. Anello submitted that Mr. Mazaheri is in
breach of his obligations as a suspended lawyer. That could indeed present a
very significant problem. But, once again, there is not a whit of evidence to
support this claim. She points to a by-law that is not before the court. She
has no particulars of any breach. She relies on his failure to transfer funds
into trust that are sitting frozen in another account to the knowledge of all.
Where is the affidavit of the Compliance officer to say that she has spent the
past year investigating the respondents’ trust funds and here are the
particulars of accounting irregularities, the missing funds, and especially,
the wrongdoing committed by Mr. Mazaheri since his interlocutory suspension
that provides reasonable grounds to find that his practice must wound up and
his trust funds closed even though he has yet to be found guilty of even jaywalking?
[22]      
Where is the analysis of the $1 million and how
much is being claimed back by clients and how much is to be held for other
purposes?
[23]      
There is no evidence that any client has asked
for funds or files to be returned. In fact, Ms. Anello refused to allow her
witness to answer questions on cross-examination about claims against Mr.
Mazaheri. I agree that the cross-examination was not to be any form of
rehearing of the tribunal proceeding. But if a hundred people are banging on
the Law Society’s wrought iron gates demanding their trust funds wouldn’t the
public interest in liquidation be different than if no one has raised any
concerns with their trust funds despite months passing since the suspension of
Mr. Mazaheri? Mr. Mazaheri could have asked a more pointed question on
cross-examination. But ultimately, the burden is on the Law Society to
establish grounds for a trusteeship. It offers no evidence of anyone asking for
money or files or any reasons why the funds cannot remain frozen to await the
earliest resolution of the conduct charges on their merits.
[24]      
In my view, a trusteeship does not automatically
flow from an interlocutory suspension order made by the tribunal. If a law
practice is to be wound up just based on an interlocutory suspension, the
statute would say so. There would be no need for a court to rubber stamp a
tribunal suspension order. That would change the entire interlocutory process
at the tribunal into a far more consequential, final one.
[25]      
But the tribunal does not have the authority to
appoint a trustee to wind up the lawyer’s trust accounts on making an
interlocutory suspension order. A court proceeding is required, on admissible evidence,
to establish different grounds to justify the appointment of a trustee.
[26]      
There may well be cases where a liquidating
trusteeship may be appropriate after an interlocutory suspension especially if
the lawyer abandons his practice or continues to act in breach of his or her
obligations despite the suspension. See, for example, the decision of today’s
date in LSO v Gauthier (unreported, Court File No.:
CV-25-00734677-00ES).
[27]      
It would be easier to understand the
reasonableness of an interlocutory trusteeship akin to a receivership or an
Estate Trustee During Litigation. The law is familiar with appointing neutral
parties as stakeholders to preserve, protect, and manage assets while issues
ensnaring the owners or managers are resolved in legal proceedings. But that
requires a trustee who is willing and capable of operating the practice for the
benefit of all interested parties. The Law Society’s Trustee Service Dept. does
not propose that it operate the business or to preserve and protect the assets
pending the outcome of the discipline proceedings.
[28]      
A trustee may be ordered under s. 49.45 (e) of
the statute where the Law Society proves “reasonable grounds for believing that
the licensee has or may have dealt improperly with property.” But here, even
accepting that the tribunal found this to be the case, it still does not
support the relief sought. The conduct issue is whether Mr. Mazaheri dishonestly
gave identified funds to a fraudster. The fraudster is no longer alive. Mr.
Mazaheri is not practising. The remaining funds are frozen and there is no
issue of Mr. Mazaheri trying to access them or deal with them improperly or at
all since his initial suspension last August.
[29]      
There is no admissible evidence before this
court on the merits. But, even if there were, there is no link between saying
that Mr. Mazaheri might have participated in a fraud and that his practice
needs to be closed and trust funds liquidated before the conduct issue is
determined.
[30]      
There is similarly no evidence to establish
reasonable grounds for believing that other circumstances exist in respect of the
licensee or the licensee's professional business that make a trusteeship order
necessary for the protection of the public. The public has been protected from
the risks identified by the tribunal by the interlocutory suspension it
ordered. Apart from that, there is no evidence or basis offered to justify an
order to wind up and distribute Mr. Mazaheri’s trust funds and law practice.
[31]      
The application is dismissed.
[32]      
Costs normally follow the event. Mr. Mazaheri is
self-represented. Accordingly, for him to seek costs, he needs to establish
that he gave up remunerative work opportunities to perform the work usually
performed by a lawyer.  Some cases will apply a modest hourly rate even without
an express finding of lost revenue. In my view, the parties should be able to
arrive at a modest result by themselves. However, if they cannot settle, each
may deliver no more than two pages of submissions and a mandatory Costs
Outline. Mr. Mazaheri’s submissions and Costs Outline will be due on or before
February 28, 2025. The Law Society’s submissions and Costs Outline will be due
on or before March 7, 2025.