[1]                  
The defendants move for orders compelling the
plaintiff to attend a psychological assessment with Dr. David Prendergast on March
11, 2025, and leave for late service of Dr. Prendergast’s report in respect of
the pretrial scheduled for May 15, 2025. The defendants also seek leave to
bring this motion, if necessary.
[2]                  
The defendants submit it is in the interests of
justice for the motion to be heard and for this assessment to take place.
Fairness requires that they have an opportunity to respond to the psychological
component of the plaintiff’s significant claim for damages. There is no
prejudice to the modestly late service of the report. Their proposed expert
advises the report can be ready by April 1, 2025, putting it inside the 60-day
window for a responding report by approximately two weeks. It will not
undermine the purposes of the pre-trial conference and will not jeopardize the
trial date. Any prejudice to the trial date will be caused by the plaintiff’s
recent service of a further four expert reports on the eve of the 90-day
deadline and not this psychological opinion. The defendants are concerned they
will not be able to respond to those reports in a timely way and plan to
address this also by way of motion. They would have included that issue in this
motion, but for the need to address entitlement to the psychology assessment in
advance of the approaching date.
[3]                  
The plaintiff submits the motion should be
dismissed. The timing of the service of the responding report is in breach of
the Rules. The defendants have failed to offer a reasonable explanation
for their delay in scheduling the assessment for a responding report when the
defendants have been in possession of the plaintiff psychology expert opinion
since October 2020. Moreover, the plaintiff would need to undertake an updated
assessment with her psychology expert to respond to the report and this would likely
jeopardize the trial date. A trial adjournment would significantly prejudice
the plaintiff because it would further limit her recovery of pre-trial damages
in respect of her income loss claim. In any event, the proposed assessment is
duplicative and unnecessary. The defendants’ recent neuropsychological report
addresses the psychological component of the claim.
[4]                  
These reasons explain why I allow the
defendants’ motion for the medical assessment but deferred on granting leave
for its service. The defendants arguably ought to have confronted this issue
earlier in the proceeding. Nevertheless, in my view, both parties bear
responsibility for these circumstances. In balancing the factors of fairness, necessity,
and prejudice, I am persuaded the psychological assessment ought to proceed.
[5]                  
I also give leave for late service of this
report, on condition that it is served by April 4, 2025. Any prejudice arising
from the plaintiff’s need for a responding opinion can be addressed by
abridging the time for service for the responding report.
[6]                  
This action arises from a rear end collision at
a stop sign at an intersection on the Western University campus on November 6,
2017. The statement of claim, issued in December 2018, claims damages of $2.5
million plus interest and costs.  Examinations for discovery were held in
September 2019. The parties unsuccessfully mediated the matter in 2022.
[7]                  
The plaintiff was a university undergraduate at
the time of the collision. She has since completed her undergraduate degree and
has been working while pursuing a Master’s degree. She claims that her injuries
from this collision have caused chronic impairments and altered her academic
and career trajectory. But for the accident, she claims she intended to
complete a PhD in social work or a related field and can no longer do so. Her
diagnoses include chronic pain, post-concussive syndrome, mild traumatic brain
injury, adjustment disorder, anxiety, and depression. The economic loss report
of February 9, 2025, recently served on her behalf projects her income loss to
range between $1.6 million and $2.5 million, which would seem to potentially
exceed the current prayer for relief.
[8]                  
The plaintiff passed the trial record on or
about October 4, 2023.
[9]                  
By letter of November 14, 2023, the plaintiff
noted the pending assignment court date for later than month and advised, with
reference to rule 53.02(2.2), that in addition to updates from current experts
and treatment providers “we may retain the following additional experts and
serve their reports on or before 90 days prior to the pre-trial; this will to
some extent be dependent on which defence medical assessments are requested and
the outcome of them…” Plaintiff counsel identified potential additional
expert reports in the fields of bio-mechanical engineering, physiatry, future
costs and accounting.
[10]              
At assignment court on November 17, 2023, the
jury trial was scheduled for the sitting commencing September 29, 2025, for an
estimated duration of five weeks and the pre-trial for May 15, 2025.
[11]              
The plaintiff has now served the following
reports in support of her claim:  physiatry, psychology, neuroradiology, neuropsychology
(responding to the defence neuropsychology opinion), vocational, future care,
bio-mechanical, and economic loss.  This does not include any opinion or report
from participant experts.
[12]              
To date, the plaintiff has been assessed on the
defendants’ behalf for a physiatry and a neuropsychology opinion. The
defendants obtained the physiatry opinion in November 2021 and the
neuropsychology opinion in 2024.
[13]              
The defendants arranged for further assessments
in the last quarter of 2024. An ophthalmology assessment is scheduled for
February 25, 2025, to address the opinions of the plaintiff’s treating
optometrist. The defendant has also retained an expert to provide a
neuro-radiology opinion to respond to the plaintiff’s expert.
[14]              
In December 2024, the defendants advised the
plaintiff they had retained Dr. Prendergast to conduct a psychological
assessment. After several follow up emails, Plaintiff counsel demurred and
asked when the psychology report would be received. The defendants made further
inquiries and confirmed the report would be delivered approximately two weeks
after the rule 53 deadline. In mid January 2025, counsel advised he would not consent
to the proposed psychological assessment both because of the timing and because
he did not think the assessment was necessary, given the recent neuropsychological
evaluation.
[15]              
As mentioned, the defendants advised they were also
just served with future care, economic loss, and bio-mechanical engineering
reports. Absent any agreement with the plaintiff, the defendants anticipate a
further motion will be necessary to address their ability to respond to these
reports in a timely way.  They advised they opted to proceed with this motion only
on the entitlement to the psychology assessment so as to preserve the potential
appointment and avoid prejudice to the pre-trial and trial dates.
[16]              
The defendants did not set this action down for
trial. Therefore rule 48.04, requiring a moving party to seek leave of the
court to bring this motion, is not required. To the extent that leave is arguably
required, I am satisfied it is in the interests of justice to address this
motion on its merits:  Louis v. Poitras, 2020 ONSC 5301, at para. 22.
[17]              
Where the physical or mental condition of a
party to a proceeding is in question, the court may order the party to undergo
a physical or mental examination by one or more health practitioners. The court
may also order further physical or mental examinations on such terms as are
just:  Courts of Justice Act, s. 105; Rules of Civil Procedure,
r. 33.02.
[18]              
Each party filed case briefs in support of their
position. In my view there is no controversy about the applicable principles;
the disagreement arises from their application. Each case turns on its own
facts. Ultimately, this court’s exercise of its discretion on this issue is
informed by necessity, fairness and prejudice:  Godin v. Goncalves, 2014
ONSC 7297 at para. 29.
[19]              
The plaintiff served her psychological report in
October 2020. Dr. Joan Clayton diagnosed Post Traumatic Stress Disorder,
Adjustment Disorder with Mixed Anxiety and Depression, and Chronic Pain with
cognitive impairment and functional limitations. Other diagnoses that have
emerged in the years since this collision include post-concussive syndrome with
oculo-visual dysfunction and post-traumatic headache.
[20]              
I will allow the defendants had to be strategic in
the selection and timing of their assessments, since they do not have a
limitless right to examinations.  This is not a situation where the record
shows the defendants showed a lack of diligence in arranging the assessments.
To date, but for this assessment, the other examinations have been arranged in
a manner consistent with the rule 53 timelines.  That said, given the time that
passed since they were first served with the psychology opinion, they arguably
had ample time in which to schedule an assessment before engaging in this race
against the clock.
[21]              
That said, I cannot find that either party
adhered to rule 53.03(2.2). The rule requires the parties to agree to a
schedule setting out dates for the service of experts’ reports in order to meet
the service deadlines for pre-trial. While plaintiff counsel’s letter of
November 2023 can be interpreted as an overture to begin that discussion, there
is no evidence that either party had any further communication about the nature
of the experts contemplated or the schedule. At most, plaintiff counsel
indicated he “may” retain further experts. There was no concrete proposal, let
alone a discussion or agreement to a schedule as contemplated by the rule.
[22]              
In a situation where one side or the other will
not agree to the required schedule for the delivery of expert reports, counsel
should immediately request a 50.13 case conference in order to have the court
fix one:  Agha v. Munroe, 2022 ONSC 2508 at para. 13. Both parties
appear to be responsible for the lack of an expert schedule in accordance with
r. 53.03(2.2). Such an exercise would have afforded the opportunity to clarify
the parties’ expectations, to identify whether there would be issues as to the
number of assessments and disciplines involved and would allow the parties to
seek the court’s direction in a timely way in advance of pre-trial and trial. While
the defendants’ motion could be dismissed for non-compliance with the timing of
service of expert reports, I find that in the circumstances of this matter, this
joint failure to agree to a schedule, in combination with other factors arising
on this record weighs in favour of the defendants.
[23]              
The number of assessments conducted by the
defence to date do not bear the hallmarks of excess in the context of the
damages claim and the array of impairments alleged as a result of the
collision.  The plaintiff claims significant damages. The recent economic loss
report would seem to put her damages claim in excess of the pleading for $2.5
million.  In my view, the defendant should be able to test the psychological
component of the claim as a matter of fairness. It will also assist the trier
of fact to have expert evidence that is subject to the adversarial process:  Girao
v. Cunningham, 2010 ONSC 4607 at para. 22.
[24]              
The plaintiff underwent a neuropsychology
assessment on behalf of the defendant by psychologist Dr. Dowhaniuk in August
2024. The selection of this discipline appears reasonable given the symptoms
and diagnoses of cognitive dysfunction arising from a suspected concussion and
the diagnosis of mild traumatic brain injury and its role in her substantial
damages claim. Dr. Dowhaniuk’s report of November 13, 2024, advised that from a
cognitive/neuropsychological perspective, the plaintiff did not meet the
criteria for a diagnosis of Neurocognitive Disorder and that it was incorrect
to classify her symptoms as “post-concussive’. He recognized she described a
degree of psychological maladjustment that was understandable and congruent
with her life situation but found she does not meet the threshold of mental
illness or a diagnosable psychological condition. He found her profile showed
no elevations indicative of clinical depression, an anxiety disorder, or any
mood disorder.
[25]              
The plaintiff submits that Dr. Dowhaniuk has
therefore already provided a psychological opinion of assistance to the
defendants such that a further assessment with Dr. Prendergast is not
necessary. The plaintiff refers to the transcript of a 2022 cross-examination
of Dr. Dowhaniuk on his affidavit in another court proceeding. In that
examination, the expert acknowledged that while he practiced neuropsychology,
that did not preclude him from commenting on psychological issues that he felt
he had the expertise or knowledge to comment upon.
[26]              
The court is without the full context of that
cross-examination in order to appreciate the context in which these comments
were made.  In any event, while there may be overlap in the disciplines and
assessments, I do not agree that Dr. Dowhaniuk has addressed the psychological
component to this claim. That same transcript of his cross-examination explains
that his registration with the Ontario College of Psychologists is limited to
clinical neuropsychology. Further, while said he is not precluded from
commenting on psychological issues that he feels he has the expertise or
knowledge to be able to comment upon, he explained he would not conduct pure
psychological assessments exclusively for the purpose of a psychological
evaluation.  Dr. Dowhaniuk’s explanation is consistent with his report in this
matter, where he has commented upon some psychological issues as they arose in
his assessment but otherwise did not engage in a psychological evaulation. The
focus of his retainer and the focus of his opinion was on the existence of
cognitive impairment and its relationship to the collision. He did not address all
the diagnoses identified by the plaintiff psychologist Dr. Clayton, such as
chronic pain or post-traumatic stress disorder, nor can I see that he was asked
to do so.
[27]              
To the extent there is concern as to unfairness
in the overlap of psychological opinion, and the perception of “doubling up” on
opinions, this could be remedied through limiting the defence expert’s trial
testimony to the neuropsychological findings, if found necessary by the trial
judge.
[28]              
My conclusion that this psychological assessment
is justified does not arise from a simply matching exercise of respective
experts:  Moore v. Bertuzzi, 2012 ONSC 5399, at para. 36. Fairness
demands that the defendant have the right to address the psychological
diagnoses, otherwise the plaintiff’s expert and the plaintiff’s evidence on
that aspect could go unchallenged: Bonello v. Taylor, 2010 ONSC 5723 at
para. 15.
[29]              
I am not satisfied that the timing of this
report will be the cause of irreparable prejudice to the trial date. The
defendants anticipate being able to serve the report sufficiently in advance of
the pre-trial. Plaintiff counsel advised that he had intended to only call Dr.
Clayton to testify as to the plaintiff’s psychological condition at the time of
the assessment in October 2020. However, if he must now respond to the
defendant’s psychological opinion, he suggests this will require a fulsome updated
assessment, possibly with psychometric testing, which could jeopardize the
September trial date. Counsel did not suggest that he did not plan to call this
expert at all. Irrespective of a responding defence report, if his original
plan was that he would only call her to testify as to her 2020 assessment, I
question whether he would nevertheless have otherwise served an updated report
in some fashion, as the psychologist’s opinion would be five years old by the
time of trial. There was no evidence as to Dr. Clayton’s availability or advice
as to the nature of an updated report and its timing, only evidence of
counsel’s concern about the timing of the responding report. There will be
approximately five months between the anticipated service of the defence report
and trial. In my view it is reasonable to conclude that a responding report
could be served without jeopardizing the trial date, with leave for late
service.
[30]              
In summary, although I remain troubled by the
lack of a schedule as required by r. 53.03(2.2), I am not prepared to visit the
consequences of that oversight entirely upon the defendants. The parties share
the responsibility for either an agreed upon schedule or in obtaining direction
from the court in the event of disagreement. As I am satisfied this report can
be served and responded to without jeopardizing the trial date, it remains the
court’s strong preference that this proceeding be determined on its merits and
not a technical application of the Rules.
[31]              
The motion is therefore granted.
[32]              
The plaintiff is ordered to attend the
assessment with Dr. Prendergast on March 11, 2025.
[33]              
The defendants have leave to serve Dr.
Prendergast’s report by April 4, 2025.
[34]              
I find it would not be appropriate to provide
terms for the service of any responding psychology report by the plaintiff as
the contingencies to contemplate are numerous. Depending upon timing and the
content of the report, it would be my expectation that the defendants would not
be able to complain of late service of a responding psychology opinion,
although this issue would likely fall to the discretion of the trial judge in
the event of disagreement.
[35]              
I encourage the parties to resolve costs. If the
court must address costs, the defendants shall deliver their written
submissions by March 7, 2025 and the plaintiff her written submission by March 14,
2025. There is no reply without leave. Written submissions are limited to two
pages, excluding bills of costs.