[1]             
Mr. Tayler has been convicted of one count of sexual assault. He was
acquitted on another count of sexual assault.  The evidence at trial consisted
of the evidence of the complainant who I will refer to as AB.  The evidence
portion of the trial took one day.  The Crown completed its closing submissions
on November 2, 2023. The trial judge adjourned the matter ultimately to
November 16, 2023 to allow Mr. Tayler time to prepare and make his closing
submissions to the court.  The matter was then put over to January 8, 2024 for
reasons. Ultimately oral reasons were provided by the trial judge on February
5, 2024.  The matter was then put over for sentencing submissions to March 27, 2024
to set a date for sentencing. On March 27, 2024 the trial judge adjourned the
date for sentencing to May 13, 2024.
[2]             
When the matter came before the court on May 13, 2024 this matter came
before me at which time I advised counsel that the trial judge was unwell and
unlikely to be able to complete the sentencing in this matter.  Mr. Tayler did
not attend. A bench warrant with discretion was issued.  When the matter came
back before me on May 29, 2024 the matter was adjourned to July 24, 2024 to
allow time for the pre-sentence report to be prepared.  On July 24, 2024 Mr.
Tayler again did not appear.
[3]             
On July 24, 2024 I raised with the Crown concerns about the facts upon which
the court would be asked to impose sentence. I indicated I was inclined to
appoint Amicus as Mr. Tayler was self-represented.
[4]             
The trial judge has now retired.  It falls to me to decide whether to
invoke the provisions of s. 669.2 and to impose sentence on Mr. Tayler. Amicus
has been appointed. Written submissions have been provided to the court by both
the Crown and Amicus that address concerns this court has raised regarding the
facts upon which this court would impose sentence and whether there are
ambiguities in the trial judge’s reasons that could cause this court to direct
a mistrial.
[5]             
The indictment charged Mr. Tayler as follows:
[6]             
As it relates to Count 1 the essence of the evidence of AB was that she
was asleep when she awoke to find Mr. Tayler digitally penetrating her vagina.
Her evidence is summarized by the trial judge as follows:
[7]             
As it relates to Count 2 the essence of the evidence of AB is summarized
in the trial judge’s reasons as follows:
[8]             
The trial judge’s reasons are 32 pages in length. The first 10 pages of
his reasons reflect a review of the chronology of the case in the Superior
Court of Justice .  The next 12 pages is the trial judge’s review of the
evidence of AB.  The trial judge’s analysis for why he acquitted Mr. Tayler occupies
one paragraph which I reproduce below:
[9]             
As for Count 2 for which Mr. Tayler was convicted the trial judge’s
analysis occupied approximately one page of the transcript which I reproduce in
its entirety below:
[10]         
Given that the trial judge has now retired it falls to me to decide
whether the facts found by the trial judge are such that this court can impose
the appropriate sentence in connection with the finding of guilt on one count
of sexual assault.
[11]         
With the greatest of respect to the trial judge I believe he has
conflated the evidence of AB as it relates to Count 1 and Count 2 of the
indictment.  While the reasons of the trial judge as it relates to the
acquittal provide little to no insight into why he ultimately concluded that
the Crown had not proven its case beyond a reasonable doubt his reasons for
conviction on Count 2 are problematical.   I say they are problematical because
the trial judge appears to have conflated the evidence of AB as it relates to
Count 2.
[12]         
The trial judge convicted Mr. Tayler on Count 2 because he believed the
evidence of AB. The problem arises when he convicts Mr. Tayler because he
accepts the evidence of AB that she could not have consented to the penile
penetration because she was asleep.  The trial judge’s own review of the
evidence makes clear that AB was asleep with respect to the events relating to
Count 1 and she was awake with respect to the events relating to Count 2.
[13]         
It is noteworthy that in assessing the credibility of AB as it relates
to Count 2 the trial judge commented on AB being fair in her evidence and
“admitting things that may have been inconsistent, like the sun being up or
down and was telling the truth”.  The problem with this analysis is that AB’s
evidence about the sun being out was in relation to the events relating to Count
1, not Count 2.  Again, it appears the trial judge has conflated the evidence
between Count 1 and Count 2.
[14]         
As it relates to the issue of whether the court is in a position to
impose sentence based on the reasons of the trial judge and the evidence of AB
the Crown argues that this court should not direct a mistrial and should impose
a sentence of 3 years.
[15]         
The Crown argues that any lingering concerns arising out of the trial judge’s
reasons can be addressed by Mr. Tayler on appeal. Alternatively, the Crown
suggests that the Crown will not rely on any aggravating facts in relation to
the state of AB’s level of consciousness at the time of the sexual assault. 
Simply put the Crown argues that the court should impose the appropriate
sentence for someone convicted of sexual assault involving penile penetration.
[16]         
The essence of the Crown’s position is that it is clear from the trial
judge’s reasons that he convicted Mr. Tayler of sexual assault.  The fact that
he may have conflated the evidence he relied upon to convict is irrelevant to
the fact that there was a sexual assault involving penile penetration which is
evident from the fact the trial judge believed AB as it relates to Count 2 of
the indictment.
[17]         
It is worth noting that the Crown quite fairly in her written submissions
agrees that the trial judge made two errors in his reasons.   In that regard I
reproduce paras. 24–27 of the Crown’s written submissions:
[18]         
The Crown argues that the trial judge’s reasons read together with the
evidence of AB leaves no doubt that AB was not in a coherent and conscious
state when Mr. Tayler engaged in non-consensual sexual intercourse and as such
this court can and should impose the appropriate sentence that would otherwise
have been imposed by the trial judge.
[19]         
As it relates to the question of whether this court should declare a
mistrial the Crown’s position is that a mistrial would be an entirely
inappropriate remedy. It is argued that this court must show deference to the
decision of the trial judge just as this court would have to defer to the
decision of a jury when imposing sentence.  Specifically it is argued that the
trial judge after a jury verdict may sentence an accused on facts different
from the facts found by the jury as long as the essential elements of the
offence have been met.
[20]         
From a procedural perspective the Crown asks this court to take note of
the delay in imposing sentence; a delay largely caused by Mr. Tayler who did
not attend court when required and only is in attendance now because he is in
custody on unrelated charges.  The Crown also asks this court to consider the
impact of a mistrial on AB who has been waiting now for nearly 44 months to
have this matter resolved.
[21]         
Because Mr. Tayler is self-represented and because it was this court
that raised concerns about the trial judge’s reasons, I appointed Amicus to
assist the court.
[22]         
By reference to a decision of the British Columbia Court of Appeal, R
v Roper, 2019 BCCA 68, Amicus suggests that in the situation
presented to this court the new judge exercising the discretion provided by s.
669.2 of the Code must sentence the accused person on the “basis of the
findings that led to the conviction.” It is argued that if those findings are
not easily discerned or if as in this case the trial judge may have
misapprehended or conflated the evidence between counts then this court ought
to be very cautious and reluctant to proceed under s. 669.2.
[23]         
Amicus notes in his written submissions that the Crown has conceded in
its written submissions that the trial judge did in fact err in some limited
fashion by conflating the evidence between counts and that it simply is not
possible to “sanitize” the reasons of the trial judge to the point where this
court can impose sentence.
[24]         
While Amicus does not disagree with the Crown that any errors in the
trial judge’s reasons might be cured in the Court of Appeal, it is argued this
simply is not appropriate where the trial judge on the face of his reasons has
misapprehended the evidence during a crucial part of his judgment. If this
court cannot make sense of the trial judge’s reasons and be satisfied that
there is a clear pathway to move forward, free of irregularities then Amicus
argues this court should not exercise its discretion under s. 669.2(1) to
impose sentence – leaving the only other remedy being a mistrial.
[25]         
It is not surprising that there is not a large body of case law that has
interpreted s. 669.2 of the Code. In R v Gionet, 2016 ONSC
6894 Templeton J. dealt with a somewhat similar situation as occurred in this
case.  The trial judge had retired, and Templeton J. was faced with a motion
for a mistrial. What differentiates Gionet from Mr. Tayler’s case is
that the trial judge in that case had released a detailed and complete set of
reasons. In denying the mistrial motion Templeton J. dealt at some length with
the appearance of justice being an essential element in any trial. At
paragraphs 31-34 Templeton J. stated:
[26]         
In Mr. Tayler’s case the public would be justifiably upset if his case
was dismissed on what some might describe as a technicality. On the other hand,
members of the public might be equally concerned to learn that the trial judge
may have misapprehended some of the evidence and convicted Mr. Tayler on the
basis of evidence conflated between Count 1 and Count 2.
[27]         
A mistrial is a remedy of last resort.  It has sometimes been referred
to as the nuclear weapon in the hands of the trial judge.  A mistrial should
only be declared if there is no other remedy available to prevent a miscarriage
of justice.
[28]         
The leading decision from the Supreme Court of Canada as it relates to
the jurisdiction of a trial judge to declare a mistrial is R v Burke,
2002 SCC 55.  At para. 75 the Court stated:
[29]         
I entirely
agree with Crown counsel that there has been an inordinate amount of delay in
this matter much of which is directly attributable to the actions of Mr.
Tayler.  I also agree with Crown counsel that the court should consider the
impact of declaring a mistrial on AB.  To declare a mistrial will deprive AB of
closure and require her to testify should the Crown decide to re prosecute this
matter. Having reviewed the victim impact statement of AB filed as part of the
sentencing submissions, I am very much alive to the impact these proceedings
have had on AB. I also equally have no doubt that to put AB back into the
witness box will only further exacerbate AB’s recovery.
[30]         
What happened in this case was not the fault of any of the parties and
was certainly not the fault of anyone associated with this case. At the end of
the day, I have to be satisfied that I can sentence Mr. Tayler on the basis of
the reasons of the trial judge read in conjunction with the evidence of AB. 
Regrettably in my view it would not be appropriate to proceed to sentence Mr.
Tayler on the record as it presently exists.
[31]         
While the Crown is correct that the Court of Appeal may address the
concerns I have raised regarding the obvious errors in the trial judge’s reasons,
my responsibility is to determine if the trial judge’s reasons, read in
conjunction with the evidence of AB, are such that this court can impose the
punishment authorized by law in the circumstances.  In coming to the ultimate
conclusion that I do in this case it is worth repeating the obvious; it is not
the role of this court to sit as an appellate court in its review of the trial judge’s
reasons.  The role of this court is to impose sentence except if there is such
an ambiguity in the trial judge’s reasons which cannot be reconciled with the
evidence of AB.  In my view for the reasons set forth above the conflation of
the evidence and the errors in the trial judge’s reasons are such that it would
not be appropriate to impose sentence.  As such a mistrial is directed.  This
matter is remitted for a new trial.