[1]         
Norman Ellis pleaded guilty to one count of
sexual exploitation contrary to s. 153(1)(b) of the Criminal Code,
R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 (the “Code”). He is before me now for sentencing.
[2]         
The parties agree that a sentence of
imprisonment is called for in the circumstances of the case. The central issue
is whether it can be served in the community or must be served in a custodial
facility. The Crown seeks a sentence of five years, to be served in a
penitentiary. The defence seeks a sentence of less than two years, to be served
in the community.
[3]         
To arrive at an appropriate sentence, I must
consider the circumstances surrounding the offence, those of the offender and
the victim, and the relevant principles of sentencing.
[4]         
The offender and his wife own and operate an
equestrian business. The victim had been a student there from the time she was
10 or 11 years old.
[5]         
In the summer of 2021, when the victim was 16
years old, she was not getting along with her parents. As a result, the
offender and his wife took the victim in. They gave her a bedroom in the
basement of their residence. They provided her with food. They also provided her
horse with lodging. In exchange, the victim was required to help with daily
chores around the farm.
[6]         
Soon after the victim moved into the offender’s
home, he began offering her alcoholic beverages and money. On one occasion in
July 2021, the victim consumed four coolers and became intoxicated. The
offender told the victim that he loved her and sexually desired her. He kissed
her for about 20 seconds. He stopped when he noticed that she was not kissing
him back and said something about it. The victim agreed and retreated to her bedroom.
[7]         
In the following weeks, the offender began to
touch the victim sexually. In one such incident, the offender and the victim
were alone at the residence. The offender told the victim that he wanted to lay
naked with her in bed. He undressed himself and then undressed the victim. He
then performed oral sex on the victim while she was seated at the end of the
bed. The incident ended when the offender told the victim to get dressed and to
carry on with her duties for the rest of the day.
[8]         
On another occasion, the offender asked the
victim to join him on his weekly trip to the garbage dump. At some point during
the trip, the offender stopped his truck on a secluded gravel road and came
around to the passenger side. He told the victim that he “just couldn’t wait
any longer”. He pulled her pants and underwear down and performed oral sex on
her while she was seated in the truck.
[9]         
A few days later, the victim texted the
offender, asking him to end the relationship. Initially, he agreed. However, a
few days later, he approached the victim and told her that he could not end the
relationship because he was in love with her. He brought the victim to his
bedroom. He removed her pants and underwear and lifted her onto the bed. He
then performed oral sex on the victim for five-to-ten minutes. He then told the
victim to perform oral sex on him, which she did briefly.
[10]     
The incident escalated when the offender told
the victim he wanted to try having sex with her. After applying lubricant to
himself, the offender inserted his penis into the victim’s vagina. However, he told
the victim that he could not continue due to erectile dysfunction and the
incident ended. The offender told the victim not to tell anyone about it.
[11]     
On August 24, 2021, the victim tried again to
stop the relationship by messaging the offender. He responded by asking her
what her next move was going to be. He later asked her if she was going to go
to the police or if they could just carry on as friends. He threatened to kill
himself if the police showed up.
[12]     
On September 3, 2021, while the victim was in
Ottawa at a horse show, she disclosed the sexual exploitation she had
experienced to an adult and the police were contacted, leading to the charge
against the offender for which he is now being sentenced.
[13]     
The offender is now 66 years old. He has lived
in the Powassan area all of his life.
[14]     
He has no criminal record other than the one
resulting from this offence. He was well-provided for by his parents in a
close-knit family when he was growing up, although he feels that the degree to
which religion played a role in his formative years had a negative impact on
his relationships with people his own age.
[15]     
Mr. Ellis completed high school but preferred
the work world to the academic one. He began working in the retail sector and
became a district manager responsible for 14 stores before he was let go due
without cause after 16 years with the same employer. He started his own retail
store and operated that for a period of 11 more years before starting the
equine business with his wife.
[16]     
Their marriage is the offender’s second. He has
two adult children from his first marriage. He and his current wife have two
children from their relationship. This offence has had a negative impact on the
offender’s relationship with his family. He is no longer invited to family
functions, one of the sons from his first marriage no longer talks to him, and he
is not allowed to see his grandchild. I was also told that the offender’s
relationship with his present wife was ending at the time of the sentencing
hearing.
[17]     
This offence has also had a negative impact on
the couple’s equestrian business, which is struggling financially.
[18]     
Mr. Ellis suffers from some health issues. I was
given a list of the medications he is on by his counsel. It is long. However,
without some additional evidence, the names of the medication taken by the
offender are not enough to tell me what they are for. I do accept counsel’s
submission that the offender suffers from a heart condition, mental health
issues, and erectile dysfunction.
[19]     
The one, and probably the only, positive thing
resulting from the offence is that the offender has stopped drinking. By all
accounts, including that of the offender’s wife, friends, and the victim
herself, the offender had a serious drinking problem prior to being charged. He
was drinking daily, sometimes as many as a dozen beer a day. The offender
maintains that alcohol played a role in the offence and, given the evidence, I
am prepared to accept that.
[20]     
However, the offender does not blame only alcohol
for what happened. He also blames the victim. I will come back to this when I
address the aggravating and mitigating circumstances affecting sentence.
[21]     
As I stated earlier, the Crown seeks a carceral
sentence of five years, together with certain ancillary orders, none of which
are in issue. It submits that the need for denunciation and deterrence of
sexual offences against children and the moral blameworthiness of such offences
requires that the offender be incarcerated in the circumstances of this case.
[22]     
The offender submits that the appropriate
sentence is one of less than two years imprisonment, thereby allowing the court
to impose a conditional sentence and a lengthy period of probation that can
equal the length of the carceral sentence sought by the Crown. On his client's behalf,
counsel highlights that the victim consented to the sexual contact that
occurred with the offender. I will return to this submission, as well.
[23]     
Before I address counsel’s submissions, I will
briefly discuss the law of sentencing.
[24]     
The fundamental purpose of sentencing is
to protect society, to contribute to respect for the law, and to maintain a
just, peaceful, and safe society: Code, s. 718.1.
[25]     
Section 718 of the Code sets out a number
of objectives to be achieved in fulfilling the fundamental purpose of
sentencing. They include denunciation of the unlawful conduct and the harm
caused by it, deterrence of the particular offender and others, and the
rehabilitation of offenders.
[26]     
In the case of offences such as this one that
involve the abuse of a child under the age of eighteen years, s. 718.01 of the Code
requires the court to give primary consideration to the objectives of
denunciation and deterrence of such conduct. A sentence expresses denunciation
by condemning the offender for encroaching on our society's basic code of
values and expresses deterrence by discouraging the offender and others from
engaging in criminal conduct: R. v. T.J. 2021 ONCA 392, at para. 26.
[27]     
The fundamental principle of sentencing
is that a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the
degree of responsibility of the offender: Code, s. 718.1.
[28]     
In R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9, [2020] 1
S.C.R. 424, the Supreme Court of Canada explained in detail the gravity of
sexual offences committed against children. As the court explained, violence is
inherent in the act of applying force of a sexual nature to a child: Friesen,
at para. 77, citing R. c. M. (L.), 2008 SCC 31, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 163, at
para. 26. The wrongfulness of sexual violence against a child derives from the
interference with the child's security of the person and the bodily integrity
which “lies at the core of human dignity and autonomy”: R. v. Ewanchuk,
1999 CanLII 711 (SCC), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 330, at para. 28. As the court also explained in Friesen,
the harm can take many forms, including low self-esteem, inability to form
emotional attachments, and self-destructive behaviour: Friesen, at para.
80, citing R. v. D. (D.) (2002), 2002 CanLII 44915 (ON CA), 58 O.R. (3d) 788 (Ont. C.A.), at para.
10.
[29]     
Offences of sexual violence against children
involve a high degree of moral blameworthiness on the part of the offender
because children are so vulnerable and because the offender is or ought to be
aware that such action can profoundly harm the child: Friesen, at paras.
88 and 90.
[30]     
Section 718.2 of the Code requires that a
sentence be increased or reduced to account for any aggravating or mitigating
circumstances relating to the offence or the offender. The section lists a
number of circumstances that are presumptively aggravating. Three of those
listed circumstances are relevant in this case: (1) evidence that the offender,
in committing the offence, abused a person under the age of eighteen years, (2)
evidence that the offender, in committing the offence, abused a position of
trust or authority in relation to the victim, and (3) evidence that the offence
had a significant impact on the victim, considering her age and other personal
characteristics: Code, s. 718.2(a)(ii.1)(iii), and (iii.1).
[31]     
Under the Code, the burden of proving the
existence of an aggravating circumstance falls upon the Crown, who must prove
the existence of such a circumstance beyond a reasonable doubt: Code, s.
s. 724(3)(e).
[32]     
Before I get to the aggravating and mitigating
circumstances of this case, I would like to address one more area of the law,
namely, the availability of conditional sentences for sexual offences committed
against children.
[33]     
Mr. Primeau urges me to impose a conditional
sentence of up to two years, under strict house arrest, to be followed by a
three-year period of probation. Since the decision of the Ontario Court of
Appeal in R. v. Basso, 2024 ONCA 168, conditional sentences have been
available for sexual offences committed against children. However, there are
two reasons why such a sentence is not available in this case.
[34]     
The first is that a conditional sentence can
only be imposed where the appropriate sentence for an offence is less than two
years imprisonment: Code, s. 742.1 That is certainly not the case here.
In my view, the appropriate sentence in a case like this is in the range of
five-to-seven years.
[35]     
One need look no further than the Supreme
Court's decision in Friesen to determine the appropriate range of
sentence. In Friesen, the Supreme Court held that while the appropriate
length of sentences for sexual offences committed against children and the
setting of sentencing ranges or starting points is a matter best left to
provincial appellate courts, mid-single digit penitentiary terms for sexual
offences are normal and upper-single digit and double-digit penitentiary terms
should be neither unusual nor reserved for rare or exceptional circumstances: Friesen,
at paras. 106 and 114.
[36]     
It is true that the victim in this case was not
a child at the time of the offences because she was 16 years of age. However,
the Supreme Court in Friesen stated specifically that the principles of
sentencing set out therein apply to the offence of sexual exploitation, which
necessarily involves persons 16 years of age or more but under the age of 18
years: Friesen, at para. 44; Code, s. 153(2).
[37]     
Moreover, even where a sexual offence has been
committed against an adult involving penetration, as occurred here, a sentence
of a least three years imprisonment is the starting point: R. v. A.J.K.,
2022 ONCA 487, at para. 77. All other things being equal, where the victim is
under the age of 18 years, that sentence can only go up: Criminal Code,
s. 718.2(a)(ii.1); Friesen, at para. 90.
[38]     
Even if the appropriate range of sentence in
this case permitted the imposition of a conditional sentence, I would not
impose one. The Court of Appeal has stated on more than one occasion that such
sentences will only rarely be appropriate in cases involving child sexual abuse,
and only in exceptional circumstances: see R. v. M.M., 2022 ONCA 441, at
para. 16; R. v. B.M., 2023 ONCA 224, at para. 2. There are no such
exceptional circumstances in this case.
[39]     
Mr. Primeau submits that a carceral sentence
would have a negative impact on his client’s health. That has not been
established. As I said earlier, the long list of medications tells me nothing
about the underlying medical issues. And there is no evidence that Mr. Ellis
cannot obtain all of those medications while incarcerated.
[40]     
Mr. Primeau also asks me to consider the
negative financial impact that a carceral sentence will have on the equestrian
operation. I do have some sympathy for Mr. Ellis's spouse. However, as both
trial and appellate courts have said repeatedly, the focus in sentencing an
offender for sexually abusing a child must be on the harm caused to the victim
and on the offender's conduct, not on the effect of the sentence on the
offender, or even his spouse: T.J., at para 37; R. v. Williams,
2023 ONSC 6127, at para. 66.
[41]     
For these reasons, I reject the submission that
a conditional sentence should be imposed. Instead, I accept the Crown's
submission that Mr. Ellis must serve a carceral sentence. I turn now to the question
of how long that sentence should be.
[42]     
I will begin by examining the aggravating
factors in this case and I will then examine those that mitigate the sentence.
[43]     
As I mentioned earlier, there are three aggravating
factors present in this case that are mentioned in s. 718.2 of the Code.
[44]     
The first is the age of the victim at the time
of the offence. She was only 16 years old. The offender was in his 60s. In Friesen,
the Supreme Court poignantly laid out the potential harm that sexual abuse of a
young person can cause, and why. As the court explained, at para. 56, sexual
violence against children can cause serious emotional and psychological harm
that “may often be more pervasive and permanent in its effect than any physical
harm”. The court explained why, at para. 58:
[45]     
That is exactly what happened here. In her
Victim Impact Statement, the victim eloquently articulated the profound effect
this offence has had on her. As she wrote, the abuse she suffered changed
“every aspect” of her life.
[46]     
Prior to the abuse, the victim loved going to
the equestrian centre more than anything else. The offender and his family were
like a second family to her. The horse barn became a safe place for her, where
she could escape her stress and anxieties. However, that all suddenly changed.
As she put it:
[47]     
Following her disclosure of the abuse and the
laying of charges against the offender, the victim was again victimized, this
time by the offender's friends and associates in the equestrian world. In the
months after, her name and reputation were tarnished. She lost all of her
“horse world” friends and any chance she had of continuing in the sport.
[48]     
The abuse has continued to harm the victim. I
cannot put it any better than she did:
[49]     
The third and final statutory aggravating factor
is the fact that the offender abused a position of trust or authority over the
victim.
[50]     
On behalf of the offender, Mr. Primeau submits
that his client did not use his position of authority over the victim to commit
the offences. On the basis of the admitted facts, I cannot accept that
submission.
[51]     
The victim had known the offender since she was
10 or 11 years old. She was so close to the offender and his wife that they
took her in when she was having issues with her parents. There is no evidence
that they did this regularly or for anyone else. Both the victim and her
parents trusted the offender to care for and protect the victim.
[52]     
The victim was also dependant on the offender
and his wife for food and lodging. However, that does not mean that the
offender was not also in a position of trust in relation to the victim. As one
of the only two adults in the house, he most certainly was. As the court
explained in Friesen, at para. 126, “any breach of trust is likely to
increase the harm to the victim and thus the gravity of the offence.”
[53]     
There are other aggravating factors in this case
beyond those referred to in s. 718.2. One is the grooming of the victim in
which the offender engaged: Williams, at para. 49; R. v. Green,
2022 ONSC 3786, at para. 43. He was supplying her with alcohol and offering her
money before he began to abuse her.
[54]     
Another aggravating feature is the fact that the
offender isolated the victim: Williams, at para. 51. He did this when he
stopped his truck in the middle of nowhere and performed oral sex on her.
[55]     
Yet another is the offender's efforts to silence
the victim: Williams, at para. 52. He did this while the abuse was
occurring by telling the victim not to tell anyone and again when the victim
tried to end the abuse when he threatened to kill himself if the police showed
up.
[56]     
Perhaps the most aggravating non-statutory
feature of the facts in this case is the degree of physical interference with
the victim's bodily integrity. The court in Friesen acknowledged that the degree of physical interference is a
recognized aggravating factor: Friesen, at para. 138. As I mentioned
earlier, our Court of Appeal has held that forced penetration of any kind,
whether it be oral, anal, or vaginal, increases the starting point of a
sentence. In this case, the offender forced the victim to fellate him and
penetrated her vagina with his penis.
[57]     
I turn now to the mitigating factors.
[58]     
There are not many mitigating factors in this
case.
[59]     
Among them is the fact that the offender has no
criminal record. He has also been a contributing member of the community
throughout his life.
[60]     
Probably the most important mitigating factor is
the offender's plea of guilty. This plea spared the victim from having to
undergo the ordeal of a trial.
[61]     
Mr. Primeau also relies upon the offender's
self-imposed isolation since his arrest in 2021 and the fact that he was not
able to attend horse shows due to the terms of his release as mitigating factors.
I do not see these as overly mitigating. I have no idea exactly what
restrictions the offender placed upon himself, as I might have had if his
isolation had been imposed by the terms of a release order. I am also told by
the Crown that the condition that the offender not attend horse shows was
varied to allow him to do so, except for two such shows where the victim was
expected to be.
[62]     
As I understand Mr. Primeau's submissions, the
fact that the offender has stopped drinking and started helping more around the
farm is also a mitigating factor in the sense that it shows the potential for
rehabilitation. There are two problems with this submission.
[63]     
The first is that, in sentencing an offender for
the sexual abuse of a child, rehabilitation takes a back seat to denunciation
and deterrence by virtue of the Code: s. 718.01. The second is that, to
have rehabilitative potential, the offender must accept responsibility for the
offence: R. v. B.C., 2008 ONCA 486, at para. 57. The offender has not
done that here.
[64]     
The offender told the author of the pre-sentence
report that the victim “lured and seduced” him. He described her as
“promiscuous” and “precocious”. During submissions, Mr. Primeau did not deny
that his client had said these things but, rather, tried to explain them away
by saying that the comments by the offender were spoken out of a sense of frustration.
That is not sufficient in my view. The offender should not be feeling
frustration. He should be feeling remorse. If he is frustrated, it shows that
he still blames the victim.
[65]     
This leads me to the submission made by Mr.
Primeau on behalf of the offender, that all of the offences were consensual,
even though they were criminal. I cannot accept this submission, either.
[66]     
The offence of sexual exploitation is based on
the premise that 16- and 17-year-olds cannot validly consent to having sexual
contact with adults who are in positions of trust or upon whom they are dependant.
As the Supreme Court made clear in Friesen, the fact that a victim has participated
is not a mitigating factor: Friesen, at para. 149.
[67]     
Finally, I come to Mr. Primeau's submission that
it is a mitigating factor that the offender did not threaten to take away the
victim's room and board. This is not a mitigating factor. Had the offender done
this, it would have been an aggravating factor. However, the absence of an
aggravating factor is not a mitigating factor: Friesen, at para. 150.
[68]     
Having considered all of the sentencing purposes and principles
mentioned earlier, and all of the circumstances surrounding the offence, the
offender, and the victim, I agree with the Crown that the appropriate sentence in
this case is five years imprisonment. Anything less than this would not express
society’s condemnation of the offender’s behaviour, discourage others from behaving
likewise, or address the harm that the offender has done to the victim.
[69]     
Had the offender been found guilty after a trial, I would have sentenced
him to a term of imprisonment in the six-to-seven-year range in the
circumstances of this case.
[70]     
The following ancillary orders will also be made: