[1]              
This is an Application for relief from
forfeiture.
[2]              
The Applicant, was the purchaser under an
Agreement of Purchase and Sale for residential property which (together with
extras) she had agreed to purchase for $1,423,408.96.  She had paid deposits
totalling $99,810.00.  When she failed to close the transaction on the date
eventually fixed for closing, she was advised that the deposits would be forfeited,
and the Respondent would hold her liable for its losses pursuant to the terms
of the Agreement of Purchase and Sale.
[3]              
The Applicant brings this Application for a
return of her deposits.  She relies upon the power of the Court to relieve from
penalties or forfeiture under s. 98 of the Courts of Justice Act. She asks
the Court to order the return of the deposits.  The Respondent opposes such an
order both on the merits but also on the basis that it will shortly be
commencing an action and it would be inappropriate to deal with the deposits in
isolation from the issues which will be litigated in its claim for damages.
[4]              
There is no dispute that the Respondent vendor
was ready, willing and able to close on the date set for closing (which had
been extended at least twice) but the Applicant purchaser was not able to complete
the purchase. This is because her financing fell through due to a decision by
the bank which she asserts to have been outside of her control.  It appears
from the affidavit that the bank had an issue with the valuation of the
property. In addition, interest rates rose. As a consequence, the bank refused
to honour its mortgage commitment.  The Applicant was unable to arrange
alternative financing. The Respondent vendor was unwilling to agree to a
substantial reduction of the purchase price.
[5]              
Because the Agreement of Purchase and Sale was
unconditional by the date set for closing, upon the Applicant advising the
Respondent she was unable to close, the Respondent declared her to be in breach
of contract.  She was advised that the Respondent would be forfeiting the
deposits and upon reselling the property would hold her liable for any losses.
[6]              
I am advised that the property has recently sold
for less than the original purchase price and the Respondent will be seeking
damages from the Applicant. I am advised that after giving credit for the
deposits, there remains a significant claim.
[7]              
The Applicant contends that the issue with the
valuation was the fault of the Respondent which had misrepresented the size of
the lot and charged her a premium. The Respondent denies these facts and
advises that the premium was charged for a corner lot. The Applicant also
alleges she had an alternative purchaser but the Respondent unreasonably refused
to consent to an assignment of the Agreement of Purchase and Sale.  Clearly there
are facts that are in dispute and the Respondent will be advancing a claim for
its losses and the forfeiture of the deposit by way of action.
[8]              
In effect this Application is brought in advance
of the action and after the Applicant was advised the Respondent would be
pursuing her for damages. In those circumstances it would amount to interim
relief from forfeiture in circumstances where the vendor has a prima facie right
to forfeit the deposit. See Azzarello v. Shawqi, 2019 ONCA 820 (CanLII)
[9]              
Relief from forfeiture is available in certain
circumstances.  In general this requires that the forfeited deposits are out of
proportion to the damages suffered by the other party and it would be
unconscionable for the seller to retain the deposit. See Redstone
Enterprises Ltd. v. Simple Technology Inc., 2017 ONCA 282 (CanLII).
[10]          
It is premature to determine if the loss
suffered by the seller is more than the sum of the deposits although it appears
likely that it will be. On the other hand, if the Applicant has a defence for
failing to close, she may defend the anticipated action and if she had a legal
basis for refusing to close, she may seek the return of the deposit in the
context of that action.
[11]          
I am not prepared to grant relief from
forfeiture on the limited evidence available at this time.  I am not prepared
to make a finding about disputed allegations of misrepresentation in a 
s. 98 Application.
[12]          
I am dismissing the Application for relief from
forfeiture but without prejudice to such a claim being advanced as part of a
defence and counterclaim if the Respondent proceeds with its threatened action
for damages.
[13]          
In the event that an action is commenced, the
affidavit material filed on this Application may be used in the action. It is also
possible the Respondent will not commence an action for damages despite its representation
that it intends to do so.  Perhaps it will conclude that forfeiting the deposit
is sufficient compensation and be satisfied with that or perhaps the parties
will reach an agreement.
[14]          
Ordinarily the Respondent should be entitled to
costs of the Application but under the circumstances the parties may agree to
reserve those costs to the trial judge.  I invite the parties to reach
agreement failing which I will entertain written costs submissions within the
next 30 days.