[1]              
On July 16, 2024, I granted in part the
applicant’s motion to find the respondent in contempt of Cullin J.’s order
dated October 07, 2024.  I adjourned the penalty phase of the motion to permit
the respondent an opportunity to purge the contempt.
[2]              
After the contempt finding, several case
management appearances were required.  During that time, the respondent brought
a motion to set aside Cullin J’s order, as well as other relief.  Oral
submissions on that motion as well as the penalty phase of the applicant’s
motion were heard together on January 06, 2025.  This is my decision on the
motions.  While there are two named respondents, I refer to them in the
singular because Leslie Woodward is clearly the controlling mind of the
corporate respondent.
[3]              
In April 2021 the respondent obtained a building
permit from the applicant and started construction of a residential dwelling on
his property at 162 Lee Valley Road, Massey, ON (hereinafter “the property”).  On
August 03, 2021 the applicant issued an Order to Comply to the respondent
pursuant to the Building Code Act, S.O. 1992, C.23 (hereinafter “the Code”). 
Unsatisfied with the respondent’s compliance, On August 23, 2021 the applicant
issued a Stop Work Order pursuant to the Code.
[4]              
The applicant visited the property several times
over the following months, noting that construction continued despite the Stop
Work Order.  Letters were sent to the respondent and to his engineer asking
that the order be respected.  The applicant eventually started an application
in August 2022 and brought a motion for an interim injunction.
[5]              
The respondent attended briefly on the first
return date of the motion but did not remain until the matter was addressed. 
The court adjourned the motion to October 07, 2022, and granted the respondent
until September 30, 2022, to deliver his responding materials, though none were
ultimately ever filed.
[6]              
The respondent did not appear on October 07,
2022.  Cullin J. heard submissions from the applicant and granted the motion
with reasons to follow.  Those reasons were set out in an endorsement dated
October 20, 2022.
[7]              
In her order Cullin J. restrained the respondent,
“their employees, agents, contractors and invitees…from directly or indirectly,
performing any construction, demolition or alteration on the property…and from
causing, permitting or performing any other acts on that property that require
a Building permit.”  She also ordered substantial indemnity costs of $6,803.49
which have not been paid.
[8]              
In her reasons, Cullin J. found that the
uncontradicted evidence established the respondent continued construction on
the property after the Stop Work Order.  She also found the respondent refused
to permit the applicant to inspect the construction site.  She held the
respondent’s conduct was “flagrant and unjustified.”
[9]              
By way of motion dated November 23, 2023, the
applicant sought a finding that the respondent was in contempt of Cullin J’s
order.  Responding materials were filed and the contempt hearing took place on
July 16, 2024.
[10]          
It was not disputed by the respondent that on
May 29, 2024, he completed some construction on the property.  This was in
response to a LeeMan Engineering report dated May 28, 2024.  The report was
prepared due to the respondent’s concern about sagging in a canopy protruding
from both sides of the dwelling.  The report recommended that, among other
things, temporary supports be installed for safety reasons.
[11]          
In the end, I found this to be the only example
of contemptuous conduct by the respondent, though others had been pled by the
applicant.   It was apparent the applicant required as-built drawings approved
by an engineer before it would consider lifting the Stop Work Order.  I amended
Cullin J.’s order on consent to permit the applicant’s engineer access to the
property to complete these drawings.
[12]          
By way of motion dated October 25, 2024, the
respondent asks that Cullin J.’s order be set aside.  In support of this
request the respondent filed an affidavit to which he attached as an exhibit a
report dated October 22, 2024, from Dahl Engineering. Interim as-built drawings
of the same date were also made an exhibit during the hearing of the motion. 
The parties agreed that this evidence could be applied to both this motion and
the remedy phase of the applicant’s contempt motion.  The respondent also asks
for details of closed session council meetings and recordings of conversations
between the building inspector and a third party.
[13]          
The applicant argues Cullin J.’s order ought not
be set aside.  They submit there have been material changes to the dwelling
since the initial plans were approved, and these have not been reflected in the
updated as-built drawings. The following concerns are raised by the applicant:
[14]          
The applicant also submits they cannot attend on
the respondent’s property for inspection purposes because they have been told
by the respondent to stay away and they are concerned about the respondent’s
threatening behaviour.  They are prepared to engage a Registered Code Agency, as
permitted by the Code, to conduct necessary inspections, at the respondent’s
cost.
[15]          
While acknowledging the respondent’s efforts to
purge his contempt, the applicant asks the court to impose a penalty
proportionate to the harm caused.  While leaving the decision “in the court’s
hands,” the applicant submits jail or a $10,000 fine would be appropriate, together
with costs.  The applicant argues the penalty needs to send the message to the
respondent and the public generally of the need to respect court orders,
particularly those concerned with construction pursuant to the Code.
[16]          
The respondent submits the new as-built drawings
and engineering report confirm the construction already completed more than
meets the Code’s requirements.  He argues Cullin J’s order should be set aside
so that construction can resume in accordance with the plans.  He notes
mortgage remedy proceedings in respect of the property are outstanding.  His
ability to resolve the mortgage issues has been hampered by his inability to
complete the construction.
[17]          
He further argues, without evidence, the
applicant failed to properly attend inspections he paid for as part of the
application process.  He accordingly asks that the applicant be responsible for
the costs of the Registered Code Agency.
[18]          
The test for injunctive relief is as set out in RJR-MacDonald
Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General), 1994 CanLII 117 (SCC), [1994] 1 SCR 311 at paras 81-86:
[19]          
Irreparable harm and the balance of convenience
will generally give way to the public interest when municipalities seek
injunctive relief to prevent contravention of the law: Vancouver (City) v.
Zhang, 2009 BCSC 84 at para 18.
[20]          
Rule 60.11(5) of the Rules of Civil Procedure,
RRO 1990, Reg. 194 sets out the following remedies available to the court upon
a finding of civil contempt:
[21]          
In Boily v. Carleton Condominium Corp,
2014 ONCA 574 at para 90 the Court of Appeal set out the following factors to
be considered in determining the appropriate sentence upon a finding of
contempt:
[22]          
Efforts to purge the contempt are considered at
the penalty phase: Business Development Bank of Canada v. Cavalon, 2017
ONCA 663 at para 59.
[23]          
In applying the RJR-MacDonald test,
Cullin J. concluded the claim was serious.  She noted the respondent’s blatant
failure to respect the Order to Comply and the Stop Work Order, including his
refusal to permit inspections.  She was also concerned about structural
deficiencies.  She found the respondent’s behaviour fostered irreparable harm
in the sense that it made the municipality powerless “to protect their
interests by ensuring code-compliant, safe building practices.”  While
acknowledging the injunction would severely impact the respondent’s interests,
she concluded his behaviour tipped the balance of convenience in favour of the
applicant.
[24]          
In my view, there has been a sufficient change
in circumstances to warrant setting aside the interim injunction along terms I
will order.
[25]          
Dahl Engineering has been involved in the
project since 2021. They recently completed an inspection of the property on
July 25, 2024 “to review the building in its current condition and document the
existing structural systems.”  Writing for the firm, Stephen Dahl provided
details of their review together with updated as-built drawings on October 22,
2024. I realize this report was not filed as an expert report in this
proceeding.  However, I find it is of assistance to me, particularly given Dahl
Engineering’s lengthy involvement with the project.
[26]          
Stephen Dahl notes they also reviewed the issues
raised in the Order to Comply and the Stop Work Order in their reports dated
July 29, 2021, August 26, 2021, and January 23, 2023.  I accept Stephen Dahl’s
evidence that the primary concerns have been addressed.
[27]          
For example, the applicant argues the updated as-built
drawings are insufficient for various reasons, including the absence of evidence
of frost protection and the location of beams and posts not set out in the
original plans.  But in a report stamped January 23, 2023, Dahl notes the
concrete slab was built according to Code.  He found rigid insulation exceeding
the Code was installed below the slab.  He also notes adequate footing is in
place to support a full-length steel beam.
[28]          
The applicant also submits an energy efficient
design summary needs to be completed, and that Dahl has not provided an energy
compliance package.  However, Stephen Dahl notes the original plans (not drawn
by them) as approved by the applicant did not specify an HRV.  Dahl recommends
a better ventilation solution that would be an improvement to the original
plans.  I agree that failing to provide the minimal remaining documentation
falls far short of a reason to maintain the Stop Work Order and the
injunction.
[29]          
The applicant is also concerned about the
dwelling’s roof.  They are unable to determine what materials were used,
whether it is strapped on the underside and whether there is underlayment for R
value.  However, Dahl notes the structural systems “as installed to date and/or
as outlined on the enclosed plans in terms of beam/joist spans vs. loading
exceed the requirements of the Ontario Building Code…” This gives the court
comfort that the structure of the roof exceeds the Code.  The questions raised
by the applicant again fall short of maintaining the Stop Work Order and the
injunction.  As acknowledged by the applicant in their evidence, Dahl need only
make notes about these changes to the original designs.
[30]          
Finally, I am satisfied the inability of the
applicant to inspect the property is resolved.  Stephen Dahl provided a
Commitment to General Review by Engineer signed by him and the respondent and offered
to assist the parties to eliminate the conflict that has persisted.  In
addition, the parties agree a Registered Code Agency will be retained by the
applicant to conduct its statutorily required inspections, though they cannot
agree on the costs associated with the Agency.
[31]          
In my view, the respondent should pay for the
costs of these inspections.  These proceedings arose partly because of the
respondent’s refusal to allow the applicant’s representatives on the property. 
While the respondent may believe he was justified in so doing, the law requires
the inspections to take place and other solutions should have been explored by
him.  I have also considered this under the penalty phase of the contempt
motion, as I will discuss below.
[32]          
In short, I find Cullin J.’s order should be set
aside and the respondent ordered to maintain his retainer and Commitment to
General Review with Dahl Engineering (or another professional engineering firm)
as well as to pay for the cost of the Registered Code Agency inspections.
[33]          
The respondent acted in contempt of Cullin J.’s
order when he completed work in response to the LeeMan Engineering report dated
May 28, 2024.  LeeMan Engineering visited the property on May 04, 2024, and
noted several safety concerns.  They recommended temporary supports be
installed.  The respondent installed these posts and completed other work that
had been identified as problematic.  This included completing some footings,
repairing a twisting beam in the carport, and installing sonotubes.
[34]          
Considering the LeeMan Engineering report, the
proper course of action would have been to bring the matter before the Court
for a reconsideration of the interim injunction.  That said, the respondent
completed only what he believed was necessary based on the report.  The
sentence must be proportionate to this misconduct.
[35]          
The misconduct is aggravated by the fact that
the respondent ignored not only Cullin J.’s order but the Stop Work Order.  I
remind myself I am sentencing the respondent for his May 2024 conduct. 
However, that conduct followed a pattern of disrespect for lawful orders made
by the applicant pursuant to the Code.  It is evident the respondent has no
respect for the people engaged by the applicant to enforce the Code and chooses
his own interpretation of compliance over theirs.  The conduct is aggravated by
the fact the legislature enacted the Code for public safety reasons.
[36]          
The respondent’s efforts to purge his contempt
are significant and mitigating.  The October 2024 Dahl Engineering report and
updated as-built drawings have put the respondent in a position where he is
ready to work with the applicant to continue and complete construction of the
dwelling.  By agreeing to work with a Registered Code Agency, the respondent
acknowledges the primacy of the Code and the need to work within it.  Since the
finding of contempt in July 2024, no other allegations of contempt have been
raised, and the respondent engaged in the court process so that the court could
determine the outstanding issues between the parties.  I have also considered
the respondent will be responsible for the costs of the Registered Code Agency.
[37]          
The sentence in this case must denounce the
respondent’s violation of Cullin J.’s order.  Unsanctioned willful disrespect
of court orders erodes the role of the court in maintaining a free, just, and
democratic society.  An appropriate sentence will deter the public generally
and the respondent specifically from engaging in this type of behaviour,
particularly where public safety is at the core of the subject legislation.
[38]          
For these reasons, I conclude a fine in the
amount of $7,500 together with an order for costs is a just and appropriate
sentence in these circumstances.  I have considered the respondent’s ability to
pay.  While I recognize the respondent is engaged in mortgage remedy
proceedings involving the property, I also know he has an ongoing business and
has engaged professional engineers to assist in the completion of the
dwelling.  I am satisfied he can pay the fine.
[39]          
The respondent also asks for production of
closed session meetings held by the applicant as well as a recording of
meetings between Jeff Lapierre and third parties.  The respondent suggests this
evidence will establish slanderous comments were made about him by the
applicant.
[40]          
The relevance of documents is determined by the
pleadings: Denault v. Alplay, 2016 ONSC 1618 at paras. 11-13; The
Manufacturers Life Insurance Company v. ASG Technologies Group, Inc., 2020
ONSC 3286 at para. 13.  The respondent’s pleadings do not contain a claim based
in slander.  The request for production of this information is accordingly
dismissed.
[41]          
For these reasons I order as follows:
[42]          
If the parties are unable to agree on the costs
of these motions, the applicant may serve and file submissions on costs of no
more than two pages, not including a bill of costs and any offers to settle,
within fifteen days of the date of this order.  The respondent may serve and
file submissions on costs of no more than two pages, not including any offers
to settle within thirty days of the date of this order.