[1]              
The Defendants, Marc Castillo and Castillo HR Consulting Inc. (together,
“Castillo”) seek an order staying the action for abuse of process. Castillo
contends that the Plaintiff failed to make timely disclosure to Castillo, as
non-settling Defendant, of agreements it reached with three employees or former
employees of Castillo’s: Erika Saclayan, Nikki Mathews, and Anita Crawford (the
“Settling Defendants”). In those agreements, the Settling Defendants agreed to
co-operate with the Plaintiff in advancing its claims.
[2]              
Alternatively, Castillo seeks an order for further and better production
of some 1 to 4 million documents seized by the Plaintiff from Mr. Castillo’s
residence under an Anton Piller Order. To date, the documents have been
produced to Castillo in a format which is inaccessible and which, in
particular, does not reveal the meta-data and so it cannot be determined when
and where they originally were created – i.e. the very issue in this claim,
which alleges misappropriation of intellectual property and centres
on the source of certain documents.
[3]              
The Plaintiff entered into a settlement
agreement with the Defendant, Anita Crawford, on September 12, 2024. This
agreement includes terms requiring Ms. Crawford to cooperate with the Plaintiff
in its ongoing litigation against Castillo. This cooperation includes her
agreeing to produce documents to the Plaintiff, swearing an affidavit as
requested, and testifying at trial without a summons.
[4]              
On September 16, 2024, counsel for the Plaintiff served counsel
for Castillo with a Notice of Discontinuance in respect of its claim against
Ms. Crawford. The Notice did not come with any message from Plaintiff’s counsel
regarding a settlement agreement. On September 20, 2024, four days later and
eight days after the settlement was finalized, the Plaintiff advised Castillo
for the first time that it had reached a settlement agreement with Ms. Crawford.
[5]              
The Plaintiff entered into separate settlement
agreements with the Defendants, Erika Saclayan and Nikki Mathews, on
September 24, 2024. Each of those agreements included terms requiring Ms.
Saclayan and Ms. Mathews to cooperate with the Plaintiff in its ongoing litigation
against Castillo. Those terms are identical to the terms contained in the
Plaintiff’s settlement agreement with Ms. Crawford.
[6]              
On September 25, 2024, counsel for the Plaintiff served counsel
for Castillo with a Notice of Discontinuance in respect of its claim against Ms.
Saclayan and Ms. Mathews. However, the Plaintiff did not advise Castillo of the
settlements until twelve days after the settlement agreements were finalized,
on October 7, 2024.
[7]              
Castillo moved to stay the Plaintiff’s action as a result of the
Plaintiff’s failure to immediately disclose the three settlement agreements. In
Castillo’s view, the agreements fundamentally change the nature of the
litigation landscape, converting former Defendants adverse to the Plaintiff into
non-parties that provide evidentiary support to the Plaintiff.
[8]              
In Handley Estate v. DTE Industries Limited, 2018 ONCA 324,
at para. 39, the Court of Appeal stated that parties to an action have an unequivocal
obligation to immediately disclose any agreement such as a Mary Carter or
Pierringer agreement “that has the effect of changing the adversarial position
of the parties set out in their pleadings into a cooperative one.” The Court
explained the rationale for this strict rule is to maintain fairness as between
the remaining parties to the litigation. More specifically, parties, and the
court itself, need to “know the reality of the adversity between the parties”
and whether an agreement changes “the dynamics of the litigation” or the
“adversarial orientation”: Ibid., at para. 40, quoting Moore v.
Bertuzzi (2012), 2012 ONSC 3248 (CanLII), 110 OR (3d) 611, at paras. 75-79 (SCJ).
[9]              
 In Tallman
Truck Centre Limited v. K.S.P. Holdings Inc., 2022 ONCA 66, at para. 22,
the Court of Appeal made clear that it is not sufficient for the non-settling
Defendant to have suspected that an agreement had been reached when, for
example, it received a Notice of Discontinuance against a co-Defendant. The agreement
itself must be immediately disclosed.
[10]          
The Court has further clarified that both
the existence of the settlement and the specific terms of the settlement that
change the adversarial orientation of the proceeding must be disclosed: Poirier
v. Logan, 2022 ONCA 350, at para. 26. Importantly, the Court has also been
specific in instructing that, “The absence of prejudice does not excuse the
late disclosure of such an agreement”: Waxman v. Waxman, 2022 ONCA 311,
at para. 24.
[11]          
In each of these cases, the Court of Appeal
indicated that any failure to immediately disclose the agreement amounts
to an abuse of process and will result in serious consequences for the litigation:
Handley, at para. 45; Waxman, at para. 24; Poirier, at
para. 38. In fact, the Court has opined that the only remedy to properly redress
this failure is to stay the claim brought by the non-disclosing party;
otherwise, the court will be unable to control its own processes or to see that
justice is done between the parties: Handley, at para. 45; Tallman,
at para. 28; Waxman, at paras. 24, 45-47; Poirier, at paras.
38-42.
[12]          
As explained in Crestwood Preparatory College Inc. v. Smith,
2021 ONSC 8036, at para. 80, aff’d 2022 ONCA 743, defendants are entitled to
know the adversity of the action before pleading in their own defense. Counsel
for Castillo points out that the Plaintiff has pleaded that the Defendants,
including Castillo, Anita Crawford, Erika Saclayan, and Nikki Mathews,
“coordinated together in an unlawful means conspiracy to acquire and misuse [the
Plaintiff’s intellectual property].” There is no suggestion in the pleading
that the three settling Defendants were anything but adversarial with the
Plaintiff and aligned with Castillo.
[13]          
Accordingly, a settlement under which the three settling
Defendants are obliged to assist the Plaintiff against Castillo represents a
significant shift in the posture of the action. “[P]rocedural fairness requires
immediate disclosure, among other things because the settlement
agreement may have an impact on the strategy to be pursued by non-settling
defendants, who need to be able to properly assess the steps being taken by the
settling parties… These considerations apply at the pre-statement of defence
stage as well as after” [emphasis added]: Ibid., at para. 81, citing Handley,
at para. 38.
[14]          
The Court of Appeal has shown zero tolerance for
any deviation from the immediacy requirement. In Waxman, at para.
29, the Court determined that settling defendants had gone from adverse parties
adverse vis-à-vis the plaintiff to cooperating parties, due primarily to
the fact that their “cooperation extended to providing affidavits and
subjecting themselves to cross examinations.” 55 56. In Poirier, at
para. 71, the plaintiff entered into a settlement whereby one of the defendants
was released from the action, without costs, in exchange for “a statement under
oath setting out his knowledge of the facts relevant to the action”.
[15]          
In both cases, the courts reasoned that “when
the settling co-defendant agrees to co-operate in the plaintiff’s prosecution
of the proceeding, the plaintiff or applicant must immediately disclose to the
non-settling defendants: Ibid., at para. 45. Once the relationship
between the parties is altered in this way, the non-settling Defendant cannot
be lulled into thinking it has an ally in the settling Defendant.
[16]          
For that reason, time is of the essence when it comes to
disclosure. The Court of Appeal has insisted that “The standard is ‘immediate’;
it is not ‘eventually’ or ‘when it is convenient’… ‘The rules really can’t be
any clearer. Where an agreement involves a party switching sides from its
pleaded position, it must be disclosed as soon as it is made’”: Tallman,
at para. 26.
[17]          
In the present case, it cannot be said that immediate
disclosure was made by the Plaintiff. In Tallman, disclosure after three
weeks was considered excessively delayed on the settling parties’ part. The
point, however, is not to have to count the days or weeks at all.
[18]          
In fact, the Court of Appeal has insisted that “the
existence of such an agreement is to be disclosed, as soon as it is concluded”:
Laudon v. Roberts, 2009 ONCA 383, at para. 39. To
put it another way, “The agreement must be disclosed to the parties and
to the court as soon as the agreement is made”: Pettey v. Avis Car Inc. (1993),
1993 CanLII 8669 (ON SC), 13 OR (3d) 725, at 737 (SCJ).
[19]          
The lapses of eight days in respect of the Crawford
settlement and twelve days in respect of the Saclayan and Mathews
settlements violate this strict rule. Unbeknownst to Castillo at the time, the Plaintiff’s
agreement with its former employees was not banal; it substantively changed the
position of the parties and the landscape of the case: see Performance
Analytics v. McNeely, 2022 ONCA 731, para 5. While
I do not say that there was malintent on the Plaintiff’s behalf, the delay put
Castillo in a position for a time in which it could not accurately analyze its
position and strategize its response.
[20]          
Counsel for Castillo submits that, “The only remedy for this
abuse of process acceptable to courts in Ontario is a permanent and
non-discretionary stay of proceedings.” Given the pronouncements from the Court
of Appeal and from this Court, I am compelled to agree.
[21]          
As a result of the untimely disclosure to Castillo
of the settlement and cooperation agreement with three other Defendants, the
action must be stayed.
[22]          
Given my conclusion with respect to the delayed
disclosure of the three settlement agreements, it is not strictly necessary to
address Castillo’s alternative argument. That said, Castillo’s argument that it
is entitled to further and better disclosure of the documents seized under the Anton
Piller Order is an interesting and relatively novel one. The parties and
their respective counsel spent considerable time arguing the point. I will
therefore turn to it, if only briefly.
[23]          
At the commencement of this case, the Plaintiff
obtained an Anton Piller Order issued by Justice Brownstone on July 24,
2024. In that Order, Her Honour appointed the firm Cassels
Brock & Blackwell LLP as Independent Supervising
Solicitor (“ISS”) to monitor and administer the seizure of evidence from Castillo.
Among other things, the Order obliges the ISS to provide Castillo of a list of
all evidence seized and to ensure that Castillo has reasonable access to all of
that evidence. The Order also provides that Castillo can come back to court for
a better report from the ISS if the disclosure is insufficient.
[24]          
Castillo submits that the disclosure and access
to the seized evidence provided by the ISS is not only insufficient; it is
useless. Apparently, instead of indicating the computer files it has under its
control, the ISS has simply advised Castillo that it has their computer hard
drives. And instead of forwarding the files in native format so that the meta-data
is readable – i.e. the only part of any file that is relevant to this
proceeding since the issue revolves around the origin of the documents – they
have forwarded the files in a format that is unreadable.
[25]          
According to Castillo, the disclosure by the ISS
is something like a party not listing the files it has in its possession but
instead disclosing merely that it has a filing cabinet. Likewise, the
production by the ISS is something like a party forwarding the files themselves
in an indecipherable code instead of a language which the parties understand.
[26]          
Counsel for Castillo points out that the entire
point of listing the files and then producing them is so that they can be
reviewed for relevance and privilege before forming part of the productions in
the case. Needless to say, files that are not individually identified and that
are produced in an inaccessible format cannot possibly be reviewed for
relevance and privilege.
[27]          
The Supreme Court of Canada indicated in Celanese
Canada Inc. v. Murray Demolition Corp., 2006 SCC 36 (CanLII), [2006] 2 SCR 189, at para. 32, that
a party seizing evidence under an Anton Piller Order has an obligation
to be as transparent as possible and to shoulder the burden of full disclosure
of the material seized:
[28]          
Generally speaking, the obligation of the
seizing party or the ISS in custody of the seized documents is to produce them
in ordinary, readable form: Bergmanis v. Diamond, 2012 ONSC 5762 at
para. 24. It is important that the documents be maintained by the ISS in a
manner which reflects a complete, detailed record of all seized documents and
which makes them accessible for the parties’ review: Regal Ideas Inc. v Haus
Innovations Inc., 2018 BCSC 136, at para. 60.
[29]          
The dispute here is not so much over the
obligation to disclose and produce – both sides concede that Justice
Brownstone’s Order requires full disclosure and production. Rather, it is over
the cost of doing so. Listing, file by file, the millions of files in the
seized hard drive will be a time and resource consuming chore. Furthermore, to
transpose all of those files into a readable format so that the metadata can be
retrieved will require specialized software and is a costly proposition.
[30]          
In the ordinary course, following the close of
pleadings it would be Castillo’s obligation under Rules 30.02 and 30.03 to disclose
and list in its affidavit of documents all documents in its possession relevant
to the issues in the action. That would include each and every relevant
document stored in its computer hard drive.
[31]          
Of course, disclosure of the documents is not
the same as disclosure of their contents. To take a simple example, a party is
obliged to describe in its affidavit of documents that there is a letter going
from person X to person Y dated January 17, 2025. But it is not obliged to state
what the letter contains or says. If the opposing side wishes to know what is
in the letter, Rule 34.04(1) gives it the right to inspect the letter, while
Rule 34.04(7) gives it the right to photocopy the letter at its own expense. If
the letter were found on the producing party’s hard drive, and the metadata
embedded in the letter was of relevance in the case, it would be Castillo’s
obligation to make the metadata available for inspection as an integral
component of the document.
[32]          
Computer-stored documents, even if previously
deleted and now invisible, must be disclosed and produced by the party with
possession of them where relevant: Wenzel Downhole Tools Ltd. v.
National-Oilwell Canada Ltd., 2011 FC 1323. The same logic pertains to
deleted or invisibly embedded parts of an otherwise disclosable document. If
there were a cost entailed in making the metadata visible, it would
presumptively be borne by Castillo as the party with the obligation to produce
the document for inspection. The receiving party has to pay for hard copies of
the documents, but the producing party has to do whatever it takes to make the
documents available – and visible – for inspection.
[33]          
I will add that the cost of production is, like everything
else, subject to the overall proportionality principle expressed in Rule
1.04(1.1). The cost burden imposed on a party could be tempered or modified by
the court as “proportionate to the importance and complexity of the
issues, and to the amount involved, in the proceeding.” Assuming,
however, that the metadata is entirely relevant and that there is a substantial
amount at stake in the action overall, the party in possession of the document
must disclose it in its entirety, including the metadata. If that is a costly
process that requires special software or an I.T. consultant, the expense may
be a disbursement to be factored into a costs determination at a later point in
the litigation: Barker v. Barker, 2007 CanLII 13700, at para. 14 (SCJ).
[34]          
This action, however, has not proceeded in the
ordinary way. It commenced with an Anton Piller Order, which has had the
effect of changing the possession of the documents in issue. Now it is the ISS,
at the behest of the Plaintiff, that is in possession of the documents found on
Castillo’s hard drive. The logic of civil process dictates that the party who
has possession, custody or control of documents…is to produce those documents
at that party’s expense; it is the cost of being involved in a lawsuit”:  Traverse v. Turnbull, [1996] N.S.J. No. 212 (NS CA). Since the
initial Anton Pillar Order changed the possession of the documents from
Castillo to the ISS, it also changed the cost burden entailed in their
production.
[35]          
An Anton Piller Order is an extraordinary
pre-judgment tool and, if not carefully controlled, amounts to extreme
interference with the target party’s business or personal life. It is not to be
sought lightly by parties, and it comes with obligations on the party obtaining
it that must not be overlooked. The relative means of the party who has
obtained this extraordinary remedy does not excuse that party from adhering to
the terms of the Anton Piller Order, or authorize it to play by a
different set of rules: Veilette v. Piazza, 2012 ONSC 5414, at para. 17.
[36]          
Given that the evidence list and production by
the ISS is not usable for the purposes they were meant to serve, the ISS has
not satisfied the terms of Justice Brownstone’s Order. But those terms are
mandatory, and the ISS is obliged to adhere to them.
[37]          
Were this action not to be stayed for breach of
the Handley Estate rule, the ISS would be directed to provide Castillo
with a file-by-file list of what was seized in the execution of the Anton
Piller Order.  The ISS is obliged to provide Castillo with sufficient
information or with a format which allows Castillo to be able to access the
documents in a way that will be useful during the course of the litigation. This
includes access to the metadata for the documents if that portion of the
documents is relevant to the issues in the action.
[38]          
The action is permanently stayed.
[39]          
The parties may make written submissions on
costs. I would ask counsel for Castillo to provide me with brief submissions by
emailing them to my assistant, and serving them on the Plaintiff, within two
weeks of today. I would also ask counsel for the Plaintiff to provide me with
equally brief submissions by emailing them to my assistant, and serving them on
Castillo, within two weeks after receiving Castillo’s submissions.