[1]              
Mr. Nicol White is charged with one count of sexual assault
involving the complainant, Z.E.  The parties were introduced on the Tinder
dating platform and then met in person twice.  Once was a brief encounter on
the evening of September 18, 2021.  The second time was on Halloween weekend, October
30-31, 2021.
[2]              
When they met on Halloween weekend, Mr. White invited Z.E. back
to his condominium.  Z.E. accepted with a condition.  She did not wish to have
“sex” with Mr. White.  Mr. White understood, suggesting they could do “other
stuff”.  They took a taxi to Mr. White's condominium with Mr. White’s friend,
Mr. Ali Jawanshir.  Shortly after arriving at the condominium, Mr. White and
Z.E. engaged in various sexual acts in Mr. White’s bedroom.
[3]              
While the complainant testified that some of the acts were
consensual, she says that others were not, giving rise to the charge before the
court.  Mr. White testified.  He submits that all sexual acts were consensual. 
He denies that he sexually assaulted Z.E.
[4]              
I have concluded that Crown counsel has not proven beyond a
reasonable doubt that Z.E. did not consent to the sexual activity in question. 
Mr. White is acquitted.
[5]              
What follows are my reasons.
[6]             
It is agreed that the issue that requires
resolution in this case is consent.  The burden is on the Crown to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that the complainant did not consent to the sexual
activity in question.
[7]             
Consent means the voluntary agreement of the
complainant to engage in the sexual activity in question.  The consent must be
to each and every act that occurred.  A complainant is not obliged to express a
lack of consent either by words or conduct.  There is no consent unless the
complainant has agreed in his or her mind to the sexual activity at the time it
was occurring.  An agreement to one form of sexual activity is not agreement to
any or all forms of sexual activity.  For example, an agreement to touching one
part of the body is not agreement to touching other parts of the body.  In
addition, a person may revoke consent or limit its scope at any time.  Silence
does not constitute consent.  Nor does submission or lack of resistance.[1]
[8]             
As I have stated above, Mr. White testified, as
did his friend, Mr. Jawanshir. When examining the
evidence favouring Mr. White, including his own evidence, I am required to
consider the principles set out in R. v. W.(D.).[2]  I remind myself of those principles, which
are as follows:
[9]             
When considering Mr. White’s evidence and the evidence that
favours him, I have done so in the context of the evidence as a whole. I have
not isolated it in a vacuum.
[10]          
I have considered all the evidence in this case.  I am not
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Z.E. did not consent to the sexual
activity in question.  I believe the evidence of Mr. White.  He is acquitted on
that basis.
[11]          
To give context to my finding, I will address the uncontested
facts and the evidence of Z.E. before turning my attention to the defence
evidence.
[12]          
Both Z.E. and Mr. White agree on much of what occurred, but for
certain of the sexual acts.  For example, they agree on the following:
[13]          
While Z.E. testified that kissing on the mouth and Mr. White
kissing her breasts was consensual, she maintains that any other activity which
occurred was not.  Z.E. testified that the following acts occurred in the
bedroom, and that these sexual acts were not consensual:
[14]          
In cross-examination, Z.E. testified as follows:
[15]          
Mr. White disagrees with Z.E.’s evidence about what occurred in
the bedroom after the initial acts that she says were consensual.  He testified
that Z.E. was on top of him at certain points.  She performed oral sex on him. 
He performed oral sex on her.  Z.E. gave him a hand job and they engaged in
mutual oral sex in the “69” position.
[16]          
Mr. White testified as follows about what occurred in the
bedroom:
[17]          
Mr. White testified that after Z.E. left the condominium, he and
Mr. Jawanshir ate food from Wendy’s delivered by Uber Eats.  Mr. White denies
that he spoke to Mr. Jawanshir about what happened with Z.E. in the bedroom.  Mr.
Jawanshir confirmed both facts when he testified.  However, he also testified
about an observation that he made of Mr. White and Z.E. while they were in the
bedroom.
[18]          
Mr. Jawanshir was present in the condominium at the time that
Z.E. and Mr. White were in the bedroom.  His evidence may be summarized as
follows:
[19]          
Mr. Jawanshir testified that after Z.E. left the condominium,
they did not discuss what happened inside the bedroom.  Nor did he discuss the
incident after Mr. White had been charged criminally.
[20]          
As I have stated above, I believe the evidence of Mr. White.  As such,
he is acquitted.
[21]          
Firstly, I find that Mr. White testified in a candid and
straightforward manner.  He was consistent in his evidence and was responsive
to the questions asked both in direct and cross-examination.
[22]          
Mr. White’s evidence is also reliable.  He consistently provided
a detailed description of what occurred in the bedroom.  Nothing in his description
of the relevant events (nor anything else) was inherently incredible.[3]  Mr. White
was subject to a rigorous cross-examination by Crown counsel.  Despite that, I
do not find that Mr. White’s credibility was diminished.  I accept his
explanation of what occurred in the bedroom.
[23]          
Further, Mr. White’s description of what occurred in the bedroom conforms
with the timeline of their presence in it.  The timeline would suggest that Mr.
White and Z.E. were in the bedroom for approximately 30 minutes.  The conduct
described by Mr. White conforms with that timeline as they engaged in various sex
acts as described by him.
[24]          
The parties agree about how the acts started: consensual kissing
on the mouth and on Z.E.’s breasts.  They also agree on how it ended:  when Mr.
White’s penis was in Z.E.’s mouth, she turned her head and stopped sucking it. 
During the other sexual activities in between, Mr. White testified that he
checked in with Z.E. to ensure that she was consenting to the sexual activities
in which they were engaged.  When Z.E. stopped performing fellatio on him by
turning her head to the side, he, too, stopped and got off her, respecting her
decision to discontinue the consensual activity.  They had a short discussion,
following which Z.E. left the condominium.  I find that Mr. White stopped
engaging with Z.E. in sexual acts when she withdrew her consent, which was
entirely proper.
[25]          
Additionally, Mr. White’s evidence does not stand alone.  Mr.
Jawanshir provided relevant evidence in direct support of Mr. White’s position,
that the sexual acts with Z.E. were consensual.  I found his evidence to be
reliable, despite Crown counsel’s submissions.
[26]          
Crown counsel submits that there are some inconsistencies between
the evidence of Mr. Jawanshir and Mr. White that should concern the court about
the reliability of their evidence.  For example, Crown counsel submits that
there are inconsistencies regarding the timing of when Mr. Jawanshir came to Mr.
White’s condominium that weekend (Mr. White says Friday, Mr. Jawanshir said
Saturday), the amount of time that Mr. White spent talking with Z.E. at the
club (Mr. White says about 15 minutes, Mr. Jawanshir says a least an hour), and
whether Mr. White danced with Z.E. before going in to the bedroom (Mr. White
says that he did.  Mr. Jawanshir did not recall).  I do not agree.
[27]          
While there were inconsistencies, I find that they were
insignificant given their content and the passage of time.   I find that  the
inconsistencies in the evidence of Mr. White and Mr. Jawanshir were not about material
things and are details that might not be remembered almost four years after the
incident.  I find that the inability of Mr. Jawanshir to recall peripheral
details does not detract from his overall reliability or credibility.[4]
[28]          
Further, the inconsistencies in the evidence of Messrs. White and
Jawanshir demonstrate to the court that they did not collude to provide
consistent evidence about what happened in the condominium.  I do not find that
the inconsistencies identified by Crown counsel were material to the
credibility of either Mr. White or Mr. Jawanshir.
[29]          
Crown counsel submits that it defies logic that Messrs. White and
Jawanshir did not discuss the incident after Z.E. left or after Mr. White was
charged.  I disagree.
[30]          
Mr. Jawanshir explained why he did not discuss the incident with
Mr. White.  Firstly, he was embarrassed.  He was not proud of himself for
looking into the bedroom from the balcony while Mr. White and Z.E. were engaged
sexually.  Secondly, when Mr. White was charged criminally, he told Mr.
Jawanshir that he was hiring a lawyer.  Mr. White’s lawyer called him and told
him not to discuss the details with anyone.  Mr. Jawanshir testified that he
followed the lawyer’s instructions.  I find both explanations to be reasonable
and plausible.
[31]          
In conclusion, I accept the evidence of Mr. White, that the
sexual activity in the bedroom with Z.E. was consensual.  I find that Mr.
Jawanshir’s evidence supports his evidence regarding consent.  As such, the
defence evidence raises a reasonable doubt.
[32]          
Crown counsel submits that even if the court finds (as I have)
that Mr. White’s testimony was articulate, responsive to the questions and
unshaken in cross examination, I may still disbelieve his version of events and
find that it does not raise a reasonable doubt based on the reasoning of our
Court of Appeal’s decision in R. v. J.J.R.D.[5]  Crown
counsel relies on para. 53 of that decision which provides as follows:
[33]          
I have considered the evidence of Z.E., and when it is “stacked” beside
Mr. White’s, I am still left with reasonable doubt.  I do not accept Z.E.’s
evidence, that certain activity in the bedroom was not consensual beyond a
reasonable doubt.  I find that there were material inconsistencies in her
evidence that affected its reliability.
[34]          
While I do not intend to give an exhaustive list of the
inconsistencies in Z.E.’s evidence or other frailties in it, the following are
two examples that raised serious concerns about its reliability.  These were
not minor or inconsistencies on peripheral matters.[6]  There was
nothing confusing about the questions asked, either when giving a statement to
Det. Ward, or testifying before the court giving rise to the inconsistencies.
[35]          
The first material inconsistency that I provide by way of example
deals with the first non-consensual act alleged by Z.E.:
[36]          
The second material inconsistency that I provide by way of
example of the unreliability of Z.E.’s evidence is about what Z.E. told her two
friends (Mohamed and Salma) following the incident alleged:
[37]          
In coming to my conclusion regarding the reliability of Z.E.’s
evidence, I have evaluated it in the context of all the evidence.  While, at
times, I found Z.E. to be combative and unresponsive to questions in cross-examination,[8] I have not
placed any weight on Z.E.’s demeanour.  I acknowledge, as set out by the Court
of Appeal in R. v. Rhayel,[9]
at para. 85, “[i]t is now acknowledged that demeanour is of limited value
because it can be affected by many factors including the culture of the
witness, stereotypical attitudes, and the artificiality of and pressures
associated with a courtroom.”
[38]          
 In conclusion, this is not a case where there is a basis to
reject Mr. White’s evidence based on a considered and reasoned acceptance
beyond a reasonable doubt of the truth of the conflicting evidence of Z.E.  For
the reasons I have just stated, I did not find Z.E.’s evidence reliable.
[39]          
After considering all the evidence, I find that Mr. White’s
evidence, combined with the credibility enhancing effect of Mr. Jawanshir’s
evidence, has raised a reasonable doubt.  As such, I am not satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that Z.E. did not consent to the sexual activity in question.
[40]          
For the abovementioned reasons, Mr. White is acquitted.