[1]         
This proceeding was started as an application on
July 29, 2016. In 2021 it was dismissed at a hearing without viva
voce evidence. In 2022 the Divisional Court set aside the dismissal,
ordered the trial of the whole application, and made procedural orders. The
parties are at odds about what constitutes the pleadings, whether evidence contained
in an affidavit of the plaintiff that was ruled not to be admissible at the
initial hearing is admissible at the trial, and the scope of the evidence that
may be lead at trial.
[2]         
The plaintiff’s motion before the court seeks to address those
issues and seeks leave to amend the plaintiff’s pleadings. To understand this
motion, it is necessary to consider the nature and history of the proceedings.
[3]         
The following is intended as a brief overview of
the application. In providing this overview, I make no findings of fact.
[4]         
The plaintiff and the defendant had been
romantically involved. In May 2013, the defendant took title to the property at
54 Gertrude Street in Hamilton (“the Property”). The purchase price was
$100,000, which was paid by arranging a mortgage for $92,000. The balance of
about $11,000 for the down payment and closing expenses came from the plaintiff’s
account, business account, and/or from a business account of Pusherelli
Corporation, a business owned jointly by the parties.
[5]         
The parties lived in the Property together with the
plaintiff’s children from about the time of the purchase until about May 2016. The
plaintiff made some monthly payments to the defendant which she applied to the
mortgage. Both the plaintiff and the defendant contributed towards renovations
to the Property and its improvement.
[6]         
After the parties separated in 2016, the
defendant excluded the plaintiff from the Property.
[7]         
The underlying issue is whether funds advanced
by the plaintiff to purchase the Property were an investment, or a loan. The
plaintiff claims an implied, constructive, or resulting trust based on the mortgage
payments he made, and certain work he performed to improve the Property. The
plaintiff claims a share in the appreciation of the market value of the Property
and a sale of the Property. The defendant disputes the plaintiff’s
contributions.
[8]         
After the application was commenced, the parties
exchanged affidavits and conducted cross-examinations. The plaintiff then
sought to tender further evidence shortly before the hearing. At issue is the
plaintiff’s May 17, 2021, affidavit and exhibits. The defendant objected to the
affidavit and Skarica J. ruled that the affidavit was not admissible on the
application.
[9]         
On June 21, 2021, Skarica J. dismissed the
application. The plaintiff appealed. On June 27, 2022, Emery J., sitting as a
single judge of the Divisional Court, allowed the appeal and set aside Skarica
J.’s order. Emery J. was of the view that it was necessary for the court to
hear viva voce evidence.
[10]     
Emery J. ordered a trial of the whole
application on the following terms:
[11]     
A pretrial was held on July 5, 2023, and this
motion was served in July 2023 shortly after the pretrial. When this motion was
served, the matter was on the September 11, 2023, trial sittings. A new trial
date has not yet been scheduled.
[12]     
The defendant has remained in possession of the Property
throughout. There is a caution registered on title which she states impacts her
ability to deal with the Property.
[13]          
The parties have filed the following materials on
this motion.
[14]     
The plaintiff seeks the following orders:
[15]     
The defendant’s position can be summarized as follows:
[16]     
At the hearing, the defendant did not take issue with the expert report
previously served by the plaintiff. The defendant seeks
an opportunity to respond if the plaintiff serves an updated report with an updated
valuation of the Property.
[17]     
The issue of delay factors into the defendant’s position, so I
will address the progress of the litigation here.
[18]     
The defendant complains in her first affidavit about the slow
pace at which this matter has moved forward. She recites the progress of the
litigation back to 2017. She complains that the plaintiff has dragged out the
litigation and that his lawyers have acted discourteously and in an oppressive
manner.
[19]     
Whatever transpired before the initial hearing in June 2021, the
matter was heard and determined by Skarica J. in June 2021, and then appealed.
The decision on the appeal was released on June 27, 2022.
[20]     
In accordance with the order of Emery J., the plaintiff served his
affidavit of documents in August 2022. The defendant did not serve an affidavit
of documents as ordered. By July 2023, the defendant had not served an
affidavit of documents.
[21]     
On consent, the parties scheduled the pretrial for July 5, 2023,
and scheduled the trial for the September 2023 trial sittings. In July 2023,
the plaintiff offered to be examined on the documents he produced in his
affidavit of documents. I was not directed to a substantive response to this
proposal from the defendant.
[22]     
The endorsement from the pretrial indicates that there was an
issue about whether the parties could engage in further examination for
discovery. The pretrial judge directed that if a party wanted to conduct
discoveries on any additional documents produced, the parties could bring a motion
for directions by no later than July 19, 2023.
[23]     
The plaintiff served this motion on July 17, 2023. It has taken
18 months to have the motion heard.
[24]     
The motion was initially scheduled by the plaintiff as a short
motion on August 17, 2023. Defence counsel was not available at that time.
Defence counsel also took the position that the motion should be a long motion.
The motion appears to have been scheduled to be heard in early September, 2023.
Plaintiff counsel took the position that the motion could not proceed because
of the “late filing” of the defendant’s motion materials on August 28, 2024.
[25]     
The parties agreed to schedule the motion for the week of
November 20, 2023. Evidence relating to the reason why the motion was not scheduled
earlier was not drawn to the court’s attention.
[26]     
In this jurisdiction, both parties are required to file motion
confirmation forms. The plaintiff did not file the required motion confirmation
form in November. Neither did the defendant. As a result, the motion did not
proceed the week of November 20, 2023. It appears that the motion might have
been put on a list in mid-December 2023, but it was ultimately adjourned on
consent to the week of January 8, 2024.
[27]     
The motion was not called to be heard by the trial coordinator until
January 19, 2024. It did not proceed in part due the schedules of both lawyers.
It was adjourned on consent to the week of February 26, 2024. It appears that
plaintiff’s counsel did not confirm the motion and it did not proceed. Plaintiff
counsel next reached out to defence counsel on May 19, 2024 seeking dates for
the motion.
[28]     
In July, on consent, the motion was scheduled for the end of
August 2024. It was not heard in August 2024 because of a lack of judges. The
motion was kept on a running weekly list. Beginning September 20, 2024,
plaintiff counsel, with copy to defence counsel, began inquiring of the trial
coordinator when the motion could be heard. As requested by the trial
coordinator, plaintiff counsel provided his availability for the motion in
September and October 2024. His availability was limited. On October 1, 2024,
the trial coordinator asked counsel to revisit their schedule because when one
counsel not available for more than a week the motion was considered adjourned.
Defence counsel was copied on all correspondence.
[29]     
On November 7, 2024, plaintiff counsel provided his availability
in November 2024. On the record before me, defence counsel did not respond to
the September and October correspondence until November 8, 2024. He indicated
that he was not available the following week and stated he was on the trial
list from November 18, 2024 to December 9, 2024. Defence counsel asserted that
the plaintiff had to obtain leave to reschedule the motion which resulted in a
case conference before Sheard J. on December 9, 2024, at which the motion was
scheduled for a hearing in late January of this year which ultimately brought
the matter before me.
[30]     
As can be seen, the 18-month delay stems from a combination of
factors. It is difficult on the record before me to determine precisely who is
responsible for each delay. Some delay was caused by plaintiff counsel, some was
caused by defence counsel, and the balance was due to a combination of a lack
of availability of counsel, lack of judges, and unexplained reasons for the delay.
It appears the plaintiff caused somewhat more of the delay than the defendant.
However, I find the difference is not significant.
[31]     
As noted, the defendant objects to the plaintiff being able to
rely on the May 17, 2021, affidavit of the plaintiff, including exhibits
thereto.
[32]     
Skarica J.’s found that the plaintiff’s May 17, 2021, affidavit
contained irrelevant evidence, evidence which was not responsive to the earlier
cross-examination of the defendant and that no satisfactory explanation was
provided for why the information was not disclosed in the plaintiff’s initial
affidavit.
[33]     
It is clear from his reasons that in deciding not to allow the
plaintiff to rely on the May 17, 2021 affidavit Skarica J. relied on Rule
39.02 and the jurisprudence considering the Rule. The defendant submits
that Skarica J.’s reasons were not appealed by the plaintiff and that the
Divisional Court’s determination that the affidavit did not form part of the
pleadings, means the evidence the evidence contained in the affidavit cannot be
tendered at trial. I do not agree.
[34]     
The defendant’s arguments and submissions all rely on Rule
39. All the cases relied upon by the defendant are cases involving motions and
applications and the application of Rule 39.
[35]     
Skarica J. heard the application on a paper record. He determined
the admissibility of evidence on the hearing in accordance with the rules that
govern applications, in particular, Rule 39.02. One of the purposes of
the rule is to provide some finality to the exchange of evidence before a
motion or application.
[36]     
Rule 39 governs applications, not trials. Evidence at
trial is governed by Rule 53 and the common law as to admissibility.
[37]     
Emery J. was of the view there should be viva voce
evidence and ordered that the whole of the application proceed to trial. He also
ordered that the cross-examinations conducted for the application shall be
treated as examinations for discovery and that each party shall serve an
affidavit of documents by August 31, 2022.
[38]     
Emery J. was addressing steps that would be required in an
action, not an application. He did not set out a complete procedural schedule
or set of orders for a trial.
[39]     
Emery J.’s order that the affidavits be treated as the pleadings and
that the affidavit ruled inadmissible by the application judge shall not form
part of the pleadings is not a determination of what is admissible at trial. Pleadings
are not evidence. Pleadings contain a concise statement of the material facts
on which the party relies for the claim or defence, but not the evidence by
which those facts are to be proved: r. 25.06(1). Determining what constitutes
pleadings is not the same as determining what evidence may be called at the
trial or what may be included in an affidavit of documents.
[40]     
Emery J. did not limit further discovery, limit the documents to
be included in the affidavit of documents, or limit the evidence to be called
at trial. It is clear from his decision that the parties would call viva
voce evidence. He did not direct that evidence in chief would be led by way
of the existing affidavits.
[41]     
Rule 30.02
requires every document relevant to any matter in issue in an action that is or
has been in the possession, control or power of a party to the action to be
disclosed as provided in Rules 30.03 to 30.10, whether or not privilege
is claimed in respect of the document. Parties have an ongoing obligation to
disclose relevant documents. This obligation continues after the completion of
examinations for discovery: Falcon Lumber Limited v. 2480375 Ontario Inc.
(GN Mouldings and Doors), 2020 ONCA 310, at paras 41 – 42.
[42]     
The parties here have an ongoing obligation to
disclose relevant documents.
[43]     
In submissions, the defendant admitted that the evidence at trial
will be viva voce evidence, not evidence by affidavit. The defendant
conceded that if new relevant evidence was discovered the parties would be
entitled to lead this evidence at trial. The defendant submits that the only
limit on the evidence to be lead at trial is that the plaintiff cannot lead
evidence contained in his May 17, 2021 affidavit even if it is relevant. I do
not agree.
[44]     
The admissibility of evidence is based in part on its relevance.
Relevance is based on the issues in the litigation as defined by the pleadings.
Admissibility is best determined by the judge hearing the evidence at trial. The
Divisional Court did not impose a limit on relevant evidence to be tendered at
trial.
[45]     
The defendant also submits that she will be prejudiced by the
plaintiff being able to rely on the evidence contained in his May 17, 2021,
affidavit because the evidence had been ruled inadmissible by Skarica J. and
because it is detrimental to her case. Neither is a reason to exclude the
evidence in this case.
[46]     
The defendant has now been aware of the disputed evidence for
almost four years. She asserts the plaintiff should not be
allowed to rely on evidence in the May 17, 2021, affidavit because he has never
explained why it was not disclosed or tendered earlier. While this is an issue
in an application and motion in light of Rule 39.02, given a party’s
ongoing disclosure obligation in an action or matters proceeding like an
action, such an explanation is not required in order to call evidence at trial
that has been disclosed years before trial.
[47]     
For all these reasons, subject to relevance and
admissibility to be determined by the trial judge, the plaintiff is not
precluded from tendering evidence at trial that is contained in his May 17,
2021 affidavit. Similarly, the defendant is not limited to only calling
evidence that is contained in her affidavits filed.
[48]     
The defendant objects to the plaintiff relying
on evidence in his May 2021 affidavit that discloses:
[49]     
The defendant seeks to have this evidence excluded
from the evidence lead at trial. For the reasons set out above, the plaintiff
is not precluded from attempting to call such evidence at trial because it was
in his May 17, 2021, affidavit.
[50]     
The parties did not provide the court with a sufficient
evidentiary or legal basis to determine whether the evidence is privileged. The
parties conceded that the trial judge is best suited to determine whether
privilege applies to the communications and whether the communications may be
admitted into evidence. The trial judge is best positioned to make an
evidentiary ruling on privilege in the context of viva voce evidence at
trial, the issues before the trial judge, and the evidentiary foundation for
admissibility or privilege.
[51]     
When this motion was served in July 2023, the plaintiff sought
leave to amend his pleadings.
[52]     
The defendant asserts that because of the order of the Divisional
Court, the plaintiff’s pleading is comprised only of his original affidavit. The
defendant asserted that the Divisional Court had struck out the Notice of
Application. When pressed, the defendant conceded that the Divisional Court had
not done so. I find that the plaintiff’s pleadings includes the plaintiff’s
Notice of Application which had been amended once before in April 2021.
[53]     
The defendant submits that she does not know what amendments the
plaintiff proposed and so could not respond. The proposed amended notice of
application is attached as Exhibit P to Mr. Presvelos’ January 2024 affidavit. The
defendant has had the amended pleading for over a year.
[54]     
The proposed amendments are not significant. Some of them are
beneficial to the defendant. Principally, the plaintiff seeks to add a claim
for damages in the alternative, based on facts already pleaded. The plaintiff
also removes some of the relief he was initially seeking. It is evident from
the original pleading that the plaintiff asserts contribution to the property
entitling the plaintiff to an interest in the property. To obtain that
interest, the plaintiff must prove his contribution. If not entitled to an
interest, and if it is determined that the money advanced was a loan, it is
obvious from the facts pleaded that the plaintiff would seek the return of
those funds. The amendment provides clarity to the relief sought by the
plaintiff based on the facts already pleaded.
[55]     
Rule 26.01 provides that on motion at any stage of an
action the court shall grant leave to amend a pleading on such terms as are
just, unless prejudice would result that could not be compensated for by costs
or an adjournment.
[56]     
The Rule is framed in mandatory terms: the court must
allow the amendment, unless the responding party would suffer non-compensable
prejudice, the proposed pleading is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious, or the
proposed pleading fails to disclose a reasonable cause of action: see Klassen
v Beausoleil, 2019, ONCA 407. The defendant relies only on the first ground
to oppose the amendment.
[57]     
The court may refuse an amendment where it would
cause non-compensable prejudice. The prejudice must flow from the amendment and
not some other source: Klassen at para. 31. At some point the delay in
seeking an amendment will be so lengthy, and the justification so inadequate,
that prejudice to the responding party is presumed. In such a case, the onus to
rebut the presumed prejudice lies with the moving party: Klassen at
para. 31.
[58]     
Alternatively, the responding party may resist
the amendment by proving actual prejudice by leading evidence that the
responding party has lost an opportunity in the litigation that cannot be
compensated by an adjournment or an award of costs as a consequence of the
amendment. It is incumbent on the responding party to provide specific details
of the alleged prejudice: Klassen at para. 31.
[59]     
Irrespective of the form of prejudice alleged, there
must be a causal connection between the non-compensable prejudice and the
amendment: Klassen at para. 33.
[60]     
The only prejudice the defendant could point to is that she might
incur additional costs because of the amendment, and she cannot deal with the Property
until the conclusion of the trial. The defendant remains in sole possession of
the Property. Other than a bald assertion, the defendant led no cogent evidence
of any impact on her ability to deal with the Property. In any event, this arises
from the delay in having the matter determined on its merits, not from the
proposed amendment.
[61]     
The defendant could not demonstrate any actual
prejudice flowing from the amendment and did not draw the court’s attention to evidence
that the defendant has lost an opportunity in the litigation that cannot be
compensated by an adjournment or an award of costs. The defendant relies on
presumed prejudice that she says arises from the the lengthy delay in
seeking the amendment and the lack of justification for the delay.
[62]     
The defendant asserts that the proposed amendment does not add
anything that was not already a part of the prior amended notice of
application. She asserts there is no need for the proposed amendment. The
defendant submits that the monetary value of any claim for damages for the
plaintiff’s contribution are not substantial. The defendant’s position suggests
there is no non-compensable prejudice to the plaintiff.
[63]     
The plaintiff does provide some explanation for the timing of the
amendment and why it was made after the initial hearing and appeal was
completed. The amendment was initially sought in July 2023. There is no
explanation for the delay between July 2022 and July 2023. The specific
amendments were not set out until January 2024. There is no explanation for why
the amendments where not contained in the motion in July 2023. The delay
following January 2024 is shared between the plaintiff, the defendant, and
other causes.
[64]     
I find that in the circumstances before me, the length of delay
does not give rise to a presumption of prejudice. Any
prejudice to the plaintiff can be compensated in costs. Even if there is
a presumption of prejudice and the inability to deal with the Property could
give rise to non-compensable prejudice, there is no causal connection between the
non-compensable prejudice and the amendment. The prejudice does not flow from the
amendment.
[65]     
The plaintiff shall have leave to amend the
Notice of Application.
[66]     
The plaintiff was directed to file a
consolidated Amended Amended Notice of Application by 10 a.m. on February 14,
2025. As of the date of the release of this decision, the plaintiff has failed
to do so.
[67]     
I make the following orders;
[68]     
If the parties cannot resolve the issue of costs, they may submit a bill of costs and make written submissions
consisting of not more than two double-spaced pages in length, together with
excerpts of any legal authorities and a bill of costs. The plaintiff’s
submissions are to be served by no later than March 3, 2025; the defendant’s by
no later than March 13, 2025.
[69]     
All submissions are to be filed with the court
and uploaded to Case Centre, with a copy to the trial coordinator by end of day
March 13, 2025. If no submissions or written consent to a reasonable extension
are received by the court by March 13, 2025, the matter of costs will be deemed
to have been settled.