[1]              
This dispute centres around $16 million advanced by the Applicants
(including Shizhong Liu) to the Respondents, Naiyu Chai (“Mike”) and Yunshen
Xing (“Oliver”), and the characterization of such advances. The Applicants say
that the parties agreed that the development properties purchased with these
funds would stand as security.
[2]              
The Applicants bring this motion for an interlocutory proprietary
injunction and leave to issue a certificate of pending litigation
("CPL") over the properties in question known as the Meadowlily
Property, the Buroak Property, and the Exeter Property (collectively, the
“Properties”).
[3]              
The Respondents’ position is that the money advanced by the Applicants
was a loan and/or investment that did not create any property interest. They
say that the Applicants are seeking to obtain execution before judgment in this
matter.
[4]              
On September 17, 2024, Justice Centa granted an interim injunction on
consent as follows:
[5]              
For the reasons that follow, I grant the injunction in respect of the
Exeter Property and Meadowlily Property pending the hearing of the Application
on its merits, which I will expedite such that it is heard within six months. I
also grant an injunction in respect of Buroak, but one that will permit the
Respondents to obtain financing to pay out the vendor take back mortgage.
[6]              
A CPL is not necessary in the circumstances, but I would have granted
one based upon the test.
[7]              
The well-established RJR-MacDonald test for an interlocutory
injunction has three parts: (1) is there a serious issue to be tried; (2) would
the moving party suffer irreparable harm if the injunction is not granted; and
(3) does the balance of convenience favour granting the injunction: RJR-MacDonald
Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General), 1994 CanLII 117 (SCC), [1994] 1 S.C.R. 311, at p. 334.
[8]              
The Applicants say that they seek a proprietary injunction which is a
species of recognized interlocutory injunction granted to preserve an asset in
possession of the defendant: Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce v. Credit
Valley Institute of Business and Technology, 2003 CanLII 12916 (ON SC), at
para. 15; Robert J. Sharpe, Injunctions and Specific Performance
(Toronto: Thomson Reuters Canada, 2021), at para. 2.20.
[9]              
Despite the serious run that the Respondents took at this issue, I agree
that the Applicants have satisfied the low threshold of demonstrating a serious
issue to be tried to determine whether they have a claim to an equitable
mortgage in respect of the Properties and/or that the Respondents have been
unjustly enriched such that the Applicants are entitled to a constructive trust
over the Properties.
[10]          
As set out in Elias Markets Ltd., Re (2006), 2006 CanLII 31904 (ON CA), 274 D.L.R. (4th) 166
(Ont. C.A.), at para. 65, an equitable mortgage may exist where there is a
common intention of a mortgagor and mortgagee to secure property for either a
past debt or future advances, where that common intention may not be strictly
enforceable at common law. It is essentially founded on valuable consideration
that shows the intention of the parties to create a security.
[11]          
An agreement in writing to provide a legal mortgage is an equitable
mortgage. Cases where this has been applied involve situations where there was
a want of formality in the mortgage documentation or the borrower refused to
execute a mortgage: see Elias, at para. 58, citing Scherer v. Price
Waterhouse, [1985] O.J. No. 881 (H.C.J.), at para. 22, where the Court of
Appeal for Ontario notes that Sutherland J. carefully reviewed the law on
equitable mortgages.
[12]          
There are no concluded formal written agreements that set out the
totality of the parties’ agreements. Rather, there are a series of
communications and documents, as well as the parties’ conduct, from which a
court will ultimately have to ascertain whether the parties had a common
intention to create mortgage security.
[13]          
These documents and communications are not entirely consistent with
either parties’ evidence. In argument, as expected, each side focused on the
parts of these communications that supported their position.
[14]          
Up until the events that led to this Application, Shizhong and Oliver
had a long-term relationship of trust. Oliver had been Shizhong’s accountant
for approximately 19 years. In February 2022, Oliver helped Shizhong establish
the Liu Family Trust. Oliver was an original trustee of the Liu Family Trust
until March 2024. At that point, Shizhong says he lost trust in Oliver and
asked him to resign, which he did.
[15]          
Shizhong says that in early 2023, Oliver approached him about lending
him and Mike money to purchase land for development in London, Ontario. He says
Oliver brought him to the Properties to see them. Shizhong understood from
Oliver that Mike and Oliver were friends. He says that they asked him to lend
their designated companies $10 million at an annual interest rate of 12.5 % to
be used towards the purchase of the Meadowlily and Buroak Properties first. Shizhong
says that he was concerned about the significant amount of money involved and
asked that the loan be secured by a mortgage on the Properties and that Mike
and Oliver agreed to this.
[16]          
Shizhong relies upon the following WeChat message May 7, 2023, as documentary
corroboration for his evidence that the parties had agreed that Shizhong would
have mortgage security.
[17]          
The Respondents argue that to understand the concluding statements in
the WeChat communication of May 7, 2023, the entire chain must be read and that
it supports their evidence that their intention was that the Applicants would
invest in a limited partnership. However, there is no mention of a limited
partnership in this WeChat. Shizhong’s evidence is that he was giving Oliver
advice about how to structure the project and he does say “the above are my
thoughts for your reference” which supports that. Notably, a great deal of
Shizhong’s communication to Oliver here discusses the significant risks
inherent in this type of project at that time. He said, “There are risks
existed when assessing the commercial value of this land. For one, there is an
unfavourable environment for real estate development, the high bank interest
rate will impact the purchase of the properties in the next one or two. Years.
For two, there is a big gap between the appraised value and the market value
right now.” He said, “I recommend risk control on financing and profit.”
[18]          
Following this exchange, on June 29, 2023, Shizhong directed $5 million to
be used to purchase the Meadowlily Property. That purchase closed on July 7,
2023.
[19]          
On August 14, 2023, Shizhong directed a further $5 million to be used to
purchase the Buroak Property. That purchase closed on September 25, 2023.
[20]          
Then on November 7, 2023, Shizhong says Oliver begged him to lend a
further $6 million at 10 % interest to be used to purchase the Exeter Property,
because the original investor failed to advance the funds and the matter was
urgent. The WeChat conversation concluded as follows:
[21]          
However, Shizhong did ultimately provide funds for this final purchase of
the Exeter Property. To provide such funds, he redeemed a GIC early, which
resulted in his loss of $299,200 and a penalty charge of $300,000. Oliver and
Mike agreed to pay the penalty which would be rolled into the loan.
[22]          
Oliver and Mike also gave Shizhong a personal guarantee to repay $6
million and accrued interest by June 30, 2024, in respect of the Exeter
Property.
[23]          
Thus, it is undisputed that the Applicants advanced a total of $16
million dollars in three tranches between June 2023 and November 2023. The
funds came from the Liu Family Trust as well as Shizhong Holdings Inc. which is
a holding corporation owned by Shizhong. Notably, at this time, Oliver was
still a Trustee of the Liu Family Trust and as such had fiduciary obligations
to it.
[24]          
The following is a chart that shows the flow of funds, dates of purchase
of the various properties and by which entity. There is no dispute that this
chart accurately sets out the flow of funds.
[25]          
To summarize, what the chart and the evidence shows is that funds flowed
from either the Liu Family Trust or Shizhong Holdings through various
corporations that were owned or controlled by Oliver and Mike and/or their
family members.
[26]          
There is no evidence in the record that the current registered owners of
the Properties paid consideration for the Properties to the entities that
completed the purchases. There are no contracts in evidence as to any
agreements among Oliver and Mike and the entities who currently own the
Properties. No assignment documents have been produced. There is no evidence
that the Applicants have any direct contractual relationships with the ultimate
owners of the Properties.
[27]          
There is some contemporaneous documentary support for Oliver and Mike’s
position that the advances towards the Meadowlily and Buroak Properties were
some form of equity investment and that the advances towards the Exeter
Property was a loan:
[28]          
I note however that there are no written communications in evidence
about the Applicants becoming limited partners whatsoever and no evidence that
anyone sent Shizhong or the Applicants any investment package if these were
intended to be investments in a limited partnership. As well, there are no
signed limited partnership agreements in evidence among any of the Respondents.
[29]          
There is also additional contemporaneous documentary support for Shizhong’s
position that he made loans and expected security. In addition to the May 7, 2023,
WeChat message above, on February 14, 2024, Shizhong’s lawyer emailed Oliver a
copy of a draft loan agreement for the securities to be deposited on the
Properties. The letter said “Attached is draft loan agreement to be forwarded
to your counsel for review. We appreciate that you could provide your counsel contact
information as soon as possible and we can attend to mortgage registration.”  As
well, in accordance with Shizhong’s understanding, the draft loan agreement
contained a provision requiring second collateral charges on the Properties in
s. 5. No one responded to say this was not the deal.
[30]          
Shizhong gave uncontradicted evidence that following the February 14, 2024
email, he met with Oliver and Mike on February 17 and April 5, 2024, and at
these meetings they did not take any issue with the draft loan agreement his
lawyer sent them on February 14, 2024 which reflected the requirement for
security.
[31]          
In or around June 2024, Shizhong again raised with Oliver and Mike the
formalization of his loan agreement with security.
[32]          
Oliver then sent Shizhong a WeChat message dated June 10, 2024, where he
states “Hello, President Liu, Happy Chinese Dragon Boat Festival. I will get
the collateral issue done as soon as possible.” [Emphasis added]
[33]          
Oliver further wrote to Shizhong’s lawyer on July 3, 2024:
[34]          
Notably, the word “charges” is plural and not singular, which supports
the conclusion that this was in respect of all the Properties. Notably, the
above two messages from Oliver happened after Shizhong’s lawyer had sent Oliver
and Mike the draft loan agreement that provided for collateral charges on all
of the Properties.
[35]          
Between July 3 and 14, 2024, the parties then had further discussions to
finalize a loan agreement and registration of mortgage security through counsel.
All of this is on the record and no one takes the position that any of these
communications are protected by solicitor and client privilege.
[36]          
The parties exchanged communications and drafts through their lawyers. The
discussion began with Shizhong’s position that their arrangement was that he
would obtain security on all the Properties which he says was his understanding.
Then the Respondents said they would only be prepared to provide a charge on
the Exeter Property and they also requested they be released from personal or
corporate guarantees. There were also issues discussed about possible Planning
Act violations and the possible need for an existing lender to register a
new charge and other issues.
[37]          
On July 31, 2024, Shizhong’s counsel wrote:
[38]          
Further negotiations ensued and drafts were exchanged on these and other
issues.
[39]          
On August 13, 2024, Shizhong’s lawyers sent another draft which also set
out additional matters in particular that he insisted on the ability to discuss
the status of the projects with the planner.
[40]          
No amounts were paid to the Applicants of the outstanding and accrued
interest as had been requested in the July 31, 2024 email from Shizhong.
[41]          
Then, on August 14, 2024 Shizhong retained litigation counsel who wrote
at 9:54 am advising that it had been retained to bring an Application to
protect Shizhong’s proprietary interests in the Exeter, Buroak and Meadowlily
Properties. The Respondents say they then sent a signed version of the last draft
loan agreement, backdated to June 29, 2023, by email at 3:58 pm that same day.
However, the actual signed agreement is not attached to the emails in the Respondents’
record. The email said that it contained some amendments which were minor but
it is not possible to consider this without the agreement. It also stated:
“Please provide me with your comments or if acceptable, a signed copy of the
loan agreement along with your confirmation that the Notice of Application is
not going ahead.” This statement does suggest that the parties were still
negotiating and that the Respondents’ lawyers did not see their conduct as
acceptance of a formal offer. As well, there is no evidence that Oliver and
Mike provided the outstanding interest and principal which had been requested
in Shizhong’s July 31, 2024 letter, and there is no evidence that they have
done so even as at when the motion was argued.
[42]          
The Respondents indicate that they believe this loan agreement signed by
Mike and Oliver is a binding agreement, although they also conceded when this
was argued that I need not consider and decide whether it was on this motion.
In any event, it is not possible to consider whether this was a binding
agreement in the context of this motion because the parties have not set out
the various loan agreements that were exchanged with the emails that would show
what the drafts were and whether Oliver and Mike signed the latest draft or
some other version. Although there is an agreement signed by Oliver and Mike in
the Applicants’ record, again, it is not clear whether this was the last draft.
As well, Shizhong was not asked any questions on these negotiations or this
alleged agreement or this issue at all when cross examined.
[43]          
As well, there was no argument on any relevant contractual principles of
offer and acceptance and whether a draft agreement signed by one party can be
enforceable without the other party signing. There was no argument as to
whether sending a draft agreement can be considered an offer, and if so,
whether the email from Shizhong’s counsel on August 14, 2024, constituted an
implicit revocation of any such offer. The Respondents did not address Oliver
and Mike’s failure to repay the outstanding interest which was significant at
that time and which Shizhong requested in his July 31, 2024 email as part of
his proposal that he might accept security over Exeter only.
[44]          
Shizhong’s counsel argued that in the absence of Oliver and Mike making
payments that are outstanding, they were not acting in good faith.
[45]          
The most that I can conclude is that there is a triable issue as to
whether or not this constituted a binding legal agreement.
[46]          
Despite the disagreement over how the investments started, Oliver and
Mike agree that at some point the parties agreed to treat the advances as
loans.
[47]          
There is conflicting evidence before me on whether the parties agreed
that Shizhong would receive mortgage security on all of the Properties in the
context of the close relationship among the parties that resulted in there
being no formal executed agreement.
[48]          
On this record, there are a number of possible outcomes in this matter
which include the following:
[49]          
On this record, I find that the Applicants have established a triable
issue as to whether they will be entitled to an equitable mortgage based upon
their common intention over all of the Properties.
[50]          
In making this finding I reject the Respondents argument that the
communications referencing collateral are unclear because they do not
reference the particular properties in question or the terms of the loans. They
rely upon the decision of Brown J. as he then was in Emmott v. Edmonds,
2010 ONSC 4185, which is not an injunction decision but a decision on the
merits. Brown did not find an equitable mortgage because there was a lack of
certainty as to the essential terms which included the interest rate and the
term: para 65. In that case, the written loan agreement specified that the
terms of any second mortgage were to be negotiated.
[51]          
With respect, the entire course of conduct of the parties was with
respect to the Properties in question and at the end of the day, since there is
no formal executed agreement, their conduct and communications is what the
court will use to make an objective determination as to what their common
intention was. It is at least arguable that when they referenced collateral,
they were referencing any and all Properties purchased using the Applicants’
funds. It is unclear what else they could have been talking about.
[52]          
With respect to the term and interest rate, in Oliver’s affidavit he
references a five-year term locked in at 12.5 % regarding the advances made for
the Meadowlily and Buroak Properties. Although this is with reference to his
position that this was an investment, the term and interest rate is set out
therein even if the characterization of the advance is different, and there is
no dispute from the Applicants as to the interest rate or the term. There is also
no dispute that the $6 million advance in respect of Exeter had a 10 % interest
rate and was due on June 24, 2024. It is reasonable to assume that the term of
any mortgage security would be the same as the terms of the advances.
[53]          
I also reject the Respondents’ argument that the claim must fail because
there is no written agreement upon which the action is brought or some
memorandum or note thereof in writing signed by the party: John v. Millar,
2011 ONSC 3861.
[54]          
I first note that this requirement of an equitable mortgage was not set
out in the Court of Appeal decision in Elias. The parties agree that
this reference in John v. Miller must have been in respect of the Statute
of Frauds, R.S.O. 1990, c. S. 19, s. 4, which provides that no action can
be brought in respect of any interest in land unless the agreement upon which
the action is brought or some memorandum or note thereof is in writing and
signed by party giving the interest in the land. There is no other rationale
provided in the decision.
[55]          
I note that s. 10 of the Statute of Frauds specifically carves
out “lands or tenements by which a trust or confidence arises or results
by implication or construction of law…” [Emphasis added]. In that
regard, the Statute of Frauds does not apply to resulting trusts even
though resulting trusts are also determined based upon the common intention of
the parties similar to equitable mortgages. It is unclear to me why there would
be a requirement for a memorandum in writing for an equitable mortgage which
arises by implication of law, but not for a resulting trust.
[56]          
Second, John v. Millar is distinguishable. The parties in that
case had been involved in the purchase of a piece of property held by a shelf
corporation. They both held 50 % of the shares in the shelf company. One of the
parties contributed approximately $500,000. There was a dispute over the
treatment of this contribution. The party who contributed the money said he
advanced the money to purchase the property while the other party said that he
invested in the shelf company. The balance of the purchase price came from a
mortgage in the name of the shelf company and was guaranteed by the party who
did not contribute the $500,000.
[57]          
The party who contributed the funds brought a motion for a CPL arguing
that the amount owed to him was to form an equitable mortgage on the property.
This was on the basis that the other party advised that his contribution was to
be recognized as an “advance from shareholder” on the financial statements.
There was no loan document and no reference to any document or communication granting
any interest in the land, as there is here in the various WeChat
communications.
[58]          
Third, there is a triable issue as to whether the electronic
communications here could satisfy the test for a memorandum or note in writing.
Recently courts have held that electronic communications in other contexts can
satisfy the requirement for a memorandum in writing, particularly where there
is no dispute as to the authenticity of the communications. And in this case
there is no dispute on this point.
[59]          
For example, s. 13 of the Limitations Act, 2002, S.O. 2002, c.
24, Sched. B, provides that an acknowledgement in writing will renew the
commencement of the limitation period from the time of the acknowledgement but
the acknowledgement must be in writing and signed by the person. This is
similar language to the Statute of Frauds. Courts in the following cases
have held that text messages could satisfy the in-writing requirement: The
Maher Organization Ltd. v. HCI Mercantile Inc., 2022 ONSC 3585, at para.
26; 1475182 Ontario Inc. o/a Edges Contracting v. Ghotbi et al., 2021
ONSC 3477, 155 O.R. (3d) 272, at paras. 47-49; and Lee v. Chang, 2024
ONSC 580, at para. 160.
[60]          
Given that the Statute of Frauds and the Limitations Act, 2002,
were enacted by the Ontario government, s. 4 should be given an interpretation
consistent with the interpretation the caselaw has given s. 13(10) of the Limitations
Act, 2002: see also Golden Ocean Group Ltd. v. Salgaocar Mining
Industries PVT Ltd., [2012] EWCA Civ 265, at paras. 21-22 and 31-34, where
the English Court of Appeal held that a sequence of emails sufficed to meet the
writing requirement under the English Statute of Frauds.
[61]          
The Respondents sought to argue that for the electronic communications
to provide the required memorandum for the purpose of the Statute of Frauds,
it must comply with the Electronic Commerce Act, 2000, S.O. 2000, c. 17.
The Respondents may ultimately succeed on this argument, but none of the above
cases held that this was required in order to satisfy the in-writing
requirement where there were electronic communications, and in my view, that is
sufficient to establish a triable issue.
[62]          
There are a number of WeChat communications that could satisfy the
requirement for a signed memorandum in writing:
[63]          
And I emphasize again, that the June 10, 2024, and July 3, 2024 texts
occurred after Shizhong’s lawyers had sent the loan agreement that reflected
security on all the Properties.
[64]          
Fourth, and as I raised with the parties at the hearing, the moneys were
actually advanced in this case and so there is arguably part performance of the
alleged oral agreement pursuant to which security would be advanced. Part
performance is an exception to the Statute of Frauds.
[65]          
In Moore v. Sweet, 2018 SCC 52, [2018] 3 S.C.R. 303, at para. 37,
the Supreme Court of Canada affirmed that an unjust enrichment claim has three
elements: (1) enrichment; (2) corresponding deprivation; and (3) absence of
juristic reason for recipient’s retention of the enrichment.
[66]          
The Applicants have demonstrated an arguable case that they advanced
funds to Mike and Oliver, and that the parties agreed or had a common intention
that the Applicants would have a security interest in the Properties.
[67]          
Instead, Shizhong advanced the money to Oliver and Mike who directed it
through multiple layers of companies to corporations controlled by them or
their family members and they have not provided any security.
[68]          
There is no evidence that the ultimate owners of the Property have paid
any consideration for the Properties. Therefore, there has arguably been a benefit
to them.
[69]          
There has been a corresponding deprivation because if Shizhong is to be
believed, he only agreed to advance funds on the basis that he would have
collateral which he never received. The Properties can be mortgaged fully and
he would have no recourse against them. He would be left with a judgment
against Oliver and Mike, but he would not have the valuable security that he says
he bargained for.
[70]          
The Respondents argue that whatever contract the parties entered into is
the juristic reason for the enrichment. In that regard, courts have held that a
contract can be a juristic reason for an enrichment and deprivation because it
reflects the parties’ autonomy and the fact that they can order their affairs
by contract: see Ciccocioppo Design/Build v. Gruppuso, 2017 ONSC 2012,
76 C.L.R. (4th) 293, where the court stated that equity steps in when an
injustice arises without a remedy. Since a party who entered into a contract
can seek to remedy that injustice by bringing an action for breach of contract,
that party has a legal remedy and equity need not assist.
[71]          
Here there is no claim for breach of contract.
[72]          
Even if there had been a concurrent claim in contract, in 1153765
B.C. Ltd. v. Dann, 2024 BCSC 2148, at para. 23, the court noted that there
are two kinds of cases where unjust enrichment can be pleaded concurrent with
breach of contract: where a benefit is conferred beyond the scope of the
negotiated terms of a contract or where some issue in relation to the validity
or enforceability of the contract in question is raised.
[73]          
There is a triable issue as to whether these exceptions apply in this
case. If Shizhong is to be believed, he was supposed to obtain security in
exchange for the advance of funds and didn’t; therefore, Oliver and Mike
received something beyond the negotiated terms, they received the money without
delivering the security. Then Oliver and Mike moved the Properties through
layers of entities out of the Applicants’ reach.
[74]          
Further, it is not possible to bring a breach of contract action seeking
specific performance against Oliver and Mike because they no longer own the
Properties. It is not possible to bring a breach of contract action for
specific performance against the rest of the Respondents because the Applicants
have no contract with them. Thus, an action for breach of contract will not
remedy the situation and there is a triable issue as to whether equity should
assist.
[75]          
If Shizhong is to be believed re the parties’ common intention, the only
method of remedying the situation is through unjust enrichment or an equitable
mortgage. (I will explain further in the section on irreparable harm why a
monetary judgment against Oliver and Mike would not remedy the situation. It would
not provide the Applicants with the security they bargained for and a monetary
judgment without security is simply not the same thing as a monetary judgment
with security.)
[76]          
The Respondents also question the validity of the alleged agreement to
provide mortgage security on the basis that there is no concluded agreement in
writing. This is one of their main arguments in respect of why an equitable
mortgage is not possible and a legal mortgage is also not possible in this
case.
[77]          
I also reject the argument that unjust enrichment could not apply here
because the parties who have been enriched have received this enrichment not
directly from the Applicants, but indirectly through Oliver and Mike. In that
regard, the Respondents rely upon Palmer v. Teva Canada Limited, 2024 ONCA 220 (CanLII), 2024
ONCA 2020, 98 C.C.L.T. (4th) 9, at para. 99, where the court concluded that a
claim for unjust enrichment was doomed to fail because any benefit the
defendants received was indirect and the law of unjust enrichment does not
permit recovery of incidental collateral benefits.
[78]          
To understand this statement the facts of the case are important. Palmer
was a class action brought against pharmaceutical companies in respect of drugs
that they said put class members at a higher risk for certain diseases.
Patients would not purchase these products directly from the manufacturers but
from retailers, and the argument was that the manufacturer had been unjustly
enriched.
[79]          
The case before me is not analogous because there is a non-arm’s length
relationship between Oliver and Mike and the parties through whom the monies
and Properties flowed. The allegation here, for which there is sufficient
support to raise a triable issue, is that Oliver and Mike have in fact
benefited by structuring these transactions in the way they did to Shizhong’s
detriment. That is, they now indirectly own and control the entities that own
the Properties. With respect to the other Respondents, there is no evidence
before me that the other Respondents, who now own the Properties, contributed
anything for them and so there is a triable issue as to whether they have been
unjustly enriched.
[80]          
I also do not find the case Central Welding v. HPN et al., 2024
ONSC 1141 determinative. In that case a subcontractor sued the general
contractor, surety and owner in respect of moneys that the general contractor
had failed to pay for the purchase of structural steel for the project. The
owner would not certify substantial performance and the subcontractor refused
to pay the holdback to the subcontractor. On a motion to strike, the court held
that the subcontractor had no cause of action against the owner because the
caselaw has held that a contract between an owner and a general contractor is
the juristic reason for the owner’s enrichment in circumstances where the
subcontractor seeks to claim for unjust enrichment against the owner for
improvements: at para. 33. It also found that the contract between the
contractor and subcontractor was a juristic reason to strike out the
subcontractors claim against the owner. In that regard, the reasonable
expectations were that the subcontractor would be paid by the contractor, not
the owner.
[81]          
The Respondents have produced no contracts between Oliver and Mike and
the parties through whom they flowed the funds to purchase the Properties. The
evidence raises a triable issue as to whether these are non-arm’s length
parties. This case is simply nothing like Central Welding, which is a
particular case about the construction industry, where there were contracts
between arm’s length parties. A court in this case could find that the
reasonable expectations of the parties was that the Applicants would have a
security interest in the Properties even if there were never any concluded
agreements.
[82]          
Thus, in my view, there is a triable issue as to whether or not the
contracts the parties entered could constitute a juristic reason for the
enrichment.
[83]          
I need not consider this as I have found a triable issue in respect of
the unjust enrichment and equitable mortgage claim.
[84]          
The onus is on the Moving Parties to place sufficient financial and
other evidence before the court showing that irreparable harm will result if an
injunction is not granted. Evidence of irreparable harm must be “clear and not
speculative”: U.S. Steel Canada Inc. (Re), 2023 ONCA 569, at para. 27.
Absent “clear evidence that irreparable harm will result, an interlocutory
injunction should not issue”: 2158124 Ontario Inc. v. Pitton, 2017 ONSC
411, at para. 48.
[85]          
The Applicants say that they will suffer irreparable harm because they
have lost security that they could enforce. They say the Respondents have
already encumbered the Properties and will be able to encumber them further and
that they are so indebted on this project with personal guarantees that they
will be unable to repay the loans.
[86]          
They rely on Justice Sharpe’s commentary in Injunctions and Specific
Performance, at para. 2.12, where he writes that in a commercial case the
inability of the defendant to pay damages is an important factor in considering
whether there is irreparable harm: see also RJR-MacDonald, at p. 341,
where the court stated that irreparable harm is a harm which “either cannot be
quantified in monetary terms or which cannot be cured, usually because one
party cannot collect damages from the other.”
[87]          
Although the Respondents argue that the claim of irreparable harm is
speculative, the Applicants point out that Oliver and Mike have already
defaulted on the $6 million loan which came due on June 30, 2024, and that they
have each personally guaranteed another $59 million in debt to other lenders. They
have failed to pay outstanding accrued interest.
[88]          
In 306440 Ontario Ltd. v. 782127 Ontario Ltd, 2014 ONCA 548 at
para 24 the Court of Appeal considered the nature of a trust claim and noted
that because a constructive trust is a proprietary remedy, it carries with it
benefits that do not attach to personal remedies. See also Sirius Concrete
Inc. (Re), 2022 ONCA 524 at para 14.
[89]          
Some courts have held that a plaintiff will suffer irreparable harm if
defendants are not restrained from dealing with a property where the claim
involves a proprietary trust claim: Transmaris Farms Ltd. v. Sieber, 30
C.P.C. (4th) 369 (Ont. Gen. Div.), at para. 73; HarbourEdge Mortgage Investment
Corp v. Community Trust Company, 2016 ONSC 448, 16 E.T.R. (4th) 124, at
paras. 57 and 73; and Exponents Canada Inc. v. Sharma, 2014 ONSC 7097,
at para. 51.
[90]          
In my view, this is similar to the loss of security if an injunction is
not granted. The loss of mortgage security is irreparable because the whole
point of obtaining security is that the lender is not simply a judgment
creditor at the end of the day. Recall that at the outset, in his May 7, 2023
WeChat, Shizhong was expressing great concern about the risks of this project
and apparently to assuage his concerns Oliver said, “the land is the
collateral.”
[91]          
A monetary judgment is simply not the same as a monetary judgment
coupled with the ability to enforce that judgment on a piece of land that is
not fully encumbered. Damages are not an adequate remedy because a damage award
might never be paid. The potential for an unsecured damage award is no
substitute for registered security.
[92]          
I do not agree that the case 1954294
Ontario Ltd. v. Crocco, 2022 ONSC 5279 is
analogous. That was a motion for a stay pending appeal of a refusal to grant an
injunction. The issue did not involve a lender alleging that it had been
promised security.
[93]          
The third part of the RJR-MacDonald test, the balance of
convenience, requires the court to consider the relative impact upon the
parties of granting or withholding the injunction.
[94]          
The Respondents argue that they purchased these Properties for
development purposes. The existence of a proprietary injunction on these
Properties will hamper their ability to develop them, and if existing mortgages
go into default, the value of the projects will be lost.
[95]          
However, the Respondents have provided no evidence that shows that these
Properties are remotely close to power of sale. There is no evidence that they
have been unable to pay the mortgages on a monthly basis in the past or that
they cannot do so in the future. Indeed, part of the Respondents’ case is their
assertion that they are quite wealthy and as such, the Applicants should not be
concerned about their ability to repay the Applicants. If that is the case,
then it is hard to accept that they do not have the money to pay the carrying
costs pending the hearing of this Application on a final basis.
[96]          
Additionally, the Respondents’ concerns are not the same for all the
Properties.
[97]          
The vendor take back mortgage has a five-year term. The current interest
rate is 1.5 % and the annual payments are $671,822.00 which is $55,985.00 per
month. The Respondents provided no other details of the monthly carrying
charges.
[98]          
The Respondents have not yet begun any development of the Exeter
Property although it is zoned for residential development. They say that their
intention is to complete the necessary studies to have a development plan
approved over the next several years. They do not cite any particular concerns
with respect to an injunction over the Exeter Property. They do not cite any
proposed financing that will be affected.
[99]          
Additionally, the Respondents submitted during the argument that they believe
the loan agreement they signed in August 2024 is a binding agreement. This
agreement gives the Applicants security on Exeter. It is hard to see how the
balance of convenience could favour the Respondents when it is their position
in the lawsuit that the parties had an agreement that the Applicant would have
mortgage security on Exeter, which would essentially be up to the maximum of
what the Respondents say Exeter is currently worth including the other mortgages
on title. It would be difficult to obtain additional mortgage financing in that
case in any event.
[100]      
I find that the balance of convenience favours the Applicants because of
the undertaking as to damages and the evidence before me that the Applicants have
$20 million in assets which is more. I will also be expediting this hearing so
that it is heard within 6 months. The Respondents’ own plans do not involve
developing Exeter within six months. This would mean that the mortgage payments
the Respondents would have made from the date of Centa J.’s order to this
injunction would be approximately $671,822 which is well within Shizhong’s
means to pay.
[101]      
Even if the Respondents win the Application their undertaking is
sufficient to reimburse the Respondents for carrying charges during the period
of the injunction, if they are able to prove that such damages were caused by
the injunction. If the Applicants do not pay any damages assessed, there is no
dispute that the Applicants are owed $6,000,000 in respect of what the parties
now agree was a loan, and this is now in default. Therefore, there is an
argument that the Respondents could set off any damages assessed pursuant to the
Applicants’ undertaking against the $6,000,000, subject to arguments about the
mutuality of the parties.
[102]      
Therefore, the balance of convenience favours the Applicants with
respect to the injunction in respect of the Exeter Property.
[103]      
The Respondents did not articulate the details of their current carrying
charges on the Buroak Property but the vendor take back mortgage has a 5 %
interest rate such that the annual interest is $1,160,000 or $96,666 per month.
[104]      
They have not yet begun development in earnest. The Respondents intend
to only complete servicing of the site and then sell subdivided lots to third
party builders who will construct the residential units. They are awaiting
final approval from the City of London for the engineering design and there is
no information as to when this is expected.
[105]      
They say they have secured financing from Cameron Stephens to service
the property and pay off the vendor take back mortgage in the amount of
$30,000,000. This commitment expired on September 6, 2024, and states that if a
fully executed copy is not accepted and delivered by that day, it shall be null
and void. It was signed by the borrowers on September 25, 2024, after it had
expired and after this Application was commenced. There is no evidence that the
deadline was extended by the lender.
[106]      
Nevertheless, the vendor take back mortgage will be up on March 25,
2025. Thus, an injunction here would prevent the Respondents from obtaining new
financing to pay out the mortgage and put them in default.
[107]      
Therefore, the balance of convenience favours the Respondents here to
some extent but I can craft the injunction to remedy this issue. The injunction
I will issue here is that pending the hearing of the Application, the
Respondents will be able to negotiate and complete financing that would take
out the vendor take back mortgage, but no more than that amount. The
Applicants’ assets are sufficient to cover the possible damages on this record which
may include the additional interest charges which would be approximately $1,160,000
from the date of Centa J.’s order.
[108]       There
are three charges on the Property: one in the amount of $5,422,500.00, another
in the amount of $8,477,500.00, and a third in the amount of $5,500,000.00.
These were used to pay off a pre-existing mortgage, fund the cost of servicing
the Meadowlily Property and to secure the issuance of a subdivision bond by the
City of London. These mortgages have not been produced. The amount of the
monthly mortgage payments, the interest rate, and the monthly carrying costs
are unknown.
[109]       If
the Application is heard within six months, assuming an interest rate of 10 %
applied to the two mortgages (which is generous), the total interest from the
time of Centa J.’s order would be approximately $2,082,000 which is within the
Applicants’ means to pay if the Respondents win the Application and a court
found that granting the injunction caused these additional carrying charges
because of delay.
[110]      
I turn to the impact on the Project and the delay. Oliver says that
significant development work has already been done. They are ready to begin
pre-construction sales of residential units. Services for the Property are
complete and a vacant condominium plan has been registered. They plan to build
36 houses and 52 townhouses.
[111]      
They provided evidence of a term sheet they received dated March 4, 2024,
for construction financing in the amount of $20,430,000.00 which they say is
conditional on registration of mortgage security against title. They say that
they could not proceed with the financing or further development because of
this proceeding.
[112]      
The Applicants point out that the term sheet they provided as
corroboration of this indicates that it was open for acceptance up until March
13, 2024, after which it was null and void. The term sheet in the record is not
signed by the borrower nor any of the guarantors listed. Mike testified he did
not sign it. Both Auston and Rong Tian Chai, who are directors of Meadowlily
Development Inc., the legal owner and listed as guarantors, were unaware of the
term sheet. Oliver’s evidence when cross examined was that this document is the
final version in their possession and it is unsigned as noted. There is no
evidence of any communications with the purported lender after the expiry of the
term sheet or that it was ever extended. As well, there was not yet any
proceeding against the Respondents until August 2024, so the Applicants’
proceeding could not have prevented the Respondents from signing this within
the time period required.
[113]      
In my view, the only thing that the Respondents have established is that
there will potentially be carrying costs thrown away as well as delay in their
plans. While they argue that the injunction will imperil their development
plans, they have not provided sufficient evidence to support that conclusion.
They are only at the stage of selling pre-construction units. It is not clear
on this record that they need the construction financing at this stage for this
purpose. It is not clear when they plan to start construction.
[114]      
On the other hand, if the injunction does not issue then the Respondents
will further mortgage the Meadowlily Property and if the Applicants win their
case, they will nevertheless be subordinated to any lender who has priority.
[115]      
With respect to whether any of the mortgages on any of the Properties
could go into default in the interim, the Respondents have not provided any
evidence that they could not continue to service the existing mortgages for the
next six months. They were already under an injunction as of September 2024 and
if they had had difficulty meeting mortgage payments, I expect there would have
been some evidence of this.
[116]      
As well, Oliver and Mike personally guaranteed all of the mortgages and
Mike indicated when cross examined that his personal net worth exceeds $75
million.
[117]      
Neither Oliver nor Mike or any of the Respondents have proffered any
evidence that they cannot pay the ongoing carrying costs and mortgages. If such
a risk exists and is real, the Respondents should have put forward evidence of
this.
[118]      
Therefore, balancing all factors, the balance of convenience favours the
Applicants because I will be expediting this to be heard in six months such
that on this record, the impact is some delay and additional carrying charges
which the Respondents can pay. And as I have said, if the Respondents win the
Application, they can claim the additional carrying costs were caused by the
injunction, and the Applicants have assets to satisfy the known carrying
charges during the injunction, if those are found to be damages.
[119]      
I reject the Respondents’ argument that the Applicants cannot succeed
because they have not claimed a permanent injunction in the Notice of
Application: TriDelta Investment Counsel Inc. v. GTA-Mixed-Use, 2022
ONSC 6106, at paras. 47-48, appeal dismissed, 2024 ONCA 746. In their factum,
the Applicants sought an amendment in this regard, which I grant pursuant to r.
26.01 of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, which
provides that an amendment will be granted on just terms at any stage of a
proceeding “unless prejudice would result that could not be compensated for by
costs or an adjournment.” The Respondents did not provide any basis for denial
of the amendment. Notably, the Respondents also consented to the Centa J.
injunction despite the absence of this pleading which they could have raised at
that time. It is unclear what the prejudice is other than the possibility of a
successful claim which is not the kind of prejudice that this caselaw
references.
[120]      
I also reject their argument that an injunction cannot be ordered
because the Applicants’ claim is in essence a claim for specific performance of
an agreement and this relief has not been pleaded. They say that even if this
had been pleaded, there is no possible way that the Applicants could ever
obtain an order for specific performance because orders for specific
performance should not be granted as a matter of course absent evidence that
the property is unique to the extent that its substitute would not be readily
available: Lucas v. 1858793 Ontario Inc. (Howard Park), 2021 ONCA 52, at
para 69. They say the Applicants have not led any evidence to raise a triable
issue in this regard.
[121]      
The Respondents must take the Application and the causes of action
pleaded as they are. There is no claim for enforcement of a contract or
specific performance of it. They have asserted an equitable mortgage and unjust
enrichment. Just because the parties’ intentions and reasonable expectations
are relevant to these causes of action, it does not mean that they are claiming
specific performance of a contract. Parties are permitted to plead their cases
based upon causes of action that they choose. I note that equitable mortgages
are imposed at trial (as are resulting trusts). Courts do not refuse to impose
them on the basis that they are like orders for specific performance. The whole
point of equity is that it can step in, in appropriate circumstances, where the
application of strict legal rights will work an injustice.
[122]      
As noted by the Court of Appeal for Ontario in Elias, at para. 64:
[123]      
In the event I am wrong about the injunction, I would
nevertheless grant a CPL over the Properties.
[124]      
The usual test for granting leave to register a
CPL is well established in the relevant jurisprudence. It requires the
determination of whether there is a triable issue in respect of the moving
party’s claim to an interest in the property: Abu-Saud v. Abu-Saud, 2023 ONSC 6199 at para
17(c); Saggi v. Grillone, 2020 ONSC 4140 at para 62.
[125]      
Even if a triable issue is established, the Court must take into account
equitable factors and the balance of convenience.
[126]      
For the reasons I already set out above, I find that there is a triable
issue in respect of the Applicants’ claim to a security interest in Meadowlily
and Buroak.
[127]      
There are a number of usual equitable considerations taken into account
commonly referred to as the Dhunna Factors.  These typically include
whether the plaintiff is a shell corporation, whether the land is unique, the
intent of the parties in acquiring the land, whether there is an alternate
claim for damages, the ease or difficulty in calculating damages, whether
damages would be a satisfactory remedy, the presence or absence of a willing
purchaser. These factors developed in the context of cases where a plaintiff
seeks recovery of a piece of property for itself, for example cases involving a
failed real estate transaction.
[128]      
In my view, the uniqueness of the land is not relevant as the Applicants
do not seek it for themselves. Rather, they seek a security interest/equitable
mortgage. The existence of a willing purchaser is also not relevant. There is
no claim for damages and in my view, damages would not be sufficient to stand
in place of the nature of the claim here which is the loss of mortgage security.
The Applicants are not shelf corporations and provided adequate evidence of
assets that could be used to satisfy their undertaking as to damages if the
Respondents win and they prove that carrying costs during the period of the CPL
were caused by the CPL.
[129]      
As well, for the same reasons as set out above, the balance of
convenience would favour a CPL.
[130]      
Thus, I grant the injunction with respect to Exeter and Meadowlily and a
more limited injunction against Buroak such that the Respondents may negotiate
financing to take out the existing vendor take back mortgage. The Application
shall be expedited and heard within six months. The parties may arrange a case
conference with me to schedule this and they may also consider whether this
could proceed by way of summary trial.
[131]      
The parties are encouraged to resolve costs. If they cannot, they can
make submissions as follows: the Applicants within 5 days and the Respondents
within 5 days thereafter.​