[1]              
On this motion, the plaintiff seeks orders, among others, approving the
settlement agreement reached between the plaintiffs and defendants, approving
the distribution protocol to govern the administration of the settlement
agreement, approving fees and disbursements of class counsel, approving certain
other fees to be paid out of the settlement funds, and approving an honorarium
for the plaintiff, Alga Adina Bonnick.
[2]              
This action arises out of agreements for leased equipment, including
water and air filters, entered into between class members and different
corporate entities that are alleged to be related or part of a common scheme.
The agreements were originated by door-to-door salespeople. In many cases,
Notices of Security Interests (“NOSIs”) were registered on title to the class
members’ homes, in amounts that appear to far exceed the value of the equipment
installed, and at least sometimes in amounts that do not appear to relate to
the value of the contracts. There are allegations that the rental charges and
buy-out costs of the equipment under the contracts are out of all proportion to
the value of the equipment leased.
[3]              
The plaintiffs allege that the agreements are predatory and
unconscionable. They allege causes of action grounded in breach of consumer
protection legislation, conspiracy, unconscionability, slander of title, and
unjust enrichment.
[4]              
The issues raised by the plaintiffs have garnered significant public
attention. Class counsel, together with advocacy organizations, including
Advocacy Centre for the Elderly and Pro Bono Law Ontario, worked to raise
awareness of the plaintiffs’ allegations. Media reported on predatory sales
tactics that led to the type of allegedly unconscionable contracts at issue in
this litigation. The evidence[1],
and the experiences certain class members relayed at the hearing of the
settlement approval motion, suggest the defendants, or some of them, engaged in
a business plan that included:
[5]              
In Ontario, the advocacy efforts and issues raised led to statutory
reform, under which consumer NOSIs registered in Ontario were deemed expired: Homeowner
Protection Act, 2024, S.O. 2024, c. 18, Sched. 4.
[6]              
Despite the broad range of predatory tactics and unfair business
practices described by class members, class counsel focused this litigation more
narrowly, to render it more suitable for determination on a class-wide basis.
The action concentrates on the NOSIs and the contracts at issue, rather than
the door-to-door sales tactics.
[7]              
I set out the allegations above for context, and not as findings of fact
of wrongdoing on the part of the defendants. The alleged wrongdoing of the
defendants has not been litigated, and is not before me for determination on
this motion. The defendants deny liability.
[8]              
The procedural history of this action is complex. It began with a
putative class action commenced by the plaintiff, Alga Adina Bonnick, against
the defendant Lawrence Krimker and certain of the corporate defendants. While a
motion for summary judgment and certification was pending, certain of the
defendants in that action became insolvent. A creditor of the insolvent
companies, People’s Trust Company, commenced proceedings under the Companies’
Creditors Arrangement Act (“CCAA”).
[9]              
In the course of the CCAA proceedings, the plaintiffs learned
information that led them to believe that People’s Trust Company was a party to
the alleged scheme that underlay the allegations in the class action. The
plaintiffs commenced a second putative class action, this time against People’s
Trust Company.
[10]          
 The stay in the CCAA proceedings was lifted to allow the summary
judgment motion and certification motion in the first action to proceed. Before
the motion was concluded, the parties reached a settlement agreement.
[11]          
On November 15, 2024, I released an endorsement in both actions: Bonnick
v. Krimker et al., 2024 ONSC 6331. In my endorsement, I granted an
amendment in the action against People’s Trust Company, including adding
additional defendants. I consolidated the two actions and certified the
consolidated class proceeding for purposes of settlement. I also approved the
notice plan and proposed notices.
[12]          
The certified class is: all persons in Canada who are or were party to a
Lease at any time between July 17, 2013 and January 15, 2025 (the Opt Out
Deadline), except Excluded Persons. “Lease” and “Excluded Persons” are defined
terms, but I need not repeat the definitions of those terms here.
[13]          
On December 13, 2024, I released an endorsement in the consolidated
action: Bonnick v. Krimker et al., 2024 ONSC 7018. In this endorsement, I
approved Verita Global as administrator for the implementation of the proposed
settlement of the proceeding.
[14]          
The parties now seek approval of the settlement agreement and the
distribution protocol, and ancillary relief. Class counsel seeks approval of
its fees and disbursements, as well as other costs to be paid out of the
settlement fund, including administration costs and the Class Proceedings Fund
levy. I am also asked to make an order approving an honorarium of $10,000 for
one of the representative plaintiffs, Alga Adina Bonnick.
[15]          
Because some of the defendants continue to be in CCAA proceedings,
even if I grant the relief sought, the agreement remains subject to approval of
the CCAA court, to be addressed in a further hearing.
[16]          
The settlement agreement provides relief for class members in different
ways, and not all class members will receive the same relief. It provides:
[17]          
The settlement contemplates that some of these benefits will be
administered directly by the settlement agreement and orders of the court,
rather than the distribution protocol. For example, the permanent cap in annual
escalation, the reduced buyout and termination fees, and the invalidity of the
NOSIs together with the letters authorizing discharge require no further
administration if the settlement is approved and the proposed court orders
signed.
[18]          
The cash component of the settlement and lease cancellations are
proposed to be distributed under the distribution protocol, as follows:
[19]          
The distribution protocol also provides for an internal summary appeal
process for class members.
[20]          
Under s. 27.1(1) of the Class Proceedings Act, 1992, S.O. 192, c.
6, (“CPA”), a proceeding brought under the CPA may only be
settled with court approval. The court shall not approve a settlement unless it
determines that the settlement is fair, reasonable, and in the best interests
of the class: s. 27.1(5) CPA, at para. 7. The burden lies on the party
seeking approval: Robinson v. Medtronic, Inc., 2020 ONSC 1688, at para.
63; Nunes v. Air Transat A.T. Inc., 2005 CarswellOnt 2503 (S.C.J.), at
para. 7.
[21]          
Public policy favours the resolution of complex litigation: Nunes,
at para. 7.
[22]          
Settlements need not be perfect; they are compromises: Lozanski v.
The Home Depot, Inc., 2016 ONSC 5447, at para. 71. To find that a
settlement is not fair and reasonable, it must fall outside a range of
reasonable outcomes: Nunes, at para. 7. An objective and rational
assessment of the pros and cons of a settlement is required: Mancinelli v.
Royal Bank of Canada, 2017 ONSC 2324, at para. 38. There is a strong
presumption of fairness when a proposed class settlement, which was negotiated
at arms-length by counsel for the class, is presented for court approval: Nunes,
at para. 7.
[23]          
A court must be assured that the settlement secures appropriate
consideration for the class in return for the surrender of its litigation
rights against the defendants: Nunes, at para. 7. However, it is not the
court’s function to substitute its judgment for that of the parties or attempt
to renegotiate a proposed settlement. Nor is it the court’s function to
litigate the merits of the action, or, on the other hand, to rubber-stamp a
settlement: Nunes, at para. 7.
[24]          
When considering whether to approve a negotiated settlement, the court
may consider, among other things: (a) the likelihood of recovery or likelihood
of success; (b) the amount and nature of discovery, evidence or investigation;
(c) the proposed settlement terms and conditions; (d) the recommendation and
experience of counsel; (e) the future expense and likely duration of litigation
and risk; (f) the recommendation of neutral parties, if any; (g) the number of
objectors and nature of objections, if any; (h) the presence of good faith,
arm’s length bargaining and the absence of collusion; (i) the degree and nature
of communications by counsel and the representative parties with class members
during the litigation; and (j) information conveying to the court the dynamics
of and the positions taken by the parties during the negotiation: Lozanski,
at para. 73; Nunes, at para. 7; Robinson, at para. 65.
[25]          
Other relevant considerations include whether there are any structural
indicators that suggest collusion or conflict of interest: Leslie v.
Agnico-Eagles Mines, 2016 ONSC 532, at para. 8; Green v. CIBC, 2022
ONSC 373, at para. 17.
[26]          
Agreements that place a high value on non-monetary or conditional
compensation, contemplate a possible reversion of settlement funds to
defendants without a concomitant reduction in class counsel’s compensation,
make settlement approval contingent on fee approval and have optics that
suggest the settlement is more favourable to class counsel than class members
are the kinds of features which suggest collusion or conflict of interest: Smith
Estate v. National Money Mart Co., 2010 ONSC 1334, at paras. 33 and 95,
varied in part, 2011 ONCA 233; Leslie, at footnote 10, Brown v.
Canada (Attorney General), 2018 ONSC 3429, at paras. 85-86.
[27]          
Where counsel is in possession of significant facts and knowledge of
risks, the court is justified in assuming that counsel had a complete or almost
complete understanding of the risks and rewards of further litigation, and the
court will be more comfortable relying on class counsel’s recommendation that
the settlement is in the best interests of the class: Cannon v. Funds for
Canada Foundation, 2017 ONSC 2670, at paras. 5-10.
[28]          
Distribution protocols are assessed under the same legal test as
settlement approval, that is, whether the protocol is fair, reasonable, and in
the best interests of the class: Zaniewicz v. Zungui Haixi Corp, 2013
ONSC 5490, at para. 59; The Trustees of the Drywall Acoustic Lathing and
Insulation Local 675 Pension Fund v. SNC-Lavalin Group Inc., 2018 ONSC
6447, at para. 72.
[29]          
I consider below the factors relevant to the approval of the settlement
and the distribution protocol.
[30]          
The likelihood of recovery is a significant risk in this class proceeding,
not least because of the ongoing CCAA proceedings.
[31]          
Moreover, as Perell J. recognized in Blackford-Hall v. Simply Group,
2021 ONSC 8502, at para. 31, historically, many suppliers in the HVAC
marketplace go out of business, sometimes by bankruptcy, and some are taken
over by other suppliers. “This circumstance makes it difficult for the
consumers to escape the agreements that have been assigned, and this
circumstance often makes it both difficult and futile to obtain any remedial
relief from the vendor (supplier) which breached the consumer protection
legislation.”
[32]          
The evidence in this action reveals the assignment of agreements between
different corporate entities, demonstrating the concern identified by Perell J.
[33]          
While the class has a strong legal position with respect to the
agreements, a judgment that cannot be enforced would not be of practical value
to the class.
[34]          
Class counsel has had ample opportunity to investigate the allegations
underlying this claim. They first became familiar with the alleged scheme when
acting pro bono in individual proceedings for certain consumers who were
party to the sort of leases impugned in this proceeding.
[35]          
The contact between class counsel and class members in this case was
unusually extensive. During the class proceeding, class counsel had contact
with hundreds of class members who provided information and documents. They
also received extensive documentary productions through the development of a
motion record in a highly contested summary judgment motion. In addition, there
was extensive documentary production and records obtained through the CCAA proceeding
in which class counsel participated on behalf of the class.
[36]          
Class counsel’s knowledge and understanding of the evidence and
allegations in this proceeding is thus extensive and deep.
[37]          
The proposed settlement in this case is informed by a similar class
action in the same industry, Cullaton v. MDG Newmarket Inc. In Cullaton,
the class alleged that they were owed damages and other remedies due to
misleading HVAC leases that contravened the Consumer Protection Act. Cullaton
dealt with a single standard form contract by one supplier. Cullaton was
settled through an agreement that provided a monetary element and solutions by
way of contract modification for class members remaining in their contracts. Class
counsel built upon the experiences learned from the Cullaton settlement
when negotiating the settlement agreement in this proceeding.
[38]          
I have already described the elements of the proposed settlement and
distribution protocol. All class members will derive some benefit from it,
although the benefits will be different. Importantly, all NOSIs will become
unenforceable, and no longer able to act as an impediment to class members’
refinancing or selling their homes. Some class members will receive monetary
compensation, while others will receive lease cancellation benefits. Some will
receive contractual benefits in the form of reductions in the buy-out cost of
the lease, and caps on increases in annual lease payments.
[39]          
The settlement is recommended by class counsel, who is very experienced.
In counsel’s view, especially in view of the CCAA proceedings, the
recovery for the class is as good as could have been expected. It resolves the
litigation in a timely manner. For a class that includes a high number of elderly
and disabled class members, some of whom have died during the course of the
proceeding, a timely resolution provides real value.
[40]          
An adjudication of the issues in this litigation would be
time-consuming. It would require reviving the summary judgment and
certification motion in the original class proceeding, assuming the lift stay
order in the CCAA proceedings could be continued, which is a
questionable assumption. It would require advancing the class proceeding
against People’s Trust Company, which is at the earliest stages and can be
expected to be vigorously contested.
[41]          
The complexity of two class actions and the CCAA proceedings would
add delay and expense to the proceedings. Appeals would be expected. The class
proceedings would likely take years to resolve.
[42]          
The representative plaintiffs support the proposed settlement.
[43]          
Notice of settlement approval reached a few million people. Two class
members objected to the settlement. Four others provided comments. The comments
can be described as generally supportive of the settlement. Some class members
who commented wished to share their stories with the court. Several class
members attended the hearing and shared their views, including objections.
[44]          
The objections to the settlement were limited to certain aspects only.
Two class members shared their view that the cap on lease increases and the
reduction in buy-out amount were insufficient, and still resulted in lease
costs and buy-out costs out of proportion to the value of the equipment. One
class member shared his view that it should be up to the defendants to remove
the NOSIs from title to the class members’ properties.
[45]          
Class counsel explained that there was a finite pool of benefits or
funds that could be obtained in the settlement, and determining the allocation
of those required judgment which they exercised based on the instructions of the
representative plaintiffs and the experiences of class members. A significant
objective of commencing the proceeding at the outset was to address the NOSIs,
and as a result of the proposed settlement, no class member will have to worry
about an enforceable NOSI on title. The proposed settlement strikes a balance
designed to provide all class members with some relief. I note that the $2
million in lease cancellations that are within the discretion of class counsel
is also meant to address the situation of class members who continue to have
leases for HVAC equipment and whose circumstances require further redress,
based on the criteria identified earlier, including vulnerability.
[46]          
Apart from the objectors, I note that there were 31 putative class
members who opted out of the settlement, many because they had commenced
individual litigation in relation to their contracts.
[47]          
The parties entered into a negotiation process prompted by order of the CCAA
court on advice of the CCAA monitor. They were assisted by a former
judge of this court with familiarity with CCAA proceedings. The evidence
indicates the negotiations took place over several months, after an initial
mediation failed. There is every indication that good faith, arms-length
bargaining led to the proposed settlement.
[48]          
There are no structural elements of the proposed settlement that
indicate any collusion or conflict of interest.
[49]          
As I have noted, settlement discussions originally failed, and took
months to result in a proposed resolution.
[50]          
I have already noted that class counsel’s communications with class
members was unusually frequent and deep. The interest of class members in the
proceeding was reflected in the attendance of many spectators at the summary
judgment motion, and the participation of class members at the settlement
approval hearing. The class in this proceeding has been attentive and engaged
throughout.
[51]          
I have already averted to the biggest risks inherent in not approving
the settlement: the length of time it would take to reach an adjudicated
result, the delays associated with appeals, the potential that the stay of
proceedings from the CCAA proceeding would be renewed, and the risk of
inability to recover based on the nature of the HVAC industry and the transfers
of contracts between corporate entities, and the insolvency of a number of the
corporate defendants.
[52]          
I reiterate that in determining whether the settlement and distribution
protocol ought to be approved, it is not within my discretion to rework aspects
of the settlement. I cannot, for example, decide that the settlement should be
approved, but with a greater reduction in the buy-out fees for leases, and a
smaller cash component. I am asked a yes or no question when it comes to
approving the settlement and distribution protocol.
[53]          
I reiterate too that to find the settlement or distribution protocol is
not fair and reasonable, it must fall outside a range of reasonable outcomes.
[54]          
I accept the submissions of the objectors that the settlement and
distribution protocol are not ideal in some respects. They are imperfect, but
imperfection is an inescapable characteristic of settlements. All class members
will benefit from the proposed settlement and distribution protocol in
important and valuable ways. In contrast, the risks of proceeding with the
litigation are significant, especially in view of the CCAA proceedings
and the insolvency of many of the corporate defendants.
[55]          
In my view, the settlement and distribution protocol are fair,
reasonable, and in the best interests of the class. I approve them.
[56]          
The plaintiffs seek approval of a notice of settlement approval. I have
reviewed the proposed notice and I am satisfied that it clearly sets out the
required information. The proposed notice complies with s. 27.1(12) of the CPA.
[57]          
The court has already approved a notice plan. The notice of settlement
approval shall be distributed by the administrator in accordance with the plan.
I note that the notice shall only be distributed if the CCAA court also
grants approval to the settlement, and subject to any non-material modification
that may be required by that court. If a material modification is required, the
parties may seek a further attendance before me to address notice approval for
purposes of the CPA.
[58]          
As I have noted, on December 12, 2024, I approved Verita Global as
administrator of the settlement. The settlement, which I have approved,
contemplates that the costs of notice and administration of the settlement
shall be paid out of the settlement fund. I approve the payment of the
administrator’s reasonable fees and disbursements from the settlement fund.
[59]          
Class counsel seeks approval of its fees the amount of $5,610,000 plus
33% of any Participation Amount that may result from the sale of the business
in the CCAA proceeding.
[60]          
Class counsel entered into retainer agreements with the representative
plaintiffs under which class counsel is entitled to 33% of any recovery, plus
taxes and disbursements.
[61]          
The amount class counsel seeks in this case is less than provided for in
the retainer agreement. Class counsel seeks approval for 33% of the cash
components of the settlement only.
[62]          
As Morgan J. noted in Austin v. Bell Canada, 2021 ONSC 5068, at
para. 10, citing Commonwealth Investors Syndicate Ltd. v. Laxton, [1994]
O.J. No. 2922, at para. 63 (S.C.J.), when considering whether to approve class
counsel fees, “the amount payable under the contract is the starting point for
the application of the court’s judgment.”
[63]          
In MacDonald et al. v. BMO Trust Company et al., 2021 ONSC 3726,
at para. 21, Belobaba J. held that the approach that presumes valid the
percentage of recovery agreed to in the contingency fee retainer (up to
one-third) is appropriate in most class action settlements. See also Dufault
v. The Toronto-Dominion Bank, 2024 ONSC 961, at para. 39, where I held,
citing Cannon, at paras. 8-10, that:
[64]          
There is ample law explaining why contingency fees in class proceedings
advance the goal of access to justice: see, for example, Baker (Estate) v.
Sony BMG Music (Canada) Inc., 2011 ONSC 7105, at para. 64; Osmun v.
Cadbury Adams Canada Inc., 2010 ONSC 2752, at para. 21.
[65]          
Contingency fees also incentivize class counsel to maximize recovery for
the class, and promote judicial economy by encouraging efficiency in the
litigation and discouraging unnecessary work: Crown Bay Hotel Ltd.
Partnership v. Zurich Indemnity Co. of Canada, 1998 CanLII 14842; Osmun,
at para. 21
[66]          
The general principles to apply to the assessment of class counsel’s
fees were set out by Juriansz J.A., in Smith Estate v. National Money Mart
Co., 2011 ONCA 233, at para. 80:
[67]          
The court also considers the integrity of the profession as a relevant
factor: Fresco v. Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, 2023 ONSC 3335, at
paras. 127-133, aff’d 2024 ONCA 628, at paras. 101-102. It is important to
note, as the Court of Appeal did in Fresco, at para. 84, that the phrase
“integrity of the profession” is not meant to connote dishonesty in this context,
but rather, a fee that is not champertous.
[68]          
In McIntyre Estate v. Ontario (Attorney General), 2002 CanLII
45046, at para. 76, the Court of Appeal for Ontario found that a “fee agreement
that so over-compensates a lawyer such that it is unreasonable or unfair to
the client is an agreement with an improper purpose -- i.e., taking advantage
of the client.”
[69]          
The risk class counsel took on must be measured from the outset of the
litigation, not with the benefit of hindsight: Gagne v. Silcorp Ltd.,
1998 CanLII 1584.
[70]          
I begin by noting that the jurisprudence reviewed above supports the
conclusion that the agreed-upon 33% contingency fee contained in the retainer
agreements is presumptively valid. Moreover, the record establishes that the
retainer agreements satisfy the requirements of s. 32(1) CPA.
[71]          
I find that the counsel fees sought (plus applicable taxes), and
including 33% of any Participation Amount, are fair and reasonable. I reach
this conclusion for the following reasons:
[72]          
I also approve class counsel’s requests for disbursements, plus their
request for additional reasonable disbursements up to a maximum of $30,000 plus
taxes, recognizing the amount of work that remains for class counsel in
connection with this litigation. If greater disbursements are incurred, class
counsel may seek a further order of this court for approval of additional
disbursements.
[73]          
These amounts shall be paid from the settlement fund.
[74]          
The Class Proceedings Fund provided funding to the plaintiff class in
the original action. I am asked to approve a levy payable to the Class
Proceedings Fund in the amount of 10% on 38.19% of the net settlement fund.
[75]          
This figure originates from the data provided to class counsel from
Chief Restructuring Officer in the CCAA proceeding. The best estimate
available is that 138,977 leases nationally (some of which may be held by the
same class member) were captured in the People’s Trust Company class
proceeding. The definition of the class in the original class proceeding is
wholly subsumed by the definition of the class in the People’s Trust Company
proceeding (and in the consolidated proceeding). The Chief Restructuring
Officer’s best estimate is that, of the 138,977 leases, 53,088 leases were in
Ontario and involved a NOSI on title, and thus captured by the class definition
in the original proceeding.
[76]          
The Chief Restructuring Officer further estimates that each householder
(i.e., class member) has an average of 1.35 leases.
[77]          
Using these estimates, the original class proceeding covered 39,324
class members, and thus constitutes 38.19% of the national class in the
People’s Trust Company action.
[78]          
The plaintiffs calculate the Class Proceedings Fund levy at 10% of
38.19% of the net settlement fund, inclusive of the initial cash payment and
any Participation Amount, after payment of class counsel fees, disbursements
and administration expenses, in accordance with s. 10(3) of O. Reg. 771/92. I
am satisfied that the evidence supports the levy in the amount sought.
[79]          
In addition, the Class Proceedings Fund advanced disbursements of
$5,294.07 in connection with this litigation. It is entitled to be reimbursed
that amount from the settlement fund.
[80]          
The plaintiffs ask that I approve an honorarium for the representative
plaintiff, Alga Adina Bonnick, in the amount of $10,000, to be paid from the
settlement fund. They do not seek an honorarium for the other representative
plaintiffs.
[81]          
In Doucet v. Royal Winnipeg Ballet Company, 2023 ONSC 2323, the
Divisional Court considered the circumstances under which a representative
plaintiff may be entitled to an honorarium. The Divisional Court found that a modest
payment to the representative plaintiff can be made in exceptional
circumstances. In considering whether to approve or disapprove a request for an
honorarium, the court should consider the following factors (Doucet, at
para. 92):
[82]          
The Divisional Court’s conclusion was cited with approval by the Court
of Appeal for Ontario in Fresco, at paras. 107-112.
[83]          
In my view, Ms. Bonnick’s contribution to this class proceeding can
fairly be described as exceptional.
[84]          
Ms. Bonnick became a proposed representative plaintiff in her 70s. Ms.
Bonnick is a retired house cleaner. She manages chronic medical conditions,
including high blood pressure and poor eyesight. She is of limited means. She
had no experience with the civil justice system until this proceeding.
[85]          
It is apparent to me, from the affidavits of class members that I read
in the context of the summary judgment and settlement approval motions, from
the written statements class members delivered in connection with the
settlement approval motions, and from the stories that class members who
attended the settlement approval hearing told me, that many class members
experienced a great deal of stress and anxiety as a result of the leases at
issue in this proceeding. Class members relayed how their health had suffered
from the stress. They felt exploited, and helpless.
[86]          
The court sees lease-related disputes regularly, but this dispute was
qualitatively different, measured by the impact it had on consumers, and
particularly those who are vulnerable.
[87]          
When Ms. Bonnick decided to take on the role of representative
plaintiff, she not only sought justice for class members, but she shielded them
from having to revisit publicly events that many of them found to be traumatic.
Ms. Bonnick went through a lengthy cross-examination, and by placing herself at
the forefront of the litigation, she allowed others to protect themselves.
[88]          
Ms. Bonnick was so committed to the proceeding that she persevered while
dealing with the illness of her son. Tragically, he died shortly before the
hearing of the summary judgment motion. Ms. Bonnick put off time to grieve with
family abroad to be present for the hearing.
[89]          
The honorarium sought is modest, both in general, and in the context of
the benefits of the settlement.
[90]          
 Ms. Bonnick’s exceptional commitment to the proceeding ought to be
recognized with an honorarium. I approve the honorarium of $10,000.
[91]          
In conclusion, I approve the settlement and distribution protocol. I
approve class counsel’s request for fees, disbursements, and taxes, and the honorarium
for Ms. Bonnick. I approve the notice, administration fees, and payment to the
Class Proceedings Fund.
[92]          
These orders are contingent upon the approval of the settlement
agreement by the CCAA court, and the agreement becoming effective
pursuant to its terms.
[93]          
The plaintiffs have provided me with draft orders with which I am
largely satisfied. However, I ask counsel to take these reasons into account
and provide me with finalized copies of the orders for my signature.
[94]          
I wish to thank all counsel for their professionalism and helpful
submissions throughout this complex and important litigation. In many ways,
this litigation highlights how the objectives of class proceedings — access to
justice, behaviour modification, and judicial economy —  are not just
aspirational.
[95]          
I also wish to extend my thanks to the class members who participated and
engaged in the process; by doing so, you demonstrated the importance of this
proceeding to you and to the class, and the value of class actions as a vehicle
for justice in our society.
[96]          
Finally, I wish to offer my thanks to the representative plaintiffs, and
particularly to Ms. Bonnick who suffered a great deal personally while continuing
to persist in this litigation. There is no access to justice in class
proceedings without representative plaintiffs; our system of justice owes each
person who is willing to take on the (unpaid) responsibilities of a
representative plaintiff for the benefit of others a debt of gratitude.