[1]              
This an appeal under s. 88.33 (9) of the Municipal
Elections Act, 1996.[1] 
The facts are almost identical to those discussed by my colleague Justice Somji
in Thompson v. City of Ottawa Elections Compliance Audit Committee (“ECAC”)
decided just weeks ago.[2]
I will not repeat the description of the legal framework or the analysis set
out in that decision as the parties both rely on the decision.[3] I adopt Justice Somji’s
conclusions concerning the standard of review and the purpose of the
legislation.
[2]              
In this case, as in Thompson, the
candidate made an error on his “Form 4” financial statement.  The candidate was
required to value campaign signs left over from a previous election and used in
the 2022 municipal election. The present value of the signs must be counted as
an election contribution from the candidate himself and must also be counted as
an election expense.
[3]              
Unlike in Thompson where the ECAC had
ordered a compliance audit and was upheld on appeal, in the case now before the
court the ECAC (“the tribunal”) declined to make such an order and it is the
failure to order an audit that is under appeal.[4]
[4]              
In this case, during the hearing under questioning from
the tribunal, the candidate acknowledged that the value of the election signs
kept in inventory from the previous election and shown on his Form 4 was in
error.  In estimating the value, he had failed to account for large signs
valued at $36.75 per sign and small signs valued at $5.65 per sign.
[5]              
I note that, according to the evidence of the
candidate before the tribunal, the error may have been only $30.00 but even if
it was $1,000.00 it would not have put the candidate over the allowable
contribution or expense limit.  Under the scheme of the legislation, however,
the function of the audit committee at this point is simply to determine if an
audit should be ordered or not. An audit is to be ordered if the committee
agrees with the complainant that there are “reasonable grounds” to believe the
candidate has contravened a provision of the Act.
[6]              
As discussed by Justice Somji and accepted by
both parties in argument, a failure to complete Form 4 accurately may be a
breach of the Act even if it appears de minimus.  An error that is not a
mere typographical error but is a substantive inaccuracy in calculation or
reporting is sufficient to clear the very low hurdle at the first step of the s.
88.33 procedure.
[7]              
In order to ensure transparency in municipal
election financing and expenditures and because an error in reporting could be
indicative of further irregularities, the ECAC should order an audit even if
the Form 4 contains a minor financial irregularity.[5] In Thompson, the tribunal
did order an audit and that decision was upheld.  In the decision before me,
the tribunal did not order an audit.  It is impossible to determine from the
reasons whether this is because the tribunal believed this was a minor innocent
error and it believed it had the discretion to ignore it or whether the
tribunal failed to notice the error by ignoring the math.  In the former case,
the Appellant argues the tribunal erred in law and in the latter that it
committed a palpable error in a finding of fact.  In either case the court
would be entitled to intervene on appeal.
[8]              
I have a statement of agreed facts in which it
is admitted there is a mathematical error in the value of the election signs
declared on the Form 4.  Given this discrepancy on the financial statement, the
limited role of the Audit Committee in screening out frivolous requests for a
compliance audit, and given that both parties agree that even a de minimus reporting
error may be sufficient to trigger the obligation of the Committee to order an
audit, I find that the Audit Committee was in error in not ordering a
compliance audit.
[9]              
At this stage, neither the Committee nor this Court
is making a finding that there was any form of wrongdoing on the part of the
candidate.  As outlined by Justice Somji in Thompson and in the various
cases cited by her, this is a three part process.  If a compliance audit is
conducted then based on the results of that audit, the Committee may authorize
a prosecution.  It would then be for the Ontario Court of Justice to determine
if an offence has occurred.  It is neither necessary nor appropriate for the
tribunal or the court to believe the candidate is guilty of an offence in order
to require a compliance audit.  A breach of the requirement for accurate
financial reporting is sufficient basis to accept the complainant’s request for
an audit.
[10]          
For these reasons I find that the ECAC was in
error and should have ordered an audit.
[11]          
Pursuant to s. 88.33 (9) of the Act, if the
Court finds the ECAC was in error, the Court is authorized to “make any
decision the Committee could have made”.  That is the remedy sought by the
Appellant. Accordingly I am ordering a compliance audit and directing the ECAC
to appoint an auditor under, s. 88.33 (10) of the Act.
[12]          
The parties agreed there should be no order as
to costs, so no costs are awarded.