[1]              
At the time of the trial, the accused, Steve
Moreau (“SM”), was 41 years of age and the complainant, VJ, was 24 years of age.
The incidents allegedly occurred between early 2017 and mid 2021. At this time,
the complainant was between the ages of 16 and 21 and the accused between 34 and
38 years old. At all relevant times, the accused employed VJ at a janitorial company
that he owned.
[2]              
On September 30, 2020, the complainant formally reported
the incidents to the police. She attended the Chatham-Kent Police Department (“CKPD”)
and provided a videotaped statement which resulted in charges against the
accused pursuant to the Criminal Code, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46.
[3]              
The accused was subsequently arrested and is
charged on a three-count indictment as follows:
[4]              
On consent, at the conclusion of the Crown’s
case, the end date in count #3 (September 31, 2019) was amended to conform with
VJ’s evidence. The end date is now December 31, 2019.
[5]              
The complainant was 16 years old when the accused
hired her at his janitorial company. The relationship quickly became sexual and continued until VJ was 21 years old. At all times during the
relationship, VJ remained an employee of the accused.
[6]              
On one occasion, VJ alleges that the accused
engaged in sexual activity without her consent.
[7]              
There are three issues to decide in this trial:
[8]              
At trial, the defence admitted jurisdiction and the
identity and continuity of text messages/images that the police downloaded from
the complainant’s phone.
[9]              
The judge-alone trial of this matter was held in
Chatham over four days. The court heard evidence from two witnesses. Final
submissions were delivered on the third and fourth day. The witnesses at trial
consisted of the complainant, VJ, and the accused, SM.
[10]          
A publication ban was ordered pursuant to s.
486.4 of the Criminal Code.
[11]          
The complainant is currently 24 years old. She
met the accused through a friend who assisted her at the age of 16 year to
obtain employment as a commercial/industrial cleaner at the accused’s janitorial
business. According to VJ, the accused’s date of birth is March 16, 1983 and he
was 34 years old at the time the two first engaged in sexual activity.
[12]          
Her first day of employment was January 2 or 3,
2017. By text, it was arranged that the accused would pick her up from her
parent’s house and take her to the first jobsite, which he did that first
afternoon at approximately 5:30 p.m.
[13]          
The first shift involved just the two of them
cleaning an industrial/office site together. VJ testified that right from the
start, the two got along and enjoyed each others’ company. She said that the
accused was an easy person to talk to and she felt comfortable with him.
[14]          
During this early period of her employment, the
two would usually work alone together, but occasionally others would work with
them. Her shifts were on Wednesday evenings, either Saturday or Sunday, and sometimes
she would pick up another shift during the week.
[15]          
The nature of the relationship quickly changed over
the next several weeks from an employer/employee relationship to a sexual one. VJ
testified that text messages and telephone conversation between the two became
more personal. The accused also began to open up about his struggling marriage
and parental challenges. The complainant found the accused to be very charming.
[16]          
In mid January 2017, the accused asked her to
work on a day that was not a typical workday, and she agreed. When the accused
picked her up as he usually did (she did not have a driver’s licence at this
time), he told her that he decided they would get something to eat, drive
around and talk instead. The complainant testified that she was flattered
because she enjoyed his company so much while working.
[17]          
The two smoked some marihuana. The accused then
told her a story about him being called up to the blackboard when he had a
“boner” in high school. The complainant testified in cross-examination that she
may have initiated that discussion when she told the accused that she often became
sexually aroused riding the bus to school. This was the first time the
conversation between the two became overtly sexual. On other occasions, the
accused had told VJ that if he were younger, he would have dated her.
[18]          
On January 28, 2017, the accused asked the
complainant to clean an apartment building on a day that she was not scheduled
to work. On the ride to the jobsite, the accused vented about his relationship
with his wife, that she had been cheating on him for years and that they were
only together for the sake of his seven-year-old daughter. The accused also told
her for the first time that he was attracted to her and had a crush on her. VJ
was taken aback and flattered. She also said that she had a crush on him.
[19]          
At the jobsite, the accused expressed how much
he liked her and that he wished to kiss her. VJ told him that she was nervous
and not ready yet. The accused told her that they would get a pizza first and
then kiss afterwards.
[20]          
After pizza, the two eventually kissed and “felt
up” each other. VJ testified that she “batted” the accused hands away on
several occasions when he began to feel her breasts and vagina over her
clothing. After pulling his hands away, he would again periodically touch those
areas. At one point, he placed his hand down her pants and touched her vagina. VJ
pulled his hand out and told him that she was not ready for that yet. The
accused responded by saying that he was attracted to her because she said no to
his advances – VJ testified that she felt good that she got his approval for
saying no. The sexual activity did not escalate any further that night. (I note
that while the touching by the accused of the complainant in the manner that he
did could, arguably, constitute a sexual assault, the Crown did not allege that
this incident was the subject matter of any of the counts in the indictment.)
[21]          
This first sexual act of kissing occurred after
the two had worked together approximately ten times.
[22]          
VJ testified that although she had conflicting
emotions regarding the accused, especially since he was in his 30’s, she nonetheless
developed a very close and strong connection to him and was falling deeply in
love.
[23]          
The week after the two kissed, the accused
picked VJ up from school and they went out to eat. The two then drove around
and eventually parked in a rural area. They started to make out before the
accused asked if he could give her oral sex. VJ testified that she was nervous
but ultimately agreed. The accused then proceeded to give VJ oral sex in his vehicle
and she eventually did the same to him in return. Before dropping VJ off, the
accused gave the complainant a pamphlet of the ten commandments and explained
the importance of having a relationship with God. It was obvious to VJ that
religion was very important to him.
[24]          
The following week the two ended up together at
a jobsite. They proceeded again to give each other oral sex. The accused asked VJ
if they could have sexual intercourse. VJ said she was not ready yet and
remarked that in any event he did not have a condom.
[25]          
On the next occasion, February 12, 2017, the two
were scheduled to work together. The accused picked her up as usual and then
the two parked in an out-of-the-way spot on the way to work and started making
out. He told her as they were parked that he had a condom and would put it on
his penis and just rub her vagina but would not penetrate her. VJ was nervous
but ultimately agreed to have full sexual intercourse with him, which happened for
the first time on that occasion.
[26]          
VJ had strong but conflicting feelings about the
relationship. She often told him about the concerns she had regarding the age
gap, his marriage, and that her parents, or society for that matter, would not
approve. At one-point, VJ Googled the legal age of consent and advised the
accused that it was sixteen unless one of them was in a position of authority
such as being an employer. The accused replied by saying that he really loved
her and because she was so mature for her age, their relationship was different
and an exception to the rule. The accused told her this several times during
the relationship but would then insist that she keep the relationship a secret.
The accused also emphasized that if people found out, his daughter could be
taken from him.
[27]          
VJ testified that she had a deep sense of love
and loyalty towards the accused. She went on to say that she did not wish to
jeopardize his relationship with his daughter.
[28]          
The accused had the master key and alarm code to
the various jobsites. The jobsites would sometimes be used by the two to engage
in sexual activity.
[29]          
The sexual relationship continued through the
summer and into the next year, which was grade 12. During that period, the two
spent more time together and referred to themselves as boyfriend and girlfriend.
They were also beginning to discuss a future together.
[30]          
They would communicate and send images to each
other largely through Snapchat, knowing that same would be deleted unless both
intended to save what was sent. VJ would often, either intentionally or
accidentally, save communications or images sent to her phone via screen shots.
Sometimes, she would delete the materials if she believed that her parents were
becoming suspicious and possibly go through her phone. She also changed the
call display name for the accused on her phone to the name of her friends,
Ashley and/or Gabby, and saved some of the more private Snapchat communications
she had with the accused to a password protected “My Eyes Only” function.
[31]          
VJ freely admitted that she lied to her parents
and others about the nature of her relationship with the accused, testifying at
trial that it happened “more times than I can count.”
[32]          
A forensic examination of the complainant’s
phone by the police (Exhibit #1a and 1b) resulted in the extrapolation of
several messages and images. These included a sexualized poem and sexually explicit
messages sent between the two in 2017, as well an image of the accused’s erect
penis that, according to the complainant, was sent to her just before her 18th
birthday.
[33]          
On March 5, 2018, the complainant turned 18. Even
though VJ started to realize by this time that the accused was struggling with
drug and alcohol abuse, she remained committed to the relationship.
[34]          
Until mid-2018, the number of hours that VJ consistently
worked for the accused remained the same, except that it increased somewhat during
summertime. VJ testified that she received no significant perks during her
employment with the accused, such as being promoted to a managerial position.
[35]          
By June 2018, VJ’s hours increased to close to
full-time after another employee went on maternity leave. She was also making
approximately $17 per hour, which was more than the student minimum wage she
made when she started her employment. The complainant also became a salaried
employee during COVID, making the equivalent of $25 per hour for a 40-hour
week.
[36]          
As time went on, the accused became friend’s with
VJ’s family, and he eventually employed her older and younger sisters.
[37]          
By March 2019, the accused had separated from
his wife, and VJ started to spend even more time with him at his house. VJ
testified that as they spent more time together, she noticed that the accused’s
struggles with alcohol and substances had become worse.
[38]          
In the September/October 2019, VJ had a medical
procedure in which she received an IUD. She was told that she would likely
experience pain after the procedure and to avoid sexual intercourse for at
least 24 hours. The accused drove her to and then back home from the medical
procedure. That night the two were spooning and cuddling each other in bed while
watching television. The accused began to “come on to her” and she felt his
erect penis on her backside. He began to pull the complainant’s pajama pants
down, but she told him that she was in pain and did not want to have sex. According
to VJ, the accused ignored her and inserted his penis in her vagina anyways. The
complainant cried silently during intercourse as her face was positioned away
from the accused.
[39]          
VJ failed to disclose this incident in both
videotaped statements that she provided to the police. The first time VJ
disclosed this sexual assault was when she was cross-examined at the preliminary
hearing. She explained that she did not previously tell anyone about the
incident because she was never asked if the accused ever had sex with her
without her consent. VJ did say she brought this event to the attention of PC
Sharrow of the CKPD when, in between the two videos, he had asked her questions
from a questionnaire. According to VJ, when PC Sharrow gave her the option of
providing a formal statement about the incident, she declined to do so.
[40]          
In December 2019, VJ finally obtained her driver’s
licence. In late 2020 or early 2021, VJ bought a house that needed extensive
renovations. The complainant explained that during this period, she rarely saw
or worked with the accused and instead spent most of her time working on the
house. He was also becoming increasingly mean to her and was regularly
belittling her. The complainant felt overwhelmed and burdened by the accused’s
struggles with family/work/finances/anxiety and his substance abuse issues. The
relationship had become toxic and VJ eventually decided that she wanted out,
but that proved difficult because she felt trapped financially since she now owned
a house and he was her only source of income.
[41]          
The two continued to keep the relationship
secret even though the complainant was now 21 years old. They were both still concerned
that if they went public, people would figure out when the relationship first
started.
[42]          
Eventually things came to a head after VJ had
what was essentially an emotional break-down on August 25, 2021. VJ called 911 on
that day and told the operator, and then the police officers who attended her
residence, that she had been involved in an inappropriate relationship with the
accused. When she was later cross-examined on the officer’s notes, VJ denied
that she refused to identify the accused as the one who she claimed sexually
assaulted her.
[43]          
VJ was subsequently taken to the hospital by her
mother. On the way there, she attempted to delete the communications she had
with the accused. She did this, she says, to prevent her mom from being
embarrassed, believing that she would go through her phone while she was in the
hospital. VJ was eventually discharged once she spent a couple nights recovering
in the hospital. After a few more days of work, she and her sister gave the
accused their notices of resignation. VJ also ended their relationship at this
time.
[44]          
VJ has now started her own cleaning business, which
she continues to operate today.
[45]          
On September 30, 2021, VJ attended the CKPS
headquarters and provided a videotaped statement about the incident. She gave
another recorded interview on November 11, 2021. Both interviews were conducted
by PC Sharrow.
[46]          
The accused elected to testify in his defence.
[47]          
The accused confirmed, in large part, the
contents of Exhibit #1b as well as the complainant’s testimony regarding the
facts central to the incidents. This includes the events that occurred within
the first couple months of the relationship. A summary of the accused’s testimony
is as follows:
[48]          
The two would on average have intercourse at
least once a week until the relationship ended in 2021.
[49]          
The employer/employee relationship remained
essentially the same until COVID. At that time, VJ gained more managerial type
responsibilities within the corporation and her wages, as well as many of the
other employees, increased. In the case of VJ, her wages increased from $17 to
$24 per hour.
[50]          
According to the accused, it was VJ who wanted
to keep the relationship secret – and he merely assisted her to do so. The accused
was not at all concerned whether the relationship was legal; rather, his
concern was if it was socially acceptable. Although he had developed a
relationship with her family, particularly her mother, the accused testified
that he was not really concerned about inadvertently disclosing the nature of
the relationship to them.
[51]          
In relation to the alleged sexual assault after the
IUD procedure, the accused mostly confirmed VJ’s evidence but stated emphatically
that the two did not have sexual intercourse that night. The accused confirmed
that VJ told him that they should not have intercourse and, while he did not
specifically recall what happened that night, he testified that he would have respected
her wish.
[52]          
The accused testified that he had no idea until
VJ filed her letter of resignation in late summer 2020 that she wanted to end
the relationship. He believed the two were still in love and that they would
eventually marry.
[53]          
The accused was subsequently arrested in January
2022.
[54]          
The case of R. v. W.(D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), [1991] 1 S.C.R.
742, applies as the accused testified. The defence argues that the accused was
not shaken in cross-examination and his evidence should be accepted.
Alternatively, even if not fully accepted, the accused’s evidence should at
least raise a doubt as to his guilt. Finally, even if the accused’s evidence is
rejected in its entirety, the evidence of the complainant is so unreliable,
especially in relation to count three, or is otherwise insufficient to prove his
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt on the essential elements in counts one and two.
[55]          
As it relates to counts one and two, the defence
argues that the Crown has not proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused
was in a position of trust or authority towards VJ, even though the accused was
her employer. In any event, even if it is proven that the accused was in a
position of trust, there is nothing in the evidence to suggest that this played
any role or had any influence over how their intimate relationship began and
developed.
[56]          
As it relates to count three, the defence submits
that the failure by VJ to disclose to the police in her two videotaped
statements that the accused had sexual intercourse with her without her consent
raises serious questions about the reliability and/or credibility of her
account of this incident. Without evidence confirming her testimony, the
defence argues that it would be dangerous to convict on this count.
[57]          
Accordingly, the accused ought to be acquitted
of all charges.
[58]          
The Crown submits that but for the sexual
assault in count three, the evidence as between the accused and the complainant
were similar.
[59]          
In relation to counts one and two, the accused was
her employer and therefore in a classic position of trust and authority towards
her during their sexual relationship. The Crown submits that the evidence of
guilt is overwhelming during that period when sexual activity took place while VJ
was under the age of 18 years and therefore he ought to be convicted on count
one.
[60]          
The Crown further argues that the accused also influenced
VJ to engage in sexual activity by abusing the position of trust and authority
as her employer. The Crown argues that consent under s. 273.1(2)(c) in respect
to sexual assault offences does not require coercive force to nullify consent
but rather may flow naturally from personal feelings and confidence engendered
by that relationship, which is consistent with the testimony of VJ. Therefore,
the accused should be convicted of count two.
[61]          
As it relates to count three, VJ was a credible
and reliable witness, and her evidence ought to be accepted without any reservation.
Her evidence was straightforward and honest when she testified about the
accused ignoring her request not to have sex and then forcing himself on her after
the IUD procedure. The accused’s testimony, on the other hand, was self-serving
and tended to minimize his own responsibility, and it ought to be rejected. After
considering all the circumstances, including most importantly VJ’s testimony, the
sexual assault has been proven beyond a reasonable doubt and therefore the
accused also should be convicted on count three.
[62]          
In conclusion, the Crown submits that the case
against the accused has, on all counts, been proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
[63]          
To convict a person accused of a crime, the
Crown must prove every element of each offence charged beyond a reasonable
doubt. Accordingly, I instruct myself on the criminal standard of proof in
accordance with the guidance provided by the Supreme Court of Canada in R.
v. Lifchus, 1997 CanLII 319 (SCC), [1997] 3 S.C.R. 320, at para. 39.
[64]          
The credibility and reliability of a witness are
two distinct concepts. Simply, credibility relates to whether a witness was
telling the truth, and reliability is whether a witness, although apparently
honest, provides the court with inaccurate evidence: see R. v. Morrissey (1995),
1995 CanLII 3498 (ON CA), 22 O.R. (3d) 514 (C.A.), at p. 17.
[65]          
If an accused elects to testify on his own
behalf and the court is presented with two fundamentally different versions of
the critical events in question such that credibility is important, the
principles enunciated in W.(D.) are central to the court’s analysis. In W.(D.),
Cory J. held that the trier of fact should be instructed on the issue of
credibility in accordance with a three-step analysis, at p. 758:
[66]          
Although the age of the complainant ranged from
16 years old at the time of the first incident to approximately 21 years old
when her relationship with the accused ended, I find that the principles
related to the reception of children’s evidence are applicable, at least in
relation to those incidents that took place before she turned 18 years old. In
historic sexual abuse cases against children, the Supreme Court of Canada in R.
v. W.(R.), 1992 CanLII 56 (SCC), [1992] 2 S.C.R. 122, at p. 134, explained that when adults
testify as to events that occurred when they were a child, “the presence of
inconsistencies, particularly as to peripheral matters such as time and
location, should be considered in the context of the age of the witness at the
time of the events to which she is testifying.”
[67]          
With all the above in mind, I will now consider
the evidence of the witnesses.
[68]          
I will assess the accused’s evidence at the
outset before dealing with the facts in relation to each count.
[69]          
I reject those parts of the accused’s evidence
that are not otherwise confirmed by VJ’s testimony. The evidence, which I do
accept, includes that he both intended and did engage for a sexual purpose to
have intimate relations with VJ before she turned 18 years old.
[70]          
The accused clearly has little insight with
respect to how morally inappropriate it was for him to have sexual relations
with his 16-year-old employee. In fact, the failure by him to have any insight into
what he did was obvious when he described at trial the seemingly normal and
healthy way the relationship that he had with this teenage employee of his quickly
developed shortly after they first met.
[71]          
More troubling is how he minimized what he did
in terms of developing the sexual relationship he had with VJ. The thrust of
his testimony was that it was primarily this young 16-year-old complainant, and
not him, who from the onset had controlled the direction and pace of the
relationship. According to the accused, it was VJ who played the leading role
in quickly escalating the sexual activity between the two, from simply kissing
to having sexual intercourse within six weeks or less, that he had essentially
taken a hands-off approach and allowed the relationship to develop at a pace
set by VJ. If the accused is to be believed, at no time did this 34-year-old
employer in any way attempt to persuade or influence VJ to do anything that she
was otherwise reluctant, at least initially, to do.
[72]          
Again, I reject the accused’s evidence in all
areas that conflict with VJ’s evidence, which I will comment on soon when I
deal with count two – although, apart from count 3, very little turns on this
credibility contest.
[73]          
The applicable parts of s. 153(1) of the Criminal
Code states the following:
[74]          
From David Watt, Watt’s Manual of Criminal
Jury Instructions, 2024, (Toronto: Thomson Reuters, 2024), at p. 522, the
definition of “Position of Trust” and “Position of Authority” are defined as
follows:
[75]          
When comparing s. 153(1) (sexual exploitation)
in relation to count 1 with the definition of consent in s. 273.1 (sexual
assault) of the Criminal Code in count 2, there is a notable difference between
the two sections regarding the definition of position of trust and position of
authority.
[76]          
Section 153(1) states that any person in a
position of trust or authority who, for a sexual purpose, touches the body of a
young person is guilty of an offence.
[77]          
In contrast, the wording of s. 273.1(2)(c) states
the following:
[78]          
As it relates to s. 273.1, it is not merely whether
a person is in a position of trust or authority that is prohibitive but whether
the person also “induces the complainant to engage in the [sexual] activity by
abusing a position of trust, power or authority.” Under s. 153(1), the Crown is
not required to prove anything beyond that the person was in a position of
trust or authority when the young person was touched for a sexual purpose – nor
is the Crown required to demonstrate that the accused
abused that position of trust or authority.
[79]          
Accordingly, it appears that the forbidden
conduct in s. 273.1 is much more narrow or restrictive when obtaining another
person’s consent than the behaviour captured by s. 153(1): see R. v. Audet,
1996 CanLII 198 (SCC), [1996] 2 S.C.R. 171, at para. 23.
[80]          
I will have more to say about s. 273.1 later.
[81]          
I will now focus on s. 153(1) and whether the
accused held a position of trust or authority towards VJ during that period
when she was under the age of 18 years old and the two engaged in sexual
activity. In that regard, all circumstances must be considered, including the
age difference between the two and the status of the
accused in relation to VJ. The nature of the relationship is also
important in this analysis: see Audet, at para. 38.
[82]          
The facts in relation to this count are not at
all in conflict as between the two witnesses.
[83]          
At the time the two first engaged in sexual
activity, VJ was 16 years old and the accused was 34 years old - an age gap of
approximately 18 years. As the direct employer of this young person, the
relationship between him and VJ created mutual legal employment obligations and
responsibilities. It also created an opportunity for the accused to persuade
and influence VJ and force obedience from her. Examples include that the
accused had the authority as her employer to set VJ’s rate of pay, the number
of hours she worked and at which jobsite she would be placed. He also had the
authority to terminate her employment and enforce her to comply with employment
related policies and procedures.
[84]          
Whether the accused abused this position of
authority or trust as VJ’s employer is an irrelevant consideration. The only
issue is whether the accused occupied a position towards this young person that
would have created the opportunity to persuade or influence the complainant to
engage in the sexual activity – and there is no doubt in my mind that these
circumstances existed at the time the two had sexual relations. I agree with the
Crown that caselaw has recognized employers as someone who enjoys a position of
trust towards an employee: see R. v. R.H., 2024 ONCA 672, at para. 2; R.
v. DiMichele, 2020 ONCA 48, at paras. 2, 9.
[85]          
Section 153(1) recognizes
that young persons are vulnerable and that the burden is on those in a position
of trust or authority to say no even if that young person wishes to engage in
any form of sexual activity. On this point, La Forest J. in Audet refers
to what he described as the eloquent comments of Woolridge
J. in the case of R. v. Hann (No. 2) (1990), 1990 CanLII 2629 (NL SC), 86 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 33 (Nfld. S.C.), at p. 36:
[86]          
The significant difference in age coupled with the
employer/employee relationship created an obligation on the accused in the
circumstances to abstain absolutely from acting on any temptations that may
arise when dealing with this young person.
[87]          
It is for all the above reasons that I find that
the accused was in a position of both trust and authority towards VJ when he
had, before she turned 18 years old, touched her for a sexual purpose.
[88]          
After considering the uncontested evidence that
the accused willingly engaged in sexual touching VJ during that period leading
up to her 18th birthday, I find the accused guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of
sexual exploitation, which is count one in the indictment.
[89]          
The Crown argues further that even though the
complainant had consented to sexual activity with the accused, there is no
consent at law by operation of s. 273.1(2)(c).
[90]          
To begin, the fact that a person is in a
position of trust or authority is not, by itself, sufficient to vitiate consent
where sexual activity occurs: see R. v. Snelgrove, 2018 NLCA 59, 366
C.C.C. (3d) 164, at para. 15, aff’d 2019 SCC 16, [2019] 2 S.C.R. 98.
[91]          
A case dealing with the applicability of s.
273.1(2)(c) that has some similarity with the case at hand is the decision of R.
v. Lutoslawski, 2010 ONCA 207, 260 O.A.C. 161. In Lutoslawski, the
accused was in a position of trust as an organizer with a youth group that took
children on camping trips. He was in his late 30’s or early 40’s when he met
the 15-year-old complainant on one of these trips. While on camping trips, as
well as on other occasions, they engaged in consensual sexual relations,
including intercourse. A long-term intimate relationship ensued until it ended
when she was 19 years old. The complainant testified that during this period, she
thought she was in love with the accused. The trial judge erroneously referred
to s. 265(3)(d) (assault) instead of s. 273.1(2)(c) (sexual assault) on the
issue of whether the Crown had proved the absence of consent. The accused was
ultimately acquitted at trial. Doherty J.A., for the majority, quashed the
acquittal and directed a new trial. In doing so, he said the following, at
paras. 12 to 13:
[92]          
The British Columbia Court of Appeal decision of
R. v. M.S., 2022 BCCA 390, 421 C.C.C. (3d) 391, is also instructive on
the applicability of s. 273.1(2)(c) in cases of sexual assault. At paras. 49,
51 and 53, the court said the following:
[93]          
On the issue of the complainant’s subjective
state of mind regarding consent in sexual assault cases, the court in M.S.
had this to say, at paras. 37, 38:
[94]          
While I find that at all relevant times, the
accused occupied a position of trust and authority towards VJ, I have
ultimately concluded, despite struggling with this issue, that the Crown has
not proven beyond a reasonable doubt that there was no consent to the sexual
activity by virtue of s. 273.1(2)(c). More specifically, I am not entirely satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt, as I must be, that the accused induced or otherwise
influenced, enticed, or persuaded, either overtly or subtly, the complainant to
engage in sexual activity by abusing his position of trust or authority while
she was under his employ.
[95]          
The relevant period in count 2 is from the start
of the sexual relationship, when the complainant was a month or two shy of her
17th birthday, until September 2021 when, at the age of 21 years old, she
finally resigned from the accused’s company.
[96]          
I had the opportunity to carefully listen to and
watch the complainant testify at trial over a two-day period and I believe I developed
a good understanding of her as a person – and I find her to be both credible
and reliable. While I appreciate that she was 24 years old and testifying about
events that took place when she was much younger, I nonetheless believe I have
a good sense of what her subjective state of mind was when, at such a young
age, she decided to have, and remain in, a sexual relationship for as long as
she did with a person who was 18 years or so her senior: see M.S., at
paras. 20, 57.
[97]          
As I have already found, the sexual relationship
between the two began when VJ was unable to provide lawful consent. Thereafter,
the two quickly fell in love and settled into what was a relatively stable intimate
relationship. By all accounts, VJ appeared to be happy in that relationship -
at least for the first couple of years. While the two would often spend alone time
together late at night engaging in sexual activity at various jobsites, when I consider
all the circumstances, I am not satisfied that there is sufficient evidence to
find that the accused’s position as the VJ’s employer had any discernable
impact on the decisions she made regarding the sexual nature of their relationship.
I am instead of the view that VJ was more than capable of making decisions about
sex free from any influences that may have resulted from that employment
relationship.
[98]          
Although it is not necessary for the purpose of
my ruling to make these findings, I am nonetheless satisfied that there is no
evidence to indicate that the complainant was in any manner and at any point exploited
during the relationship or in a state of dependency vis-à-vis the
accused – a position that the defence mistakenly believed was an essential element
of both counts one and two. Instead, because of VJ’s confidence, discipline,
and maturity that stretched well beyond her youthful years, and despite the
significant age gap between herself and the accused, it was apparent that she
was able to quickly establish herself as an equal in a relationship that eventually
lasted approximately four and ½ years. The complainant also had a significant
degree of autonomy during that time she was with the accused. She mostly lived
at home with her parents and siblings, all of whom appeared to love and support
her, until she saved enough money to purchase and move into her own
house, by herself, when she was just 20 years old.
[99]          
The two spoke often of getting married, and both
participated in online training with the goal of operating the janitorial
company jointly as business partners. It was only when VJ was increasingly
exposed over the years to the accused’s failings as both a human being and a
romantic partner (abusing drugs and alcohol, anxiety, depression, emotional
abuse etc.) did she slowly start to withdraw from the relationship until she,
of her own free will, abruptly ended both that and her employment with the
accused in September 2021.
[100]      
The Crown argues that the accused abused his
position of trust and authority towards the complainant by continuing a secret,
intimate and sexual relationship with her while she was an employee. According
to the Crown, this is evident by viewing the circumstances as a whole, including
certain strongly held beliefs that the accused expressed about: (1) the
relationship being an exception to the rule, (2) that in the eyes of God, they
were married because the relationship was consummated by sex, and (3) that it
was wrong for either of them to deny the other sex. While the accused certainly
communicated these beliefs to the complainant, this in no way demonstrates that
within the context of the position of trust and authority that he held as VJ’s
employer he expressed these beliefs in a manner that may have either directly
or subtly influenced her to have sexual relations.
[101]      
The fact that the accused was VJ’s employer
played only a minor incidental role in the development, maintenance, and
eventual demise of their romantic relationship. Although only one of many
factors within the matrix of all the evidence in respect to this issue, I find
that if anything, the accused was a good employer who treated all his
employees, including VJ, fairly and without any favouritism. VJ’s rate of pay
and hours of work, for instance, appeared to have improved naturally over time
and was based, it appears, on merit and her excellent work ethic and nothing
more.
[102]      
Further, at no time did it appear that the
accused attempted to abuse or exploit the fact that VJ was, as an employee,
financially dependent on him. Considering the dynamics of the relationship, I
find insufficient evidence to demonstrate that the accused misused the
influence vested in him by virtue of the employer-employee relationship or used
personal feelings and confidence engendered by the nature of that working relationship
to secure apparent consent from VJ for sexual activities. After considering all
the circumstances, and not any specific acts or words spoken, I am convinced
that a sexual relationship would have developed between the two in the exact
same way as it did had the accused been VJ’s co-worker rather than her boss.
[103]      
I am also mindful of Doherty J.A.’s comments in Lutoslawski,
a case that has similarities to this one. Before ordering a new trial, Doherty
J.A. found, at para. 16, that while the Crown’s case was formidable, a
conviction would not necessarily have flowed from the trial judge’s factual
findings. While a very close call, I am also not entirely convinced, when
considering the whole of the circumstances, that the Crown has proven beyond a
reasonable doubt that the accused abused his position of trust and authority to
induce VJ to have sexual relations in a manner consistent with s. 273.1(2)(c).
I do so while bearing in mind the principle set out in R. v. Hutchinson,
2014 SCC 19, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 346, at para. 18:
[104]      
Accordingly, I find the accused not guilty of
count two.
[105]      
Even though I have rejected the accused’s testimony
in all areas that conflict with VJ’s testimony, including evidence that is relevant
to count three, I am still left with a reasonable doubt based on her evidence
alone. I will explain.
[106]      
As it relates to the allegation in relation to
count three, a reasonable doubt is raised in my mind due to VJ’s failure to
disclose this serious sexual assault not only once but in both of her
videotaped statements to the police. According to the complainant, she
disclosed this incident only at the preliminary hearing when she was cross
examined in this area. While VJ testified at trial that she had advised PC
Sharrow of the incident, the officer was not called as a witness nor were any
records produced to confirm VJ’s evidence on this point.
[107]      
As the trier of fact, I can accept all, some, or
none of a witnesses’ evidence. As it relates to VJ, I accept virtually all her
evidence save and except for that part related to the sexual assault that
allegedly happened after the IUD procedure. Again, the failure to disclose this
significant event until the preliminary hearing coupled with the absence of
evidence confirming that she also advised PC Sharrow of this incident raises a reasonable
doubt in my mind as to the reliability of the complainant’s version in this one
specific area.
[108]      
As a result, in the absence of other evidence
capable of enhancing the quality of VJ’s evidence, her testimony in this area falls
just short of establishing a solid foundation for a verdict of guilt.
[109]      
Accordingly, I find the accused not guilty of
count three.
[110]      
After considering all the evidence, I find the
accused guilty beyond a reasonable doubt on count one, not guilty on count two,
and not guilty on count three in the indictment.