1.      The parties have two
children, who are now 10 and 9. The children reside primarily with the
applicant, Mx Mayer Graham, and have parenting time with the respondent, Mr. Desgagne.
Despite several court orders, Mr. Desgagne has not had meaningful and
consistent parenting time with the children since August 2024.
2.      The respondent brings a
motion asking that the applicant be found in contempt. He alleges that they
failed to facilitate his parenting time from December 21, 2024, to January 4,
2025, in breach of the order of Justice Smith, dated May 3, 2024 and my order
of October 28, 2024. The respondent also seeks an order reversing the parenting
schedule.
3.      The applicant brings a motion
to appoint the Office of the Children’s Lawyer (“OCL”).
4.      The three motions were heard
on February 4, 2025. For the reasons that follow, I find that the applicant is
in contempt of the court’s orders of May 3, 2024 and October 28, 2024. I am
granting the applicant’s request for the appointment of the OCL and will ask
that this be done on an urgent basis. While I am not prepared to reverse the
parenting schedule at this stage, I will consider this measure at the
sentencing proceeding. In the meantime, the applicant is directed to provide
make-up parenting time for the respondent.
5.      The parties were married in
2016 and separated in 2018. The applicant resides in Embrun. The respondent is
a member of the Canadian Armed Forces and resides in Winnipeg, Manitoba.
6.      In 2019 and 2021, the court
issued two final orders addressing parenting and support issues between the
parties. These orders provided that the children would reside with the
applicant and have parenting time with the respondent. They also set out how
the children would travel between Winnipeg and Embrun and who would bear those
costs.
7.      In the main, the respondent
had parenting time in accordance with these orders until 2024, when the issues
giving rise to these motions arose. Since May 2024, the respondent has come
before the court five times to deal with issues involving his parenting time.
8.      At the father’s request, an urgent case
conference was scheduled on May 3, 2024. On consent of the parties, Justice
Smith rendered an order that same day (“Smith Order”), providing that the
respondent have parenting time by phone at three specific times each week. The
respondent would initiate calls to the applicant’s number, and the applicant
was required to facilitate the calls with the children. The Smith Order also
indicated that the respondent would have in-person parenting time over the
summer of 2024 and at Christmas, from December 21, 2024, to January 4, 2025.
9.      In the spring of 2024, there was a dispute
about whether the respondent was required to pay approximately $1,000, either for
child support or for travel expenses. In a series of text messages, the
applicant indicated they would cancel the father’s in-person parenting time
unless he made this payment. On July 11, 2024, the respondent brought an
enforcement motion. Justice Kauffman issued an order directing in-person
parenting time for the father in accordance with the Smith Order. He also
directed the respondent to make the payment, on a without prejudice basis.
However, Justice Kauffman concluded that the payment issue was not a basis for
the applicant to deny the respondent his parenting time.
10.                  
The summer parenting
time took place as ordered, though not without issues. On August 12, 2024, the
applicant apparently called the Winnipeg Police Service, claiming the children
were in danger. The police attended the respondent’s home, conducted a wellness
check, and reported that the children were fine.
11.                  
Between August and
October 2024, the respondent was denied any telephone parenting time with the
children. On October 18, 2024, the respondent brought another enforcement
motion. I issued a temporary order requiring the telephone ordered by Justice
Smith and imposed a fine for each missed telephone visit. In addition, my order
set out the following directions regarding the respondent’s in-person parenting
time in December:
12.                  
On November 29,
2024, the respondent brought a contempt motion, alleging that the applicant was
interfering with his phone calls with the children. Justice Champagne found
that the applicant was in breach of court orders. However, she held they were
not guilty of contempt, having technically complied with the court order
because the children spoke with their father. Justice Champagne wrote:
13.                  
Justice Champagne
granted the applicant leave to bring a motion for the appointment of the Office
of the Children’s Lawyer and gave the respondent leave to bring a motion to
change the children’s primary residence should he continue to experience
ineffective compliance with the court orders.
14.                  
Since the first
contempt motion, there have been further and significant issues with the father’s
parenting time.
15.                  
Between November 29
and before December 21, 2024 the respondent had telephone calls with the
children. The calls continued to be short and angry; as before, the children
told the respondent they did not wish to speak to him.
16.                  
The respondent
provided transcripts of his calls with the children on December 10 and 19. The
transcripts identify a voice in the background, which the respondent says
belongs to the applicant. The applicant does not deny this. On the December 19th
call, the children repeatedly stated, “We are not going to talk to you, we are
not going for Christmas.”  The applicant also spoke, telling the respondent
that the kids did not wish to visit him.
17.                  
The Smith Order
provided for in-person parenting time for the father, from December 21, 2024 to
January 4, 2025, and my order provided directions regarding how the children
would be exchanged. The respondent shared the flight details for the children’s
Christmas visit to Winnipeg as directed. The respondent arranged to travel from
Winnipeg to Ottawa to meet the children and travel back with them to Winnipeg.
18.                  
The respondent and
his counsel made several attempts to reach the applicant to coordinate the
children’s arrival at the airport.
19.                  
On December 11, 16
and 20th, counsel for the respondent emailed the mother, asking them
to confirm that they would bring the children to the airport on the morning of
December 21. The applicant did not respond to any of these emails.
20.                  
The respondent
nevertheless travelled from Winnipeg to Ottawa on December 20th. At
6:30 am on December 21, the respondent texted the applicant to confirm that
they would be at the Ottawa airport by 8 am, as the flight was at approximately
10. At 8:26, the applicant responded by saying they were in their vehicle
outside the departure area of the Ottawa airport.
21.                  
The parties
exchanged a series of text messages between 8:26 and 9:08. These exchanges are
compelling: they show the respondent pleading with the applicant and making
every effort to locate the children at the airport. The respondent telephoned
the applicant, who did not answer their phone. Mr. Desgagne went to the
departure area and texted photos showing that the applicant and the children
were not there, as the applicant had previously indicated. The respondent sent
a pin of his location and asked the applicant to send a pin of their location.
He also offered to pay for the applicant to park the vehicle so they could
bring the children inside. The
applicant replied to the text messages, but their responses were unhelpful and
uncooperative. They neither agreed to the respondent’s suggestions nor offered
any alternative solutions of their own. They simply repeated that they could
not see the respondent from where they were.
22.                  
The last text
message from the applicant was at 9:08. Assuming they were ever at the airport,
the applicant appears to have left around 9:08. In their affidavit, they
provided the following explanation:
23.                  
Significantly, the
applicant’s assertion is inconsistent with the text messages between the
parties, which show that the applicant was not available by phone and was not
in the departures area. I have considerable doubt that the applicant went to
the airport at all.
24.                  
From December 21,
2024, to early January, the respondent continued to initiate calls to the
applicant. These calls all went to voicemail and were not returned.
Consequently, the respondent had no parenting time between December 21 and January
4, 2025.
25.                  
The applicant
resumed facilitating calls on January 4, 2025, after she retained counsel.
Since then, the respondent says he has had long and meaningful conversations
with the children. He states that they have not expressed any fear or reluctance
to engage with him.
26.                  
The
applicant submits that their decisions and actions regarding the respondent’s
parenting time must be considered in context, which they say includes:
27.                  
These
concerns date from at least 2022. The applicant had ample opportunity to bring
a motion to change the parenting arrangement in light of their alleged
concerns. They did not do so. Instead, they began withholding parenting time
from the respondent two years later, in 2024. The mother’s concerns do justify
non-compliance with court orders.
28.                  
Moreover,
the evidence does not substantiate the applicant’s allegations of abuse. Their assertions are inconsistent with
the multiple agreements and consents to orders for extensive parenting times at
Christmas and over the summer period over the years, as recently as the summer
of 2024. Other
than the incident in the summer of 2022, the applicant has not referred to any
police or social service involvement with the father. They have not provided
any documents from police or social services to substantiate their allegations.
29.                  
The
applicant’s allegation that urgent intervention was required during the summer of
2022 is inconsistent with text messages exchanged between the parties at that
time. The applicant’s allegations are also contradicted by Ms. Mannix, who
submitted an affidavit. Ms. Mannix and Mr. Desgagne are now separated, although
they have a five-year-old child together. Ms. Mannix states that Mr. Desgagne
is an active parent to their child and cares for him when Ms. Mannix works in
the evening. Ms. Mannix says she has not observed Mr. Desgagne be physically or
mentally abusive towards any of his three children. Ms. Mannix says she spent
time with Mr. Desgagne and the three children almost daily during their visit
in the summer of 2024.
30.                  
The leading
authority on civil contempt is Carey v. Laiken 2015 SCC 17. The Court
explained that to find contempt, a judge must be convinced of three elements
beyond a reasonable doubt:
31.                  
Importantly, a
contempt finding is a remedy of last resort. It is a discretionary power that must be exercised cautiously
and with restraint as an enforcement tool of last resort. A judge may exercise
discretion to decline to impose a contempt finding where it would work an
injustice. As an alternative to making a contempt finding too readily, a judge
should consider other options, such as issuing a declaration that the party
breached the order or encouraging professional assistance: Valoris pour enfants et adultes des
Prescott-Russell c. K.R. et A.C., 2021 ONCA 366 at para. 41; and Moncur
v. Plante, 2021 ONCA 462 at para. 10.
32.                  
When the issue
raised on the contempt motion relates to parenting time and children, the
paramount consideration is the best interests of the children: Valoris,
supra at para. 41; and Moncur, supra at para. 10.
33.                  
There is
no dispute that the Smith Order and my order of October 28, 2024, are clear
regarding telephone parenting time. They indicate when the calls take place,
who initiates them, and the mother’s requirement to facilitate the conversation
between the respondent and the children.
34.                  
Counsel
for the applicant submitted that the orders lacked clarity about the Christmas
parenting time. While they directed the mother to “bring the children to the
airport” in time for the flight, the orders did not specify where in the
airport the children would be exchanged.
35.                  
I do not
accept this argument. The degree of specificity is not required for an order to
be clear and unambiguous. The applicant knew they were required to bring the
children to the Ottawa airport and understood what was required of them.
36.                  
The
applicant does not dispute that they had knowledge of the Smith Order and my
order of October 28th. The applicant attended the case conference
and consented to the terms of the Smith Order. They received copies of the
endorsements and orders from the court. They also attended the contempt motion
on November 29, 2024, during which both orders were discussed.
37.                  
Dealing
first with telephone parenting time, there is no dispute that from December 21
to January 4, the applicant did not accept the respondent’s calls and did not
facilitate his telephone parenting time with the children. Their explanation
for this was that the children did not wish to speak to their father.
38.                  
As
Justice MacKinnon explained in Dunn v. Shaw, 2021 ONSC 8286 at paras. 20
to 22, deliberate and willful disobedience may be inferred if a party does not
take concrete measures to apply normal parental authority to have the child
comply with a parenting order. Parents cannot simply leave the decision about
participating in parenting time up to the child. Instead, the parent has an
obligation to do all they can to require the child to comply with the parenting
order. Although the onus of proof beyond a reasonable doubt remains throughout
on the moving party to the contempt motion, the other party has both a
parenting responsibility and an evidentiary onus in responding to the contempt
motion.
39.                  
In this
case, the applicant provided no evidence to show that they applied parenting
authority or did anything at all to require or encourage their children to
speak to their father. Significantly, the applicant did not even accept or
return the respondent’s calls from December 21 to January 4. The applicant
provided no explanation for this, other than to say the children did not wish
to speak with their father.
40.                  
Justice
Champagne’s ruling had previously put the applicant on notice that they needed
to do more to ensure meaningful compliance with court orders. However, rather
than do more to ensure compliance with the orders, the applicant did less.
It is not possible to facilitate telephone parenting time if you do not
even answer the phone.
41.                  
In some
respects, this case is similar to Godard
v. Godard, 2015 ONCA
568 (CanLII),
where the Ontario Court of Appeal upheld a finding of contempt.  In that case,
the parent had also been put on notice that they were required to do more to
ensure the children complied with the parenting order. Yet Ms. Godard provided
no evidence to show that she had done anything more than encourage the
children, effectively leaving the decision concerning compliance up to them. The Court of Appeal held that, in these
circumstances, the motion judge had properly concluded that deliberate and
willful disobedience was established beyond a reasonable doubt.
42.                  
In the
case before me, I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt, that the applicant
deliberately breached the Smith Order. Their wilful disobedience can be
inferred from their failure to take steps to ensure the children’s compliance
with the parenting order. Moreover, their decision to not accept the
respondent’s calls between December 21 and January 4th actively
prevented the respondent from reaching the children. It was a willful and
deliberate breach of the orders.
43.                  
Turning next to the
Christmas parenting time, I find that the mother’s behaviour was egregious.
Knowing the respondent was travelling from Winnipeg to meet the children, the
applicant refused to confirm they would deliver the children to the airport
until after they were asked to be there. The text messages between the
parties show that the applicant made no reasonable effort to bring the children
to the airport, so they could catch their flight.
44.                  
It is not clear that
the applicant went to the airport at all. However, I cannot make that finding
beyond a reasonable doubt. Even assuming the applicant did travel to the
airport with the children, the evidence shows that they paid only the barest of
lip service to the requirements of the October court order. The applicant did
not bring the children to the airport in a meaningful way. They were late, they
refused to cooperate or assist the respondent in his efforts to locate them,
and the respondent’s photos show that they were not where they said they would
be. The applicant effectively led the father on a wild goose chase in the
minutes leading up to his return flight.
45.                  
Again, the
applicant’s willful disobedience can be inferred beyond a reasonable from their
failure to take meaningful measures to comply with the court’s order. The order
required the applicant to bring the children to the airport on time for their
flight to Winnipeg. They failed to do this in any meaningful way.
46.                  
Several
steps have already been taken to address the applicant’s non-compliance with
court orders:
47.                  
Notwithstanding
all of this, the applicant continued a pattern of non-compliance. Until
recently and despite the court’s interventions, the applicant’s non-compliance
became increasingly flagrant. They went from paying lip service to telephone
parenting time, to being told to do more, to not answering the respondent’s calls
at all. Their behaviour leading up to the Christmas parenting time was particularly
egregious. Moreover, the applicant has shown little insight into their
behaviour.
48.                  
I have
considered the remedies available under section 1(8) of the Family Law Rules.
Many of these measures have been attempted, others do not readily apply to the
applicant’s circumstances.
49.                  
As the
hearing of this contempt motion approached, the mother began meaningfully
complying with the order for telephone parenting time. The applicant now states
that they are fully committed to complying with court orders.
50.                  
The
respondent submits that little weight should be given to this: it is too little
too late. Moreover, this is part of a pattern where the applicant complies with
orders in the face of imminent proceedings, but their non-compliance resumes once
court proceedings conclude.
51.                  
I have
considered this carefully. While the applicant demonstrated compliance with
telephone parenting time since early January, I have little confidence that
their compliance will continue. They have shown no insight into the impact of
their behaviour. Instead, they have attempted to justify it, relying on implausible
arguments and inconsistent evidence.
52.                  
In
considering whether a finding of contempt is appropriate in this case as a last
resort, I have been guided by the best interests of the children. The children
have been placed in the center of their parents’ conflict and the applicant has
used them as pawns. Clearly, this is not in their best interest and it must
stop. Until at least early January and in the face of multiple court orders,
the applicant’s non-compliance became increasingly egregious. The children have
endured the fallout.
53.                  
Given the
applicant’s pattern of troubling behaviour and considering the children’s best
interests, I believe a finding of contempt is necessary.  I have no confidence
that alternative measures would bring a stop to the applicant’s egregious
behaviour and their non-compliance with court orders.
54.                  
The
applicant seeks to appoint OCL so that the children’s wishes can be heard and
considered. The respondent objects to the appointment, not because he does not
wish for the children’s views to be considered, but because he believes they
have been influenced and manipulated by the applicant to the point that their
real views cannot be discerned. Also, he does not wish to cause further delays
in what has already been a lengthy series of proceedings.
55.                  
I agree
that these are concerns. However, in the circumstances and given the
significant remedies the respondent is seeking, it will be important to have information
about the children’s views. The OCL is appointed on an urgent basis. In
assessing the children’s views, it will be important for the OCL to consider
the extent to which they have been influenced by the applicant.
56.                  
The
respondent submits that it is in the children’s best interests that their
primary residence be reversed due to the applicant’s chronic lack of compliance
with court orders and inability to support the father’s relationship with the
children. While I have serious concerns about the applicant’s behaviour and
lack of insight, I am not prepared to reverse primary residence at this time. However,
I will consider this issue further at the sentencing stage.
57.                  
In the
meantime, in addition to his scheduled telephone parenting time, the father is
entitled to make-up parenting time with the children. That parenting time will
take place as follows:
58.                  
For the
reasons provided, I find the applicant in contempt of two court orders. The OCL
is asked to act for the children on an urgent basis.
59.                  
A return
date will be scheduled in early April to receive an update regarding the OCL
and to set a date for sentencing. The parties and their counsel may attend
virtually.
60.                  
The
parties made cost submissions at the hearing of the motion. In the
circumstances and given the finding of contempt, the applicant is ordered to
pay the respondent’s costs of this motion on a substantial indemnity basis. Payment
is to be made within 60 days.