[1]         
The
Respondents purchased a new residential property on Fiddlers Green Road prior
to selling their home on Chancery Road. To close on Fiddlers Green, the Respondents
required bridge financing.
[2]         
The
Applicants were private lenders who advanced $460,000.00 to the Respondents for
the bridge financing.
[3]         
The
bridge financing was secured by two second mortgages registered against
Chancery Road and Fiddlers Green.
[4]         
The
Respondents sold Chancery Road with a closing date set for June 2024.
[5]         
Although
the sale of Chancery Road did not close, the Applicants’ two mortgages, were
discharged.
[6]         
In
this application, the Applicants sought leave to register two new mortgages on
the same lands and on the same terms[1].
[7]         
In
the alternative, the Applicants sought an Order directing the Land Registrar to
re-intestate the two earlier mortgages and to delete the corresponding
discharges.
[8]         
The
only question put to this court was whether rectification or re registration
was to be granted to the Applicants.
[9]         
For
reasons that will follow, neither form of relief was appropriate.
[10]      
The
events that led up to this application were as follows:
[11]      
The
Applicants relied on the Land Titles Act (“LTA”) in support of the rectification
of the registers for the Chancery and Fiddlers Green properties.
[12]      
Section
159 of the LTA provides that if the court “…has decided that a person is
entitled to an estate, right or interest in or to registered land or a charge
and as a consequence of the decision the court is of opinion that a
rectification of the register is required, the court may make an order directing
the register to be rectified in such manner as is considered just.”
[13]      
Section
160 of the LTA further provides that “…if a person is aggrieved by an entry
made, or by the omission of an entry from the register…the person aggrieved…may
apply to the court for an order that the register be rectified, and the court
may either refuse the application….or may, if satisfied of the justice of the
case, make an order for the rectification of the register.”
[14]      
The Applicants argued that the court should exercise its equitable
discretion to correct the situation and restore the parties to their original
bargain, i.e. a loan of money in exchange for the security of a registered
mortgage. They relied upon the decision in Tiao v Leone et al 2016 ONSC 3015
as support for the proposition that rectification under sections 159 and 160
could be ordered to reverse a mistake with respect to the discharge of a
mortgage. They also relied upon Central Guaranty Trust Co v Dixdale Mortgage
Investment Corp 1994 CanLII 1429 (CA) to address the scenario wherein the registration
of a discharge was because of a mortgagee’s own negligence. In Central
Guarantee the court found that if they did not allow for rectification, unjust
enrichment would ensue with a corresponding windfall. The Bank of Nova
Scotia v Niemira 2023 ONSC 1380 followed the reasoning in Central
Guaranty and also concluded that even in a situation where the bank negligently
discharged its own mortgage in error, this would not preclude the court from
correcting that error and restoring the banks priority as mortgagee on the
basis of an unjust enrichment analysis.
[15]      
The Respondents argued that the Applicants’ own lawyer was
fully aware of the Purchasers’ view that the agreement was at an end and the
contrary position taken by Gatto but elected to register the discharges. The Respondents
argued that given this knowledge, there was neither error/mistake nor
negligence in registering the discharges. They also argued that there was no
statutory or equitable basis to grant the relief sought under the LTA. In
support of this argument they referenced section 78 of the LTA wherein absent
fraud or an error by the Registrar, the discharges were presumptively valid.
[16]      
Additionally, the Respondents argued that the Applicants
could not be viewed as “aggrieved” pursuant to section 160, as the discharges
were registered, after they received full payment.
[17]      
The Respondents (and Applicants) referenced the decision in
Sylvan Lake Golf & Country Club Ltd. v Performance Industries Ltd. 2002 SCC 19 (CanLII), 2002
SCC19 (Can LII) in which the court wrote “The court’s task in a
rectification case is corrective, not speculative. It is to restore the parties
to their original bargain, not to rectify a belatedly recognized error of
judgment by one party or the other.”
[18]      
When
this application was commenced, the Applicants feared that if the closing funds
were returned to the Purchasers (including the portion that was earmarked to
discharge their second mortgages) then the Applicants would neither have their
money nor any security for their loan.
[19]      
At
the hearing, the court was advised that circumstances had changed since this
application had started. An agreement had been reached between the Respondents
and the original Purchasers. In that agreement, all closing funds (including the
funds originally tendered to discharge of the subject second mortgages) were to
be returned to the Purchasers, however, the Respondents were using their
own funds to pay back the portion representing the original second mortgage payout.
The original funds for the second mortgage payout remained under the control of
the Applicants’ lawyer, in an interest-bearing account.
[20]      
With
this change of circumstances and with funds being held by the Applicants’ own
lawyer, there was no longer a need to rectify the register for the principal purpose
of providing security for the loan. The only remaining purpose of rectification
would be to effectively revive the original terms of the loan, the most
significant of which would be to immediately increase the interest rate to 18%
and to put the Respondents into a position of default.
[21]      
The
evidence of the Applicant Truong summed things up when he stated that he considered
“the deal to be done” and further stated that he had not wanted to return the mortgage
payout, but did so, at the request of Chepil. From this evidence we see that in
the eyes of the Applicant the Respondents had fulfilled the terms of the mortgage
loan. There was nothing more for the Respondents to do, the agreement had come
to an end.
[22]      
To
summarize, Applicants provided a discharge statement, they received the exact amount
they needed to discharge their mortgages and in fact registered the discharges.
The fact that they later voluntarily placed those same funds into an interest-bearing
account at the request of their lawyer, is of no moment.
[23]      
On
these facts, Section 159 of the LTA did not assist the Applicants because as
noted earlier, it would be unjust to order a rectification of the register to
provide the Applicants with security to which they were no longer entitled.
Additionally under section 160, the Applicants were not aggrieved by the
discharges as they received and continued to hold discharge funds that were
accruing interest, here again it would be unjust to order a rectification.
[24]      
I
would add that the cases relied upon by the Applicants were distinguishable as
far as the Respondents in this case could not be said to have been unjustly
enriched in any way.
[25]      
For
the foregoing reasons, this application for rectification of the register or
reregistration of mortgages is dismissed.
[26]      
If
the parties cannot agree on costs of this application, the Respondents shall
deliver their costs submissions of no more than 2 pages, double spaced, (not
including offers to settle and bills of costs) within 14 days of the date of
release of this decision.
[27]      
The
Applicants shall deliver their costs submission, also of no more than 2 pages,
double spaced (not including offers to settle and bills of costs) within 7 days
thereafter.
[28]      
If
required, the Respondent shall deliver any reply submissions, of no more than 1
page, double spaced within 3 days thereafter.
[29]      
If
a submission is not delivered within the aforenoted time frame, the party who had
the opportunity to make it, will be deemed to take no position.