[1]              
In this Simplified Procedure action, the
plaintiff seeks damages arising from a failed real estate transaction.  In
September 2022, the defendant was unable to fulfill her contractual obligation to
purchase the plaintiff’s residential property (“the Property”) for the agreed
upon price of $885,000. The plaintiff ultimately sold the Property for
$830,000.
[2]              
The plaintiff claims damages of $56,917.  That amount is
comprised of the following components:
[3]              
The defendant acknowledges that the plaintiff is entitled to
reasonable damages.  The defendant alleges that the plaintiff sold
the Property for an unreasonably low price and therefore failed to mitigate her
damages.
[4]              
The defendant forfeited her $25,000 deposit, as
was required pursuant to the terms of the Agreement of Purchase and Sale between
the parties (“the Agreement”).  The defendant does not dispute the
plaintiff’s entitlement to the additional carrying costs and the legal fees
incurred for the failed transaction.  The defendant’s position
is that the plaintiff’s damages are more than adequately addressed by the
defendant’s forfeiture of the $25,000 deposit (which amount the plaintiff has
received).
[5]              
The parties agree that there is no genuine issue
requiring a trial; the matter may be determined by motion for summary judgment.
[6]              
In support of her claim for damages, the plaintiff
relies on an affidavit from her real estate agent (“the McAfee affidavit” and
“Mr. McAfee”, respectively).  Mr. McAfee was the plaintiff’s real estate agent
for both the original listing and the re-listing of the Property following the
defendant’s breach of her contractual obligation.
[7]              
The parties disagree as to the category of witnesses
into which Mr. McAfee falls.  The plaintiff asks the court to treat Mr. McAfee
as a participant expert and accept his evidence without a Form 53
acknowledgment of expert’s duty.  The defendant submits that the McAfee
affidavit includes opinion evidence.  The defendant asks the court to exclude
the opinion evidence of Mr. McAfee because the plaintiff did not comply with
Rule 53.
[8]              
The court must therefore determine the following
preliminary issue: Is Mr. McAfee a participant expert?
[9]              
The substantive issues to be determined are,
[10]          
I start with the preliminary issue regarding Mr. McAfee’s potential
status as a participant expert.
[11]          
 The McAfee affidavit, sworn in February 2024, contains 19 paragraphs
and, with exhibits, is 63 pages long.  In his affidavit, Mr. McAfee,
[12]          
For the following reasons, Mr. McAfee falls within the category of a participant
expert.
[13]          
First, Mr. McAfee has “special skill, knowledge, training or experience”
within the meaning of Westerhof v. Gee Estate, (2015) ONCA 206, 2015 ONCA 206 (CanLII), 124 O.R.
(3d) 721, at para. 60.  Not only did Mr. McAfee have six years of experience as
a realtor in 2022, when he was involved in the listing and re-listing of the
property.  He had specific knowledge of and experience in residential real
estate in Kanata, Ontario, where the Property is situated.
[14]          
Second, Mr.  McAfee was not retained by the plaintiff after the sale of
the Property to express opinions regarding what had transpired. His evidence,
including his opinions where expressed, are based on his “observation of or
participation in the events at issue”:  see Westerhof, at para. 60.  For
example, Mr. McAfee explains the dynamics of the residential real estate market
during the relevant period (spring, summer, and fall of 2022).  As another
example, Mr. McAfee compares the Property to other properties in the same area
of Kanata.  He does so to explain the basis for his recommendations over time regarding
the listing price for the Property.
[15]          
Third, Mr. McAfee formed his opinion regarding the listing price and
whether offers should be accepted or rejected “as part of the ordinary exercise
of his skill, knowledge, training and experience when observing or
participating” in the events at issue:  see Westerhof, at para. 60.
[16]          
Mr. McAfee’s evidence about the steps taken to re-list and sell the Property,
after the defendant failed to close, is admissible as the evidence of a participant
expert.
[17]          
The Agreement is dated June 13, 2022.  The original closing date
stipulated therein is September 1, 2022.  At the defendant’s request, and in
accordance with the terms of the Agreement, the closing date was extended to
September 29, 2022.  The Amended Agreement of Purchase and Sale, stipulating
the revised closing date, is dated August 11, 2022.
[18]          
On August 24, 2022, the defendant’s solicitor informed the plaintiff’s
solicitor that the defendant (a) was unable to secure the financing she
required to close the transaction, and 
(b) would not be in a position to close the transaction or to fulfil her
obligations pursuant to the Amended Agreement of Purchase and Sale.
[19]          
In response, and again through the parties’ respective solicitors, the
plaintiff informed the defendant that she was in anticipatory breach of the
Amended Agreement of Purchase and Sale.  On August 29, 2022, the defendant
waived tender for the transaction.
[20]          
At paragraphs 7 to 17 of his affidavit, Mr. McAfee discusses the steps
taken between late August and mid-October 2022 to re-list and sell the Property. 
Those steps include the following steps:
[21]          
In his affidavit, Mr. McAfee describes that the Ottawa market, including
Kanata, had “softened” between June 2022 (when the plaintiff accepted the defendant’s
offer) and September 2022 (when the plaintiff was again trying to sell the
Property).  Mr. McAfee explains that, as a result of the softened market,
properties were both selling for less and remaining on the market longer than
they had been in the spring and early summer of 2022.
[22]          
The only evidence upon which the defendant relies regarding the issue of
mitigation of damages is the following three paragraphs from her responding
affidavit:
[23]          
The defendant does not rely on evidence from her realtor or from an expert
retained for the purpose of this proceeding.
[24]          
The defendant did not cross-examine Mr. McAfee on his affidavit. The defendant
also did not cross-examine Andrew Boyd on his affidavit (“the Boyd affidavit”).
 The Boyd affidavit includes minimal evidence regarding the re-listing and sale
of the Property in the late summer and early fall of 2022.  The vast majority
of the evidence on which the plaintiff relies regarding mitigation of damages
is found in the McAfee affidavit.
[25]          
The onus is on the defendant to prove that the plaintiff’s efforts to
mitigate her damages were unreasonable: 100 Main Street Ltd. v. W.B.
Sullivan Construction Ltd. (1978) 1978 CanLII 1630 (ON CA), 88 DLR (3d) 1, 20 O.R. (2d) 401 (ON CA).  The evidence upon
which the defendant relies (i.e., the three paragraphs quoted above from her
affidavit) is given no weight whatsoever.
[26]          
The defendant chose not to cross-examine either Mr. McAfee or Mr. Boyd.  The
defendant chose not to attempt, or obtain, through cross-examination,
admissions, acknowledgements, or other evidence that might detract from the
credibility or reliability of one or both of Mr. McAfee and Mr. Boyd.
[27]          
The defendant has not met her onus regarding the defence of failure to
mitigate.  I reject that defence.  All that remains to be determined are the
damages to which the plaintiff is entitled.
[28]          
Based on Mr. McAfee’s evidence, I find that the plaintiff acted in a
timely and reasonable manner in her efforts to re-list and sell the Property
after being informed that the defendant would be unable to close on September
29, 2022.  Within less than a month after being so informed, the plaintiff
entered into an Agreement of Purchase and Sale with the ultimate purchaser of
the Property.  The Property was sold, and the transaction completed, within six
weeks of the defendant informing the plaintiff that she was unable to secure
the financing she required to fulfil her obligations pursuant to the Agreement.
[29]          
Leaving aside the alleged failure to mitigate (not so found in any
event), there is no evidence to support a finding that the damages claimed are
in any way unreasonable.
[30]          
The plaintiff’s damages are assessed in the total amount of $56,917.
[31]          
The plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment is granted.  The defendant
shall pay the plaintiff a total of $56,917 in damages.
[32]          
The defendant is entitled to a credit for the $25,000 deposit forfeited
and released to the plaintiff, pursuant to a court order, in the latter half of
2024.
[33]          
The plaintiff is entitled to pre-judgment interest pursuant to the Courts
of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C. 43.
[34]          
There is no evidence before the court of the amount of pre-judgment interest
accrued as of the date of this endorsement.  The date on which the $25,000 was
released to the plaintiff is relevant to the calculation of pre-judgment
interest.
[35]          
Given the modest monetary amounts involved, the court encourages the
parties to agree upon the amount of pre-judgment interest accrued and to which
the plaintiff is entitled.
[36]          
The plaintiff is also entitled to post-judgment interest pursuant to the
Courts of Justice Act.
[37]          
As the successful party on the motion for summary judgment, the plaintiff
is presumptively entitled to her reasonable costs of the motion and the action.
 There is nothing arising from the substantive decision that leads me to conclude
that the presumption in that regard has been rebutted.  The plaintiff is
entitled to her reasonable costs of the motion and the action.
[38]          
The plaintiff requests that costs be awarded on the partial indemnity
scale in the amount of $16,768 (fees, disbursements and HST).
[39]          
The defendant asks the court to consider the quantum involved, her March
2024 offer (release of the $25,000 deposit and transfer of the action to the
Small Claims Court), and the partial indemnity costs of $5,920 (fees,
disbursements, and HST) particularized in the defendant’s costs outline.
[40]          
The damages claimed and awarded are in excess of the $50,000 monetary
jurisdiction of the Small Claims Court.  The release of the $25,000 and the
credit to the defendant for that amount do not bring the action within the
jurisdiction of the Small Claims Court.  The plaintiff acted reasonably by
proceeding with her claim in this court under the Simplified Procedure.
[41]          
The hourly rate charged by the plaintiff’s lawyer is reasonable given
his level of experience.  That said, a less experienced lawyer could have
handled the litigation.  The litigation was not complex and did not require a
lawyer with more than 15 years’ experience.  The plaintiff is within her right
to retain an experienced lawyer.  The exercise of that right does not
necessarily entitle the plaintiff to costs arising from that choice.
[42]          
The number of hours docketed on the file is excessive.  For example,
more than 14 hours were docketed for correspondence and telephone
communications and more than 4.5 hours to address undertakings.
[43]          
I fix the plaintiff’s fees at $9,000 on the partial indemnity scale.  To
that amount, I add HST of $1,170.  The disbursements claimed in the amount of
$1,670 (incl. HST) are reasonable.
[44]          
The defendant shall pay the plaintiff her costs, on the partial
indemnity scale, fixed in the amount of $11,840 inclusive of fees,
disbursements and applicable HST.