[1]              
Dwaine Graham took the life of 24 year old Noran
Leslie-Durrant, by stabbing him with a broken golf club.
[2]              
Mr. Graham was originally charged with second degree
murder.  However, Crown counsel proceeded on a fresh indictment charging
manslaughter, to which Mr. Graham pleaded guilty.
[3]              
Crown and defence counsel jointly submit that Mr.
Graham should be sentenced to 9 years’ imprisonment, less pre-trial custody.
[4]              
Late in the afternoon of Friday June 17, 2022, Noran
Leslie-Durrant went to a house in King Township.  The residence was associated
to the mother of Dwaine Graham. There, Mr. Leslie-Durrant and Mr. Graham got
into an altercation.
[5]              
Paul Kendrick, who was the boyfriend of Mr. Graham’s
mother, stood between the two men and tried to break up the fight. Mr. Graham
yelled and screamed at Mr. Leslie-Durrant, who was not saying anything. Mr.
Kendrick told Mr. Graham to stop.  Instead, Mr. Graham picked up a golf club
and broke it. It ended up in two pieces.
[6]              
Mr. Graham lunged toward Mr. Leslie-Durrant, with one
half of the club in his hand.  Mr. Leslie-Durrant was unarmed. Mr. Kendrick
raised his arm to block Mr. Graham. The golf club penetrated Mr. Kendrick’s arm
and came out the other side.  Mr. Kendrick pulled the club out of his arm.  He
was bleeding profusely.  He left the room briefly to attend to his wound.
[7]              
In the one to two minutes that Mr. Kendrick was gone,
Mr. Graham stabbed the still unarmed Mr. Leslie-Durrant in the chest with the
broken golf club.
[8]              
Mr. Kendrick returned to the room to find Mr.
Leslie-Durrant sitting on the floor against the bed, and asking for water.
[9]              
At 5:27 p.m. Mr. Graham left the residence in a stolen
vehicle. His girlfriend, Payton-Rose Biggar, and Mr. Kendrick went with him.
They drove to the home of a friend of Mr. Kendrick, to get assistance for his
wound.
[10]          
At 5:36 p.m. the police were called to the scene of the
stabbing by a neighbour.  When the officers arrived at the house, the neighbour
was there with Mr. Graham’s mother. The house was in complete disarray, with
rotting food, piles of clothing, and broken items scattered throughout.
[11]          
The police found Mr. Leslie-Durrant in a bedroom,
seated on the floor with his back against the bed and his head laying on a
mattress.  He wore only his underwear.  He was unresponsive. EMS attended soon
after, but despite their efforts Mr. Leslie-Durrant was pronounced deceased.
[12]          
Post-mortem examination later revealed the cause of Mr.
Leslie-Durrant’s death to be a penetrating stab wound to the chest. It ruptured
a major coronary artery that supplied blood to the heart. The injury caused
internal bleeding into the left chest cavity, as well as heart dysfunction due
to lack of blood supply to the heart.
[13]          
The night following the stabbing, Mr. Graham and Ms.
Biggar drove in the stolen vehicle to the home of his father and stepmother in
South River.  Mr. Graham’s father told him to hide out there for the weekend,
that they would get him and Ms. Biggar some money, and then they could go. When
the police came to a neighbouring home, Mr. Graham’s father hid him in his
basement.  Mr. Graham burned his blood-stained clothing in a barrel on the
property. His father bought him drugs during his stay.
[14]          
Mr. Graham and Ms. Biggar remained in South River until
June 22, 2022. That afternoon, while driving the stolen vehicle, Mr. Graham was
involved in a fail to remain collision in Huntsville. Several hours later, the
couple left the stolen vehicle in East Gwillimbury. Ms. Biggar’s mother picked
them up and drove Mr. Graham to a York Regional Police station where he was
arrested.
[15]          
No Victim Impact Statements were tendered by Crown
counsel.  I was advised that Mr. Leslie-Durrant’s family members found it too
difficult to provide that information to the court.
[16]          
Mr. Graham is now 36 years old.  He has a prior
criminal record dating back to 2015. It includes convictions for assault,
aggravated assault, uttering threats, flight from police, and failing to comply
with court orders.
[17]          
Although a Gladue report was ordered at Mr.
Graham’s request, an Indigenous background could not be substantiated. As a
result, no report was forthcoming. Mr. Graham instructed his counsel that he
wished to proceed to sentencing without a report.
[18]          
Information about Mr. Graham’s background was provided
by defence counsel. Mr. Graham was at one point diagnosed with ADHD. He has
difficulty reading and writing.  He became addicted to fentanyl when he was in
his 20s. His criminal record is related to his addiction. His girlfriend having
died of a fentanyl overdose, I am told that Mr. Graham appreciates the need to
address his addiction.
[19]          
Mr. Graham has had some employment in landscaping, and
may be able to do that kind of work again in the future.
[20]          
Mr. Graham has been in custody since June 22, 2022, but
on August 7, 2024, he began serving a sentence on another matter. Accordingly,
his pre-trial custody is limited to 778 real days.
[21]          
In his remarks at the conclusion of the sentencing
hearing, Mr. Graham expressed that he had not intended to take Mr.
Leslie-Durrant’s life when the fight began.
[22]          
Crown and defence counsel jointly submit that Mr.
Graham should be sentenced to 9 years in jail, less his available pre-trial
custody credited at one and a half to one. They agree that the sentence should
be ordered to run concurrent to the 12 month sentence he is currently serving,
which was imposed on August 7, 2024.  They agree that there should be a DNA
order, a s. 109 weapons prohibition order for life, and a s. 743.21
non-communication order in respect of any member of Mr. Leslie-Durrant’s
family. Counsel submit that the sentence they jointly suggest takes into
account the aggravating factors, including that Mr. Graham used a weapon against
an unarmed man, he fled without doing anything to assist Mr. Leslie-Durrant,
and he has a prior criminal record, as well as the mitigating factors, which
include his guilty plea, and the harsh conditions of his pre-trial custody.
[23]          
The Criminal Code (“the Code”) sets out a number of
principles of sentencing that govern a judge’s determination of the appropriate
sentence in any given case.
[24]          
Section 718 provides that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to
protect society and to contribute to respect for the law and the maintenance of
a just, peaceful and safe society. This is achieved by the imposition of just
sanctions that have one or more of the following objectives:  the denunciation
of unlawful conduct and the harm done to victims or the community, deterrence
both general and specific, the separation of the offender from society where
necessary, rehabilitation, reparation for harm done to victims or the
community, and promotion of a sense of responsibility in offenders and
acknowledgment of the harm done to victims or the community.
[25]          
Section 718.1 provides that a sentence must be proportionate to the
gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender. The
Supreme Court of Canada reiterated in R. v. Friesen, 2020 SCC 9, that
proportionality is the fundamental principle of sentencing.
Proportionality is determined on an individualized basis, in that the sentence
must reflect the gravity of the offence, the offender’s degree of
responsibility, and the unique circumstances of each case:  see, R. v.
Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64.
[26]          
Section 718.2 provides that a sentence should be increased or decreased
to account for any aggravating and mitigating circumstances. It sets out
various aggravating factors. It also requires that a sentence be similar to
those imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar
circumstances, that an offender not be deprived of liberty if less restrictive
sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances, and that all available
sanctions other than imprisonment that are reasonable in the circumstances and
consistent with the harm done to victims or the community be considered.
[27]          
In every case, the determination of a fit sentence is a
fact-specific exercise, not a purely mathematical calculation: see, Lacasse, at para. 58. As the Supreme Court of Canada put it in R. v. Ferguson,
2008 SCC 6, at paragraph 15, “The appropriateness of a sentence is a
function of the purpose and principles of sentencing set out in ss. 718 to
718.2 of the Criminal Code as applied to the facts that led to the
conviction.”  The gravity of the offence, the offender’s degree of
responsibility, the specific circumstances of the case, and the circumstances
of the offender all must be taken into account by the sentencing judge:  see, Lacasse,
at paras. 58 and 143.
[28]          
Under s. 236 of the Code, the maximum sentence for manslaughter
is life imprisonment.
[29]          
Manslaughter is a serious offence because it involves the taking of a
life, and ordinarily attracts a lengthy sentence:  see, R.
v. Head, [1985] O.J. No. 153 (C.A.).
However, as noted by the Court of Appeal for Ontario in R. v. Grandine, 2022 ONCA 368, manslaughter encompasses a range of conduct
from almost accident to almost murder, and so the caselaw reflects a wide range
of sentence.
[30]          
The Court of Appeal for Ontario directed in R. v. Simcoe, 2002 CanLII 5352 (ON CA), [2002]
O.J. No. 884, that to arrive at the appropriate sentence in a particular
case of manslaughter, the sentencing judge must consider the context in which
the manslaughter occurred, meaning the case-specific circumstances of the
offence and the offender. This was echoed in R. v. Devaney (2006), 2006 CanLII 33666 (ON CA), 213
C.C.C. (3d) 264 (Ont. C.A.), where the Court abandoned the concept of
sentencing based on subcategories of manslaughter, in favour of a case-by-case
comparison of circumstances.
[31]          
The aggravating circumstances in this case include:
[32]          
In mitigation I consider that:
[33]          
This is an extremely serious offence, and Mr. Graham’s
moral culpability is substantial. He took the life of an unarmed young man by
using a weapon against him. He then callously and cowardly left his victim to
die.  Thinking only of himself, and knowing that he would be wanted by the
police, he remained at large for several days. It appears that he learned
little from jail sentences imposed on him in the past, including for crimes of
violence. His untreated addiction to fentanyl calls into question his ability
to be a productive member of society in the future. His rehabilitative
potential is uncertain at best.  This is a case in which denunciation and
deterrence both of others and of Mr. Graham must be the paramount objectives of
sentencing.
[34]          
Crown and defence counsel jointly ask that I impose a
jail sentence of 9 years. In R. v. Anthony-Cook, 2016 SCC 43, the
Supreme Court of Canada instructed trial judges that a joint recommendation as
to sentence should be rejected only where it would bring the administration of justice
into disrepute or would otherwise be contrary to the public interest. This is
not such a case. The joint submission made to me by Ms. Cadman and Mr.
Willschick falls within the range of sentence of 8 to 12 years’ imprisonment
referenced by the Court of Appeal for Ontario in R. v. Clarke, (2003),
2003 CanLII 28199 (ON CA), 172 O.A.C. 133, a case of the stabbing of an unarmed victim that featured a
number of aggravating factors.  See also R. v. Mohamed, 2023 ONSC 6294,
and R. v. Lee, 2021 ONSC 7672.
[35]          
Mr. Graham, please stand.
[36]          
I accept the joint submission made by your lawyer and
Crown counsel. I sentence you to 9 years in jail (108 months), less
pre-sentence custody of 778 days that I treat at one and a half to one as 39
months, leaving a sentence still to serve of 5 years and 9 months (69 months),
concurrent to the sentence being served.
[37]          
There is a DNA order, a s. 109(3) weapons prohibition
order for life, and a s. 743.21 non-communication order in respect of the
persons named by Crown counsel.