[1]                    
S.J. was charged with having sexually assaulted
his former employee and friend, M., contrary to section 271 of the Criminal
Code.  The offence allegedly occurred at Milton, Ontario, at the home
of the accused, on October 9, 2011.
[2]                    
The evidence and submissions at trial were
completed in less than one full day of court time. Two witnesses testified
– the complainant and the accused.  In submissions, Ms. O’Marra, quite
professionally and in accordance with the highest standard expected of a Crown
prosecutor, invited this Court to enter an acquittal.  This Court did
so.  A verdict of not guilty was rendered, with brief reasons to follow
for the benefit of both the complainant and the accused.
[3]                    
Now 34 years of age, the complainant worked for
the accused’s construction and landscaping company.  That company was
operated from the accused’s home in Milton.  The complainant lived in the
basement of that home.
[4]                    
The complainant continued to live and work with
the accused until well, in fact years, after the alleged offence date.
[5]                    
The complainant testified that, late in the
evening on the date in question, after drinking alcohol with the accused in the
living room on the main floor of the accused’s bungalow residence in Milton,
the complainant became “incapacitated”.  The accused took the complainant
downstairs and put him on the bed in the basement.  The accused then
“raped” the complainant; the accused penetrated the complainant’s anus with his
penis.  The next day, the complainant was bleeding from his anus as he
went to the bathroom.  As he was not sure what happened, he asked the
accused to take him to the hospital, which was done.
[6]                    
According to the complainant, years later,
sometime in 2017, he and his partner travelled from Atlantic Canada to Milton
to confront the accused.  The three of them sat in the backyard of the
accused’s home in Milton.  The complainant told the accused that he had
taken advantage of the complainant while he was incapacitated.  The
accused did not appear to be shocked by the accusation.  The accused did
not outright deny the allegation.  The accused replied by saying something
like “I don’t know; I was drinking too”.
[7]                    
The accused testified that he may have consumed
alcohol with the complainant at his home on the night in question.  He
never took the complainant to the hospital.  He never “raped” the
complainant.  He never touched the complainant inappropriately or
sexually.
[8]                    
According to the accused, there was a time,
years later, that the complainant visited his home in Milton.  The
complainant was alone (and not with any partner).  During the discussion
that was had on that occasion, the complainant alleged that the accused had
“groped” him on the stairs.  The accused denied that.  There were no
other allegations made by the complainant.
[9]                    
The accused is presumed to be innocent of the
charge.  He has no burden to prove anything.  The burden of proof
rests exclusively with the prosecution.  The standard of proof is
relatively high – proof beyond a reasonable doubt.  Proof beyond a
reasonable doubt means something more than proof of probable or likely
guilt.  Unless and until this Court is sure of the guilt of the
accused, S.J. is entitled to an acquittal.
[10]                
The pathway to verdict in a criminal trial is
not to be short-circuited by having the judge simply ask, who was more
credible, the complainant or the accused?
[11]                
The accused in our case steadfastly denied that he
touched the complainant in a sexual manner.  If I accept that evidence,
the accused shall be found not guilty.  If I do not necessarily accept
that evidence, then I must ask whether it leaves me with a reasonable doubt,
and if so, the accused must be found not guilty.  If I reject the evidence
of the accused such that I neither accept it nor find that it leaves me with a
reasonable doubt, then I must ask whether the evidence at trial that I do
accept has met the burden of proving the charge beyond a reasonable
doubt.  If not, then the accused shall be found not guilty.  If so,
then (and only then) should the accused be found guilty of the offence.  R.
v. W.(D.), [1991] 1 S.C.R. 742, 1991 CanLII 93 (S.C.C.).
[12]                
The Crown filed the following decision of the
Manitoba Court of Appeal: R. v. Perrone, [2014] M.J. No. 217, 2014 MBCA
74, which decision quotes extensively from authorities from the Court of Appeal
for Ontario.
[13]                
Set out below are paragraphs 25-29 of the
decision in Perrone, supra.
[14]                
The Crown conceded in brief oral submissions
that there was no reason for this Court to reject the evidence of the
accused.  I agree.
[15]                
The accused was a good witness at trial. 
He answered all of the questions put to him, by both counsel, very directly,
very succinctly, and very clearly.  He, without hesitation, made several
admissions against his own interest: that he could have easily returned home
from dinner with his father in time to sit with and share some drinks with the
complainant on the night in question; that it was common for him to drink
scotch with the complainant; and that he may very well have drank alcohol with
the complainant on the night in question, as just three examples of those
admissions.
[16]                
The accused’s denials were unequivocal and
completely unshaken.
[17]                
I accept the evidence of the accused.  On
that basis, he had to be acquitted of the offence.
[18]                
But even if I had not accepted the evidence of
the accused and not been left with a reasonable doubt of his guilt because of
that evidence, this Court would still have acquitted the accused.  I would
have concluded that it was unsafe to find the accused guilty because of serious
reliability concerns that infect the evidence of the complainant.
[19]                
It must be observed that:
[20]                
I have no doubt that the complainant genuinely
and sincerely believes that he was sexually assaulted by the accused.  In
light of the above, however, I have a reasonable doubt as to whether it, in
fact, happened.
[21]                
These are the reasons why the Court agreed with
the Crown’s invitation to find the accused not guilty of the offence.