[1]         
Mr. Elawad is charged with:
[2]         
The Crown did not proceed with counts 2 and 3. Mr.
Elawad pled not guilty to the remaining counts.
[3]         
The police assert that on July 5, 2022, they engaged
in a traffic stop of Mr. Elawad because the licence plates on the vehicle he
was driving were obscured contrary to s. 13(2) of the Highway Traffic Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. H.8 (the “HTA”). After some interaction between the
officers and Mr. Elawad, the officers demanded Mr. Elawad’s keys. When the
demand was made, Mr. Elawad fled on foot. The police assert that the vehicle
was abandoned and that they were entitled to remove the vehicle and conduct an
inventory search. They had the vehicle towed to an authorized tow facility where
they conducted an inventory search and found a handgun under a blanket or
sweater on the floor behind the driver’s seat and drugs in the glove
compartment. The police stopped the search, had the car towed to a police facility,
sealed the vehicle, obtained a warrant, and then conducted a further search of
the vehicle.
[4]         
Mr. Elawad has brought an application asserting
breaches of ss. 8, 9, and 10 (a) and (b) of the Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedoms and seeks the exclusion of the evidence seized during the searches
pursuant to s. 24(2) of the Charter. The Charter application
proceeded as a blended voir dire with the trial.
[5]         
Mr. Elawad asserts that the traffic stop was a
pretext. He submits that the officers engaged in racial profiling and that he
was stopped because he is a young black man. He submits that, during the
traffic stop, the police began investigating what they believed, without any
basis, might be a stolen vehicle, and that he was not advised of the reason for
the stop or investigation and was not provided with his right to counsel. Mr.
Elawad submits that the demand for his keys was an unlawful seizure. He asserts
that racial profiling played a role in all of these decisions by the officers.
Mr. Elawad submits that the vehicle was not abandoned and there was no lawful
basis for the inventory search or the subsequent warrant.
[6]         
Mr. Elawad seeks to have the evidence of the
drugs and gun excluded. If the evidence is not excluded, Mr. Elawad asserts
that he had no knowledge of the drugs and gun and raises a third-party defence.
[7]         
Three witnesses testified. As agreed between the
parties, Mr. Elawad testified first, both with respect to the Charter
issues and the trial. The Crown then called Police Constables Rennie ("PC
Rennie) and Raza (“PC Raza"). At the conclusion of the viva voce
evidence, the parties filed an Agreed Statement of Facts pursuant to s. 655 of
the Code (the “ASF”).
[8]         
Although I address credibility and reliability
at the outset, my summary of the credibility and reliability of the witnesses
is based on all the evidence.
[9]         
I found Mr. Elawad to be credible. With few
exceptions, he gave his evidence in a straightforward, frank, open, sincere,
and forthright manner. He was responsive to questions, not evasive. He gave
evidence that did not put him in a good light and which potentially put him at
risk. He gave evidence which was consistent with the subsequently filed ASF. Mr.
Elawad’s evidence was consistent in cross-examination. For the most part and on
key points, his evidence made sense and was corroborated in many respects by
the evidence of PC Raza. Standing alone, Mr. Elawad’s evidence could seem
convenient or, as the Crown suggested, difficult to believe, but considered with
the totality of the evidence, it is credible.
[10]     
PC Rennie was not credible. She gave evidence
that was contrary to her notes and her evidence at the preliminary inquiry. She
gave implausible and at times incredulous answers. She testified to matters of
which she did not have direct knowledge. Her evidence was at times internally inconsistent.
Examples of some, but not all such evidence from PC Rennie is discussed in my
review of the evidence and analysis below.
[11]     
PC Rennie was evasive, argumentative and
combative. She repeatedly refused to answer questions directly. She had to be
asked the same questions multiple times to elicit a direct answer. She
repeatedly answered questions by giving the ambiguous answer “ok” and had to be
asked repeatedly to give the actual answer, which was “yes”. PC Rennie’s
evidence was contrary to both the evidence of PC Raza and Mr. Elawad with
respect to the important initial interaction between the police in their
cruiser and Mr. Elawad in his vehicle.
[12]     
PC Raza’s evidence was at times not credible, evasive,
and internally inconsistent. In certain respects, it was inconsistent with the
evidence he gave at the preliminary inquiry. At times he adopted his evidence from
the preliminary inquiry. At other times he sought to distinguish it or asserted
he did not understand the question at the preliminary inquiry. PC Raza has a
troubling lack of notes for important aspects of the interaction with Mr.
Elawad. All of this undermined the reliability of his evidence. Examples of
some, but not all such issues with PC Raza’s evidence are discussed below.
[13]     
I turn now to a review of the evidence of the
witnesses. I consider first the evidence with respect to Mr. Elawad’s
background and the events leading up to his encounter with the police. I then
consider his interaction with the police and the actions of the police after that
encounter and make findings of fact. Some of the specific, more detailed,
evidence relating to the encounter between the police and Mr. Elawad is discussed
in the analysis of the issues raised in his Charter application and I
make additional findings of fact in that analysis. I have considered the
totality of the evidence even if the findings of fact are found under various
headings in this decision.
[14]     
On July 5, 2022, Mr. Elawad was 27 years old and
addicted to drugs. He had just come off a two to three day drug binge in London,
Ontario at the house of H.N., his dealer. He had taken a cocktail of
hydrocodone, Percocet and MDMA mixed in a two litre bottle of soda. Mr. Elawad
also admits to being a user of psylocibin and marijuana. His family was not aware
of his drug addiction.
[15]     
Mr. Elawad had a history with H.N. that dated
back a few years. He regularly stayed at what he referred to as H.N.’s “stash
houses”, where a specific group of men were regularly in attendance and where
he witnessed H.N. engaged in drug transactions and in possession of firearms. He
denies knowing where H.N. kept the drugs.
[16]     
In exchange for money to buy drugs, Mr. Elawad
would look after H.N.’s dogs. He also supplied H.N. with a vehicle for his use.
The VW was rented by Mr. Elawad’s sister on his behalf. He told his sister he
needed it to go to London to look after the dogs. H.N. would give Mr. Elawad
cash to pay for the rental and he would give the cash to his sister to reimburse
her.
[17]     
Mr. Elawad knew he was a suspended driver on
July 5, 2022. He had been suspended on May 17, 2022, for nonpayment of fines.
[18]     
Mr. Elawad testified that he woke up in the late
afternoon on July 5, 2022. He wanted to go back to Toronto see his family. When
he left, he observed H.N. asleep in his room. Mr. Elawad retrieved his keys which
were kept in the house and got in the VW. The vehicle had been moved from where
he had left it. On the way to Toronto, he was hungry and wanted to eat to feel
better and decided to stop in Hamilton at Wingporium, his favourite place to
eat chicken wings.  He was familiar with the location of the Hamilton Wingporium
but did not know the area that well.
[19]     
Mr. Elawad testified that after eating, he got
back into the VW to drive to Toronto. Shortly after getting in the car, he said
he received a call from H.N., who advised him that he had to come back to
London because H.N. had left something in the car. H.N. did not say what it
was. Mr. Elawad suspected that H.N. had left a gun in the car because he had
seen H.N. brandish guns in the past and H.N. had pointed a gun at him in the
past. He told H.N. that H.N. would have to come to get what was in the car. Mr.
Elawad looked in the back seat on the passenger side and in the front of the
car while driving but did not see anything. He testified that he became nervous
and panicky, which made him feel like he had to urinate. He testified that he needed
to figure out what was in the car and was not sure what to do.
[20]     
Mr. Elawad drove around trying to decide what to
do. He was unsure exactly where he was. Mr. Elawad’s evidence about what
occurred on July 5, 2022, leading up to his interaction with the police was not
significantly undermined.
[21]     
At the time of Mr. Elawad’s encounter with the
police, it was about 8:22 p.m. and light out. PC Rennie does not know if it was
sunny. Her notes indicate that a little over an hour earlier it was overcast
but not raining. PC Raza testified it was sunny. He said the sun was setting. Mr.
Elawad said it was bright out.
[22]     
Mr. Elawad testified that before parking he drove
toward and past a cruiser and the two officers in the cruiser made eye contact
with him as they passed.
[23]     
PC Raza was driving the cruiser and PC Rennie
was in the passenger seat. Their evidence was at odds with respect to the
location and direction of travel of the cruiser and the VW when the two
vehicles first encountered each other.
[24]     
PC Raza’s evidence was consistent with Mr.
Elawad’s evidence – the vehicles passed each other on Princess Street, east of
Sherman Avenue, with Mr. Elawad heading east on Princess in the VW and the
police heading west in the cruiser toward Sherman Avenue. PC Rennie’s evidence
places the cruiser on Princess Street, heading east toward Sherman Avenue. She
testified that the VW passed in front of the cruiser heading north on Sherman
before it turned east on Princess Street. At the preliminary inquiry, PC Rennie
testified that the officers were traveling westbound. She said this was an
error and that they were traveling eastbound.
[25]     
There is no scenario in which both officers’ evidence
on this crucial point is correct and true. They both situate the cruiser on
Princess Street, but on opposite sides of Sherman Avenue and heading in
opposite directions, with the VW on different streets when it passes the
cruiser.
[26]     
Both officers deny making eye contact with Mr.
Elawad when the vehicles passed.
[27]     
Both officers testified that they observed that
the plates on the VW were obscured and that, as soon as they saw the obscured
plates, they knew they were going to make a traffic stop.
[28]     
PC Rennie initially agreed that when she saw the
obstructed front plate, the offence under the HTA of obscured plates was
made out in her mind, and she knew at that point that the officers would be
engaging with the VW and its driver to address the infraction. She then backed
away from this evidence and said that she did not know when the plan was made
to initiate the traffic stop. She said she saw both obstructed plates and she
and PC Raza had a brief discussion about it that lasted about 20 to 30 seconds
during which it was determined they would initiate a traffic stop.
[29]     
I address the officers’ observations of the
plates in more detail when I consider s. 9 of the Charter.
[30]     
There is no dispute that after passing the
cruiser, Mr. Elawad pulled into a parking area in front of an industrial
building on Princess Street and backed into a parking spot. There were other
vehicles parked there.
[31]     
Everyone agrees that Mr. Elawad got out of the
VW and locked the doors. There is some discrepancy about whether the cruiser
was still approaching the VW or was in front of the VW when he got out.
[32]     
Mr. Elawad testified that he saw the cruiser
make a U-turn when he stepped out of the vehicle. PC Raza testified that he
made a U-turn with the intention of speaking to the driver about the plates. PC
Rennie denies the officers made a U-turn.
[33]     
Mr. Elawad testified that the cruiser drove up and
stopped in front of the VW, blocking it in after he was out of the vehicle. The
officers agree that they pulled up in front of the VW.
[34]     
Both officers testified that they heard the
“beep” of the doors locking. PC Rennie testified in chief that she saw Mr.
Elawad get out of the VW after she got out of the cruiser. In cross-examination,
she agreed that Mr. Elawad was already out of the VW when she approached him. In
chief, PC Raza testified that he was still in his cruiser when he saw Mr.
Elawad get out of the car.
[35]     
Mr. Elawad testified that the cruiser was very
close to his car, blocking a portion of the front end of the VW. PC Rennie
testified there was a large gap between the front of the VW and the cruiser so
that the VW could still drive away. PC Raza testified that he stopped the
cruiser about six feet in front of the VW. He says the VW could still drive
away and that he had no intention of blocking the VW.
[36]     
Mr. Elawad testified that the male officer asked
him if he worked there and he responded “no”. PC Raza denies this.
[37]     
Mr. Elawad immediately told the police that he
had to urinate. The officers agree this happened but testified that Mr. Elawad
was “jumping around”.
[38]     
PC Raza testified that he was the one who told Mr.
Elawad that he was being stopped because of obstructed plates. PC Raza
testified he was still in the cruiser with the driver’s window down when he
said this. In cross-examination, PC Raza agreed that he got out of the car and
said this to Mr. Elawad. PC Raza has no notes of his conversations with Mr.
Elawad that day. His will say statement does not record what he told Mr. Elawad
about the reason for the stop. PC Raza acknowledged that this fell short of the
kind of notes he should keep of such encounters.
[39]     
PC Rennie testified that she immediately told Mr.
Elawad that it was a traffic stop because his plates were obscured. PC Rennie
agreed that if PC Raza had told Mr. Elawad this, there would be no reason for
her to tell him.
[40]     
Mr. Elawad denies that the police ever told him that
he was being stopped for obstructed plates. I prefer the evidence of Mr. Elawad
over the contradictory and inconsistent evidence of the officers. I find that
Mr. Elawad was asked if he worked there and that he said “no” and the
discussion turned to his need to urinate. I find he was not told that he was
being stopped because of obstructed plates.
[41]     
Everyone agrees that Mr. Elawad was allowed to
find a spot to urinate. He went around the corner of the building and said he
was told to go where he could be seen. PC Raza agrees that the initial location
chosen by Mr. Elawad was not appropriate as it was too public and that he told him
to go where PC Raza could keep an eye on him. PC Raza agrees Mr. Elawad
complied and moved to another location to try to urinate. PC Raza says that the
spot Mr. Elawad chose was about 30 meters from the cruiser. Everyone agrees Mr.
Elawad had his back to the officers.
[42]     
PC Rennie’s evidence again differs from PC Raza’s
and Mr. Elawad’s evidence. She testified that she told Mr. Elawad that he could
go and urinate. She denies telling him not to go around the corner or to stay
in an area where the officers could see him. She says he chose to go around a
corner and she maintained eyes on him from quite a distance away, perhaps 25 or
30 feet.
[43]     
Mr. Elawad testified that he was not able to
urinate in those circumstances and that while he was trying to urinate, he
looked over his shoulder to see where the police were. He saw them looking into
back seat of the VW with a flashlight. PC Rennie denies doing this. PC Raza was
not asked.
[44]     
PC Rennie “believes” that while Mr. Elawad had
gone to urinate she walked up to the VW to get a closer look at the plates and
called the plates in over the air. PC Raza says he is the one who queried the
plates while Mr. Elawad was urinating. One of the officers is mistaken. They
did not both not run the plates.
[45]     
PC Raza testified the plates came back as
belonging to a company. PC Rennie testified that she was told that the plates
were registered to Newport Leasing and a numbered company in Mississauga. She testified
that this did not raise any issues for her. She just had to continue with the
traffic stop and was waiting for Mr. Elawad to finish urinating.
[46]     
PC Rennie testified that she thought Mr. Elawad was
taking a long time to urinate. He was looking over his shoulder and appeared
nervous and fidgety. She interpreted that as Mr. Elawad looking for a way out.
[47]     
PC Raza said about a minute passed while Mr.
Elawad was urinating. He admits he could not see if Mr. Elawad was urinating. PC
Raza testified that he drove up a couple of meters to keep an eye on him. He said
Mr. Elawad was looking left and right and fidgeting with his waistband. This
made PC Raza suspicious. He thought Mr. Elawad was looking for a way to escape
and was going to run, so he got out of the cruiser.
[48]     
PC Raza admitted that at the preliminary inquiry,
he testified that Mr. Elawad was also looking over his shoulder at the
officers. He agreed his memory would have been fresher at the preliminary
inquiry.
[49]     
PC Raza’s evidence of driving forward a few
meters is not in his notes and is inconsistent with his evidence at the preliminary
inquiry, where he testified that when he got out of the cruiser he was in front
of the hood of the VW. His explanation for this inconsistency did not make
sense. He said that it is possible his evidence at the preliminary inquiry was
true but that his evidence at trial is what he remembered “today”. He also
acknowledged that the preliminary inquiry was closer to the events and his
memory would have been better at that time.
[50]     
Mr. Elawad testified that when he stopped trying
to urinate, the officers walked toward him and he moved toward them. PC Raza’s
and PC Rennie’s evidence is consistent with this. The officers met Mr. Elawad somewhere
in the middle of the initial distance between them. They were still a distance
from the VW.
[51]     
Mr. Elawad testified that he asked the officers
why they had pulled him over. He was told he was being detained. Mr. Elawad
testified that he was not told the reason for the detention.
[52]     
PC Raza testified that he again told Mr. Elawad that
he was stopped for obstructed plates and asked for identification, ownership,
and insurance. This is not in his notes.
[53]     
PC Rennie testified that she asked Mr. Elawad
for his ownership and insurance. PC Rennie testified that Mr. Elawad told the
officers that they could not stop him because he was not in his vehicle so she
told him a second time the reasons for the stop. This is not in her notes. PC Rennie
testified that at this point Mr. Elawad started calling “random” people. She
later changed her evidence to say that it was when the officers first walked up
to Mr. Elawad that he started calling people.
[54]     
PC Raza testified that he asked Mr. Elawad who
the VW belonged to. At this point, PC Raza knew that the plate had come back as
being owned by a company. PC Raza’s evidence at the preliminary inquiry was
different. He had testified that it was PC Rennie who asked Mr. Elawad whose
vehicle it was. PC Raza adopted his evidence from the preliminary inquiry.
[55]     
Mr. Elawad testified that the officers asked him
whose car it was and he told them it was a rental. He said the officers asked
him if he was sure it was not stolen. He testified that when the officers said
that, he tried to call the rental company. The male officer asked him what he
was doing, and if he was trying to record the officer.
[56]     
PC Raza testified that Mr. Elawad was
confrontational and questioning his authority. He said Mr. Elawad mentioned
that the roof lights on the cruiser were not on. PC Raza testified that at this
point, Mr. Elawad started to call someone on FaceTime. PC Raza asked him if the
call was more important than what was happening and told him to provide his
driver’s licence. PC Raza also testified that Mr. Elawad already had someone on
FaceTime when the officers first approached him.”
[57]     
PC Rennie testified that Mr. Elawad could not
provide the details of who rented the vehicle and the name of the company who
leased the vehicle to him. She testified that he continued to appear nervous
and was looking around.
[58]     
I find Mr. Elawad asked why he was being stopped
and questioned the police officers’ authority to do so. I find he was not told
he was stopped for obstructed plates, but was told he was detained. I find that
the officers asked Mr. Elawad who owned the VW, that he told the officers it
was a rental, that the officers asked him if he was sure it was not stolen and
that he placed a call at this time. I find that when the officers told him to
put the phone away, he complied.
[59]     
Mr. Elawad also complied with the request to provide
his driver’s licence. PC Raza gave Mr. Elawad’s name and date of birth to
dispatch to run his name. He did not immediately receive a result.
[60]     
Mr. Elawad and PC Raza agree that PC Raza asked for
the rental agreement and Mr. Elawad indicated it was in the vehicle. PC Raza
suggested that they go back to the vehicle. PC Rennie testified that the
officers asked Mr. Elawad to retrieve it from the vehicle. PC Rennie said she asked
for the document because she had concerns about who the vehicle belonged to.
[61]     
The officers and Mr. Elawad walked toward the VW
together. Mr. Elawad testified that he was in front and the officers were close
behind him. PC Raza testified that Mr. Elawad was walking about three meters to
his left. The officers were relatively close together.
[62]     
The officers agreed that to this point Mr.
Elawad had complied with all their demands. PC Rennie agreed that he had given
responsive answers. She agreed that as Mr. Elawad was walking to the VW, she
was thinking the VW was stolen. She did not tell Mr. Elawad this. She testified
it was because there was no time as Mr. Elawad ran away.
[63]     
Mr. Elawad testified that the male officer asked
for the keys and said they were going to search the car. PC Raza testified that
he asked for Mr. Elawad’s keys. PC Rennie testified that she remembers asking
for the keys. Both officers deny telling Mr. Elawad that they were going to
search the VW.
[64]     
Mr. Elawad testified that when he was asked for
the keys, he did not move and the male officer walked up and reached for or
tried to grab his arm. He ran away. PC Raza denies reaching for the keys or
trying to grab Mr. Elawad.
[65]     
When Mr. Elawad ran, PC Rennie and PC Raza gave
chase. The officers soon lost sight of him and returned to the cruiser. They learned
that Mr. Elawad was wanted by London police for firearms offences.
[66]     
Mr. Elawad testified that he was not aware of
the London warrant and that he learned of it when he turned himself in to the
Hamilton police in October 2022. As set out in the ASF, in December of 2023,
Mr. Elawad provided a statutory declaration and the London charges against him were
withdrawn on December 21, 2023. In the declaration, he identified H.N. and stated
that he was not aware of the presence of firearms in the vehicle on the night
giving rise to the London charges.
[67]     
The VW was towed to an approved tow compound
where PC Rennie asked the tow operator to open the vehicle. She searched the
glove box and found two plastic baggies containing a green rock substance she
believed to be fentanyl. At the same time, PC Raza searched the front driver’s
side and found a loaded firearm on the floor behind the driver’s seat under a
sweater or blanket.
[68]     
Mr. Elawad denies that the drugs found in the
glove compartment and the gun found behind the driver’s seat were his. He
denies knowing those items were in the VW. He testified that he had seen H.N.
in possession of the firearm on a previous occasion.
[69]     
PC Rennie testified that the jeopardy changed when
the gun and drugs were found and she determined that a warrant was required to
search the vehicle. The search was stopped and the VW was towed to the police
garage and secured there.
[70]     
According to the ASF, the ITO for the warrant was
based on the information provided by PC Raza and PC Rennie. This is troubling
because, read collectively, paragraphs 7 through 12 of the overview in the ITO paint
a somewhat misleading picture of the traffic stop of Mr. Elawad. Paragraphs 7
through 12 are repeated several times throughout the ITO.
[71]     
Both PC Rennie and PC Raza had difficulty
acknowledging that paragraphs 7 through 12 were misleading and that, although
they did not speak to the affiant of the ITO directly, they were the only source
of information in those paragraphs.
[72]     
Section 9 of the Charter provides that
everyone has the right not to be arbitrarily detained or imprisoned.
[73]     
The law is clear that a roadside stop of a
vehicle for possible violations of the Code or for provincial regulatory
offences under statutes such as the HTA is a detention: R. v.
MacDonald, 2012 ONCA 495, 94 C.R. (6th) 355, at para. 29, citing R. v.
Hufsky, 1988 CanLII 72 (SCC), [1988] 1 S.C.R. 621; R. v. Ladouceur, 1990 CanLII 108 (SCC), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1257; R.
v. Mellenthin, 1992 CanLII 50 (SCC), [1992] 3 S.C.R. 615; R. v. Orbanski; R. v. Elias,
2005 SCC 37, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 3; and R. v. Harrison, 2009 SCC 34, [2009]
2 S.C.R. 494.
[74]     
The Crown concedes that Mr. Elawad was detained when
the police pulled up in front of the VW. Mr. Elawad remained detained
throughout his interaction with the police: see MacDonald, at paras. 29-30
and the cases cited therein.
[75]     
Although an assessment of the lawfulness of a
detention is not dispositive of the s. 9 claim, it is appropriate to begin by
addressing the lawfulness of the detention. If the detention is lawful, it is
not arbitrary unless the law authorizing the detention is arbitrary. If the
detention is found to be unlawful, that finding will play a central role in
determining whether the detention is also arbitrary: R. v. Simpson, 1993 CanLII 3379 (ON CA), 12 O.R.
(3d) 182, at para. 15.
[76]     
The Crown submits that Mr. Elawad was lawfully
detained for a legitimate investigation under the HTA. The only reason
articulated by the officers for the traffic stop was the alleged obscured plate
infraction. In its factum, the Crown asserted the detention was justified under
ss. 13(2) and 216 of the HTA. At trial, the Crown abandoned the s. 216
argument. However, the law regarding the scope of the detention authorized by
s. 216(1) is informative.
[77]     
Section 216(1) of the HTA provides that:
[78]     
The Supreme Court of Canada held that the
equivalent predecessor section to s. 216(1) of the HTA authorized
arbitrary detentions in that it allowed random stops without any basis to
believe that the person or vehicle was in contravention of any law: Ladouceur; Brown v. Regional Municipality of
Durham Police Service Board, 1998 CanLII 7198 (ON CA), 43 O.R. (3d) 223, at para. 50.
[79]     
The scope of the detention authorized by s.
216(1) was set out in Brown, at para. 24:
[80]     
So long as one of the purposes behind the
traffic stop is legitimate under the HTA, multiple purposes for a
traffic stop do not necessarily render a stop unlawful, unless one of the other
purposes for the stop is improper: Brown, at paras. 26-31. If one of the
purposes motivating a stop and detention is improper, then the stop is unlawful
even if HTA concerns also factor into the decision to make the stop and
detention: Brown, at paras. 34-39.
[81]     
As noted, the cause articulated by the officers for
the stop was obscured plates under s. 13(2) of the HTA, which provides
that:
[82]     
Subject to the existence of any improper
purposes for the stop, a stop pursuant to s. 13(2) would be lawful and not
arbitrary: Brown, at para. 53. If, however, the officers did not observe
obstructed plates, that calls into question the lawfulness of the stop and whether
the detention was arbitrary: Simpson, at para. 15.
[83]     
The photographs of the VW plates are of limited
assistance in determining what the officers saw.
[84]     
The photos show that the plates were covered by
a clear plastic cover. In some photos the cover does not appear tinted. In others,
it does. It appears to depend on the angle, lighting and perhaps the flash from
the camera.
[85]     
Some photos suggest that both plates, but
especially the front plate, were readily visible through the plastic cover from
some angles. The rear plate is not as clear as the front plate. This appears to
be due to dirt on the back of the vehicle and plate cover. There is a spot of
mud covering a portion of a number on the rear plate.
[86]     
The photographs also demonstrate that in certain
lighting, and at certain angles, the plates are not entirely visible. There are
no photos of the plates without the plastic covers to compare whether the
plates would be visible at the same angles without the plate cover. The photos
also suggest that the camera flash might be obstructing the view of the plates.
[87]     
Some of the close-up photos show the plates as
partially obscured, yet, at the scene, the officers were able to read the front
plate and call it in.
[88]     
PC Rennie testified that the plates of the
vehicle in the photos where the numbers are clearly visible did not look like
that at the roadside. She repeatedly testified that the photos were taken by a
forensics officer in a controlled setting with heavy indoor lighting on the
ceiling and on the walls and with a flash on the camera and that as a result,
the photos that clearly showed the plate numbers did not represent what she saw
at the roadside. This does not explain why the lighting did not make the plates
clearly legible in all the photos.
[89]     
PC Rennie also testified that she was not
present when the photos were taken and that she does not know enough about
flash photography to know how it compares to natural illumination by the sun.
[90]     
Both officers testified that plate covers are
illegal under the HTA. PC Rennie went further, testifying that borders
or frames around plates are not allowed under the HTA. Without deciding
the issue, s. 13 does not specifically indicate that covers or borders are
illegal; rather, the issue is whether the entire plate, including the numbers,
is plainly visible at all times and not obscured by anything. It is readily
apparent to anyone driving in Ontario that a large portion of vehicles in
Ontario have frames on the plates.
[91]     
The evidence of the officers with respect to mud
on the plates was not consistent with their notes and prior testimony or with
the photo of the front plate.
[92]     
The notes of both officers say that there was
mud on the front plate. Both officers testified at the preliminary inquiry that
there was mud on the front plate. There is no mud on the front plate in the
photos.
[93]     
PC Rennie testified that there was mud on the rear
but not the front plate. She agreed her evidence about mud on the front plate
changed at trial. She does not know why. She testified that she did not make a
cognitive decision to change her evidence. She denies that it was because she
reviewed the photos prior to testifying at trial. She testified that she may
have been mistaken about the mud on the front plate.
[94]     
PC Rennie testified that her attention was drawn
to the VW because of a dark tinted plate cover on the front so that she could
not see the licence plate. She testified that the plates were not visible when
the vehicle approached and passed the cruiser.
[95]     
PC Raza testified that, as is his practice, as
the VW approached, he looked at the plate on the front of the VW to try to get
the number. He testified that because the plate was dark, there was mud on it,
it had a cover on it, there was glare from the sun, or for whatever reasons, he
could not see the plate. As the VW passed on the left of the cruiser, beside
him, PC Raza turned over his left shoulder to look at the rear plate. He said
he could not read the letters “perfectly”.
[96]     
PC Raza returned to the glare of the sun
obstructing his view of the front plate several times. It is not an offence
under the HTA if an officer cannot see a licence plate because the sun
is in his eyes.
[97]     
PC Raza also testified that a reason he could
not read the front plate on the road was that the sun might have been shining
on the plate causing a glare. This was a fabrication readily pointed out in
cross-examination by the fact that from PC Raza’s vantage point, the sun would
have been setting behind the VW, not in front of it.
[98]     
The photos depict that the rear windows of the
VW are heavily tinted. However, the front driver and passenger windows appear
to have no or minimal tint. In the photos, one can see right through the front
of the vehicle from one side to the other, including details outside the far
side of the VW, and a reflection of objects in the passenger mirror on the
opposite side of the vehicle.
[99]     
The photos strongly suggest that the officers
would have been able to see into the VW when it approached them or passed in
front of them according to PC Rennie.
[100] 
Both officers agree that officer safety is
paramount in any traffic stop and that ideally officers want to know who they
are dealing with and how many people are in a vehicle.
[101] 
PC Rennie denies that she saw the driver of the
VW prior to the stop. She denies seeing who was in the VW, how many people were
in the vehicle, or the colour of Mr. Elawad’s skin. She testified that she
could not see inside the vehicle because the windows were tinted. PC Rennie also
testified that windows tinted in a manner to obscure the identity of the driver
is an offence under the HTA. However, she does not record in her notes
that the windows were tinted. Mr. Elawad was not stopped for such an offence.
[102] 
PC Rennie testified that when the VW passed in
front of her, there was a short period of time that the driver’s side of the VW
was in front of her. This would have allowed her to look inside the vehicle.
[103] 
PC Rennie testified that she was focused on the
front plate and then the back plate, both of which were obstructed. She
repeatedly testified that the reason she did not see who was driving the VW was
because she did not look inside the vehicle and because the tinted windows
made it so she could not see inside. If PC Rennie did not look inside the
vehicle, she could not have seen whether the tint on the windows obscured her
view. Further, she gives no explanation for why she did not look inside the
vehicle. She testified that she does not know where her eyes went between the
front and the rear plate. Notwithstanding admitted general concerns for officer
safety, PC Rennie testified that once she decided to pull the VW over, she did
not look inside the driver’s area of the vehicle because it did not matter at
that point who was driving.
[104] 
While PC Rennie testified she spoke to PC Raza
about not being able to see the plates and making the traffic stop, she said that
they did not talk about the tint on the windows or whether PC Raza saw who was
driving.
[105] 
On the evidence, I am left with the conclusion
that PC Rennie looked inside the vehicle but refuses to admit she did. This
conclusion is underscored by her refusal to acknowledge that Mr. Elawad is a
young black man because, in her words, she does not “know how he identifies
himself.”
[106] 
PC Raza agreed that as the VW drove past him the
driver’s side window would have been immediately to his left. He testified that
the tinting on the driver’s side front widow prevented him from seeing who was
driving. He also says the glare of the sun made it difficult to look into the
driver’s window as it passed.
[107] 
PC Raza’s notes make no reference to tinted
windows. PC Raza was turning his head to look at the rear plates. He would have
been looking south directly into the VW as it passed on his left. The sun would
not have been in his line of sight. In cross-examination he conceded that it
was possible that he saw a male in the vehicle and that it was possible he saw
a black male in the vehicle. However, he maintains that he did not see the
driver.
[108] 
I find that the VW approached the cruiser head
on in its own lane while on Princess Street, passed the cruiser on the driver’s
side, and turned behind the cruiser into a parking area. The cruiser then made
a U-turn to come back to the location of the VW. This is consistent with the
evidence of PC Raza and Mr. Elawad.
[109] 
I do not accept PC Rennie’s evidence regarding
the plates. Her evidence is based on the cruiser and the VW being in another
location entirely and on a different interaction between the two vehicles. PC
Rennie’s evidence is further undermined because of issues with her credibility that
I have described. I do not find PC Raza’s evidence about the plates and his
changing reasons for why the front plate was obscured to be credible.
[110] 
The evidence of both officers was also
undermined by their evidence about the tinted front windows. I find that as the
VW approached the cruiser the officers would have looked into the vehicle, and
that the windows did not prevent them from doing so. I do not accept the
officers’ evidence that they could not see the driver of the VW and that they
did not see Mr. Elawad or could not identify that he was a black man.
[111] 
I do not accept that the officers observed the
VW’s front plates to be obstructed and have very serious doubts that the
officers observed the VW’s rear plates at all, or that they observed them to be
obstructed when the VW drove past the cruiser.
[112] 
As a result, I am left with the conclusion that
something else motivated the officers to pull in front of the VW and question Mr.
Elawad.
[113] 
It was recognized as early as R. v. Storrey,
1990 CanLII 125 (SCC), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 241, 53 C.C.C. (3d) 316 that racial bias, bias toward a person
of a different nationality, or personal enmity between an officer and the
person arrested could render invalid an otherwise lawful arrest: pp. 251-252.
[114] 
Officers who select persons to be stopped based
on their sex or colour, or who stop someone to vent their personal animosity
toward that person, all act for an improper purpose and cannot rely on s.
216(1) of the HTA even if they also have highway safety concerns when
making the stop: Brown, at para. 39.
[115] 
Racial profiling is primarily concerned with the
motivation of the police. It occurs when race or racial stereotypes about
offending or dangerousness are used, consciously or unconsciously, to any
degree in suspect selection or subject treatment: R. v. Le, 2019 SCC 34,
[2019] 2 S.C.R. 692, at para. 76. It was described in Peart v. Peel Regional
Police Services Board (2006), 2006 CanLII 37566 (ON CA), 43 C.R. (6th) 175 (Ont. C.A.), at para.
90, leave to appeal refused, [2007] S.C.C.A. No. 31798 as using race, consciously
or subconsciously, as an indicator of potential unlawful conduct based not on
any personalized suspicion, but on negative stereotyping attributing propensity
for unlawful conduct to individuals because of race.
[116] 
Racial profiling has also been described as any
action taken by one or more people in authority with respect to a person or
group of persons, for reasons of safety, security, or public order, that is
based on actual or presumed membership in a group defined by race, colour,
ethnic or national origin, or religion, without factual grounds or reasonable
suspicion, exposing the person or group to differential treatment or scrutiny: Le,
at para. 77, citing Quebec (Commission des droits de la personne et des
droits de la jeunesse) v. Bombardier Inc. (Bombardier Aerospace Training
Center), 2015 SCC 39, [2015] 2 S.C.R. 789, at para. 33.
[117] 
In these circumstances, racial profiling is
anchored to an internal mental process that is held by the police: Le,
at para. 78. The inquiry into whether a police officer racially profiled someone
is not necessarily resolved by determining whether that officer in general
holds conscious or unconscious racist attitudes; it is possible for the
reasoning of someone who is otherwise scrupulously and self-consciously
egalitarian to be misshapen by unconscious bias in making a particular decision:
R. v. Bailey, 2024 ONSC 2136.
[118] 
Racial profiling has two components: (1) an
attitudinal component; and (2) a causation component: R. v. Dudhi, 2019
ONCA 665, 147 O.R. (3d) 546, at para. 54.
[119] 
The attitudinal component is the acceptance by a
person in authority, such as a police officer, that race or racial stereotypes
are relevant in identifying the propensity to offend or to be dangerous: Dudhi,
at para. 55, citing Peart, at para. 90.
[120] 
Racial profiling is difficult to prove: Dudhi,
at para. 75. As has been stated by other courts, a police officer is unlikely
to admit to engaging in conscious racial profiling. If racial profiling is to
be proven, it must be done by inferences drawn from circumstantial evidence: R.
v. Brown (2003), 2003 CanLII 52142 (ON CA), 64 O.R. (3d) 161 (C.A.), at para. 44.
[121] 
As noted by the Court of Appeal for Ontario in Peart,
at para. 95:
[122] 
Racial profiling may be established where the
evidence shows that the circumstances relating to a detention correspond to the
phenomenon of racial profiling and provides a basis for the court to infer that
the police officer is lying about why he or she singled out the accused person
for attention: R. v. Brown, at para. 45; Dudhi, at para.
80. However, a trial judge is not required to find that a police officer who
testifies that race played no role in the decision to detain or arrest was
lying to reach a conclusion that the stop involved racial profiling: R. v.
Sitladeen, 2021 ONCA 303, 155 O.R. (3d) 241, at para. 54. The Court of
Appeal for Ontario has held that unconscious racial bias may also play a role
in an officer's decision to stop or to arrest an accused: Sitladeen, at paras.
57-64; Peart, at para. 93.
[123] 
Racial profiling does not necessarily reflect
any racial bias.  It may reflect the officer’s legitimate perception of the
reality of the world in which the officer operates: Peart, at para. 93.
[124] 
The absence of objective grounds for detention,
or the fabrication of grounds, can lead to an inference that the detention was racially
motivated. The presence of objective grounds is no doubt relevant in providing
an alternative, innocent explanation for a decision to detain. However, the
presence of objective grounds does not undermine a finding of racial profiling.
Racial profiling can exist regardless of whether the police conduct that it
precipitates could be justified apart from resort to negative stereotyping
based on race: Dudhi, at para. 85. For example, a police officer who
sees a vehicle speeding and decides to pull the vehicle over in part because of
the driver’s colour is engaged in racial profiling even though the speed of the
vehicle could have justified the officer’s action: Peart, at para. 91.
[125] 
The causation component requires that race-based
thinking consciously or unconsciously play a causal role; race or the racial
stereotype must motivate or influence, to any degree, decisions by persons in
authority regarding suspect selection or subject treatment: Dudhi, at
paras. 55 and 73. It is open to a trial judge in an appropriate case to find
that despite an officer’s demonstrated conscious or unconscious racist
attitude, that attitude did not influence the decisions that were made: Dudhi,
at para. 73.
[126] 
Policing decisions based on race or racial
stereotypes are not, by definition, objectively reasonable decisions: Dudhi,
at para. 60. If illegitimate thinking about race or racial stereotypes factors into
suspect selection or subject treatment, any pretence that the decision was
reasonable is defeated; the decision will be contaminated by improper thinking
and cannot satisfy the legal standards in place for suspect selection or
subject treatment: Dudhi, at para. 62.
[127] 
In determining whether racial profiling
occurred, judges must consider all the circumstances surrounding the police
action: Dudhi, at para. 76. In doing so, the court must consider all the
circumstances that led to an accused's detention and/or arrest and determine
whether they correspond to the phenomenon of racial profiling, as understood in
the social science literature, the reports of inquiries into race relations
with police, and the case law: Sitladeen,
at para. 54.
[128] 
The accused has the onus of establishing racial
profiling on a balance of probabilities: Peart, para. 140.
[129] 
Regardless of whether the officers saw the
plates of the vehicle, I am persuaded that they engaged in racial profiling and
that Mr. Elawad was stopped because of the colour of his skin.
[130] 
I find that PC Rennie was not truthful about her
observations of the driver of the vehicle. I am led to this conclusion by the
totality of the circumstances. They include the issues with PC Rennie’s
credibility, her evidence about why she could not or did not look at the driver
of the VW contrary to ideal police safety practices, as well as her refusal to
acknowledge that Mr. Elawad was a young black man. I find that PC Rennie’s
evidence was an attempt not to admit that Mr. Elawad was stopped, at least in
part, because he was a black man driving a late model black SUV.
[131] 
PC Raza acknowledged that it is possible that race
may have played a subconscious role in how the interaction with Mr. Elawad
played itself out. For similar reasons, I find that PC Raza’s evidence about
the licence plates, the tinted windows, and his inability to identify the
driver of the vehicle, masks, at a minimum, an unconscious decision to stop Mr.
Elawad because he was a black man.
[132] 
I find that both the attitudinal and causal
components of racial profiling are made out. Mr. Elawad was stopped because of
racial stereotypes related to propensity to offend.
[133] 
Mr. Elawad asserts that the stop morphed into an
investigation into whether the VW was stolen. The Crown denies this.
[134] 
In chief, PC Rennie denied that, prior to Mr.
Elawad running away, she was investigating any criminal offences. This is
contradicted by her own evidence.
[135] 
PC Rennie testified that in her mind the
“answers that he was giving us, or the lack of answers, the lack of
documentation, the evasiveness and everything all added up” to PC Rennie
believing Mr. Elawad was not lawfully in possession of the vehicle. PC Rennie testified
that when Mr. Elawad told the officers that the documents were in the car and
they started walking to the VW, she thought the vehicle was stolen and it
appeared that Mr. Elawad was looking for a way out.
[136] 
The damage to the lock on the driver’s door
handle was the subject of much evidence. Mr. Elawad denies that he was aware of
the damage to the lock on the handle. He did not have to insert a key to unlock
the door.
[137] 
Photographs of the VW show that the driver’s
side front door handle is missing the cover over the lock area of the handle. Some
photos show some marks around the lock area. The visibility of the marks seems
to vary depending on the photo. This may simply be a matter of reflection,
lighting, or glare.
[138] 
In any event, it was not until PC Rennie
returned to the vehicle after the brief foot chase that she noted damage to the
driver’s side front door handle lock, which she testified raised her suspicion
even more that she needed to investigate further.
[139] 
I find that PC Rennie began investigating a
stolen vehicle as soon as she received the information that the vehicle was
owned by a numbered company and that she believed the VW had been stolen before
Mr. Elawad ran.
[140] 
There was no basis to believe the vehicle was
stolen before Mr. Elawad ran. He had the keys for the vehicle. The plates
matched the vehicle. The vehicle was not reported stolen. There were no reports
of stolen vehicles in the area. The police did not see the damaged lock until
after he ran away. Mr. Elawad provided his identification and advised the
officers that the vehicle was rented. This was consistent with the information
that the officers received that the vehicle was owned by a corporation. The
fact that Mr. Elawad did not have ownership, insurance and leasing information
on his person outside of the vehicle is not surprising. It should go without
saying that a black man driving a car owned by a company should not raise any
suspicion that the vehicle is stolen.
[141] 
Mr. Elawad complied with the officers’ demands. He
was not being evasive. He was cooperative; he was not trying to escape. PC Raza
testified that he did not suspect the VW was stolen. I find the principal
reason for PC Rennie’s suspicions was that Mr. Elawad was a black man.
[142] 
For the reasons articulated above, I conclude
that the officers did not stop Mr. Elawad because of obstructed plates.
[143] 
Even if the officers had stopped Mr. Elawad in
part because of the plates, they engaged in racial profiling. A detention based
on racial profiling is one that is, by definition, not based on reasonable
suspicion: Le, at para. 78. Because illegitimate thinking about race or
racial stereotypes factored into the stop, any pretence that the decision was
reasonable is defeated. Given that one of the purposes motivating the stop of
Mr. Elawad was improper, the stop is unlawful even if grounds existed under the
HTA.
[144] 
As a result, the traffic stop was a breach of
Mr. Elawad’s s. 9 right not to be arbitrarily detained. The ongoing detention
was arbitrary and a breach of s. 9.
[145] 
Section 8 of the Charter provides that everyone
has the right to be secure against unreasonable search or seizure.
[146] 
Warrantless searches are prima facie
unreasonable and the burden shifts to the Crown to prove on a balance of
probabilities that a search incident to arrest was conducted lawfully and
reasonably: R. v. Caslake, 1998 CanLII 838 (SCC), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 51, 13 C.R. (5th) 1, at paras.
10-12.
[147] 
As summarized in R. v. Tim, 2022 SCC 12, [2022]
1 S.C.R. 234, at para. 46, a search is reasonable, and complies with s. 8 of
the Charter, if: (1) the search is authorized by law; (2) the law
authorizing the search is reasonable; and (3) the search is conducted in a
reasonable manner: see R. v. Collins, [1987] 1. S.C.R. 265, at p. 278; Caslake,
at para. 10; R. v. Saeed, 2016 SCC 24, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 518, at para. 36.
[148] 
To be authorized by law, the police must point
to a specific statutory provision or common law rule authorizing the search, the
search must be carried out in accordance with the procedural and substantive
requirements of the law, and it must not exceed its authorized scope: Caslake,
at para. 12.
[149] 
The essence of a seizure is the taking of a
thing from a person by a public authority without that person’s consent: R.
v. Dyment, 1988 CanLII 10 (SCC), [1988] 2 S.C.R. 417, at para. 26; R. v. Colarusso,
1994 CanLII 134 (SCC), [1994] 1 S.C.R. 20, at p. 41.
[150] 
The Crown conceded the police cannot rely on Mr.
Elawad’s subsequent flight to assert a basis for the demand for his keys.
[151] 
PC Raza testified that he did not have the
authority to ask Mr. Elawad for the keys. He denies that he was attempting to
seize the keys. He testified that he was only going to detain the keys
temporarily. He referred to his demand for the keys as a “simple, humble
request”, which he asserts Mr. Elawad could have declined. PC Raza acknowledges
that if Mr. Elawad had refused to hand over the keys, Mr. Elawad would have had
to explain why he would not do so.
[152] 
PC Raza denied that he intended to go into the
vehicle to search the vehicle or to obtain the vehicle documents himself. He
admitted that he gave contrary evidence at the preliminary inquiry. He
explained the difference by saying that he was not sure what he thought the
question meant when it was asked at the preliminary inquiry. He said that,
slowing the question down, word for word, he did not intend to go into the
vehicle. I do not accept his explanation.
[153] 
PC Rennie agreed that asking for the keys was a
seizure that would result in the officers taking control of the vehicle.
[154] 
Both officers asserted that they demanded the
keys for officer safety and to protect the public. PC Rennie testified that she
wanted to prevent Mr. Elawad from getting into the car and taking off, and
striking the cruiser, or her partner, or other members of the public. She
formed this belief because of Mr. Elawad’s behaviour. PC Raza gave similar
evidence.
[155] 
The Court of Appeal for Ontario in R. v.
Buakasa, 2023 ONCA 383, at paras. 36-48 and 56 considered the conflicting
and evolving law with respect to the standard for police safety searches in
various circumstances, whether different standards apply to different safety
searches and the circumstances that distinguish their application. The Court of
Appeal did not resolve whether the standard of reasonable suspicion or
reasonable belief in imminent harm applied.
[156] 
The officers must have both subjective and
objective grounds for the search, and those grounds “must correspond – officers
‘cannot rely on the fact that, objectively a legitimate purpose for the search
existed when that is not the purpose for which they searched’”: Buakasa,
at para. 55, citing R. v. Stairs, 2022 SCC 11, [2022] 1 S.C.R. 169, at
para. 128, quoting from Caslake, at para. 27.
[157] 
I find that whatever standard is applied, the
police did not meet the lower standard of reasonable suspicion. I find that in
the totality of the circumstances, up until the time the officers requested the
keys from Mr. Elawad, they could not have had a subjective reasonable suspicion
of a threat to officer or police safety, and even if they did, it was informed
by racial profiling.
[158] 
In chief, PC Rennie testified that she started
to get “a bit uncomfortable” because Mr. Elawad was jumpy, that he said that he
had to go to the bathroom but it did not seem to her that he urinated, that he
was looking over his shoulder, that he was evasive with the questions the
officers were asking him. PC Rennie thought he was planning a way out. As a
result, she demanded his keys.
[159] 
I reject PC Rennie’s evidence and find that it
is an after-the-fact justification for her conduct. She agreed in
cross-examination that Mr. Elawad had been compliant and responsive up until
the walk toward the car. He was not evasive with his answers to the officers’
questions.
[160] 
PC Raza testified that as they approached the
vehicle, he had a “feeling” that Mr. Elawad was going to jump in the vehicle
and drive off. He said this was because of everything he observed, which raised
red flags. He identified the following red flags:
[161] 
I do not accept PC Raza’s evidence that what he
observed gave rise to a reasonable suspicion that there was a risk to officer
or public safety.
[162] 
First, I note that the evidence is that the
interaction between the officers and Mr. Elawad lasted about five minutes.
During that time, the officers agreed that until he ran, Mr. Elawad complied
with their requests and demands. He answered their questions.
[163] 
With respect to the first point, I find this to
be an exaggeration of the evidence. Mr. Elawad was telling the officers he had
to urinate. I reject PC Raza’s evidence that he told Mr. Elawad the reason for
the stop, and I accept Mr. Elawad’s evidence that PC Raza asked him if he
worked there, to which he responded “no”, and that he told the officers he had
to urinate. Further, the police created the situation that arose by stopping
and questioning Mr. Elawad under the pretext of obstructed plates.
[164] 
With respect to the second point, the fact that
a man is trying to urinate in public, which the police allowed, and was looking
side to side and over his shoulder at the police who were watching him and was
moving his hands in area at the front his waistband is not unreasonable. It is
understandable that Mr. Elawad would look around to see how close the police
were and whether anyone else was nearby. The reason for Mr. Elawad’s hands
being in the area of his waistband are obvious.
[165] 
With respect to the use of the phone and PC Raza’s
third red flag, I prefer the evidence of Mr. Elawad that he was trying to call
to prove that he had rented the vehicle, over the evidence of the officers,
which was internally inconsistent as to the timing of the call. In any event,
when told to put the phone away, Mr. Elawad complied.
[166] 
With respect to the fourth alleged red flag, I
find it is an exaggeration and does not conform with the evidence, including
the officer’s own evidence that Mr. Elawad was compliant with their directions
and requests. In addition, the balance of the circumstances noted above – the
plates were immediately returned as belonging to a company, Mr. Elawad said the
vehicle was rented, there was no basis to believe the vehicle was stolen, and the
blocking of the VW with the police cruiser – undermine the officers’ purported
fear that Mr. Elawad would get in the car and drive away.
[167] 
Further, the police had no information that Mr.
Elawad was wanted by the police or the circumstances of the other warrant until
after he fled. Mr. Elawad himself did not know that there was a warrant for his
arrest. He believed the issue giving rise to that warrant had been dealt with.
There is no evidence that the police believed that there was a weapon in the
car. The police had no objective evidence that Mr. Elawad was dangerous.
[168] 
There is no evidence that at that time of the
evening, in that industrial area, there were members of the public around.
[169] 
PC Rennie testified that prior to Mr. Elawad fleeing,
the officers had no authority to search the VW. She testified that her
authority to search the vehicle was a result of the VW being abandoned. PC Raza
gave similar evidence.
[170] 
The Crown asserts the vehicle was abandoned and
therefore the officers could tow the vehicle away and conduct an inventory
search. In its factum, the Crown also relies on search incident to arrest. That
argument was abandoned in submissions.
[171] 
The officers testified that the VW was abandoned
because Mr. Elawad fled.
[172] 
PC Rennie also testified that she could not
leave the vehicle there and risk Mr. Elawad returning and stealing it again. PC
Raza testified that he towed the vehicle to find out more about the vehicle and
the owner.
[173] 
The Crown relies on s. 221(1) of the HTA,
which provides in relevant part that a police officer or an officer appointed
for carrying out the provisions of the HTA, who discovers a vehicle
apparently abandoned on or near a highway, may take the vehicle into the
custody of the law and may cause it to be taken to and stored in a suitable
place.
[174] 
The Crown submits that once a vehicle is
abandoned and taken into custody, the police are authorized to conduct an
inventory search of the vehicle.
[175] 
The Crown relies on R. v. Ellis, 2016
ONCA 598, 340 C.C.C. (3d) 279. The defence relies on the companion case of R.
v. Dunkley, 2016 ONCA 597, 340 C.C.C. (3d) 530. At para. 41, Dunkley
summarizes the law in Ellis relating to inventory searches:
[176] 
As noted in Ellis, at para. 62, the test
for abandonment articulated by the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Patrick,
2009 SCC 17, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 579 is whether the individual acted in a manner
that a reasonable and independent observer would believe, based on the totality
of the circumstances, that a continued assertion of privacy over the object was
unreasonable. Further, s. 221 speaks of “apparently abandoned” vehicles.
[177] 
In Ellis, the accused was found to have
abandoned a vehicle. The police had pursued Ellis in a marked vehicle after observing
his vehicle and another vehicle apparently racing. The police followed Ellis
into a residential area dead-end street where the officer located it parked in
a mutual driveway between two houses. Ellis was found walking away from the
vehicle toward the back of the houses. The court held that Ellis fled from the
police and admitted to trying to avoid arrest on his outstanding warrants. He had
parked and locked the car in a mutual driveway to which he had no right or
association and walked away. The court held that his actions to that point were
consistent with those of someone who wished to dissociate himself from the
vehicle.
[178] 
In Dunkley, the Court of Appeal held that
Dunkley’s vehicle was not abandoned. Dunkley had unknowingly parked his vehicle
beside an unmarked police vehicle. The officers approached Dunkley when he left
a gas station kiosk, identified themselves, and asked for identification.
Dunkley backed away and then ran. He was located and arrested a short time
later and his keys were found. Dunkley testified that he lost his keys and did
not dispose of them.
[179] 
The Court noted that Dunkley’s vehicle was
parked in a parking lot at a commercial establishment. When Dunkley parked the
vehicle, there was no indication that he believed that the officers had
followed him to that location. In other words, he did not park the car
intending to abandon it and flee police. The fact that Dunkley ran away could
be consistent with abandonment but, without more, it was difficult to conclude
that he intended to abandon his vehicle. Further, the fact that the keys had
been discovered on the route he took in fleeing the scene might have been
significant evidence had the police seen him throw his keys away. They did not.
[180] 
The court held that Dunkley could be contrasted
with the factual scenario in Ellis where, on the evidence, it was clear
that the accused was fleeing the police, that he parked his vehicle with the
intention of distancing himself from it, and that he left it on a private
driveway where he knew it could not legally remain.
[181] 
Mr. Elawad was in the process of parking the VW before
his encounter with the police. He was parked before the police arrived and
exited and locked the vehicle. He was not being pursued by the police and was
not fleeing from them. Mr. Elawad intended to urinate and check the vehicle
following his call with H.N. Although he suspected there was a gun in the
vehicle, he had not yet seen it. Mr. Elawad parked in a parking area where
there were other vehicles parked. The officers did not suggest it was improper
for him to park there. He had the keys to the vehicle in his possession.
[182] 
Mr. Elawad was not aware that there was a
warrant out for his arrest. He interacted with the police over a period lasting
up to five minutes. He complied with police requests and directions. He
provided his driver’s licence. He answered questions. There was nothing
unlawful about his conduct prior to the request for his keys, including the
questions and inquiries he made of the officers. Mr. Elawad did not discard his
keys.
[183] 
It was not until the unlawful demand was made
for his keys, that Mr. Elawad ran. Running from the police was a direct
response to the unlawful demand by the police for his keys. In running from the
police with the keys, Mr. Elawad asserted his privacy and control over the vehicle.
The police cannot rely on Mr. Elawad’s flight to assert a basis for the vehicle
being abandoned and searched given his flight was in response to an unlawful
detention and seizure.
[184] 
I find that the vehicle was not abandoned by Mr.
Elawad.
[185] 
As the vehicle was not “apparently abandoned”,
it could not be taken into the custody of the police pursuant to s. 221(2) of
the HTA. As a result, there was no authority for the inventory search. The
search of the vehicle was unlawful and a breach of Mr. Elawad’s s. 8 Charter
rights.
[186] 
The Crown did not argue that the subsequent search
warrant could survive a finding that the vehicle was not abandoned.
[187] 
Sections 10(a) and 10(b) of the Charter
provide that everyone has the right on arrest or detention to (a) be informed
promptly of the reasons therefor, and (b) retain and instruct counsel without
delay and to be informed of that right.
[188] 
As summarized by the Court of Appeal for Ontario
in R. v. Sanclemente, 2021 ONCA 906, at para. 129:
[189] 
The Supreme Court of Canada held in Orbanski,
at para. 60, that the implicit limitation on the s. 10(b) right to counsel that
is inherent to roadside stops is justifiable under s. 1 of the Charter: MacDonald,
at para. 29. Therefore, in this case, had the traffic stop for obstructed
plates been justifiable, there would not have been a breach of s. 10(a) and (b)
with respect to the traffic stop.
[190] 
However, during Mr. Elawad’s ongoing detention, the
investigation shifted from a purported HTA stop to a criminal
investigation about whether the VW was stolen. This placed Mr. Elawad in
jeopardy under the Code and triggered his s. 10 rights, especially his
right to consult counsel: MacDonald, at paras. 30-32.
[191] 
In breach of s. 10(a), Mr. Elawad was never
advised during his detention that the police were investigating whether he was
in lawful possession of the VW and whether it was stolen.
[192] 
The purpose of s. 10(b), is “to provide a detainee with
an opportunity to obtain legal advice relevant to his legal situation” or, more
particularly, “to allow the detainee not only to be informed of his rights and
obligations under the law but, equally if not more important, to obtain advice
as to how to exercise those rights”: R. v. Lafrance, 2022 SCC 32, at para. 70.
[193] 
The right to retain and instruct counsel is
“meant to assist detainees to regain their liberty, and guard against the risk
of involuntary self-incrimination” and ensure that an individual who is under
control of the state and in a situation of legal jeopardy “is able to
make a choice to speak to the police investigators that is both free and
informed”: R. v. Taylor, 2014 SCC 50, citing R. v. Sinclair, 2010
SCC 35, [2010] 2 S.C.R. 310, at paras. 24 and 26.
[194] 
Mr. Elawad was denied these opportunities and
protections because, in breach of s. 10(b), he was never informed of his right to
counsel. This prevented him from contacting counsel and obtaining legal advice
with respect to how he should handle the situation he was then facing and whether
he was required to surrender his keys to the officers.
[195] 
The onus is on the applicant to establish on a
balance of probabilities that the admission of the evidence seized would bring
the administration of justice into disrepute.
[196] 
In R. v. Grant, 2009 SCC 32, [2009] 2 S.C.R.
353, at para. 67, the Supreme Court held that the purpose of s. 24(2) is to
maintain the good repute of the administration of justice. It is an objective
inquiry, and it asks whether a reasonable person informed of all relevant
circumstances and the values underlying the Charter would conclude that
the admission of the evidence would bring the administration of justice into
disrepute: Grant, at para. 68.
[197] 
At para. 71 of Grant, the Supreme Court outlined
the following three lines of inquiry to consider when determining whether the
admission of the evidence brings the administration of justice into disrepute:
[198] 
The first Grant line of inquiry considers
the seriousness of the Charter-infringing conduct and requires the court
to consider the nature of the police conduct that infringed the Charter.
It focuses on the extent to which the state conduct at issue deviates from the
rule of law. Or, as the Supreme Court phrased it in R. v. Harrison, 2009
SCC 34, [2009] 2 S.C.R. 494, at para. 22: “Did [the police conduct] involve
misconduct from which the court should be concerned to dissociate itself?”.
[199] 
The court must situate the conduct on a spectrum
or a scale of culpability: Grant, at para. 74; R. v. Paterson,
2017 SCC 15, [2017] 1 S.C.R. 202, at para. 43.
[200] 
The Charter breaches were very serious. The
police engaged in racial profiling. I find that PC Rennie consciously did so. Racial
profiling undermines effective policing by alienating law-abiding members of
the community who are members of the targeted race: Peart, para. 93. Racial
profiling is conduct from which the court must dissociate itself. Admitting evidence obtained as a result of racial profiling
in these circumstances would bring the administration of justice into disrepute.
[201] 
In addition, PC Rennie began
to investigate Mr. Elawad in the midst of a traffic stop with respect to
whether the VW was stolen, failed to advise Mr. Elawad of this and to advise
him of his right to counsel in breach of ss. 9, 10 (a) and (b). The interaction
with Mr. Elawad had been underway for some time. There was no need to return to
the vehicle before informing him of the change in jeopardy. There was no basis
to seize the keys for officer or public safety. The subjective basis formed by
the police was a result of racial profiling. There was no urgency or exigent
circumstances at play. There were no extenuating circumstances that offer some
explanation for the disregard of Mr. Elawad’s constitutional rights.
[202] 
While it was not wilful misconduct on the part
of the police to believe the vehicle had been abandoned, this does not
attenuate the gravity of the other breaches of Mr. Elawad’s rights. The police
engaged in an unauthorized search of the VW.
[203] 
The police conduct falls at the very serious end
of the continuum. The cumulative impact of the numerous Charter breaches
pulls very strongly in favour of exclusion of the gun and drugs.
[204] 
The second line of inquiry considers the impact
of the breach on the Charter-protected interests of the
accused. It asks whether the breach actually undermined the interests
protected by the right infringed: Tim, at para. 90. The court identifies
the interests protected by the infringed right and evaluates the extent to
which the breach affected or undermined those interests: Tim, at para. 90.
Like the first line of inquiry, the second line envisions a sliding scale of
conduct, from fleeting, transient or technical to profoundly intrusive or which
seriously compromises the interests underlying the right: Grant, at
para. 76; Tim, at para. 90.
[205] 
Although Mr. Elawad was not searched and did not
provide any incriminating information because of police questions, the
intrusion on Mr. Elawad’s interests was very serious. The detention here was
not fleeting. The interests protected include the right not to be treated
differentially because of membership in a group defined by race, colour, ethnic
or national origin or religion, without factual grounds or reasonable
suspicion, resulting in exposure to differential treatment or scrutiny. Both
the right to be free from arbitrary detention and s. 10 (b) rights that flow
from detention are engaged. As noted above, the denial of Mr. Elawad’s s. 10(b)
rights denied him crucial information which ultimately increased his jeopardy.
[206] 
Further, there is a causal link between the Charter
breaches and the evidence. The discovery of the gun and the drugs flowed from an
unlawful traffic stop informed by racial profiling. That stop lead to an
ongoing detention of the accused in breach of s. 9. The police then relied on Mr.
Elawad’s alleged behaviour during his unlawful detention to unlawfully demand his
keys and control of the VW. This led to Mr. Elawad fleeing and the police
asserting the vehicle was abandoned as a result, which led to its search and
the discovery of the evidence.
[207] 
While drivers have a reduced expectation of
privacy in their vehicles, a reduced expectation of privacy does not mean that
an unjustified stop and search is permissible. A person in Mr. Elawad's
position has every expectation of being left alone subject to valid highway
traffic stops: see Dunkley, at para, 58 and cases cited therein.
[208] 
The Crown submits that the officers very shortly
would have learned they had a basis to arrest Mr. Elawad on an outstanding
warrant and for driving suspended, and to impound the VW if he had not fled. This
may have allowed the police to lawfully search the vehicle. The Crown submits
this militates in favour of inclusion of the evidence because the gun and drugs
would have been found independent of any other breaches. This may have occurred
if the police had not unlawfully demanded the keys, causing Mr. Elawad to flee.
However, the Crown’s position does not address the unlawful traffic stop and
racial profiling that gives rise to the Crown’s hypothetical outcome.
[209] 
In my view, admitting the evidence obtained following multiple Charter
breaches, and in particular flowing from conduct arising out of conscious racial
profiling, would send a message to the public that Charter rights are of
little actual avail to the citizen: see Grant, at para. 76; R. v. McColman, 2023 SCC 8, at para. 66. This line of inquiry militates strongly against admission.
[210] 
The third line of the Grant inquiry,
which considers society’s interest in the adjudication of the case on its
merits, asks whether the truth-seeking function of the criminal trial process
would be better served by admission or exclusion of the evidence: McColman,
at para. 69 citing Grant, at para. 79. While disrepute may result
from the exclusion of relevant and reliable evidence,  it may also result from
admitting evidence that deprives the accused of a fair hearing or amounts to
“judicial condonation of unacceptable conduct by the investigatory and
prosecutorial agencies”: Le, at para. 158.
[211] 
Under this third line of inquiry, courts should
consider such factors as the reliability of the evidence, the importance of the
evidence to the Crown’s case, and the seriousness of the alleged offence. The last
factor can cut both ways: McColman, at para. 70, citing Grant at
paras. 81 and 83-84. While the public has a heightened interest in a
determination on the merits where the offence is serious, it also has a vital
interest in maintaining a justice system that is above reproach.
[212] 
The offences are serious offences posing a
danger to the public given the nature of the drugs and that the weapon was a
loaded handgun. The combination of guns and drugs is a potent recipe for loss
of life: R. v. Stephens, 2024 ONCA 793, at para. 19.
[213] 
The gun and drugs are reliable evidence critical
to the Crown’s case. Without this evidence, the Crown’s case collapses. Reliable
evidence critical to the Crown’s case generally pulls toward inclusion: Tim,
at para. 96. That is the case here. The exclusion of
highly reliable evidence impacts more negatively on the repute of the administration
of justice where the remedy effectively guts the prosecution: Grant, at
para. 83. This factor pulls strongly in favour of admitting the evidence.
[214] 
The final step is a balancing of the three lines
of inquiry. The cumulative weight of the first two lines of inquiry must be
balanced against the third line of inquiry: Lafrance,  at para. 90; R.
v. Beaver, 2022 SCC 54, at para. 134. The evidence on each line of
inquiry must be weighed in the balance, to determine whether, having regard to all
the circumstances, admission of the evidence would bring the administration of
justice into disrepute: Harrison, at para. 36.
[215] 
Police perform a fundamental role in protecting
and maintaining a civilized, democratic society. Among other things, they are
charged with the responsibility of preserving the peace, preventing crimes, and
assisting victims of crime: R. v. McCool, 2024 ONCA 457, at para. 40. The
role of police officer is unquestionably a difficult and dangerous one,
especially for officers on patrol. Their safety is routinely at risk, often
without warning to officers. The public must have confidence in its police
officers. That confidence is undermined by conscious racial profiling and
attempts to obfuscate police motives. Without that confidence, the relationship
between police and the public becomes dysfunctional, leading to distrust,
confrontation, and greater risk both to officers and the public they serve and
protect.
[216] 
I conclude that the admission of the evidence would bring the
administration of justice into disrepute. The justice system must dissociate
itself from conscious racial profiling and cumulative breaches of Charter
rights. Society’s interest in the adjudication on the merits of this case must
yield to the important long-term interests served by excluding the evidence.
[217] 
The evidence of the drugs and gun is excluded.
[218] 
Without the drugs and gun, the Crown cannot
establish the offences beyond a reasonable doubt.
[219] 
Mr. Elawad is acquitted of all charges.