[1]    
     On
or about August 20, 2024, counsel on behalf of the Respondents filed a Request
for stay or dismissal this Application pursuant to Rule 2.1.01.  The motion
originally returned in court before Antoniani J., who by way of endorsement on
August 29, 2024 adjourned the motion as it had not been confirmed.  The return
date was October 10, 2024.
[2]    
     The
matter was next before me on October 10, 2024.  The Applicant had by that point
filed and uploaded written submissions, an Affidavit, a Supplemental Affidavit
and a Confirmation.  After some discussion with Mr. Cummings on his own behalf
and counsel on behalf of the Respondents, it was determined that the matter
should proceed as a chambers matter with the parties filing further written
submissions pursuant to the procedure set out in Rule 2.1.01.  Having read the
materials filed for the October 2024 return date and having heard some initial
submissions, I seized myself with this matter.
[3]    
     At
the October appearance on this matter, Mr. Cummings withdrew some of the
requests for relief in his application as moot.  Therefore, these reasons deal
only with the remaining items still at issue from Mr. Cummings Application.
[4]    
     Rule
2.1.01 of the Civil Procedure Rules provides as follows:
[5]    
     The
Ontario Court of Appeal set out the legal framework and principles governing
the application of Rule 2.1:
[6]    
     Black’s
Law Dictionary defines “frivolous” as: “Lacking a legal basis or legal merit;
not serious; not reasonably purposeful.”   If a party does not have standing to
seek the relief being requested, then their pleading has no legal basis and is
therefore “frivolous” as a matter of law.  There are cases in which the Applicant’s
lack of standing formed grounds to dismiss a proceeding under Rule 2.1.[2]
[7]    
     Having
established the legal framework for the request to dismiss pursuant to Rule
2.1, I will address each request for relief that Mr. Cummings is still pursuing
in order.
[8]    
     At
the October appearance, Mr. Cummings clarified that what he is seeking in
relation to this request is for directions from the Court.  The request for
directions is also set out in the Application, wherein it is requested that the
court “direct the committee to provide a clear explanation on the decision” and
provide an explanation for “why an investigator was not recommended on the many
issues such as the redirection of the websites and the reference to Reg Cutler
to determine the exact involvement of Amy Martin in these allegations.”
[9]    
     The
decision referred to in the Application arises out of a complaint made by
Krystal Chopp, the former Mayor of Norfolk County, to the Municipal Election
Audit Committee (MEAC) regarding financial contributions made to the election
campaign of the current Mayor of Norfolk County, Amy Martin.
[10]    
 On
a plain reading, this request is seeking an Order compelling the MEAC to
provide further reasons for their decision and an explanation for a failure to
make a specific recommendation.  There is no basis in law for me to make such
an Order.  Even on a judicial review or an appeal, a reviewing court cannot
order the lower court or administrative tribunal or decision-maker to provide
supplementary readings.  On that basis, this request is frivolous.
[11]    
 If
I read this request more broadly, I could interpret this as a request for an
appeal.  Decisions of the MEAC may be appealed to the Superior Court of
Justice.  On an appeal, the Court could assess whether the reasons provided
were sufficient to allow for meaningful review.  However, Mr. Cummings was not
a party to the process arising out of the complaint made by Ms. Chopp to the
MEAC.  Therefore, he does not have standing to seek a review of the MEAC’s decision
by way of an appeal because he was not a party to the complaint.
[12]    
 I
have also considered the issue of the limitation period.  A decision of the
MEAC may be appealed to the Superior Court within 15 days of the decision being
made. The MEAC’s decision was July 27, 2023.  This Application was issued on
July 16, 2024, almost one year later.  Although in his responding materials,
Mr. Cummings argues that his request should be interpreted to include leave to
extend the timelines, any such request would need to include the reason for the
delay, which Mr. Cummings materials do not.  Furthermore, even if Mr. Cummings
had requested leave and provided an explanation for the delay in filing the
appeal, a determination of whether to grant leave to extend the timelines
necessarily involves a preliminary assessment of the merits of the appeal.  In
my view, even if Mr. Cummings had sought leave to extend the timelines, leave
would not have been granted as he has no standing to appeal the MEAC’s
decision.
[13]    
 Given
my findings on both a plain reading and a more broad and generous reading of
this request, I am satisfied that this claim is frivolous and should be
summarily dismissed.
[14]    
 Under
section 276 of the Municipal Act, a municipality may request that a
judge of the Superior Court of Justice conduct an investigation into an alleged
breach of trust or misconduct of a member of council, or other employee of the
municipality.  However, that process requires that the municipality makes the
request to the Superior Court of Justice by way of a resolution which would be
passed by Council.  Mr. Cummings is not a Norfolk County Councillor, nor does
he have any authority to speak on behalf of Norfolk County Council.
[15]    
 Section
273 of the Municipal Act provides that upon application of any person
the Superior Court of Justice may quash a by-law in whole or in part for
illegality.  Mr. Cummings cites this section as providing the authority for
his standing to seek the relief requested in his Application as set out in 1d). 
Even on a fulsome and expansive reading of Mr. Cummings Application and all of
his supplementary submissions filed in response to the Rule 2.01 request, there
is nothing to indicate the basis upon which Mr. Cummings says that the by-law
in question should be quashed for illegality.  Even on a generous reading of
the Application, it is a stretch to say that the request is even an application
to quash.
[16]    
 The
request in 1d) explicitly relates to the conduct of members of council
in the process of approving a by-law.  That interpretation is further confirmed
by the responding submissions filed by Mr. Cummings where he goes to great
lengths to cite the lack of consultation with residents and the dismissal by
councillors of the deputations that were made to Council.  Mr. Cummings request
is best summed up by the following sentence in his Reply to Motion 2.01 by
opposing counsel: “The question here is did the council act in a “Good Faith
Effort” to consider the will of the people.”
[17]    
 I
accept that as a residence of Norfolk County Mr. Cummings takes a personal
interest in the decisions made by Council given the effect that those decisions
have on all the residents of Norfolk County.  I also accept that Mr. Cummings
genuinely believes that there was a lack of fulsome consultation with residents
of Norfolk County in relation to this particular by-law. However, a lack of
consultation alone does not support an argument that the By-Law is illegal and
should therefore be quashed.
[18]    
 The
other argument raised by Mr. Cummings in support of his request for a review of
the conduct of Council is an allegation that there was a “discriminatory
effect” created by Council giving undue weight to the submissions of certain
parties and dismissing the submissions of other parties without proper
consideration.  A By-Law is not illegal by virtue of Council having considered
certain parties’ interests over others.  To put it another way, Council choosing
not to consider the submissions made by parties opposing the By-Law in deciding
whether or not to enact the By-Law does not make the By-Law itself illegal.
[19]    
 A
By-Law enacted for the benefit of a small group of people is not necessarily
illegal.  In this case, the allegation that the interests of people involved in
land development were considered and preferred over the interests of private
citizens residing in Norfolk County, cannot in and of itself lead to a finding
that the By-Law is illegal.  In order for a court to make an order quashing the
By-Law, there must be a basis upon which to find that the By-Law itself is
illegal or ultra vires – purporting to deal with matters outside the
jurisdiction of the municipality.
[20]    
 There
is nothing before me to indicate that the By-Law itself is illegal or ultra
vires the municipality.  All of Mr. Cummings complaints are about the
process by which the By-Law was enacted not about the provisions or contents of
the By-Law itself.
[21]    
 The
Court does not have the jurisdiction to hear and determine issues relating to
the conduct of municipal council in the discharge of their official duties,
unless that conduct constitutes a criminal or provincial offence.  If the
conduct of councillors runs afoul of any procedures, rules and policies
governing ethical behaviour, that is a matter for the Integrity Commissioner
appointed pursuant to section 223.3 of the Municipal Act, not the Court.
[22]    
 Given
that Mr. Cummings has no standing under s. 276 to request a review and has
provided no basis under s. 273 to quash the By-Law, the request is frivolous
shall be summarily dismissed.
[23]    
 As
I have found that Mr. Cummings has no standing to request a review of the
conduct of council, there is no basis upon which a review should be conducted,
and therefore there is no basis upon which I, or any other judge of the
Superior Court of Justice, could make an appointment of an independent
impartial auditor or investigator.
[24]    
 I
am also not satisfied that the court even has the jurisdiction to appoint an
auditor or investigator to review the conduct of Council as requested.
[25]    
 As
there is no basis upon which this request could be granted, it is frivolous and
shall be summarily dismissed.
[26]    
 Given
my findings that Mr. Cummings lacks standing to request a review and therefore
the court has no basis or authority to appoint an auditor or investigator, this
request is frivolous and will be summarily dismissed.
[27]    
 Section
1(1) of the Municipal Act sets out the definitions of terms used in the
Act, including the term municipality:
[28]    
 Section
2 of the Municipal Act sets out the purposes of the Act:
[29]    
 These
two sections read together make it clear that a “municipality” for the purpose
of the Municipal Act is the corporation created to govern all of the
residents living within specific territorial boundaries.  For the purpose of
this Application, the municipality in question is the corporation of Norfolk
County, which has been duly incorporated to govern matters on behalf of the
residents living within the geographic boundaries of Norfolk County.
[30]    
 The
Corporation of Norfolk County is managed by duly elected members of the
municipal council who make decisions on behalf of the residents of the county,
much the way a Board of Directors makes decisions on behalf of the shareholders
of a private corporation.  The purpose of municipal elections is to allow the
residence of any particular county to exercise their democratic rights to
participate in choosing elected officials.  However, once a municipal council
is constituted by way of individuals assuming the municipal office to which
they were duly elected, the power of the municipality for the purpose of the Municipal
Act is vested in the municipal council which acts pursuant to the powers
and duties prescribed in the Municipal Act.
[31]    
 Based
on the following interpretation of the Municipal Act I have determined
that the definition of “municipality” does not extend to individual residents
of Norfolk County so as to give them standing to request or question the legal
bills presented to the county by retained legal counsel.  Given that an
individual resident of Norfolk County, such as Mr. Cummings, does not have
standing to challenge or question the legal bills of Ross & McBride as the
county’s solicitors, I decline the request of Mr. Cummings to permit residents
of Norfolk County to commence an assessment process of Ross & McBride’s
accounts rendered to Norfolk County.
[32]    
 I
accept that Mr. Cummings is a concerned citizen of Norfolk County who takes his
civic rights and responsibilities seriously.  In finding that much of what he
has requested in his Application should be summarily dismissed, I have not
concluded that Mr. Cummings’ Application is an abuse of process.  Mr. Cummings
genuinely believes that elected officials should be accountable for their
actions.  To that end, he has sought redress from the Courts.  My findings that
there is no legal basis for the relief he is requesting does not amount to a
finding that Mr. Cummings Application itself is an abuse of process.
[33]    
 I
also decline to find that the relief Mr. Cummings has sought is vexatious as
the stigma that can attach to that term is not appropriate in this case.  I am
not aware of any other litigation commenced by Mr. Cummings seeking the same or
similar relief.  Mr. Cummings is not a repeat litigant, coming before the Court
again and again requesting relief that cannot be granted.
[34]    
 Most
of the relief that Mr. Cummings is seeking cannot be granted due to a
combination of a lack of standing or legal basis for the request made. That
relief therefore falls within the definition of frivolous.  Having found those
claims to be frivolous, summary dismissal is appropriate. However, this finding
is not meant to be a judgment on the intent of Mr. Cummings in commencing these
proceedings but simply an assessment of whether or not there is a legal basis
to any of the claims he has made.
[35]    
 The
final claim requested at paragraph 1h) I have summarily determined by way of
these reasons.
[36]    
 The
proper use of scarce judicial resources is a very delicate balance.  Rule 2.01
is one mechanism by which the Court can manage its own processes to ensure the
appropriate allocation of judicial time.  At the same time, it is important
that Rule 2.01 decisions not deter individuals from seeking redress from the
Court when they have a genuine belief that there has been a wrong committed or
harm done.  It is simply the reality of our common law system that sometimes relief
from the Court is not possible or not available in the circumstances.
[37]    
 A
finding that a claim meets the legal definition of frivolous does not mean that
the matter is without value or merit in a normative sense.  I accept that Mr.
Cummings has genuinely held concerns about the manner in which Norfolk County
council has made decisions on behalf of the citizens residing and paying taxes
in the municipality.  However, the reality of our system of justice is that not
every grievance between two parties gives rise to an opportunity to have a
court hear and determine the case on its merits.
[38]    
 That
is not to say though that councillors and mayors who choose to ignore the
deputations of their constituents cannot be held accountable for that
decision.  Every four years councillors and mayors must submit themselves to
the will of the voters by way of an election.  During the election process,
councillors and mayors must answer to their constituents about the decisions
they made during their tenure and the voters decide whether or not councillors
and mayors are given another mandate.
[39]    
 For
all of these reasons, the balance of Mr. Cummings’ Application not already
withdrawn on consent is hereby summarily dismissed.
[40]    
 If
the parties wish to file written submissions on costs, despite my comments
above, those submissions shall be filed as follows: