[1]              
The applicant, the Attorney General of Ontario
(AG) seeks an order forfeiting the sum of $99,210 in Canadian Currency (the
monies seized) pursuant to s. 3 of the Civil Remedies Act, 2001[1] (the Act).
[2]              
The AG contends that the monies were obtained by
Branavan Kanapathipillai through unlawful activity, namely money laundering. The
AG contends that the monies should remain seized and forfeited. A preservation Order
dated April 26, 2023 was granted by Lavine J.
[3]              
Mr. Kanapathipillai contends that he is a chronic
high-stakes gambler and as such deals in large sums of cash.  The monies seized
were not from unlawful activity.  The AG has not proven that the monies seized
were from unlawful activities and thus, the monies seized should be returned to
him. At a minimum, the $20,000 from a line of credit should be returned.
[4]              
For the reasons to follow, I grant the relief
requested by the AG and Order the monies forfeited.
[5]              
On November 13, 2022, the police seized the
monies at Fallsview Casino (the Casino).
[6]              
Mr. Kanapathipillai presented the monies seized
in cash to a cashier at the Casino at around 6:23 p.m.  The monies seized were
sorted into five bundles.
[7]              
Staff at the Casino notified the Ontario
Provincial Police (OPP) and the OPP conducted source of funds interviews.
[8]              
The monies seized were kept by the OPP for
further investigation. From the investigation, it was concluded that the monies
seized were most likely a situation of money laundering and were therefore from
unlawful activities.
[9]              
The investigation comprised of various
interviews with Mr. Kanapathipillai, Casino staff and a tracing analysis which
included a review of the sources of the monies, as alleged by Mr.
Kanapathipillai. In the tracing analysis, various persons were utilized
including the investigating detective, Detective Constable Vic Jevtic, and two
experts Fallon Reid, a Senior Forensic Accountant with the Forensic Accounting
Management Group (FAMG) of Public Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC), and Dwayne
King, Senior Manager in the National Forensics Practice with Grant Thornton
Canada LLP.
[10]          
There is no dispute that Mr. Kanapathipillai deals
with large sums of monies and cash. The investigation determined, as deposed in
the affidavits of Detective Constable Vic Jevtic dated November 14, 2023, and
November 28, 2023 (Jevtic Affidavits) that large sums of monies flow through
various bank accounts and that Mr. Kanapathipillai has deposited and withdrawn
large sums of money over numerous years. This was not denied. The AG contends
that through their investigation it was revealed that Mr. Kanapathipillai has
created and used 12 different aliases, 14 different addresses, 13 different
phone numbers, five different driver’s licences and various dates of birth. The
Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada (FINTRAC) reports
obtained on Mr. Kanapathipillai’s Canadian financial transactions revealed that
between August 2, 2010, and October 21, 2022, there
were 27 Suspicious Transaction Reports, 179 Large Cash Transaction Reports, 209
Casino Disbursement Reports, and five Electronic Funds Transfer Reports
generated concerning Mr. Kanapathipillai, totalling approximately the sum $11,720,520.03
CAD.
[11]          
Mr. Kanapathipillai not only had various personal
accounts, he also used accounts in the names of corporate entities such as 1999533
Ontario Limited and 1999535 Ontario Limited. A total of 23 financial accounts were
examined. They included 19 different bank accounts and four Mastercard
accounts.
[12]          
Concerning the seized funds, it consisted of:
[13]          
Mr. Kanapathipillai provided documentation to
show that the seized funds were from a third mortgage and were used to purchase
a condominium. It was purchased “in trust” by “a friend”, Ms. Singh for a price
of $375,000 in October 2022.  Of the $375,000, $137,660 was paid to Chopra Law
Office and $234,046 was paid to the seller, Ms. Topalis. The seller deposited $220,000
into a bank account that belonged to Mr. Kanapathipillai. A further $75,727.95
was paid to Mr. Kanapathipillai by bank draft from the law firm. Mr.
Kanapathipillai received 79% of the purchase funds.
[14]          
The Jevtic Affidavits set out a 24-year history
of fraudulent activity of Mr. Kanapathipillai dating back to September 2005.
Though Mr. Kanapathipillai has not been charged with a criminal offence from
the alleged activities of this application.
[15]          
Mr. Kanapathipillai owns
an information technology consulting business called Kryptek.  The office is in
India where he sells accounting software. He has had this business since 2018. 
He also rents cars through a website. Mr. Kanapathipillai represented that his
income in 2022 was approximately $200,000 and $150,000 in 2021. The last time he
filed his taxes was in 2020.
[16]          
Mr.  Kanapathipillai purchased an Audi E-Tron in
August 2022 for $149,833 plus financing costs of $46,048.58.
[17]          
Mr.  Kanapathipillai has changed his name at
least three times since 1995.
[18]          
I will first review the opinions of the two
experts.
[19]          
It is not disputed that expert opinion evidence
is generally inadmissible. Such evidence is admissible if it meets the
requirements of admissibility, and it passes scrutiny at the gate keeper stage.
In this case, generally, there is no dispute that the expert evidence provided
meets the requirements of admissibility. Further, it was conceded that the experts
presented have the expertise and the qualifications for which their expert opinions
were based. Thus, there was no objection taken to the admissibility of this expert
opinion evidence.  On that concession, the evidence was admitted and relied
upon, subject to the Court’s ongoing gate keeping function.
[20]          
Ms. Reid is a professional accountant employed
as a Senior Forensic Accountant in the Forensic Accounting Management Group of
the PSPS. Ms. Reid has provided a report at the request of the AG to analyze
and summarize the activity conducted through the accounts held by Mr.
Kanapathipillai, 1999533 Ontario Limited and 1999535 Ontario Limited. This report
is dated October 27, 2023 (the Reid Report). From these accounts, Ms. Reid
provided an analysis from January 1, 2022, to January 31, 2023. Ms. Reid was
asked by the AG to provide:
[21]          
Ms. Reid further described in the Report the methodology
of money laundering: placement, layering and integration.
[22]          
Placement means that it is the goal to deposit
criminal proceeds into a financial system.
[23]          
Layering means the goal to conceal the criminal
origin of the proceeds.
[24]          
Integration takes two forms. Justification means
the goal to create an apparent legal origin for criminal proceedings.  Investment
means the goal to use criminal proceeds for personal benefit.
[25]          
After the review of the 23 accounts, Ms. Reid
provided the following potential indicators of money laundering:
[26]          
In the tracing of funds for the third mortgage
Ms. Reid concluded:
[27]          
On the third issue to review, cash transactions,
Ms. Reid concluded:
[28]          
From the information available, it appears that from
the income generated from Mr. Kanapathipillai's businesses, as well as the sums
deposited and withdrawn from the Accounts could not be supported.  The sums of
monies deposited into, and the withdrawal of accounts not yet obtained, are
substantial. Ms. Reid concluded on the source and use of funds that:
[29]          
Mr. King presently is employed by Grant Thornton
Canada LLP as a Senior Manager in the National Forensics Practice and has 27
years of continuous service with the Toronto Police Service.  He worked over 8
years in the Financial Crimes Unit in the Asset Forfeiture Section. He was
requested by the AG to provide, if possible, an opinion based on his training
and experience that speaks to the following areas:
[30]          
Mr. King described in his report (the King
Report) the elements of money laundering as well as the three phases of money laundering:
placement, layering and integration. He emphasized that legitimately sourced funds
are not money laundered. He further explained:
[31]          
Mr. King explained the regime in place to monitor
financial activity and to recognize money laundering.  Through the regime one
can detect “red flags”. Red flags are indicators or warning signs that suggest suspicious
financial activity.  Red flags do not necessarily mean that there is illicit financial
activity or money laundering on their own but serve as warning signs.
[32]          
Mr. King examined the financial activity and
casino activity of Mr. Kanapathipillai. Mr. King noted many red flags in the
financial activity of Mr. Kanapathipillai.  These red flags included:
[33]          
In reviewing the above factors (red flags) as a whole,
Mr. King concluded that “the currency seized at
Fallsview Casino on November13, 2022, bears the hallmarks of monies that were
about to be laundered, by converting the funds to casino chips and then game
play, by an individual player in an Ontario casino.”[4]
[34]          
Mr. Kanapathipillai filed an affidavit dated
February 2024 (the Responding affidavit). In the Responding affidavit, Mr.
Kanapathipillai deposes that he has a gambling problem. He is a high-stakes
gambler and has been for the past 20 years. As a high stakes gambler, he
utilizes large sums of money.
[35]          
He deposes that most of the money came from the funds
owed to him from Ms. Singh. He says he took out a third mortgage to assist her
in purchasing her condominium in trust from the seller, Ms. Topalis. Mr.
Kanapathipillai provided documents to show the transaction of the third
mortgage and monies received from the law firms and deposited into his account.
[36]          
He also deposed and provided documentation to
show that Ms. Singh deposited the $220,000 owed to him in an account. He deposed
that he used these funds to gamble.
[37]          
Mr. Kanapathipillai also deposed that approximately
$20,000 in cash was received from a previous withdrawal from a line of credit. 
He provided documents to show a withdrawal of $25,000 which he deposed some
were used to pay contractors for a renovation on this home and the rest, approximately
$20,000, he used as money to gamble.
[38]          
Mr. Kanapathipillai admits that he has been
convicted of fraud over $5,000 in 2005 but has not been convicted of any other
crime.
[39]          
On the aliases, he deposed that he has never
used a driver’s license that was not in his legal name. As he deposes: “Mahalingam was my father’s
name. I decided to change it to my grandfather’s name, Kanapathipillai.”
[40]          
Section 3 of the Act reads:
[41]          
In Chatterjee, the Supreme Court of
Canada described the Act as a way “to make crime in general unprofitable, to capture
resources tainted by crime so as to make them unavailable to fund future crime
and to help compensate private individuals and public institutions for the
costs of past crime.”[5]
[42]          
To obtain an order forfeiting property under
the Act, the AG must prove, on a balance of probabilities, that the
property at issue is either “proceeds of unlawful activity” or an “instrument
of unlawful activity”.[6]
[43]          
The two-step test for forfeiture under ss. 3 and
8 is set out in Attorney General v. 104,877 in U.S. Currency (in rem).[7]  In this case, over
$100,000 of American cash (bundled and hidden in socks) was seized along with a
small amount of cocaine at the Canadian border.[8]
  The appellant, Mr. Bourgeois was charged with money laundering, violating the
Controlled Drugs and Substance Act (CDSA), and possession. The AG
argued that the money was the product of unlawful activity or an instrument
thereof. Mr. Bourgeois argued that the money was his life savings that he
earned from working at different casinos. Chapnik J. sets out the test at
paras. 29 - 31:
[44]          
Furthermore, Chapnik J. summarized relevant
principles in the jurisprudence about forfeiture at para. 35:
[45]          
There are two exceptions to forfeiture under s.
3 of the Act. First, s. 3(3) applies where the party seeking to avoid
forfeiture “proves” that there they are an “uninvolved interest holder of the
property”. An uninvolved interest holder means “a person who did not, directly
or indirectly, acquire the property as a result of unlawful activity committed
by the person, and who was the rightful owner of the property before the
unlawful activity occurred or innocently acquired the property without knowing
it was the proceeds of unlawful activity.”[9] The
second is codified in s. 3(1) where the Act says that the court will
order forfeiture unless it is “clearly in the interests of justice” not to forfeit
the property. [10]
[46]          
The Court of Appeal in Ontario (Attorney     General)
v. 8477 Darlington Crescent[11] articulated
the “clearly not in the interests of justice” test, explaining that this test
requires considering “all factors that are relevant to the ‘interests of
justice’” and making orders that maintain public confidence in the civil
justice system, accord with the community’s sense of fairness and are not
excessive.[12] The factors certainly include the “closeness of the connection
between the property and the illegal activity”.[13] Doherty
J. A. recognized that it is not possible to list all of the factors that could properly
be considered in assessing the interests of justice analysis, but identified three:
[47]          
The Court of Appeal in Ontario (Attorney General)
v. 20 Strike Avenue,[15]
applied this analysis and provided a helpful reminder at para. 94:
[48]          
The court is not required to precisely trace
every dollar of the seized currency to the unlawful activity.[16] The AG only must prove
that the “property was acquired in part because of unlawful activity.[17] Whether the alleged
owner has any interest in the property that is tainted by unlawful activity is
a consideration to be weighed when determining whether forfeiture is in
interest of justice.[18]
[49]          
In a recent application of the Act, Attorney
General of Ontario and $48,575 in Canadian Currency (in Rem)[19], the AG’s
position was that the seized funds were proceeds of crime because they were
found in the respondent, Ross-Young’s, possession and that he has been involved
in unlawful activity. The respondent’s position was that the AG had “not met
the requisite evidentiary threshold to establish its case.”[20] He argued that “the mere
possession of funds and a general allegation of unlawful activity is not
sufficient to establish a direct connection between the seized funds and the
alleged unlawful activity” and that by failing to directly link the property to
the unlawful conduct, the AG’s position is based “solely on speculation and
assumptions.”[21]
Goodman A.J. disagreed with the respondent and summarized:
[50]          
Courts in Ontario have held that suspicious
circumstances, such as the possession of large amounts of currency, call for a
credible and reasonable explanation.[22] 
A court is entitled to consider the lack of credible explanation as to the source
or purpose of the money and to draw adverse inferences.
[51]          
The Ontario Court of Appeal shared this same
perspective in Ontario (Attorney General) v. 855 Darby Road, Welland (In
Rem).[23]
The trial judge was asked to determine whether: i) the residence was used as a
Hells Angels’ (Hells Angels Motorcycle Club or HAMC) clubhouse; and ii) whether
the Hells Angels’ paraphernalia ought to be forfeited under the Act. The
applicant relied on evidence that: the clubhouse operated as an illegal bar,
drug deals took place at the property, and that the Hells Angels planned their
criminal activity at “church meetings” on the property. The respondent argued
that the evidence did not support the finding that unlawful activity took
place. The trial judge determined that the property was an instrument of
unlawful activity, and a subset of the paraphernalia was seized as well. [24] The respondent appealed.
One of the issues on appeal was whether the trial judge erred in holding that
the property constituted proceeds of unlawful activity. The appellant
maintained that there was insufficient evidence to conclude that the property’s
mortgage was paid through unlawful activity and amounted to pure speculation.[25] The Court of Appeal
disagreed saying:
[52]          
This sentiment was adopted by Perell J. in Ontario
(Attorney General) v. Contents of Bank Accounts (in rem).[26] Perell J. considered
monies being paid into an account from a monetary exchange used in the Chinese-Canadian
community, Hawala. Perell J. surmised as follows:
[53]          
The evidentiary burden is on the AG to prove on
the balance of probabilities that the monies seized were proceeds of unlawful
activity and/or an instrument of unlawful activity. A specific criminal
activity need not be proved.  If the AG meets this evidentiary burden either through
direct or circumstantial evidence, the onus shifts to the party whose property
is the subject matter of the forfeiture to show they are the responsible owner
of the property or an uninvolved interest holder.  Failure of that party to
provide a credible explanation for a legitimate source of the property may be
considered by the court. Suspicious circumstances, require a “credible and
reasonable answer”.
[54]          
Further, the AG need not provide a forensic
accounting that the property in question is directly from unlawful activity or
the instrument of unlawful activity.  The AG needs to prove through direct or
circumstantial evidence that on the balance of probability that part or some of
the property in question generally is from unlawful activity or an
instrument of unlawful activity. The AG needs to show, at least, suspicious
circumstances that there is unlawful activity. Again, if the AG has proven
such, the burden shifts to the party who wishes to have the property returned
to provide a credible and reasonable answer.
[55]          
The Court has the overall discretion to not
order forfeiture if it is clearly in the interest of justice to do so.
[56]          
There is no question that Mr. Kanapathipillai is
the owner of the funds seized and that the monies came from his accounts.
[57]          
In my view, the AG has established through the evidence
provided that on the balance of probabilities that part or all the monies seized
are from unlawful activity.  These evidentiary indicators include:
[58]          
In addition, Mr. Kanapathipillai has not
provided an explanation or the source of the vast sums that have flowed through
the various accounts that are under his control.
[59]          
The income stated in the income tax returns and the
stated income by Mr. Kanapathipillai clearly cannot support the monies flowing
through his various accounts. He has provided no evidence to justify the use of
the various corporations or why the monies have flowed to him.  The corporations,
as mentioned before, show no indicators of an active continuing business purpose.
They appear to be tools to flow money in and out.
[60]          
Mr. Kanapathipillai has argued that the monies
in question are from legitimate sources: the third mortgage and line of
credit.  As such, the monies should not be forfeited.  First, there is no onus
of the AG to prove on the balance of probabilities that the specific funds in
question are fully from unlawful activities or the instruments of unlawful activities. 
The AG need only provide that generally the funds are from unlawful activities.
Second, the evidence provided by Mr. Kanapathipillai is suspect and he does
not, in my view, provide a credible and reasonable explanation of the source of
the monies that have flowed through his and the corporations accounts. The
sources for the purchases outlined do not demonstrate why these vast sums of
monies have flowed into and from the accounts.
[61]          
The structure of the transactions on the alleged
money owed to him and the source monies deposited into the line of credit are suspect.
The vast sums of monies with no stated source and the structure of these
transactions allowing him to withdraw monies from various bank accounts,
personal and corporate, are all in suspicious circumstances. The explanation by
Mr. Kanapathipillai in obtaining 79% of the proceeds of sale from that property
is suspect. As well, the structure of the purchase is suspect. The fact that he
signed the Agreement of Purchase and Sale, and that the trust agreement appears
to be back dated. The mortgage commitment for a one-year mortgage was not
signed by the lender, Sadhu Aggarwal. The mortgage was not renewed and after
the one-year power of sale proceedings were commenced. Mr. Kanapathipillai
defended the action pleading that the lender and his counsel are trying to
steal his properties.
[62]          
Moreover, there was no affidavit evidence
provided from Ms. Singh or Ms. Topalis to support the contention of Mr.
Kanapathipillai that monies were owed to him, the source of the funds were
legitimate, that the payment from the sale proceeds were a legitimate
transaction to pay the alleged debt owing and that the property was not Mr. 
Kanapathipillai’s property.
[63]          
Thus, Mr. Kanapathipillai has not provided convincing
evidence to support his allegations that the monies seized were from legitimate
source(s) and were not in part from unlawful activities. The lack of evidence from
parties involved in the transaction leads the Court to adopt an adverse
inference against Mr. Kanapathipillai. That inference is that the parties
involved would not provide evidence to support his contention that the source of
the funds that have flowed through the accounts, the alleged debt owed, and the
line of credit were not supported or funded all or in part from unlawful
activities.
[64]          
There are numerous red flags exhibited on the
descriptors of unlawful activity, namely money laundering. Taking all together,
I am satisfied that the AG has proven on the balance of probabilities that the
monies seized are from unlawful activities.
[65]          
I will also consider whether returning the
monies to Mr. Kanapathipillai is in the interest of justice. Though Mr.
Kanapathipillai did not argue that the monies seized should be returned to him
on that basis, I will consider whether I should exercise my discretion
accordingly.
[66]          
On the basis of the evidence provided, I conclude
quite definitely that there is no evidentiary basis that would compel this Court
to exercise its direction in the interest of justice in favour of Mr.
Kanapathipillai. There is nothing provided that would give this Court pause on
whether granting the order for forfeiture would diminish public confidence in
the civil legal system and not be in the interest of justice to do so. Hence, I
do not find support that would justify this Court to not exercise its
discretion to grant forfeiture.
[67]          
I therefore conclude that the AG is successful
in its application and that the monies in question be forfeited to the AG.
[68]          
I find in favour of the AG and Order that the
sum of $99,210 plus any accumulated interest be forfeited to the AG per s. 3(1)
of the Act.