[1]         
This application is brought by Tara-Lee Daniel
(“Daniel”) pursuant to ss. 2. and 3. of the Partition Act, R.S.O. 1990. c.
P. 4, for an order directing the listing and sale of two properties she owns
with the respondent, Michaelangelo Rizzo (“Rizzo”), acquired while they were in
a relationship between 2018 and 2022.
[2]         
The properties are:
[3]         
While on good terms, Daniel and Rizzo bought Trent
Lakes. It was used as a family cottage for Daniel, her children and Rizzo and also
for short-term vacation rentals. It was purchased using funds from the sale of
a cottage owned by Rizzo and a mortgage. Rizzo was unable to obtain a mortgage
on his own so Daniel agreed to co-signing the mortgage, in return for which she
would receive a 50% ownership of Trent Lakes.
[4]         
The relationship between Daniel and Rizzo came
to a final end in September 2022. Daniel no longer used Trent Lakes and asked Rizzo
to remove her name from title to the Properties and from the mortgages. Rizzo
failed or refused to do either, which led Daniel to bring this application. Notwithstanding
her ownership interests in the Properties, Daniel does not seek to share in the
any net sale proceeds realized on the sale of the Properties.
[5]         
At the outset of this hearing, the court was
advised that the parties had reached a settlement with respect to the Niagara
Falls Property. The parties were invited to submit an Order for me to sign,
which embodied the settlement.
[6]         
Rizzo’s position on this application was that Trent
Lakes ought not to be sold. However, midway through this hearing, Rizzo
withdrew his opposition to its sale. He agreed that an order for the sale (“Sale
Order”) could proceed on the terms proposed by Daniels (attached at Schedule
“C” to her Factum), save and except for para. 1.e. of the proposed order, which
Rizzo did not wish to be included. Para. 1.e. reads as follows:
[7]         
As a result, the only substantive issue to be
decided by the court is whether the Sale Order should include para. 1.e.
[8]         
When Daniel and Rizzo bought Trent Lakes, the
Agreement of Purchase and Sale included a Schedule “C”. By signing Schedule
“C”, Daniel and Rizzo acknowledged that there “may be a driveway through the
northeast corner” of Trent Lakes, which provides access to three neighbouring
properties.  They also agreed that, “if in fact” there was such a driveway,
provided that by November 17, 2024 the other affected  property owners (defined
herein as “the Neighbours”) paid the costs of a survey and the Planning Act
process applicable to grant a permanent right-of way, Daniel and Rizzo “for
themselves and successors in title” would cooperate “expeditiously and bona
fide at all times to grant a deeded and surveyed right-of-way” (the “ROW”) to one
or all of the Neighbours.
[9]         
The Neighbours assert that in reliance upon
Schedule “C”, they obtained and registered a survey, had their lawyer prepare a
consent application for the ROW, which was sent to Daniel and Rizzo for
approval and signature in January 2022. They assert that Daniel and Rizzo
refused to sign the application, seeking to impose conditions that were not
included in Schedule “C”.
[10]     
In March 2023, the Neighbours sued Daniel and
Rizzo[1]
for specific performance of Schedule “C” and other relief (the “Toronto
Action”)[2].
The Neighbours claim that Rizzo and Daniel breached their obligations under
Schedule “C” by refusing to execute the consent Planning Act application
documents, required to obtain and register the ROW. The Toronto action is
ongoing.
[11]     
Daniel and Rizzo delivered separate statements
of defence to the Toronto Action. In her Defence, Daniel admits that pursuant
to Schedule “C”, she was “obligated to “cooperate expeditiously and bona
fide” to provide and register the permanent right-of-way in favour of the
Plaintiffs.[3]
[12]     
Daniel reached a resolution with the Neighbours
in the Toronto Action which provides, in part, that she would seek as a term of
any court-ordered or voluntary sale that any subsequent purchaser be required
to sign the planning application for the ROW, to cooperate expeditiously and in
good faith at all times, and to take all other steps necessary to grant the
ROW.
[13]     
Daniel submits that the essence of her
resolution with the Neighbours does no more than to give effect to what she
believes she agreed to when she executed Schedule “C”.
[14]     
In his Defence to the Toronto Action, Rizzo
denies that Schedule “C” entitled the Neighbours to apply for or obtain an
easement[4],
asserting that Schedule “C” refers to an “right of way”, not to an easement.
Rizzo also disputes that the Neighbours are entitled to the ROW or to any
“prescriptive easement”.
[15]     
By way of consent order dated April 18, 2024,
the Neighbours were added as parties to this application for the limited
purpose of allowing them to make submissions that, should an order be made, the
court should direct that the sale of Trent Lakes provide for the ROW.
[16]     
Specifically, the Neighbours ask that any sale
order should require any subsequent purchaser to:
[17]     
On this application, Rizzo submits that to include
para. 1.e. in the Sale Order and/or the terms proposed by the Neighbours, would
be tantamount to granting the Neighbours the judgment they seek in the Toronto
action, without a trial or hearing on the merits.
[18]     
Rizzo acknowledges that that there is a prima
facie right of a co-owner of property to partition or sale in the absence
of sufficient reason for the court to exercise its discretion to refuse the
order and that the basis for finding a sufficient reason to deny the
application is limited to circumstances where the applicant has acted
maliciously, oppressively, or with a vexatious intent toward the respondent.
[19]     
There is an extensive record before this court.
Had Rizzo not conceded that Trent Lakes be sold, I would have ordered its sale.
In my view, the reasons he put forth to resist the sale of Trent Lakes were
contradicted by the factual record, including admissions, he made on
cross-examination. I see no evidence that Daniel acted “maliciously, oppressively,
or with a vexatious intent toward” Rizzo.
[20]     
I find that the grounds raised by Rizzo in
support of the delay or dismissal of the application or to direct a trial, to
be devoid of merit.
[21]     
In his factum, Rizzo submitted that “it is clear”
that Trent Lakes “was subject to a business arrangement” between Daniel and
Rizzo; that it was not a “matrimonial property”, and that Daniel disclaims any
financial interest in it.
[22]     
I do not accept those submissions. Not only did Rizzo
not provide any evidence of a “business arrangement” with Daniel, but his own
evidence contradicts that assertion. For example, in his supporting affidavit,
Rizzo stated that the cottage was to be a family cottage for use by him and
Daniel and her children (Rizzo transcript, CC, page M-A796).
[23]     
As to the latter assertion, while, on this
application Daniel does not seek to share in the net sale proceeds of Trent
Lakes, she has not waived or disclaimed her 50% ownership interest in it.
[24]     
In his factum, Rizzo submitted that the pending
title insurance claim relating to Trent Lakes would create uncertainty for any
purchaser, who would not know what the were purchasing while the claim was
outstanding. That assertion appears to be misleading: at the hearing, the court
was advised that the insurance claim was denied in July 2024.
[25]     
Rizzo made a similar argument concerning the
uncertainty created by the Toronto Action. Specifically, Rizzo submitted that
until the Toronto Action is resolved, prospective purchasers will not know
precisely what they are purchasing.
[26]     
That argument is undermined by the very fact
that Daniel and Rizzo chose to buy Trent Lakes and to sign Schedule “C” in the
face of the same alleged “uncertainty”.
[27]     
In oral argument, Rizzo submitted including
para. 1.e. in the sale order would negatively affect the purchase price.
[28]     
In response to that argument, Daniel submitted,
persuasively, that Rizzo provided no evidence – expert or otherwise – to
establish that including para 1.e. which, for all intents and purposes reflects
the provisions of Schedule “C”, would reduce the sale price achievable for Trent
Lakes.
[29]     
A further example of an argument raised by
Rizzo, which was unsupported by the factual record, was his assertion that this
application could not proceed on a paper record in that there were numerous
material facts in dispute.
[30]     
In his factum at para. 42, Rizzo lists the
alleged material facts in dispute that include:
[31]     
Daniel submitted, persuasively, that not one of
the listed “material facts” in dispute were, in fact, disputed.
[32]     
Daniel submitted, persuasively, that one of Rizzo’s
main objectives in opposing this application was to delay the sale of the
Properties, which he, alone, uses and enjoys.
[33]     
As Rizzo has conceded that Trent Lakes can and
should now be sold, it is no longer open to him to argue that its sale should
be deferred until the Toronto Action has been resolved. While I have not made
extensive reference to the evidence supporting the existence of the ROW, there
is, in fact, a significant record before this court that would support the
position taken by the Neighbours that the ROW has been in place for decades.
[34]     
Included in that evidence is Schedule “C” which,
in itself, is strong evidence of the existence of the ROW. It is fair to
assume, which I do, that if there were any diminution in the market value of Trent
Lakes by reason of the potential registration of the ROW, that had already been
reflected in the price paid by Daniel and Rizzo when they bought.
[35]     
Para. 1.e. is intended to reflect the terms that
Daniel and Rizzo accepted when they bought Trent Lakes. Accordingly, I do not
accept Rizzo’s submissions that to impose similar terms on a new buyer will be
prejudicial to him or cause an unfair reduction in its market value.
[36]     
Indeed, I come to an opposite conclusion. Omitting
para. 1.e. from the sale order could, and very likely would, create unresolved
uncertainty and, possibly, give rise to the registration against the title of Trent
Lakes, such as of a Certificate of Pending Litigation, putting potential buyers
on notice of the Neighbours claims to the ROW, which would interfere with or
even prevent its sale and/or reduce the sale price achievable.
[37]     
Rizzo has also submitted that to grant the
relief sought by Daniel would, in effect, be to grant judgment to the
Neighbours on the claims raised in the Toronto Action.
[38]     
I do not accept those submissions. The claims
made in the Toronto Action against Rizzo include declaratory relief and
damages, neither of which is requested on this application.
[39]     
The Neighbours submit that Rizzo’s own planning
expert has provided an opinion that the ROW lands meet the definition of an “access
road” under the Ontario Road Access Act, and as such, any subsequent
purchaser would already be subject to restrictions concerning the use of the
lands that the Neighbours assert are subject to the ROW: Neighbour’s Factum, at
para. 50.
[40]     
Rizzo has put forth no evidence to support his
assertion that the inclusion of para. 1.e. in the Sale Order would negatively
affect the ability to sell Trent Lakes or the potential sale price achievable.
By contrast, based on the record before me, there is evidence on which to
conclude that not including para. 1.e. in the sale order could
negatively affect the ability to sell and/or the sale price achieved.
[41]     
In my view, including para. 1.e. in the Sale Order
will achieve a proper and fair outcome to Daniel and Rizzo: 1) it will
alleviate any uncertainty to any potential purchaser(s) that might interfere
with the sale of Trent Lakes and/or with achieving the highest possible sale price;
2) it recognizes Daniel’s inherent right to seek the sale on terms that are
fair to her, as a 50% owner; and, 3) it will not prejudice Rizzo’s future use
or enjoyment of Trent Lakes, which he has agreed will be sold.
[42]     
For the reasons set out, I grant an order for
the sale of Trent Lakes in the form attached as Schedule “C” to Daniel’s Factum
dated September 30, 2024, (Case Center pages M-A409 - A420), subject to the
following amendments:
[43]     
Daniel and Rizzo are encouraged to reach an
agreement on the costs of this application.
[44]     
If the Neighbours are seeking their costs, they,
too, are encouraged to reach an agreement.
[45]     
Should Daniel, Rizzo and/or the Neighbours be
unable to agree on costs, they are to make written costs submissions as
follows: