[1]              
Gray Jay Estates Inc. ("Gray Jay")
seeks an order varying the “Payment Amount” as defined in the assignment
of indebtedness and security agreement dated April 24, 2024, between, among
others, Gray Jay as assignor, NE SPC II LP ("Blacksail") as
assignee, and 9869247 Canada Limited d.b.a Safari Flower ("Safari
Flower") as borrower (the "Blacksail Assignment Agreement").
[2]              
The variation sought by Gray Jay would have the effect
of increasing the Payment Amount as defined in the Blacksail Assignment
Agreement, such that the amount to be paid by Blacksail to Gray Jay would be
increased by approximately $1 million.
[3]              
Blacksail opposes the relief sought by Gray Jay.
[4]              
Safari Flower and GN Ventures Ltd., the Applicants in
this proceeding, carried on business as a licensed cultivator and processor of
cannabis.
[5]              
Blacksail and Gray Jay were senior secured lenders of
the Applicants.
[6]              
An initial order under the Companies’ Creditors
Arrangement Act R.S.C., 1985, c. C-36 (the "CCAA") was
made in respect of the Applicants on January 12, 2024, and Ernst & Young
Inc. was appointed as monitor (the "Monitor").
[7]              
Blacksail was the DIP lender in the CCAA proceedings of
the Applicants.  It is not disputed that the sum of $2,898,130.00 was owing
under the DIP facility (the "DIP Facility") as of August 16,
2024.
[8]              
A sale process was run in the CCAA proceedings and did
not result in any offer that was acceptable. As a result, Gray Jay and
Blacksail entered in a number of agreements which at a high-level provided that
Gray Jay had the option to take an assignment of Blacksail’s debt and security.
If Gray Jay closed on that assignment, Gray Jay would also become the purchaser
under a share purchase agreement in respect of the shares of the Applicants. If
Gray Jay did not close on that assignment, then Blacksail would take an
assignment of Gray Jay’s debt and security and would proceed to close as
purchaser under the share purchase agreement between the Applicants and
Blacksail dated as of April 29, 2024 (the “Share Purchase Agreement”).
[9]              
To this end, on April 25, 2024, Blacksail and Gray Jay
entered into an assignment agreement which provided for the purchase by Gray
Jay of Blacksail's loan to the Applicants (the "Gray Jay Assignment
Agreement"). Under the Gray Jay Assignment Agreement, if Gray Jay
failed to purchase the Blacksail debt and security by May 17, 2024, then
Blacksail would purchase the Gray Jay debt and security pursuant to the
Blacksail Assignment Agreement.
[10]          
Gray Jay failed to complete the assignment contemplated
by the Gray Jay Assignment Agreement and, therefore, the Blacksail Assignment
Agreement became operative.
[11]          
The Share Purchase Agreement was approved by the Court
on May 7, 2024, pursuant to a reverse vesting order.
[12]          
The Blacksail Assignment Agreement was originally
scheduled to close on June 17, 2024.  There were delays and closing was
eventually rescheduled for August 9, 2024, however the parties could not agree
on the Payment Amount.
[13]          
The Payment Amount was defined in section 2.01 of the
Blacksail Assignment Agreement as follows:
[14]          
On August 19, 2024, the Court granted an order (the “August
19 Order”) compelling Gray Jay to complete the Blacksail Assignment
Agreement based on a Payment Amount of $4,451,870.32, provided that Gray Jay
had the right to bring a motion for an order varying the Payment Amount.
[15]          
The transaction contemplated by the Blacksail
Assignment Agreement closed on August 22, 2024. Shortly thereafter, the
transaction contemplated by the Share Purchase Agreement also closed.
[16]          
Gray Jay then, as contemplated by the August 19 Order,
brought a motion seeking an increase in the Payment Amount to reflect that (i)
cash on hand should have been used by the Applicants to repay a portion of
amounts outstanding under the DIP Facility prior to closing under Blacksail
Assignment Agreement (the “Assignment Closing”); and (ii) cash on hand
for purposes of (i) should be increased to reflect the amount of certain
pre-paid expenses.
[17]          
There are two issues to be decided:
[18]          
In their written material, Gray Jay also claimed that
the cash on hand of the Applicants, at the time of the Assignment Closing
(being $1,155,285) should also be adjusted by certain amounts, including an
increase of $805,365.56 representing ‘prepaid expenses’ of the Applicants. 
However, during the course of oral argument, Gray Jay abandoned that claim.
[19]          
Gray Jay argues that the DIP Facility matured, pursuant
to its terms on June 30, 2024. Further, Gray Jay says that the Monitor
projected that the Applicants would only have cash on hand of $188,736 at the
time of the Assignment Closing (the “Projected Closing Cash”). 
Accordingly, Gray Jay takes the position that it would only be reasonable and
proper to assume that the Applicants’ cash on hand, in excess of the Projected
Closing Cash, would have been used to repay the DIP Facility.
[20]          
Gray Jay submits that applying the cash on hand, less
the Projected Closing Cash, to reduce the DIP Facility would have resulted in a
corresponding increase of almost $1 million in the payment that Blacksail was
required to make to Gray Jay under the Blacksail Assignment Agreement. Because
Blacksail was also the purchaser under the Share Purchase Agreement,
immediately following the closing of that transaction, Blacksail retained the
benefit of the cash on hand in the Applicants (as the new shareholder of the
Applicants).  As such, Gray Jay says, Blacksail has obtained a ‘windfall’ of
approximately $1 million because the Applicants did not use their ‘excess’ cash
to repay the DIP Facility – the Payment Amount was reduced by the amount of the
excess cash while, at the same time, Blacksail retained the benefit of that
cash.
[21]          
There is no question that had the Applicants used a
portion of the cash on hand to reduce the DIP Facility prior to Assignment
Closing, that Payment Amount owing by Blacksail to Gray Jay would have
increased and there would have been less cash in the Applicants following
closing.  However, the DIP Facility was not in fact repaid.
[22]          
Blacksail did not control the Applicants prior to
closing of the Share Purchase Agreement transaction. As the Assignment Closing
preceded the closing of the share purchase transaction, it was not Blacksail’s
decision to repay the DIP Facility prior to the Assignment Closing.
[23]          
Blacksail also takes issue with Gray Jay’s reliance on
the Projected Closing Cash. First, it says that the cash flow forecast relied
on by Gray Jay was attached to the Monitor’s Seventh Report dated July 24,
2024.  The Monitor’s Seventh Report was compiled approximately three months
after the Blacksail Assignment Agreement had been entered into and, therefore,
cannot be relevant to an interpretation of that agreement.
[24]          
Second, Blacksail says that the closing was originally
scheduled for June 17, 2024, and was then delayed through July and into August,
including in part because of the dispute with Gray Jay. The cash on hand in the
various cash flow forecasts filed by the Monitor varied depending upon the
week. For example, the cash flow forecast attached to the Monitor’s Seventh
Report shows an opening cash balance of almost $1 million for the week of July
22, 2024.  However, it does not forecast any DIP Facility repayment (even
though, as argued by Gray Jay, the DIP Facility had matured at that point).
[25]          
I agree with Blacksail that reliance on the Projected
Closing Cash is not appropriate.
[26]          
Blacksail also says the documents at the time indicated
no intention to repay the DIP Facility. The DIP Facility was an assumed
obligation under the Share Purchase Agreement.  That agreement, at section 3.3
provides:
[27]          
Gray Jay was not a party to the Share Purchase
Agreement, however, as noted above, the Share Purchase Agreement formed part of
the package of documents entered into around the time of the Blacksail
Assignment Agreement.  The Share Purchase Agreement was also publicly filed and
was approved by the Court by Order dated May 7, 2024.
[28]          
There was nothing in the Blacksail Assignment Agreement
or the Share Purchase Agreement which spoke to repayment of the DIP Facility
prior to closing of those transactions.
[29]          
It is agreed that the DIP Facility had matured.
However, Gray Jay was not a party to the DIP Facility. The parties to the DIP
Facility had also entered into the Share Purchase Agreement and as noted above,
the Share Purchase Agreement spoke to a retention of the DIP Facility along
with amended terms and conditions – not a repayment prior to closing.
[30]          
Accordingly, based on the record before me, I am not
persuaded that an order should be made deeming that cash on hand of the
Applicants be used to repay amounts under the DIP Facility prior to the
Assignment Closing.
[31]          
Gray Jay submits that the phrase “all amounts
outstanding under [the DIP Facility]” in section 2.01(a) of the Blacksail
Assignment Agreement should be read to mean all amounts properly
outstanding under the DIP Facility.
[32]          
As noted above, Gray Jay submits that the amount properly
outstanding should be calculated by applying the cash on hand of the
Applicants, less the Projected Closing Cash to reduce the DIP Facility.
[33]          
As set out by the Supreme Court of Canada in Earthco
Soil Mixtures Inc. v. Pine Valley Enterprises Inc., [Earthco] 2024
SCC 20 the overriding concern of contractual interpretation is to determine the
parties’ intention and the scope of their understanding: see Earthco at
para 62. The actual words chosen are central to the analysis, but to determine
true intent, “decision makers must read the contract as a whole, giving the
words used their ordinary and grammatical meaning, consistent with the
surrounding circumstances known to the parties at the time of formation of the
contract” see Earthco at para 63 quoting Sattva Capital Corp v
Creston Moly Corp, 2014 SCC 53 [Sattva], at para 47.  Although the
facts surrounding the contract formation are relevant, those facts must not be
allowed to overwhelm the words of the contract see Earthco at para 63.
[34]          
As stated in paragraph 65 of Earthco, “Sattva allows
courts to interpret contractual terms in light of the contract as a whole and
with reference to objective evidence that illustrates what was within the
parties’ knowledge at or before the time of their contract’s formation (see
para. 58). Ultimately, ascertaining the objective intent of the parties
involves not only a consideration of the actual words used in a contract but
also a consideration of the factual matrix surrounding the contract.”
[35]          
The record before does not demonstrate that the parties
to Blacksail Assignment Agreement, being Gray Jay and Blacksail had a mutual
understanding at the time the Blacksail Assignment Agreement was entered into
that any cash on hand of the Applicants (or any ‘excess’ cash on hand) would be
used to repay the DIP Facility prior the Assignment Closing.  The target
closing was prior to the DIP Facility maturity, and Gray Jay admits that there
is no evidence that the parties had turned their mind to repayment of the DIP
Facility if cash was available.
[36]          
Gray Jay also submitted that while it did not allege
any bad faith on the part of Blacksail, relying on Bhasin v. Hrynew,
2014 SCC 71 at para 45, consideration of good faith should be assumed so as to
intend minimum standards of conduct on the part of Blacksail. In this regard,
Gray Jay submits that the minimum standard of conduct should be assumed to be
that any ‘excess’ cash on hand would have been used to repay the matured DIP
Facility.  Gray Jay takes the position that not doing so leads to an
unreasonable result and, therefore, cannot be what the parties intended. As set
out below, I do not agree.
[37]          
Blacksail, takes the position that Gray Jay, with the
benefit of hindsight, deciding it had made a bad bargain, asks the court to
re-write the agreement. Blacksail relies on the Ontario Court of Appeal’s
recent decision in ID Inc. v. Toronto Wholesale Produce Association,
2025 ONCA 22 which quoted with approval the decision of Arnold v. Britton,
[2015] UKSC 36, [2015] A.C. 1619, at para. 19, "[t]he mere fact that a
contractual arrangement, if interpreted according to its natural language, has
worked out badly, or even disastrously, for one of the parties is not a reason
for departing from the natural language.”
[38]          
In considering the words used in the Blacksail
Assignment Agreement, the phrase “all amounts outstanding under the [DIP
Facility]” is clear. The parties agree that the amount outstanding at the
relevant time was $2,898,130.00.  There is nothing in the text of the agreement
or in the surrounding circumstances that leads me to conclude that anything
different than the plain reading of the phrase ‘all amounts outstanding’ was
intended.
[39]          
Gray Jay asks that the court imply the term ‘properly’
into section 2.01 of the Blacksail Assignment Agreement.  Gray Jay and
Blacksail agree that the law regarding implied terms in contracts is as set out
in Moulton Contracting Ltd. v. British Columbia, 2015 BCCA 89 [Moulton]
where it was held:
[40]          
In the present case, implying the term ‘properly’ in
reference to the outstanding amount under the DIP Facility is not necessary to
make the contract as the parties intended.  There is, as admitted by Gray Jay,
no evidence as to what the parties intended. I recognize that as held by the
Ontario Court of Appeal in Energy Fundamentals Group Inc. v. Veresen Inc.,
2015 ONCA 514 [Energy Fundamentals], the implication of a contractual
term does not require a finding that the parties actually thought about it –
often implied terms fill gaps in agreement to which the parties did not turn
their mind: see para 35.  However, the court will not imply a term which contradicts
the express language of the contract or is unreasonable: see para 36 of Energy
Fundamentals.
[41]          
The Blacksail Assignment Agreement is effective as it
was drafted. Adding the word “properly” as requested by Gray Jay would only
lead to ambiguity and potential litigation about the word’s meaning.
[42]          
The crux of the matter appears to be Gray Jay’s belief
that Blacksail is receiving a windfall.  However, the record before me does not
support that position. If the parties had intended the Payment Amount was to
increase based on the amount of cash (or prepaid expenses) of the Applicants at
the time of the Assignment Closing, the parties could have negotiated language,
similar to a working capital adjustment of some kind, to address that business
risk.  They did not do so. Gray Jay may regret that no other adjustments to the
Payment Amount were negotiated, however, the language of 2.01 of the Blacksail
Assignment Agreement is clear. There is no need to imply a term as requested by
Gray Jay to make the contract effective and doing so would not be appropriate.
[43]          
Accordingly, I would dismiss Gray Jay’s motion.
[44]          
For the reasons above, the motion by Gray Jay is dismissed.
[45]          
The parties had advised me during oral argument that an agreement had
been reached between them that costs of the motion would be payable of $20,000
by the unsuccessful party.  Accordingly, Gray Jay is ordered to pay Blacksail
the amount of $20,000 inclusive of HST within 30 days hereof.