[1]              
Three proposed class actions seek carriage of investors’
claims against Toronto-Dominion Bank (“TD” or “the bank”) and its officers and
directors.
[2]              
Listed in chronological order, these actions are:
Parkin v. TD Bank (the “Parkin action”), Gazarek v. TD Bank (the
“Gazarek action”), and Nam v. TD Bank (the “Nam action”).
[3]              
Each action seeks statutory and common law remedies
on behalf of investors for losses linked to TD’s alleged inadequate anti-money
laundering (“AML”) controls, the alleged failure to disclose the inadequate
controls, and the regulatory/criminal investigations and consequences flowing
from its acknowledged inadequacies.
[4]              
I conclude that the Parkin action is best suited
to advance class members’ claims in an efficient and cost-effective manner. These
are my reasons for that decision.
[5]              
The considerations and timing applicable to
carriage motions is set out in section 13.1 of the Class Proceedings Act,
1992, S.O. 1992, c. 6 (the “Act”):
[6]              
The objective of a carriage motion is to select
the counsel and proceeding that will best advance the interests of the class
members, in a cost-effective and efficient manner: Buis v. Keurig Canada
Inc., 2023 ONSC 87, at para. 15.
[7]              
Subsection 13.1(4) requires the court to
consider how each proposed action will achieve access to justice for the
members of the class, and the extent to which the competing theories of the
case may lead to a disproportionate effort in comparison to the potential
benefit: Blackford-Hall v. Simply Group, 2021 ONSC 8502; Bonnick v.
Crown Crest Capital Management Corp., 2021 ONSC 8503, at para. 10.
[8]              
In Longair v. Akumin Inc, 2022 ONSC 2571,
at para. 8, Akbarali, J. affirmed that carriage motions require “a case by case
analysis of the efficiency, productivity and proportionality and the needs of
Class Members, as distinct from the wants of class counsel.”
[9]              
Before I analyze the competing actions, the Nam
action has moved to stay the Parkin action for failing to register its action
on time as required by the Act. In the alternative, the Nam action seeks leave
to commence its action out of time pursuant to s. 13.1(8) of the Act. I will address
these issues first.
[10]          
A class proceeding must be registered with the National
Class Action Database of the Canadian Bar Association (the “CBA Database”) on
the same day it is issued: the Act, s. 2(1.1); O. Reg 497/20,
s. 1(2). Any subsequent action may not be commenced more than 60 days after the
first action, without leave of the court.
[11]          
The chronology of relevant events unfolded as
follows:
[12]          
The Nam action seeks a stay of the Parkin action
because it was not registered on the day that it was commenced. The Nam action
submits that this important requirement should be treated like a limitation
period and that the Parkin action should be declared a nullity.
[13]          
In the alternative, the Nam action seeks relief
from the leave requirement to commence its own action. It reasons that by
failing to comply with the registration requirement, the Parkin action was not
“commenced” on May 24, 2024.  The Nam action argues that the Gazarek action
started the 60-day “clock” because it was properly commenced by registering its
action on June 4, 2024. If I accept this submission, then the Nam action is not
out of time and does not require leave of the court.
[14]          
However, if the Parkin action was commenced on
May 24, 2024, then the Nam action was brought more than 60 days after the
Parkin action and does not comply with s. 13.1 (3) of the Act. The Nam action
would then need leave of court under s. 13.1(8).
[15]          
I consider the following issues raised by the
Nam action:
[16]          
Statutory interpretation is required to resolve
these issues. The starting point in statutory interpretation is Driedger’s
modern principle, which states that the words of a statute must be read in
context, given their ordinary meaning and harmoniously with the scheme and
object of the Act and the intention of the legislator: Rizzo & Rizzo
Shoes Ltd. (Rd), 1998 CanLII 837 (SCC), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 27, at para. 21. I must first answer the
following interpretive question: does the failure to register a proceeding in
accordance with s. 2(1.1) mean that a proceeding has not commenced within the
meaning of s. 2?
[17]          
Section 2 of the Act deals with commencing a
class proceeding, registration, and provisions for the motion for
certification. Subsections 2(1)-(4) read as follows:
[18]          
O. Reg 497/20 under the Act (the “Regulation”) directs
those who commence a proceeding to register the action as follows:
[19]          
Section 2 of the Regulation deals with certain
class proceedings where leave is required under the Ontario Securities Act,
R.S.O. 1990. c. S.5  (the “SA”). This provision applies here because all
three actions include statutory claims under the SA which require leave.
Section 2 of the Regulation reads:
[20]          
Subsection 13.1(3) creates a 60-day motion
period for all carriage motions; the clock starts to run on the “day on which
the first of the proceedings was commenced.” Thus, the 60-day motion period is
connected to when the first action commenced proceedings.
[21]          
 The Nam action submits that the mandatory
registration requirement in s. 2(1.1) of the Act means that a class proceeding
is not “validly commenced” until it has been registered.
[22]          
I disagree. Reading ss. 2(1) and 2(1.1)
together, those provisions do not make the commencement of the proceeding
conditional on registration. The “commencement of a proceeding” is not
equivalent to, or dependent upon registration on the CBA Database. Rather, s.
2(1), under the heading “Plaintiff’s class proceeding” permits one or members
of a class to commence a proceeding in the court on behalf of the
members of the class (emphasis added).
[23]          
A “proceeding” is defined as an action or an
application: Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, s. 103. A
proceeding “is commenced” by issuing either a statement of claim or a notice of
action: York Region Standard Condominium Corporation No. 1206 v. 520 Steeles
Developments Inc., 2020 ONCA 63, 444 D.L.R. (4th) 415, at paras. 46-48 6 (“YRSCC
No. 1206”).
[24]          
Once a proceeding is commenced, then s. 2(1.1),
under the heading “Registration of proceeding”, requires that a person who
commences a proceeding under subsection (1) “shall register the proceeding in
accordance with the regulation.” A plain reading of the provisions demonstrates
that these are two discrete events.
[25]          
The Regulation is consistent with this
interpretation. Subsection 1(2) of the Regulation contemplates that “commencing
an action” does not include registration, because it says:
[26]          
The Regulation links the commencement of a
proceeding to the court’s issuance of the originating process. Once “commenced,”
the proceeding must be registered by delivering a copy of the issued originating
process to the CBA Database. These are two distinct requirements.
[27]          
Further, in actions that require leave under s.
138.3 of the SA, as is the case here, section 2 of the Regulation confirms
that for the purposes of a carriage motion, the proceeding shall be considered…
“to have been commenced under section 2 of the Act on the day the
originating process is issued”.  The Regulation explicitly identifies the proceeding’s
date of commencement as the day the originating process is issued for actions
that require leave under the SA.
[28]          
I find that the 60-day motion period began to
run from the date of commencement of the first action, that is, when the Parkin
notice of action was issued.
[29]          
I turn next to the consequences of the failure
of the Parkin action to register the proceeding in accordance with the Regulation
on the day that it commenced the action.
[30]          
The Nam action acknowledges that there are no legislated
consequences for an action that does not register, or registers late. Here, the
Parkin action did not register a May 24, 2024 notice of action. Instead, it
amended its notice of action on June 19, 2024 and registered it the next day.
In the interim, the Gazarek action was issued and registered, putting both the
Parkin action and the Nam action on notice that there was a competing class
proceeding.
[31]          
In considering Nam’s first submission, that the
Parkin action is a nullity, I begin first with the text. There is no remedy
stipulated for any failure of a party to register in accordance with the
Regulation. A finding that any such claim is a nullity is not supported by the
legislation. However, the next question is how should I exercise my discretion
to remedy the Parkin action’s failure to carry out a mandatory step?
[32]          
I begin with the context and policy
underpinnings for class proceedings. The jurisprudence, legal texts, and 2019
report of the Law Commission of Ontario (the “LCO”) all describe the purpose of
class actions as: a legal procedure that enables large groups of people who
suffer a common harm to seek a legal remedy.  Class actions are intended to achieve
three public policy purposes: access to justice, behaviour modification and
judicial economy: Winkler, Perell, Kalajdic and Warner, The Law of Class
Actions in Canada (Toronto: Thomson Reuters Canada Limited, 2014), at p. 2;
Law Commission of Ontario, Class Actions: Objectives, Experiences and
Reforms: Final Report (Toronto: July 2019), at p. 2; Hollick v.
Toronto (City), 2001 SCC 68, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 158, at para. 15; AIC
Limited v. Fischer, 2013 SCC 69, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 949.
[33]          
Class proceedings’ legislation should be
construed generously to give effect to its goals: Hollick, at para. 14; Sun‑Rype
Products Ltd. v. Archer Daniels Midland Company, 2013 SCC 58, [2013] 3 S.C.R.
545, at para. 109.
[34]          
Proceedings are registered on the CBA Database
to notify potential competing actions. The LCO Report of 2019 identified
concerns with delay and the costs associated with “carriage battles”. The
subsequent amendments to the Act aim to reduce those problems. Registration is
an important step and should not be ignored due to carelessness or to obtain
strategic advantage.
[35]          
However, I disagree with the Nam action that
Parkin’s delay in registration means that their proceeding should be found to
be a nullity. This is an early stage of the proceedings. The legislation is
intended to facilitate access to justice and is silent on the consequences of
failing to comply. Declaring the Parkin action a nullity would be
disproportionately harsh, because there are other ways to respond to a failure
to comply with the same-day registration requirement.
[36]          
If non-compliance with s. 2 (1.1) in any
circumstance automatically nullifies a proceeding, this could doom meritorious
actions and deprive class members of access to justice. I conclude that the
preferable approach, given the nature and purpose of the legislation, is to
treat the registration timing requirement as a procedural requirement, with any
default being a procedural defect.
[37]          
In making this finding, I apply by analogy the
reasoning in YRSCC No. 1206. There, the Court of Appeal overruled its
prior decision in York Condominium Corp. No. 46 v. Medhurst, Hogg &
Associates Ltd. et al. (1983), 1983 CanLII 1970 (ON CA), 41 O.R. (2d) 800 (C.A.) by finding that
non-compliance with notice provisions in s. 23(2) of the Condominium Act
should not mean that an action is a nullity.
[38]          
In YRSCC No. 1206, the Court of Appeal
considered the consumer protection objectives of the Condominium Act, 1998,
S.O. 1998, c. 19 and the impact of finding an action to be a nullity for
statutory non-compliance: at para. 28. In applying that framework to the notice
period at issue, the Court of Appeal concluded that declaring an action to be a
nullity could result in injustice by operating to defeat a meritorious action: YRSCC No. 1206., at para. 33.
[39]          
The Act accords the court broad remedial
procedural powers to ensure fairness and expeditiousness in the conduct of
class proceedings. Section 12 of the Act reads:
[40]          
The Nam action fairly points out that it was
prejudiced by the Parkin action’s failure to register – it led to their action needing
leave. There are, however, other ways to remedy any such prejudice on the
motion for leave which I discuss below. There may be other consequences for
procedural defects, including considering it as a factor in the analysis of the
experience of counsel on a carriage motion. The court has discretion to decide what
the consequence of non-compliance should be based on the extent of that
non-compliance and any prejudice suffered because of the defect: YRSCC No. 1206., at para. 37.
[41]          
Declaring the Parkin proceeding a nullity would
be a harsh penalty for non-compliance. It is inconsistent with the liberal
approach to construing the Act as adopted in Hollick. Although
important, procedural formalities should not be enforced at the expense of
class members' access to justice. I do not find that the Parkin action should
be declared a nullity.
[42]          
I turn next to Nam’s alternative submissions.
[43]          
Given my finding that the Parkin action is not a
nullity, the date of the commencement of the Parkin action places the Nam
action outside the 60-day carriage motion period. Consequently, the Nam action
requires leave of the court to participate.
[44]          
The Parkin and Gazarek actions do not oppose the
court granting leave to the Nam action participating in the carriage motion. I
would grant leave and adopt similar criteria to that used to determine whether
to extend time to file an appeal.
[45]          
Similar to motions to extend time on appeal, I
consider whether the “justice of the case” informed by the circumstances
supports an extension: Rizzi v. Mavros, 2007 ONCA 350, at para. 17; Monteith
v. Monteith, 2010 ONCA 78, at para. 11; Issai v. Rosenzweig, 2011
ONCA 112, at para. 4; Krawczynski v. Ralph Culp and Associates Inc.,
2019 ONCA 399, at para. 9.
[46]          
I propose to consider the following factors in deciding
whether to grant the Nam action leave participate in the carriage motion:
[47]          
Here, the length of Nam action’s delay is brief:
60 days from May 24, 2024, the date the Parkin action commenced, is July 23,
2024. The Nam action was commenced 11 days later, on August 2, 2024. The reason
for the delay is connected to Nam’s position that the Parkin action is a
nullity.
[48]          
The prejudice here is minor, because the parties
sought and received case management directions from Justice Akbarali on how to
approach the issue. All parties had notice of each other’s positions and
material. The court was served by a range of competing actions on carriage.
This was to the benefit of the class.
[49]          
Overall, the justice of the case favours
granting the Nam action leave to participate in the carriage motion. I grant
the Nam action leave to participate.
[50]          
I turn next to the substance of the carriage
motion, beginning with a brief description of the background to the actions.
[51]          
TD is a reporting issuer and a responsible
issuer as defined in the SA. TD is headquartered in Ontario. It’s shares
trade on the Toronto Stock Exchange (TSX) and the New York Stock Exchange
(NYSE).
[52]          
All three actions arise from a series of allegedly
untimely or incomplete disclosures related to TD’s AML measures. These events culminated
in the first ever guilty plea by a bank in the U.S. to the criminal charge of
conspiracy to commit money laundering.
[53]          
While there are some common law claims, all
three actions agree that the most significant aspect of each of the claims
competing for carriage are the damages claims for misrepresentation under the SA.
[54]          
The SA creates a statutory right of
action in damages for secondary market misrepresentations under s. 138:
[55]          
The SA defines what is meant by a
“misrepresentation” and a “material fact”, both of which,  form part of the
definition of what constitutes a misrepresentation for the purposes of an
action under s. 138:
[56]          
TD has not filed a statement of defence to any
of these actions, pending a decision on carriage. The focus on this motion is
the question of carriage in accordance with the factors in the Act. In
the absence of a statement of defence, discovery of relevant records and
investigation of witnesses by the competing actions, I will be cautious in
avoiding speculative assumptions.
[57]          
Next, I turn to the background facts beginning
with TD’s October 2024 guilty plea.
[58]          
On October 10, 2024, TD’s U.S. affiliates
pleaded guilty on a criminal indictment filed by the U.S. Department of Justice
to conspiracy to commit money laundering and failure to prevent money
laundering. TD agreed that it was aware of the systemic deficiencies in the
bank’s AML measures, but placed a higher priority on profit. TD agreed that it
had failed to monitor trillions of dollars in transactions for at least a
ten-year period between 2014-2024.
[59]          
TD acknowledged that its failures to address
insider risk meant that bank customers and five bank insiders laundered
approximately $671 million through TD accounts in the U.S. TD agreed to having
filed 564 materially incorrect CTRS, which omitted the identity of an
individual conducting the transaction, involving more than $412 million in
currency transactions and thus impeding law enforcement.
[60]          
Through its U.S. holding company, TD agreed to
pay a criminal penalty of $3.09 billion US.
[61]          
The guilty plea was accompanied by consent orders
with the Office of the Controller of the Currency (the “OCC”) and the U.S.
Treasury Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN). Those orders prevented
TD from expanding in the U.S. – including being prevented from opening new
retail and commercial branches.
[62]          
Each action relies on overlapping alleged
misrepresentations by omission. The Nam action relies on misrepresentations related
to AML violations, the impact on TD’s growth and the AML investigations, but unlike
the other two actions, does not allege accounting misrepresentations.
[63]          
The Parkin action relies on four categories of
misrepresentation: ineffective AML controls, the criminal and regulatory investigations
into the bank’s AML controls, criminal investigations of TD’s employees and
customers, and accounting compliance with International Control Over Financial
Reporting (“ICFR”)/goodwill.
[64]          
The Gazarek action relies on the same four
categories as the Parkin action, except it does not pursue a ground of misrepresentation
related to accounting for goodwill. It frames the accounting misrepresentation
as a failure to record a provision when a liability is probable and estimable.
[65]          
Beginning on May 8, 2023 and through until TD’s
guilty plea on October 9, 2024, TD and members of the media published
information about TD’s AML problems. Each action relies on subsets of
information taken from a global list of “corrections” of TD’s alleged failures
to disclose material information.
[66]          
The pleaded corrective disclosures, listed in
chronological order, include:
[67]          
All three actions allege that TD misrepresented
the state of its AML controls, the nature of regulatory investigations into its
AML controls, money laundering activity by TD employees and customers, the risk
to expansion plans in the U.S. including the acquisition of US bank, First
Horizon Corp., and CEO and CFO certification misrepresentation. The actions are
grounded in statutory and common law causes of action. The claims have more in
common than not, as illustrated by the following comparison of the causes of
action across the three claims:
[68]          
While there are more similarities than
differences in each case theory, the actions differ in terms of the class
period and size, the number of defendants, and the choice of pleaded
corrections. Each seeks recovery of billions of dollars in damages on behalf of
the investors.
[69]          
The Gazarek action begins in 2018 – which takes
it outside the three-year statutory limitation period in the SA. To address
this issue, the Gazarek action pleads fraudulent concealment. The Nam action ends
its proposed class period on June 3, 2024 for reasons of cost-benefit to
investors and efficiency. The Parkin action has filed a motion for leave under
the SA as of September 6, 2024, which suspends the running of the
limitation period as of that date.
[70]          
Each action critiques how the others chose to
define their class period. Each action’s rationale for their selected class
period in brief, is:
[71]          
All three actions seek relief for significant
groups of investors harmed because of TD’s alleged misrepresentations and
subsequent sets of corrections. As amended, the Gazarek action seeks relief on
behalf of the largest group. However, this is a starting point, given the
limitation period issue raised by the other actions. I consider the impact of
the limitation period on the Gazarek class period under the “likelihood of
success” factor.
[72]          
The Nam action submits that the phrase
“efficient and cost-effective” modifies all of the criteria found in ss.
13.1(4)(a)-(d). This approach would favour the Nam action with a single class
plaintiff, fewer individual defendants, a shorter class period, and an absence
of accounting misrepresentations. However, this submission would sever and
elevate considerations of efficiency above the overriding aim expressed in s.
13.1(4).  The court must determine “which proceeding would best advance the
claims of the class members in an efficient and cost-effective manner.” The
leanest action would not necessarily advance the claims of the class members. A
more compact action might be more efficient, but excessively abridging a claim
in the name of efficiency may come at a cost to the class members.
[73]          
As Morgan, J. put it in Dziedziejko v. Canopy
Growth Corporation, 2023 ONSC 6318, at para. 32: “streamlined actions
encouraged by the factors to be taken account of under s. 13.1(4) are intended
to foster access to justice, not to eliminate it for some claimants with
credible claims in order to expedite it for a smaller and thus inevitably more
manageable class of claimants.”
[74]          
The Gazarek action has 21 defendants, comprised
of TD,  past and present CEOs and CFOs who certified that TD’s disclosures did
not contain any misrepresentations, officers with responsibility for AML
controls and members of the TD Audit Committee whose mandate included
overseeing the adequacy of TD’s AML systems and internal controls. The chosen
defendants relate to their responsibilities and  likelihood of knowledge. The
Gazarek action names the largest number of defendants. It is potentially the
most unwieldy among the three actions.
[75]          
The Parkin action has 13 defendants, comprised
of TD, and some directors and officers of the bank. It is the only action to
include what the Parkin action describes as “four critical defendants”: Mia
Levine, Allen Love, Kevin Doherty, and Greg Braca. The Parkin action submits
that these defendants are important due to their responsibilities and as
sources of critical evidence about the events during the relevant class period.
[76]          
More particularly, each of the four named Parkin
defendants had the following responsibilities:
[77]          
The Nam action names the fewest defendants: TD
and three officers. Nam submits this is another litigation choice which makes its
action preferable because it is leaner and more efficient.  This is true but
could sacrifice access to information from key players, especially those
involved in the plea agreement, in the name of efficiency. On an incomplete
record, it cannot be said that Nam’s smaller group of defendants offers the
best outcome for the class in what is fairly anticipated to be strongly
defended litigation. The Nam action has not explained the benefit of omitting
the four U.S. AML officers apparently connected to the TD guilty plea or
countered the Parkin action’s submissions about their expected usefulness to
the action.
[78]          
Each of the actions include statutory defendants
under the OSA, TD as the corporate defendant, and various officers and
directors. The Parkin action has provided a comprehensive description of the
rationale for its choice of defendants, including the unique positions of the
four officers above.  Given the issues of AML controls and knowledge in play,
these added four defendants can reasonably be expected to have relevant
evidence. I find that the choice of defendants favours the Parkin action.
[79]          
The Nam action distinguishes itself from the
Parkin and Gazarek actions by reducing the number of corrections to five and
selecting June 3, 2024 as the final date for the correction of
misrepresentations.
[80]          
The Nam action submits that all the information
that was published on August 21, 2024 and again on October 9 and 10, 2024 had
already been made public by June 3, 2024.  Thus, the Nam action reasons that
any purchasers after June 3, 2024 had knowledge of the corrections and do not
have a cause of action against TD.  The Nam action submits that the failure of
the Parkin and Gazarek actions to plead the June 3, 2024 corrective disclosure
reveals a weakness in their case theories.
[81]          
The Parkin and Gazarek actions contrast their
econometric opinions in support of their pleaded corrective disclosures to the
Nam action which relies on a chartered business valuator without experience in
securities misrepresentation cases.  The Parkin and Gazarek actions rely on the
importance of economic analysis of alleged corrective disclosures in the wake
of misrepresentations as discussed in Drywall Acoustic Lathing and
Insulation, Local 675 Pension Fund v. Barrick Gold Corporation, 2021 ONCA
104, at para 50, adopting Perell J.’s analysis in Drywall Acoustic Lathing
and Insulation, Local 675 Pension Fund (Trustees of) v. SNC Lavalin
Group Inc., 2016 ONSC 5784.
[82]          
Determinations of whether an alleged public
correction reveals a prior misrepresentation requires a “robust analysis of the
evidence” on which the proponent argues supports a finding that a trial court
could find that the purported public correction could serve as a “time-post”
for damages: see Kauf v. Colt Resources Inc., 2019 ONSC 2179, 145 O.R.
(3d) 100, at para. 121.
[83]          
The Parkin action is critical of Gazarek’s
pleading that the January 9, 2024 Globe and Mail article is a partial
corrective disclosure and its choice to exclude the May 8, 2023 publication,
relying on preliminary reports from its economist expert. The Gazarek action
submits that Parkin’s DRIP misrepresentation claims and goodwill claims are
flawed.
[84]          
All three actions have a rationale for their
litigation choices. The wisdom and flaws of some of the details cannot be
readily distinguished at such an early stage, and in the absence of complete
expert analysis. At its highest, I conclude that the Parkin and Gazarek actions
have filed economic expert evidence to support their choices in accordance with
the jurisprudence on how damages are to be assessed. However, these are not
final reports and there have been no cross-examinations to test the assumptions
within those reports. This aspect favours the Parkin and Gazarek actions.
[85]          
The Parkin action began its preparation and
research in January 2024. It has advanced the furthest since that date by researching
publicly available materials, issuing its Notice of Action, a Statement of
Claim, an amended Statement of Claim, serving its leave motion by September 6,
2024 to toll the SA limitation period, retaining and obtaining
preliminary expert reports in the areas of securities action econometrics, AML,
banking, accounting, corporate governance and disclosure.[1] The Parkin action has
added an experienced representative class plaintiff, The Trustees of the
Drywall Acoustic Lathing and Insulation Local 675 Pension Fund.
[86]          
The Gazarek action has likewise researched
publicly available records and materials, issued and amended its Statement of
Claim, pleaded fraudulent concealment and discoverability with a view to
defeating limitations periods issues, researched and signed an agreement with experienced
securities class action counsel in the U.S., Cohen Milstein (“CM”). CM has in
turn retained private investigators to seek out and interview witnesses,
including former TD employees. Several senior lawyers with CM have applied for
and received foreign legal consultant licences from the Law Society of Ontario
to give legal advice on Ontario concerning U.S. laws.[2] The Gazarek action has
also retained experts and obtained preliminary reports from American experts
ranging from AML regulatory structures, OCC and bank regulation, accounting and
goodwill, and corporate compliance and risk. In addition to Mr. Gazarek, the
Canadian investor representative, the Gazarek action has added an American
representative plaintiff, the Public School Teacher’s Pension and Retirement
Fund of Chicago.
[87]          
The Nam action started its investigation at the
beginning of May 2024 when it read the April 30, 2024 report that disclosed
issues with TD’s AML program and that it was taking an initial provision of
$450 million connected to potential regulatory penalties.  Like the other
actions, the Nam action reviewed TD’s public disclosure documents and news
concerning money-laundering activity in U.S. TD banks, and the applicable laws
and regulations concerning bank obligations for AML programs. The Nam
action has engaged two experts: Mark G. Jones, an accounting expert to provide
an opinion on the length of the class period and partial disclosures, and Ross
S. Delston, a certified AML specialist.
[88]          
Overall, the Parkin and Gazarek actions have
moved farther ahead than the Nam action in their preparations for leave and
certification. This aspect favours them.
[89]          
All of the actions have pleaded viable claims on
their face. The expert reports, the pleaded misrepresentations and corrections,
and the TD guilty plea with its references to what was known by senior TD
management, are preliminary indicia of support for the case theories. While
each takes issue with certain choices and diverge on questions such as whether
to pursue the tort of deceit (Nam-yes; Parkin and Gazarek-no) and accounting
misrepresentations (Gazarek and Parkin-yes; Nam-no), these are not core
differences.
[90]          
The Nam action submits that adding accounting
misrepresentations adds time and energy to the analysis without any additional
benefit. Nam’s choice to add the tort of deceit could potentially motivate
individual defendants “dig in” to protect their personal reputations, thereby
adding to the length of trial unnecessarily and with no corresponding value.
These are all possibilities with elements of speculation.  As all counsel
acknowledged, the claims are broadly alike in their quest to obtain damages for
investors who traded in “damaged shares” because of the misrepresentations.
[91]          
Overall, these are not really “competing theories”
but “competing actions” with the same theory and slightly different approaches
to seeking damages for the benefit of the class. I do not find that the
critiques of the added tort of deceit by Nam, or the accounting claims by
Gazarek and Parkin are significant enough to be determinative.  Each action has
pleaded some basis for each of their choice of claims. This aspect is neutral for
all three actions.
[92]          
These actions require leave to proceed under s.138.8
of the OSA, prior to any motion to certify the action.  Thus, the
relative likelihood of success of the actions must be considered in the context
of leave and certification, while bearing in mind that this is not a full adjudication
on the merits: Longair, at para. 16; Blackford-Hall, at paras. 4,
37; Dziedziejko, at para. 44; Liang v. SSR Mining,
Inc., 2024 ONSC 4432, at para. 3.
[93]          
The leave
requirement means that the plaintiff must offer a “plausible analysis” of the
legislation, and demonstrate a legal foundation for the claim, supported by
credible evidence. The record must demonstrate a reasonable chance the action
will succeed during this stage: Drywall Acoustic Lathing and Insulation
(Pension Fund, Local 675) v. Barrick Gold Corporation 2024 ONCA 105 (“DALI
v. Barrick 2024”), at paras. 26-32.
[94]          
While the
leave step is not a “mini trial”, the motion judge acts as a gatekeeper and
considers all the evidence – including whether cross-examination has undermined
the credibility or reliability of the plaintiff’s critical evidence: DALI v.
Barrick 2024, at para. 32.
[95]          
Understanding
the role of the motion judge on leave, as well as certification, informs the
carriage decision. At the carriage stage, I focus on whether there are
identifiable weaknesses, complications, or impediments to leave and/or
certification with the competing actions relative to one another: Buis, at
para. 26; Dziedziejko, at para. 4.
[96]          
There are
two areas of weakness which I address next. The first involves the Gazarek
action’s longer class period, stretching back to 2018. That action relies on
pleading fraudulent concealment to defeat the three-year statutory limitation
period in the SA.
[97]          
The Gazarek action submits that it will benefit
a larger class of wronged investors, with the longest class period pleaded. The
statutory limitation period in s. 138.14 of the SA requires that an
action be commenced no later than three years after the first release of a
document containing the actionable misrepresentation. It is an
“event-triggered” limitation period and is not subject to discoverability: Kaynes
v. BP, P.L.C., 2018 ONCA 337, at para. 15.
[98]          
By virtue of s. 138.14(2), the limitation period
is suspended when a party files a notice of motion for leave under s. 138.8. 
Otherwise, statements made more than three years before an action is commenced fall
outside the limitation period. Section. 138.14 of the SA aims to balance
claims of current or previous shareholders against the interests of subsequent
shareholders: Kaynes, at paras. 19-21.
[99]          
The Gazarek action proposes to address the statutory
limitation period defence under the SA by pleading the equitable
doctrine of fraudulent concealment. Fraudulent concealment has historically
been applied where a defendant in a special relationship to a plaintiff takes
advantage of that relationship and knowingly withholds information from the
plaintiff that would give rise to a cause of action. The doctrine aims to
prevent wrongdoers who hide their wrongs long enough to then benefit from a
limitation period.  The doctrine operates by suspending the limitation period
until the plaintiff discovers the fraud or ought reasonably to have discovered
the fraud: Guerin v. The Queen, 1984 CanLII 25 (SCC), [1984] 2 S.C.R.
335, at p. 390; M. (K.) v. M. (H.), 3 [1992] S.C.R. 6, at pp. 56-57; Pioneer
Corp v. Godfrey, 2019 SCC 42, [2019] 3 S.C.R. 295, at para. 54; Gilani
v. BMO Investments Inc., 2021 ONSC 3589.
[100]      
Prior to 2019, a special relationship between
the parties was a precondition for the doctrine of fraudulent concealment.
However, the Supreme Court of Canada restated the test in Pioneer Corp.  The
Supreme Court focussed on the unconscionability of the defendant’s actions in
the overall context of the relationship, eliminating any requirement that there
be a “special relationship” as a precondition to applying the doctrine: Pioneer
Corp, at para. 54; see also Soetemans v. Design Concrete Systems Ltd.,
2022 ONSC 5595, at paras. 32-43.
[101]      
More recently, in the Gilani class
action, Glustein, J. applied the doctrine of fraudulent concealment in the
context of a trustee-beneficiary relationship and reasoned as follows:
[102]      
Gazarek pleads that there is a special
relationship between a responsible issuer and investors due to the knowledge
imbalance, and the unconscionability of the issuer withholding important
information about its AML failures. In essence, the pleading defines secondary
market misrepresentation claims made by a reporting issuer as “unconscionable” per
se. The implications of this position would mean that the doctrine of
fraudulent concealment would apply in any such cause of action. As Ms. Nayerahmadi
put it in her submissions, this would effectively “obliterate” the three year
limitation period in the SA for such claims.  I agree with her that this
is a novel attempt to extend fraudulent concealment to secondary market claims
of misrepresentation under Part XXIII.I of the SA. It can reasonably be
predicted to complicate and lengthen the issues on leave and certification,
given its broad implications. This is not in the best interests of the class.
[103]      
The Parkin action further submits that the
Gazarek action proposes an unlawful fee-splitting arrangement between Canadian
counsel, Sotos, and its agreement with its American counterparty, CM, contrary
to the Rules of Professional Conduct.  In support of that position, the Parkin
action filed an expert report from Gavin Mackenzie.
[104]      
The Gazarek action responds that the expert
report is not admissible because it is expert evidence on domestic law – that
being the Law Society Act, R.S.O. 1990, c L.8 and the Rules of
Professional Conduct – and is therefore within the realm of knowledge of the
court: International Air Transport Association v Canada (Transportation
Agency), 2024 SCC 30, at para. 78.
[105]      
I disagree. Expert evidence about professional
standards of conduct is admissible: Teskey v. Canadian Newspapers Co.,
1989 CanLII 4392, 68 O.R. (2d) 737 (C.A.), at paras. 44-46. I apply Teskey
to the opinion tendered here and the test found in White Burgess Langille
Inman v. Abbot and Haliburton Co. 2015 SCC 23, [2015] 2 S.C.R. 182, at
paras. 19 -23. I conclude that the expert evidence meets the White Burgess criteria.
[106]      
The expert evidence concerns the standards of
practice in Ontario of lawyer licensees, which is an area of expertise outside
the regular knowledge of the court. There is no exclusionary rule. Mr. Mackenzie
is a properly qualified expert to give evidence on the standards for lawyers
licensed to practice in Ontario. To name but a few of his credentials, he is
former Senior Counsel, Discipline and Treasurer of the Law Society of Ontario,
and author of Lawyers and Ethics: Professional Responsibility and Discipline
(Toronto: Carswell, 1993).
[107]      
In terms of the cost-benefit analysis of
receiving the expert evidence, the funding issue is important. If the
arrangement between Canadian and U.S. counsel is vulnerable to challenge based
on unlawful fee-splitting, this could seriously undermine the Gazarek action’s
leave and certification application. The opinion is not lengthy and the parties
have had a fair opportunity to make submissions on it. I conclude that the
benefits of admitting Mr. Mackenzie’s opinion outweigh the risks.
[108]      
The opinion considers the application of r.
3.6-7 of the Rules of Professional Conduct, which prohibits Ontario lawyers
from fee-splitting with non-lawyers. Rule 3.6-7 provides that: “[a] lawyer
shall not directly or indirectly share, split, or divide their fees with any
person who is not a lawyer or paralegal”. The definition of “lawyer” in r. 1 is:
“a person licensed by the Law Society to practice law as a barrister and
solicitor in Ontario.” Subject to certain exceptions that do not apply here, r.
3.6-7 does not allow fees to be divided between law firms based in Ontario and firms
in American jurisdictions that are not licensed to practice in Ontario.
[109]      
The agreement between Sotos and CM envisions a
40:60 fee split, which would come from the total fees approved for Sotos. Under
the terms of that agreement, Sotos will maintain control of the litigation, and
any disputes will be resolved in Canada by an arbitrator. CM will not practice
law in Canada and has obtained the necessary foreign legal consultant permits
to give advice on U.S. law. CM has agreed to fund disbursements with a 100%
premium on disbursements paid. The agreement between the firms also permits CM
to approve Sotos’ disbursements that are over $5,000.
[110]      
While the Parkin action acknowledges that U.S.
firms can be paid for services rendered to Canadian class counsel, it is the
nature of the Ontario rule and the terms of this arrangement that is
problematic. In Leslie v. Agnico-Eagle Mines, 2016 ONSC 532, 90 C.P.C.
(7th) 201, the court approved payment of $700,000 to an American firm
commensurate with their time spent assisting class counsel. This was not a
contingency fee arrangement.
[111]      
Class counsel routinely retain U.S. law firms. Their
fees are generally treated as justifiable costs or disbursements: Bancroft-Snell
v. Visa Canada Corporation, 2015 ONSC 7275, at para. 62.
[112]      
In Canadian provinces where the rules around
fee-splitting are different from those in Ontario, courts have permitted
contingency fees with U.S. counsel: New Brunswick v. Rothmans Inc, 2009
NBQB 198, 352 N.B.R. (2d) 226, at para. 71; Plimmer v. Google Inc., 2013
BCSC 681, at para. 74. These differences were noted in Plimmer. Griffin,
J. reviewed the Code of Professional Conduct for British Columbia which permits
fee sharing among lawyers in B.C. with lawyers in other jurisdictions, subject
to client consent and proportionality. In contrast, as Griffin, J. noted at
para. 72:
[113]      
A fee-sharing arrangement was proposed in the failed
certification of an automobile defect class action in Poulin
v. Ford Motor Company of Canada Limited, 2006 CanLII 38880.  In that
case, the motion judge declined to certify the class proceeding. Among other
findings, the motion judge raised a concern that U.S. counsel were effectively
underwriting the action: Poulin, at para. 92. The Divisional Court
upheld the decision on the broader questions of suitability of the plaintiff,
lack of common issues, and that there a class proceeding was not the preferable
procedure: Poulin v. Ford Motor Company of Canada Limited, 2008 CanLII
54299, 301 D.L.R. (4th) 610. In doing so, the Divisional Court echoed the
concerns of the motion judge, including the U.S. firm’s power of approval of
disbursements over $2500.
[114]      
The cases the Gazarek action relied upon do not
assist with the question of allowable fee-splitting with U.S. counsel. The
decisions in Shah v. LG Chem. Ltd, 2021 ONSC 396 and Mallette v. Bank
of Montreal, 2021 ONSC 2924 concerned interprovincial firms working jointly
on Canadian class actions in Ontario. Canadian lawyers enjoy inter-provincial
mobility which may permit them to practice in other provinces. This feature
distinguishes the approved fee arrangements in Shah and in Mallette
from the Gazarek action’s proposal.
[115]      
In summary, there is admissible expert evidence
that the proposed fee arrangements in the Gazarek action may be contrary to the
Rules of Professional Conduct in Ontario. This is capable of being a live issue
on certification to the detriment of the class, and thus reduces the
preferability of the Gazarek action.
[116]      
The solicitors for the Parkin action have acted
as lead or co-lead counsel in over 16 securities class actions. They were
counsel on two common issue securities trials: AIC v. Fischer, which is
proceeding to a damages trial in April of 2025, and Kerr v. Danier Leather
Inc. in 2004. They are the only firm in Canada to have prosecuted the only
two common issue securities trials in Ontario.
[117]      
The Gazarek action has likewise established that
its team has extensive credentials in class action litigation, particularly in
competition law matters. Counsel has bolstered its securities subject matter
expertise with the agreement formed with CM, an established U.S. firm of 105
lawyers with over 50 years of representation in securities actions, complex
litigation and class actions.  However, this is subject to the comments above
about the risks posed by the financial arrangements between the firms, and the
critical role of Canadian counsel where a case is prosecuted in Canada: Wilson
and Shah v. LG Chem, 2014 ONSC 1875, at para. 22.
[118]      
The solicitors for the Nam action collectively
bring securities class action experience as co-counsel on several securities
class actions. They have collectively settled securities class actions ranging
from $6-11 million. The firm seeking carriage on behalf of the Nam action was
granted carriage in the Dziediejko action, in which the motion judge
Morgan J. described each competing firm as “experienced in investors’ rights
litigation and class actions.”
[119]      
These are complex actions. Given what is at
stake, actions of this nature predictably attract all manner of issues, motions
and appeals. The experience of the legal team selected is relevant to
efficiency: experienced counsel are well-placed  to make strategic choices that
move matters along and avoid unnecessary skirmishes that can entangle a class
action in delay.
[120]      
I conclude that all three competing actions have
legal teams who are competent to prosecute class actions. However,
acknowledging the expertise of the group, the Parkin action team has more
experience as lead counsel in prosecuting large-scale securities class actions,
although it inexplicably failed to register its initial Notice of Action on
time, and failed to include all relevant material in its carriage material in
accordance with the court’s timetable.
[121]      
The scope of this action will predictably
attract corresponding resources in defence of the claims.  The class will
benefit from the trial experience in securities’ class actions. Overall, this
factor slightly favours the Parkin action.
[122]      
Each action has slightly different proposals for
its share of fees from any recovery. Each proposes a contingency agreement on
fees.
[123]      
Even though fees must be approved, their
importance to the class means that significant differences in funding proposals
are relevant on carriage motions: Mancinelli v Barrick Gold Corporation,
2016 ONCA 571, 131 O.R. (3d) 497, at para 18.
[124]      
At the time of the oral argument, a range of
contingency fee arrangements were sought as follows:
[125]      
In response to my request for further
submissions on the comparative benefits of the different funding proposals in a
single document with the same assumptions underlying each outcome for ease of
comparison, each action filed new charts, raised issues with their rival’s
charts and in the case of Parkin and Nam, adjusted their proposed funding
structures to compete with the Gazarek proposal.
[126]      
The revised contingency fee proposals are:
[127]      
Each action has a different proposal for funding
its disbursements.
[128]      
The Parkin action proposes to self-fund
disbursements, compared to its two initial proposals: apply to the Class
Proceedings Fund or use a third party funder with an accompanying premium to
the funder on settlement.  The Parkin action submits that its latest proposal
to self-fund is in the best interests of the class because it will not add
further costs to the class. The Parkin action submits that it has experience in
self-funding class action litigation with good outcomes. It has self-funded the
disbursements required in this action to date, including the costs of several
detailed expert reports.
[129]      
The Gazarek action proposes a disbursement
funding arrangement via its agreement with CM. It submits that this mitigates
the risk and potential for conflict which can arise from a single firm
self-funding disbursements, as the Parkin action now proposes to do. The
Gazarek action criticizes the Parkin action for changing its funding proposals
on an iterative basis throughout the lead up to the carriage motion, with this
latest proposal representing the Parkin action  “betting the firm” and raising
serious risks of liquidity. The Gazarek action further submits that a
self-funding option is not acknowledged in the retainer agreements signed by
the representative plaintiffs in the Parkin action.
[130]      
This is a legitimate concern, given that at the
time the carriage motion was argued, the Parkin action had not landed a funding
option. The Parkin submissions did not spend much time on the question of
funding, and the materials focussed more on the open application to the Class
Proceedings Fund and a third-party funding proposal which was more expensive
than the comparative proposals from the Gazarek action and the Nam action. While
the Parkin action cited its experience in self-funding prior actions, it would
have been preferable to have the final funding decision put before the court at
the time of argument to accommodate questions and submissions. However, I have
taken that problem into account and granted extensions to counsel for brief
reply in writing to the changed proposals. I also consider Parkin’s experience
with mega-fund cases, their assessment of the scale of disbursements that will
be needed to bring this case to trial, and the absence of any suggestion or
evidence that the firms involved have defaulted on payment of disbursements in
class action litigation.
[131]      
The Nam action proposes to use a third-party
funder for its disbursements, which will attract a premium payable from any settlement
to the funder. This represents a higher cost of litigation financing than that
proposed by the Parkin and Gazarek actions, however the Nam action has proposed
to reduce its fee to make its total cost to the class equivalent to its initial
proposal.
[132]      
An additional cost to the class arises from the
purchase of “After the Fact Event” (“ATE”) insurance as a protection against
unfavourable costs orders. The Parkin action does not propose to charge those
costs to the class. The Gazarek action would pass along this cost to the class.
The Gazarek insurance expense is not material at higher levels of recovery, but
below a threshold, this cost becomes more material.
[133]      
Overall, the proposed funding arrangements have
strengths and weaknesses that are unique to each proposal. All have taken steps
to arrange funding. The materiality of the differences among the classes
depends on the timing and the amount, if any, of a settlement. All are subject
to court approval.  The funding proposals, in my view, do not represent a
significant difference among the three competing actions.
[134]      
I conclude that the Parkin action will best
achieve the interests of the class, in a cost-effective manner when measured
against the statutory factors within the Act. To summarize the factors
discussed above, the Parkin action has been either in first place or tied for
first place in its proposal for the theory of its case, work done to date,
choice of defendants, experience in securities “mega-fund” class actions, and it
avoids the potential complicating factors of the Gazarek funding arrangement
and limitation period issues. The Parkin action has a track record which
supports its capacity to fund disbursements.
[135]      
The Gazarek and Nam actions are stayed. Carriage
is ordered to the Parkin action.
[136]      
Counsel for Parkin and the TD defendants are to
communicate with my office within 15 days of this decision to arrange a case
conference with a view to setting a timetable for the leave/certification
motions.