[1]              
A solicitor’s mother, who was also the
solicitor’s law clerk and office manager, hijacked his practice, had access to
his trust account, and, together with her friend, a longtime mortgage broker
working in the firm, defrauded the Plaintiffs – clients of the firm. Mother paid
funds that the Plaintiffs placed in trust with the law firm to her and the
broker’s family members and to a real estate company and its principals who the
law firm also represented in an undisclosed conflict of interest with the
Plaintiffs. The mother and the mortgage broker have now vanished.
[2]              
The Plaintiffs seek summary judgment and
reimbursement/damages from the mother, the broker, the solicitor, and the law
firm. They also seek payment from the real estate company and related parties who
received the Plaintiff’s monies wrongfully and who profited from cooperation
with the law firm.
[3]              
The solicitor himself contends that he had no
personal involvement in the transactions. The other Defendants argue that the
Court needs to hear from the missing culprits before all of the facts can be
found and judgment granted.
[4]              
The Plaintiffs submit that whether the solicitor
was involved or was absent from his law practice does not matter, as he is
liable for the actions of his firm. They further submit that the
misappropriation of trust funds and the trail of wrongful payments going to all
of the Defendants speak for themselves in leading to judgment.
[5]              
The action revolves around the Plaintiffs’ claim
of misuse of funds they invested in a real estate development project. The
project aimed to build a gas station at 595 Bronte Road, Oakville, Ontario (the
“Property”) owned by the Defendant, 2640353 Ontario Inc. (“264”).
[6]              
In early 2022, the Defendants, Suyun Lu (known
as “Lulu”) and Helen Zhao (“Helen”), who were, respectively, office manager/law
clerk and in-house mortgage broker for the Defendant, David Hao Professional
Corporation (“DHPC”), a law firm owned and operated by the Defendant, David Hao,
approached each of the Plaintiffs about an “investment opportunity”. The
opportunity was described as a construction loan to 264, to be secured as a
second mortgage on the Property.
[7]              
The arrangement called for DHPC to represent the
Plaintiffs in securing the loan, documenting the transaction, registering it as
a second mortgage on the Property, and administering the funds through its
trust account. As indicated, the Property was owned by 264, whose directors and
principals, are the Defendants, Suyin Lu, Dunhua Yean (also known as Donahue Yuan), Yumin Su, Zijian
Liu, Bao Ying SunN (also known as Baoying Sun), Ping Yuan, and Min Hui Zhou. Several
of the individual Defendants are also guarantors of the loan to 264.
[8]              
Some of the Plaintiffs were former clients of David
Hao and DHPC, having used them as solicitors on previous transactions. In
February 2022, Lulu and Helen first recruited the Plaintiffs, Baochong Liu,
Yali Wang, and Mike Qiao to contribute $2,000,000 towards the investment in
264. A month later, in March 2022, they recruited the Plaintiffs, Yinghui Zhu,
Yanhui Liang, and Viktoria Jin to contribute an additional $650,000 towards 264’s
development project, bringing the total to $2.65 million. All of the Plaintiffs
were told that DHPC would be representing them in this investment and mortgage;
in fact, evidence in the record establishes that they were instructed that DHPC
was to be their only law firm representing them in respect of the loan to 264.
[9]              
David Hao and DHPC were also the solicitors who
acted for 264 in securing the first mortgage on the Property. This conflict was
not disclosed to any of the Plaintiffs.
[10]          
Lulu and Helen, as agents for DHPC, made a
number of representations to the Plaintiffs. These include:
[11]          
The Plaintiffs’ investment in 264 was documented
in two Mortgage Contracts entered into in the spring/summer of 2022. The
Mortgage Contracts identified David Hao of DHPC as the solicitor for the Plaintiffs.
They also named 264, as well as the principals of 264, the Defendants Donahue
Yuan and Yumin Su, as the borrowers, and the Defendants, Min Hui Zhou, Ping
Yuan, Bao Ying Sun, Donahue Yuan, Yumin Su, and Zijian Liu, as the guarantors.
Under the Mortgage Contracts, the Plaintiffs’ loan was set to mature on
February 21, 2023.
[12]          
The Plaintiffs paid their funds to DHPC, in
trust, relying on the law firm to release those funds to 264 in accordance with
the following agreed-upon stages of the project:
[13]          
After forwarding their initial funds, the Plaintiffs received
three months’ interest in advance, and then monthly interest payments until
December 2022. During this time, they collected the interest payments by cheque
from the DHPC offices. Most of these cheques were signed by David Hao as
trustee, although some were issued and signed by 264. DHPC did not provide any updates
or ongoing accounting to the Plaintiffs as to the progress of the gas station’s
construction, nor did DHPC advise the Plaintiffs that there were any
difficulties in funding the construction.
[14]          
On December 28, 2022, when some of the Plaintiffs
came to the DHPC offices to collect their monthly interest payment, Lulu
advised them that the trust monies were spent. She stated that 264 and its
principals did not have sufficient funds to make further interest payments or
to return their principal, and that they were not able to complete the gas
station construction.
[15]          
During the course of a number of meetings in
early 2023 with Lulu, Helen, and some of the principals of 264, the Plaintiffs
learned that the first mortgage was never properly registered on title to the
Property. They also learned for the first time that David Hao and DHPC were the
solicitors for 264 on the first mortgage transaction. In addition, they were
told that $678,867.50 of their trust funds had been paid out to 264 not for the
purposes of building the gas station, but rather for 264’s use in paying down
and restructuring the first mortgage – i.e. the transaction on which David Hao
had represented 264. In addition, they came to understand that Helen’s son,
through his company Hillcrest Group Inc., was retained by 264 to do the
construction work for the gas station on the property.
[16]          
Eventually, it was disclosed to the Plaintiffs that none of their
funds had been paid out of the DHPC trust account in accordance with the stages
of construction as provided in the Mortgage Contracts. Rather, the Plaintiffs’
funds were paid out to a combination of 264, its principals, DPHC and related
persons, as well as to a number of persons or entities unknown to the
Plaintiffs, as follows:
[17]          
It is noteworthy that the Statement of Claim in this action was served
on the Defendants on June 6, 2023. Despite David Hao’s protestations that he
knew nothing about his mother’s and Helen’s misrepresentations to the
Plaintiffs and their use of the Plaintiff’s funds in his firm’s trust account, the
final payment to his firm is four months after he was served with the Statement
of Claim. He must have understood by that time that something was awry in his
firm, but he saw fit to continue paying himself from the Plaintiffs’ trust
funds. He has deposed that, in fact, his mother remained
employed by DHPC and had full access to his trust account until November 2023.
[18]          
The Plaintiffs have presented an uncontroverted
record evidencing conflict of interest and misdirected payments of their funds.
With all of that, it is interesting to observe that it is 264 and the individual
Defendants related to 264 who claim to be the victims of a fraud. They argue that since David
Hao/DHPC was the Plaintiffs’ lawyer, everything he and his firm did – including
sending the Plaintiffs’ funds to his own family members and to some of the 264
principals personally – was done as the Plaintiffs’ agent.
[19]          
By this logic, 264 argues that it is the Plaintiffs who deprived
264 of a significant portion of their promised investment. Counsel for 264
explain the point in their factum:
[20]          
The argument by counsel for 264 is a clever one.
[21]          
It is generally the case that a solicitor of
record has ostensible authority to bind the client and to advance funds from his
or her firm’s trust account: Dick v. McKinnon, 2014 ONCA 784, at para.
4. It is also trite law that a solicitor, acting under authority from a client,
is in the same position as an agent in conducting a commercial transaction on
the client’s behalf: Felty v. Ernst & Young LLP, 2015 BCCA 445, at
para. 38.
[22]          
Flowing from that, a solicitor, acting as agent,
can bind the principal – i.e. the client – in respect of obligations to third
parties: Scherer v. Palleta, 1966 CanLII 286 (ON CA); Regional Group
of Companies Inc. v. 1760452 Ontario Inc., 2015 ONSC 3514, at para. 74(3). The
solicitor/agent, acting within their authority, is also liable for deceit or
fraud on which a third party detrimentally relies: Straus Estate v. Decaire,
2011 ONSC 1157, at para. 65, aff’d 2012 ONCA 918.
[23]          
But with all of that, 264’s agency argument is
in reality too clever by half.
[24]          
In the first place, a substantial amount of trust
funds that were misdirected or misappropriated by DHPC were, in fact,
misdirected away from the gas station project but for the benefit of 264 and
its principals. For example, on March 29, 2022, $401,667.03 of the Plaintiffs’
funds were sent to pay off a mortgage on a property owned by Ping Yang, a director
of 264. This payment misappropriated the Plaintiff’s funds for the benefit of
Ms. Yang personally, and perhaps for the benefit of 264, but to the detriment
of the Plaintiffs. It is self-evident that it was Ms. Yang and her company,
264, and not the Plaintiffs, that gave instructions to DHPC as to where to send
these funds.
[25]          
This example flows directly from the fact that
DHPC was in a conflict position, having been 264’s solicitors for the first
mortgage on the Property and, apparently, still administering the second
mortgage funds on 264’s and its principals’ behalf as well. Indeed, the very
first payment out of the Plaintiffs’ funds – a payment of $678,867.50 on March
2, 2022 – went to pay down the first mortgage on the Property to the direct
benefit of 264. This payment was not envisioned in the Mortgage Contracts entered
into by the Plaintiffs, and did not fund the gas station construction project
as intended by the Mortgage Contracts.
[26]          
This March 2, 2022 payment to the first
mortgagee of the Property was wrongly paid by DHPC from the Plaintiffs’ trust
funds; and this misappropriation of those funds was, quite obviously, done at
the direction of DHPC’s other client, 264. The Plaintiffs were interested in
getting the gas station built so that their mortgage loan could be serviced by
264; they had no interest in sending funds to service, or to restructure, the
first mortgage on the Property. It does not lie with 264 to contend that it relied
on DHPC’s ostensible authority to act on behalf of the Plaintiffs when DHPC was
acting for 264’s benefit to the detriment of the Plaintiffs.
[27]          
 The argument by 264 regarding the payments made
to Hillcrest from the trust funds are also perplexing. Counsel for 264 makes
the point that Hillcrest is owned by Helen’s son, and then goes on to argue
that since Helen is, in effect, part of the in-house staff of DHPC, any payment
to Hillcrest is a payment made both by and to DHPC on the Plaintiffs’ behalf. However,
Hillcrest is a construction company retained for the gas station job by 264. The
fact that it is owned by Helen’s son does, of course, suggest that it was Helen
who recommended Hillcrest to 264, but that only underscores DHPC’s conflict of
interest.
[28]          
Why, one might rhetorically ask, would a
borrower embarking on a development project act on the advice of their lender’s
law firm in retaining a building contractor? To ask the question is to already
answer it: DHPC was 264’s lawyer and trusted advisor at the same time as it was
counsel to the Plaintiffs and administering their trust funds. In fact, the
record contains an affidavit of 264 director Ping Yang sworn in respect of
proceedings by the Property’s first mortgagee, in which the affiant confirms
that 264 was of the view that Helen and DHPC were at all relevant times acting
as 264’s agent.
[29]          
Unfortunately for the Plaintiffs, DHPC was, once
again, administering their trust funds not for their benefit, but for the
benefit of 264. Counsel for 264’s attempt to use the law of agency in
associating all of DHPC’s acts with the Plaintiffs is, to put it delicately,
contrary to reality. No recitation of agency case law can obscure the fact that
DHPC had two clients, and that it was taking money from one – the Plaintiffs –
and using it, improperly, for the benefit of the other – 264.
[30]          
 There may also have been self-dealing here on
the part of Helen. That is, she had engineered the arrangement in a way that
also benefitted her son as the principal of Hillcrest. I do note that it is
264’s view that Hillcrest was not up to the task of constructing the gas
station on the Property, and that it should therefore never have been referred
to it for the job in the first place.
[31]          
On the other hand, the record contains
photographic evidence of the fact that Hillcrest did indeed build a large
building on the Property. While 264 contends that the interior of the building was
never finished, it is obvious from the photo in the record that an entire new
building is now standing on the grounds of the Property. The evidence from 264
itself is that it never paid any of its own funds to Hillcrest, and so the
building that was built must have been entirely funded by the payments by DHPC out
of the Plaintiffs’ funds.
[32]          
The payments to Hillcrest were not made by DHPC
in accordance with the Mortgage Contracts, as they did not follow the staged
payment schedule as a security measure for the project. But they did enure
entirely to the benefit of 264 as owner of the Property since they resulted in
a substantial building being built on what had been empty land.
[33]          
Counsel have advised me that the Property has
now been sold by the first mortgagee in exercise of its rights, but that the
sale did not produce sufficient proceeds to pay the Plaintiffs’ second
mortgage. I can only assume that the sale of the Property reflected the market
value added by Hillcrest in constructing the building, even if the interior was
not fully complete. Since 264 contributed none of its own funds to the
construction of the building, that value was a result of the Plaintiffs’ funds
being directed to Hillcrest.
[34]          
In short, there is no merit to 264’s defense
based on the law of agency. It ignores the fact that DHPC was 264’s own agent
at the same time as it was acting for the Plaintiffs and directing payments of
the Plaintiffs’ trust funds. More importantly, it takes no account of the fact
that 264 was itself a beneficiary of the misdirection of the Plaintiffs’ trust
funds and that as such it was a participant in the misappropriation of those
funds.
[35]          
As indicated at the outset of these reasons,
David Hao’s defense is that he didn’t know what his mother/office manager,
along with the mortgage broker who worked out of his office, were doing. Counsel
for Mr. Hao and DHPC makes no excuses for the conduct of those two individuals in
respect of the Plaintiffs and their funds; indeed, there can be no excuse for
their manipulation of the Plaintiffs and the misappropriation and misdirection
of their trust funds. However, counsel submits that the record contains no
evidence of the solicitor’s own misconduct or of the standards that he
allegedly fell below.
[36]          
Counsel for Hao/DHPC argues that given the state
of the record, the Plaintiffs’ causes of action in negligence and breach of
trust have not been made out:
[37]          
As counsel for the Plaintiffs points out, the
Supreme Court of Canada has articulated that the point of any expert evidence
is to “provide the court with a ready-made inference which the judge and
jury, due to the technical nature of the facts, are unable to formulate”: R v Mohan, 1994 CanLII 80 (SCC), [1994] 2 SCR 9, quoting R. v. Abbey,
1982 CanLII 25 (SCC), [1982] 2 SCR 24, at 49.
[38]          
With respect, no specialized knowledge is necessary for the Court
to understand that David Hao’s own position is that he entirely neglected his
responsibilities to his clients. He allowed his mother unfettered access to his
law firm’s trust account, to his law firm’s offices, and to its letterhead. He
claims not to have been aware that $2,650,000 flowed through his trust account
until 18 months after the first deposit. He also maintains that he had no knowledge
of numerous deposits, cheques, and transfers of funds during the entire period.
[39]          
His abdication of all control and responsibility for his law
practice seems to have been complete. With due respect, this conduct is so far
below the standard expected of a competent solicitor that no expert evidence is
necessary to establish that a reasonable standard of care has not been met.
[40]          
The record also indicates that even after
he acknowledged discovering his mother’s and Helen’s unauthorized dealings in
his firm and their transactions in and out of his trust account, Mr. Hao made
no effort to retrieve the Plaintiffs’ funds or to make them whole. He did not,
for example, contact any of the recipients – including his father and his aunt
– to request the return of the Plaintiffs’ misdirected funds. Rather, he apparently
abandoned his law office, leaving the LSO to discover the problem and take
trusteeship over his legal files.
[41]          
Mr. Hao’s behaviour in this regard is, again, “so egregious
that it is obvious that his or her conduct has fallen short of the standard of
care, even without knowing the precise parameters of the standard”: Mandozai
v. Igbinosun, 2015 ONSC 2288, at para. 17, citing Krawchuk v. Scherbak
(2011), 2011 ONCA 352 (CanLII), 106 OR (3d) 598 (CA). No expert evidence or trial is needed to
determine his negligence as a practicing lawyer.
[42]          
Furthermore, both David Hao and his professional
corporation, DHPC, are named as Defendants. Pursuant to section 3.4(2)
of the Ontario Business Corporations Act, RSO 1990 c. B.16 (“OBCA”),
actions of DHPC are deemed to be Mr. Hao’s own actions as shareholder and agent
of DHPC. The Plaintiffs provided $2,650,000 to DHPC in trust, and Lulu, DHPC’s
employee, deposited these funds into DHPC’s trust account and then distributed them
to unauthorized individuals on DHPC cheques. DHPC’s breach of trust is clear on
the face of this record and extends to Mr. Hao himself.
[43]          
In short, there is no merit to David Hao’s
defense that he knew nothing of his mother’s and Helen’s misdeeds. The argument
ignores the fact that he is liable for the acts of his professional corporation/law
firm, and that there is no possible defense to the way in which the staff of
his law firm mishandled the Plaintiffs’ legal affairs and their money.
[44]          
Neither Lulu nor Helen have defended the action. They are in default
of the claims against them for negligent misrepresentation and knowing
assistance of DHPC’s breach of trust. Having been noted in default, Lulu and
Helen are taken to admit the facts alleged in the statement of claim, including
that they had a special relationship with the Plaintiffs that gave rise to a
duty of care. They made a number of false and misleading representations to the
Plaintiffs in carrying out their duty of care, and, as agents for DHPC, they acted
negligently in their treatment of the Plaintiffs.
[45]          
Furthermore, the Plaintiffs reasonably
and foreseeably relied, to their detriment, on the misrepresentations by Lulu
and Helen to enter into the Mortgage Contracts. These representations included
that they were retaining David Hao and DHPC as their lawyer with all of the
duties of trust and care accompanying that relationship. These facts, and the
overall relationship between Lulu and Helen as DHPC staff and the Plaintiffs as
DHPC clients, clearly establish Lulu’s and Helen’s liability for negligent
misrepresentation, as well as DHPC’s liability for negligence and breach of
fiduciary duty to its clients.: Doumouras v. Chander, 2019 ONSC 6056, at
para 25.
[46]          
As indicated above, David Hao himself is liable for all acts of
DHPC pursuant to s. 3.4(2) of the OBCA. Further, David Hao is personally
liable for negligence and for breach of fiduciary duties in the operation of
his law practice and his trust account. He allowed Lulu and Helen to act on his
behalf in a manner that breached his and his firm’s duty of care and fiduciary
duties to the Plaintiffs as clients; this permissiveness, or willful blindness,
with respect to Lulu and Helen’s wrongful conduct was itself a breach of duty
by David Hao to the Plaintiffs as his and DHPC’s clients.
[47]          
As borrower, 264 and its principals are
also liable for the return of the funds wrongfully advanced to them in a manner
that was contrary to the terms of the Mortgage Contracts, together with the
interest on those funds. The Mortgage Contracts specify that the borrowers must
pay 12% per annum for the first twelve months of the mortgage term and at a 18%
per annum for every month thereafter.
[48]          
In addition, pursuant to the Mortgage Contract, the borrowers
have also agreed to pay to the lender any “expenses of collecting any payments
not received from the Borrower when due” and “any and all legal fees incurred
by the Lender.” Furthermore, given the conflict of interest, with DHPC acting
in the interest of 264 and its principals and preferring those interests to the
interests of the Plaintiffs, it is evident from the record that all of the
Defendants were working together to deprive the Plaintiffs of their funds. 264
and its principals are therefore jointly and severally liable for all of the
breaches of duty and negligence of Lulu, Helen, David Hao, and DHPC toward the
Plaintiffs.
[49]          
The damages calculation is:
[50]          
Counsel for the Plaintiffs submit, and I would
agree, that, “[t]he actions of these defendants are “so malicious and
outrageous that they are deserving of punishment on their own”: McCabe v.
Roman Catholic Episcopal Corporation (2019), 2019 ONCA 213 (CanLII), 146 OR (3d) 607, at para. 39
(SCJ). Punitive damages are appropriate in these circumstances where, to limit
the Plaintiffs’ damages to the principal and interest under the Mortgage
Contracts would amount to a “license fee” for the Defendants to engage in the
exploitation of other lenders: see Whiten v. Pilot
Insurance Co., 2002 SCC 18 (CanLII), [2002] 1 SCR 595, at para. 32. The court cannot allow such
conduct to go undeterred.
[51]          
The Plaintiffs shall have an order granting summary judgment in
the amount of $3,660,020 plus pre- and post-judgement interest from February
25, 2025 in the amount of 18%, jointly and severally as against all Defendants.
The Defendants shall also, jointly and severally, pay punitive damages to the
Plaintiffs in the amount of $100,000.
[52]          
The Plaintiffs also deserve their costs
of this motion and of this action. Given that the Mortgage Contracts call for
full indemnity, the Plaintiffs deserve an award of costs on at least a
substantial indemnity basis as set out in their Bill of Costs.
In any case, the Defendants have all put the Plaintiffs through relatively
extensive litigation in a case where their liability was patent on the face of
their dealings. The Plaintiffs deserve costs recovery that is adequate to the
ordeal they have been put through.
[53]          
Including disbursements and tax, the Plaintiff’s
cost request comes to $319,189.49. Under the circumstances, that is a
reasonable request. Their counsel invested substantial time and effort in this matter,
and that investment paid off with a successful result. I am inclined to
exercise my discretion under section 139 of the Courts of Justice Act to
do no more than to adjust the Plaintiffs’ request with some minor rounding off to
$319,000 for the sake of convenience.
[54]          
In sum, the Defendants shall, jointly and
severally, pay the Plaintiffs $3,760,020 in damages, plus costs in the amount
of $319,000, plus 18% interest thereon from February 25, 2025 to the date of
payment.