1              
“68
Minutes”.  Not the similarly named TV newsmagazine.  But the motion.
2              
Actually
the self-represented Applicant father has brought two motions, both
relating to an ongoing parenting-time dispute relating to three children:
seven-year-old twins and a six year old.
3              
One
of the motions is on consent:  The Office of the Children’s Lawyer is requested
to consider involvement in this matter.  The parties are to submit their OCL
intake forms within 14 days.  There are no costs on this issue.
4              
As
an aside, I mentioned to the father that this matter has a Trial Scheduling
Conference scheduled for next week – February 18, 2025 at 12:00 p.m.  I wanted
him to be aware that if we are now requesting the involvement of the OCL, it
will likely be some time before the OCL gives a response, and depending on what
assistance the OCL might provide (a section 112 investigation, for example), it
might take quite a number of months before the OCL would be able to provide a
report.  The scheduling of the trial will likely have to be delayed until we
are able to ascertain what additional evidence and information (if any) will be
available from the OCL and when.  The father confirmed that he understood that
by requesting the involvement of the OCL at this late stage, it may delay the
trial.
5              
The
father’s second motion is in relation to a Request to Admit.  The facts are
very straightforward.
6              
A court may exercise its discretion to allow the late filing of a
Response to Request to Admit. The reason for the late response will be a
critical factor in the court's determination.
7              
In
this case, the mother’s lawyer advises that late service of the Response by 68
minutes was simply a matter of error or oversight.
8              
The
father doesn’t accept this explanation.  He feels it was a deliberate attempt
to exercise power or control.  He points to previous situations in which he
feels the mother has deliberately created a nuisance or inconvenience for him.
9              
I
am not going to comment on any of the father’s allegations about previous
incidents or situations.  I am only dealing with the father’s specific motion
today.
10          
While
the father is to be commended for utilizing a Request to Admit which is an
important mechanism intended to reduce factual disputes at trial, I cannot help
but conclude that his extremely technical approach to the 20-day deadline set
out in Rule 22(4) is unhelpful and a needless distraction from very important
parenting issues.
11          
The
father is a well-informed and somewhat frequent litigant.  I would remind him
about Rule 2 of the Family Law Rules.
12          
The
father admits that there is no real prejudice to him by having received the
Response to Request to Admit 68 minutes late.  This breach of timelines has not
impacted his ability to marshal evidence or prepare for a trial which is likely
many months away (likely even more months away as a result of his late
request for an OCL).  By his own admission, he is simply asking for strict
compliance with the Rules for purely technical reasons, rather than anything to
do with fairness or the best interests of his children.
13          
The
father is correct that Rules should be followed.  But discretion and common
sense also have a place in family court.
14          
This
is a high conflict parenting dispute.  Trivial technical breaches should not be
allowed to interfere with the court’s need to receive all relevant information
concerning the best interests of children.
15          
While
the father may complain that the mother has historically engaged in nuisance
behaviour, bringing this motion because service was 68 minutes late may also
fall into the nuisance category.
16          
To
avoid any further discussion on this topic, the mother is granted leave to file
the Response to Request to Admit which was served 68 minutes late.
17          
The
father’s motion is dismissed.