[1]      
The lead plaintiff,
Paul Mr. Taylor (“Mr. Taylor”), in this proposed class action brings a motion
seeking an order pursuant to Rule 37 of the Ontario Rules of Civil
Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194 (the “Rules”) that the Workplace
Safety and Insurance Board (“WSIB”) pay all legal costs of the lead plaintiffs,
and in the alternative, pursuant to the same Rule, this court appoint amicus
curiae to represent the class plaintiffs in the putative class proceedings.
In the further alternative, Mr. Taylor seeks an order permitting the lead
plaintiffs of the proposed class action to represent the class members, which
have yet to be defined.
[2]      
For their part, the
defendants, the WSIB and Workplace Safety and Insurance Appeals Tribunal
(“WSIAT”) bring a motion for an order dismissing the plaintiffs’ action for
their failure to comply with Rule 15 of the Rules, and in the
alternative, an order dismissing or staying the action if within 30 days of the
order of this court, Mr. Taylor does not pay the legal costs owed to the WSIB
and WSIAT as ordered in previous litigation and in this proceeding.
[3]      
At a case management
conference held on April 17, 2024, the plaintiffs were invited to bring a motion
to request the appointment of legal counsel on their behalf to argue the
defendants’ Rule 15 motion, but they have not done so.
[4]      
This putative class
proceeding was commenced on August 16, 2021. Mr. Taylor is described as “the
main contact for the Lead Plaintiffs”, and “the Lead Plaintiffs’
self-representative representative” in the statement of claim. Mr. Taylor lists
himself as the author of the statement of claim.
[5]      
The plaintiffs’ claim
challenges the workers’ compensation regimes in 13 different provinces and
territories, seeking relief pursuant to s.24 of the Canadian Charter of
Rights and Freedoms (the “Charter”), s.7 part 1 of the Constitution
Act, 1982 being Schedule B, and s.52 of the Canada Act (UK), 1982,
c. 11a. The statement of claim alleges amongst other matters that the
defendants’ use of deeming statutory provisions, paid doctors, pre-existing
conditions, intentional systemic delays, and unlawful use of age infringe the
plaintiffs’ rights under the Charter, and specifically, ss.2(b), 7, 12,
14, and 15.
[6]      
Apart from seeking a
declaration that the current workers compensation regimes are unconstitutional,
and the regimes should be converted to a no-fault system, the statement of claim
seeks damages of $45 million.
[7]      
No steps have been
taken by the plaintiffs to advance the claim since it was issued some three and
a half years ago.
[8]      
Rule 15.01(1) mandates that a party who acts in
a representative capacity shall be represented by a lawyer. Representative
plaintiffs in a class action are no exception to the requirement.
[9]      
Cullity J. in Fenn
v. Ontario, 2004 CanLII 28170 (ONSC) (“Fenn”), made clear that the
requirement for representative plaintiffs in class proceedings to be
represented by counsel is mandatory.
[10]      
Cullity J. in Fenn
explained the policy rationale for Rule 15 in this way at paras. 10 and
11:
[11]      
The two rationales
examined by the court in Fenn – that counsel is bound by their fiduciary
duty to act in the interests of the entire prospective class and that counsel
plays an integral role in navigating the complexities of class proceedings and
sustaining the litigation – are the touchstone policy considerations that
ground Rule 15.01(1).
[12]      
One procedural
complexity in class proceedings highlighted by Cullity J. in Fenn is
that the named plaintiff(s) must have regard to the interests of all putative
class members and should take direction from the court prior to certification
when their interests may be adversely affected by steps to be taken in the
proceedings, or otherwise by the conduct of any of the parties (at para. 18).
The only way of ensuring that the interests of all proposed class members are
protected is through the engagement of legal counsel.
[13]      
In Logan v. Canada
(Minister of Health), 2003 CanLII 20308, Winkler J. (as he then was) stated
that a proposed class proceeding “originates from the time of the issuance of
the claim or notice of actions. It is not an individual action that metamorphosizes
to a class proceeding when certified” (at para. 13).
[14]      
Winkler J.’s finding,
in conjunction with Cullity J.’s reasoning in Fenn, leaves no doubt that
legal counsel is required as soon as the proceeding is commenced.
[15]      
This court’s finding in
Fenn, has been applied in other provinces. For example, in Peets v.
Alberta, 2022 ABQB 482, a decision of the Alberta Queen’s Bench, the court
held that “self-represented litigants may not initiate a class action
proceeding”. In Sandhu v. Household Realty Corp., 2011 BCSC 897 (“Sandhu”),
the British Columbia Supreme Court held that the findings in Fenn with
respect to the requirement for counsel in class proceedings apply equally in that
province.
[16]      
Burnyeat J. in Sandhu
commented that there “might be cases where a non-lawyer or the plaintiff
themselves could be suitable representatives” for class proceedings, but it is
doubtful “whether any lay person could adequately or competently conduct
proceedings…” which involve complex issues that require “considerable legal
ability to identify the true issue, gather the necessary evidence and marshal
the evidence to the issues” (at paras. 17-19).
[17]      
Cullity J. similarly
commented in Fenn that while there may be cases where compliance with Rule
15.01(1) might be dispensed with in class proceedings, the case before him was
not one such case. He found that “apart from anything else, the state of the
plaintiff’s pleading cries out for professional advice and guidance” (at para.
19).
[18]      
I reach the same
conclusion as did Cullity J. and Burnyeat J. in the matter before them – this
case is not one where compliance with Rule 15.01(1) ought to be waived
notwithstanding the discretion afforded to me pursuant to Rule 2.03. I
come to this conclusion not only because the lead plaintiffs have proffered no
evidentiary or legal basis for me to exercise my discretion in favour of their
representing the putative class members but also because no lay person owes the
fiduciary duty of counsel to the group of plaintiffs they purport to represent.
Furthermore, no lay person’s conduct is governed by the rules of an overseeing
regulatory body and no lay person would be insured against claims that might be
made against them for damages in negligence in the conduct of the proceeding
(see: Gitxsan House of YAL v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests),
2005 BCSC 994, at para. 92). In addition, I reach this conclusion on account of
the number of Charter issues raised in the statement of claim, the
complexity of the issues, and the deficiencies in the pleadings.
[19]      
I comment on the
deficiencies for purposes only of illustrating the need for the intervention of
counsel and without coming to any conclusions with respect to their
consequences.
[20]      
For example, the statement
of claim lacks specificity. It alleges the defendants’ use of deeming, paid
doctors, pre-existing conditions, intentional systemic delays, and unlawful use
of age, are infringements of the plaintiffs’ Charter rights. What the statement
of claim does not do, however, is set out the elements of such claims against
the defendants or any particulars to support the asserted claims. The Supreme
Court in Danson v. Ontario (Attorney General), 1990 CanLII 93, made very
clear that Charter cases are not to be decided without an appropriate
factual context; generalizations as to perceived unfairness and Charter
breaches do not suffice.
[21]      
Therefore, for these
reasons, I find, as Cullity J. did in Fenn, that in this instance the
members of the purposed class require and are entitled to professional advice
and guidance.
[22]      
While it may be argued
that Mr. Taylor, as a paralegal and the author of the statement of claim, is in
a position to provide the required advice to which the proposed class members
are entitled, I have concluded that he is unsuited to the task of bringing an
orderly and responsible approach to the litigation.
[23]      
I reach this conclusion
for a number of reasons.
[24]      
First, this putative
class proceeding raises a number of issues that have been unsuccessfully
litigated by Mr. Taylor in previous actions. To a large extent the only
difference between the proceeding before me and earlier litigation initiated by
Mr. Taylor is that in this proposed class action, Mr. Taylor has joined other
parties and expanded the defendants to include not only the WSIB and WSIAT, but
all such boards and tribunals across Canada.
[25]      
As early as 2014, Mr.
Taylor raised before this province’s courts the issue of the constitutionality
of the actions of the WSIB and WSIAT as well as the legislative provisions in
the Workers’ Compensation Act, R.S.O. 1990, C.WII (and the Workplace
Safety and Insurance Act, 1997 S.O. 1997, c.16 Sched. A (“WSIA”) as
infringements of ss. 7, 12 and 15 of the Charter.
[26]      
These arguments were
unsuccessfully raised by Mr. Taylor by way of notice of constitutional question
in action No. CV-14-794 between he, as plaintiff, and the WSIB and WSIAT, as
defendants. The action was dismissed with costs by order of Price J., dated
February 22, 2017. Mr. Taylor’s appeal was also dismissed by the Court of
Appeal with costs on February 6, 2018. The constitutional issues raised by Mr.
Taylor in the 2014 Superior Court proceeding were ultimately resolved by the
Supreme Court of Canada which denied Mr. Taylor’s leave to appeal application
on April 16, 2020.
[27]      
In the meantime, in
Superior Court action No. 81/18 between Mr. Taylor, as plaintiff, the WSIB, as
defendant, Mr. Taylor brought an urgent application for judicial review
alleging that the WSIB had violated his Charter rights by requesting a
medical report in support of his continued use of prescription drugs.
[28]      
In this same
application, along with alleging an infringement of his section 7 Charter
rights, Mr. Taylor sought an order that the WSIB and WSIAT hold hearings and
render decisions within a prescribed time. As the author of the statement of claim
in this proceeding, Mr. Taylor, on behalf of the putative class, also seeks a
speedy appeals process and to have decisions rendered within one week.
[29]      
Peterson J. dismissed Mr.
Taylor’s application with costs on March 20, 2018. The Court of Appeal
subsequently dismissed Mr. Taylor’s appeal of the decision of this court on
September 21, 2018 as did the Supreme Court of Canada deny Mr. Taylor’s leave
application on December 20, 2010.
[30]      
In a second urgent
judicial review application before this court, issued on March 13, 2020 in
action No. CV-20-110, Mr. Taylor alleged, other matters, that the WSIAT had
breached ss. 2, 7, 12 and 15 of the Charter. Although this judicial
review application was abandoned by Mr. Taylor, soon thereafter he commenced a
separate application in Divisional Court file No. 381/20 against his former
employer, Pivotal Integrated HR Solutions, to have the decisions of the WSIAT
which were the subject of the March, 2020 application reversed. The application
against Mr. Taylor’s former employer prompted the WSIAT to move to be added as
a party. Ultimately the matter came before Favreau J. (as she then was) who
observed that Mr. Taylor had raised the same Charter issues in a number
of other proceedings (see:  Taylor v. Pivotal Integrated HR Solutions,
2021 ONSC 7388 (“Pivotal”) at para. 15) before dismissing Mr. Taylor’s
motion for interim relief and notice of constitutional question.
[31]      
While the parties to
this class action are not the same as those in the prior litigation initiated
by Mr. Taylor, by raising many of the same issues that have been raised in the
past, the lead plaintiffs, and Mr. Taylor in particular, are attempting to
circumvent previous decisions and to mount a collateral attack on them. This
motivation of the lead plaintiffs militates against granting them, and Mr.
Taylor in particular, the liberty of representing the putative class members.
[32]      
Secondly, it does not
escape me that two motions instituted by Mr. Taylor in this proceeding have
been dismissed as an abuse of process. Specifically, in an urgent motion
against the WSIB, Mr. Taylor sought to have the WSIB found in contempt for
having made a decision adverse to his interests regarding future healthcare
entitlement. This court found that Mr. Taylor’s motion was fundamentally flawed
because there was no order compelling the WSIB to pay healthcare benefits, and
in the end, the motion was an abuse of process (see: Toombs v. Worksafe BC,
2024 ONSC 1532, at para. 20).
[33]      
This conduct on the
part of Mr. Taylor causes me to pause and conclude that Mr. Taylor has a
propensity to initiate abusive litigation. The proposed class members deserve
better from their litigation representative.
[34]      
It is also relevant to
this analysis that Mr. Taylor has failed to satisfy the outstanding cost orders
of previous litigation, some of which I have referred to above, as well as the
cost orders made in this proceeding. The undisputed amount owed to the WSIAT is
$15,750 and the evidence is that a like amount is owed the WSIB.
[35]      
This court stated in Gyimah
v. Reda, 2016 ONSC 5550 13, at para. 49 that “a litigant, having asked the
Court for its help, must follow its direction. The cost order is an order, not
an invitation”. This principle applies equally to self-represented parties.
“[R]espect and support for self-represented litigants does not mean that the
interests of adverse parties to a fair process, or the court’s due process
requirements, are to be ignored” (see: Taylor v. Pivotal, 2020 ONSC
5500, at para. 3). While self-represented litigants may be afforded latitude,
deference and assistance, there are limits. One such limit is adherence to
court orders and cost orders are no exception.
[36]      
Because there is no
evidence to suggest that Mr. Taylor has made any effort to settle the
outstanding cost awards against him, some of which have been outstanding for
over ten years, I conclude that for this reason and the other reasons detailed
above, that the only named plaintiff with any ability to protect the interests
of all putative class members, navigate the procedural complexities of the prevailing
legislation and meet the requirements for certification is an unsuitable
candidate to undertake this responsibility.
[37]      
In sum, I conclude that
compliance with Rule 15.01(1) is mandatory based on the facts of this
case.
[38]      
I also find, as Cullity
J. found in Fenn, that where Rule 15.01(1) has been infringed,
the court has jurisdiction to dismiss the action or stay the proceedings
pending compliance with the Rule, and subsequently, to dismiss the
action if the plaintiffs fail to retain counsel (see: Fenn, at para.
19).
[39]      
In the event of my
reaching the conclusion that I have, the lead plaintiffs seek an order that amicus
curiae be appointed to represent the proposed class members and that the
WSIB pay the costs of amicus curiae, and in the alternative, that the WSIB
be responsible to fund the legal costs of the proposed class members’ lawyer of
choice. The lead plaintiffs propose that the WSIB fund these costs from the
insurance fund.
[40]      
The lead plaintiffs seek
this alternative relief pursuant to Rule 37. While I find that I have no
authority to grant this relief pursuant to Rule 37, I conclude that I do
have the inherent jurisdiction to consider the relief sought. I also find in
the case of the appointment of amicus curiae, Rule 13 grants me
the required authority and s.131(1) of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O.
1990, c. C. 43 affords me the jurisdiction to make an interim cost award.
[41]      
During the course of
the lead plaintiffs’ submissions, it became clear that they look to s.176 of
the WSIA to fund the legal expenses they seek. Section 176 of the WSIA
continues the office of the worker adviser and the office of the employer adviser
from predecessor legislation. The respective functions of these two offices are
to educate, advise and represent workers who are not members of a trade union
and their survivors and to educate, advise and represent primarily those
employers that have fewer than 100 employees. I find that there is no statutory
authority in s. 176 of the WSIA, or in any other provision in the
subject legislation, to fund litigation against the WSIB or any third party.
[42]      
The extent of the
WSIB’s obligation pursuant to s.176 is limited to funding the offices of the worker
adviser and employer adviser. To suggest that s.176 of the WSIA supports
payment of legal costs would be an untenable interpretation of the legislation
and I reject that notion.
[43]      
Having reached this
conclusion, the question remains whether in the circumstances of this case should
amicus curiae be appointed to represent the proposed plaintiff class, or
in the further alternative, is the proposed class entitled to an interim
advance cost award as the lead plaintiffs submit in their factum?
[44]      
In Pivotal, Mr.
Taylor requested the appointment of amicus curiae. In dismissing this
relief, Favreau J. succinctly described the circumstances in which amicus
may be appropriate. At para. 19, Favreau J. stated:
[45]      
Although the Court of
Appeal in Benevides considered the issue of amicus curiae within
the context of a family proceeding, I find, just as the Favreau J. found in Pivotal,
that the Court’s guidance is instructive in any proceeding. In Benevides,
the Court of Appeal emphasized that:
[46]      
In considering the
direction provided by the Court of Appeal in Benevides, I decline to
exercise my discretion to appoint amicus curiae. This case is not one of
exceptional circumstances in which amicus is essential to adequately
discharge the functions of the court at this stage of the proceedings. Equally
important from the point of view of the lead plaintiffs, the appointment of amicus
would not provide them with the legal assistance that they are seeking. This is
because amicus does not represent a party. Simply put, the role of amicus
is not to help the self-represented party but rather to give assistance to the
court.
[47]      
Having reached this
conclusion, I do acknowledge that amicus curiae has been appointed in
class action proceedings. The Court of Appeal in Smith Estate v. National
Money Mary Company, 2011 ONCA 233 (“Smith Estate”), emphasized the
benefits of appointing amicus to assist the court in the approval of
settlements and class counsel fees. The Court of Appeal noted that the
appointment of amicus is particularly relevant where the issues to be
determined proceed on a consensual basis as is typically the case with respect
to settlement and fee approval motions (at para. 23). The appointment of amicus
in such instance is important to ensure that the disposition is fair and
reasonable.
[48]      
Following the Court of
Appeal’s direction in Smith Estate, amicus curiae has been
appointed in a number of cases by this court and the Federal Court to offer
assistance to the court in determining the appropriateness of a class action
settlement and counsel fees. See for example, Waldman v. Thomson Reuters
Canada Limited, 2016 ONSC 2622 (Div. Ct); Bozsik v. Livingston, 2019
ONSC 2268; and McLean v. Canada 2019 FC 1077. I also recognize that amicus
has been appointed in other instances in class action proceedings such as to
assist the court determine the appropriateness of a litigation funding
agreement (see: Difederico v. Amazon.com, Inc., 2021 FC 311) as well as
to help the court with respect to issues regarding a claims process (see: Fontaine
v. Canada (AG) 2021 ONSC 2921).
[49]      
The one common thread in
all of the class action cases where amicus has been appointed is that the
role of amicus to assist the court. Amicus curiae is not
appointed to represent the interests of the putative class members at this
early stage of the proceedings.
[50]       The discretionary power to grant interim
advance cost awards in appropriate cases has been recognized in Canada for some
time (see: Organ v. Barnett (1992), 1992 CanLII ONSC 7433) (“Organ”).
An interim cost award is designed to forestall “the danger that a meritorious
legal argument will be prevented from going forward merely because a party
lacks the financial resources to proceed” (see: British Columbia (Minter of
Forests) v. Okanagan Indian Band, 2003 SCC 71 (“Okanagan”), at para.
31). It is also well settled, however, that the discretionary power to award
interim costs is “limited to very exceptional cases and ought to be narrowly
applied” (see: Organ at para. 215).
[51]       With these considerations in mind, the
Supreme Court in Okanagan stipulated these conditions that must be met
to justify an interim advance cost award. These conditions are:
[52]       Mr. Taylor submits that the first condition
particularized by the Supreme Court is irrelevant to this proceeding because
pursuant to the prevailing workers compensation legislation, the financial
status of the injured worker is not a factor in awarding compensation. Apart
from the clear direction from the Supreme Court, I cannot accept Mr. Taylor’s
submission. I find considerations for workers’ compensation entitlement under
the provincial legislation regimes are very different from entitlement for an
interim advance cost award. The difference is one of apples and oranges.
[53]       I also find that for purposes of this
motion, I need not address the second and third conditions as stated in Okanagan
as a prerequisite to the exercise of my discretion in favour of an advance cost
award. I have reached this conclusion because the lead plaintiffs have failed
to satisfy the first branch of the test.
[54]       There is no evidence in the record of the
financial means of any of the lead plaintiffs, including Mr. Taylor.
Additionally, apart from not being satisfied that the lead plaintiffs cannot
self fund the litigation, there is insufficient evidence in the record for me
to conclude that no other realistic options are available to the lead
plaintiffs to retain counsel. Attempts by certain lead plaintiffs to retain
counsel to advance their individual claims against various worker compensation
boards are irrelevant. Similarly, evidence of being referred by one law firm to
another firm which may be interested in acting as class counsel without
anything further is not enough.
[55]       As an aside, I would comment that unlike in
Okanagan, where the Supreme Court found based on the facts of that case,
a contingency fee arrangement was unrealistic, such a fee arrangement may be a “realistic
option” in the context of the proposed class proceeding before me. Indeed,
continency fee retainers are the norm in class proceedings.
[56]       In any event, because on the record before
me the lead plaintiffs have failed to satisfy the first prong of the Okanagan
test, I decline to exercise my discretion in favour of granting the lead
plaintiffs an interim advance cost award.
[57]       For all of the above reasons, the following
order will issue:
[58]       I encourage the parties to agree on the
issue of costs. If, however, the parties are not able to agree, I will consider
written cost submissions. The part(ies) seeking costs will have fourteen days
from the date of this Decision to provide their submissions and the responding
part(ies) will have fourteen days to respond from the date of receipt of the
opposing part(ies’) submissions. There will be no right of reply. All
submissions are to be a maximum of three double spaced pages excluding offers
to settle, cost outlines and authorities. If no submissions are received within
this time frame, the parties will be deemed to have settled the issue of costs
as between themselves. If I do not receive responding submissions within the
specified time frame, I will consider that the responding part(ies) do not wish
to make submissions and decide the matter on the basis of the material that I
have. Submissions are to be sent to my judicial assistants at HamiltonSopinka.SCJJA@ontario.ca