[1]              
The defendants collectively move to discharge
the plaintiff’s lien and dismiss this action as being frivolous, vexatious, and
an abuse of process or, alternatively, for inexcusable and inordinate delay in
advancing this action.  They assert that the plaintiff is not a proper lien
claimant, that the lien is a pressure tactic, and that they continue to suffer
undue prejudice from the improper lien and ongoing delays in prosecuting the
action.
[2]              
The dispute arises from renovation work
performed at a house on Coxwell Avenue in Toronto, which is owned by Bill
Aggelis.  Mr. Aggelis formally entered into a contract with Lumar Design Group
Inc. (“Lumar”) for the renovation work.  Nick Koutlemanis is the principal of
Lumar.  It is undisputed that work was performed by Kyriakos Constantinidis who
operates a business called Fielding Construction.  The core dispute is over the
relationship between Mr. Koutlemanis and Mr. Constantinidis, specifically
whether they were in partnership on the project or whether Mr. Constantinidis
was a subcontractor to Lumar.
[3]              
Kyriakos Constantinidis registered his claim for
lien against the property in June 2023.  He was cross-examined on the lien in
August 2023, following which this lien action was commenced in September 2023. 
Other than exchanging pleadings, nothing has happened in the lien action.  Some
undertakings from the cross-examination still remain outstanding.
[4]              
Lien actions are statutorily prescribed to be
summary in nature.  Mr. Constantinidis has not advanced this litigation in a
timely fashion.  Nevertheless, I am not convinced that the delay is so
sufficient to warrant discharging the lien and dismissing this action.  On the
substantive issues of whether there was a partnership and, as a result, whether
Mr. Constantinidis is a proper lien claimant and proper quantification of the
lien, there is merit to the defendants’ positions.  However, I find triable
issues both on the relationship and agreement as between Mr. Constantinidis
and Mr. Koutlemanis with respect to the project and with proving the lien
claim. I am accordingly dismissing the motion, but am imposing a timetable for
next steps.
[5]              
The defendants move for relief under both s. 47
of Construction Act, RSO 1990, c C.30 and subrule 24.01(1)(c) of
the Rules of Civil Procedure, RRO 1990, Reg 194 (the “Rules”).
[6]              
Discharge of a lien may be ordered under the Construction
Act on the basis that the claim for the lien is frivolous, vexatious or an
abuse of process, or on any other proper ground:  s. 47(1).  Registration
of a claim for lien or certificate or action may also be ordered vacated or an
action dismissed on any proper ground:  s. 47(1.1).  An order made under s. 47
may include any terms or conditions that the court considers appropriate in the
circumstances:  s. 47(1.2).
[7]              
Subrule 24.01(1)(c) of the Rules provides
that a defendant who is not in default under the Rules or an order of
the court may move to have an action dismissed for delay where the plaintiff
has failed to set the action down for trial within six months after the close
of pleadings.
[8]              
No case law has been cited granting relief in a
lien action under rule 24 of the Rules.  I have previously held that subrule
24.01(1)(c) is inconsistent with the scheme of the Construction Act and does
not apply in lien actions:  Bernach v. Makepeace, 2021 ONSC 1289 at
para. 17; Smith v. Hudson’s Bay Company, 2019 ONSC 2348 at para. 19.  I remain
of the same view.  Relief in this lien action is accordingly not available to the
defendants under subrule 24.01(1)(c).  I have thereby only considered the
arguments for discharge of the lien and dismissal of the action under s. 47 of
the Construction Act.
[9]              
The defendants argue that the lien and this
action are frivolous, vexatious, and an abuse of process.  They submit that Kyriakos
Constantinidis is not a proper lien claimant.  He and Lumar are alleged to be
partners and co-contractors on the project.  Since there was no default under
the contract with Bill Aggelis, and no amounts are owing, the defendants argue
that there is no basis for a lien claim by Mr. Constantinidis.  The defendants
further argue that Mr. Constantinidis has failed, or is unable, to
quantify his lien claim, which supports that the lien is frivolous, vexatious, or
an abuse of process.  In addition, they argue that they are suffering undue
prejudice from the ongoing lien, which they submit is itself a “proper ground”
on which to discharge it.
[10]          
Discharging a lien under s. 47 of the Construction
Act in these circumstances is substantive relief and a discretionary
decision.  The Divisional Court has set out that, in deciding a s. 47 motion,
the focus is on whether there is a triable issue in respect to any of the bases
on which a moving party seeks discharge and dismissal:  Maplequest (Vaughan)
Developments. Inc. v. 2603774 Ontario Inc., 2020 ONSC 4308 (Div Ct) at
para. 2.  I have previously commented that s. 47 is broadly drafted and may be
used in a variety of manners.  Those include a process similar to summary
judgment under rule 20 of the Rules as well as in other manners that do
not necessarily seek a summary disposition of a lien action on its merits:  Infinite
Construction Development Ltd. v. Chen, 2022 ONSC 3929 at para. 16, aff’d 2023
ONSC 2627 (Div Ct); GTA Restoration Group Inc. v. Baillie, 2020
ONSC 5190 at paras. 42-45, leave to appeal ref’d 2021 ONSC 1250 (Div Ct).
[11]          
When discharge is sought on the merits, both
parties have a “best foot forward” evidentiary onus.   Nevertheless, the primary
evidentiary onus remains on the moving party to establish that there is no
triable issue on each basis for discharge:  GTA Restoration Group Inc v
Baillie, 2020 ONSC 5190, at paras. 52 and 56.
[12]          
The parties’ dispute turns, in part, on whether
Mr. Constantinidis is a “contractor” or a “subcontractor” under the Construction
Act.  The relevant definitions of those terms are set out in s. 1(1) of the
Construction Act, as follows:
[13]          
A lien arises under s. 14 of the Construction
Act for the “price” of services and materials supplied to an improvement. 
Under s. 1(1), “price” is defined with reference to the contract or
subcontract.  Based on the record before me, there is only one contract with
Bill Aggelis, namely the contract with Lumar.  The record further supports
that, at the time that Kyriakos Constantinidis preserved and perfected his
lien, Bill Aggelis was not in default under the contract with Lumar and that no
amounts were due and owing to Lumar.  It follows that if Mr. Constantinidis
is a co-contractor, as alleged, and not a subcontractor, then there is arguably
no valid basis for a lien for unpaid amounts.
[14]          
Nick Koutlemanis’ evidence is that Kyriakos Constantinidis
agreed to partner with Lumar on the project and to share in any resulting
profits once the job was complete.  They worked together to develop the scope
of work and pricing for the job, as well as deciding timing and amount of
progress payment requests from Bill Aggelis.  Mr. Aggelis’ evidence is that he
contracted with Lumar, but understood that Nick Koutlemanis was undertaking the
project in partnership with Mr. Constantinidis.  Mr. Aggelis’ evidence is that
he was told by Mr. Koutlemanis that the two were partners.
[15]          
Kyriakos Constantinidis’ evidence is that he was
not in any partnership with Nick Koutlemanis or Lumar.  His evidence from the
s. 40 cross-examination confirms that he assisted in pricing and was
“partnering up” with Mr. Koutlemanis.  However, Mr. Constantinidis’ affidavit states
that he had only an informal, oral arrangement with Mr. Koutlemanis to
perform work and be compensated at a daily rate of $400, plus reimbursement of
all expenses, followed by a split of any net profits 50/50 with Lumar.  Mr.
Constantinidis says that he understood he was being hired by Lumar, not Mr.
Aggelis.
[16]          
There is no dispute that Mr. Constantinidis
supplied services and materials to the property.  Mr. Constantinidis claims to
be owed money by Nick Koutlemanis and/or Lumar, not Bill Aggelis.  That was admitted
during his s. 40 cross-examination.  On the partnership dispute, though, I find
triable issues both on whether there was, in fact, a partnership as alleged and
on whether Mr. Constantinidis is a “subcontractor” under the Construction
Act.  I say this for several reasons.
[17]          
First, although the agreed compensation alleged
by Mr. Constantinidis for his work includes profit sharing, which is more
typical of a partnership arrangement, and Mr. Constantinidis admittedly did not
render any invoices on Lumar, those facts are not dispositive.  On the record
before me, there are several arguable indicia of a partnership.  The affidavit
evidence and s. 40 cross-examination evidence on the relationship between
Mr. Constantinidis and Nick Koutlemanis could well support a finding of partnership
at trial, but it also equally supports a finding that Mr. Constantinidis
was an active, supportive subcontractor.   For example, it is not uncommon for
subcontractors to support contractors by providing cost estimates before a
prime contract is finalized, or even to assist in defining scope of work and job
costing.  In my view, deciding the disputed partnership requires additional
evidence on their relationship during the course of the project that is not
before me.
[18]          
Second, there is no written agreement between
Mr. Constantinidis and Mr. Koutlemanis, who disagree on the nature and
scope of their oral agreement.  In my view, credibility is squarely at issue.  Mr.
Aggelis’ evidence on his understanding that the two were partners does not
assist, since it seems to come from representations to that effect by Mr. Koutlemanis.
The credibility dispute is better resolved on a more fulsome evidentiary record
than is available to me on this motion.  The record before me is limited to largely
self-serving affidavits on which no cross-examination occurred.
[19]          
Third, regardless of whether a partnership
agreement is found, the record before me does not support a finding of any direct
contract between the owner, Bill Aggelis, and Mr. Constantinidis.  Lumar
is not, nor is it alleged to be, an “agent of the owner” under the Construction
Act.  Lumar is also not argued to have been an agent for Mr. Constantinidis
when entering the contract with Bill Aggelis.  In any event, there is
insufficient evidence before me to find that Nick Koutlemanis acted as Mr.
Constantinidis’ agent.  I am accordingly unable to find that Mr.
Constantinidis was clearly “employed directly by the owner or an agent of the
owner”.  Whether Mr. Constantinidis is a “contractor”, as alleged by the
defendants, is thereby a triable issue.
[20]          
If Mr. Constantinidis was not a “contractor”,
then any services and materials supplied by him were supplied pursuant to some
agreement with Nick Koutlemanis or Lumar.  In my view, there is also a triable
issue on whether Mr. Constantinidis’ supply of services and materials meets the
definition of “subcontractor”, regardless of whether there was a partnership
agreement, since Mr. Constantinidis’ supply of services and materials under a
partnership agreement may still have been a supply “under an agreement with the
contractor”.  No case law was tendered by either side dealing with judicial
interpretation of that portion of the definition.
[21]          
I am also not satisfied that Mr. Constantinidis’
failure to more clearly quantify his lien rises the the level of a frivolous,
vexatious, or abusive lien such that it should be discharged, at least not yet.  
The defendants point to and rely on my colleague’s decision in 2708320 Ontario
Ltd. cob Viceroy Homes v. Jia Development Inc., 2023 ONSC 2301.  In that
case, my colleague held that the lien claimant’s lien was frivolous, vexatious,
and an abuse of process and discharged it.  The defendants have sought to draw
parallels between this case and that decision, but I do not agree that they are
comparable.
[22]          
Viceroy Homes turned
on its facts.  It involved a claim for over $3 million in alleged services and
materials supplied in a period of only 39 days.  My colleague did not accept that
the claimed work was performed based on the evidentiary record before him. 
That included contemporaneous records, such as photographs, and admissions
during the lien claimant’s s. 40 cross-examination that claimed work had not
been performed, that the amount of the claim for lien was based on budgeting
estimates, and that the lien included amounts for materials that had not been supplied
to the site.  The lien claimant also failed to respond to or appear on the
motion.
[23]          
In this case, cross-examination on the lien took
place on August 22, 2023.  During that examination, Mr. Constantinidis
does appear to have relied on his memory and his own estimates of work
completed and time spent in reaching the lien quantum.  He has provided some
disclosure of his receipts and records, but did not provide any clear accounting
of the lien until this motion was brought.  The defendants have raised
meritorious challenges to many of the items in that hand-written accounting. 
However, the fact that Mr. Constantinidis has failed to tender an ironclad
accounting of his lien and the payments received in response to this motion does
not mean that his claim is “void of merit and obviously cannot succeed.”
[24]          
For example, the disputed hours claimed by Mr.
Constantinidis as worked do not necessarily need be proved by documents, such
as timesheets, but may also be proved by testimonial evidence of workers.  Similarly,
Mr. Constantinidis has put forward an interesting argument on how, since compensation
for work performed was to include a profit component, an amount for estimated
profit is properly accounted for when valuing the work already performed.  That
argument may or may not ultimately succeed, but I need not decide it.  In my
view, there is sufficient other evidence before me supporting triable issues on
quantification of the lien.
[25]          
The defendants further argue that undue
prejudice is itself a “proper ground” on which to discharge Mr. Constantinidis’
lien. In support of that position, they point to litigation delay and the financial
strain on both Nick Koutlemanis and Bill Aggelis, as set out in their
affidavits.  Mr. Koutlemanis has provided an affidavit outlining alleged
reputational damage and financial impacts from Mr. Constantinidis’ purported
abandonment of the project.  Mr. Aggelis has also provided an affidavit
outlining financial impacts from the lien, including the inability to
re-finance and other financial hardship.  He also outlines the untenable living
arrangements that Mr. Aggelis and his family have had to continue while
the project remains stalled, namely continuing to impose on his elderly parents
in their three-bedroom semi-detached house, which is not large enough for Mr.
Aggelis, his spouse, his children, and his parents.
[26]          
I have sympathy for the situations of both Mr.
Koutlemanis and Mr. Aggelis.  In my view, though, in the circumstances of this
case, the prejudice allegedly suffered by them due to the lien is more properly
the subject matter of a claim for damages under s. 35 or for costs under s. 86
if the lien is not proven, not discharge of the lien.
[27]          
Lien actions are statutorily-mandated to be
summary in nature:  Construction Act, s. 50(3).  There has been
some delay in this lien action, but it has not been inordinate.  This motion
was brought over a year after the action was commenced, at which time only
partial answers had been provided from the s. 40 cross-examination.  However,
there is evidence before me supporting that, in late 2023, there were ongoing
settlement discussions.  Mr. Constantinidis appears to have failed to respond
to multiple requests for his answers to undertakings between January and April
2024, but his lawyer did provide some disclosure in May 2024 and communicated
with opposing counsel.  Although it appears a removal motion was anticipated,
the plaintiff’s lawyers remained on the record.  The parties had discussed exchanging
affidavit of documents and conducting examinations for discovery, but both are
interlocutory steps in a lien action requiring consent of the court:  O Reg 302/18,
s. 13.  There has been no formal order granting leave for discoveries
and, based on the email exchanges in evidence, the terms of discovery were not
fully agreed.
[28]          
I am mindful that the Construction Act affords
a lien claimant with two years from the date of commencing a lien action to have
it set down for trial:  Construction Act, s. 37(1).  Particularly since
I have found triable issues on the merits of Mr. Constantinidis’ lien and
claim, I am unconvinced that his delay in this action, which is not yet close
to its second anniversary, is itself sufficient to constitute a “proper ground”
to discharge the lien.  There remains ample time the parties to ready this
action for trial in compliance with s. 37(1).
[29]          
In my view, though, the inaction by Mr.
Constantinidis and the evidence before me on the ongoing impacts of the lien do
warrant judicial intervention to move the action forward to trial readiness.  In
the alternative to the discharge and dismissal relief, the defendants have
proposed a timetable for next steps.  Mr. Constantinidis does not oppose that
timetable being imposed.  Given this reserve, though, dates have passed and it
accordingly requires modification.
[30]          
For the foregoing reasons, I order as follows:
[31]          
Costs outlines were exchanged.  Mr.
Constantinidis confirmed that he was not seeking costs in the event he was
successful.  However, this motion appears to have been needed to prompt the
plaintiff to engage with this litigation.  In these circumstances, I am
not prepared to deny the defendants their costs of the motion.
[32]          
I have broad discretion under s. 86 of the Construction
Act in deciding costs of a motion, including against whom costs should be
ordered.  As set out in subrule 57.01(2) of the Rules, the fact that a
party is successful in a step in a proceeding does not prevent the court from
awarding costs against the party in a proper case.  If the defendants seek any
costs at this time, and the parties cannot agree, then the defendants are at
liberty to arrange a case conference before me for the purpose of making costs
submissions.
[33]          
Any hearing for costs submissions shall be
booked directly through my Assistant Trial Coordinator within thirty (30) days
of this decision being released (although the hearing date need not be within
that timeframe).  If costs are not agreed and no such hearing is booked, then the
defendants’ costs of this motion shall be reserved to final disposition of the
action and claimable in the cause.