[1]         
The defendants seek an order for production of
video/audio recordings from the plaintiffs’ in-home camera. The plaintiffs
oppose.
[2]         
On February 12, 2025, I released a bottom line
ruling that the defendants’ motion is dismissed with written reasons to follow.
These are my reasons.
[3]         
This is a medical malpractice proceeding. The
plaintiffs are seeking damages for serious injuries sustained by Ms. Ibrahimova
in May 2019 when she suffered a septic pregnancy loss. This resulted in her
near-death, kidney injury and transplantation, below knee amputation, brain
hemorrhage resulting in a craniotomy, hemiparesis, clawed hand, and seizures.
She alleges that the defendants, who are three doctors she saw on different
dates in the emergency department, failed to diagnose previable premature
rupture of membranes leading to an infection which caused her injuries. As a
result, she alleges that the defendants were negligent as they failed to meet
the standard of care required of them and that their negligence caused her
injuries.
[4]         
The defendants deny that they were negligent in
their treatment of Ms. Ibrahimova. Causation is also in dispute.
[5]         
The parties hoped to agree on damages prior to
trial.  Unfortunately, that has not yet occurred. The trial is scheduled to
proceed in March 2025 in Owen Sound for five to six weeks. This is a fixed
trial date.
[6]         
Due to the seriousness of her injuries, the
plaintiffs are seeking damages in excess of $20 million.
[7]         
The plaintiffs’ position is that Ms. Ibrahimova
will never be able to work and advance a claim for past and future income loss.
They also claim that she requires 24/7 attendant care in the home. There are
claims for supervisory care, housekeeping, and ongoing medical treatment. Mr.
Gubenko, Ms. Ibrahimova’s spouse, also has claims for past and future income
loss and for loss of care, guidance, and companionship.
[8]         
In June 2024, Ms. Ibrahimova gave birth. The
plaintiffs seek additional damages for childcare costs and housing costs.
[9]         
The defendants do not appear to dispute the
seriousness and permanency of Ms. Ibrahimova’s injuries. While they have served
several reports dealing with the standard of care and causation issues, there
has only been one defence medical examination conducted by an occupational
therapist (“OT”). That assessment focuses on the future care costs, as there is
a dispute about Ms. Ibrahimova’s claims for ongoing care and assistance in her home
and to what extent she can carry out her activities of daily living.
[10]      
I have conducted two pre-trials in this matter.
There have also been case conferences to ensure that the matter is ready for
trial. As the trial dates are fixed, it is critical that the trial proceed as
scheduled. This is of particular concern as there are limited judicial
resources in Owen Sound where this trial will be conducted.
[11]      
At a case conference on January 14, 2025, I was
told that the defendants served and filed a motion in Walkerton, where this
action was commenced, seeking an order that Ms. Ibrahimova attend for a further
examination for discovery and that she produce any and all video and audio
recordings from an in-home camera system. In order to expedite the matter, I offered
to hear that motion on January 20, 2025.
[12]      
Following that motion, I ordered that further
discoveries be conducted. I also requested further evidence regarding the video
and audio recordings. I have now received that evidence, together with
supplementary factums from both parties.
[13]      
On December 11, 2024, with the plaintiffs
consent, the defence OT attended at the plaintiffs’ home for a second in-home
assessment. This was requested due to the change in the family circumstances
following the birth of their child in June 2024 and service of an additional OT
report from the plaintiffs in October 2024. About one hour into the assessment,
Mr. Gubenko told the OT that the assessment was being recorded. No prior notice
of this was given to the OT or the defendants. The OT continued with the
assessment after being told that it was being recorded.
[14]      
After being informed of this by the OT, the
defendants requested a copy of that recording; the plaintiffs refused that
request. During submissions, Ms. Legate, counsel for the plaintiffs, indicated
that she would consent to produce that recording, once the OT’s report was
served.  She maintained her refusal to produce any other recordings.
[15]      
I found the proposal to produce the recoding
after service of the defence OT report reasonable and made that order. I understand
the recording was produced but it is only an audio recording.
[16]      
The only evidence in the plaintiffs’ responding
motion record about the in-home camera recoding system was that an in-home
monitoring device was recommended by the defendants’ OT expert as an
alternative to attendant care and that the camera was constantly on to address
Ms. Ibrahimova’s attendant care needs.
[17]      
Given this limited evidence, I requested the
following additional evidence from the plaintiffs in my January 21, 2025
endorsement:
[18]       Supplementary affidavits were filed in response to this endorsement.
[19]      
In connection with the videos already produced
to the defendants, Mr. Gubenko’s evidence is that he took 18 videos of Ms. Ibrahimova
between September 6, 2019 and March 21, 2021 on his cell phone. Of those 18
videos, 11 were taken while Ms. Ibrahimova was hospitalized in 2019-2020. The
seven other videos, taken between April 2020 and March 2021, were taken of Ms.
Ibrahimova primarily in their home doing things such as using a stationary
bike, sitting on her bed, sitting on a couch, and using her walker for the
first time with her new leg prosthesis. All but six of these videos are one
minute or less. According to Mr. Gubenko, he took these videos with the idea
they could possibly to be shown to other people in the future.
[20]      
None of the videos produced were from the
in-home camera system.
[21]      
Mr. Gubenko’s evidence is that he purchased a
home-monitoring video camera system about four or five years ago. The brand
name is Geeni. It was installed for safety reasons so that he could monitor Ms.
Ibrahimova’s movements in the home when he was not there. The camera system
connects to an iPhone app on his phone. He is the only person who can see the
live video feed when the system is connected and operating. Both his phone and
the app are password-protected.
[22]      
Mr. Gubenko is currently on paternity leave.
Prior to that, he would watch the video feed when he was at work to see if Ms.
Ibrahimova had fallen or had a medical event like a seizure. Since he has been
at home on paternity leave, he does not watch the feed. More recently, the
cameras have not been in use as they have switched internet service providers
and he has not set the cameras back up. Prior to that, the cameras were used more
as a security system; the live feed  is rarely watched.
[23]      
There are two cameras in the home; one pointed
at the kitchen and front door and the other pointed at the kitchen, dining
area, living room and hallway to the bedroom.
[24]      
The cameras or app do not save recordings to a
cloud or remote server.  There is an option to place a Micro SD card in a camera,
which Mr. Gubenko did not always do. When an SD card is inserted, it saves
video footage for about 2 to 3 days and then it is overwritten. The camera must
have the SD card inserted in order to save the recordings. Mr. Gubenko has
given the SD card to his lawyer; he does not know what is saved on it as the
cameras have been off for several weeks since switching internet providers. The
only way he knows how to watch or listen to the materials is through his phone
app.
[25]      
The only time Mr. Gubenko recalls watching the
saved recordings was when movement notifications were turned on and the app
alerted him of an unexpected movement in the house.
[26]      
According to Mr. Gubenko, he never intended the
videos to be seen by anyone other than himself and Ms. Ibrahimova.
[27]      
Ms. Kim Destun, a law clerk from Ms. Legate’s
office, filed an affidavit.  According to Ms. Destun, the Micro SD card is at
the law office. She attempted to review its contents but the law firm does not
have the necessary software to do so. Her evidence is that the SD card will
have to be sent to an IT company to determine what, if any, video, and audio recordings
are on the card. She does not know what that will cost and what other steps
would be needed to save the files on the SD card.
[28]       I will first address the defendants’ argument that the plaintiffs
failed to provide the evidence I requested in my January 21, 2025 endorsement.
[29]      
The defendants argue that the plaintiffs have
not:
[30]      
To be clear, I did not order nor did I expect that
the plaintiffs would provide a description of any recordings that were
preserved on the in-home camera system. I did not order details or particulars
of what was on each video. I also presume that the SD card that has been
provided to counsel contains the only recordings, if there are any recordings
on the SD card. I also did not specifically ask how many videos, if any, were
on Mr. Gubenkos’ phone. Lastly, I did not ask for any explanation about why the
recording from the OT’s attendance is only in audio format.
[31]      
I do not find that there is a lack of evidence
in order for me to make a determination on the merits of this motion.
[32]      
The jurisprudence has developed over the years
with respect to production of images and videos posted by a plaintiff on
various social media platforms. Generally, content posted on social networking
websites such as Facebook are documents producible under the Rules of Civil
Procedure: Leduc v Brown (2009), 2009 CanLII 6838 (ON SC), 308 D.L.R. (4th) 353 (Ont. S.C.), at para. 27 and Papamichalopoulos v. Greenwood,
2018 ONSC 2743, at para. 11.
[33]      
Of course, production is only required if the
posted content is relevant to the issues in dispute. In this case, the defendants
seek production of the recordings on the basis that the extent to which Ms.
Ibrahimova needs attendant care and services in the home is an issue in
dispute. Accordingly, any recordings of her in the home carrying out any
activities of daily living such as cooking, cleaning, etc., are relevant.
[34]      
The defendants seek an order, therefore, that
the recordings on the SD card and Mr. Gubenko’s phone be reviewed and that
those videos showing Ms. Ibrahimova carrying out any daily activities be
produced.
[35]      
I agree that such videos are relevant to the
issues in dispute. and that if there are recordings which show Ms. Ibrahimova
carrying out her daily activities in the home they should be produced.
Relevancy is not, however, the only factor to consider. In my view, the
plaintiffs’ privacy rights must be considered given the high expectation of
privacy a person has in their home. Those privacy interests prevail, even at
the production stage.
[36]      
When dealing with production of documents from
social media platforms, claims of privacy rights do not generally override
disclosure requirements. Courts have noted that social media platforms are
accessible to the public and accordingly, parties making those postings do not
have a serous expectation of privacy: Murphy v. Perger, 2007 CarswellOnt
9439 (S.C.), at para. 20. In fact, the primary purpose of postings on social
media platforms is to share information with others: Leduc at para. 35.
[37]      
In my view, the purpose of the in-home camera
recordings in this case is quite the opposite of the purpose of postings on
social media sites. The plaintiffs installed the cameras, as per the
recommendation of the defence expert’s OT -  for safety purposes — so that Mr.
Gubenko could monitor Ms. Ibrahimova’s movements in the home when he was not
present. There is no evidence that the plaintiffs had any intention nor have
they shared these videos with anyone.
[38]      
A party who commences a claim seeking damages
for injuries and places their health, ability to work, and ability to care for
themselves in issue does not automatically waive all their privacy rights. In M.
(A.) v. Ryan, 1997 CanLII 403 (SCC), [1997] 1 S.C.R. 157, at para. 38, McLachlin J. rejected the suggestion that just by
commencing an action for damages, a party gives up their right to privacy:
[39]      
While I agree that the plaintiffs have placed
Ms. Ibrahimova’s need for care in the home and ability to carry out activities
of daily living at issue, and are seeking significant damages in that regard,
that does not mean she has waived all of her privacy rights. A home is the
place where a person’s most intimate and private activities are most likely to
take place. Indeed, a person’s expectation of privacy is at its highest in
their home: R v. Tessling, 2004 SCC 67, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 432,
at para. 22.
[40]      
The court must determine if the invasion of
privacy rights is necessary to the proper administration of justice: M.(A.)
v. Ryan, at para. 10.
[41]      
Breaching of such significant privacy interests by
requesting production of recordings of Ms. Ibrahimova is not required for the
proper of administration of justice. The plaintiffs consented to the
defendants’ OT assessor attending in their home to assess Ms. Ibrahimova and
address the very issues in dispute. The jury will hear that evidence and assess
the degree to which Ms. Ibrahimova can perform her activities of daily living
in her home. They have also questioned her twice at examinations for discovery
where this issue I presume was fully explored.
[42]      
The video cameras are directed towards the
living areas in the house; there are no cameras in the bedroom or bathroom. In
my view, the location of the cameras is not relevant. There is no lower
expectation of privacy in one room of a home verses another. The most intimate
and personal of activities can occur in any room in a home. No person should
fear that those recordings or images could one day be ordered produced in
litigation and viewed by strangers.
[43]      
I also consider the purpose for which the
cameras were installed to be a relevant factor. As noted above, the
videos/audios/images that might be captured and stored were not created for any
purpose other than to monitor safety in the home. They have not been posted or
shared with others. If they had, privacy interests may not prevail. Similarly,
had the plaintiffs produced other from this in-home camera system, that may
have had a bearing on their claim that their privacy interest are paramount.
Given the facts in this case, the sanctity of the plaintiffs’ home must be
preserved.
[44]      
Counsel did not file jurisprudence from any
jurisdiction that involved production of videos taken from inside a plaintiff’s
home. In my view, the jurisprudence dealing with production from social media
platforms, or from a doorbell camera as in Chan v. Pham, 2022 BCSC 2394,
are distinguishable from what the defendants are requesting in this matter.
None of the cases relied on by the defendants address what I consider to be the
most critical issues in this case — the plaintiffs’ privacy interests.
[45]      
 The production of recordings of public
activity, as in Chan, where the court ordered production of footage
from a doorbell camera that captured a motor vehicle outside the home, is
distinguishable from a request for production of recordings of private activity
in a person’s home.
[46]      
Cases where there has been production of
surveillance videos taken by a private investigator retained by the defendant
showing a person engaged in activities of daily living are also
distinguishable. Such videos can be used to either impeach a plaintiff’s
credibility or by the defendant as part of their substantive case: Nemchin
v. Green, 2019 ONCA 634, 147 O.R. (3d) 530. Those
videos can only be taken if they are of the plaintiff in a public setting. A
private investigator cannot record a person in their home. The reason is clear:
privacy interests are at their highest in a person’s home.
[47]      
Thus, while the recordings of Ms. Ibrahimova in
her home carrying out her activities of daily living are relevant to the issues
in dispute, her privacy interests prevail. Using the words of Heeney J in Stewart
v. Kempster, 2012 ONSC 7236, it would be “unimaginable” and “shockingly intrusive”
for the plaintiffs to be ordered to disclose recordings of Ms. Ibrahimova in
her home.
[48]      
The defendants’ motion for production of the
recordings is dismissed.
[49]      
My endorsement released on February 12, 2025
addresses the steps for the parties to take to address costs if they cannot
reach an agreement.