[1]              
This Application was filed under the Partition
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.4, for the sale of the jointly owned Property known
municipally as 7 Main Street, Odessa, Ontario (the “Property”). The joint
owners are the applicant, Caralee Madelyn Paul, and the respondent, Jeffrey
Dean Baker.
[2]              
The applicant seeks the following relief:
[3]              
The application initially proceeded on June 18, 2024
and was adjourned as a result of a number of new issues brought forward by the
respondent just prior to the original hearing date. The application was
adjourned to allow the parties to obtain better evidence to address some of the
issues raised, particularly the issue of hardship and the circumstances of the
transfer. The application was also adjourned to allow the respondent an
opportunity to obtain a firm mortgage commitment to potentially buy out the
interest of the applicant.
[4]              
After further evidence was obtained, in
particular, evidence from the lawyer who acted on the transfer of the Property
to the applicant and the respondent jointly, the matter proceeded to
adjudication. Of note, the respondent did not file any additional evidence in
respect of his ability to buy out the interest of the applicant.
[5]              
For the reasons set out herein, the court concludes
that the applicant is properly a joint tenant with the respondent and that they
both retain a 50% beneficial interest in the Property. The applicant is
entitled to partition and sale and there is no basis to deny that right.  The
first step is to consider an accounting to determine the adjustments based on
eligible expenses and what the parties have contributed to the Property.
[6]              
As for the sale process, the court indicated
during the application that it would allow the respondent a brief opportunity
to make a suitable offer to the applicant to purchase her 50% interest (subject
to adjustments) before the Property is listed for sale. This can only be done
after the adjustments are determined. As part of that process, the parties must
turn their minds to the expenses incurred for the Property in respect of the
amounts paid towards the mortgage, property taxes, insurance, and maintenance, to
determine each party’s share of the net proceeds of sale. If the parties are
unable to agree on adjustments to the net proceeds of sale, they will reappear
before Justice Labrosse at a 9:00 a.m. time to have the issue adjudicated, with
each party filing an affidavit and allotted 20 minutes to argue their position.
[7]              
If the parties can agree on the adjustments, Justice
Labrosse will remain available to address the terms of sale if necessary.
However, if the parties are unable to agree, they will return to this court to have
the terms of sale decided, including the listing price and acceptance process.
The parties are encouraged to make explicit offers on how the terms of sale
should proceed and the court will consider those offers if further appearances
are required as this will impact the costs awarded.
[8]              
The Property is the Baker family home. The
respondent and his sister, Amy Baker, inherited the Property from their father.
They each owned a half share and were cohabitating in the home. The
cohabitating siblings had signed an agreement which included a clause that if
either sibling wish to leave the home, one sibling would purchase the other
sibling’s interest in the Property or, in the alternative, the Property would
be sold.
[9]              
In the spring of 2018, Amy Baker exercised her
right pursuant to the agreement and requested that the respondent purchase her
interest in the home, failing which she would require that it be sold. The
Property was then unencumbered.
[10]          
The respondent was financially unable to
purchase his sister’s share or pay the ongoing costs relating to the home. As a
result, the respondent and Ms. Paul agreed that she would assist by pledging
her credit to obtain financing for the Property and by contributing to the
ongoing costs. In exchange, Ms. Paul would be a 50% beneficial owner. The
applicant and the respondent were in a relationship at the time.
[11]          
On July 10 and 11, 2018, there were three
transactions. In the first transaction, Amy Baker transferred her interest in
the Property to Jeffrey Dean Baker for $150,000. The second transaction was to
add Caralee Madelyn Paul to the title as joint owner. The third transaction had
a mortgage registered on title to the Property in the amount of $190,000. The chargors
for the mortgage were Mr. Baker and Ms. Paul.
[12]          
With the assistance of a lawyer, Mr. Bradley
Fochesato, the parties executed a trust agreement specifying that they held the
Property as equal beneficial owners. Ms. Paul and Mr. Baker then became joint
tenants of the Property and co-mortgagors. Mr. Fochesato was cross-examined and
gave evidence that the sole purpose of the trust agreement was to avoid the
payment of a land transfer tax. In addition, Mr. Fochesato affirmed that he
properly advised Mr. Baker independently. Mr. Baker never raised any concerns
about his ability to understand the lawyer with the lawyer.
[13]          
 The trust agreement confirms that when Mr.
Baker received the full ownership of the property following the transfer from
Amy Baker, he was holding title to the property for both Mr. Baker and Ms. Paul
as joint tenants. This confirmed Ms. Paul’s 50% beneficial interest in the Property,
which was established once Amy Baker was paid out for her interest in the
property from the mortgage proceeds obtained through the mortgage co-signed by
Ms. Paul. There were no issues raised with the trust agreement in Mr. Baker’s
initial affidavit other than he could not recall why it was signed.
[14]          
Mr. Baker's objections, on the basis that
he suffers from cognitive challenges, only came to light in his second
affidavit.
[15]          
Mr. Baker’s evidence surrounding the agreement
between the parties was that Ms. Paul was purchasing Amy Baker’s half share of
the Property. This is what Mr. Baker said he believed was happening when the
services of Mr. Fochesato were utilized. Mr. Baker testified that he did not
understand the nature of these transactions and that he was incapable of
instructing Mr. Fochesato to structure the transaction in any way. He claims
that it was Ms. Paul who instructed the lawyer.
[16]          
Ms. Paul provided an accounting of the payments
that she made towards the mortgage and property taxes. She claims to
have contributed $30,763 to the mortgage and $8,106.04 to the property taxes. A
handwritten accounting was provided of these payments which essentially claims
that Ms. Paul made the full amount of the initial payments from August 2018
until May 2019. She then did not make a payment until December 2019 when the
parties seem to have started alternating bi-monthly payments. Ms. Paul then
made the COVID relief payments until October 31, 2020. Then Mr. Baker assumed
the bi-monthly payments until May 2021 when the parties seem to alternate
again. Overall, Ms. Paul claims to have made 51 mortgage payments plus 12 COVID
relief payments which were reduced mortgage payments during the COVID pandemic.
Mr. Baker made 56 mortgage payments.
[17]          
There is little to no evidence in the record as to why Ms. Paul
stopped paying the mortgage at times and how Mr. Baker reacted. The only
evidence is that Mr. Baker then assumed the responsibility for making the
mortgage payments after Ms. Paul stopped making them and then they alternated
at times. The parties were still a couple for a certain period of time, and it
is unclear as to what transpired within their relationship which resulted in
the change in payments.
[18]          
In addition, when the parties signed on to the new mortgage, they
both received $18,737.38 from the mortgage proceeds. There is no explanation in
the evidence as to why either party received this amount. Ms. Paul’s evidence is that she used a portion of the funds received from
the mortgage to cover legal fees related to Mr. Baker’s buyout of his sister’s
share of the Property. Mr. Baker did not properly explain his understanding of
the $18,737.38 payment that he received.
[19]          
On April 20, 2020, Ms. Paul ended her
relationship with Mr. Baker but continued to make mortgage payments. After the
separation Mr. Baker continued to reside at the Property. Despite being co-owners,
Ms. Paul was never given a key to the Property and had no access, despite
requesting it three times over a period of four years. In the summer of 2022,
Mr. Baker married another woman with whom he resided at the Property until her
passing in the summer of 2024.
[20]          
It was also Mr. Baker’s evidence that he rented
part of the Property to a tenant in 2022 for $800.00 per month. He did not
provide a proper accounting of the amounts received, nor did he share any of
the rental income with Ms. Paul. The respondent stated that the tenant did not
pay regularly. He estimates having received $5,200.00 without providing any
supporting documents.
[21]          
Ms. Paul severed the joint tenancy on May 11,
2022 and has since sought to sell the Property to discharge the joint mortgage
and pay off debts.
[22]          
It is the applicant’s position that, without any
agreement limiting her ownership in the Property, the applicant is entitled to
50% of the net proceeds of sale.
[23]          
  The court identifies the following issues that
require adjudication:
[24]          
 Section 3 of the Partition Act allows
any person with an interest in land to bring an action or make an application
for the partition of such land, or for the sale thereof under the court’s directions,
if the court considers the sale to be more advantageous to the parties
interested.
[25]          
 It is not disputed that, pursuant to the Partition
Act, the court has a broad discretion in making orders upon partition and
sale of a Property. As set out in Sauve v. Davidson, 2024 ONSC 2091,
that discretion includes the power to make all allowances and give such directions
as will result in equity to the parties. The court has the jurisdiction to
refuse to force a sale where there is evidence of oppression.
[26]          
The respondent advances that the agreement was
always that Ms. Paul was purchasing Amy Baker’s interest and that the mortgage
should have been her responsibility alone. In support of that contention, he
points to the fact that Ms. Paul alone paid for the mortgage for the first 16
months following the transfer of the Property. Mr. Baker states that he did not
address the applicant’s default as a result of his dyslexia and that he could
not constantly make complaints about this. The problem is that he could not
show an instance where he made even one complaint.
[27]          
The respondent states that it is clear as to
what the agreement was between the parties given that Ms. Paul made all the
mortgage payments for the first 16 months and then reneged on their agreement.
In sum, the respondent relies on the nature of the personal relationship, his disability,
and the fact that the applicant paid the mortgage for the first 16 months, to
support his version of the narrative. The respondent states that this is proof
that Ms. Paul only purchased Amy Baker’s half share of the house, subject to
the mortgage.
[28]          
The respondent argues that the trust agreement
was a gift from himself to Ms. Paul as no consideration was paid for it. Accordingly,
there is a presumption that there is a resulting trust unless there is clear
evidence to the contrary. The respondent states that if the trust agreement is valid
then Ms. Paul holds the share of the Property transferred to her by the deed in
trust for Mr. Baker.
[29]          
I disagree. There is an absence of information about what the
agreement was between the parties for the payment of the mortgage during the
relevant period. At times they are alternating and at other times one or the
other is making two payments a month. There is also no information about what
happened when Ms. Paul stopped making both monthly payments in May 2019. At
this time, the parties were still in a relationship. Their relationship ended
in April 2020. While the respondent suggests that the applicant reneged on her
deal, they remained a couple for almost a year after the change in who made the
mortgage payments. There is no evidence to establish that Ms. Paul reneged on
any deal. There are also no written communications about a change in the
agreement and neither party has made any reference to discussions amongst them
about why the respondent took over the payment of the mortgage and why things
changed thereafter.
[30]          
In addition, they both received $18,737.38 from the mortgage proceeds. There is no explanation as to why the respondent would receive such
a significant payment. It certainly goes against the suggestion that this was solely
the applicant’s mortgage and that she was solely responsible for the payment of
the mortgage. Furthermore, when looking at the trust agreement, it was signed
in circumstances where the respondent acquired his sister’s interest in the
Property in exchange for $150,000.00 of mortgage funds. The bottom line is that
there is nothing clear about what the arrangement was or how it may have
evolved. The court must make inferences based on the available evidence.
[31]          
The court highlights that the law of equity
presumes bargains, not gifts: see Pecore v. Pecore, 2007 SCC 17, [2007]
1.S.C.R. 795, at para. 24. The burden is on the individual who receives a
gratuitous transfer of Property to rebut the presumption of bargain by proving
that it was intended as a gift at the time of transfer.
[32]          
The respondent argues that the trust agreement
was never consented to by his client as a result of his learning difficulties.
This argument has little merit given that the trust agreement has a very small role
to play in this analysis. I attribute limited weight to the trust agreement
because it was not intended to reflect an agreement in respect of either
party’s interests, although it coincides with the receipt of mortgage funds to
pay out Amy Baker. Its purpose was to avoid the payment of land transfer tax.
It was not meant to reflect a situation where one person received more than
what they should have in the bargain.
[33]          
In the present case, the respondent was going to
have to sell the Property to allow his sister to realize on her interest. The
applicant was able to assist in obtaining a mortgage to pay off the sister and then
she contributed significantly to the payment of that mortgage without ever
actually living in the home. Both parties received over $18,000 from the
mortgage proceeds which demonstrates that there was an obvious agreement that the
respondent would benefit from the mortgage proceeds over and above paying out
the respondent’s sister.
[34]          
The applicant has addressed a number of
arguments against partition and sale such as equity, unjust enrichment,
resulting trust and the purchase money resulting trust. I briefly address these
issues in the following summary of legal principles:
[35]          
In consideration of the above legal principles,
the evidence is clear that the parties made a bargain for the applicant to
become a 50% joint owner of the Property. The respondent was in a difficult
position of having to sell the Property and the parties arranged for the
respondent’s sister’s interest to be paid out of a joint mortgage. The evidence
of the lawyer who acted on the transaction leads me to conclude that the applicant
understood the documents he was signing. He received over $18,000 from the mortgage
proceeds. This does not happen in a vacuum and certainly not if the applicant
was solely responsible for the mortgage.  There is no indication that the
applicant was solely responsible for the mortgage registered on the Property.
This would be inconsistent with the available evidence from that time and how
the respondent later assumed the mortgage payments.
[36]          
When considering the trust agreement, it clearly
acknowledges the 50% joint ownership of the parties. While the intent of the
trust agreement was to avoid land transfer tax, its legal effect cannot be
ignored and is consistent with the transaction that placed the property in
joint ownership.  Although it is not dispositive of this application, it
supports the court’s finding that the parties were to have a joint ownership of
the Property.
[37]          
As previously stated, I disagree with the
respondent that the evidence clearly shows that the applicant was solely
responsible for the payment of the mortgage. While I appreciate that she did make
the payments during much of the first year following the registration of the
mortgage, there is no evidence to suggest that she would have reneged on the
agreement, especially given that the parties continued to be in a relationship
for almost a year thereafter. There is nothing to suggest that the respondent
did not accept to take over the mortgage payments.
[38]          
 I am satisfied that the decision to place the Property
in joint names, facilitated by the trust agreement which acknowledges their joint
ownership, along with the joint mortgage, represents a bargain made by the
parties. They both received over $18,000 from the mortgage proceeds and each contributed
significant amounts to the mortgage and property taxes. This is sufficient to
rebut any presumption of a resulting trust if it exists.
[39]          
I am satisfied that the principles related to a
resulting trust do not apply in this matter. Firstly, they both received an
interest in the Property, the respondent received not only the access to
mortgage financing but also received a significant payment of $18,737.38.
Further, the applicant made significant contributions to the mortgage and
property taxes. The presumption of a resulting trust has been rebutted as these
were not gratuitous transfers.
[40]          
In addition, the circumstances of these
transactions and the contributions of the parties rebut any allegations of
unjust enrichment.
[41]          
Firstly, I disagree that the applicant was
unjustly enriched by having agreed to become a joint owner of the Property and a
joint borrower on the mortgage. The applicant contributed significant amounts
on the mortgage and property taxes without having ever residing in the Property.
She took on the liability for the mortgage and made important contributions to
the payment of the mortgage. She provided consideration for what she obtained.
[42]          
 In addition, I do not find that there was a
corresponding deprivation by the respondent who was on the verge of losing the Property
prior to entering into this arrangement with the applicant. He received a
considerable amount from the mortgage proceeds and benefited from the mortgage payments
made by the applicant. However, if the registration of the mortgage on the
entire Property, including his 50% interest, is deemed to be a deprivation, there
was clearly a juristic reason for that deprivation in the manner in which this
transaction happened. This was the bargain that the parties made to prevent the
respondent from losing the Property.
[43]          
I am satisfied based on the evidence of the
lawyer who acted on the transaction that the respondent understood the
transaction at the time. The respondent met with the lawyer and the joint
ownership, joint mortgage and trust agreement represent juristic reasons which
justify the nature of the transactions.
[44]          
In addition, the evidence does not demonstrate
any oppression by the applicant, nor does it establish any undue influence or
lack of understanding by the respondent. The respondent has failed to establish
this on a balance of probabilities. On this last point, the respondent’s claim that
dyslexia prevented him from understanding the nature of these transactions does
not warrant a finding of oppression. The respondent has graduated from a post-secondary
education program and has signed numerous other documents surrounding his
ownership of the Property. These other documents have never been put in doubt. The
applicant has not satisfied me that he was unable to appreciate the nature of
these transactions. He participated and benefited from the transactions. He was
represented by counsel and his actions do not suggest that he ever opposed the
arrangements made with the applicant. That bargain was allowed to remain in
place for several years. If the applicant had truly reneged on the deal that
had been made, the time to object was when she stopped paying the mortgage or
at least when the relationship ended.
[45]          
 For all of the above reasons I conclude that
the applicant is properly entitled to the partition and sale of the Property as
a result of her 50% joint ownership which will be subject to the following
provisions:
[46]          
The parties are encouraged to resolve the issue
of costs and, if unable to do so, may provide written submissions on costs
after the sale process is concluded or agreed to. The written costs submissions
shall not exceed three pages plus attachments.