[1]              
The accused is charged with the following
offence:
[2]              
After the Crown closed its case, the defence
brought a motion for a directed verdict. This is my ruling on that motion.
[3]              
For the purpose of this motion, the defence
concedes that the Crown has adduced evidence as it relates to the following
essential elements of the offence:
[4]              
When he filled out an application to join the
Atomwaffen Division and was asked whether he had any “unique/useful skills”, the
accused stated that he had skills as a mechanic. He also offered his “loyalty”.
The accused acknowledges that this was some evidence that he offered to
participate in or contribute to the activities of a terrorist group.
[5]              
The defence also acknowledges that based on the
evidence of Dr. Garth Davies who was qualified as an expert to offer opinion
evidence on the identification of specific ideologically motivated violent
extremist groups including Atomwaffen Division (AWD) and National Socialist
Order (NSO) that there is some evidence before the court that both of those
organizations were terrorist organizations.
[6]              
The defence focused their submissions on the
issue of whether the Crown has adduced any evidence that the participation in,
or contribution to the terrorist organization by the accused was “for the
purpose of enhancing the ability of the terrorist group to facilitate or carry
out a terrorist activity”.
[7]              
The defence submits that the evidence of the mens
rea of the offence is lacking, in that there is no evidence from which the
court could infer that the actions of the accused were undertaken for the
purpose of enhancing the ability of the terrorist group to facilitate or carry
out a terrorist activity.
[8]              
The defence submits that there is no evidence as
to the extent of Mr. Bertrand’s knowledge about AWD and, although he might be
ideologically aligned with them, there is no evidence before the court from
which the court could infer that his application to join AWD was for the
purpose of enhancing the ability of the terrorist group to facilitate or carry
out terrorist activity.
[9]              
The Crown submits that there is some evidence
before the court on each essential element of the offence including that the
accused applied to the AWD to join the group, offering
[10]          
The Crown suggests that on a motion for a
directed verdict, the court cannot make findings of fact, but must consider the
evidence as a whole. The court must review the circumstantial evidence to determine
whether the inferences that the Crown asks the court to draw may reasonably be drawn
from that evidence.
[11]          
In this case, in addition to the accused’s
application to join AWD, the Crown relies on the actions of the accused as well
as the statements made by him in online chats, to the undercover officer when
he did not know he was speaking to the police, and in the statements made
following his arrest to support the position that the accused intended to
enlist in a terrorist group for the purpose of enhancing the ability of the
terrorist group to facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity.
[12]          
The Crown submits that the law is clear; if the
evidence is circumstantial and there are competing inferences to be drawn from
the evidence, the court must draw the inference most favourable to the Crown on
a motion for a directed verdict.
[13]          
Since the defence does not dispute that there is
some evidence before the court of the accused’s participation in the activities
of a terrorist group in the form of his application to become a member of AWD/NSO,
I will only briefly address the evidence as it relates to those elements of the
offence.
[14]          
Prior to submitting his application to join
Atomwaffen Division, the accused wrote graffiti on the WETrans Support Centre
Building on two occasions, on February 15 and 20, 2021 where he wrote the words
“fuck fags” on the building and drew a swastika.
[15]          
Mr. Bertrand then applied online on February 21,
2021, to join Atomwaffen Division. In that application/questionnaire under the
question “Why should we bother to recruit you?” the accused wrote:
[16]          
Not long after submitting that application
online, on February 22, 2021, the accused again wrote offensive graffiti on the
WETrans Support Centre building and threw a brake rotor through the front
window. On February 24, 2021, he was found by the police loitering outside of
the same building. Later that same evening the accused signed into an online
chat group for the National Partisans Movement using the name “Thewaffenman”
with a profile picture of him in a so-called “siege mask”.
[17]          
As part of an Agreed Statement of Facts, it was
agreed that Mr. Bertrand posted a voice message in that online chat saying:
“let me show you how I proved my worthiness to you guys, hold on you gonna
fuckin love this” and then uploaded a series of screenshots of media coverage
of the recent graffiti and damage to the WETrans Centre caused by him.
[18]          
There was additional discussion and commentary
in the online chat about whether the police would be able to identify Mr.
Bertrand. On February 26, 2021, the accused uploaded a voice post which stated
the following: “look on the bright side, if I do end up going to jail, um, I
can recruit people from inside the prison”. In February of 2021, the accused
uploaded to the internet a recruiting poster for AWD which included an image of
a person wearing a siege mask and the words “you who are hated are needed now
more than ever”.
[19]          
On March 6, 2021, the accused sent an email to
the Folkish Resistance Movement, using his student email account attempting to
join them. He indicated that he was “willing to perform activism”, that he had
military training and was good with cars.
[20]          
Then, on two dates in March 2021, the accused
was observed on home security video outside a residence at 1145 Tuscarora
Street in Windsor where he punctured the tires on a vehicle parked outside of
the residence on each of those occasions. On May 20, 2021, Mr. Bertrand left a
note outside of the residence which was occupied by a same sex married couple.
The note said “The AtomWaffen knows who you are!” and contained Nazi symbols
and the words “hail Hitler”.
[21]          
Mr. Bertrand had a meeting with an undercover
RCMP officer which was surreptitiously recorded and adduced as evidence at this
trial after it was determined to be admissible. In that statement, he admitted to
participation in the offences of mischief at WETrans and to harassing a gay
couple on Tuscarora Street.
[22]          
The accused told the undercover officer the
details of the mischief offences he committed including drawing swastikas on
the door and window of the WETrans building and writing words that denote slurs
against gay people and racial slurs as well. He said that the morning after
doing that, he texted people in the Inkjet Division and the National Partisans
to advise them of what he had done.
[23]          
Mr. Bertrand referred to Atomwaffen Division as
a “domestic terrorist organization” when he was explaining it to the undercover
officer.
[24]          
After his arrest, when the accused was
questioned by Sergeant Schedewitz of the RCMP, he said that at the time he
applied to the AWD he believed that people of a different race “were out to get
us”. The accused stated that he learned about the Atomwaffen Division and
“they’re a paramilitary terrorist organization so, of course, back then, I was,
I wanted to jump on that”. Later in the statement he said that when he submitted
his application “they weren’t really registered as a terrorist organization. It
was still the newly beginning paramilitary group.”
[25]          
And later, he indicated that at the time of his
arrest, he did not want to be involved in terrorist groups anymore, but “there
was a point in my life where I thought that was the best way to live and that’s
fucking wrong obviously”.
[26]          
Section 83.18(1) of the Criminal Code,
R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, makes it an offence for any person to knowingly
participate or contribute to any activity of a terrorist group for the purpose
of enhancing the ability of a terrorist group to facilitate or carry out a
terrorist activity.
[27]          
Section 83.18(2) states that the offence under
(1) does not require that the terrorist group actually facilitates or carries
out a terrorist activity, or that the participation or contribution of the
accused actually enhances the ability of a terrorist group to facilitate or carry
out a terrorist activity.
[28]          
Participation or contribution to an activity of
a terrorist group is defined in s. 83.18(3) of the Code to include the
following activities:
[29]          
Section 83.18(4) of the Criminal Code sets
out the factors that a court may consider in determining whether an accused
participated in or contributed to any activity of a terrorist group including
whether the accused:
[30]          
In R. v. Khawaja, 2012 SCC 69, at
para. 48, the Court said the following in relation to the mens rea of this
offence:
[31]          
In R. v. Ansari, 2015 ONCA 575, Watt
J.A. sets out the elements of the offence at para. 179 where he states:
[32]          
In R. v. Hersi, 2014 ONSC 1217, at
paras. 23-24, Baltman J. said the following in relation to proving the offence:
[33]          
The test to be applied on a motion for a
directed verdict is well known and was succinctly stated by
Doherty J.A. in R. v. Kelly, 2017 ONCA 920, at para.
19:
[34]          
Where there is direct evidence in relation to
each element of the offence charged, the matter must go to the jury. In R.
v. Arcuri, 2001 SCC 54, in the context of the test for committal
[35]          
Where the evidence is circumstantial, the
assessment conducted by the trial judge is different and was explained as follows in Arcuri at para. 23:
[36]          
The standard on a directed verdict application
does not differ according to whether the Crown’s case consists of direct or
circumstantial evidence, it is only the nature of the judge’s task that varies:
see R. v. Bains, 2015 ONCA 677, at para. 159.
[37]          
It is not the function of this court on a motion
for a directed verdict to make findings of credibility or draw factual
inferences.
[38]          
However, as noted above, where some of the
evidence adduced at trial consists of circumstantial evidence, the court must
engage in a limited weighing of the evidence to determine whether the evidence
is reasonably capable of supporting the inferences that the Crown will ask the
trier of fact to draw.
[39]          
In R. v. Ahmad, 2009 CanLII 84774,
in considering an application to determine whether the Criminal Code provisions
dealing with terrorism offences were vague and violated s. 7 of the Charter,
Dawson J. said the following at para. 26:
[40]          
The issue on this motion for a directed verdict
is whether there is some evidence before the court upon which a jury properly
instructed could find that by the accused’s participation in or contributions
to, the activities of a terrorist group, he intended to enhance the ability of the
terrorist group to facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity.
[41]          
The evidence of the intention of the accused may
be inferred from evidence of the knowledge of the accused and the nature of his
actions: Khawaja at para. 48.
[42]          
In his application to AWD, the accused indicates
that he wants to be “apart [sic] of a group that is actually doing things to
help save/protect the white race”. The accused identifies his “ideology” as:
“everyone has a homeland in which they do not leave exept the faggs and the
jews they are an enemy [sic]”.
[43]          
On a motion for a directed verdict, the court
must look at the totality of the evidence and where that evidence is
circumstantial, engage in a limited weighing to determine whether the evidence
is reasonably capable of supporting the inferences that the Crown asks the
court to draw.
[44]          
In this case, there is some direct evidence as
to the knowledge of the accused. He told the undercover officer that AWD was a
“domestic terrorist organization”. He made conflicting statements to Sgt.
Schedewitz after his arrest. At one point he said that he learned that the
Atomwaffen Division was a paramilitary terrorist organization and he “wanted to
jump on that”. At another point he said that AWD was not registered as a
terrorist organization at the time he applied to join them. However, on a
motion for a directed verdict it is not my function to weigh that evidence or
to make findings of fact or credibility.
[45]          
Furthermore, the knowledge of the accused can be
gleaned from the comments he made in online chats, including identifying
himself as “Mr. Waffen” or “the waffenman”. He said that if he went to jail, he
could recruit people from inside prison. In February of 2021, he uploaded to
the internet a recruiting poster for AWD. On May 20, 2021, he left a note at
the residence on Tuscarora with the words “The AtomWaffen knows who you are”.
It could be inferred that the accused is aligning himself with Atomwaffen
Division.
[46]          
In R. v. Hersi 2019 ONCA 94, leave to
appeal refused 2022 CanLII 16725 (SCC), the appellant’s conviction for an
offence under s. 83.18(1) of the Criminal Code was upheld. In that case,
the evidence obtained through an undercover investigation was that the accused
intended to travel to Somalia to join Al-Shabaab and once he got there, he
would do whatever they asked him to do in support of the group’s Jihadist goals.
The accused was arrested at Pearson airport where he was about to board a
flight. Although the accused in that case undertook no specific actions on
behalf of Al-Shabaab, his conduct was sufficient to support the conviction.
[47]          
When reviewed in its totality, in these
circumstances, there is some evidence upon which a jury properly instructed
could convict. The accused espoused the ideology of an organization that he
himself identified as a domestic terrorist organization. He applied to join
that terrorist organization, pledged his loyalty, and wanted to be part of the
group. He thereafter engaged in conduct that was designed to instill fear, that
are hate-motivated crimes to show his commitment.
[48]          
In my view, on the basis of all the evidence
before the court, when I consider whether a reasonable jury properly instructed
could convict, and consider whether the reasonable inferences that the Crown
seeks to draw from the circumstantial evidence could be drawn, I find that there
is some evidence in relation to each of the elements of the offence upon which
a jury could convict. On that basis, the motion for a directed verdict will be
dismissed.