[1]         
On March 15, 2023,
the Plaintiff (“RBC”) obtained judgment against the Defendant, Hussein El
Hossaini (the “Debtor”) for $238,545.03, including interest (the “Judgment”).
RBC then served a Notice of Garnishment on the Garnishee, H & M Flooring
Inc. When the Garnishee failed to serve and file a Garnishee’s Statement, RBC
moved for an order requiring the Garnishee to pay it the full amount of the
Judgment.
[2]         
The Garnishee has
failed to respond to this motion. Nonetheless, for the reasons set out below, I
dismiss this motion without prejudice to the right to bring it again upon
better materials.
[3]         
The Judgment is
based on an unpaid debt that the Debtor owes to RBC. On August 8, 2023, RBC
issued the Notice of Garnishment which commenced this proceeding. On August 10,
2023 it was served on the Garnishee, along with a Garnishee’s Statement, by
regular mail. On November 13, 2023, counsel for RBC again wrote to the
Garnishee, enclosing a copy of his previous letter and requesting a response.
He received no response. On April 2, 2024 Counsel for RBC served his client’s first
motion record for this motion on both the Garnishee and the Debtor by ordinary
mail pursuant to r. 60.08(8).
[4]         
This motion was originally
heard by Brown A.J. on September 12, 2024. He found that RBC had not proven the
amount owing by the Garnishee to the Debtor or the relationship between the
two. He cited r. 60.08(17) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O.  1990
Reg. 194, which reads as follows:
[5]         
Rather than
dismiss the motion, Brown A.J.  adjourned this motion to January 22, 2025, before a judge.
He did so to allow RBC to
provide further evidence of the amount that the Garnishee owes to the Debtor
and proof of the relationship between the two.
[6]         
RBC’s evidence
comes in the form of affidavits prepared by a person variously described as the
legal assistant to RBC counsel, Mr. Bowden or a law clerk in his firm (the “Clerk”).
In her affidavit of September 23, 2024, the Clerk exhibited both a corporate
profile report of the Garnishee and a skip trace report regarding the Debtor.
[7]         
The corporate
profile report named what appear to be two directors of the Garnishee but no
officers. The report actually named four directors but three of them appear to
be the same person, the Debtor, with slightly varied spellings of his name. The
other director is named as Ali Al-Husseinie (“Ali”). The registered head office
of the Garnishee matches the listed address of Ali; an apartment or condominium
unit in Toronto (“Unit 1503”).
[8]         
The skip trace
report stated:
[9]         
RBC counsel relies
on this skip trace report to support the claim that Ali is the “owner” of the Garnishee
and that he is the brother of the Debtor.
[10]       When I pointed out to RBC counsel
during the hearing of this motion that the skip trace report also says that the
Debtor is out of town and only intermittently employed by the Garnishee, counsel
responded that the statement in the report is hearsay. So too is the statement
about the Debtor being the brother of the owner of the Garnishee and being
employed by it.
[11]       In RBC’s second supplementary motion
record, RBC requests a garnishment order against Fine Auto Export Inc. But at
the hearing before me, RBC counsel withdrew that request because Fine Auto
Export Inc. is already a Defendant in this action and RBC has already obtained
judgment against it.
[12]       Brown A.J.’s endorsement required RBC
to serve its original motion record and any supplementary motion record upon
the Garnishee by courier. RBC’s second supplementary record contains an
affidavit of the Clerk, which deposes that the courier was unable to serve RBC’s
motion materials at the Garnishee’s registered head office (Unit 1503), as “the
occupant denied that the documents belonged to him”.  However, copies of those
documents were also served by ordinary mail at that same address, also pursuant
to Brown A.J.’s endorsement.
[13]       On November 5, 2024 RBC purported to
serve a Summons to Witness to a pending motion under r. 39.03 on Ali, as a
director of the Garnishee. RBC contends that Ali is the brother of the Debtor
and the “owner” of the Garnishee. Ali never attended the examination, which had
been scheduled for November 28, 2024, by Zoom.
[14]       In his affidavit of service, RBC’s process
server deposed as follows. He was advised by the adult who answered the door of
Unit 1503 that he had the wrong address. The process server then checked the
tenant registry of the building and located a listing for an “Al Hussaini” at another
unit. He helpfully photographed that listing. As set out below, the spelling of
that surname differs from the spelling of Ali’s surname. Further, the process
server’s affidavit of service incorrectly spells Ali’s surname (as set out in
his photograph of the tenant register) as “Al-Hussainie”, rather than the
correct surname, Al-Husseinie.
[15]       The process server spoke to the
occupant of the Al Hussaini unit, whom the process server claims to have “identified
himself”.  The process server further deposes that “Ali Al-Husseinie” was then
served with the notice of examination and conduct money.
[16]       I note at this point that three different
spellings have been offered for Ali’s purported surname:
[17]       That being said, according to the
affidavit of the Clerk, on November 13, 2024 RBC counsel, Mr. Bowden, received
a phone call from the property manager of the building where service had been
performed. He told Mr. Bowden, in the words of his assistant, “that the
occupant that accepted the Summons to Witness and conduct money advised that
the documents do not belong to him”.
[18]       Ordinarily such evidence is
inadmissible as “it is improper for the deponent of an affidavit to act as
counsel and rely on his or her affidavit” and “[a]n advocate cannot avoid the
rule that he or she cannot be a witness and advocate through the device of
having someone else swear the affidavit based on information and belief from
the lawyer”: Gutierrez v. Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of Canada,
2019 ONSC 3069, at para. 37. However, RBC counsel does not rely on the
statement for its truth; quite to the contrary. He argues that the property
manager was not telling him the truth. But based on a close examination
of the affidavit of service, I cannot accept that contention.
[19]       As set out above, the process server’s
photograph of the tenant register by which he claims to have identified Ali refers
to an “S. Al Hussaini” rather than an A. or Ali Al -Husseinie. Both the first
initial or name as well as the spelling of the surname set out above are
different.
[20]       It is quite possible that the wrong
person was unwittingly served. Because the two surnames sound similar and
because the process server would have only verbally requested that he identify
himself, it is possible that that Mr. Al Hussaini did not realize that he was the
wrong person until he reviewed the documents served on him.
[21]       Accordingly, I place no weight on
Ali’s failure to attend at the r. 39.03 examination.
[22]       In her third supplementary affidavit,
the same Clerk stated broadly and without offering a ground for saying so, that:
“I have been advised and verily believe that the Debtor is employed with the
garnishee”. That statement violates r. 39.01(5) as it fails to offer the source
of the knowledge. Accordingly, I give that statement no weight either.
[23]       RBC relies on the following statement
by Zarnett J.A., writing for the Court of Appeal for Ontario in Benzacar v. Terk, 2023 ONCA 773, at para. 4, as to the effect of a
Garnishee’s failure to serve a garnishee’s statement:
[24]       That being said, the court did not
determine that a failure to serve a garnishee statement amounts to a shortcut
to an order that the garnishee pay the full amount claimed in a notice of garnishment.
The point is made at para. 37 of the decision where Zarnett J.A. writes:
[25]       In that case, the court ordered that
the full amount claimed in the notice of garnishment be paid. But the Court had
evidence of the quantum that the garnishee owed to the debtor and found that it
exceeded the amount claimed in the notice of garnishment before it. See: para.
56.
[26]       In a second case relied upon by RBC, Couper v. Vitaquest International LLC, 2017
ONSC 7679, Master Jolley, as she then was titled, also spoke of the
consequences of a garnishee’s failure to serve a garnishee’s statement. She
wrote at paras. 9-10:
[27]       RBC counsel argues that the situation
before the court here is analogous to the one before Master Jolley, who granted
a judgment for the full amount claimed in the notice of garnishment. But like
Zarnett J.A. and the court in Banzacar, Master Jolley had sufficient
evidence before her of the amounts that the garnishee regularly purchased from
the debtor and paid for. Over a few months, that amount exceeded the amount
claimed in the notice of garnishment.
[28]       RBC’s counsel frankly admitted that he
could cite no case in which a garnishment order was made in the absence of
proof of the amount, if any, that was owed by a garnishee to a debtor.  Nonetheless
he argued that I should draw an adverse inference against the Garnishee, that
it owes the Debtor the full $238,545.03 claimed in the Notice of Garnishment,
and thus must pay that full amount to RBC.
[29]       Counsel asks me to draw that inference
based on the failure of the Garnishee to respond to this motion, Ali’s failure
to attend at his examination and the claim that he is the brother of the Debtor.
I cannot accept that submission.
[30]       The same unsourced hearsay evidence
that RBC relies upon to say that Ali is the Debtor’s brother also says that the
Debtor is out of the country and only works intermittently for his brother when
needed.  Further, I cannot ignore the fact that the spelling of the surnames of
the Debtor, “El Hossaini”, and his alleged brother, “Al-Husseinie”, are not
even the same. Further, as set out above, I place no weight on the fact that
Ali did not attend at the r. 39.03 examination as I am not satisfied that he
was properly served with the Summons to Witness.
[31]       The Rules of Civil Procedure do
not call for a presumption that a failure to respond to a garnishment notice
means that the full amount claimed is owed by the garnishee to the debtor.
Rather, the court must still determine the amount owed in order to decide whether
it is more, less, or the same as the amount claimed in the notice of
garnishment.
[32]       Whatever inference may conceivably be
drawn from the failure to respond to a garnishment notice, I cannot draw so
broad an inference as to say that the Garnishee owes $238,545.03 to the Debtor.
The evidentiary basis provided by RBC in this motion is far too narrow to make
so broad a leap.  Ultimately, I have no reliable evidence that the Garnishee
owes anything to the Debtor at this time.
[33]       If I had better evidence before me, I
would be in a better position to make a determination of the amount, if any,
owing by the Garnishee to the Debtor. As it stands, I do not feel that I can
make a finding that any amount is owed by the Garnishee to the Debtor, let
alone the quantum of that debt sufficient to make a garnishment order.
[34]      
This motion is
dismissed without prejudice to the light to bring it again on better evidence.