[1]              
     The applicant, Ms. Bustin, brings a motion
seeking temporary without prejudice spousal support, retroactive to the date of
separation, and asks the court to impute income to the respondent, Mr.
Vandenberg, for the purpose of calculating support. The respondent opposes the
motion on the basis that the parties executed a separation agreement in which
they agreed not to claim spousal support.
[2]              
Ms. Bustin and Mr. Vandenberg were married for
22 years. It was a traditional marriage in which Mr. Vandenberg was the primary
breadwinner and financial provider. Ms. Bustin was a homemaker and primary
caregiver to the children. Ms. Bustin worked, but never earned a substantial
income. She relied on Mr. Vandenberg to financially support the family.
[3]              
The parties separated in early 2018. There are
two children of the marriage, both of whom are now independent adults. There
are no child support or parenting issues to address.
[4]              
The parties signed a separation agreement in
mid-April 2018. The agreement aimed to settle equalization and spousal support
issues. It provided that Mr. Vandenberg would buy out Ms. Bustin’s
interest in the jointly-owned matrimonial home, and provide her with a credit
of $900 per month for five years toward the rent she paid him for a unit in the
former matrimonial home (a triplex). No other debts or assets were equalized. Both
parties agreed not to claim spousal support.
[5]              
Ms. Bustin commenced these proceedings in
October 2023, after the five years of rent support ended. Among other claims in
her application, she seeks a divorce, spousal support under the Divorce Act,
R.S.C., 1985, c. 3 (2nd Supp.), and the Family Law Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.
F.3 (“FLA”), and equalization of net family property. She now seeks
temporary spousal support. She claims that she is entitled to this support and
needs it to meet her day-to-day expenses. She asks the court to impute income
to the respondent for support purposes. In the applicant’s submission, income
should be imputed because the respondent’s deductions from income for rental
expenses and businesses losses have not been substantiated and are a colourable
attempt by the respondent to reduce his taxable income.
[6]              
Mr. Vandenberg’s position is that the separation
agreement’s waiver of spousal support is binding. He submits that the court
should honour the agreement between the parties. He argues that the court
should not exercise its discretion to order temporary without prejudice spousal
support until the validity of the separation agreement can be determined at
trial. In the event that the court determines that temporary spousal support
should be ordered, the respondent asks the court to impute income to the
applicant on the basis of the undeclared benefit of $2200/month she is
receiving from living rent-free in a unit in the former matrimonial home, and
on the basis of contributions to rent and household expenses from her roommates
and rental income from her property in the Dominican Republic. In determining
the applicant’s needs, the respondent asks me to consider that her income is
sufficient to meet the expenses she has listed in her financial statement, and
that he has effectively been paying spousal support since she unilaterally
decided to stop paying rent in May of 2024 (approximately $2200/month).
[7]              
The issues for my determination on this motion
are as follows:
[8]              
For the following reasons, I find that the court
has discretion to order temporary spousal support even though there is a
separation agreement, and I have decided to exercise that discretion in this
case. I find that Ms. Bustin has demonstrated entitlement to temporary support;
that Mr. Vandenberg’s income for temporary support purposes on a without
prejudice basis is the income he reported on his tax return, with no imputation
of income; that Ms. Bustin’s income for temporary support purposes on a without
prejudice basis is the income she reported on her tax return, with no
imputation of income; that the quantum of support should be $5300 per month
payable by Mr. Vandenberg to Ms. Bustin; and that retroactive support will not be
ordered at this time. Either party may pursue their claims as to entitlement at
trial, including retroactive adjustment of amounts ordered.
[9]              
On November 27, 2024, the applicant filed a
notice of motion seeking various forms of relief. The relief sought included:
[10]          
On January 20, 2025, the respondent filed a
notice of cross-motion, returnable the same day, January 23, 2025. The
respondent’s cross-motion sought:
[11]          
At the hearing of the motion on January 23,
2025, I indicated to the parties that, in the time available to the court on
this short motion, I could not hear the applicant’s motion in its entirety, or
the late-served cross-motion. The applicant elected to proceed with the hearing
of her motion for temporary spousal support. I declined to adjourn the applicant’s
motion for temporary spousal support pending determination of the respondent’s
short motion.
[12]          
The applicant’s short motion for remedies under
rule 1(8) of the FLR and disclosure was adjourned to March 4, 2025, at
10:00 a.m. by zoom.
[13]          
The respondent’s cross-motion was adjourned to
March 11, 2025, at 10:00 a.m. to be heard as a short motion by zoom.
[14]          
The parties began living together in December of
1995. They were married on January 8, 1996. They jointly owned the matrimonial
home, a triplex, in Scarborough. They had two children together, Victoria and
Robyn, now aged 29 and 24 years respectively.
[15]          
After 22 years of marriage, the parties
separated. The date of separation is in dispute. The respondent says the
parties separated in January 2018. The applicant says they separated on April 1,
2018. Both parties continued to live in different units of the matrimonial home
triplex after separation.
[16]          
Ms. Bustin’s affidavit on this motion indicates
that when she and the respondent first contemplated separating, she retained a
family lawyer, Nirlep Chahal. Ms. Chahal sent a letter to Mr. Vandenberg dated
February 26, 2018, in which she indicated that Ms. Bustin was prepared to
discuss possible settlement of outstanding issues without the need for
litigation. She suggested that equalization and spousal support would need to
be addressed in any negotiated settlement and indicated that this would require
financial disclosure to be exchanged between the parties. She asked Mr.
Vandenberg to provide such disclosure, recommended that he retain counsel, and
asked him to have his counsel contact her.
[17]          
Mr. Vandenburg never responded to Ms. Chahal’s
letter. Ms. Chahal took no further action.
[18]          
In her affidavit on this motion, Ms. Bustin
deposes that Mr. Vandenberg threatened that if she continued to be represented
by counsel, he would make her regret her actions and it would end badly for
her. Ms. Bustin indicates that she terminated Ms. Chahal’s retainer as a
result.
[19]          
Ms. Bustin says that Mr. Vandenberg was adamant
that they resolve their separation without lawyers. She deposes that the
respondent drafted a separation agreement in his home office while she sat
nearby. According to the applicant, the respondent drafted the agreement
without any negotiation, or input from her, and did not allow her to make any
revisions.
[20]          
The applicant maintains that there was a power
imbalance between her and the respondent. Her annual income was $30,000 per
year, while the respondent’s was $175,000 per year. She was not receiving any
financial support from the respondent. While the applicant has only a high
school education, the respondent is a university educated software engineer. He
was the family’s primary breadwinner and she had always been financially
dependent on him. The applicant deposes that the respondent was financially
controlling during the marriage, and that this behaviour continued in their
separation. She indicates that the respondent wanted them to continue living in
different units in the matrimonial home after their separation. She felt she
had to do so because she could not afford to live elsewhere. Ms. Bustin says
that this power imbalance made her vulnerable.
[21]          
In these circumstances, the applicant deposes
that she felt extreme pressure and intimidation from the respondent not to seek
independent legal advice nor to demand financial disclosure from the
respondent. For this reason, according to the applicant, she did not receive
financial disclosure from the respondent, nor did she get legal advice before
signing the agreement. She maintains that she did not have a complete
understanding as to the equalization payment or spousal support owing to her when
she signed the separation agreement. She says she did not fully understand the
terms of the agreement, its ramifications with respect to support, or what she
might have been entitled to if she did not sign the agreement.
[22]          
In his affidavit on this motion, the respondent maintains
that there was no duress, pressure, or intimidation of the applicant by him
around the signing of the agreement. He deposes that the applicant was eager to
close their deal so that she could purchase a property offshore with the proceeds.
The respondent disagrees with the applicant’s claims that she was unaware of
his finances at separation. He deposes that the parties did not have
complicated finances and he did not hide his finances from the applicant at any
time. The respondent indicates that after he received Ms. Chahal’s letter, he
and the applicant engaged in negotiations about dividing their property and
support. Ultimately, according to the respondent, he and the applicant agreed
on terms. They signed a separation agreement on April 16, 2018 that reflected
the terms of their agreement.
[23]          
The respondent’s affidavit evidence is that the
applicant was encouraged to seek legal advice from her own counsel prior to
entering the separation agreement. He says he assumed that she did obtain legal
advice from Ms. Chahal prior to signing the agreement.
[24]          
An email from a lawyer at Ms. Chahal’s firm
dated April 5, 2024, was attached as an exhibit to the applicant’s reply
affidavit on this motion. The lawyer indicates that Ms. Chahal sent an initial
letter to the respondent in February 2018. No response was received. A few
months later, the firm was instructed by the applicant to close her file
because she had decided to settle privately with the respondent. The lawyer
notes that the applicant instructed the firm to close her file before any
substantial work was done. As a result of this instruction, the documents the
firm has in the applicant’s file are limited.
[25]          
Within hours of the separation agreement being
drafted, the parties attended at the office of commissioner and paralegal Daniel
Jenner. The respondent had retained Mr. Jenner.
[26]          
In her reply affidavit, the applicant indicates
that she did not have time between the drafting of the agreement and signing it
to review it with a lawyer or obtain legal advice.
[27]          
Mr. Jenner witnessed the parties’ signatures on
the agreement. He also signed an acknowledgement that the document was acknowledged
under oath to his satisfaction by each of the parties, and that each of the
parties acknowledged to him that s/he  was aware of the agreement and understood
its provisions, that s/he was aware of possible claims  to property s/he may
have at law and that s/he intended to give up these claims to the extent
necessary to give effect to the agreement, and that s/he was executing the
agreement freely and voluntarily without any compulsion on the part of the
other.
[28]          
An email from Mr. Jenner to counsel for the
applicant dated April 3, 2024 was filed as an exhibit to the applicant’s
affidavit on this motion. In it, Mr. Jenner indicated that his only role in
relation to the separation agreement was as a commissioner. In that capacity,
he did not provide legal advice. Rather, he identified the parties through
government-issued ID, reviewed the acknowledgement with them, witnessed them
signing the agreement, and commissioned it.
[29]          
The terms of the separation agreement that are
relevant to this motion are as follows:
[30]          
There was no further provision for equalization
of property or liabilities.
[31]          
The applicant continued living in unit #3 of the
former matrimonial home. She deposes that she had no choice but to continue
renting this unit because she could not afford alternative housing. She
continued to receive credit of $900 per month toward her rent until five years
had passed.
[32]          
The rent credit was not categorized as spousal
support in the separation agreement. However, the respondent required the
applicant to sign an acknowledgement each month that she received spousal
support from him in the amount of $900 per month. According to the applicant’s
affidavit evidence, the respondent told her that he would terminate her tenancy
if she did not sign an acknowledgement that she had received the rent credit as
“spousal support.”
[33]          
In 2019, 2020, and 2021 the respondent deducted
$8100 each year from his taxable income on account of “support payments.” He
did not deduct any amount for support in 2022 or 2023, even though the rental
credit of $900 to the applicant continued until April 2023 and the applicant
continued to sign monthly acknowledgements of “support payments” until that
time.  In the taxation years of 2019-2022 inclusive, the applicant included
$10,800 per year in her income ($900/month for 12 months) on account of the
rent credit as spousal support, and paid tax on it.
[34]          
After separation, the applicant continued to
earn between $30,000 and $40,000 per year. In 2023, she had employment income
of $38,720. After separation, the respondent continued to earn more than
$175,000 per year. In 2023, he had a reported income of $192,794 after he
deducted rental and business expenses from his employment income of $206,643.
[35]          
The applicant has sought disclosure from the
respondent in support of his self-employment and rental property expenses, such
as receipts, invoices, bank statements, e-transfers, lease and rental
agreements, and the like. He was ordered to disclose these items, among others,
within 30 days of the June 26, 2024 order of Horkins J. The applicant says that
the respondent has still not disclosed these items, or many of the other items
he was ordered to disclose. In respect of the business and rental expenses, the
respondent has indicated in comments he wrote into a chart of outstanding
disclosure that was filed as an exhibit to his affidavit: “this is all part of
the income tax and all after the separation. Rick does not have any paperwork
for this.”
[36]          
The applicant lives with two roommates, her
sister and her sister’s partner. She deposes that she lives with roommates
because she cannot afford to live alone. She receives $2600 per month from her
roommates. The applicant deposes that this sum covers the roommates’ share of
the rent, groceries, amenities, vet bills, and other household expenses. She
advances the rent and pays for household expenses and her roommates reimburse
her for their share.
[37]          
In her reply affidavit, the applicant’s evidence
is that she purchased an apartment in the Dominican Republic with the proceeds
of the sale of her interest in the matrimonial home. She maintains that she has
disclosed all of the documents relating to the purchase of this property to the
applicant. She also used some of the proceeds to lend her sister the funds to purchase
the apartment next to hers. Title to the second apartment in the Dominican
Republic is solely in the sister’s name. The applicant deposes that the
disclosed purchase documents demonstrate that she only owns one apartment in
the Dominican, not two as alleged by the respondent.
[38]          
The respondent suggests that the applicant receives
rental income for the properties in the Dominican Republic. He submits that
this is undeclared income that should be included in the applicant’s income for
support purposes. The applicant’s affidavit evidence is that she has never
rented out her Dominican apartment, and has no rental income from it. Although
she notes that she does not think it relevant, the applicant’s evidence is that
she does not believe her sister has ever rented out her Dominican apartment
either.
[39]          
In April 2023, five years after the separation
agreement was executed and in accordance with its terms, the monthly rent
credit was terminated. At that point, the respondent was charging the
respondent $2200 per month in rent. The applicant stopped paying rent to the
respondent in April 2024. Her affidavit evidence is that she could not afford
the rent. She says that the money she receives from her sister that would have
contributed to rent is now being applied to repay the loan her sister owes to
her for the Dominican apartment.
[40]          
The applicant launched her claim in October
2023. She seeks equalization of net family property and spousal support under
the Divorce Act and the FLA.
[41]          
The FLA establishes, in s. 30, that
spouses have an obligation to provide support for themselves and for the other
spouse “in accordance with need, to the extent that he or she is capable of
doing so.”
[42]          
Section 33(8) of the FLA sets out the purposes
of spousal support orders as follows:
[43]          
Under s. 34 of the FLA, the court may
order temporary spousal support where there is an application for spousal
support under s. 33 of the Act.
[44]          
Generally speaking, courts should be reluctant
to second-guess domestic contracts. Private parties are permitted to take
personal responsibility for their finances and structure their own affairs upon
marriage break-down: Hartshorne v. Hartshorne, 2004 SCC 22, [2004] 1
S.C.R. 550. However, when domestic contracts or their provisions are challenged
in family law litigation, courts must be mindful that negotiations over
domestic contracts often occur at a time of extreme emotional stress, when one
or both of the parties may be very vulnerable. For this reason, judges must
approach the review of domestic contracts with an eye firmly on the particular
vulnerabilities that can arise in the family law context, without assuming that
parties lack the agency to contract simply because contract negotiations took
place in a highly emotionally charged and stressful situation: Anderson v.
Anderson, 2023 SCC 13, 481 D.L.R. (4th) 1, at paras. 34-38.
[45]          
Section 33(4)(a) of the FLA establishes that
“[t]he court may set aside a provision for support or a waiver of the right to
support in a domestic contract and may determine and order support in an
application [for support] under subsection (1) although the contract contains an
express provision excluding the application of this section, (a) if the
provision for support or the waiver of the right to support results in
unconscionable circumstances”.
[46]          
Section 56(4) of the FLA provides that a
domestic contract, or a provision in it, may be set aside by a court:
[47]          
There is a difference in scope between ss. 33(4)
and 56(4) of the FLA. Section 33(4) operates to set aside support
provisions in a valid and subsisting domestic contract where those provisions
result in “unconscionable circumstances”: Scheel v. Henkelman, 2001 CanLII 24133 (ON CA), 142
O.A.C. 374, at para. 15. It is a provision that is directed at the
unconscionable results of spousal support provisions of a domestic contract at
the time of the application, not at unconscionable agreements: Scheel,
at para. 15.  An agreement regarding spousal support that was fair and
reasonable at the time it was made may result in unconscionable circumstances
within the meaning of s. 33(4) at the time of the support application: Scheel,
at para. 15.
[48]          
By contrast, s. 56(4) of the FLA “is a
codification of the general law of contract applicable to unconscionable
agreements”: Scheel, at para. 15.  It is a provision that is directed at
whether a domestic contract is invalid because it was unconscionable at the
time of formation.
[49]          
To determine whether a provision waiving spousal
support has resulted in unconscionable circumstances under s. 33(4), the court
must consider whether the circumstances are “shocking to the conscience” or
“shocking, oppressive, not in keeping with a caring society”: Scheel, at
para. 19, citing Newby v. Newby (1986), 1986 CanLII 2616 (ON SC), 56 O.R. (2d) 483 (S.C.J.)
at 486. The factors for consideration in determining whether the results of a
provision waiving spousal support are unconscionable within the meaning of s.
33(4) set out in Newby, at pp. 486-87 were cited with approval by the
Court of Appeal in Scheel, at para. 20, and summarized there as follows:
[50]          
To determine whether a domestic contract or a
provision within it was unconscionable at the time of formation under s. 56(4)
of the FLA, the court must adopt a two-stage approach: Moses Estate
v. Metzer, 2017 ONCA 767, 418 D.L.R. (4th) 486, at para. 9. First, the court
must determine whether the party seeking to set the contract or provision aside
has established that one of the listed circumstances within s. 56(4) has been
engaged. If this precondition has been met, the court must then go on to
consider whether it is appropriate in all the circumstances to exercise its discretion
to set aside the agreement: Moses Estate, at para. 9. The exercise of
discretion will involve a consideration of all relevant factors, including
whether the established factors under s. 56(4) were material to the decision to
sign the agreement by the party seeking to set it aside: LeVan v. LeVan
(2008), 2008 ONCA 388, 90 O.R. (3d) 1, at paras. 34-37.
[51]          
A court may exercise discretion to order
temporary without prejudice spousal support notwithstanding the existence of a
domestic contract waiving spousal support: LaFrance v. Charbonneau, 2011
ONSC 6462, 211 A.C.W.S. (3d) 151; Pitchforth v. Pitchforth, 2009 CanLII
43665 (ON SC); Salzman v. Salzman, 2004 CanLII 5009 (ON SC); Scheel
v. Henkelman, 45 R.F.L. (4th) 419 (Ont. G.D.); Robertson v.
Hotte (1996), 1996 CanLII 8083 (ON SC), 21 R.F.L. (4th) 452 (Ont. G.D.).
[52]          
This discretion may be exercised where the
moving party establishes that there is a triable issue as to whether the
agreement is enforceable, either because it was unconscionable at the time of
formation (under s. 56(4) of the FLA) or because it results in
unconscionable circumstances (under s. 33(4) of the FLA): LaFrance,
at paras. 9, 14.; Scheel (G.D.), at paras. 12-16; Salzman, at
para. 19; Robertson, at p. 454. It is a discretion that is to be
exercised rarely, only where the parties’ means and needs and other relevant
factors justify a temporary support order before the validity of the agreement
can be determined at trial: LaFrance, at para. 14; Scheel (G.D.),
at para. 13 citing Carlsen v. Carlsen (1990), 1990 CanLII 12249 (ON SC), 25 R.F.L. (3d) 461 (Ont.
H.C.J.), at para. 8; Trinchan v. Trinchan (1983), 1983 CanLII 1951 (ON CA), 43 O.R. (2d) 360
(C.A.), at p. 333.
[53]          
It should be noted that the applicant claims
spousal support under both the FLA and the Divorce Act. Domestic
contracts waiving spousal support may also be set aside under the Divorce
Act: Miglin v. Miglin, 2003 SCC 24, [2003] 1 S.C.R. 303. However,
the applicant has chosen to ground her motion for temporary spousal support
under the FLA. Given this position of the applicant and my conclusion that
I should exercise my discretion to order temporary support under the FLA,
as I will explain below, I need not also consider whether to grant it under the
Divorce Act.
[54]          
I have concluded that the court has discretion
to order temporary spousal support on a without prejudice basis even where
there is a domestic contract waiving such support. I have determined that this
is an appropriate case for the exercise of this discretion. The applicant has
satisfied me that there are triable issues as to whether the contract was
unconscionable at the time of formation and/or resulted in unconscionable
circumstances. I am of the view that her needs and the respondent’s means justify
the exercise of discretion to order temporary spousal support.
[55]          
The caselaw cited above satisfies me that the
court has discretion to order temporary spousal support notwithstanding the
existence of a domestic contract waiving support. The respondent did not argue
otherwise. He acknowledged that the court does have a discretion where the
moving party establishes that there are triable issues as to the validity or
enforceability of the contract. However, in the respondent’s submission, the
applicant has not met her burden of establishing that there are triable issues
here.
[56]          
I do not agree. In my view, the applicant has
met her burden of establishing that there are triable issues under ss. 33(4)
and 56(4) of the FLA, and that temporary support is required.
[57]          
The separation agreement was drafted by the
respondent. The applicant’s evidence is that there was no negotiation or
discussion of its terms, and that she did not give input into its content. She
says she felt pressured and intimidated to agree to the terms of the agreement
as drafted by the respondent, even in the absence of financial disclosure and
legal advice. The respondent’s evidence is that the agreement was the product
of negotiation and discussion, and that the agreement he drafted represented
the terms as agreed to by the parties through their negotiations and
discussion.  The respondent maintains that he did not pressure or intimidate
the applicant to come to an agreement or sign it.
[58]          
I would not have a basis to prefer the untested
evidence of one of the parties over that of the other on this point at this
early stage of proceedings, but for the applicant’s evidence that there was a
power imbalance between the parties. The applicant’s affidavit evidence is that
the parties were in a traditional marriage for 22 years. The respondent was the
primary breadwinner. The applicant was the home maker and caregiver. The
applicant did work outside of the home, but never earned a substantial income.
At separation, she was earning between $30,000 and $40,000 per year, while the
respondent was earning more than $175,000 per year. There was an educational
imbalance between the parties as well. The applicant had no education after
high school. The respondent is a university educated software engineer. The
applicant deposes that she was financially dependent on the respondent during
the marriage. She says that the respondent was financially controlling during
the marriage, and that this financial control continued in separation.
[59]          
While the respondent disagrees that the
applicant was under pressure or duress to sign the separation agreement, he does
not expressly take issue with any of the facts relied on by the applicant as
underpinning the power imbalance she asserts. I conclude, for the purposes of
this motion, that the applicant has established that there is a triable issue
as to whether there was a power imbalance between the parties that led to an
absence of contractual autonomy on the applicant’s part in the formation and
execution of the contract: Anderson, at para. 34.
[60]          
In addition, I am satisfied that there are
triable issues as to whether the procedural safeguards of financial disclosure
and legal advice were present in relation to this agreement.
[61]          
The applicant’s evidence is that she did not get
meaningful financial disclosure (or any financial disclosure) from the
respondent before she signed the separation agreement. The respondent does not dispute
the applicant’s evidence on this point. Rather, his evidence is that he
disagrees with the applicant’s claims that she was unaware of his finances at
separation. He maintains that the parties did not and do not have complicated
finances, and that he did not hide his finances from the applicant at any time.
[62]          
The fact that the respondent did not “hide” his
finances from the applicant is not equivalent to him having made full and
meaningful financial disclosure to her. The respondent’s suggestion is that a
positive obligation to formally disclose can be satisfied by a passive failure
to conceal. This is, generally speaking, not correct.
[63]          
A party contemplating contracting out of rights
and entitlements needs to be aware of what exactly they are giving up so as to
be able to make informed decisions. Full and frank disclosure of all relevant
financial information “can go far to assuage concerns of informational
asymmetry”: Anderson, at para. 35. Positive and proactive disclosure
obligations ensure that the party with direct knowledge and most access to the
relevant financial information makes disclosure to the other, thereby avoiding “tedious
and conflicting arguments related to ‘asking versus telling’”: Colucci v.
Colucci, 2021 SCC 24, [2021] 2 S.C.R. 3, at para. 53.
[64]          
In this case, the respondent effectively
concedes that he did not positively make full financial disclosure to the
applicant before she signed the separation agreement. He simply relied on what
he assumed was her pre-existing knowledge or awareness of his finances, and did
not prevent her from making her own inquiries and investigations. Depending on
the other evidence in a case, this might be adequate to establish that the spouse
seeking to set aside the domestic contract had adequate disclosure. However, in
the circumstances of this case, there is evidence of a power imbalance between
the parties. The applicant’s evidence is that the respondent ran the family
finances, and that she depended on him to do so. This could have led to
informational asymmetry that would undermine the adequacy of the financial
information available to the applicant at the time of execution of the
agreement.
[65]          
On this evidence, the applicant has satisfied me
that there is a triable issue as to whether the procedural safeguard of full
financial disclosure was met before the separation agreement was signed.
[66]          
The applicant’s affidavit evidence is that she
did not have the benefit of legal advice before she executed the agreement. Her
evidence is that the respondent intimidated her out of getting such advice. The
respondent’s affidavit evidence is that the applicant was encouraged to get
independent legal advice, and that he assumed she did receive it from Ms.
Chahal.
[67]          
The letter from Ms. Chahal’s firm suggests that
the lawyer had very limited involvement in this case. It suggests that the
applicant met with Ms. Chahal, Ms. Chahal wrote a letter to the respondent in
February 2018 as described above, and then some months later closed the file at
the request of the applicant. It is possible that Ms. Chahal gave the applicant
generic legal information or even advice about her rights and entitlements.
However, as Ms. Chahal’s February 26, 2018 letter to the respondent indicates, financial
disclosure was required before meaningful discussions about equalization or
spousal support entitlements could occur. The uncontested evidence is that the
respondent never replied to Ms. Chahal’s letter and did not make positive
financial disclosure to the applicant before the agreement was signed. In these
circumstances, it seems highly unlikely that Ms. Chahal could have provided
legal information and advice about the separation agreement to the applicant.
[68]          
Moreover, the evidence suggests that there would
not have been time or opportunity for the applicant to seek out and receive
independent legal advice between when the separation agreement was drafted and
when it was executed. The applicant’s uncontested affidavit evidence on this point
is that she and the respondent went to Mr. Jenner’s office to execute the
agreement within a very short time after the agreement was drafted.
[69]          
On the evidence before me, I am satisfied that the
circumstances surrounding the execution of the separation agreement raises
triable issues relating to whether the agreement should be set aside as having
unconscionable consequences under s. 33(4) of the FLA.
[70]          
Under the terms of the separation agreement, neither
party claimed spousal support. Both parties waived any future claims to spousal
support. The applicant received a special reimbursement of $900 per month as a
credit toward her rent of a unit at the former matrimonial home for five years.
[71]          
Although the rent credit was not spousal support
under the terms of the agreement, the uncontested evidence of the applicant is
that the respondent required her to sign an acknowledgment that she received
$900 per month in spousal support. The respondent treated the rent credit (or
part of it) as tax deductible spousal support in 2019, 2020, and 2021.  The
applicant declared the full amount of the rent credit as taxable income every
year from 2019 to 2022, and paid tax on it.
[72]          
Because the applicant was a home maker and
caregiver for 22 years while the respondent was advancing his career, there is
a triable issue that the quantum and duration of support in the separation
agreement does not meet her compensatory entitlement to support.  I find that
there is also a triable issue that her non-compensatory (or “needs based”)
entitlement is not met by the terms of the separation agreement, which I deal
with next.
[73]          
The applicant continues to work as a security
guard. She earned $38,720 in 2023.
[74]          
In her affidavit filed on this motion, the
applicant advises that she is in a state of financial hardship. She indicates
that she recently had to withdraw all of her savings to pay her debts and legal
fees.
[75]          
The other evidence in this case supports her
affidavit evidence on this point. When she swore her updated financial
statement on November 26, 2024, the applicant had a total of $58,347.59 in her
bank accounts. This means that she depleted approximately $140,000 of the
proceeds of sale of her interest in the matrimonial home in the six and a half
years between when she received it (sometime in the spring of 2018) and the
date of her financial statement. Some of the proceeds were used to purchase the
applicant’s apartment in the Dominican Republic and as a loan to her sister to
fund the sister’s purchase of the next door apartment ($17,000 USD and $25,000
USD, respectively). But I infer that the balance of the proceeds were depleted
covering the applicant’s day-to-day expenses and legal fees. And, as noted, the
applicant deposes that she recently had to withdraw the entire balance of her
savings to cover her expenses.
[76]          
The applicant is left with no savings, and no
“cushion” of funds to cover the shortfall between her income and her basic
expenses.
[77]          
The applicant’s financial statement shows that
she has no assets other than the apartment in the Dominican Republic, no RRSP,
no car, and no other sources of income. She has no higher education, and no apparent
ability to earn a higher salary. By contrast, the respondent owns the former
matrimonial home and has approximately $700,000 of equity in it. He has over
$500,000 in bank accounts, RRSPs, and pensions (although he acknowledges that
his pension has not been valued for family law purposes). He owns three cars. The
respondent has rental income and income from his independent businesses as a
web developer and some commission income from working for an investment company.
Although he has reported rental and business losses, the respondent is an
engineer with experience working in an investment company. He has the potential
to earn additional income beyond his salary from employment.
[78]          
The applicant’s monthly expenses appear to be
very basic and frugal. Her financial statement reveals that she has $2400 in
monthly expenses (which does not include rent because she is not paying rent at
this time). She is a 51-year-old woman who is forced to live with two roommates
to cover her basic day-to-day expenses, and even then has had to exhaust her savings
to stay afloat. By contrast, the respondent’s financial statement reveals that
he has $17,000 in monthly expenses. Economic hardship can arise from a party’s
reduced standard of living after the separation: Fisher v. Fisher, 2008
ONCA 11, 47 R.F.L. (6th) 235.
[79]          
I am satisfied that evidence of the results of
the separation agreement, including hardship to the applicant, give rise to
triable issues relating to whether the agreement should be set aside as having
unconscionable consequences under s. 33(4) of the FLA.
[80]          
Neither party filed evidence indicative of any
major health concerns that would result in major expenses or inability to work.
[81]          
Much of the evidence of the parties’
circumstances at the time of the hearing is already referred to and considered
above. Both parties are employable and employed.
[82]          
In 2023, the applicant’s taxable income was $38,720
(inclusive of the rental credit that continued until April 2023). In the same
year, the respondent’s employment income was $206,643. His taxable income after
he deducted rental and business losses was $192,794. The respondent’s taxable
income was almost five times more than that of the applicant.
[83]          
The respondent does not suggest that the
applicant is underemployed in her job as a security guard, presumably because
of her limited education and employment experience. The evidence suggests that
the applicant is currently realizing her earning potential, and that her income
does not cover her basic needs.
[84]          
Taken together, the evidence suggests that the
respondent is able to maintain his lifestyle but that the applicant is not able
to maintain hers.
[85]          
I am satisfied that the evidence of the parties’
circumstances at the time of the hearing gives rise to triable issues relating
to whether the separation agreement should be set aside as having
unconscionable consequences under s. 33(4) of the FLA.
[86]          
A domestic contract, or a provision in it, may
be set aside under s. 56(4)(a) if a party failed to disclose significant
assets, significant debts, or other liabilities existing at the time the
contract was made. As noted above, the respondent did not make positive
financial disclosure before the separation agreement was made.
[87]          
In assessing whether he failed to disclose
significant assets and liabilities, I note that the evidence suggests that the
respondent did not make disclosure of his income, the value of his RRSPs, or
the value of his pension at the date of separation before the contract was
made. The evidence also suggests that the respondent did not disclose loans he
says were owing to his mother and two brothers on the date of separation in the
total amount of $120,000.
[88]          
These were significant assets and liabilities in
the context of the parties’ overall financial picture. The shared equity in the
matrimonial home was approximately $300,000 on the date of separation, and the
parties were jointly responsible for a line of credit in the amount of $300,000
(according to the applicant) or $154,000 (according to the respondent) shortly
before the date of separation. The applicant’s true income, his debts of
$120,000, and his unquantified assets in the form of his RRSPs and his pension
of the date of separation would have been significant to the applicant against
the backdrop of all of the parties’ assets and liabilities. Disclosure of the
respondent’s income, his debts, and the value of his RRSPs and pension would
have been significant to the applicant in assessing her rights and entitlements,
and whether to waive them by entering the agreement.
[89]          
The applicant has led sufficient evidence for me
to find that there is a real dispute as to whether the respondent failed to
disclose significant assets and/or significant debts existing when the domestic
contract was made. There is therefore a triable issue as to whether the
separation agreement should be set aside as unconscionable at the time of
formation under s. 56(4)(a) of the FLA.
[90]          
A domestic contract or a provision in it may
also be set aside under s. 56(4)(b) if a party did not understand the nature or
consequences of the domestic contract.  The applicant’s affidavit evidence is
that she did not fully understand the terms of the agreement, its ramifications
with respect to support, or what she might have been entitled to if she did not
sign the agreement. The respondent’s affidavit evidence is that the separation
agreement was the product of discussion and negotiation between the parties.
This suggests that the applicant was an active and knowing participation in the
formation of the terms of the agreement, understood them, and agreed to them.
[91]          
In my view there is evidence capable of
establishing that the applicant did not understand the nature or consequences
of the domestic contract. The respondent did not make positive full financial
disclosure. There is evidence capable of establishing that the applicant did
not receive legal advice about the agreement before she signed it. The
applicant has limited education, and there is evidence capable of supporting
that there was a power imbalance between her and the respondent such that she
felt vulnerable and pressured to sign the agreement. I am satisfied that there
is a triable issue as to whether the separation agreement should be set aside as
unconscionable at the time of formation because the applicant did not fully
understand it within the meaning of s. 56(4)(b) of the FLA.
[92]          
The applicant has not filed any evidence that
speaks directly to the question of whether the factors under s. 56(4) were
material to her decision to sign the agreement. She has not provided affidavit
evidence indicating that non-disclosure of significant assets and liabilities
by the respondent, or what she says was her lack of understanding of the nature
or consequences of the agreement, were material to her decision to sign.
[93]          
I infer, despite the absence of direct evidence
on point, that the applicant’s position is that she would not have signed the
agreement but for the failure of disclosure and her lack of understanding. The
only reasonable interpretation of the applicant’s evidence is that she would
not have signed the agreement if she had had full disclosure and been able to
use it to gain a true understanding of her rights and entitlements, and what
she would be signing away.
[94]          
The respondent’s affidavit evidence is that the
applicant was eager to sign the agreement because she wanted to use the
proceeds from her sale of her interest in the matrimonial home to purchase her
Dominican apartment. One might infer from the respondent’s evidence that the
applicant was determined to sign the agreement no matter what, so that she
could purchase her offshore property quickly while it was under power of sale.
[95]          
There is no basis in the evidence before me to
prefer the evidence of one party over the evidence of the other on this point.
I do conclude, however, that it is a triable issue. There is evidence on which
the trial judge might conclude that the factors at 56(4)(a) and (b) are
established, and that these were material to the applicant’s decision to enter
the agreement.
[96]          
I have concluded that there are triable issues
in relation to the validity and enforceability of the spousal support waiver in
the parties’ separation agreement under ss. 33(4) and 56(4) of the FLA.
But before I can make a temporary spousal support order in the face of the
contractual waiver, I must determine whether this is one of the rare cases in
which the discretion to do so should be exercised. This requires me to consider
whether the parties’ means, needs, and all other relevant factors justify such
an order: LaFrance, at para. 14; Scheel (G.D.), at para. 13,
citing Carlsen, at para. 8; Trinchan, at p. 333.
[97]          
For reasons I will explain below, I have
concluded that the applicant has established a prima facie case for
spousal support. She has established, on a prima facie basis, that she
is entitled to it, needs it, and the respondent has the ability to pay. In my
view, this is one of the rare cases in which the discretion to order temporary
spousal support on a without prejudice basis should be exercised
notwithstanding the separation agreement.
[98]          
In Politis v. Politis, 2015 ONSC 5997, 259
A.C.W.S. (3d) 335, at para. 14, Harvison Young J. (as she then was) cited the following
summary of principles applicable to a motion for temporary support articulated
in Robles v. Kuhn, 2009 BCSC 1163:
[99]          
In Liddell-MacInnis v. MacInnis, 2021
ONSC 1787, Kraft J. summarized several additional principles that apply on a
motion for temporary spousal support at para. 65.  These include:
[100]      
In my view, the applicant has established a prima
facie entitlement to support.
[101]      
Ms. Bustin is a 51-year-old woman with a high
school education.  She earns a modest income, and has depleted her capital,
even though she has not paid rent for approximately 10 months.
[102]      
It seems clear that the applicant has suffered a
decline in her standard of living since separation. She now must live with two
roommates and subsists on $2400 for monthly expenses. “Need” for the purposes
of spousal support includes situations where a spouse suffers a significant
decline in the standard of living they enjoyed during the marriage: McIntyre
v. Winter, 2020 ONSC 4376, 329 A.C.W.S. (3d) 797; Nixon v. Lumsden,
2020 ONSC 147, 316 A.C.W.S. (3d) 324. The applicant has established a prima
facie case of entitlement on a needs basis based in the decline in her
standard of living since separation.
[103]      
The applicant’s uncontested evidence is that the
22-year marriage was a traditional one. When the parties met, the applicant was
enrolled in a dental assistant program at the Toronto School of Business. She
left the program when she became pregnant with the couple’s first child. The
applicant never pursued further education or training. Instead, she focussed on
her role as homemaker and primary caregiver to the parties’ two children while
the respondent worked in his own business and then as a software engineer. The
applicant did not work at all for a few years after giving birth to the
parties’ first child in 1995.  She returned to work after the birth of their
second child in 2000, but only worked part-time so that she could continue to
take care of the children and the household. She worked as a security guard,
janitor, and seasonal landscaper, always earning around minimum wage. In 2005,
the applicant returned to full-time work as a security guard and continues in
the same position with the same company to this day. She continued to be
responsible for childcare and the household while working full-time. The
applicant was earning approximately $30,000 per year at the time of separation.
Her evidence is that she was financially dependent on the respondent.  These
are all strong indicia of prima facie compensatory entitlement.
[104]      
As noted, over the course of the marriage, the
respondent earned significantly more money than the applicant. He continues to
do so. The applicant’s uncontested affidavit evidence is that the respondent
income split with her to lower his taxes.
[105]      
The fact that the applicant worked part-time for
five years and full-time for 13 years and earned some income “does not mean
that the role she assumed during the marriage did not create a need”: Politis,
at para. 19. Like in Politis, “[i]t is, at the very least, clear that whatever
income she did earn during the marriage was significantly less than that of
[the respondent], otherwise there would have been no need or basis for the
income splitting arrangements that were in place”: Politis, at para. 19.
[106]      
Entitlement to spousal support on a needs basis
will generally be found in cases where there is a significant income disparity
at the time of the application: Ford v. Waldhart, 2022 ONSC 6277, 2022
CarswellOnt 15970, at para. 18. In this case, a prima facie entitlement
to support on a needs basis based on significant income disparity has been
established.
[107]      
I am also satisfied that there is a prima
facie case for entitlement to spousal support on the basis of the means of
the respondent. “Means” refers to available money and includes “all pecuniary
resources, capital assets, income from employment or earning capacity, and any
other source from which gains or benefits are received”: Leskun v. Leksun,
2006 SCC 25, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 920, at para. 29, citing J.D. Payne and M.A.
Payne, Canadian Family Law (Toronto: Irwin Law, 2001), at p. 195. Also
see Berger v. Berger, 2016 ONCA 884, 85 R.F.L. (7th) 259, for this
principle.
[108]      
The respondent has employment, rental, and
business income. He owns the former matrimonial home. On May 16, 2024 a
Canadian Residential Appraiser appraised the property as being worth
$1,420,000. The respondent’s February 26, 2024 financial statement indicates
that the mortgage on the property on December 31, 2023 was $701,000. The
respondent has approximately $700,000 in equity in the home. His financial
statement indicates that he has over $500,000 in RRSPS and his pension, most of
which he says was contributed since the date of separation by remortgaging the
home. The respondent reports that he has paid off $120,000 in debts owed to his
mother and two brothers since the date of separation. He paid off a line of
credit in the amount of $145,000 on April 16, 2018 (according to the
respondent) or in the amount of $300,944 on February 5, 2018 (according to the
applicant). The respondent has significant assets. He has the ability to pay
spousal support.
[109]      
The applicant has made out a prima facie
entitlement to spousal support on a compensatory basis and a non-compensatory
basis: she needs it, and the respondent has the ability to pay it.
[110]      
Both parties ask the court to impute income to
the other for support purposes. I decline to do so.
[111]      
The applicant submits that the respondent’s real
income for support purposes is higher than his reported income. She argues that
the respondent improperly claimed rental and business expenses to reduce his
taxable income.  She asks the court to impute the rental and business expenses
into the respondent’s income so that his income for support purposes is based
on his gross 2023 income of $206,643, not his declared income of $192,794.
[112]      
I am not prepared to impute the rental and
business expenses to the respondent for the purposes of calculating temporary
spousal support. I am aware that the respondent has apparently not disclosed the
documentation (lease agreements, receipts, invoices, etc.) to substantiate
these expenses, contrary to the order of Horkins J. However, my review of the
respondent’s CRA Statement of Real Estate Rentals for 2022 suggests that the expenses
claimed are not, at first blush, unreasonable. The claimed business expenses
for 2022 in the respondent’s CRA Statement of Business or Professional
Activities are harder to assess without having access to the information that
the respondent has yet to disclose. For example, it is difficult to determine
whether $4032.96 in interest and bank charges for a business that only
generated $1973.96 in income is reasonable without knowing why those interest
and bank charges were incurred.  It may be that interest is owing on a business
loan or line of credit that was incurred in another year, when income and
expenses were higher.
[113]      
Given the absence of a complete evidentiary
record in relation to the respondent’s business and rental expenses, I am not
prepared to impute those expenses into the respondent’s income for support
purposes at this time. In my view, even though the respondent may be
responsible for the shortcomings in the evidentiary record, the imputation of
income to the respondent is a matter that requires more evidence and more in-depth
analysis than I can undertake on this motion. This is a matter for the trial: Gannon
v. Gannon, 2021 ONSC 7160, 2021 CarswellOnt 14905; Rankin v. Rankin,
2021 ONSC 4537, 339 A.C.W.S. (3d) 51.
[114]      
The respondent asks the court to impute income
to the applicant for support purposes. He submits that, in addition to her
employment income, the applicant receives financial benefits that should be
included in her income. According to the respondent, these are: (i) the benefit
of living rent-free in the former matrimonial home, worth approximately $2200
per month; (ii) rent from her sister and her sister’s partner in the amount of
$2600 per month; and (iii) rental income from her two properties in the
Dominican Republic. I note here again that the applicant submits that she only
owns one property in the Dominican Republic, and that the second property
referred to by the respondent belongs to her sister. The respondent argues that
when all the applicant’s sources of income are considered and grossed up for
taxes, her true income is close to $82,528 per annum, not including her rental
income from the Dominican Republic.
[115]      
I do not agree that the applicant should have
income imputed to her in this way.
[116]      
With respect to the $2200 in rent the applicant
has not been paying since April 2024: as I will explain further below, I have
decided not to order retroactive support at this time. The decision as to
whether to impute the $2200 per month in rent to the applicant’s income from
April 2024 to the date of this order will be a matter for the trial judge to
determine in the context of the applicant’s claim for retroactive spousal
support if she pursues it at trial. Going forward, there will be a temporary
order for spousal support on a without prejudice basis. The respondent will pay
the full amount of spousal support to the applicant. In a separate transaction,
the applicant will pay the full amount of her rent to the respondent. There
will be no more unpaid rent or rental credit. The applicant’s rent will not be
deducted from her spousal support payment. In my view, this is the least
complicated manner of ensuring that the applicant’s needs are met, the
respondent receives his rent, the parties’ autonomy is maximized, and their
affairs are as cleanly disentangled as possible. Given this decision, it would
not be appropriate to impute the benefit of $2200 in rent to the applicant’s
income for support purposes going forward.
[117]      
With respect to the $2600 per month the
applicant receives from her roommates: I am not prepared to impute this rental
income to the applicant at an interim motion. The applicant’s evidence is that
it is out of financial necessity that she has roommates. The money she received
from them on account of rent was not income to her, but a pass-through of rent
to the respondent/landlord. Further, some of the money from the roommates was
not income to her, but a reimbursement for shared expenses. Whether the
applicant will continue to have rental income after she begins to receive
temporary spousal support, and if so, whether that rental income should be
imputed to her is a determination that is best left to the trial judge.
[118]      
With respect to rental income from the
properties in the Dominican Republic: there is no evidence that the applicant
owns two properties in the Dominican Republic or that she receives rental
income from her property there. The only evidence before me is that the
applicant owns only one property in the Dominican Republic, and that she has
never rented out that property or received rental income from it. Whether income
should be imputed to the applicant for rental income she could earn from
renting the one apartment is best left for the trial judge because there must
be an evidentiary foundation to impute income. I have no evidence as to what
rental income the applicant could earn from this apartment.
[119]      
For these reasons, I have decided that the
applicant’s income for temporary support purposes on a without prejudice basis
is her 2023 employment income of $38,720, and that the respondent’s income for temporary
support purposes on a without prejudice basis is his 2023 declared taxable
income of $192,794.
[120]      
Need and ability to pay are the central issues
on a motion for temporary support. Moreover, “the court is not to engage in an
in-depth analysis of the parties’ circumstances which is better left to trial”:
Politis, at para. 36.
[121]      
As noted, I accept that the applicant has
demonstrated need. She has limited income and has depleted her savings. She has
suffered a reduction in the standard of living she would have enjoyed during
the marriage. The applicant’s financial statement indicates that her monthly
expenses are $2400 per month, exclusive of rent. However, given how pared down
the expenses are, I infer that $2400 per month ($4600 per month including rent)
is more a reflection of the applicant’s currently reduced ability to spend than
it is of her need. The applicant’s reduction in standard of living to an amount
below her need is particularly evident when compared with the respondent’s
expenses of $17,000 per month. In this case, the applicant’s monthly expenses
as listed in her financial statement are not necessarily equivalent to her needs.
Recall that temporary support aims to allow the applicant to continue living at
the pre-separation standard of living: McIntyre; Nixon. The applicant’s
need should not be defined by mere subsistence.
[122]      
The husband’s income and assets establish that
he has the ability to pay.
[123]      
In addition, given the duration of the marriage
and the parties’ roles in it, the applicant has established a prima facie
entitlement to support on a compensatory and non-compensatory basis. The
applicant made sacrifices for the family during the marriage, which benefitted
the respondent, and for which she suffered and continues to suffer financial
disadvantage: Thompson v. Thompson, 2013 ONSC 5500, 236 A.C.W.S. (3d)
693, at paras. 55-59. She withdrew from a dental assistant education program
when she became pregnant. She never pursued further education because of her
domestic and child caregiving responsibilities. She was out of the paid
workforce for five years after the parties’ first child was born, worked
part-time for four years after their second child was born, and then worked at
modestly paying jobs to enable her to continue with her domestic and childcare
responsibilities. Her role within the family resulted in her being the
secondary earner. This is prima facie evidence that the applicant suffers
ongoing financial disadvantage as a result of the marriage and its breakdown.
[124]      
The SSAG for spousal support where the
payor has an income of $192,794 and the recipient has an income of $38,720 are:
$4333 at the low end of the range; $5056 at the mid point of the range; and
$5776 at the high end of the range.
[125]      
In my view, temporary spousal support in this
case should be between the mid and high points of the range.  Depth of need,
ability to pay, and disparity in living standards are factors that have been
held to ground a decision to order support between the mid and high points of
the range: Bastarache v. Bastarache, 2012 NBQB 75, 387 N.B.R. (2d) 152. In
this case, the applicant has established meaningful need, that the respondent has
the ability to pay, and that there is meaningful disparity in the parties’
standard of living. A spousal support payment of $5056 per month (the mid point
of the range) gives the respondent 55.3% and the applicant 44.7% of the net
disposable income. By contrast, support in the amount of $5778 per month (the
high end of the range) results in a more equitable distribution of the net
disposable income with 52.1% of net disposable income to the respondent and
47.9% to the applicant. Temporary spousal support between the mid and high
range would go some ways toward levelling the standard of living disparity
between the parties. Finally, the apparent strength of the applicant’s claim
for compensatory support is a factor that inclines toward support between the
mid and high points of the range: Monahan-Joudry v. Joudrey, 2012 ONSC
5984, 223 A.C.W.S. (3d) 420.
[126]      
I have concluded that the appropriate amount of
temporary spousal support is $5300 per month, on a without prejudice basis. This
is an amount that reflects the applicant’s reasonable needs on more than a
subsistence basis, assists in levelling the amount of the net disposable income
available to each party thereby addressing the disparity in standard of living,
and recognizes the apparent compensatory nature of the applicant’s claim, while
not exceeding the respondent’s ability to pay.
[127]      
The applicant asks the court for an order that
spousal support be retroactive to the date of separation, or such other date as
the court deems appropriate.
[128]      
I decline to order that spousal support be
retroactive, without prejudice to the applicant’s ability to pursue retroactive
support at trial.
[129]      
The factors for consideration in determining the
suitability of a retroactive order for spousal support are: the needs of the
recipient both at the time they say the award should have been made and at the
time of the application; the conduct of the payor that is broadly relevant to
the support obligation; the reason for the delay in seeking spousal support; and
any hardship the retroactive award may visit on the payor spouse: Kerr v.
Baranow, 2011 SCC 10, [2011] 1 S.C.R. 269, at paras. 206-212. On this
temporary motion, there was little or no evidence in relation to most or all of
these factors. In addition, there was no evidence called by the applicant as to
why spousal support should be ordered retroactive to the date of separation,
rather than the date on which she commenced her proceedings, which is the
general rule and default option: Kerr, at para. 211.
[130]      
In the absence of evidence that could ground a
retroactive order for spousal support, I dismiss the applicant’s motion for
that relief without prejudice to her ability to pursue her claim for retroactive
support at trial.
[131]      
This court orders that temporary spousal support
on a without prejudice basis shall be paid by the respondent to the applicant
in the amount of $5300 per month, commencing March 1, 2025. The applicant shall
separately pay her monthly rent to the respondent for as long as she remains
his tenant.
[132]      
The applicant shall file a draft order, in word
format, reflecting the terms of this order.
[133]      
Ms. Bustin’s motion for disclosure and remedies
under rule 1(8) is adjourned to March 4, 2025 at 10:00 a.m. by zoom. Mr.
Vandenberg’s motion for disclosure and questioning is adjourned to March 11,
2025 at 10:00 a.m. by zoom.
[134]      
The parties are encouraged to come to an
agreement as to the costs of this motion. If they are unable to do so, they may
serve and file written submissions of not more than three pages double-spaced,
along with bills of costs and any offers to settle within 30 days of the
release of these reasons.