[1]              
The plaintiffs and defendant entered into an agreement of purchase and
sale (“APS”) under which the defendant was to purchase a property owned by the
plaintiffs for $960,000. The transaction did not close. There is no dispute
that the parties entered into an APS, and that the defendant declined to close
the transaction.
[2]              
On this summary judgment motion, the plaintiffs seek damages for breach
of contract. The defendant denies liability, on the basis that she had the
right to rescind the agreement due to an alleged misrepresentation as to square
footage of the property made by the plaintiffs’ real estate agent that she
argues induced her to enter into the APS, and also due to the plaintiffs’
alleged breaches of the agreement.
[3]              
The defendant has commenced a counterclaim against the plaintiffs that
raises the same issues that she raises in her defence of the plaintiffs’
proceeding. It alleges negligent and reckless misrepresentation “on the part of
the plaintiffs and their agent.”
[4]              
The relief sought on the plaintiffs’ motion for summary judgment
includes a dismissal of the counterclaim.
[5]              
This motion requires me to determine the following issues:
[6]              
I consider these issues in turn.
[7]              
The defendant argues that the motion for summary judgment ought to be
converted into a summary trial because:
[8]              
I decline to convert the motion into a summary trial for the following
reasons:
[9]              
There is no disagreement as to the principles that apply when
determining when a matter can be resolved on a summary judgment motion. I am
cognizant of the principles set out in Hryniak v. Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7.
There will be no genuine issue requiring a trial when the judge can make the
necessary findings of fact, apply the law to the facts, and the process is a
proportionate, more expeditious, and less expensive means to achieve a just
result: Hryniak, at para. 49.
[10]          
On a motion for summary judgment, the court is entitled to assume that
the record contains all the evidence that the parties would adduce if the
matter proceeded to trial: Sweda Farms Ltd. v. Egg Farmers of Ontario,
2014 ONS 1200, at paras. 26-27.
[11]          
Each party must put their best foot forward on a motion for summary
judgment. As Centa J. warned in 1000425140 Ontario Inc. v. 1000176653
Ontario Inc. (2023), 2023 ONSC 6688, at para. 32:
[12]          
With these principles I mind, I turn to the three claims that the
defendant makes to argue that the there are genuine issues requiring a trial
with respect to whether she had the right to rescind the APS. I note these are
the same issues raised by her counterclaim.
[13]          
The defendant alleges that the plaintiffs’ realtor, Mr. Bindlish,
induced her to enter into the APS by misrepresenting to her realtor (and
spouse), Michael Elabor, the square footage of the property that the vendors
were selling.
[14]          
The parties entered into the APS on March 12, 2022.
[15]          
In the defendant’s telling of events, on March 11, 2022, before she made
an offer on the property, Mr. Bindlish orally advised Mr. Elabor that the
property was 1500-2000 square feet. In reliance on that representation, she
made the offer. After the APS was signed, Mr. Elabor followed up by text
message on March 15, 2022 to get the representation as to the square footage in
writing. He did not get it in writing, but Mr. Bindlish again repeated the
representation orally. Then about six weeks later, on June 14, 2022, just over
two weeks before the scheduled closing, Mr. Elabor sought confirmation of the
square footage by text again. The defendant places into evidence text messages
between Mr. Bindlish and Mr. Elabor that she argues supports her narrative.
[16]          
Mr. Bindlish gave evidence on the motion. He denied having made any representation
as to the square footage of the property.
[17]          
The documentary evidence reveals that the listing of the property does
not include a statement as to the overall square footage of the property. Dimensions
are included for the different rooms in the property. Added together, they
amount to about 840 square feet. The listing also includes a statement that the
buyer is to verify all the details of the listing.
[18]          
The APS includes several relevant clauses:
[19]          
From these documents, I observe that it ought to have been clear to the
defendant, and her realtor spouse, that the defendant was not entitled under
the terms of the contract to rely on any representations that had been made, if
indeed any had been made.
[20]          
In addition to the contractual and listing documents, I have had regard
to the text message exchange between the realtors. It reveals the following
statements were made:
[21]          
From these text messages, I make the following observations.
[22]          
If Mr. Bindlish had, on March 11, 2022, advised Mr. Elabor that the
square footage of the property was 1500-2000 square feet as alleged, one would
expect Mr. Elabor to confirm that specific information via text on March 15,
2022, not ask if Mr. Bindlish had “any idea” about it because Mr. Elabor wanted
to “have an idea.” Moreover, when Mr. Bindlish indicated he had no information
about the square footage, one would have expected Mr. Elabor to reference Mr.
Bindlish’s (alleged) earlier representation that the property was 1500-2000
square feet. But he does not. Rather, Mr. Elabor falls silent on the topic for
weeks.
[23]          
If, as the defendant claims, Mr. Elabor was trying to get the alleged representation
as to square footage in writing, one would have expected Mr. Elabor to follow
up on the text exchange, and not be satisfied with the (alleged) further oral
representation made after the text message was sent. Moreover, it is unclear
what the purpose of getting the representation in writing would be after the
APS had been signed, given its clear terms disavowing any representations.
[24]          
The June text exchange, taken at its highest, suggests that at some
point Mr. Bindlish may have given Mr. Elabor some kind of indication of square
footage of the property, though even assuming the content of Mr. Elabor’s texts
to be true (which I do not for reasons I explain below), it is unclear whether
the alleged representation was that the property was 1500-2000 sq feet or 1700
sq feet. In any case, there is absolutely nothing in the documents that lends
any support to the defendant’s assertion that the representation was made prior
to her entering into the APS, and induced her to do so.
[25]          
The defendant has the additional problem that all of the evidence on
which she relies to establish that a misrepresentation was made by Mr. Bindlish
to Mr. Elabor is hearsay. While r. 39.01(4) of the Rules of Civil Procedure,
R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, permits affidavits that contain statements of the
deponent’s information and belief on a motion, if the source of the information
and the fact of the belief are specified in the affidavit, the defendant’s
tactical decision not to offer direct evidence from Mr. Elabor affects the
weight I am prepared to assign to the hearsay evidence offered by the defendant
on this critical issue. I am not prepared to accept that the content of Mr.
Elabor’s text messages are true (although I accept that the text messages were
sent as they appear to have been sent). Nor am I prepared to accept the truth
of the content of the hearsay evidence the defendant offers in her affidavit that
Mr. Bindlish misrepresented the square footage of the property to Mr. Elabor.
[26]          
The defendant does not offer evidence that raises a question of
credibility about whether the alleged representation was made. At most she
offers evidence that she might have been able to offer evidence that raised a
question of credibility, had she offered evidence from Mr. Elabor. That is not
good enough on a summary judgment motion. She made a tactical choice not to
lead Mr. Elabor’s evidence. As I have already noted, tactical choices have
consequences.
[27]          
The only conclusion that can be drawn from the evidence before me is
that Mr. Bindlish made no representation as to the square footage of the
property at any time before the APS was signed, and as such, no
misrepresentation as to square footage of the property could have induced the
defendant to enter into the APS. In these circumstances, she was not entitled
to rescind the APS based on the actual square footage of the property[1].
There is no genuine issue requiring a trial with respect to the alleged
misrepresentation.
[28]          
The defendant argues that the plaintiffs breached the APS by failing to
deliver the property in “broom-swept condition” as required by the APS.
[29]          
The defendant deposes that she visited the property on June 16, 2022,
and found “substantial damage” which was more than just “regular wear and tear.”
She offers photographs that she claims substantiate the poor condition of the
property.
[30]          
The defendant complained about the condition of the property after she
visited it. The plaintiffs subsequently undertook repairs and cleaning to the
property. The plaintiffs offer photos of the condition of the property at
closing.
[31]          
The defendant did not visit the property immediately prior to closing to
confirm whether the necessary cleaning and repairs had been undertaken. On
cross-examination, when shown the plaintiffs’ photos of the condition of the property,
the defendant refused to answer whether they depicted a property in the
dilapidated condition that she alleged.
[32]          
The defendant’s photographs show a property that requires some minor
repairs, like affixing vent covers properly, replacing light switches, and
adding door pulls to a cabinet. The photos show cleaning required in spaces
that would have been mostly covered while occupied, like inside sink cabinets,
or on flooring that was obviously underneath furniture.
[33]          
The plaintiffs make an argument about whether the requirement that the
property be in “broom-swept condition” was a representation or a warranty. I
need not delve into that question.
[34]          
The evidence before me establishes that the property was in broom-swept
condition at the time of closing. It required cleaning and repairs as of June
16, 2022 when the defendant visited it, and that cleaning and those repairs
were undertaken.
[35]          
The property was in broom-swept condition at closing. There is no breach
of the APS based on the condition of the property. Accordingly, the defendant
was not entitled to rescind the APS based on the condition of the property.
[36]          
It is undisputed that there was a tenant renting in the basement of the
property at the time the APS was signed.
[37]          
Schedule A of the APS provided as follows: “Buyer agreed to assume a
lady Tenant renting a room in the basement on the closing date.”
[38]          
The record includes a text exchange between Mr. Elabor and Mr. Bindlish
on May 30, 2022, wherein Mr. Elabor advises he wants to book a visit to the
property. Mr. Bindlish agrees, and then adds, “by the way that trouble tenant
in the basement was removed so you won’t have to worry about her.” Mr. Elabor
responds by saying, “OK, good”
[39]          
The defendant, in her affidavit, deposes the following with respect to
the tenant:
[40]          
There is no record of any objection being raised to the absence of the
tenant until June 21, 2022, although the information about the tenant leaving
was relayed on May 30, 2022. There is no explanation for the defendant’s claim
that she was never aware that the tenants were moving when the text exchange
clearly shows that the information was communicated on May 30, 2022. There is
no explanation for how the defendant would not have known the tenant had
vacated when she visited the property on June 16, 2022, where presumably it
would have been obvious that the property was no longer tenanted.
[41]          
In the defendant’s factum, she states that one of the conditions of the
agreement was that she would assume the tenant living in the basement. She made
no additional argument, either in her factum or in her oral argument on the
motion, as to why the absence of the tenant entitled her to rescind the APS. I
conclude that this is not an argument that she seriously pursued.
[42]          
However, because she raises the tenancy in her counterclaim, and in view
of the summary judgment sought dismissing the counterclaim, I consider the
impact, if any, of the absence of the tenant before closing.
[43]          
The question is how to interpret the clause: “Buyer agreed to assume a
lady Tenant renting a room in the basement on the closing date.”
[44]          
The plaintiffs rely on Sattva Capital Corp. v. Creston Moly Corp.,
2014 SCC 53, at para. 47, where the Supreme Court of Canada held (cites
omitted):
[45]          
In my view, the plain meaning of the clause is that the buyer was
obligated to take possession with the tenant in the basement, not that the
vendor was obligated to provide possession with the basement tenant. The clause
was negotiated for the benefit of the vendor, and represented a departure from
the most common clause, requiring vacant possession to be delivered on closing.
The wording of the clause places no obligation on the vendor; the obligation is
the buyer’s only. That the defendant was relieved of an obligation under the
agreement does not amount to a breach of the APS by the vendors.
[46]          
I thus conclude that the failure to provide the property with a tenant
at closing was not a breach of the APS.
[47]          
The late-breaking complaint about the lack of the tenant, especially
when seen in light of the misrepresentation claim and the claim the property
was not in broom-swept condition, were the defendant’s attempts to avoid a deal
she came to regret, or that she could not finance.
[48]          
Based on the foregoing, I find that the defendant breached the APS by
refusing to close, and had no justification for claiming rescission of the APS.
The plaintiffs’ claim is granted. The defendant’s counterclaim is dismissed.
[49]          
The next question that arises is the quantum of damages. The defendant
did not engage on the question of the quantum of the plaintiffs’ damages, other
than to allege, in a single paragraph, that there is a genuine issue requiring
a trial “with respect to whether the subsequent lower re-sale price of the
property by the Plaintiffs in a declining real estate market reflects the fair
market value of the property based on the property’s actual square footage…”
This “argument” is no more than the defendant’s musings. It is founded on
nothing but speculation.
[50]          
Failure to mitigate is a matter for the defendant to prove: Southcott
Estates Inc. v. Toronto Catholic District School Board, 2012 SCC 51, at
para. 24. The defendant has not even attempted to prove any failure to
mitigate.
[51]          
The evidence as to damages is set out in the plaintiffs’ record. They
relisted the property on July 5, 2022, just days after the transaction failed
to close, on the same terms and conditions as before, including the list price
of $959,900.
[52]          
After virtually no interest, based upon Mr. Bindlish’s advice, the
plaintiffs’ reduced the listing price of the property, and then reduced it a
second time when the first reduction did not garner the interest they had hoped
for.
[53]          
The plaintiffs received an offer to purchase on September 6, 2022, and
entered into negotiations. Ultimately, the highest offer received from that
prospective purchaser was $795,000. Mr. Bindlish advised that the price was too
low, so the plaintiffs refused the offer.
[54]          
 Several weeks later, on September 28, 2022, the plaintiffs received
another offer to purchase the property. After negotiations, and taking the
advice of Mr. Bindlish, the plaintiffs agreed upon a sale price of $815,000.
[55]          
The plaintiffs’ damages consist of the difference between the sale price
in the APS and the price they were able to obtain for the property on the
subsequent sale, together with their out of pocket expenses and carrying costs
of the property between June 30, 2022 and December 14, 2022, the date the
property’s sale was concluded.
[56]          
The various carrying costs, such as utilities, and out of pocket costs,
including legal fees in connection with the aborted sale, and the sale price
differential are set out at para. 53 of Mr. Osajie’s affidavit. I accept his
calculation of losses.
[57]          
In total, the plaintiffs’ losses are $157,396.19, before the application
of the defendant’s $30,000 deposit, which continues to be held in trust.
[58]          
The plaintiffs are entitled to the release of the $30,000 deposit, and
the defendant shall be credited that amount as against the damages she owes the
plaintiffs. After taking into account the deposit, the defendant owes
$127,396.19 to the plaintiffs.
[59]          
The three main purposes of modern costs rules are to indemnify
successful litigants for the costs of litigation, to encourage settlement, and
to discourage and sanction inappropriate behaviour by litigants: see Fong v.
Chan (1999), 1999 CanLII 2052 (ON CA), 46 O.R. (3d) 330, at para. 22.
[60]          
Subject to the provisions of an act or the rules of this court, costs
are in the discretion of the court, pursuant to s. 131 of the Courts of
Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43. The court exercises its discretion
considering the factors enumerated in r. 57.01 of the Rules of Civil
Procedure, including the principle of indemnity, the reasonable
expectations of the unsuccessful party, and the complexity and importance of
the issues. Overall, costs must be fair and reasonable: see Boucher v.
Public Accountants Council for the Province of Ontario (2004), 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R. (3d)
291 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 38. A costs award should reflect what the court views
as a fair and reasonable contribution by the unsuccessful party to the
successful party rather than any exact measure of the actual costs to the
successful litigant: see Zesta Engineering Ltd. v. Cloutier (2002), 2002 CanLII 25577 (ON CA), 21 C.C.E.L.
(3d) 161 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 4.
[61]          
The plaintiffs are the successful parties on the motion, and in the
action and counterclaim. They are presumptively entitled to their costs.
[62]          
The plaintiffs’ bill of costs supports full indemnity costs of
$37,920.18, all inclusive. On a substantial indemnity scale, the plaintiffs’
costs are $30,723.49, all inclusive.
[63]          
The plaintiffs seek costs on a substantial indemnity scale throughout,
arguing that the defendant accused them of fraudulent misrepresentation, and
failed to prove any dishonesty. They argue that failing to prove fraud after
alleging it warrants an award of substantial indemnity costs: Bargman v.
Rooney, [1998] CarswellOnt 5113, at paras. 18-19.
[64]          
As I read the pleading, the defendant stopped just short of alleging
fraud, likely to avoid the costs consequences the plaintiffs now seek. The
allegations that the plaintiffs recklessly and knowingly misrepresented the
square footage of the property come very close to allegations of fraud, but I
am not prepared to award costs on an elevated scale throughout in view of the
fact that the defendant restrained herself from actually making allegations of
dishonesty.
[65]          
In the alternative, the plaintiffs seek costs on a partial indemnity
scale up to the date of a r. 49 offer to settle they made, and substantial
indemnity costs thereafter. The offer, dated December 1, 2023, was for $135,000
plus costs fixed at $7,500. Costs calculated on a partial indemnity scale up to
the date of the offer, and a substantial indemnity scale thereafter, are
$28,775.78, all inclusive.
[66]          
I am satisfied that the plaintiffs have done better than their offer to
settle, and are entitled to costs on a partial indemnity scale up to the date
of the offer, and on a substantial indemnity scale thereafter.
[67]          
In considering the quantum of costs that is fair and reasonable, I note
the following:
[68]          
In the result, I find that the plaintiffs’ claim for costs is fair and
reasonable. The defendant shall pay the plaintiffs’ costs of the motion, action
and counterclaim, fixed at $28,775.78, all inclusive, within thirty days.
[69]          
The plaintiffs have filed a draft judgment which calculates pre-judgment
interest up to February 5, 2025. I am generally satisfied with the form of the order.
However, pre-judgment interest should be calculated up to the date of these
reasons. Counsel may provide me with a revised draft order (in word) with the
corrected figure for signature.