[1]              
The parties co-habited for approximately eleven years
(from 2011 to 2022); they separated in March 2022.  The parties are the parents
of two children: Fable Anne Emberson, born in June 2014, and Levon Eric Emberson,
born in November 2016.
[2]              
Fable was diagnosed as having autism spectrum disorder,
experiences hypermobility (with a diagnosis of Ehler Danlos Syndrome (“EDS”)
pending as Fable matures), and utilizes a wheelchair.  Fable has an
Individualized Education Plan at school.  Levon is described as experiencing
hypermobility.
[3]              
Since the date of separation, the children have been primarily
resident with the respondent mother (“Ms. Hilton”).  Also, since the date of
separation, the applicant father (“Mr. Emberson”) has been exercising, and
continues to exercise, parenting time with the children.
[4]              
Immediately prior to the date of separation, the
parties and the children resided at a home on Washburn Road in Athens, Ontario
(“the family home”).  Mr. Emberson purchased that property in 2017 and was the
sole owner.  The family home was sold in the spring of 2024.
[5]              
Subsequent to the sale of the family home, Ms. Hilton
moved, with the children, on three occasions.  At present, Ms. Hilton resides
with the children in a single room at a motel in Seeley’s Bay, Ontario.
[6]              
In the same period, Mr. Emberson moved twice.  Most
recently, in December 2023, Mr. Emberson moved to Ottawa, where he resides in a
two-bedroom apartment with his new partner.  The apartment forms part of Mr.
Emberson’s remuneration from his employer, Minto, for his position as a
superintendent of a rental apartment building.  Mr. Emberson asserts that he
moved to Ottawa in late 2023 to pursue stable employment, at a higher rate of
pay than that available in Athens and the surrounding area, so as to be able to
provide for himself and the children.
[7]              
The parties are before the court on Mr. Emberson’s
motion for an interim order providing that the children move to Ottawa to
reside with him and attend a school within the catchment area for his
residential address.  Ms. Hilton opposes the motion.
[8]              
The litigation history is relevant to both the
substantive issues raised by Mr. Emberson’s motion and Ms. Hilton’s request for
leave to file responding documents over the bench on the return of the motion.
[9]              
In the spring of 2024, after the family home was sold,
Ms. Hilton moved with the children to Selkirk, Ontario.  She did so
unilaterally and without notice to Mr. Emberson.  Prior to commencing his
application, Mr. Emberson brought an urgent motion for the return of the
children to Athens or the surrounding area.  Ms. Hilton returned with the
children to the area.
[10]          
On June 4, 2024, the parties consented to relief on a
temporary and without prejudice basis.  The relief to which they consented set a
schedule for the exchange of pleadings, and addressed parenting time, child
support, the involvement of the Office of the Children’s Lawyer (“OCL”), and
monetary issues (“the June 2024 order”).  Pursuant to the June 2024 order,
[11]          
The June 2024 order does not address decision-making or
primary responsibility for the children.
[12]          
The parties were before the court in late July 2024. 
On that occasion, the parties consented to a slightly revised version of the
June 2024 order (“the July 2024 order”).  The slight differences in wording
between the two orders are not material for the purpose of Mr. Emberson’s
motion.  The effect of the relevant terms in the July 2024 order is the same as
the effect of the terms set out in paragraph 10, above.  Like the June 2024
order, the July 2024 order does not address either decision-making or primary
responsibility for the children.
[13]          
The parties were before the court for appearances in July 2024 (twice),
September 2024, October 2024 (twice), and December 2024 (twice).
[14]          
At a case conference conducted on October 29, 2024, Mr.
Emberson informed the court that he intended to bring a motion for an interim
order providing for the children to move to and live with him in Ottawa.  At
the same conference, Ms. Hilton informed the court that she wishes to move with
the children to Selkirk.  In his endorsement for that case conference, Johnston
J. “expressed concern over the fact the children have not been regularly
attending school while in [Ms. Hilton’s] care”: Emberson v. Hilton (29
October, 2024), Brockville, FC-24-77 (Ont. S.C.).
[15]          
Justice Johnston ordered Ms. Hilton “to provide in [the] form of
affidavit an explanation for [the] children missing school[.]  If it is due to
medical issues, a Doctor’s letter”: (“the October 2024
order”).  Ms. Hilton was given twenty-one days, from the date of the October
2024 order, within which to provide that evidence.  In the same order, she
given a second (and final) extension, of seven days, within which to file her
Answer and related documents.
[16]          
The October 2024 order also required the parties to serve
their respective parenting plans within twenty-one days of the date of the order. 
Justice Johnston specifically ordered the parties to address transportation if,
in their parenting plan, they intend to seek an order permitting them to move
with the children.
[17]          
Twice in December 2024, the parties were before the court in relation to
Mr. Emberson’s motion.  In early December, Mr. Emberson’s request to file
materials in excess of a stipulated page limit was refused: Emberson v. Hilton (9 December, 2024),
Brockville, FC-24-77 (Ont. S.C.).
[18]          
The first return date for Mr. Emberson’s motion was
December 17, 2024.  For all appearances prior to that date, Ms. Hilton was
represented by the same counsel of record.  On December 17, 2024, Ms. Hilton
appeared as a self-represented litigant.
[19]          
Ms. Hilton attended on December 17, 2024, without
having filed any responding materials.  She requested an adjournment of the motion
“in order to prepare her responding material & present her plan to meet her
parenting obligations”: Emberson v. Hilton (17 December, 2024),
Brockville, FC-24-77 (Ont. S.C.) (“the adjournment endorsement”).
[20]          
 Ms. Hilton’s request for an adjournment of the motion
was granted by Schwartz J.  In the adjournment endorsement, Schwartz J.
emphasized to Ms. Hilton that she was being “given significant time” to prepare
her responding materials.
[21]          
Justice Schwartz set a timetable for the parties to
exchange their respective materials on the motion.  Mr. Emberson was given
until January 8, 2025 to serve and file better evidence in support of the
relief he seeks; Ms. Hilton was given until January 21, 2025 “to serve &
file responding affidavit evidence, which shall include the previous required
affidavit evidence relating to the children’s school attendance and medical
status.”  Regarding the reference to “previous required affidavit evidence”, Ms.
Hilton had not yet complied with the October 2024 order requiring her to file
affidavit evidence to explain the children’s absences from school.  Last, Mr.
Emberson was given until January 28, 2025 to serve and file any reply evidence.
[22]          
Justice Schwartz adjourned Mr. Emberson’s motion to
February 11, 2025.  In the adjournment endorsement, Schwartz J. recorded an
assurance received by the court from Ms. Hilton “that she understands her
obligations to get the children to school at Pineview Public in Athens, on time
& fully prepared to learn in the interim period.”
[23]          
In support of his motion, Mr. Emberson relies on a Form
35.1 Affidavit sworn by him on December 9, 2024; a Form 14A affidavit sworn by
his mother on the same date; and his Form 14A affidavit sworn on January 6,
2025.  In anticipation of a request from Ms. Hilton for the motion to be
adjourned, Mr. Emberson filed a Form 14A affidavit sworn by him on February 6,
2025.  This latter affidavit does not address the substantive issues on the
motion.
[24]          
On the return of the motion on February 11, 2025, Ms.
Hilton requested leave to file three documents, all dated February 10, 2025
(“the Documents”), over the bench: a motion confirmation form; Ms. Hilton’s
Form 14A affidavit; and a factum.  Ms. Hilton did not request an adjournment of
the motion (i.e., including as an alternative if the court did not grant leave
to file the Documents over the bench).
[25]          
The court heard submissions regarding the Documents and gave brief oral
reasons refusing the request, with written reasons to follow.  The court heard
submissions on the substantive interim relief sought by Mr. Emberson on his
motion.
[26]          
I start with written reasons for refusing Ms. Hilton’s request for leave
to file the Documents over the bench and continue thereafter with reasons on
Mr. Emberson’s motion.
[27]          
 Ms. Hilton did not rely on any evidence in support of her request for
leave to file the Documents over the bench.  She relied exclusively on the
submissions of her counsel.  I wish to highlight that the reasons, which follow
immediately below, are in no way a criticism of either of Ms. Hilton’s present
or former counsel.
[28]          
For the following reasons, Ms. Hilton’s request for leave to file the
Documents over the bench was refused.
[29]          
First, Ms. Hilton submits that she was aware by October or, at the
latest, in early November 2024 that she was granted a Legal Aid Certificate. 
Ms. Hilton asks the court to consider the difficulties she submits she
encountered in finding counsel to accept a retainer on a Legal Aid basis.  Ms.
Hilton submits that she was diligent in her efforts to find counsel who would
accept a retainer on that basis.  Her present counsel was retained in late
January 2025.
[30]          
Yet, there is no evidence to support Ms. Hilton’s submissions and permit
the court to assess (a) when Ms. Hilton became aware that her previous counsel
would not continue as counsel of record; and (b) the level of diligence with
which Ms. Hilton sought to find new counsel.
[31]          
There is nothing in any of the endorsements pre-dating February 11,
2025, to indicate that Ms. Hilton would be seeking new counsel or that her
search for new counsel might result in a request for an adjournment of Mr.
Emberson’s motion.
[32]          
For example, as of first return date for the motion (December 17, 2024),
Ms. Hilton knew that she had a Legal Aid Certificate and was no longer
represented by her former lawyer.  Ms. Hilton consented to the February 11,
2025 date for the motion.  As described by Schwartz J., Ms. Hilton was given
“significant time” within which to file her responding materials (in excess of
six weeks from the date of the adjournment).  If Ms. Hilton anticipated that
she might experience challenges in retaining counsel to represent her on the
motion, it was incumbent upon her to address with the court, at that time, the
litigation timetable and the return date for the motion.
[33]          
Second, I consider that Ms. Hilton has on several occasions prior to
February 11, 2025, failed to comply with deadlines set in court orders.  As
already identified, Ms. Hilton failed to comply with the deadline set in the
October 2024 order for the delivery of an affidavit explaining the children’s
absences from school.  She failed to comply with that deadline a second time, after
it was extended by Schwartz J. in the adjournment endorsement.
[34]          
Set out below are other deadlines, set by the court, which Ms. Hilton
failed to meet:
[35]          
Regarding the October 2, 2024 deadline, I note that in an endorsement
dated October 10, 2024, Ms. Hilton was granted a further extension, to October
17, 2024, within which to file her Answer.
[36]          
In summary, Ms. Hilton is a litigant who, even when represented by
counsel, repeatedly failed to meet deadlines set by the court.
[37]          
Third, I consider the lack of communication from Ms. Hilton with Mr.
Emberson’s counsel between December 17, 2024 and late January 2025 (i.e., when
Ms. Hilton retained her current counsel).  For more than a month, Ms. Hilton
left Mr. Emberson’s counsel in the dark as to her challenges in retaining
counsel and the impact those challenges would have on her position when before
the court on February 11, 2025.  As a self-represented litigant, it was
incumbent upon Ms. Hilton to communicate with Mr. Emberson’s counsel in that
regard.
[38]          
Last, I consider that if Ms. Hilton were granted leave to file the
Documents, an adjournment of the motion would be required so as to permit Mr.
Emberson to review the documents (dated the day prior to the return date for
the motion) and consider what reply evidence is required.  An adjournment of
the motion—even if only to a date in March 2025—would not serve the best interests
of the children.
[39]          
The concerns regarding the children’s historical and continuing absences
from school are mounting.  The evidence before the court is that the children
are, at this stage of the current academic year, approaching having missed
one-third of the school days in the academic year.
[40]          
The motion had already been adjourned once—for approximately two
months.  It is important for the children and the parties that the motion be
determined and that the proceeding move forward.
[41]          
I pause to note that Ms. Hilton’s February 10, 2025 affidavit does not
include the evidence she has, since the October 2024 order, been required to
provide.  The affidavit does not include an explanation for the children’s
absences from school in the academic years dating from September 2021 to and
including the present academic year (i.e., 3.5 years of school).  The affidavit
does not include, as an exhibit, a letter from a physician specifically tying
any of the children’s absences from school to a medical issue.  Ms. Hilton has
yet to comply with an order first made more than three months ago.
[42]          
For those reasons, Ms. Hilton’s request for leave to file the Documents
over the bench is refused.  I turn to the substantive issues raised on Mr.
Emberson’s motion.
[43]          
In his notice of motion, Mr. Emberson requests relief related to the
children’s primary residence, the school at which the children attend, Ms.
Hilton’s parenting time with the children, and child support.
[44]          
Specifically, Mr. Emberson requests an order that the children shall,
effective immediately, reside with him in Ottawa.  Recognizing that such a move
would necessitate a change in the children’s school, Mr. Emberson identifies
two schools in the catchment area for his residence.  Mr. Emberson proposes parenting
time for Ms. Hilton, differentiating between a scenario in which she continues
to reside in Eastern Ontario and a scenario in which she relocates to Selkirk,
Ontario.  Last, if the court orders that the children move to Ottawa, then Mr.
Emberson requests that his child support obligation of $683 per month be
terminated.
[45]          
Mr. Emberson approaches the request for the children to move to Ottawa
as a mobility issue.  In support of his request, Mr. Emberson relies, for
example, on the decision of Marshman J. in Plumley v. Plumley, 1999 CanLII 13990 (ON SC), [1999]
O.J. No. 3234 (S.C.J.).  At para. 7 of that decision, Marshman J. lists factors
which must be considered when determining a mobility issue on an interim basis.
[46]          
I find Mr. Emberson’s characterization of the issues as related to
‘mobility’ to be a mischaracterization of the nature of the request he makes
for the children to move to Ottawa.  I characterize the nature of that request
as falling within the scope of a change in the children’s primary residence
(i.e., from primary residence with Ms. Hilton, to primary residence with Mr.
Emberson).  The mobility issue is subsidiary to the issue of the change
requested for the children’s primary residence.
[47]          
For the reasons which follow, Mr. Emberson’s motion is dismissed.
[48]          
One of the decisions upon which Mr. Emberson relies is Boudreault v.
Charles, 2014 ONCJ 273.  In Boudreault, the applicant mother was the
parent with primary care of the parties’ child.  The mother brought a motion
for an order permitting her to relocate to another city with the child.  At
para. 25 of Boudreault, Sherr J. reviews the principles set out in Plumley
v. Plumley, 1999 CanLII 13990 (ON SC), [1999] O.J. 3234 (S.C.J.); at para. 26, Sherr J. summarizes principles
from seven other decisions.
[49]          
In many of, if not all, the decisions cited in Boudreault,
the parent seeking an order for relocation of a child is the parent with whom
the child has been primarily resident.  Decisions involving that fact scenario
are distinguishable from the circumstances in the matter before this court. 
Mr. Emberson made the choice in late 2023 to move to Ottawa.  He did so without
addressing, at that time, the children’s primary residence.  For clarity, Mr.
Emberson is not a parent with whom the children are primarily resident and who
is seeking to move, together with the children, to a new location.
[50]          
I approach the decision on Mr. Emberson’s motion based on the
principles related to “material change” set out in the Supreme Court of Canada
decision in Gordon v. Goertz, 1996 CanLII 191 (SCC), [1996] 2 S.C.R. 27, at para. 13:
[51]          
The order which Mr. Emberson seeks to vary is
the July 2024 order to which the parties consented.  By the spring of 2025, the
children will have been primarily resident with Ms. Hilton for three years. 
The court is unable, based on the evidence before it, to determine whether
there has been a “material change” which supports granting of the interim
relief, changing the children’s primary residence, requested by Mr. Emberson:
[52]          
I do not in any way discount the historical,
continuing, and increasing concerns regarding the children’s absences from
school and the impact of children’s chronic absences from school on their
education, socialization, and general well-being.  The number of days each
child has been absent from school for the past 3.5 academic years is very
concerning.
[53]          
It is also concerning that the children’s
absences persisted, let alone appear to have increased in frequency, even after
Ms. Hilton consented to an order which requires her to “ensure the children
attend all regularly scheduled classes on time absent medical emergency or
other valid medical reasons supported by their physician’s express recommendation
in writing”: see the July 2024 order, at para. 7, item c.
[54]          
The exhibits to Mr. Emberson’s Form 14A
affidavit include report cards for each of the children for the three most
recent complete academic years.  Mr. Emberson expresses concern for the children’s
academic performance based on the final report card each received for the
2023-24 academic year.  For example, Mr. Emberson identifies that Fable
received four letter grades of “D”, two letter grades of “C”, and three letter
grades of “I” (insufficient evidence upon which to assign a letter grade).  For
the same year, Levon’s final report card includes one letter grade of “D” and
two letter grades of “C”.
[55]          
It would be reasonable to infer that if both
children were to attend something closer to one hundred percent of the school
days (as opposed to 70 percent or less), their academic achievement would
improve and they would be better positioned to continue to learn in future
grades.  I need not, however, draw an inference and make a finding at this time.
[56]          
The final report card for each child includes a
positive summary statement by the child’s teacher about the child and their
achievements during the academic year.  That is not to say there is not room
for improvement for each child when their respective academic performances are
considered on a subject-by-subject basis.  The contents of the report cards do
not, however, support a finding that the children are at risk of harm, such
that it is in their best interests to change their primary residence to Ottawa
and change schools, the latter with 4.5 months left in the school year.
[57]          
The OCL’s involvement in this matter is
relatively recent.  In her submissions, counsel for the OCL acknowledged that
she has not completed the requisite interviews in this matter.  Despite the
limitations on her ability to make meaningful submissions, counsel for the OCL
made thoughtful submissions regarding the impact on the children of their
chronic absences from school.  The concerns expressed in that regard by counsel
for the OCL echo the concerns expressed by Johnston J. in October 2024 and by
Schwartz J. in December 2024.
[58]          
The children are relatively young.  Regardless,
their input, as provided by counsel for the OCL will be of assistance to the
court when it makes final determinations on the issues raised in the
pleadings—including where the children will primarily reside.
[59]          
To relocate the children at this stage in the
academic year would (a) disrupt the primary residence they have known for
almost three years (i.e., with their mother); (b) cause the children to lose
the day-to-day connections that they have with their friends at school and in
the area in which they live; and (c) require them to adjust to a new academic
setting with approximately 4.5 months left in the school year.
[60]          
It is, however, important that the parties,
specifically Ms. Hilton, take every measure required to ensure that the
children regularly attend Pineview Public School to the completion of the
academic year.  If the children’s attendance at school improves, they will be
better-positioned than they are now for the beginning of the next and future academic
years (i.e., September 2025 and beyond).
[61]          
The evidence before the court is that Mr.
Emberson has, from time to time, taken on the sole responsibility of ensuring
that the children attend school.  The children’s attendance at school
significantly improved during the periods that Mr. Emberson, or his delegate,
was responsible for transportation of the children to and from school.
[62]          
The evidence before the court is that Mr.
Emberson has also considered Ms. Hilton’s limited financial means and both
provided direct financial aid (a single $7,500 payment) and addressed, in an
anticipatory way, potential costs awards against Ms. Hilton.
[63]          
In summary, from both a practical and monetary
perspective, Mr. Emberson has attempted to address the children’s attendance at
school and provide assistance to Ms. Hilton to facilitate an improvement in the
children’s rate of attendance at school.
[64]          
I pause here to note that Ms. Hilton presents
herself as someone who is economically challenged.  Yet, she pays $1,750 per
month to reside in a motel and continues to pay $1,800 towards a residence in
Selkirk (to which she hopes to eventually move with the children).  Ms. Hilton
appears to rely on a lack of financial resources as one of the reasons why the
children miss school on occasion.  The motel in which they reside is outside
the school bus route for Pineview Public School.  As a result, Ms. Hilton must
find and pay for other means of transportation for the children to/from school.
[65]          
Without making any findings, I simply point out
that Ms. Hilton’s financial management skills are concerning.  She chooses to
put her hope of relocating with the children to Selkirk ahead of the children’s
current academic needs and the benefits to them of ensuring that those needs
are met.  The $1,800 per month spent on a home in Selkirk, which Ms. Hilton and
the children do not occupy, would go a long way to assisting the children in
their current location.
[66]          
It is important that the children’s primary
residence and school be settled prior to the beginning of the 2025-26 academic
year.  For that reason, I order that the parties proceed to an expedited
trial.
[67]          
Last, it is important that Mr. Emberson have a
reasonable opportunity to monitor how the children are faring pending a trial. 
For that reason, his parenting time is increased in accordance with the order
set out below.
[68]          
For the reasons set out above, I make the
following order:
[69]          
Although Mr. Emberson’s motion was not
successful, Mr. Emberson was motivated, at least in part, out of concern
arising from Ms. Hilton’s failure to comply with the terms of the July 2024
order and her failure to comply with the orders made by Johnston and Schwartz
JJ. to provide affidavit evidence explaining the children’s chronic absences
from school.  The costs of Mr. Emberson’s motion are therefore reserved to the
judge hearing the trial of this proceeding or, if pursued, any further motion
to change the children’s primary residence.