[1]              
Expert evidence is a form of hearsay evidence, as the expert him-
or herself is speaking not to personal and direct observations, but rather to
opinions formed on the basis of information reported to him or her, viewed
through the lens of a particular scope of expertise.  Hearsay evidence is not
generally admissible and therefore there must be a legal reason to create an
exception to that general rule.  The Supreme Court of Canada’s unanimous
decision in White Burgess Langille Inman v. Abbott and Haliburton Co., 2015 SCC 23 (CanLII), [2015] 2 SCR
182 is the binding authority on the admissibility of expert
testimony.  The following excerpts from that decision describe the concept and
provide a legal framework for assessing expert testimony (some internal
citations omitted for clarity):
[2]              
Justice Cromwell for the Supreme Court continues to write with
approval of the statements of expert’s duty as set out in the Ontario Rules
of Civil Procedure.  These have since been adopted under Rule 20.2 of the Family
Law Rules.  The Court emphasizes the three related concepts underlying the
expert’s duty as: impartiality, independence and absence of bias.
[3]              
The question of compliance with the expert’s duty goes to the
admissibility of his or her testimony, and not just to the weight to be
ascribed to the evidence.
[4]              
The full test as required under the Mohan case deals with
“novel science” and addresses the question of whether opinions in an emerging
area of expertise should be accepted into evidence.  Here, Mr. Sud does not
appear to contest the concept of vocational assessments as an expert
discipline.  His concern is whether Ms. Talbot-Fletcher specifically is a
properly-qualified expert.  So that there can be no potential future confusion
on this point, I have applied the first three White Burgess/Mohan
criteria to the discipline of vocational assessment (i.e. a determination of
the employability of a particular individual) and I conclude that:
[5]   I pause here
to note two things:
[6]              
We turn then to the final portion of the White Burgess/Mohan test
which requires the expert to be properly qualified.  This encompasses the
concept that a properly-qualified expert has a duty of impartiality.  This is
also the point at which the scope of work must be assessed having regard to the
proposed expert’s qualifications; in some situations, an expert can be
qualified to speak to certain aspects of his or her opinion but not others.  It
is open for the Court to conclude that some opinions offered in a report are
actually outside of that individual’s sphere of expertise.
[7]              
Starting first with Ms. Talbot-Fletcher’s duty of impartiality, I
am persuaded not simply by her signature upon the Form 20.2 acknowledgment, but
more importantly by her testimony in the voir dire.  In
cross-examination, she attested that she was obligated to write up her report
based on any conclusions that she reached regarding Mr. Sud’s employability and
the job market at the applicable time.  It was not, as Mr. Sud suggested, that
she had been hired to provide evidence supporting Ms. Sud’s position that he
was underemployed.  Further, she said that she is not aware of the fees paid by
the client to her employer, and that as an employee any such amounts are
irrelevant to her personal financial situation.  Notably, the Retainer
Agreement filed as an exhibit includes the following term: “Regardless of
findings and outcomes, the balance [of the fee] will be due in full, plus
applicable interest, to Spencer Rehabilitation Experts…”.  I therefore conclude
that Ms. Talbot-Fletcher’s evidence is impartial and can be relied upon by the
Court in this regard.
[8]              
We turn then to Ms. Talbot-Fletcher’s expertise and the scope of
the proposed testimony.  As the Court of Appeal noted in R. v. Terceira,
1998 CanLII 2174 (ON CA) (aff’d by
SCC at 1999 CanLII 645 (SCC), [1999] 3 SCR
866), in assessing expertise, the judge must:
[9]              
I am satisfied that the assessment of an individual’s vocational
abilities and the conclusion regarding the employability of such an individual
in a defined marketplace goes beyond the knowledge of the trier of fact (here,
the judge).
[10]          
Based on the following evidence given by Ms. Talbot-Fletcher, I am
specifically satisfied that she personally possesses sufficient skill,
knowledge and experience such that her testimony in this regard will be of
assistance to the trier of fact:
[11]          
I note that this is Ms. Talbot-Fletcher’s first opportunity to
testify in court.  While this alerts me, in my evidentiary gate-keeping
function, to monitor her first-time testimony, I agree with the Alberta Court
of Appeal in R. v. Plourde, 2017 ABCA 367 at
paragraph 5, that “there is no rule that the evidence of a “first time” expert
cannot be accepted.”  To exclude a prospective expert on the basis that it is
his or her first time testifying is not a good succession plan for our
litigation system.
[12]          
In his cross-examination, Mr. Sud raised questions regarding the
underlying facts supporting the conclusions reached by Ms. Talbot-Fletcher.  In
particular, he asserted that her conclusions are undermined because she does
not know him personally and suggested that she did not obtain sufficient
information from him to comment specifically upon his situation.  For clarity,
he is welcome to raise these questions in his cross-examination of Ms.
Talbot-Fletcher regarding the substance of her report.  At this stage, the
question is not whether Ms. Talbot-Fletcher has reached the proper conclusions
regarding Mr. Sud’s employability.  The question is whether Ms. Talbot-Fletcher
is qualified to undertake any vocational assessment of any person at all.  I
find that she is so qualified, and I admit her testimony as expert opinion
evidence regarding vocational assessments in exception to the general rule
against hearsay evidence.