[1]         
This is an Application by the Alam Law Firm
Professional Corporation for a charging order against the Respondents.  The
Respondent Christine Roberts was a former client of the Applicant.  The
Respondent Chubb is an insurance company that provides Accident Benefits (“AB”)
insurance for the Respondent Ms. Roberts.
[2]         
The Applicant was originally retained by Ms.
Roberts in order to pursue both tort and accident benefits claims.  There has
been a breakdown of the solicitor-client relationship.  According to the Applicant,
Ms. Roberts is attempting to resolve her AB claim directly with Chubb.  No tort
claim has been commenced, and it does not appear likely that one will be
commenced.
[3]         
For the reasons that follow, I have determined
that the Applicant should not be entitled to a charging order as against Ms.
Roberts. Given that the Applicant conceded in argument that it was not entitled
to a charging Order as against Chubb, the Application is dismissed.
[4]         
In December of 2022, Ms. Roberts signed a
retainer agreement with the Applicant.  Under this agreement, the Applicant was
to pursue her claim for benefits under the Statutory Accident Benefits
Schedule (“SABS”). There was also an agreement between Ms. Roberts and the
Applicant to potentially pursue a tort claim.
[5]         
Under both agreements, there was a provision
that addressed disbursements as a first charge.  That provision stated:
[6]         
There were also provisions in both agreements
directing that funds received from the settlement of the matter had to be sent
to the Applicant and placed in trust with them.  In addition, the agreements
also provided the Applicant with the right to recover disbursements and legal
fees in the event that the retainer agreements were terminated before the case
was concluded.
[7]         
Over the next year and a half, the Applicant
retained experts and conducted investigations on behalf of Ms. Roberts.  The
Applicant incurred expenses on behalf of Ms. Roberts during this time period. 
However, in November of 2024, Ms. Roberts and the Applicant parted ways.
[8]         
A letter from the Applicant was sent to Ms.
Roberts on November 1st, 2024 confirming that there had been an
irreconcilable breakdown in the solicitor-client relationship.  It confirmed
that the retainer agreement had been terminated, and advised that a bill for
services rendered and disbursements would be provided.
[9]         
At the time when the retainer came to an end,
there was no settlement with the Accident Benefit carrier.  There was also no
indication that there would be a settlement.
[10]      
The Applicant states that the total account
amounts to $23,907.04, inclusive of HST and disbursements.  However, they are
prepared to reduce it to $18,869.36 inclusive of HST and disbursements.
[11]      
The Applicant seeks a first charge on the
proceeds of settlement or any proceeds after judgment payable to Ms. Roberts. 
This charge is sought pursuant to section 34 of the Solicitor’s Act. 
They also seek an order directing Chubb to pay the first charge directly out of
any settlement funds owing.
[12]      
Chubb attended at the motion and was opposed to
any order being made against it.  They took no position on whether or not the
Order should be granted as against Ms. Roberts.  Counsel for the Applicant
advised that he was not seeking an order as against Chubb at this point.
[13]      
The starting point is section 34 of the Solicitor’s
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S 15, which states:
[14]      
For a solicitor to be entitled to a lien under
this section, there would have to be a superior court action that the solicitor
had prosecuted or defended.  By statute, the SABS claim must be brought before
the Licence Appeal Tribunal (“LAT”).  As a result, a SABS claim cannot be the
subject of a charging order under the Solicitors Act:  Ryan Naimark
Professional Corporation v. Lilly, 2023 ONSC 1690 at para. 6.
[15]      
However, that conclusion does not end the matter
for two reasons.  First, the Court has a jurisdiction to grant a charging lien
pursuant to its inherent jurisdiction.  Second, there was both a SABS retainer
and a tort retainer in this case.  As a result, I need to consider whether a
lien should be granted in this case.
[16]      
For a charging order under the Solicitors Act
or a charging lien, the criteria are the same.  Thomas Gold Pettinghill v.
Ani-Wall Concrete Forming Inc., 2012 ONSC 2182 at para. 84, Lilly, supra.
at para. 8.  Those criteria are:
[17]      
In addition, the Court has a discretion to grant
or refuse a charging order even if the criteria for a charging order are
otherwise met.  Weenen v. Bidai 2018 ONCA 288 (2018) 141 O.R. (3d) 276
at para. 15.
[18]      
In this case, I am not persuaded that the second
criteria has been met.  In that respect, the evidence does not demonstrate that
the work of the Applicant has either improved the chances of the Client to
obtain recovery in a tort action in Superior Court.  In respect of the SABS
claim, there is more evidence that the contingent value of this claim has been
increased.  However, it remains a contingent value.  Specifically, the
Applicant was involved in having Ms. Roberts moved to a different scale of
benefits, which may have increased the amount of benefits she would be entitled
to.  However, I am not clear on how much this change would have benefitted Ms.
Roberts.
[19]      
There was also some evidence that might have
suggested that the Applicant had assisted Ms. Roberts in the recovery of some
small additional amount of money in respect of a couple of expenses, it was an
amount that was de minimis.  Beyond that amount, there is no evidence to
suggest that the work done by the Applicant resulted in the recovery or
preservation of the property.  As a result, the criteria for a lien are not met
and one should not be granted.
[20]      
The Applicant relied on the Lilly
decision.  However, the facts in that case disclose that the offer obtained by
the law firm in that case was “four times higher” than the offer originally
made.  In Lilly, the Court was satisfied that the law firm made a
“substantial and integral” contribution to Mr. Lilly’s recovery (para. 21). 
That is different from the conclusion that I have reached in this case.
[21]      
I should also make one additional observation
about discretion.  One point that was not argued in Lilly relates to
section 62 of the SABS.  That section voids all assignments of benefits
except in four circumstances:
[22]      
As a result, if there were an assignment of SABS
benefits from Ms. Roberts to the Applicant, that assignment would be void. 
Therefore, even if I am wrong about whether the criteria for a charging lien
has been met, I would exercise my discretion and refuse the request for the
lien.  The Court should not grant an equitable remedy that would circumvent the
legislative intention to limit assignments of benefits.  There are other
remedies available to the Applicant to pursue its’ claims against Ms. Roberts.
[23]      
For these reasons, the request for a charging
order as against Ms. Roberts is dismissed.
[24]      
The Application originally sought a charging
Order as against Chubb as well.  That relief was properly abandoned at the
hearing of the motion, as there was no basis for it.  That part of the
application is also dismissed.
[25]      
For the foregoing reasons, the Application is
dismissed.
[26]      
Ms. Roberts did not participate in this
application and, as a result, is not entitled to costs.  Chubb, on the other
hand, may be entitled to costs.  The parties, however, indicated that they were
trying to work out the question of costs.
[27]      
To that end, if Chubb is seeking costs of this
application, they may serve, file and upload costs submissions of no more than
two (2) single-spaced pages, exclusive of bills of costs, offers to settle and
case-law within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the release of these
reasons.  Copies are also to be sent to my judicial assistant electronically. 
Counsel will have received this decision by e-mail from her.
[28]      
The Applicant will then have ten (10) calendar
days thereafter to serve, file and upload costs submissions of no more than two
(2) single-spaced pages, exclusive of bills of costs, offers to settle and
case-law.  Copies are also to be sent to my judicial assistant electronically.
[29]      
There are to be no extensions on the time for
serving costs submissions, even on consent, without my leave.  If I do not
receive costs submissions in accordance with this timetable, then there shall
be no order as to costs.
[30]      
There shall be no reply submissions on costs,
even on consent, without my leave.