[1]              
The accused, Mark Andre Davis, is charged with two offences that are
alleged to have been committed in Toronto between July 1 and August 31, 2020:
(a) sexual assault on the complainant, contrary to section 271 of the Criminal
Code; and (b) touching the complainant, a person under the age of 16, for a
sexual purpose, directly or indirectly with a part of his body, contrary to
section 151 of the Criminal Code.
[2]              
In the summer of 2020, the complainant was 13 years old.  Mr. Davis was
her tennis coach.  The two offences with which Mr. Davis has been charged
relate to an incident that took place in Mr. Davis’ car after Mr. Davis drove
the complainant home following a tennis practice.  At trial, the complainant
and Mr. Davis gave very different accounts of what happened in Mr. Davis’ car
on that day.  The complainant alleged that Mr. Davis intentionally touched her
breasts and her inner upper thigh.  This was denied by Mr. Davis.
[3]              
On the whole of the evidence, I am not satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt of the guilt of Mr. Davis.  Accordingly, I find him not guilty of the two
offences with which he was charged.
[4]              
The Crown called one witness, the complainant.  The defence called two
witnesses: Mr. Davis and the complainant’s mother, A.B.
[5]              
The following is a summary of the witnesses’ evidence on various factual
issues.
[6]              
The complainant is 17 years old.  She was 13 years old at the time of
the incident in July 2020.
[7]              
The complainant has been playing tennis since she was 5 years old.  She
started playing competitively when she was around 11 or 12 years old.
[8]              
In 2019, when she was 12 years old, the complainant started training at
a new tennis club.  Her main coach there was Mr. Davis.  She trained around
four to five times a week, but the number of times could vary.  The training
involved a combination of private lessons, fitness training and group lessons. 
The lessons were from one to three hours.  The one-on-one sessions occurred
only once or twice a week and lasted one hour.
[9]              
The complainant described her relationship with Mr. Davis in 2019 as
“regular”.  She said that they had regular conversations.  In 2020, they
started getting closer.  The complainant and Mr. Davis would talk about more
personal things in their lives, but nothing too serious or deep.  The
complainant also started getting closer to some of Mr. Davis’ students,
including A.M.
[10]          
When the COVID-19 pandemic started, there were times when training at
the complainant’s tennis club was not allowed so the complainant would train at
outdoor courts.  In the fall of 2020, she would do fitness training at the
house of A.M.  A.M. was one of the complainant’s best friends.  A.M. is
approximately one year younger than the complainant.  When they did fitness
training at A.M.’s house, Mr. Davis was there 75% of the time, and sometimes
another student was there as well.  They continued doing fitness training at
A.M.’s house until January 2021, when both Mr. Davis and A.M. left for Florida.
[11]          
Prior to the incident in issue in this case, Mr. Davis had tickled the
complainant and many other students.  The complainant said that Mr. Davis would
tickle her about once a week, often when they were doing fitness training.  He
would tickle her in her stomach area or her armpits.  There were other students
around when that happened, and Mr. Davis would also tickle other students on
those occasions.  Everybody treated the tickling as normal.
[12]          
Before July 2020, Mr. Davis had also made sexual and inappropriate
comments and used harsh and vulgar language around the complainant and A.M. 
Mr. Davis started making this kind of comments when they got closer at the
start of 2020.  He would make the comments whenever they were together.  Among
other things, Mr. Davis would joke that the complainant and A.M. were lesbians,
that they should date and have sex and get it over with, that they should do
graphic things to each other and go to the back of his car.  He used a lot of
swears.  Mr. Davis occasionally made inappropriate comments when he was just
with the complainant.  The complainant never told her parents about Mr. Davis’
comments.  She was too scared to tell them.  She did not know how to deal with
these comments.  They made her feel embarrassed and insecure.
[13]          
Further, during private lessons that took place in early 2020, Mr. Davis
once or twice grabbed the complainant’s hips and her lower back close to her butt
to try to show her some technique.  The complainant had never had another coach
do this before and Mr. Davis never asked her whether he could put his hands
there before doing it.  The complainant agreed that, in her experience, it was
normal for a tennis coach to make technical adjustments by putting hands on a
student to show them how to do it right.  However, she said that her other coaches
used a tennis racket to touch her hips, and Mr. Davis was the only one who used
his hands.
[14]          
During her cross-examination on this point, the complainant said that
Mr. Davis had put his hands on her butt two to three times, and probably more
times on her hips.  She disagreed with the suggestion that Mr. Davis had
touched her on her lower back near her butt.  However, during the preliminary
inquiry, the complainant said that Mr. Davis touched her lower back near her
butt.  The complainant said at trial that she had trouble judging certain areas
of her body at the time of the preliminary inquiry and she is now confident that
the touching was on both her lower back and her upper butt.  She said that her
understanding of the touching had never changed, but her communicating of it had
changed.  She stated that half of Mr. Davis’ hand was on her lower back and
half of his hand was on her upper butt.  She also stated that his hands were on
her back, not on the side.  The complainant had previously said during the
preliminary inquiry that this touching was on the side.  When confronted with
this prior statement at trial, she said that Mr. Davis would move his hands,
and there would be multiple placements in one instance.  This kind of touching
only lasted a couple of seconds.
[15]          
I note that the preliminary inquiry in this matter took place on May 18,
2023, when the complainant was 16 years old.
[16]          
Mr. Davis is 41 years old.  He used to be named Mark Furman.  He changed
his name in late 2021 because his name was the same as a detective involved in
the O.J. Simpson trial who was alleged to be racist, and Mr. Davis did not like
the negative association.  Mr. Davis said that there was no specific reason for
doing this change in 2021.
[17]          
After graduating from high school, Mr. Davis went to York University in
the early 2000s for a year and a half or two years, and then transferred to
Ryerson University.  He got a degree from Ryerson University in the 2000s.  He
is currently in business school and plans to become a certified public
accountant (CPA).  He has been in this program for about a year.  The last time
that he worked was in 2022.  He was working in his family business, which is in
the area of logistics.
[18]          
Mr. Davis was a tennis player before becoming a tennis coach.  He played
collegiately when he was at York University in the early 2000s, and he played a
bit professionally after he was done with college.  He was not playing
professionally full time.  He was doing a lot of coaching at the same time.
[19]          
Mr. Davis worked as a tennis coach for 22 years.  As a tennis coach, Mr.
Davis coached students of all ages, adults and juniors (i.e., anybody under
18).  He stopped coaching tennis in 2021 because he was experiencing burnout
and he had a lot of physical injuries.  He has chronic injuries to his back,
ankles and hips which prevent him from walking or standing for a long time.  He
decided that he needed to retire and choose a different career.  He had been
experiencing burnout for a few years before he stopped coaching.  He does not
know when he started feeling his burnout.
[20]          
In around 2005, Mr. Davis started being a coach at the tennis club where
he subsequently met the complainant.  He was a tennis coach there until 2020.
[21]          
In 2020, Mr. Davis was doing significantly less than what he did
previously as a tennis coach.  There were two lockdowns.  The facility where he
worked closed down for most of the year.  He said that he perhaps coached
between 10 and 20 players that year.
[22]          
Mr. Davis was the complainant’s tennis coach from the end of 2018 until
January 2021.  Mr. Davis stated that the complainant was about 11 years old
when he started being her coach, but he said that he could be mistaken.  Mr.
Davis also said that it was possible that he started coaching the complainant
in 2019 instead of 2018.  He stopped coaching her in January 2021 because he left
for Florida.  He went to Florida with A.M., A.M.’s mother and another kid to
train and play tournaments there.
[23]          
Mr. Davis’ evidence is that he did not coach the complainant four or
five times a week.  He said that he did not think that she ever played that
much.  Mr. Davis stated that the complainant may have been playing that many
times per week doing different things, but he was coaching the complainant on
the court once a week when she started.  The frequency of the coaching sessions
increased a bit to once or twice a week.  Mr. Davis would see the complainant
at the tennis club.  When the tennis club shut down during the COVID-19
pandemic, they had to find other locations to play.  He did not coach her
during the lockdowns.  The coaching lessons with the complainant were mostly
one hour long, but there might have been some times when the lessons were two
hours long.  There were private and group lessons.  Some of the lessons could
extend beyond two hours.  The group lessons could include 2 to 16 players.
[24]          
They did fitness training at A.M.’s house because she had a home gym.  Mr.
Davis knew A.M. before he knew the complainant.  Mr. Davis does not know when
he started doing fitness training at A.M.’s house.
[25]          
The complainant has been in Mr. Davis’ car more than once.  Mr. Davis
did not keep track of how often it happened, but he said that it happened
perhaps 10-20 times.  He also drove other students, including A.M.  Mr. Davis
had a white Honda Civic at the relevant time.
[26]          
Mr. Davis sometimes used foul language around the complainant and other
students.  He denied making any sexual comments to the complainant or
commenting on her sexuality or sexual orientation.  He also denied making any
comments about the complainant and any other student engaging sexually with one
another.
[27]          
As a coach, Mr. Davis would sometimes physically touch a student for the
purpose of instruction, but not very often.  He did not ask for permission
before touching the student.  Mr. Davis did touch the complainant for the
purpose of instruction to show her how to do something on the tennis court. 
Mr. Davis remembers that the first time that he met the complainant, they were
working on her serve, and he touched her elbow because it was not in the right
place.  He took her elbow and moved it into the right place.  Mr. Davis does
not remember touching the hips of any student during the course of instruction,
but he said that it was possible that he touched a student’s hips to show them
to turn their hips.   Mr. Davis said that he has never had a reason to touch a
student’s butt while giving instruction.  He does not recall touching any part
of a student’s butt during instruction.
[28]          
Mr. Davis tickled some of his tennis students to make them laugh, but
not during instruction and not frequently.  The students he tickled were under
11 years old.  He tickled the students on the side, on their rib cage,
approximately half-way up the torso, not close to the armpit.  Mr. Davis said
that he always tickled students in the same place.  He did not ask for permission
before tickling them.  Mr. Davis would tickle students he had known for a long
time and with whom he was close.  Mr. Davis was not able to remember the names
of any students he had tickled.  Mr. Davis does not remember ever tickling the
complainant, but he said that it was possible that he tickled her.  He does not
think that he ever tickled her in his car.
[29]          
Mr. Davis said that he and the complainant were not that close.  They
were “medium close”.  Mr. Davis testified that the complainant would sometimes text
him about television programs, movies or music she liked.  Mr. Davis would
respond.  He exchanged similar text messages with almost all of his students. 
He would also talk with his students during water breaks about these topics and
about what they liked to do.  Mr. Davis had a good rapport with the
complainant.  He would also text her to give her feedback on her play, send her
what fitness to do and arrange times to play.
[30]          
One day at the end of July 2020, the complainant, A.M. and Mr. Davis
went training together at a tennis club located near the complainant’s home. 
The father of the complainant dropped her off at the tennis court and she met
with A.M. and Mr. Davis there.  The complainant said that she could not dismiss
the possibility that she may have been picked up by Mr. Davis and A.M. on that
day.  It was not uncommon for Mr. Davis to drive her to a lesson or back home
after a lesson.  The complainant was wearing tennis clothes, i.e., shorts and a
tank top.
[31]          
The complainant denied telling A.M. and Mr. Davis when they picked her
up that she had stolen liquor from her parents’ cabinet and drunk some, and
that she had done drugs or taken an edible.  She also denied having done these
actions.  She stated that she had never drunk or taken drugs knowing that she
had a tennis practice within a couple of hours.
[32]          
The complainant testified that she knows that the incident occurred at
the end of July 2020 because she wrote down in a journal the month in which it
happened and because they were training outdoors, which means that this
happened during the summer months.
[33]          
Mr. Davis remembers an altercation with the complainant in his car on
July 1, 2020.  He knows the exact date on which the incident occurred because
he has text messages from that day.  On that day, Mr. Davis was with another
student, A.M.  They did fitness together – running and stretching.  Mr. Davis
and A.M. were supposed to meet with the complainant for a practice at the
tennis court at noon on that day, and Mr. Davis was going to pick up the
complainant at her house.  However, Mr. Davis and A.M. were late by one hour
and 10 minutes.  Mr. Davis knows how long they were late because this
information is in text messages that he sent to the complainant on that day. 
Mr. Davis checked his text messages after he found out that he was charged. 
The last time that he looked at the text messages was about one month before
the trial.  He looked at them on other occasions between the time that he was
charged and one month before the trial.
[34]          
The fact that Mr. Davis and A.M. were running late was communicated to
the complainant by text message by either A.M. or Mr. Davis.  When A.M. and Mr.
Davis arrived at the complainant’s house at 1:10 p.m., Mr. Davis texted the
complainant that they were there.  The complainant got into Mr. Davis’ car and
they started going to the tennis court.  A.M. asked the complainant what she
had been doing for that hour that she had on her own.  The complainant
responded that she was having a party.  A.M. asked her what that meant.  The
complainant told them that she broke into her parents’ liquor cabinet and was
doing drugs.
[35]          
Mr. Davis testified that he did not know whether what the complainant had
said was true, but she said something that made him believe that it would be
true.  The complainant said that her parents marked the back of the bottles
with a Sharpie and that after she drank, she made a new mark with a Sharpie. 
She also said that she kept her stash in her closet.
[36]          
Mr. Davis has no memory of smelling alcohol in the car.  He does not
think that the complainant was slurring her words.  However, the complainant
was laughing a lot and there was a lot of giggling.
[37]          
They went to a tennis court that was very close to the complainant’s
house.  Both the complainant and A.M. were playing on the court.  The
complainant was laughing a lot and fooling around.  She had never done that
before.  She was missing the ball completely.  She was hitting the ball in the
net or over the fence and laughing about it.  At some point, she tripped on her
feet.  Mr. Davis then decided to end the practice because of the way the
complainant was playing and behaving.  He remembers thinking to himself that
she was going to hurt herself.  He was concerned about her safety.  Mr. Davis
said that the practice was over and they left. They were not there for very
long.  Mr. Davis was not happy with the complainant because she was fooling
around at practice and had gotten intoxicated before practice.  He believed
that she was intoxicated based on what she had told him and what he observed. 
Nothing like that ever happened before or after that day.
[38]          
After practice, Mr. Davis drove the complainant home in his car.  A.M.
was also in the car.  She was sitting in the front passenger seat and the
complainant was sitting on the backseat, in the middle.
[39]          
Mr. Davis parked his car just past the complainant’s house, in front of
a neighbour’s house.  He parked as close to the complainant’s house as one was
allowed to stop.  It was daylight.  The cars of the complainant’s parents were
both in the driveway.  The complainant’s parents would have expected her home
at around that time.  Before Mr. Davis’ car had fully come to a stop, the
complainant made a joke or comment, but she does not remember what it was
about.  Mr. Davis turned the car off and took off his seatbelt.  The
complainant took her seatbelt off as well.  Mr. Davis then leaned over the
middle console and started tickling the complainant on her stomach, over her
clothes.  He did not say anything after the complainant made the joke or
comment before he started tickling her.  Mr. Davis was using both of his
hands.  The complainant laughed during the first 30 seconds.  The complainant
asked him seriously to stop, but Mr. Davis did not stop.  There was no more
laughing after the first 30 seconds.
[40]          
Approximately 30 seconds after the tickling started, the complainant tried
to back away and she was at that time behind the passenger seat.  She was
telling Mr. Davis to stop seriously and was trying to push his hands away.  At
this point, Mr. Davis was completely leaned over the middle console.  At the
one-minute mark, the complainant could feel Mr. Davis moving up her stomach as
he was tickling her.  He was close to her rib cage.  At that time, the
complainant moved further behind the passenger seat, but she was still mostly
sitting upright.  Her right foot got stuck under the driver’s seat.  Mr. Davis
continued moving up with the tickling and approximately one minute and a half
later, he made an initial contact with the complainant’s breasts for a brief
second.  The complainant tried to push his hands away and fell off balance at
an odd angle.  She was almost completely lying down on the back bench at about
a 35o angle, and her right arm was trapped between her body and the
car seat.  The complainant’s left arm was behind her.  She was using it to try
to pull herself up and push herself further away if she could.  The complainant
could no longer use her arms to push Mr. Davis’ hands off, and that is when Mr.
Davis got to her breasts.  At that time, the complainant would have liked to
get out of the car, but she was unable to do so because of the position in
which she was.  At no point did Mr. Davis hold or restrain her.
[41]          
During the second part of her cross-examination, the complainant’s
evidence regarding the initial contact with her breasts appeared to change. 
She said that after the initial contact or “grazing” of her breasts occurred,
she moved further away and Mr. Davis’ hands were then lower and continued to go
up and tickle her for another two minutes before reaching her breasts again.
[42]          
After Mr. Davis reached the complainant’s breasts, the tickling turned
into fondling and deliberate touching, still over her clothes.  Mr. Davis
tickled and fondled the complainant’s breasts for approximately 45 seconds or
between 30 and 60 seconds.  The complainant is 100% sure that Mr. Davis’
touching of her breast was not less than 30 seconds.  He had one hand on each
breast.  The touching was similar to tickling, but it was obvious to the
complainant that it was not tickling anymore.  It was a much more purposeful
and controlled motion.  The way Mr. Davis was moving his hands was more
intentional and slower.  The complainant repeatedly told Mr. Davis to stop and
that it was not funny anymore.  She felt incredibly uncomfortable and that it
was no longer normal for someone to be doing this.  The complainant could no
longer move away from Mr. Davis as her upper back was against the rear
passenger door and the rest of her body was on the back seat, partially lying
down.  Her right foot was still jammed under the driver’s seat.  Her hands were
now to her side.  The complainant could not hear if Mr. Davis was saying
anything over her yelling.  However, when she looked at him, he had his mouth
closed.
[43]          
Mr. Davis’ knees were on the driver’s seat, not on the middle console,
and he was completely leaning over into the back row.  He was almost on top of
her as he was coming from above, which limited her space, but his body weight
was not on her.  Mr. Davis was able to keep his balance by leaning his weight
on both the driver’s and the front passenger seats.  The complainant said that
Mr. Davis was able to put himself on an angle where his torso was mostly
leaning on the driver’s seat, but he could also use the front passenger seat to
support his shoulder by having his armpit on the top left corner of the seat. 
The complainant stated that the car was relatively small, that Mr. Davis is a
fairly tall man with long arms, and that he was able to reach her in that
position.
[44]          
The complainant does not know what A.M. was doing at that time.  She did
not hear A.M. say anything as the complainant could only hear herself
screaming.  A.M. never left her seat.
[45]          
The complainant tried to use her left leg to push Mr. Davis’ shoulder
away from her.  It worked, but then Mr. Davis grabbed her inner upper thigh
with his right hand, about four inches away from her “private areas”.  His hand
was on her skin.  Mr. Davis removed his left hand from her breast.  The complainant
was then able to use her left arm to pull herself up, free her right arm and
use her right hand to reach over her right shoulder and pull the car door
handle behind her.  She opened the door and she fell out of the car.  Her torso
was out of the car and her feet were still in the car.  She flipped onto her
stomach, in a push-up position, crawled out of the car on her hands with her
legs dragging behind, and pulled herself up.
[46]          
Mr. Davis’ right hand was on the complainant’s thigh for about 5-10
seconds, until she got out of the car.  Mr. Davis did not move his hand on her
thigh or leg and he made no attempt to touch her vagina.  The complainant said
that she understood that Mr. Davis reaching his arm out could have been to find
balance, but she did not understand how grabbing her inner thigh would have
been helpful.  It would have made more sense for him to grab her knee or foot
to push them away.  She stated that the position was illogical to her, and that
she had no way of knowing if Mr. Davis had put his hand there for a sexual
purpose.  The complainant testified at trial that she did not believe that Mr.
Davis put his hand on her thigh to push her leg.  However, she said during the
preliminary inquiry that Mr. Davis had placed his hand there to push her leg. 
At trial, the complainant explained that she had said that Mr. Davis had pushed
her leg not because he was trying to push it away, but because he was pushing
on her leg and applying a significant force onto her leg.
[47]          
During her video statement to the police, the complainant said that she
swung the car door open, swung her legs out and then got out of the car.  At
trial, she explained that she did not go through the entire chain of events
with the police and in as much detail.  She said that her legs were on the
bench as she was crawling out of the car, but once a significant part of her
body was out of the car, she did swing her legs off the bench to get them out
of the car entirely and pull her legs towards her, under her body.
[48]          
At the preliminary inquiry, the complainant also said that she “swung
out of the car” and “swung [her] legs around and closed the car door” after
sliding/falling out of the car.  At trial, she said that the reference to
swinging her legs around was a reference to bringing her legs out of the car
with the rest of her body, and the reference to “swinging out of the car” was a
reference to pulling her body out of the car.
[49]          
The complainant testified that she was really scared.  Mr. Davis tickled
her for a total of about four minutes, including the touching of her breasts. 
The complainant said that she is confident that it lasted at least three
minutes.  This was unreasonably long to her.  She also thought that Mr. Davis
was unreasonably forceful when she initially tried to push his hands away.  She
knew that she had to get out of the car when Mr. Davis grabbed her leg.  She
was fearing for her safety and feeling incredibly uncomfortable.  She could not
understand why anybody would want to tickle someone so badly and so intently.
[50]          
After he started tickling her in the car, Mr. Davis did not stop
tickling or touching her until she got out of the car.  After the first 30
seconds of tickling, the complainant continuously protested verbally, and she consistently
asked Mr. Davis to stop and told him that it was not funny anymore.  During her
cross-examination, she stated that she screamed or yelled for three or four
minutes, and that she stopped yelling approximately 10 seconds before she
opened the door of the car because she was out-of-breath.  During her
re-examination, the complainant said that she was protesting for three to four
minutes, but she was not initially yelling.  She said that she started asking Mr.
Davis calmly to stop in an insistent matter.  Her tone and volume increased as
he continued and by the end, she was talking at a considerable volume, almost
yelling.
[51]          
After getting out of the car, the complainant left without saying
anything.  She closed the door of the car, opened the trunk, took her bag and
went home.  Both of her parents were home.
[52]          
The complainant stated that they were stopped outside of her house for a
total of about ten minutes, but she later said that it could have been less
than that.  Mr. Davis did not say anything from the time that the car stopped
until the complainant got out of the car.
[53]          
The complainant did not tell anything about the incident to her parents
or A.M. on that day.  She was very embarrassed and insecure about what had
happened.
[54]          
The times given by the complainant as to how long various things were
during the incident in the car are her best estimation of how she remembers the
events.  She said that when she thinks about her memory of the events, she is
able to count “on the side” as the memory is playing in her head.  She stated
that it was an unnerving amount of time and considerably long to be tickling
and touching someone.
[55]          
Mr. Davis drove the complainant home.  A.M. was sitting in the front
passenger seat and the complainant was sitting on the backseat, in the middle.
When they arrived at the complainant’s house, the complainant said that her
parents were home.  They saw the car in the driveway.  The complainant said
that she did not want to go on a trip with her parents that they were due to go
on in a day or two.  The car was still moving when the complainant said that,
and Mr. Davis stopped the car shortly thereafter.  After the car stopped, A.M.
and the complainant started talking about what the complainant had just said. 
Mr. Davis was not listening to what they were saying and he took his cell phone
to make a phone call.  A.M. and the complainant talked for about 10-20
seconds.  Mr. Davis does not believe that he ever made the call that he was
going to make because he was interrupted by the complainant.  The complainant
looked at Mr. Davis’ phone and asked him if he had any drug dealer in his contacts
because she wanted to get a bowl of cocaine.  Mr. Davis did not respond.  He
was extremely uncomfortable and there was a long awkward pause.  A.M. asked the
complainant whether she was doing okay.  The complainant responded: “No, I’m so
fucking drunk right now, I think I’m about to puke.”
[56]          
Mr. Davis then looked at the complainant through the rearview mirror and
told her to get out of the car.  One of the reasons why he told the complainant
to get out was because he was concerned that she would vomit in his car.  After
Mr. Davis asked her to get out of the car, the complainant said “no”.  Mr.
Davis then turned around in his seat so that he was slightly more on his right
hip and he told the complainant “to get the fuck out”.  During his
cross-examination, Mr. Davis stated that when he said that, his right index
finger was pointing at the rear passenger door.  The complainant then asked Mr.
Davis to drive around the block because she did not want her parents to find
out.  Mr. Davis said: “Absolutely not.”  He was upset with the complainant
because of what she did before the practice, how she behaved and performed at
practice, and because he was concerned that she was going to vomit in his car. 
He was also concerned about her well-being.
[57]          
Mr. Davis’ hand went from pointing at the rear passenger door to
pointing down at the complainant’s seatbelt buckle.  He lowered his right hand
slightly down towards the seatbelt buckle, which was to the right of the
complainant, in her hip area.  The seatbelt buckle was about one inch or two
out of the car seat.  Mr. Davis’ right side was leaning slightly over the
middle console towards the backseat, he was facing A.M. and reaching back with
his right hand.  His left hand was in the front of the car, but he does not
remember where exactly.  Mr. Davis’ intention was initially to lower his hand
down to that area and point to the seatbelt buckle.  Mr. Davis thought that it
would make the complainant leave if he reached down to the seatbelt buckle.  It
was his hope that the complainant would undo her seatbelt and that he would not
have to press the button on the buckle.  However, unfastening the seatbelt
himself was a possibility.
[58]          
Mr. Davis never reached the seatbelt buckle.  The complainant started
pushing his hand away with her hands when his hand was approximately at her hip
level or slightly higher, a few inches off of her torso.  Mr. Davis’ right arm
was over her knees, but he was not touching her.  Mr. Davis started pushing
back against the complainant’s hands, making a sweeping motion.  As they were
pushing, Mr. Davis’ hand touched the complainant’s rib cage.  When Mr. Davis touched
her rib cage, the complainant leaped forward in her seat.  The bottom of her
breast touched the back of Mr. Davis’ hand.  Mr. Davis pulled his hand away. 
He then pointed to the door and told her to go.  The complainant gave him
attitude like a teenager, and she stormed out.  Mr. Davis unlatched the trunk
release from inside the car.  The complainant got her things in the trunk,
closed the trunk and went inside her house.  Mr. Davis watched the complainant
walk to the door of her house to make sure that she got to the door.  Then he
and A.M. left.
[59]          
Mr. Davis never succeeded in unbuckling the complainant’s seatbelt.  She
unbuckled it herself.  There were about 10 seconds between the time that Mr.
Davis first reached for the seatbelt buckle and when he pointed to the door and
told the complainant to go.  Mr. Davis never took off his seatbelt and he never
moved his left hand into the back of the car.  He just turned around in his
seat.
[60]          
Mr. Davis never had to tell the complainant to get out of his car either
before or after that day.
[61]          
Mr. Davis denied having any sexual purpose in any of the physical
contacts with the complainant in the car on that day.  Nothing sexual was said
in the car.  The contact between the complainant’s breast and Mr. Davis’ hand
lasted a millisecond.  Mr. Davis did not otherwise touch the complainant’s
breasts in the car on that day.  Mr. Davis never touched the complainant’s
upper thigh on that day, and he did not climb into the backseat.  Mr. Davis did
not tickle the complainant in the car on that day.  He did not intentionally
touch her chest.
[62]          
After the incident, the complainant had two lessons with Mr. Davis.  She
then told her father that she was not feeling super comfortable with Mr. Davis
as a coach anymore.  She stopped seeing him for a couple of weeks, but
ultimately went back to having him as her instructor at the end of September
2020 or the beginning of October 2020.  He was her instructor until January
2021.  During that time, she was seeing him three or four times a week.  Mr.
Davis still tickled her, but less frequently as the complainant was more reserved. 
He never talked to her about the incident in the car and he never apologized. 
The complainant also never talked to him about the incident in the car because
she was too scared to talk about it.  The complainant was concerned that it was
possibly going to happen again, but she wanted to give Mr. Davis the benefit of
the doubt, i.e., that it was not intentional.  However, subconsciously, she
knew that it was not right and it was not an accident.
[63]          
In January 2021, Mr. Davis, A.M. and another student went to Florida to
participate in tournaments and to train.  At that time, the complainant found a
new club and a new coach.
[64]          
While Mr. Davis, A.M. and the other student were in Florida, the
complainant would sometimes call A.M. on FaceTime.  Since Mr. Davis and A.M.
were living in the same house in Florida, the complainant would occasionally
see him and talk to him when she called A.M.  She had no further contacts with
Mr. Davis after A.M. came back from Florida around June 2021.  Mr. Davis did
not come back to Canada with them.
[65]          
After the incident, Mr. Davis continued giving lessons to the
complainant.  They had a regular schedule if they were both in town.  After
July 1, 2020, the complainant’s family went away on a trip, and Mr. Davis did
not see her during that period of time.  Mr. Davis and the complainant never
talked about the incident.  However, during water breaks at practice, Mr. Davis
talked to the complainant about not doing drugs and not consuming alcohol
because she was a tennis player and an athlete.  Mr. Davis never raised with the
complainant’s parents the fact that he had seen her in an intoxicated state. 
He never saw the complainant in that state again.  He continued to have a good
relationship with the complainant after that day.
[66]          
Mr. Davis stopped coaching the complainant in January 2021 because he
left for Florida.
[67]          
After his stay in Florida with A.M., her mother and another kid, Mr.
Davis did not immediately come back to Canada.  He went to New Jersey and
stayed with people he knew there.  He was still doing some tennis there, but
not full time.  Mr. Davis came back to Canada between June and August 2021.  At
that point, he was consulting with tennis players, but he decided that he was
going to stop doing it on court because of his burnout and injuries.  Later in
2021, he stopped consulting.
[68]          
The complainant told her cousin about the July 2020 incident when she
saw her cousin in September 2020.
[69]          
In November 2020, the complainant told A.M. that Mr. Davis had touched
her in the car and that she was feeling incredibly uncomfortable.  A.M. said
that she remembered Mr. Davis tickling her.  This conversation took place when
they were together in person.  The complainant gave evidence at the preliminary
inquiry that this conversation with A.M. was in January 2021.  At trial, the
complainant said that it was possible that it was in January 2021.  She stated
that it took place before A.M. went to Florida in January 2021.
[70]          
On a Thursday night in January 2022, the complainant and A.M. were
texting on Snapchat, catching up.  During this conversation, A.M. told the
complainant that Mr. Davis had broken into her house two weeks before and raped
her.[1] 
The complainant then sent the following messages [all the messages below are
reproduced verbatim]:
[71]          
A.M. responded as follows:
[72]          
The complainant then wrote the following:
[73]          
A.M. wrote back: “oh yeah i noticed”.
[74]          
The complainant’s evidence is that her messages to A.M. refer to the
incident in the car when Mr. Davis tickled her.  The complainant did not
mention that Mr. Davis touched her breasts in the messages.  When asked about
this omission, she said that at that point, she was not in denial and she knew
that Mr. Davis had deliberately touched her breasts.  However, her goal in the
messages was not to go into complete details about what Mr. Davis had done to
her.  The complainant considered what had happened to her to be less serious
and she did not want to cause more distress to A.M. or to cause A.M. to worry
about her in return.  She also did not want to minimize A.M.’s experience.
[75]          
The complainant testified that when she used the word “bits” in her Snapchat
message, she meant to include both her breasts and private area.  Thus, she
meant to reference her breasts when telling A.M. that Mr. Davis got really
close to her “bits”.  She did not tell A.M. that Mr. Davis directly fondled her
breasts for some time so as not to go into too much detail for her.
[76]          
In response to questions about her use of the words “a few times” and
the fact that her messages seem to refer to more than one incident, the
complainant stated that she was referring to Mr. Davis getting close to her “bits”
multiple times, including the tickling in the car and the touching close to her
butt on the tennis court, even though the latter did not necessarily involve
tickling.
[77]          
The complainant said that she was surprised and slightly confused by
A.M.’s initial reaction to her disclosure in the Snapchat messages because A.M.
already knew about the incident in the car.
[78]          
After eventually saying good night to A.M. on Snapchat, the complainant
went to her parents’ bedroom in the middle of the night and told them about
what A.M. had told her.  She told them because she felt unsafe and she thought
that A.M. could possibly be unsafe.  The complainant was incredibly
distraught.  She was sobbing and nearly threw up.  It was hard for her to
process what had happened, and memories of what had happened to her in July
2020 flooded back.
[79]          
In addition to telling her parents what A.M. had told her, the
complainant told her parents that Mr. Davis had touched her inappropriately
before, that he had tickled her and touched her breasts, and that he tickled a
lot of his students.  The complainant denied telling her mother that Mr. Davis
had accidentally touched her breasts.  She stated that she said something along
these lines: “One day, Mark touched my breasts while he was tickling me.  It
was for a long time.  I hope it was an accident, but I don’t think it was.”
[80]          
The complainant’s family waited a couple of days before contacting the
police.  The complainant called A.M. on the Friday and A.M. gave her more
information.
[81]          
The complainant was present when her mother contacted the police on the Sunday. 
Police officers came to the complainant’s house on Sunday night.  Her mother
and father were there.  The complainant provided initial information to an
officer who was wearing a body-worn camera.
[82]          
The complainant told the following to the police: “I never knew if it
was an accident or not.”  At trial, the complainant stated that when she said
that to the police, she meant that she had never had confirmation from Mr.
Davis whether it was an accident or not.  He never apologized for it and she
would have expected him to do so if it was an accident.
[83]          
The complainant gave a video statement to a detective on January 27,
2022.  As stated above, she testified at the preliminary hearing.
[84]          
The complainant does not have a relationship with A.M. today.  The
complainant thinks that A.M. was upset that they had contacted the police.  The
complainant and A.M. stopped talking in 2022, a couple of weeks after the
complainant reported the incident to the police.  The complainant has not had
any contact with A.M. since then.
[85]          
The complainant’s evidence is that she always knew that the touching of
her breasts by Mr. Davis was on purpose and that it was wrong.  She tried to
give him the benefit of the doubt for her own mental health and tried to
convince herself that it was an accident so that she would not have to tell
anybody about it.  She was in denial.  However, she knew deep down or
subconsciously that it could not have been an accident given the amount of time
it lasted and the way that Mr. Davis was doing it.  She was very embarrassed
that this had happened to her.  The complainant testified that she never said
that it was an accident with 100% certainty because there was always a doubt
present in her mind about it.
[86]          
The complainant testified that her memory of the length of the incident
never changed.  What changed over time was how strong she felt in her
conviction that it was not an accident.
[87]          
As stated above, A.B. is the complainant’s mother.
[88]          
The complainant told her parents about the incident on a Thursday
night.  It was after midnight.  The complainant went into her parents’ bedroom. 
A.B. was asleep.  The complainant was distraught and crying.  A.B. and her
husband tried to talk to the complainant, but she was very upset.  The
complainant went into the bathroom to throw up.  For a while, A.B. and her
husband had no idea as to why the complainant was crying.  The complainant
eventually told them about her conversation with A.M. on Snapchat.  A.B. was
shocked.
[89]          
It took quite a while for the complainant to calm down.  When she was
calmer, A.B. brought the complainant into A.B.’s bedroom and told her to sleep
with A.B. in her bed.  The complainant’s father went to the complainant’s room
at some point.  A.B. asked the complainant if Mr. Davis had ever touched her
inappropriately.  The complainant responded that he did, that he touched her
breasts and her “privates”, referring to her genitals.  A.B. did not question
her further at that point because it was late and she was finally calm.  The
complainant stayed in A.B.’s bed all night.
[90]          
The following day, Friday, A.B. went to work and the complainant stayed
home with her father because she was exhausted.  While A.B. was at work, the complainant
spoke to A.M. on the phone.  After A.B. came back from work, the complainant,
A.B. and the complainant’s father met again to talk about what happened in a
bit more detail.  The complainant talked to them about the time that she was in
Mr. Davis’ car.  The complainant told her parents that Mr. Davis tickled her,
reached over between the seats to tickle her, and touched her breasts.  The
complainant said no and stop to Mr. Davis, and she wanted to get out of there. 
During her examination-in-chief, A.B. said that the complainant had also told
them that Mr. Davis had touched her upper thigh.  However, during her
cross-examination, A.B. said that she could not remember whether the
complainant had mentioned her upper thigh during this conversation.
[91]          
A.B. does not know what they talked about on the Saturday and Sunday. 
She thinks that they probably talked about the complainant’s disclosure on the
Saturday, but she does not know if they did on the Sunday.  A.B. did not make
any notes of her conversations with the complainant.  However, she took
pictures of the Snapchat conversation between the complainant and A.M.
[92]          
On Monday, January 24, 2022, after coming back from work, A.B. called
the police.  She called the non-emergency line.  The complainant was besides
her when she called the police and the complainant assisted in answering some
of the questions that the police had.  By that time, everyone was calmer but
still somewhat in shock.  A.B. knew that they had to call the police and take
action.  Because A.B. is a teacher, she also had a duty to report.
[93]          
A.B. testified that the complainant never said that the touching of her
breasts was accidental.  However, A.B. acknowledged that when she called the
police, she told the police that “one time he accidentally touched her chest
and another time was near her upper thigh”.  When asked about this statement, A.B.
said that the complainant never used the word “accidental”.  A.B.’s evidence is
that she does not know why she inserted the word “accidentally”.  A.B. also
does not know why she told the police that Mr. Davis touched the complainant
near her upper thigh instead of her “privates”.  She does not know why she
added “upper thigh” and how the words changed from “privates” to “upper thigh”
from the Thursday night to the call to the police on the Monday.  A.B.
similarly does not know why she referred to two times in her call to the
police.  She said that her understanding before she called the police was that
there was only one instance in the backseat of the car.
[94]          
After her call, the police came to her house.  A.B. and her husband were
present when the complainant told the police about what happened to her.
[95]          
With respect to the issue of the complainant’s prior consistent statements
disclosing the alleged sexual assault, the Crown’s position is as follows:
[96]          
Relying on the Court of Appeal’s decision in R. v. C.D., 2024
ONCA 936 at para. 10 (“C.D.”), the Crown submits that the
evidence of sexual comments and instructional touching in this case is relevant
to the issue of Mr. Davis’ motive, namely, his alleged inappropriate sexual
interest in the complainant.
[97]          
The Crown states that Mr. Davis was not a credible narrator.  According
to the Crown, his story was preposterous.  The Crown points to, among other
things, Mr. Davis’ evidence that the 13-year-old complainant was drunk and
possibly high for her tennis lesson at 1 p.m.  Further, the Crown argues that
it would not have been possible for Mr. Davis to do what he said he did in the
car while having his seatbelt on, including reaching the buckle of the
passenger’s seatbelt in the back of the car with his arm.  The Crown’s position
is that the Court can reach this conclusion based on common sense and does not
need evidence regarding the size of the car.  The Crown also argues that there
was no reason for Mr. Davis’ hand to touch the complainant’s breast if his hand
was near the seatbelt buckle.
[98]          
The Crown submits that Mr. Davis changed his evidence between his
examination-in-chief and his cross-examination with respect to the order of
what happened in the car and when he pointed to the door to ask the complainant
to get out of the car.
[99]          
The Crown also points out that Mr. Davis had a strange demeanour while
giving his evidence, and that he took long pauses before answering questions
and struggled to answer simple questions, e.g., questions about his educational
history.  However, the Crown acknowledges that while testimonial demeanour is a
proper consideration in the evaluation of a witness’ credibility, it is only
one of the factors that the Court should consider and it is not dispositive.
[100]       The
Crown argues that the complainant’s evidence was compelling and that her
narrative was logical and cohesive.  The Crown states that the absence of
evidence of a motive to lie should be considered when assessing her
credibility.
[101]       With
respect to the complainant’s prior inconsistent statements, the Crown submits
that there are no significant inconsistencies, the inconsistencies relate to
peripheral matters – such as timeframes, and the essence of what the complainant
has disclosed is that she was touched in a way that she should not have been.
[102]       The
Crown states that the complainant always knew that what happened in the car was
not an accident, and that her evidence should be considered in light of the
fact that she did not think about it for a long period of time.
[103]       The
Crown’s position is that the Court can be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
that the touching of the complainant’s breasts and thigh happened, and that it
had a sexual purpose.
[104]       With
respect to the issue of the complainant’s prior consistent statements disclosing
the alleged sexual assault, the defence’s position is as follows:
[105]       The
defence submits that the complainant’s allegations of sexual comments and
instructional touching on the part of Mr. Davis are not admissible to support
the complainant’s version of events.  According to the defence, this would be
evidence of bad character and prior disreputable conduct, and the Crown did not
bring the required applications.  While the defence does not disagree that such
evidence could be considered to determine whether the touching in the car was
of a sexual nature and whether Mr. Davis had a sexual purpose, the defence
argues that the alleged comments and instructional touching are not
sufficiently proximate in time.  The defence also notes that in light of the
wildly different narratives of Mr. Davis and the complainant as to what
happened in the car, the alleged sexual comments and instructional touching do
not have much bearing on the issue of the sexual nature of the touching in the
car.
[106]       The
defence argues that there is no valid reason to disregard Mr. Davis’ evidence,
and that it is impossible to reject it beyond a reasonable doubt.
[107]       The
defence states that Mr. Davis’ demeanour should only play a minor role in
assessing his truthfulness.  He was an extremely nervous witness, but an
innocent person can be as nervous as a guilty person.  His long pauses before
responding to questions about his educational history, for instance, show that
the demeanour issue was not related to the allegations of sexual assault in this
case and/or a fear to be caught in a lie with respect to these allegations.
[108]       The
defence submits that Mr. Davis’ evidence was clear, not vague to avoid
scrutiny, and internally consistent.  Mr. Davis had a good memory and was open
to reasonable suggestions.  He was not defensive or evasive, he did not
exaggerate his evidence and he acknowledged facts that were not to his
advantage.  His evidence rang true.
[109]       The
defence argues that there is nothing impossible about Mr. Davis’ account of
what happened in the car.  The defence notes that Mr. Davis is trying to
remember something that happened in a matter of seconds years ago, and that he
did not have a reason to remember this until the police called him.
[110]       The
defence states that the fact that Mr. Davis did not mention during his
examination-in-chief that he pointed to the door when he told the complainant
“to get the fuck out” does not constitute a real inconsistency.  Mr. Davis was
not asked during his examination-in-chief whether he had made any gesture at
that time.
[111]       The
defence submits that there are reliability and credibility concerns with
respect to the evidence of the complainant.
[112]       The
defence states that the complainant’s memory of a physical touch that she
genuinely thought was an accident changed to her allegations before the court
that are not compatible with something that could have been an accident.  Among
other things, the complainant alleged that Mr. Davis had one hand on each of
her breasts, and that there was continuous touching of her breasts for 30-60
seconds.  The defence argues that it is not possible to go from a plausible
accident to what she says she has a clear memory of, which involves the clear
touching of her breasts for 30-60 seconds.  The defence points out that in her
statement to the police, the complainant still could not tell whether it was an
accident or not, and she was not describing the kind of assault that Mr. Davis
is now charged with.  According to the defence, the complainant does not have a
reliable memory.
[113]       The
defence stresses the inconsistent prior disclosures by the complainant to her
mother and to A.M. in the Snapchat messages.  The defence points to the use of
the words “privates” and “bits”.  The defence states that even if the reference
to “bits” in the Snapchat messages includes breasts, the statement in the
Snapchat messages that Mr. Davis would get “really close to her bits” when he
tickled her is incompatible with the complainant’s evidence at trial of direct
fondling of her breasts for 30-60 seconds.  According to the defence, the
complainant has not provided a real explanation for the differences in her
descriptions.
[114]       The
defence submits that the manner in which the complainant responded to the
inconsistencies in her evidence was concerning with respect to her
credibility.  The defence argues that the complainant did not make a truthful
attempt to assist the court and was making it up as she went along.
[115]       The
defence also argues that the incident that the complainant described was
physically implausible.  Among other things, Mr. Davis would not have been able
to balance himself with his two hands on the complainant’s breasts and his
knees on his seat in the car.  Further, as stated above, the defence states
that the complainant fabricated the allegation that she made an in-person
disclosure to A.M. in 2020-2021 given A.M.’s reaction in the Snapchat messages,
which was not the reaction of someone who had already been told about the
incident.
[116]       The
defence notes that while there is an absence of evidence of a motive to lie,
there is no evidence disproving a motive to lie.  The defence points out that
the complainant was upset when she heard what her friend A.M was alleging against
Mr. Davis.
[117]       The
defence submits that both the complainant’s version and Mr. Davis’ version are
possible, but that Mr. Davis’ version is more reliable.  Given that both
versions are possible, the Court cannot be left with no reasonable doubt and
must acquit Mr. Davis because the Crown has failed to discharge its burden.
[118]       The
issue of prior consistent statements was raised early during the trial.  Given
that the matter was being tried without a jury, it was agreed that the issue
would be argued and decided at the end of the trial.
[119]       Prior
consistent statements are presumptively inadmissible because they lack
probative value: see Khan at para. 25.
[120]       As
noted by the Court of Appeal in Khan (at para. 26), prior consistent statements are an amalgam of two elements:
the hearsay element and the declaration element.  In this case, we are dealing
with the declaration element of the prior consistent statements.  The parties
have not argued that the statements should be admitted for the truth of their
contents.
[121]       The
rule against prior consistent statements generally excludes the declaration
element.  However, the common law recognizes a number of exceptions to the rule
that prior consistent statements are inadmissible.  When a prior consistent
statement is admissible pursuant to one of these exceptions, the declaration
element is proof that a statement was made and the statement is admissible for
limited purposes, which differ among exceptions.  See Khan at paras.
26-27.
[122]       Recognized
exceptions include admitting prior consistent statements to rebut an allegation
of recent fabrication, as pure narrative evidence or as narrative as
circumstantial evidence.  See Khan at paras. 28-29.  In this case, there
was no allegation of recent fabrication with respect to the alleged sexual
assault.
[123]       If a prior consistent statement is admitted under the pure
narrative exception, it carries no weight because it is tendered simply to give
the background to explain how the complaint came to be before the court, and to
allow the decision-maker to understand the chronological cohesion of the case. 
The statement is merely an aid in understanding the case as a whole and it does
not give rise to any inferences that would make the case of one person more
compelling than that of another.  See Khan at para. 30.  To be admissible under this exception, a statement must be
“truly essential” to the unfolding of the narrative: see R. v. D.K.,
2020 ONCA 79 at para. 37 (“D.K.”).
[124]       Under
the “narrative as circumstantial evidence” exception, the circumstances
surrounding the making of the prior consistent statement – such as the fact,
context and timing of a complaint – can be used to assist the trier of fact in
assessing the reliability and credibility of a witness.  See Khan at
paras. 31-35, 39.
[125]       I
now turn to the evidence of prior consistent statements in this case:
[126]       With
respect to the issue of sexual comments and instructional touching, I accept
the Crown’s submission, based on C.D. (at para. 10), that the evidence
of sexual comments and instructional touching in this case can be relevant to
the issue of Mr. Davis’ motive, namely, whether he had an inappropriate sexual
interest in the complainant.  However, given that I am not satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that Mr. Davis intentionally touched the complainant’s breasts
and/or upper thigh, the issue of Mr. Davis’ motive does not arise.  Further, as
discussed further below, I have considerable difficulty with the complainant’s
evidence alleging that Mr. Davis touched her butt or upper butt during tennis lessons.
[127]       Mr.
Davis is presumed to be innocent, unless and until Crown counsel has proven his
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.  To prove Mr. Davis’ guilt of the offences of
sexual assault and/or sexual interference, Crown counsel must prove each and
every essential element of the offences beyond a reasonable doubt.  A
reasonable doubt is a doubt based on reason and common sense, a doubt that
logically arises from the evidence or the absence of evidence.  Proof of
probable or likely guilt is not proof of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.  It would not be safe to convict a person of a criminal
offence with only that degree of confidence.  In order to find Mr. Davis
guilty of an offence, I have to be sure, based on all the evidence before the
Court, that he committed the offence.  See R.
v. Nyznik, 2017 ONSC 4392 at paras.
6-7.
[128]         In
a case where credibility is important, the Court’s analysis of the evidence is
to be guided by the principles set out in R. v. W.(D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), [1991] 1 S.C.R. 742 at 758 (“W.(D.)”):
[129]       The paramount question remains whether, on the whole of the
evidence, the trier of fact is left with a reasonable doubt about the guilt of
the accused.  A verdict of guilt should not be based on a choice between the
defence evidence and the Crown’s evidence.  See R. v. C.L.Y., 2008 SCC 2
at paras. 6, 8.
[130]       In
my view, the Crown’s reliance on R. v. J.J.R.D., 2006 CanLII 40088 (Ont.
C.A.) (“J.J.R.D.) in this case is misplaced.  As noted by the
Court of Appeal in R. v. C.L., 2020 ONCA 258 at paras. 32-34, the statements
made in J.J.R.D. relate to the issue of the sufficiency of reasons and do
not modify the test set out in W.(D.).  In all cases, the question is
whether the Crown has proved the accused’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
[131]       Given the opposite versions of events of the witnesses in
this case, the issues of credibility and reliability are critical.  Credibility
and reliability are different.  Credibility has to do with a witness’
veracity, truthfulness, sincerity and honesty.  Reliability has to do with the
accuracy of the witness’ testimony, i.e., the witness’ ability to observe, recall
and recount events accurately.  While a witness who is not credible on an issue
cannot give reliable evidence on the same point, a credible witness may give
unreliable evidence.  See R. v. G.F., 2021 SCC 20 at para. 82 (“G.F.”) and
R. v. H.C., 2009 ONCA 56 at para. 41.
[132]       This case also involves the assessment of credibility and
reliability of a child, i.e., the complainant.  Every person giving
testimony in court, of whatever age, is an individual whose credibility and
evidence must be assessed by reference to criteria appropriate to their mental
development, understanding and ability to communicate.  Since children may
experience the world differently from adults, it is hardly surprising that
details important to adults, like time and place, may be missing from their
recollection.  A contradiction in a child’s testimony should not be
given the same effect as a similar flaw in the testimony of an adult.  While
children may not be able to recount precise details and communicate the when
and where of an event with exactitude, this does not mean that they have
misconceived what happened to them and who did it.  A common-sense approach
should be adopted when dealing with the testimony of children and the court
should not impose the same exacting standard on them as it does on adults.  Further,
when a witness gives evidence pertaining to events which occurred in childhood,
the presence of inconsistencies, particularly as to peripheral matters such as
time and location, should be considered in the context of the age of the
witness at the time of the events to which the witness is testifying.  See R.
v. W.(R.), 1992 CanLII 56 (SCC), [1992] 2 S.C.R. 122 at 133-134 (“W.(R.)”).
[133]       Thus, the peculiar perspectives of children can affect
their recollection of events, and the presence of inconsistencies – especially
those related to peripheral matters – should be assessed in context.  A skilful
cross-examination is almost certain to confuse a child, even if the child is
telling the truth.  That confusion can lead to inconsistencies in the child’s
testimony.  Although the trier of fact must be wary of any evidence which has
been contradicted, this is a matter which goes to the weight which should be
attached to the evidence.  See R. v. F.(C.C.), 1997 CanLII 306 (SCC), [1997] 3 S.C.R.
1183 at para. 48 (“F.(C.C.)”).
[134]       However,
the way the courts look at the evidence of children does not mean that the
evidence of children should not be subject to the same standard of proof as the
evidence of adult witnesses in criminal cases.  Protecting the liberty of
the accused and guarding against the injustice of the conviction of an innocent
person require a solid foundation for a verdict of guilt, whether the
complainant is an adult or a child.  See W.(R.) at 134.
[135]       It
is a common experience that anyone, and particularly children, will have a
better recollection of events closer to their occurrence than they will later
on.  See F.(C.C.) at para. 19.
[136]       The actus reus of sexual assault requires
the Crown to establish three things: (a) touching; (b) of an objectively sexual
nature; (c) to which the complainant did not consent.  The first two elements
are determined objectively, while the third element is subjective and
determined by reference to the complainant’s internal state of mind towards the
touching.  At the mens rea stage, the Crown must show that: (a) the
accused intentionally touched the complainant; and (b) the accused knew that
the complainant was not consenting, or was reckless or wilfully blind as to the
absence of consent.  See G.F. at para. 25.
[137]       The
essential elements of the offence of sexual interference under section 151 of
the Criminal Code are as follows (see R. v. R.V., 2021 SCC 10 at
para. 58):
[138]       The
first step in the W.(D.) analysis is to ask whether I believe the evidence of the accused.
[139]       I
agree with the Crown that Mr. Davis had an unusual and strange demeanour during
a large part of his testimony.  Among other things, he took long pauses before
answering some questions, he struggled to answer simple questions, and he often
asked counsel to repeat their questions because he had been distracted and/or
could not remember the question.  However, I accept Mr. Davis’ explanation that
he was very nervous.  Further, I did not detect any pattern that would link the
demeanour issues to untruthfulness or unreliability.
[140]       Some
aspects of Mr. Davis’ version of events are difficult to believe, including the
allegation that the 13-year-old complainant got intoxicated before her tennis
practice.  However, this is not completely implausible.  I note that, when she
was asked whether she had drunk liquor and done drugs before her tennis
practice on the day in question, the complainant did not say that she was not
drinking liquor and doing drugs when she was 13 years old.  Rather, her
evidence was that she had never done that during the day before a tennis
practice.
[141]       Contrary
to the Crown’s submission, I do not find that Mr. Davis’ account of what
happened in the car after the tennis practice is physically implausible given
his height and the size of his car.  Further, the Crown’s argument that there
was no reason for Mr. Davis’ hand to touch the complainant’s breast if his hand
was near the seatbelt buckle – which was a theme pursued during the Crown’s
cross-examination of Mr. Davis – ignores his clear evidence that a number of
things happened between him reaching for the seatbelt buckle and the back of
his hand touching the complainant’s breast for a very short time.  Given the
progression of events described by Mr. Davis, it is plausible that his hand
would have accidentally come into contact with the complainant’s breast.
[142]       I
agree with the defence’s submission that Mr. Davis’ failure to mention during
his examination-in-chief that he pointed to the door when he asked the
complainant “to get the fuck out” does not constitute an inconsistency in his
evidence.  Mr. Davis was not asked during his examination-in-chief where his
hands were when he said that or whether he made any gesture.  Further, Mr.
Davis did not say during his examination-in-chief that he pointed to the door
only once during the altercation in the car.  In any event, this detail is minor
and inconsequential.
[143]       Mr.
Davis’ evidence was internally consistent, he did not exaggerate his evidence
and he acknowledged facts that were not to his advantage and/or did not make
him look good.  However, I found that there were times when Mr. Davis was not
fully candid during his testimony, which affects his credibility.  Among other
things, it is my view that Mr. Davis was not fully candid with the Court with
respect to his decision to stop being a tennis coach and his burnout, what he did
after leaving Florida, the extent to which he was tickling his students, and
his evidence that he could not remember the names of any of the students that
he tickled.
[144]       While
I do not necessarily believe the evidence of Mr. Davis, I am left in reasonable
doubt by it.  I am unable to reject his evidence regarding the incident in the
car as untruthful or unreliable.
[145]       Even
if I were not left in reasonable doubt by the evidence of the defence, I would
not be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt of Mr. Davis’ guilt based on the rest
of the evidence.  Based on the complainant’s evidence, I cannot be sure about
what happened in Mr. Davis’ car.  The credibility and reliability of the
complainant’s evidence are problematic, even when taking into account the fact
that she was 17 years old when she testified at trial and 13 years old at the
time of the incident.  The following are some of the problems with the
complainant’s evidence:
[146]       In
light of the foregoing and the numerous difficulties with the complainant’s
evidence, it would not be safe to convict Mr. Davis based on the evidence
before me.  I am not satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Davis touched
the complainant in the manner that she described or that Mr. Davis
intentionally touched the complainant’s breasts and thigh.
[147]       I
find Mr. Davis not guilty.