[1]              
Douglas Bowley, on 21 March 2024, I found you
guilty of three criminal offences, namely:
[2]              
The house on Marble Lake Road in Cloyne, which
was the subject of the arson charge and one of the uttering threats charges,
was owned by Albena Stoykova and her husband, Michael McLellan.  At the time of
the fire, you had rented and lived in the house for nearly four years.  Shortly
before the fire, you had been told by Ms. Stoykova and Mr. McLellan that the
house was going to be sold, and that you would need to find somewhere else to
live.  The threats and the eventual destruction of the house by arson were the
apparent responses by you to the news that the house was going to be sold and
that you would have to move.
[3]              
The text messages which you sent to Ms. Stoykova
were profane, insulting and intimidating.  They were laden with expletives and
threats.  Threats of physical harm, and, ultimately, threats that the house
would be burnt to the ground.
[4]              
On 20 January 2022, two hours after Ms. Stoykova
had sent you a text advising you that the house was going to be listed for sale
the next day and that the agent would try to keep showings grouped together, but
that you would be given a 24 hour notice before they needed to come in, Mr.
McLellan received a call from a neighbour to the Cloyne property telling him
that the house was on fire, and that you were at the home of some other
neighbours.
[5]              
After setting the fire, you had gone to the home
of Troy and Janeane Hanes, apparently intoxicated, saying, “they gave me 24
hours”.  In video clips admitted into evidence, you could be heard saying,
“house is gone”, “don’t fuck with me – I’ll play the ace of spades”, and
laughing in response to a comment by Mr. Hanes that “the demon could come out
any time and it did”.
[6]              
Arson is an indictable offence, punishable by up
to fourteen years’ imprisonment.  The uttering threats charges each carry a
maximum sentence of five years in prison.  The court is also required to impose
a weapons prohibition order for ten years and has discretion to make an order
requiring the provision by you of a DNA sample.
[7]              
The Crown submits that an appropriate sentence
in all of the circumstances is a term of imprisonment of eighteen months.  The
defence argues for a conditional sentence, with a substantial period of house arrest,
followed by a term of probation of three years with conditions that you
continue to address your mental health and alcohol issues.
[8]              
At the conclusion of the trial, there was a
discussion between counsel and the court about Mr. Bowley’s mental health. His
counsel at trial, Ruth Roberts, who, sadly, has since passed away, as well as
Crown counsel, agreed that it would be appropriate for the court to be provided
with a full psychiatric assessment of Mr. Bowley.  This was undertaken by Dr.
Amanjot Sandhu, a forensic psychiatrist at the Royal Ottawa Mental Health
Centre and University of Ottawa, who provided the court with a report in
September 2024.  Dr. Sandhu’s assessment revealed that Mr. Bowley was
experiencing a substance-induced bipolar and other related disorder, alcohol
use disorder, and cannabis use disorder at the time of the offences.  However,
Dr. Sandhu also concluded that, on a balance of probabilities, Mr. Bowley was
able to appreciate and know the wrongfulness of his actions between 13 January
2022 and 20 January 2022.
[9]              
Mr. Bowley is currently 60 years old.  He was
born in Hamilton and raised by his mother and father along with a younger
sister, Sherry-Lynn.  Mr. Bowley’s mother had cancer during his childhood.  She
died when she was just 26 years old and Mr. Bowley was nine.  When he was
fourteen, Mr. Bowley’s father remarried.  The marriage was not happy.  Mr.
Bowley dropped out of high school in grade ten and lived on the streets for a
while.  In his early twenties, he worked for a high pressure vacuum company
with his father.  He then moved to Calgary and worked several jobs, including
as a paint sprayer.  At some point he completed a one-year heavy equipment
technician course at the Southern Alberta Institute of Technology.  When he was
24, he entered into a relationship with a woman called Christine, with whom he
had three children.  In his early thirties, Mr. Bowley and his family moved
back to Hamilton when he was offered a job by his father to work as a sheet
metal mechanic.  It was at that time that Mr. Bowley started to have mental
health issues.  It is reported that he became paranoid, and at one point had a
psychiatric admission at St. Joseph’s Health Care in Hamilton.
[10]          
After being discharged from St. Joseph’s, Mr.
Bowley began to self medicate with alcohol.  He and Christine separated. 
Although he returned to work for a while, the combination of substance abuse
and panic attacks resulted in Mr. Bowley ultimately being terminated from his
employment.  He then moved back to Calgary for about three years.  He
eventually began a romantic relationship with an exchange student, with whom he
moved to British Columbia.  They got married and Mr. Bowley worked odd jobs as
a roofer.  However, after his wife obtained her Canadian citizenship, she left Mr.
Bowley.  He moved back to Ontario in 2008 and for a while resumed working in
sheet metal.  But in 2009, as a result of continuing mental health issues, Mr.
Bowley started to receive financial assistance through the Ontario Disability
Support Program (ODSP). He last worked about ten years ago, as a cook on a part
time basis.
[11]          
Mr. Bowley currently sees a psychiatrist at
Peterborough Regional Health Centre and, in recent months, he has been seeing
an addiction counsellor for alcohol misuse.  He has also received assistance
biweekly from a counsellor at the Canadian Mental Health Association.
[12]          
At the time of the offences, Mr. Bowley was, by
his own admission, consuming “quite a bit of beer and smoking weed”.
[13]          
A clinical impression noted by Dr. Uhoegbu, a
psychiatrist at the Peterborough Regional Health Centre, on 22 April 2024 was
alcohol use disorder, substance-induced psychotic disorder, and alcohol-induced
mood and anxiety disorder.
[14]          
The Crown concedes that, for all intents and
purposes, Mr. Bowley has no relevant criminal record.
[15]          
He has completed an anger management programme
through the Canadian Mental Health Association.
[16]          
Mr. Bowley, by all accounts, the pandemic was a
challenging time for you.  You were living alone in a remote location.  You did
not have ready access to your regular medication.  The offences occurred in
January of 2022, less than two years after the onset of the pandemic.
[17]          
At the present time, you are renting a room in a
unit that you share with a friend in a small community near Madoc.  You have
been on bail since January 2022, on conditions which have required you to
reside with one of two sureties, and to remain at such residence except when in
the presence of a surety for medical emergencies, court and lawyer attendances,
or travelling directly by public transport from the residence of one surety to
the other.
[18]          
Arson is not a victimless crime.  You destroyed
a home to which Mr. McLellan and Ms. Stoykova had devoted time and money – a
“labour of love” to quote Ms. Stoykova, repairing and restoring “that little
old house”.  Ms. Stoykova described how on the day when you set it on fire,
they stood outside in the cold watching the flames eating it, and all she could
think about was her bleeding fingers when she was nailing hardwood floors down
by hand on her knees.
[19]          
It took fourteen months after the fire for Ms.
Stoykova and Mr. McLellan to persuade the insurance company that they were
entitled to indemnity under their fire insurance policy, which contained an
exclusion that may have resulted in them being denied coverage altogether.
[20]          
Mr. McLellan’s plans to retire were put on hold,
they still had a mortgage to pay.
[21]          
And to add insult to injury, they had in the
back of their minds the threats that you had made.
[22]          
In R. v. White, 2021 ONSC 2476, at para.
13, Pomerance J. said this about the offence of arson:
[23]          
Mr. Bowley, you deliberately set a fire which
burnt the house you had lived in to the ground.  As the fire raged, propane
canisters on the premises could be heard exploding.  Local volunteer
firefighters placed themselves in jeopardy controlling and extinguishing the
fire.  It was by sheer good fortune that the consequences of your actions were
not more serious, both in terms of injury to persons and property.
[24]          
While not a mitigating factor, you destroyed not
only the property of Mr. McLellan and Ms. Stoykova, but also all of your own
possessions, including a significant collection of vinyl records.
[25]          
Your threats were vulgar, insulting and
intimidating.  Your behaviour after the fire was contemptible.  You boasted to
Mr. and Ms. Hanes that “the house is gone”, that you “played the ace of
spades”.
[26]          
At the end of your sentencing hearing, you
expressed in clear and unequivocal language your acceptance of responsibility
and your regret for the harm that you have done.  You had been going through a
stressful period of your life before you heard that you would need to leave
your home of over four years.
[27]          
You have had well documented mental health and
addiction challenges which, it would appear, you are presently working on.  For
the past three years, you have been subject to strict bail conditions without
any incidents of non-compliance.
[28]          
The general principles of sentencing are set out
in s. 718 of the Criminal Code.  Judges passing sentence are required by
law to impose a just sanction that has one or more of the following six
objectives:
[29]          
Furthermore, the sentence must be proportionate
to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the
offender.  The sentence must also be consistent with those imposed on similar
offenders, for similar offences, committed in similar circumstances.
[30]          
A review of the cases which counsel referred me
to shows that there is a wide range of possible dispositions, depending on the
particular circumstances of a given case.  The outcomes in those comparable
cases range from a suspended sentence and probation to a term of imprisonment of
three years.
[31]          
In R. v. Mirzakhalili, 2009 ONCA 905, the
respondents set fire to their business in order to get an insurance recovery at
a time when people were working in the store next door.  At trial, they were
sentenced to conditional sentences of two years less a day.  The Crown
appealed.  The Court of Appeal noted (at para. 3) that it has consistently held
that conditional sentences are not appropriate for serious arson offences.  The
arson in that case was described as well planned.  Gasoline was acquired,
deadbolts to a door were unlocked, debris was cleared away from the door to
permit entry, a motion sensor was moved, and a burglar alarm was bypassed. 
Furthermore, and undoubtedly an aggravating feature of the case, the
perpetrators followed through with their plan to blow up and burn down their
own store even after they discovered that people were working late in the
adjoining shop. The Court of Appeal said that a fit sentence would have been
two years less a day in custody, but bearing in mind that the respondents had already
complied with their conditional sentences when the appeal was heard, a further
twelve months in custody was ordered.
[32]          
In R. v. O’Hanley, 2020 ONSC 1310, the
accused was convicted of setting the residence of the complainant, a person
with whom he had had a relationship, and had children, on fire.  They were not
in the house at the time.  But the complainant and her family lost significant
personal property that was not insured, neighbours had to flee from their homes
to a position of safety, and firefighters were put at risk, not knowing whether
there were occupants in the house who needed assistance to escape the fire. 
King J. stated, at para. 55, that in the absence of any mitigating factors, the
actions of the accused might attract a sentence of three years or more.  Even
after taking into account mitigating factors, King J. was of the view (at para.
60) that the accused:
[33]          
In R. v. Nicholas, 2020 ONSC 1701, the
defendant, who was 78 at the time of the offences, pleaded guilty to two
separate acts of arson.  He first set fire to a house into which he was going
to be moving.  He did so by starting fires in the sunroom on the upper floor
and in the main basement room using an open flame and a volatile ignitable
liquid vapour.  After setting the fires, he left the house, telling a neighbour
that there was a fire in the house and that he had called 911.  In fact, he had
not made that call.  The defendant got into his vehicle and left the scene. 
Ultimately, this fire resulted in a loss of $541,835.  He then set fire to another
house where he had been residing for over 20 years.  He started the fire using
an ignitable liquid on the carpet in one of the rooms in the house. 
Ultimately, this fire resulted in a loss of $463,312.71.  The defendant
presented with significant mental and physical health concerns, and the
sentencing decision of Aitken J. was handed down just after the Covid-19
emergency had started.  She concluded, on compassionate grounds, that he should
not be incarcerated, instead suspending the passing of sentence, and placing
the defendant on probation for three years.
[34]          
In R. v. White, the defendant and his
co-accused had set fire to the house of their neighbours. While the residents
of the house suffered no physical harm, having escaped the blaze, the trial judge
noted that the emotional and financial harm they had suffered was significant.
They lost not only their home and physical possessions, but, she said, their
sense of safety and security. The defendant was 21 at the time of the incident
and suffered from what the court described as “debilitating cognitive
limitations”.  Pomerance J. stated that while the offence would ordinarily call
for a significant term of incarceration, the offender’s mental disability was a
significant mitigating factor. Noting that the defendant was amenable to
supervision and counselling, she concluded that a two-year conditional sentence
was appropriate, the first twelve months of which was under conditions of house
arrest, followed by three years of probation.
[35]          
The Crown places emphasis on the need for
general deterrence and denunciation in whatever sentence I impose on Mr.
Bowley.  I agree that these are important considerations.  That is not to say,
however, that a conditional sentence can never achieve the objectives of deterrence
and denunciation.  See, in general, R. v. Sharma, 2020 ONCA 478, at
para. 110, and in particular, R. v. Kasotty, 2021 ONCJ 238, at para. 21.
[36]          
As I have indicated, rehabilitation of offenders
is also an objective of sentencing.  In Mr. Bowley’s case, it would appear that
he has been working on addressing his mental health and substance abuse
issues.  Whereas the Crown has pressed for a custodial sentence, on Mr.
Bowley’s behalf it has been submitted that he benefits from the structure and
stability which reflects his life at the present time.
[37]          
Mr. Lisowski concedes that Mr. Bowley needs to
continue to be supervised, so that he continues with his medication, to access
services, and reduce his substance abuse.  He submits that is unlikely that
these positive activities can be achieved to the same extent, if at all, if Mr.
Bowley is in custody.
[38]          
Mr. Kavanagh, for the Crown, candidly
acknowledged that a sentence of anything less than the eighteen months that the
Crown has asked for makes it unlikely that Mr. Bowley would be able to access
specialist mental health programming in the provincial reformatory system.
[39]          
It is clear that mental health played a
significant role in the commission of this offence.  In R. v. Nicholas,
at para. 28, referring to R. v. Prioriello, 2012 ONCA 63, at paras.
11-12, Aitken J. noted that in order for mental illness to be considered as a
mitigating factor in sentencing, the accused must show a causal link between
the illness and the criminal conduct.
[40]          
Pomerance J.’s sentencing decision in R. v.
White also recognised, at paras 22-23, that a direct link between an
offender’s cognitive limitations and his involvement in the crime can justify a
lower sentence than would usually be required.
[41]          
With the assistance of Dr. Sandhu’s report, I am
satisfied that there is a causal link between Mr. Bowley’s mental health and
the offences that he committed.  Further, one only has to look at the abusive
rants in the texts that he sent to Ms. Stoykova to appreciate that his actions
and words were not those of a mentally well person.
[42]          
In R. v. Hart, 2015 ONCA 480, at para. 8,
the Court of Appeal noted, with approval, the conclusion reached by a trial
judge that to impose a custodial sentence would likely destroy any progress
that had been made by the defendant with respect to his mental health and would
serve no genuine societal interest.  In that case, the accused, who was 20
years old at the time and had a youth record and a history of mental health
issues, had set fire to a carpet which ended up setting fire to the attached
home where five people resided.  The trial judge suspended the passing of
sentence and imposed a three year period of probation, along with various
ancillary orders.
[43]          
Mr. Bowley, you can consider yourself fortunate
that no one was hurt, and that the damage caused by your criminal behaviour was
not more extensive.
[44]          
Although it is clear that what you have done would
usually merit a period of imprisonment, I have concluded that in view of your
personal circumstances it would not be appropriate to send you to prison.  In
coming to that conclusion, I have taken into account what has been said about
the need for you to continue to have access to the mental health and other
services that you have been accessing, as well as the importance of structure
and stability in your life.  I have also taken into account that you have
already spent three years living under something close to conditions of house
arrest.  Since the decision of the Court of Appeal in R. v. Downes (2006),
2006 CanLII 3957 (ON CA), 79 O.R. (3d) 321 (C.A.), it has been appropriate for sentencing judges to
consider reducing a sentence in light of time spent under stringent bail terms,
especially house arrest.
[45]          
That having been said, it is appropriate that
you experience some further deprivation of your liberty through a term of
imprisonment to be served in the community, under conditions which are intended
to promote the goal of rehabilitation.
[46]          
Mr. Bowley, please stand up.
[47]          
On the charge of arson, you will serve a
conditional sentence of imprisonment in the community of eighteen months.  In
coming to that term, I have taken into account the significant period during
which you were on judicial interim release on restricted terms.
[48]          
On each of the uttering threat charges, you will
serve a conditional sentence of imprisonment in the community of six months, to
be served concurrently.
[49]          
Within two working days of today, you will
report in person to a supervisor and, thereafter, when required by the
supervisor and in the manner directed by the supervisor.
[50]          
You will remain within the province of Ontario
unless written permission to go outside Ontario is obtained from either this
court or the supervisor.
[51]          
You will reside at a place approved of by your
supervisor.
[52]          
You will notify the supervisor in advance of any
change of name or address, and promptly notify this court or the supervisor of
any change of employment or occupation.
[53]          
For the first six months of your conditional
sentence of imprisonment, you will remain within your residence daily except in
the following circumstances:
[54]          
After the first six months of your conditional
sentence, until the conditional sentence has been served in full, you must be
in your place of residence between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless
permission in writing is obtained from the supervisor, for example to enable
you to undertake employment or education, or your absence is the result of a
medical appointment or emergency.
[55]          
Throughout the eighteen months of your
conditional sentence:
[56]          
I am required by the Criminal Code to explain
the substance of the conditional sentence order that has been made.  A
conditional sentence is both punitive, because it restricts your liberty, and
rehabilitative.  The conditions I have just told you about must be complied
with by you.  None of them are optional.  If you break one or more of the
conditions of your conditional sentence, there may be a hearing held in front
of a judge.  If the judge is convinced that you have broken one or more of the
conditions without lawful or reasonable excuse, he or she may require you to
serve the remaining time in jail.
[57]          
You, the supervisor or the Crown can apply to
the court, pursuant to s. 742.4 of the Criminal Code, to change the
conditions of this conditional sentence order upon giving notice, and in some cases,
there can be a hearing in a court to determine whether the change or changes
requested should be made.
[58]          
Do you understand what I have told you about the
conditional sentence?
[59]          
You will be provided with a copy of the
conditional sentence order that I have made as well as a copy of my reasons.
[60]          
Following the completion of your conditional
sentence of imprisonment, you will be on probation for a further three years,
the terms of which will be as follows:
[61]          
It is important that, despite some similarities
in their terms, you understand that the conditional sentence order and the
probation order that I have made are separate orders.  The probation order
takes effect when the conditional sentence ends.
[62]          
The exact wording of the conditional sentence
and probation orders that I sign may, because of forms used, vary slightly from
the terms I have just articulated, but if there are differences, they will be
differences of form, not of substance, and the signed orders will be what
governs in the event that there are any discrepancies between the orders and
the reasons I have just given.
[63]          
There will also be orders authorising the taking
from you of such bodily substances as are necessary for the purposes of a
forensic DNA analysis, pursuant to s. 487.04 of the Criminal Code, as
well as a weapons prohibition for ten years under s. 109 of the Criminal
Code.