[1]              
Grace McDonald is a former client of the law
firm of Sullivan Mahoney LLP and a resident of the township of Wainfleet,
Ontario.
[2]              
She seeks an order setting aside the Report and Certificate
of Assessment made by assessment officer David Black dated August 31, 2023,
including his order as to costs.
[3]              
Sullivan Mahoney LLP (“SM”) requests that the
motion be dismissed.
[4]              
On June 12, 2020, Ms. McDonald retained SM in
the person of Mr. J.P. Maloney to provide legal services concerning various
matters arising from disputes between her and the Township of Wainfleet and between
her and her neighbours.
[5]              
Ms. McDonald received an account from SM dated
July 30, 2020, in the amount of $4,174.16. The bill was paid.
[6]              
Ms. McDonald also received an account from SM dated
September 29, 2020, in the amount of $4,450.11 and a further account dated
December 26, 2020, in the amount of $2,041.57. Those accounts remained outstanding,
and in May 2022 SM applied for an assessment of the unpaid accounts pursuant to
the Solicitors Act[1]
(“the Act”).
[7]              
On May 11, 2022, a pre-hearing conference was
held between the parties and the assessment officer. Ms. McDonald was
self-represented. A one-day hearing was scheduled for October 24, 2022, and the
assessment officer endorsed that: “any documents that a party intends to rely
upon at the hearing shall be served on the opposing party at least 30 days
before the hearing and filed with the St. Catharines Civil Office with proof of
service.”
[8]              
No documents had been filed by Ms. McDonald prior
to the October 24 hearing as required by the May 11 endorsement. A retainer
agreement had been filed by the solicitor.
[9]              
At the October 24 hearing, Ms. McDonald
requested an adjournment because she wanted to seek a judge’s order amending
the Registrar’s Order for Assessment to add the paid account. The solicitor initially
opposed the adjournment request but then advised that he would consent if there
was a new hearing date scheduled for later in 2022 and if the matter was marked
peremptory as against Ms. McDonald.
[10]          
The assessment officer adjourned the hearing to
Thursday, December 1, 2022, peremptory as against Ms. McDonald.
[11]          
At the December 1, 2022, hearing, Mr. Maloney
made submissions relating to the accounts under assessment. Ms. McDonald
elected not to cross-examine Mr. Maloney. She attempted to introduce
photographs and emails as exhibits during her examination in-chief. Those
documents had not been filed in advance in accordance with the assessment officer’s
endorsement. Ms. McDonald was not allowed to introduce any of the documents
except for the photographs which she then declined to submit.
[12]          
The assessment officer issued his “Decision and
Reasons” dated June 23, 2023.
[13]          
On behalf of Ms. McDonald, the main submission
was that there had been violations of procedural fairness. The alleged
violations arose from the assessment officer’s failure to provide a process for
receiving and considering objections to his decision and from his decision to
prohibit Ms. McDonald from introducing her documents as exhibits during the
hearing.
[14]          
Further issues relate to the failure by the
assessment officer to permit the assessment of the July 30, 2020 account which
had not been the subject of the order for assessment, the strict enforcement of
a filing deadline which the assessment officer had established as 30 days prior
to the hearing, and making a costs award based on the usual rates of a
solicitor without regard to the fact that the solicitor was, in effect, self-represented
at the assessment hearing.
[15]          
On behalf of SM, it was submitted that the
assessment officer conducted the hearing in a way that was procedurally fair
including the enforcement of his own endorsement about the timely filing of
documents. In the hearing itself, he considered the facts presented and
appropriately applied the factors set out in Cohen v. Kealey and Blaney
(1985), 26 C.P.C. (2d) 211 (Ont. C.A.). He was generous in his post-hearing
correspondence, responding to Ms. McDonald’s questions, and he was not wrong in
proceeding to assess the accounts which were the subject of the application
without assessing the previous account which Ms. McDonald had paid. As to
costs, the assessment officer noted case law on costs awarded to self-represented
lawyers or law firms. He also considered the impact of an offer to settle made
by SM for an amount less than his award.  As well, he reduced the claim from $4,352
to an award of $2,525.  He made no error in principle.
[16]          
The order for assessment of the two unpaid
accounts rendered to Ms. McDonald by SM was a reference pursuant to s.3(c) of
the Act.
[17]          
According to s. 6(3) of the Act, the
terms of an order for costs of the reference are “in the discretion of the
[assessment] officer, subject to appeal, and shall be assessed by him or her
when and as allowed.”
[18]          
Once the account is assessed, s. 6(5) of the Act
provides that the account “shall be paid by the party liable to pay the amount,
forthwith after confirmation of the certificate in the same manner as
confirmation of a referee’s report under the Rules of Civil Procedure[2]” (the “Rules”).
[19]          
Rule 54.09(1) of the Rules provides that,
other than where there is a consent of both parties, the report, (in this case,
the assessment officer’s order), is confirmed once 15 days pass after the
service and filing of the order, unless a motion to oppose confirmation is
served within that time.  The Act provides in s.6(9) that a motion to
oppose confirmation of the certificate shall be made to a judge of the Superior
Court of Justice.
[20]          
Rule 54.09(3) requires that any motion disclose
the reasons for opposing confirmation and must be served within 15 days after
the report was filed and must name the first available date for hearing that is
at least three days after service.
[21]          
Although the initial version of the notice of
motion herein was for an order that the Certificate of Assessment not be
confirmed, it was amended to request instead that the Certificate be set aside,
and a fresh assessment ordered.
[22]          
Pursuant to s. 17(b) of the Courts of Justice
Act[3] (the “CJA”), an appeal lies to the Superior Court of Justice
from a certificate of assessment where an objection was served under the Rules.
[23]          
A motion to oppose an assessment officer’s
certificate is in the nature of an appeal as stated in Moore v. John A.
Annen Barrister Professional Corporation, 2017 ONSC 7720, and the parties
agree that this motion is an appeal.
[24]          
As described by the Ontario Court of Appeal in Samuel
Eng and Associates v. Ho, 2009 ONCA 150 at para. 1:
[25]          
That comment was endorsed and amplified by the
Court of Appeal in Rabbani v. Niagara (Regional Municipality), 2012 ONCA
280 when the court observed at para. 6 that:
[26]          
In summary, for questions of law, the standard
of appellate review is correctness.  For questions of fact, the standard of
review is palpable and overriding error.   Questions of mixed fact and law are
reviewed for palpable and overriding error unless the error was in the
application of a legal principle in which case a correctness standard applies.  On
issues of procedural unfairness, there is no standard of review:  if something
is unfair, it is unfair and is subject to appellate scrutiny.[4]
[27]          
Ms. McDonald raises several issues of procedural
fairness that arose in the assessment proceeding.
[28]          
At the assessment hearing of October 24, 2022,
Ms. McDonald requested the addition of the paid account of July 3, 2020 to the
two accounts being assessed pursuant to the SM requisition for assessment.  SM
did not consent.  The assessment officer apparently advised that to add the
account would require a judge’s order and that Ms. McDonald would need to bring
a motion for that relief.  The matter was adjourned to December 1, 2022,
peremptory on Ms. McDonald.  There was no evidence that she had made or
attempted to make such a motion.
[29]          
In Fellowes, McNeil (1997), 1997 CanLII 733 (ON CA), 34 O.R. (3d) 301
(C.A.), the court noted that the Act makes no provision for the
assessment of accounts paid more than 12 months before the application is
made.  The July 3, 2020 account is in that category. The court has inherent
jurisdiction to order the assessment of such accounts, but that jurisdiction is
limited to circumstances amounting to fraud or gross misconduct.
[30]          
In this case, since no fraud or gross misconduct
is alleged, it is unlikely that any court order would have permitted the
addition of the paid bill to the assessment hearing.  In any event, however,
Ms. McDonald did not take any steps to seek such an order.  As a result, there
is no error on the part of the assessment officer in proceeding with the assessment
without including the paid account of July 3, 2020.
[31]          
Counsel for Ms. McDonald submitted that it was a
breach of procedural fairness for the assessment officer to have refused to
permit her filing of and referring to documents at the December 1, 2020,
hearing, despite the objection of SM.
[32]          
The endorsement of May 11, 2020, clearly set out
the requirement to serve any materials no less than 30 days before the
hearing.  Nothing was filed 30 days in advance of the October 24, 2020 intended
hearing, or before the ultimate hearing of December 1, 2020 which was marked
peremptory on Ms. McDonald and in fact nothing was filed at all prior to the
hearing, even ignoring the 30 day requirement.  When asked at the hearing, she
was not even able to identify the number of documents and photographs she
intended to rely on, although she estimated more than 20.  SM did agree to
permit Ms. McDonald to refer to photographs, but she chose not to do so.
[33]          
The assessment officer indicated that having
documents filed in advance prevents the opposite party from being taken by
surprise.
[34]          
Ms. McDonald advised at the hearing that: “I am
not understanding I should have filed those kind of things, email or paper or
letters, those kind of things or pictures for the convenience of the hearing
they need to be filed, like prior to that hearing.”  She went on to say that
she thought she would have more time, because she anticipated the hearing would
take longer than one day, even though there is no indication of any such
information being provided to her, and that at the pre-hearing conference of
May 11, 2022, this hearing was scheduled “for one day”.
[35]          
The assessment officer has the right and
responsibility to control the process of the hearing, just as a judge does in
court.  The 30-day notice requirement was reasonable and clear.  There is no
evidence of any attempt at compliance by Ms. McDonald.
[36]          
Despite the submissions of counsel, it was not
unreasonably inflexible on the part of the assessment officer to have
maintained the procedural order he made.  Her self-represented status provides
Ms. McDonald no excuse.  The language used was plain and easy to comprehend. 
She simply chose to ignore it.
[37]          
The submission that there was a breach of
procedural fairness in failing to allow presentation of the documentary
evidence at the hearing fails.
[38]          
On behalf of Ms. McDonald, it was submitted that
the assessment officer was procedurally unfair to her in failing to advise her
about the process for filing an objection pursuant to rule 58.10.  She had
indicated her intention to do so following the release of his decision on June 23, 2023.  Counsel
submits that if she had been permitted to file objections, she would have been
entitled to a reconsideration and review of the decision.
[39]          
The following is a summary of the communications
between the officer and Ms. McDonald after he released his decision.
[40]          
She sought guidance on
June 26, 2023, when she corresponded by email with the assessment officer advising in part as follows:
[41]          
The assessment officer responded by email later
in the day on June 26, 2023 in part as follows:
[42]          
Whether Ms. McDonald sought outside advice as
suggested by the assessment officer is unknown, although it is clear that she
did not serve an Objection.
[43]          
On August 31, 2023, after receiving submissions
in writing on costs related to the assessment hearing, the assessment officer
entered his “Decision and Reasons on Costs” in which he awarded costs to the
solicitor in the amount of $2,525.34 inclusive of HST and disbursements. On
that same day, a Report and Certificate of Assessment was issued by the
assessment officer in the amount of $9,177.08, relating to the two unpaid
accounts and interest.
[44]          
A further exchange of correspondence took place
between Ms. McDonald and the assessment officer which began on September 5,
2023. In her email of 8:18 a.m. September 5, she stated as follows:
[45]          
A few minutes later, the assessment officer
responded by email in part as follows:
[46]          
Later that same morning, Ms. McDonald
corresponded with the assessment officer again. She said:
[47]          
The following morning, on September 6, 2023, the
assessment officer responded by email.  He said in part:
[48]          
Email correspondence ended when on September 7,
2023, Ms. McDonald stated as follows to the assessment officer: “Thank you for
the further clarifications; I now understand better. Therefore, the options
left for me are to seek ways to deal with these matters in both appellate and
civil court.”
[49]          
Ms. McDonald submits that the foregoing exchange
demonstrated a failure on the part of the assessment officer to engage with her
in her rights to object to his decision.
[50]          
That submission is an example of the common confusion
between the procedures for assessment of an account under the Act and an
assessment of costs of litigation under the Rules. As stated by MacLeod J. in Moore
at para. 10 and A. Ramsay J. in Singh v. Reesa Heft and Heft Law
(unreported CV-17-573071) at para. 88, rule 58 deals with assessment of costs
as between litigants and not with proceedings under the Act.
[51]          
Unlike the situation in Singh where, notwithstanding
the lack of statutory authority requiring reference to rule 58,  the assessment
officer embarked on the process of considering objections under it and then
failed to follow the mandatory process, in this case the officer specifically
did not do so.
[52]          
In any event, as confirmed by Perell J. in RZCD
Law Firm LLP v Williams, 2016 ONSC 2122 at para. 34, the appeal may proceed
without objections being filed, as to matters of jurisdiction including
procedural fairness.
[53]          
As to procedural fairness, I find that the
assessment officer engaged fully and promptly in response to Ms. McDonald’s
queries. It was not his role to advise her about the steps available for her to
question his decision, yet he did respond to each of her queries.  She may not
have understood the distinction between an assessment under the Act and
one as between parties in litigation under the Rules and may well have
been frustrated as a result.  However, she was able to file her motion herein
within the requisite time, to appeal and request that the Report and
Certificate of Assessment be set aside.
[54]          
I conclude that the assessment officer made no
error of law in proceeding without engaging the provisions of rule 58, and that
he did not breach procedural fairness in his post-hearing communications with
Ms. McDonald by failing to advise her of those provisions.
[55]          
On behalf of Ms. McDonald, it was submitted that
the assessment officer should not have awarded costs payable by Ms. McDonald
using the rates requested by SM, given that Mr. Maloney, while acknowledged to
be a lawyer, was essentially self-represented in the proceeding.  Instead,
counsel submits that SM should have received a nominal amount.
[56]          
As noted above, s. 6(3) of the Act
permits an award of costs in the assessment officer’s discretion.  In this
case, he considered the factors set out in rule 57.01 as well as the rule 49
offer. He also referenced current Ontario caselaw as to the awarding of costs
to self-represented lawyers.  His conclusion was that the policy undergirding
rule 49 to encourage settlement was a significant factor to be applied so that costs
should be awarded in an amount greater than a nominal amount, but less than the
amount that would otherwise be applicable in normal litigation.
[57]          
The awarded costs were calculated at a partial
indemnity rate, which was reduced from the submitted 70 per cent to 60 per cent
for a total of $1,848 plus HST and disbursements.
[58]          
The award of costs does not disclose any legal
error.  Consideration was given to SM’s self-represented status, and to the
applicable caselaw.  It was reasonable for him to consider the significance of
the rule 49 offer.
[59]          
The awarding of costs is a matter within the
officer’s discretion, and there is no palpable and overriding error evident in
the exercise of that discretion.
[60]          
For the foregoing reasons, the request for an
order setting aside the Report and Certificate of Assessment dated August 31,
2023, including the Decision and Reasons of Assessment dated June 23, 2023, and
the Decision and Reasons on Costs dated August 31, 2023 is denied and the
appeal dismissed.
[61]          
The parties are encouraged to resolve the issue
of costs of the motion between themselves.  If they are unable to do so, they
may submit their Bills of Costs and make written submissions, consisting of not
more than three pages in length according to the following timetable:
[62]          
If no submissions are received by the court by
March 12, 2025, or any agreed extension, the matter of costs will be deemed to
have been settled.