[1]               
The accused, Rebecca Horton, is currently indicted on various charges
connected to the alleged “human trafficking” of two female complainants (R.W.
and M.D.).
[2]               
More particularly, the accused is charged with the following eleven
offences, namely: (1) exercising control over R.W., for the purpose of
exploiting her, contrary to s. 279.01(1) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C.
1985, chap. C-46; (2) exercising control over R.W., for the purpose of facilitating
the commission of an offence under s. 286.1(1), contrary to s. 286.3(1) of the Criminal
Code; (3) receiving a financial benefit knowing that it was obtained by the
commission of an offence under s. 279.01(1), contrary to s. 279.02(1) of the Criminal
Code; (4) receiving a financial benefit from the sexual services of R.W., knowing
that it was obtained by the commission of an offence under s. 286.1(1),
contrary to s. 286.2(1) of the Criminal Code; (5) assaulting R.W.,
contrary to s. 266 of the Criminal Code; (6) exercising control over M.D.,
a person under the age of 18 years, for the purpose of exploiting her, contrary
to s. 279.011(1) of the Criminal Code; (7) procuring M.D., a person
under the age of 18 years, for the purpose of facilitating an offence under  s.
286.1(2) of the Criminal Code, contrary to s. 286.3(2) of the Criminal
Code; (8) exercising control over M.D., a person under the age of 18 years,
for the purpose of facilitating an offence under s. 286.1(2) of the Criminal
Code, contrary to s. 286.3(2) of the Criminal Code; (9) receiving a
financial benefit from the sexual services of M.D., knowing that it was
obtained by the commission of an offence under s. 286.1(2), contrary to s.
286.2(2) of the Criminal Code; (10) receiving a financial benefit knowing
that it was obtained by the commission of an offence under s. 279.011(1), contrary
to s. 279.02(2) of the Criminal Code; and (11) sexually assaulting M.D.,
contrary to s. 271 of the Criminal Code.  All of these offences are
alleged to have been committed by the accused in Toronto and elsewhere in
Ontario between the dates of March 1 and April 21, 2018.
[3]               
The trial of this matter started on September 11, 2023, with some
pre-trial motions, and two other accused persons, namely, her then boyfriend, Daylo
Robinson (also known as “Preem”) and his best friend, Tyler
Vickers.  The trial of this matter, on a 17-count indictment, was then
scheduled to last for approximately two months, beginning with one or two weeks
of motions, followed by a jury trial lasting approximately a further four or
five weeks.  The jury trial started on September 25, 2023, but the jury did not
reach its verdict (in relation to the charges against the other two accused)
until November 29, 2023.  Accordingly, the jury trial itself lasted for more
than two months.
[4]               
On October 27, 2023, more than a month into the jury trial, Ms. Horton
re-elected trial by judge alone (before me), and she was severed from the other
two accused, with the evidence heard up to that point continuing to apply, to
her judge-alone trial, that was eventually scheduled to resume on December 9,
2024.  This severance/adjournment took place when one of her lawyers, for
personal reasons, could understandably no longer continue with the joint jury
trial.  As part of this aspect of the proceedings, Ms. Horton also expressly
waived her right to be tried within a reasonable time, pursuant to s. 11(b) of
the Charter of Rights.
[5]               
The judge-alone proceedings before me in relation the charges
against Ms. Horton have now been completed.  After the Crown’s case was
completed, Ms. Horton testified, at some length, in her own defence.  After
hearing the closing submissions of counsel, today was scheduled for judgment.
[6]               
The Crown’s theory of the case is, essentially, that Mr.
Robinson, Ms. Horton and Mr. Vickers decided to begin working in the sex trade
in Toronto.  Originally, all three individuals came from the east coast of
Canada.  Ms. Horton had earlier worked in the sex trade on her own in this east
coast geographical area.  However, the Crown’s theory was that Ms. Horton
decided to work with her then boyfriend, and his friend, in the sex industry in
Toronto.  According to the Crown, R.W. and M.D. were procured into this sex
trade business, where they effectively worked for the three accused persons. 
M.D. was clearly less than 18 years of age at the time.  Mr. Robinson was the organizational
head of this small sex industry business, helping to recruit young women to
work in the sex trade for them, creating the general “price list” for their
sexual services (individually or in “duos”), and ultimately preparing and
placing advertisements for the three female sex workers.  Mr. Vickers was alleged
to be the “muscle” or “enforcer” of the business, to the
extent that it was needed.  Finally, Ms. Horton was allegedly the “Queen of the
Preem Team.”  She was allegedly Mr. Robinson’s “main girl” and the female lead of
this small stable of female sex workers.  She was responsible for grooming the
other women, making them comfortable, and showing them “the life” in the sex
industry.  All three women (including Ms. Horton) performed in the sex trade industry
in financial support of all of them.  The Crown alleged, more specifically,
that Ms. Horton was one of the accused who benefitted financially from the sex
work of the two female complainants.
[7]               
The defence theory of the case is, essentially, that Ms. Horton
was just another one of the “victims” of these “human trafficking” offences by
Mr. Robinson and Mr. Vickers, in that she was simply one of the three sex
industry workers, who did as she was told by Mr. Robinson.  Essentially, according
to Ms. Horton, she would usually just go along with whatever Mr. Robinson said,
as she was afraid of him, and she did not want to inspire his anger by any type
of disagreement or confrontation.  Ms. Horton denied that she was in any way
involved in the management of this little sex industry business, and she denied
the commission of any of the alleged offences.  Instead, Ms. Horton suggested
that she was just another one of its exploited sex workers.  She agreed,
however, that throughout the time of the alleged offences, she was romantically
involved in a personal relationship with Mr. Robinson.
[8]             
The accused is, of course, presumed to be innocent.  That
presumption of innocence has been with the accused throughout the trial and
remains with her unless and until the Crown establishes her guilt for these
alleged offences beyond a reasonable doubt.  That heavy burden of proof never
shifts.  The accused has no obligation to establish her innocence.  This
important and long-standing principle of our criminal law is constitutionally
entrenched in s. 11(d) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
See: R. v. Dubois, 1985 CanLII 10 (SCC), [1985] 2 S.C.R. 350, 22 C.C.C. (3d) 513, at p. 357; R.
v. Pearson, 1992 CanLII 52 (SCC), [1992] 3 S.C.R. 665, 77 C.C.C. (3d) 124, at pp. 682-683, 687.
[9]             
It is also important to recall the nature of the heavy burden of
proof on the Crown.  As juries are typically instructed, a reasonable doubt is
not an imaginary, far-fetched or frivolous doubt, or a doubt based on sympathy
or prejudice.  Rather, it is a doubt based on reason and common sense.  It is a
doubt that logically arises from the evidence, or the lack of evidence.  Of
course, it is not enough for a trier of fact, whether it be judge or jury, to
believe that an accused is probably guilty or likely guilty, as that is not
proof beyond a reasonable doubt.  However, the Crown is not obliged to
establish, with absolute certainty, the alleged guilt of an accused, as such a
standard of proof is impossibly high.  Nevertheless, as the Supreme Court of
Canada stated in R. v. Starr, 2000 SCC 40, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 144, at para.
242, proof beyond a reasonable doubt is much closer to proof of absolute
certainty than it is to proof of probable guilt.  At the end of the case, after
considering all of the evidence, a trier of fact must be sure that an accused
committed the alleged offence before finding him or her guilty of that offence,
because it is only at that point that the trier of fact can be satisfied beyond
a reasonable doubt as to the guilt of the accused.  See also: R. v. Lifchus,
1997 CanLII 319 (SCC), [1997] 3 S.C.R. 320, 118 C.C.C. (3d) 1, at paras. 13-43; Mr. Justice David
Watt, Manual of Criminal Jury Instructions (2015, 2nd ed.), at pp.
261-267.
[10]         
Further, as Ms. Horton testified in this case and denied her
alleged guilt, in assessing whether or not the Crown has proven her guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt in relation to these alleged offences, I must apply
the three important principles articulated by the Supreme Court of Canada in R.
v. W.(D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), [1991] 1 S.C.R. 742, 63 C.C.C. (3d) 397, at pp. 757-758.  In
other words: (1) if I believe the testimony of the accused that she did not
commit the alleged offences I must find her not guilty; (2) even if I do not
believe the testimony of the accused that she did not commit the alleged offences,
if her testimony leaves me with a reasonable doubt as to her guilt regarding
these offences, I must find her not guilty; and (3) even if the testimony of
the accused does not leave me with any reasonable doubt as to her guilt
regarding these alleged offences, I may only properly find her guilty if, based
on the evidence that I do accept, I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt of her
guilt regarding these offences.  The application of these principles ensures
that reaching a verdict does not devolve into a mere credibility contest
between the Crown’s main witnesses and the accused – and ensures that the presumption
of innocence and the Crown’s burden of establishing the alleged guilt of the
accused beyond a reasonable doubt properly operate.  See also: R. v.
Y.(C.L.), 2008 SCC 2, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 5, at paras. 6-8; R. v. Vuradin,
2013 SCC 38, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 639, at paras. 20-28.
[11]         
Moreover, in a case such as the present one, where the Crown’s
case depends, at least in part, upon circumstantial evidence, the application
of this burden of proof requires that the trier of fact must be satisfied that the
only reasonable or rational inference that can be drawn from all of the
circumstantial evidence is that the accused is guilty.  If there are reasonable
inferences other than guilt, the Crown’s evidence does not establish the
alleged guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable doubt.  See: R. v. Griffin,
2009 SCC 28, [2009] 2 S.C.R. 42, at para. 33; R. v. Villaroman, 2016 SCC
33, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 1000, at paras. 17-22, 28-30, 32-38; R. v. Pearle,
2016 ONCA 954, [2016] O.J. No. 6505, at para. 7; R. v. Biggs, 2016 ONCA
910, 34 C.R. (7th) 147, at para. 17.  Of course, the circumstantial case
against the accused must be considered as a whole.  It is only the cumulative
effect of all of the evidence that must satisfy the Crown’s heavy burden
of proof in order to justify conviction.  Individual items of circumstantial
evidence must not be subjected to isolated scrutiny in a piecemeal analysis, as
they are merely links in the chain of ultimate proof.  See: R. v. Morin,
1988 CanLII 8 (SCC), [1988] 2 S.C.R. 345, at p. 361; R. v. Uhrig, 2012 ONCA 470, [2012] O.J.
No. 3011, at para. 13; R. v. Smith, 2016 ONCA 25, 333 C.C.C. (3d) 534,
at paras. 81-82.
[12]            There
were countless text messages between Ms. Horton and Mr. Robinson (and others) on
a variety of subjects.  Of course, given that the Crown expressly declined any
reliance on the co-conspirator’s exception to the rule against hearsay, only
the statements (oral or electronic) authored by Ms. Horton are admissible in
relation to the case against her.  Accordingly, any statements made by Mr.
Robinson (or anyone else for that matter) are not admissible for the
truth of their contents, but rather are only admissible for the fact that they
were made, and to provide the necessary factual context to understand the meaning
of the statements made in response directly by Ms. Horton.  See: R. v. Carter, 1982 CanLII 35 (SCC), [1982] 1 S.C.R. 938, at
pp. 943-948; R. v. Evans, 1993 CanLII 86 (SCC), [1993] 3 S.C.R. 653, at pp. 664-669; R.
v. Foreman (2002), 2002 CanLII 6305 (ON CA), 62 O.R. (3d) 204 (C.A.), at para. 37, leave denied,
[2003] S.C.C.A. No. 199; R. v. Osmar, 2007 ONCA 50, at para. 53, leave
denied, [2007] S.C.C.A. No. 157; R. v. Bridgman, 2017 ONCA 940, at para.
10-11.
[13]            It
remains noteworthy, however, that according to the phone that belonged to Ms.
Horton, the messages of Mr. Robinson came from “My Daddy King,” while her own
text messages were sent, mostly, by “Preems Bitch.”  Further, the romantic
nature of their personal relationship was permanently proclaimed by the large heart-shaped
tattoo that was placed on the buttocks of Ms. Horton, which covered the
entirety of the right cheek of her buttocks, and which constantly proclaimed
that she was the “Property of Preem.”  A photograph of this tattoo was made an
exhibit in these proceedings.  Other exhibits that were also filed in this case
established that Ms. Horton, with some regularity, voluntarily proclaimed her
eternal love for Mr. Robinson, and said that she would do “anything” for Mr.
Robinson, to ensure that they have a “good life” together.
[14]            I
note in passing, however, that the romantic relationship between Ms. Horton and
Mr. Robinson, that spanned the course of all of the alleged offences, is now
over.
[15]            In
a series of text messages from Mr. Robinson on November 7, 2017, he told Ms.
Horton that the three of them (i.e. Mr. Robinson, Ms. Horton and Mr. Vickers)
had the expenses to “get back out to Toronto,” and that he had a “solid
opportunity” to “double [his] income” and to “make their name and team
bigger.”  Mr. Robinson said that this “opportunity” made it possible” for them
to “come back” to the east coast “in a month for a visit instead of struggling.” 
Mr. Robinson suggested that it made sense for them to take this opportunity
now, which would “set [them] on a path to live,” and that this was his “shot”
to get to where he wanted to be, and to “put” Ms. Horton where she wanted to
be.  Mr. Robinson said that they had to “take” this opportunity.  Mr. Robinson
asked his “baby gurl” to text him back to confirm she got his message.  Mr.
Robinson then said that he had just added up the numbers, and that with all of
their “expenses,” they had enough money to get to Toronto, and have a “good
drink the first night” and “maybe run a couple of calls” to get to the
weekend.  Mr. Robinson indicated, in this series of text messages, that he was
giving her “enough respect as a main girl” to hear [his] plans, and that he
wanted to know her “honest opinion” as to what was best for their “growth.”
[16]            Ms.
Horton responded, in her own series of text messages, “whatever you say” and she
reiterated that she did not have any opinion because “whatever” he said
“goes.”  Ms. Horton did say that it hurt to leave her daughter, and to just go
back to how they were living before, having a “bunch of girls around,” even if
Mr. Robinson had “money” this time.  Nonetheless, Ms. Horton agreed with the
plan proposed by her boyfriend, Mr. Robinson.
[17]            After
they arrived in Toronto, and set up their business in the sex trade, the role
of Ms. Horton became clearer, and it became apparent that she was responsible
for grooming the young females who had been procured into their sex trade
business.  Of course, this conduct by Ms. Horton, who was also engaged
personally in providing her own sexual services for money, in this sex trade
business, was critical in the exploitation of the other young women – R.W. and M.D.
[18]            Mr.
Robinson sent Ms. Horton text messages telling her to make one of the other
young women her “bitch” and her “wifey.”  He told Ms. Horton to tell the other
woman that they were going to get their hair and nails done together.  Mr.
Robinson also encouraged Ms. Horton to be “more interactive” with the other
women.  Ms. Horton responded positively to these suggestions, indicating among
other things, “OK daddy I will.”  Ms. Horton said that she was already being
“interactive” and advised Mr. Robinson that she had invited one of the young
women into “the bathroom with [her] to shower,” where they “talked about going
to get piercings and stuff.”  Ms. Horton also provided advice about what to do
if the young women were ever approached by the “cops” to talk about what was
going on.
[19]            Ms.
Horton spent considerable time in the company of the other women when they were
not on “calls,” providing their sexual services to others for money.  Mr.
Robinson told Ms. Horton repeatedly that she was “in charge” of the other
women, and Ms. Horton acknowledged her understanding of this role in the
organization.
[20]            In
his text messages to Ms. Horton, Mr. Robinson called her the “cute” and
“pretty” “Queen of the Preem team” and his “main girl.”  In response, Ms.
Horton replied affirmatively and said “Thank you” to Mr. Robinson.
[21]          Ms.
Horton is charged with having committed five offences in relation to the
complainant, R.W.  More specifically, the accused is charged with: (1) exercising
control over R.W., for the purpose of exploiting her, contrary to s. 279.01(1)
of the Criminal Code; (2) exercising control over R.W., for the purpose
of facilitating an offence under s. 286.1(1), contrary to s. 286.3(1) of the Code;
(3) receiving a financial benefit knowing that it was obtained by an offence
under s. 279.01(1), contrary to s. 279.02(1) of the Criminal Code; (4)
receiving a financial benefit from the sexual services of R.W., knowing it was
obtained by an offence under s. 286.1(1), contrary to s. 286.2(1) of the Code;
and (5) assaulting R.W., contrary to s. 266 of the Code.
[22]          Following
her extensive, periodic testimony, by zoom, at the preliminary hearing in this
case, R.W. fled to the United States and steadfastly refused to return to
Canada.  R.W. similarly refused to provide any further testimony in this case,
either in person or virtually.  However, her lengthy April 23, 2018 video-recorded
interview statement to the police was ultimately admitted in this case for the
truth of its contents, with the parties being permitted to file any excerpts they
wished from her preliminary inquiry testimony, to be taken into account in
assessing her reliability and/or credibility as a witness.  See: R. v. Robinson, 2022 ONSC 6667; R. v.
Robinson, 2023 ONSC 5257.  Substantial portions of her preliminary inquiry
testimony were, in fact, tendered into evidence in this case, in furtherance of
this aspect of the ruling substantively admitting her police interview
statement.
[23]          In
the first count of the indictment, Ms. Horton is charged, essentially, with the
offence of “human trafficking,” in that she did “recruit, transport, transfer,
receive, hold, conceal or harbour or exercise control, direction, or influence
over the movements” of R.W., “for the purpose of exploiting or facilitating her
exploitation,” contrary to s. 279.01(1) of the Criminal Code.  See,
generally: R. v. T.J.F., 2024 SCC 38, 497 D.L.R. (4th) 441, at paras.
52-71, 91-95, 97-109.
[24]            This
offence has two essential elements, namely: (1) that the accused intentionally did
recruit, transport, transfer, receive, hold, conceal or harbour, or exercise
control, direction, or influence over the movements of R.W.; and (2) that the accused
engaged in this conduct for the purpose of exploiting or facilitating the
exploitation of R.W.  As I have noted, this conduct by the accused must have
been intentional, not accidental.
[25]            It
is significant, however, that the Criminal Code expressly provides that “no consent to the activity that forms the subject-matter of a
charge” under s. 279.01(1) “is valid.”  In other words, Parliament has
determined that a person cannot legally consent to someone recruiting,
transporting, transferring, receiving, holding, concealing or harbouring, or
exercising control, direction, or influence over their movements, for the
purpose of exploiting or facilitating the exploitation of them.  In short, the potential consent of any complainant is simply not
a defence to a charge of “human trafficking,” and the Crown is not
obliged to prove that the complainant did not consent to the conduct that forms
the subject matter of the alleged offence.
[26]              
The actus reus of the offence of “human
trafficking” is clearly disjunctive.  In other words, the conduct
requirement of this offence is established if the Crown is able to prove that
the accused intentionally engaged in any of the alleged forms of
prohibited conduct.  Accordingly, the first question is whether Ms. Horton intentionally
recruited, transported, transferred, received, held, concealed or harboured, or
exercised control, direction, or influence over the movements of R.W.  See: R.
v. Gallone, 2019 ONCA 663, 147 O.R. (3d) 225, at paras. 14-17, 29-41, 42-51;
R. v. A.A., 2015 ONCA 558, 327 C.C.C. (3d) 377, at paras. 70-73, 79, 80-88;
R. v. T.J.F., at para. 92.
[27]              
It is apparent that s. 279.01(1) of the Criminal Code
captures “two clusters” of prohibited conduct, in that: (1) it prohibits intentional
conduct by an accused that recruits, transports, transfers, receives, holds, conceals,
or harbours another person; and (2) it also prohibits intentional conduct by an
accused that exercises control, direction or influence over the movements of another
person.  See: R. v. T.J.F., at paras. 91-95.
[28]              
In this regard, the term “recruits” means to persuade another to
do or help with something; the term “transports” means to carry or convey from
one place to another; the term “transfers” similarly means to carry or convey
from one place to another; the term “receives” means to take delivery or to be
given or presented with; the term “holds” means to keep possession of, to
detain, to possess, to occupy; the term “conceals” means the act of removing
the person from sight and/or notice; and the term “harbors” means to provide shelter.
[29]              
In this regard, the phrase “exercising control” refers to
invasive, intentional conduct, and it is the exercise of a power that leaves
the controlled person with little choice over their movements.  This conduct
includes acts of direction and influence.
[30]              
The phrase “exercising direction” means that direction is
exercised over the movements of a person when rules or behaviours are imposed
on them, that guide their movements.  The exercise of direction does not,
however, preclude the possibility that the directed person (i.e. R.W.) might be
left with some latitude, or a measure of discretion, regarding their movements.
[31]              
The phrase “exercising influence” has a somewhat similar meaning
to the phrase “exercising direction,” except that it includes somewhat less
invasive and less coercive conduct than “exercising direction.”  Rather, it
includes any action exercised over the movements of another person for the
purpose of aiding, abetting or compelling that person to engage in a particular
kind of conduct (in this case, the selling of their sexual services for money). 
Of course, influence can be exerted or exercised over another person while still
allowing some scope for the person’s free will to operate concerning their
movements.  Accordingly, this would include anything done to induce, alter,
sway, or affect the will of the complainant concerning her movements.
[32]              
Thus, if “exercising control” is like giving an order that the
person has little choice but to obey, and “exercising direction” is like
imposing a rule that the person should follow, then “exercising influence” is
like proposing an idea and persuading the person to adopt it.  See: R. v.
Gallone, at paras. 42-52; R. v. Ochrym, 2021 ONCA 48, 69 C.R. (7th)
285, at paras. 29-36.
[33]              
Exercising control, direction or influence over the movements of
another person generally suggests a situation that results from a series of
acts rather than a single, isolated act.  The term “exercises control,
direction or influence”, evokes a scenario in which a person, by virtue of her
relationship with the complainant, has some power – whether physical,
psychological, moral or otherwise – over the complainant and her movements. 
These terms characterize the nature of the conduct in terms of the relationship
between the accused and the complainant in relation to the complainant’s
mobility.  In other words, by virtue of the relationship between an accused and
the complainant, the accused was in a position, or had the ability to control,
direct, or influence the movements of a complainant.
[34]            The
second element of this offence defines the subjective mental element, or
the mens rea of the offence.  The Crown must establish that the accused intentionally
engaged in this prohibited conduct for the purpose of exploiting or
facilitating the exploitation of R.W.
[35]            The
Criminal Code, in s. 279.04, helpfully defines the term “exploitation.” 
According to this statutory definition, someone “exploits” another person if
they “cause them to provide, or offer to provide, labour or a service by
engaging in conduct that, in all of the circumstances, could reasonably be
expected to cause the other person to believe that their safety or the safety
of a person known to them would be threatened if they failed to provide, or
offer to provide, the labour or service.”  A number of principles emerge from
this statutory definition.
[36]            The
terms “labour” and “services” in this definition must be understood, in this
context, to have their ordinary broad meaning, and would clearly include all
manner of sexual services.
[37]            The
specific “expectation” caused by the prohibited conduct of the accused, that
the safety of the complainant, or another person known to them, would be
threatened if they failed to provide the labour or service, must be a “reasonable”
expectation.  In other words, the test to be applied in these circumstances is an
objective one.  Any evidence as to the subjective belief of the complainant
in this regard can properly be considered, but the test is an objective
one: would a reasonable person, in the circumstances of the complainant,
be expected to believe that their safety, or the safety of a person known to
them, would be threatened if they failed to provide the labour or service.
[38]            Of
course, in the application of this standard, the notional “reasonable person”
is not someone who is exceptionally timid, apprehensive or worried, nor is it
someone who is exceptionally brave, daring, or courageous.  Rather, a
reasonable person is someone of normal temperament and ordinary prudence, as well
as someone of the same gender and age as the complainant and someone in her
particular circumstances (including any particular vulnerabilities, such as
lack of education, prior victimization, socio-economic disadvantage, and social
and family isolation).
[39]          This
determination as to the nature of the expectation must be made, as I have
already indicated, on the basis of all of the circumstances of the
case.  For example, in determining whether Ms. Horton “exploited” R.W. within
the meaning of this definition, a trier of fact may properly consider, for
example, whether Ms. Horton threatened the use of force or coercion, whether
Ms. Horton used deception, or psychological pressure, or whether Ms. Horton abused
a position of trust, power or authority.  While these are just some possible examples,
all of the circumstances must be considered.  See: R. v. T.J.F.,
at paras. 104-106.
[40]          More
particularly, as the Court of Appeal for Ontario observed, in R. v. Sinclair,
2020 ONCA 61, 384 C.C.C. (3d) 484, at para. 15, it may be important to consider
all of the following listed circumstances in determining whether the conduct of
the accused could reasonably be expected to have caused the complainant to fear
for her safety (or the safety of another known person):
[41]          The
reasonably expected belief in the threatened “safety” of the complainant or the
safety of someone known to them includes not only their physical safety
but also their psychological safety.  Further, as the Crown need prove
only that the belief in the threat to safety could be reasonably
expected, their physical or psychological safety need not actually be
threatened.  It is enough if the belief in such a threat to safety could
reasonably be expected in all of the circumstances if the labour or service was
not provided.
[42]          This
element of the offence requires the Crown to prove that Ms. Horton engaged in
the prohibited conduct “for the purpose of exploiting” R.W., or for the purpose
of “facilitating her exploitation.”  This requirement goes beyond proof that
the accused engaged in the prohibited conduct intentionally.  It requires the
Crown to establish that the accused intentionally engaged in the prohibited
conduct for that express goal or desired result, namely, to exploit R.W., or to
facilitate her exploitation.  To engage in conduct for a particular “purpose”
means that Ms. Horton directed her mind to that prohibited consequence (i.e.
the exploitation of R.W.) and intended to bring that prohibited consequence
about by her conduct, or at least knew that its occurrence was a virtual
certainty from her conduct.  The Crown need not establish, however, that the
accused was successful in achieving their aim.  In other words, no actual
exploitation needs to be proven by the Crown to have resulted from the
prohibited conduct of the accused. See: R. v. Gallone, at paras. 53-55.  But,
the Crown must prove that the accused intentionally engaged in the prohibited
conduct with that ulterior purpose in mind – to exploit R.W., or to facilitate
her exploitation.
[43]          Having
outlined my understanding of the legal nature of this alleged offence, I now
turn to the evidence in the present case, and draw my conclusions as to what
this evidence establishes.  In this regard, I must say that I am satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt, based on all of the evidence in this case, that Ms.
Horton intentionally transported, transferred, received, held and harboured
R.W., and intentionally exercised control, direction and influence over R.W.,
for the purpose of exploiting R.W. or facilitating her exploitation in the
business of the sex trade.  As the Crown has established the elements of this
offence beyond any reasonable doubt, Ms. Horton must be convicted of this
offence of “human trafficking,” contrary to s. 279.01(1) of the Criminal
Code.
[44]            First,
in her lengthy April 23, 2018 video-recorded police interview statement, which
was admitted for the truth of its contents in this case, R.W. indicated,
essentially, as follows in connection with the activities of Ms. Horton:
[45]            I
listened carefully to both this video-recorded police interview statement, and
the many preliminary inquiry excerpts that were played during the trial of this
matter, and I have no doubt that R.W. was being truthful in the evidence that
she provided to the police, and that her honest interview statements to the
police were reliable.  None of her testimony at the preliminary inquiry causes
me to reject any aspect of her evidence.  Further, the fact that she ultimately
refused to voluntarily provide trial testimony in this case, either in person
or virtually, does not shake my confidence in the truth or reliability of her
video-recorded police interview statement.  Indeed, I accept her evidence in
this regard.
[46]            Second,
text messages from Ms. Horton’s cell phone clearly confirmed many aspects of
the police interview statement of R.W.  More particularly in this regard, the
cell phone records of Ms. Horton reveal all of the following:
[47]            It is hardly surprising that prospective clients would contact Ms.
Horton when they were interested in obtaining the sexual services of R.W.
and/or Ms. Horton, given that the evidence was clear that all of the ads
that were placed for the sexual services of R.W. made specific reference to Ms.
Horton’s cell phone number (none of the ads displayed R.W.’s own cell phone
number).  It seems obvious, at least to me, that these ads for the sexual
services of R.W. were created in this fashion, so as to permit Ms. Horton to
effectively control, direct, and otherwise influence the movement and conduct
of R.W. in the sex trade business.
[48]            The exculpatory trial testimony of Ms. Horton does not
cause me to have any reasonable doubt in relation to her guilt in connection
with this offence.  Indeed, I found her trial testimony to be entirely
self-serving, manufactured and incredible.  I reject her testimony entirely,
and find that it does not raise any reasonable doubt in relation to her
liability for this offence.  In my view, Ms. Horton fulfilled her role in this
small human trafficking organization, as the “Queen of the Preem team,” because
of her fervent romantic attachment to Mr. Robinson, and a desire to work in the
sex trade business, together with the other young women who had been procured for
this purpose, to financially benefit Mr. Robinson, Mr. Vickers and herself.
[49]            In
the third count of the indictment, Ms. Horton is charged with “procuring” R.W. 
More particularly, the indictment charges that Ms. Horton, “between the 22nd
day of March, 2018 and the 21st day of April, 2018,” did, for the
purpose of facilitating an offence under subsection 286.1(1) recruit, hold,
conceal, or harbour or exercise control, direction, or influence over the
movements” of R.W., contrary to s. 286.3(1) of the Criminal Code.
[50]            In
order to establish the alleged guilt of Ms. Horton for this offence, the Crown
must prove: (1) that Ms. Horton intentionally recruited, held, concealed, or
harboured or exercised control, direction, or influence over the movements of R.W.;
and (2) that Ms. Horton engaged in this conduct for the purpose of facilitating
an offence under subsection 286.1(1) of the Criminal Code.
[51]              
This way of physically committing the offence of “procuring”
shares much of the language that I have already articulated in connection with
the offence of “human trafficking.”  Those terms mean the same thing in the
present context.  In other words, the Crown must establish that the accused
intentionally recruited, held, concealed, or harboured, or exercised control,
direction, or influence over the movements of R.W. in order to prove the actus
reus of this offence of procuring.  Of course, the Crown need not
establish all of these ways that Ms. Horton is alleged to have procured R.W. 
One way is enough.
[52]              
The Crown must also prove that Ms. Horton, in engaging in the
prohibited conduct, did so for the purpose of facilitating an offence under s.
286.1(1) of the Criminal Code.  This is the essential subjective mens
rea of the offence.
[53]            Section
286.1(1) of the Criminal Code states that “everyone who, in any place,
obtains for consideration, or communicates with anyone for the purpose of
obtaining, for consideration, the sexual services of a person” is guilty of an
offence.  Essentially, this provision of the Criminal Code criminalizes
the actions of a purchaser (but not the seller) of “sexual services.”  Anyone
who, in any place, obtains for consideration, or even simply communicates with
someone for the purpose of obtaining, for consideration, any sexual services
will be guilty of this offence.
[54]            I
have no difficulty concluding that the Crown has established the guilt of the
accused, beyond a reasonable doubt, in relation to this offence.  In other
words, I have no reasonable doubt that Ms. Horton did, for the purpose of facilitating
an offence under subsection 286.1(1) recruit, hold, conceal, or harbour or
exercise control, direction, or influence over the movements” of R.W.  In this
regard, I have already concluded that the Crown has established, beyond a
reasonable doubt. that Ms. Horton did recruit, hold, conceal, or harbour or
exercise control, direction, or influence over the movements” of R.W.  I now
conclude that Ms. Horton engaged in this prohibited conduct for the purpose of
facilitating the commission of an offence under s. 286.1(1) of the Criminal
Code.  The evidence, in my view, overwhelmingly supports this conclusion.
[55]            In
the fifth count of the indictment, Ms. Horton is charged with the offence of
“receiving a financial benefit from the offence of human trafficking.”  More
particularly, Ms. Horton is charged that, “between the 22nd day of
March, 2018 and the 21st day of April, 2018, she did “receive a
financial or other material benefit, namely a sum of money,” knowing that it
was “obtained by or derived directly or indirectly by the commission of an
offence under subsection 279.01(1),” contrary to s. 279.02(1) of the Criminal
Code.
[56]            Similarly,
in count six of the indictment, Ms. Horton is charged with receiving a
financial benefit from the sexual services of R.W.  More particularly, Ms.
Horton is charged that she, between March 22, 2018 and April 21, 2018, did “receive
a financial benefit or other material benefit, namely a sum of money, from sexual
services provided by [R.W.] for consideration, knowing that it was obtained by
or derived directly or indirectly by the commission of an offence under
subsection 286.1(1),” contrary to s. 286.2(1) of the Criminal Code.
[57]            With
respect to the fifth count of the indictment, the Crown must establish these
elements of this offence: (1) that Ms. Horton received a financial benefit,
namely, a sum of money; (2) that the offence of “human trafficking” was
committed; (3) that the sum of money Ms. Horton received was obtained by or
derived from the commission of the offence of “human trafficking;” and (4) that
Ms. Horton knew that the money she received was obtained by or derived from the
commission of the offence of “human trafficking.”
[58]          Similarly,
with respect to the sixth count of the indictment, the Crown must establish
these elements of the offence: (1) that Ms. Horton received a financial
benefit, namely, a sum of money; (2) that the offence of “obtaining sexual
services for consideration” was committed; (3) that the money the accused
received was obtained by or derived from the sexual services of R.W. for
consideration; and (4) that Ms. Horton knew that the money she received was
obtained by or derived from the sexual services of R.W. for consideration.
[59]          I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Ms. Horton is guilty
of both of these offences.  In my view, the evidence is clear that Ms. Horton knowingly
received money from R.W., that was provided to R.W. for her sexual services, as
part of her human trafficking exploitation, by Ms. Horton.
[60]          The complainant, R.W. herself, stated, in her April 23, 2018
video-recorded police interview statement, that, on occasion, Ms. Horton would demand,
and then take, all the money directly from R.W.’s sexual service clients, just
before R.W. provided her sexual services to the client (at pp. 13, 114-117,
121-122).  Again, I accept that evidence as truthful and reliable.  I find that
this money was obviously provided to R.W. in exchange for her sexual services,
and was passed along by her clients as part and parcel of her human trafficking
in the sex trade by Ms. Horton.  These were all facts that were well known by
Ms. Horton.  Accordingly, I find that Ms. Horton intentionally took all of this
money, from R.W., knowing that it was obtained directly from the sexual
services that she was providing, for consideration, to clients, and knowing
that it was money that Ms. Horton obtained from the human trafficking of R.W.
in the sex trade.
[61]          I should also note, at least in passing, that Mr. Paul Medeiros
testified that R.W. made five electronic financial transfers to Ms. Horton in
mid-April of 2018, as was clear from her bank records.  Ms. Horton testified
that these particular transactions were, effectively, just reimbursements for
food purchases she made for R.W., given that R.W. was experiencing trouble with
her own bank card at the time.  I am not sure why all of these allegedly
reimbursement transactions took place only in mid-April of 2018, when R.W. said
that her difficulties with her own bank card started when she first got to
Toronto on March 24, 2018.  But, even if these particular transactions were
just reimbursements for food purchases, as seems quite unlikely, they do not
undermine the finding I have already made that Ms. Horton knowingly received
money from R.W., that was provided to R.W. for her sexual services, as part of
her human trafficking exploitation, by Ms. Horton.
[62]          There
is no doubt in my mind that Ms. Horton, together with Mr. Robinson, were
exploiting R.W., in a clear effort to benefit financially from her work in the
sex trade.  This is made clear, inter alia, by the text message exchange
between Ms. Horton and Mr. Robinson on March 27, 2018.  In this exchange, as I
have mentioned, Mr. Robinson told Ms. Horton that they had to “soldier this
girl up,” referring to R.W., and indicating that, if Ms. Horton can “finesse,”
then “we can bank.”  Ms. Horton replied: “I got you baby.”  This text message
exchange illustrates that Ms. Horton was fully aware of their obligations to
promote R.W.’s work in the sex trade so that they could both “bank” (i.e.
benefit financially from her sex trade work).
[63]          I
note in passing in this regard, that there were a number of photographs
contained in the cell phone of Ms. Horton, that show her (and some photographs
of Mr. Robinson) holding large stacks of paper money, sometimes fanning out 
this large amount of cash, or just showing large stacks of paper money by themselves,
all of which photographs were taken during the time period of the alleged
offences (i.e taken between March 19 and April 23, 2018 according to the
meta-data associated with the photographs).
[64]          The
eighth count of the indictment charges Ms. Horton with the offence of “assault”
against R.W.  More particularly, this count of the indictment charges that Ms.
Horton “between the 22nd day of March, 2018 and the 21st
day of April, 2018, did assault” R.W., contrary to s. 266 of the Criminal
Code.
[65]          The
Crown must establish these three essential elements for this offence: (1) that Ms.
Horton intentionally applied force to R.W.; (2) that R.W. did not consent to
the force that Ms. Horton intentionally applied; and (3) that Ms. Horton knew
that R.W. did not consent to the force that Ms. Horton intentionally applied.
[66]          I
am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the Crown has established all of
these elements of this offence.  Indeed, I am satisfied that Ms. Horton repeatedly
assaulted R.W., without her consent, and that Ms. Horton knew full well that
R.W. did not consent to the assault.
[67]          In
her lengthy video-recorded April 23, 2018 police interview statement, R.W.
stated that both Mr. Robinson and Ms. Horton were “physically abusive” to her,
and that Ms. Horton threatened her and “hit” her and “smacked” her on a number
of different occasions.  In the result, R.W. was afraid of Ms. Horton.  (at pp.
13, 110, 129-130, 134-135, 164).  I accept her evidence as truthful and
reliable in this regard.  I reject entirely the testimonial denials of Ms.
Horton, as incredible and untruthful.  The evidence of Ms. Horton does not
raise any reasonable doubt in my mind in connection with this allegation.
[68]          Court
11 of the indictment charges Ms. Horton with the offence of “human trafficking”
in relation to a person under 18 years of age.  More particularly, Ms. Horton is
charged that she did, between the 1st day of March, 2018 and the 27th
day of March, 2018, “recruit, transport, transfer, receive, hold, conceal or
harbour or exercise control, direction, or influence over the movements” of M.D.,
a person under the age of 18 years, for the purpose of exploiting her or facilitating
her exploitation, contrary to s. 279.011(1) of the Criminal Code.
[69]          I
have already outlined almost all of the elements of this offence, so I will not
spend any time doing so again.  Rather, I will simply note that, for this
offence, the Crown must establish each of these three essential elements: (1)
that Ms. Horton did intentionally recruit, transport, transfer, receive, hold,
conceal or harbour, or exercise control, direction, or influence over the
movements of M.D.; (2) that Ms. Horton engaged in this conduct for the purpose
of exploiting or facilitating the exploitation of M.D.; and (3) that at the
time M.D. was under the age of 18 years and Ms. Horton knew it.
[70]          The
one aspect of this offence that I have not yet addressed relates to the alleged
age of the complainant, M.D.  In order to prove the commission of this offence,
as alleged in the indictment, the Crown must establish: (1) that M.D. was, in
fact, under 18 years of age at the time of the human trafficking; and (2) that
Ms. Horton knew that M.D. was under 18 years of age at the time.
[71]          M.D.
testified clearly as to her actual age, by unequivocally expressing her date of
birth.  There is no evidence to the contrary.  She was just 17 years old at the
time.  Accordingly, it is clear that M.D. was, in fact, under 18 years of age
at the time of the alleged offence.
[72]          However,
the Crown must also establish that Ms. Horton knew that she was under 18 years
of age at the time.  This knowledge on the part of Ms. Horton can be
established in one of two different ways.  First, the Crown might prove that Ms.
Horton actually subjectively knew that M.D, was under 18 years of age. 
Second, the Crown might prove that Ms. Horton was wilfully blind to
whether M.D. was under 18 years of age at the time.  Wilful blindness is the
legal equivalent of actual knowledge.
[73]          I
am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Ms. Horton is guilty of this
offence as the evidence proves that Ms. Horton intentionally transferred,
received, held, and harboured M.D., or exercised control, direction, or
influence over the movements of M.D. for the purpose of exploiting or
facilitating the exploitation of M.D. and that she knew full well that M.D. was
under the age of 18 years at the time.
[74]          M.D.
testified by way of closed-circuit television (CCTV) from a location elsewhere
in the courthouse.  Having listened carefully, to her evidence, in-chief and in
cross-examination, I accept her testimony as credible, truthful and reliable.
[75]          As
I have already indicated, M.D. provided her actual date of birth, which would
have made her just 17 years of age at the time of the alleged offences.
[76]            M.D.
testified that, in March of 2018, she did not have a place to live, or have any
kind of “safe, stable environment,” but rather was living basically “on the
street.”  She described how she was taking drugs (specifically alcohol and
cocaine) at the time, and that she was into “illegal activities.”  She
explained that, financially, she had “nothing,” and she was staying
periodically with this friend of hers.  She also explained that she had “no
family” that she could rely on to help her, and that (without any money), she
just felt “desperate.”
[77]                   
M.D. testified that, in March of 2018, she went to the “Motel 6”
to “escort.”  She realized that she had no money, but that she had to eat and
take care of herself.  At the time, she was being “helped” in this regard by a
number of people, including a friend of hers who was also staying at the Motel
6.  This was where she met his friend, Mr. Robinson, who occupied the next room
in the Motel 6 facility, and who was introduced to her as “Preem.”
[78]                   
M.D. testified that Mr. Robinson seemed “overly friendly” to her,
and he suggested that they should work “together.”  He told her that he would
help her make “more money” as an escort, and that he would help her engage in
the business properly.  M.D. testified that Mr. Robinson next told her that he
“had a girl in another hotel that she could make money with.”  Mr. Robinson
then explained the “rules” to her, telling her that she had to “cut down time”
that she spent with each “trick” or “client,” for example, by making “half an
hour” effectively less than that period of time.  This would result in them
making more money.  Mr. Robinson told her that she would be “splitting the
money equally with his girlfriend.”  Mr. Robinson also told her that he would
“take care of her money” and that “her outfits” would also be “taken care of.” 
MD. subsequently learned that the “other girl” was Mr. Robinson’s girlfriend, the
accused, Rebecca Horton.
[79]                   
As a result of this discussion, M.D. understood that she would be
“escorting” for Mr. Robinson.  Initially, M.D. was “fine” with the rules, but
that subsequently changed when she discovered what they were “actually doing.”
[80]                   
M.D. testified that she ultimately met Ms. Horton shortly
thereafter.  M.D. explained that Mr. Robinson ordered an “uber” for her to meet
with Ms. Horton at this other hotel.  When she eventually arrived at this other
hotel, she met Ms. Horton at the “side door,” and then they walked up to a
man’s room in the hotel.  Ms. Horton received M.D., and then told M.D. to just
“follow her lead.”  After drinking some wine in the hotel room, clothes were
removed and the two women started “doing a call with the man.”  M.D. explained
that Ms. Horton took her clothes off, and told M.D. to take off her clothes and
“kiss the client.”  While she obliged Ms. Horton in this regard, M.D. testified
that she felt “uncomfortable” doing this.  M.D. explained that they were in the
hotel room for “more than an hour,” and that Ms. Horton got all the money from
the man (i.e. more than $100 in American funds), and then they went back to the
Motel 6 to meet Mr. Robinson.
[81]                   
There were a considerable number of text messages between Mr. Robinson
and Ms. Horton concerning M.D. on the evening of March 20, 2018.  Ms. Horton
indicated that M.D. could be given some of her clothing to wear, and she seemed
surprised that Mr. Robinson was sending M.D. to help her with a client.  Ms.
Horton also expressed concern about photographs of M.D. that suggested she was
“under age.”  Mr. Robinson told Ms. Horton to tell the client that M.D. was
“24” years old.  When Ms. Horton asked if M.D. was actually 24, Mr. Robinson
said “no,” but he indicated that M.D. had a “fake ID.”  Ms. Horton told Mr.
Robinson to make sure that M.D. was “dressed nice” so that the client would
like her.  Ms. Horton suggested that the client was prepared to spend
approximately $300, and Ms. Horton indicated that she would make sure M.D. got
“paid.”  Mr. Robinson told Ms. Horton to “make her your bitch,” and Ms. Horton
replied in the affirmative.  Subsequently, Ms. Horton told Mr. Robinson that
M.D. had said that she had “just turned” 18 years old, but Ms. Horton said that
she did not believe that “tbh” (i.e. to be honest).
[82]                   
M.D. testified that, after they stayed at the Motel 6 for a short
period of time, Mr. Robinson and Ms. Horton took her to the “Mississauga Gates
Inn” in an uber or a taxi, where Mr. Robinson got them a room – a “jacuzzi
suite,” where the hot tub was in the large bedroom, which had just one
king-sized bed.  M.D. testified that their purpose in attending at this hotel
was for “escorting.”
[83]                   
M.D. testified that, while she was being sexually assaulted by
Mr. Robinson and Ms. Horton in the hot tub, she ended up cutting her foot
trying to move away from them.  When she was bleeding on the floor, she told
Mr. Robinson that she did not want to “escort” any more.  In response, Mr.
Robinson told her that, if she did not continue to escort for him, she would be
“sorry.”  This scared M.D. and caused her to worry about what would happen to
her if she ever stopped escorting for him.
[84]                   
M.D. testified that, after they left the Mississauga Gates Inn,
they went to an airbnb “condo” located on “Blue Jays Way” for the purpose of
“escorting.”  This was Mr. Robinson and Ms. Horton’s idea, and they took her to
this location.
[85]                   
M.D. testified that there were escorting
“calls” with “Johns” that she made “here and there” in the hotels, but she did
not remember “the details” of those calls.  She explained that the money that
she gained from those “calls” would go to Mr. Robinson or Ms. Horton.  M.D.
estimated that she made at least $200 per call, and would have made a total of
a “few thousand dollars” from those calls, but that she was able to keep “none”
of that money.  M.D. testified that she was told that the money she made from
the calls was used to pay for her food, alcohol, drugs, hotel room and clothes,
but she testified that she never got anything from Mr. Robinson or Ms. Horton that
would have come close to totaling a “few thousand dollars.”
[86]                   
M.D. testified, however, that she “barely” got any food from either
Mr. Robinson or Ms. Horton, and she “went hungry most of the time,” even though
she asked them for food.  They would tell her that she had to “escort” first,
before they got her any food, but they never gave her any food thereafter.  M.D.
testified that she was typically offered alcohol and/or drugs before she made
“calls,” even though Mr. Robinson and Ms. Horton knew that she was “struggling”
with drugs and alcohol, but what she consumed certainly did not total a “few
thousand dollars.”
[87]                   
M.D. testified that Mr. Robinson and Ms. Horton knew how old she
was, as they saw her “health card” which displayed her true age accurately with
her date of birth, and which showed that she was only 17 years old at the
time.  According to M.D., however, neither Mr. Robinson nor Ms. Horton ever said
anything to her when they saw that she was only 17 years old.  Indeed, according
to M.D., “nothing changed” after she showed them the health card.  They simply
remarked that her age was “close enough” to 18, so it did not matter.
[88]                   
M.D. testified that Mr. Robinson told her that she had to give
him the money that she was earning from “escorting.”  She did not know what he
did with the money she gave him.  M.D. testified that she felt “discouraged”
about the fact that she was making the “calls,” but getting none of the money
that was paid for her services.  She felt like she was doing things for “no
reason.”  She was, however, too “scared” and “intimidated” to ask Mr. Robinson
or Ms. Horton for the money.
[89]                   
M.D. testified that she felt “scared for her safety” by Mr.
Robinson, and by her “customers.”  She explained that, at one point while they
were at the Blue Jays Way condo, she saw a black handgun in a case, under the
bed in one of the bedrooms.  Mr. Robinson pulled out the handgun from under the
bed, and told her that she need not be scared because he had “this.”  However,
seeing this handgun under the bed simply made M.D. “even more” afraid.
[90]                   
M.D. testified that she was eventually able to escape and run
away, one night when they all “crashed on cocaine.”  She felt that this was her
only chance to escape.  She ran away from the hotel, crying down the street,
where she was assisted by a passing motorist.  M.D. ultimately called the 911
emergency number, and eventually (much later) spoke to the police.
[91]                   
M.D. testified that, after a while, things changed, in that she
realized that she was not making lots of money – indeed she was not making any
money at all from escorting – and that she was not being taken care of. 
Instead, everything was being done for the “selfish benefit” of Mr. Robinson
and Ms. Horton.  M.D. testified that her problems with alcohol and cocaine were
getting worse, as the accused kept feeding it to her – it seemed that they
wanted to keep her “under the influence.”
[92]                   
With respect to the “ads” for her sexual services, with the
“fake” pictures of her, M.D. testified that she did not remember what was said
in the ads, or what phone number was used, but she stated that the “ads” were
created by Mr. Robinson, without any input from her.  Some of the ads were for
the services of both her and Ms. Horton as a “duo.”  M.D. did not recall the
“rates” that were specified, and she was not asked about any “restrictions”
that were placed in any of the “ads.”
[93]                   
In my view, Ms. Horton (together with Mr. Robinson) used, inter
alia, deception and psychological coercion to exploit M.D., and to
facilitate her exploitation, in the sex trade business.  Meaning her no
disrespect, M.D. was, in some ways, a “perfect victim” for Ms. Horton (and Mr.
Robinson) to exploit, in that she was extremely vulnerable, young and
inexperienced, with no money, no place to live, addicted to cocaine and
alcohol, without any emotional support from her family, and seemingly herself on
the verge of entering the sex trade business on her own as an “escort.” 
Indeed, it was easy for Ms. Horton (and Mr. Robinson) to exert control, direction
and influence over M.D. in the sex trade, by simply lying to her about how they
would help her in the sex trade business, when their intention, from the very outset,
was not to help her, but rather to help themselves, by exploiting her to the
extent that they could in the sex trade, benefitting financially from her providing
her sexual services to others for monetary consideration.  See: R. v.
Sinclair, at para. 15.
[94]            Again,
it is worthwhile to recall that the Criminal Code expressly provides
that “no consent to the activity that forms the subject-matter
of a charge” under s. 279.011(1) “is valid.”  In other words, Parliament has
determined that the potential consent of any complainant is simply not a
defence to a charge of “human trafficking of a person under 18 years of age,”
and the Crown is not obliged to prove that the complainant did not
consent to the conduct the forms the subject matter of the alleged offence.  Accordingly,
even if M.D. consented to everything – all of the activity that formed the
subject matter of the indictment in relation to the charge of “human
trafficking a person under 18 years of age” – that consent would not
provide Ms. Horton with a valid defence in relation to this charge.
[95]            I
reject entirely the testimonial denials of Ms. Horton.  I find her evidence in
this regard wholly incredible, untrustworthy and unreliable.  I do not believe
her exculpatory evidence in this regard, nor does her testimony raise any
reasonable doubt as to her guilt for this offence.
[96]            In
count 12 of the indictment, Ms. Horton is charged with the offence of
“procuring” a person under the age of 18 years.  More particularly, in count 12
it is alleged that Ms.  Horton, between the 1st day of March, 2018
and the 27th day of March, 2018, did for the purpose of facilitating
an offence under subsection 286.1(2) procure a person under the age of 18
years, namely, M.D. to offer or provide sexual services for consideration,”
contrary to s. 286.3(2) of the Criminal Code.
[97]            The
Crown is obliged to prove the following essential elements of this offence: (1)
that Ms. Horton intentionally procured M.D. to offer or provide sexual services
for consideration; (2) that Ms. Horton engaged in this conduct for the purpose
of facilitating an offence under s. 286.1(2) of the Criminal Code (i.e.
the offence of obtaining sexual services for consideration of a person under
the age of 18 years); and (3) that M.D. was, in fact, less than 18 years of age
at the time of the alleged offence, and Ms. Horton knew that she was less than
18 years of age at the time.
[98]            I
am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the Crown has proven each of these
essential elements, and that, accordingly, Ms. Horton must be found guilty of
this offence.
[99]            In
short, essentially for the reasons already provided, I am satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that Ms. Horton intentionally procured M.D. to offer or
provide sexual services for consideration, that Ms. Horton engaged in this
conduct for the purpose of facilitating an offence under s. 286.1(2) of the Criminal
Code (i.e. obtaining sexual services for consideration of a person under
the age of 18 years), and that M.D. was, in fact, less than 18 years of age at
the time of the alleged offence, and Ms. Horton knew full well that she was
less than 18 years of age at the time.
[100]    
   Similarly,
count 13 of the indictment also charges Ms. Horton with procuring M.D., a
person under the age of 18 years.  More particularly, this charge in the
indictment alleges that Ms. Horton, between the 1st day of March,
2018 and the 27th day of March, 2018, did, for the purpose of
facilitating an offence under subsection 286.1(2) recruit, hold, conceal, or
harbour or exercise control, direction, or influence over the movements of M.D.,
a person under the age of 18 years,” contrary to s. 286.3(2) of the Criminal
Code.
[101]        For this
alleged offence, the Crown must prove each of the following essential elements:
(1) that Ms. Horton intentionally recruited, held, concealed, harboured, or
exercised control, direction or influence over the movements of M.D.; (2) that
Ms. Horton engaged in this conduct for the purpose of facilitating an offence
under s. 286.1(2) of the Criminal Code (i.e. obtaining sexual services
for consideration of a person under the age of 18 years); and (3) that M.D,
was, in fact, less than 18 years of age at the time of the alleged offence, and
that Ms. Horton knew that she was less than 18 years of age at the time.
[102]        Again, I am
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the Crown has proven each of these
essential elements, and that, accordingly, Ms. Horton must be found guilty of
this offence.  Again, in short, and essentially for the reasons already
provided, I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Ms. Horton intentionally
recruited, held, concealed, harboured, or exercised control, direction or
influence over the movements of M.D., that Ms. Horton engaged in this conduct
for the purpose of facilitating an offence under s. 286.1(2) of the Criminal
Code, and that that M.D, was, in fact, less than 18 years of age at the
time of the alleged offence, and that Ms. Horton knew full well that she was
less than 18 years of age at the time.
[103]    
   As I have
already indicated, I reject the incredible and unreliable testimonial denials of
Ms. Horton.  Further, her evidence does not raise any reasonable doubt as to
her guilt for these offences.
[104]    
 In count 14 of the
indictment, Ms. Horton is charged with receiving a financial or other material
benefit from the sexual services of M.D. for consideration.  Similarly, in
count 15 of the indictment, Ms. Horton is charged with receiving a financial or
other material benefit from the trafficking of M.D. contrary to s. 279.011(1)
of the Criminal Code.
[105]    
 More particularly, in
count 14 of the indictment, Ms. Horton is charged that she, between the 1st
day of March, 2018 and the 27th day of March, 2018, did receive a
financial benefit or other material benefit, namely a sum of money, from sexual
services provided by M.D. for consideration, knowing that it was obtained by or
derived directly or indirectly by the commission of an offence under s. 286.1(2)
(i.e. obtaining the sexual services for consideration from a person under 18
years of age), contrary to s. 286.2(2) of the Criminal Code.
[106]      Similarly,
in count 15 of the indictment, Ms. Horton is charged that she, between
the 1st day of March, 2018 and the 27th day of March,
2018, did receive a financial or other material benefit, namely a sum of money,
knowing that it was obtained by or derived directly or indirectly by the
commission of an offence under subsection 279.011(1), contrary to s. 279.02(2)
of the Criminal Code.
[107]      The essential elements of
these offences are very similar: (1) that Ms. Horton received a financial
benefit, namely, a sum of money; (2) that the offence of “obtaining sexual
services for consideration of a person under the age of 18 years was committed
(for count 14) – or that the offence of “human trafficking of a person under
the age of 18 years” was committed (for count 15); (3) that the money the
accused received was obtained by or derived from those offences; and (4) Ms.
Horton knew that the money she received was obtained by or derived from those
offences.
[108]               
I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Ms. Horton is
guilty of both of these offences.  Ms. Horton clearly received some of the
money that was provided by the clients of M.D., for her sexual services.  I
have no doubt that this money was obtained by Ms. Horton from the sexual
services provided by M.D. as part of the human trafficking of M.D. by Ms.
Horton (and Mr. Robinson), when M.D. was under 18 years of age, and that these
facts were all well known to Ms. Horton.
[109]               
While M.D. was told, at the beginning of her exploitation in the
sex trade, that the money she earned in providing her sexual services as an
“escort” would be split with Ms. Horton, M.D. never received any of the money
that she earned in the sex trade.  Instead, all of her money went to Ms. Horton
and Mr. Robinson.  While she was understandably unable to recall the details of
each of her sex trade transactions, M.D. realistically estimated that she
earned at least $200 per call, and she estimated that she would have made a
total of a “few thousand dollars” from those calls, but that she was able to
keep “none” of that money.  The money all went to Ms. Horton and Mr. Robinson. 
I have no difficulty accepting her testimony in this regard.
[110]               
It is immediately apparent from the text messages exchanged
between Mr. Robinson and Ms. Horton that M.D. was being exploited for the money
that she could make for them in the sex trade business.  In one of their text
message exchanges on March 20, 2018, Mr. Robinson urged Ms. Horton to try to
make sure that M.D.’s client paid her $700, so that she would receive $350 when
the money was “split.”  Mr.  Robinson also told Ms. Horton that if M.D. made a
“big call” for them, M.D. would be “making money for us the whole time.”  He
also urged Ms. Horton to tell M.D. that she performed a “bbbj” (i.e. bare back
blow job) for some clients, so that M.D. would be “ready to do it later on.” 
Mr. Robinson suggested that if they were able to establish this “trust” with
M.D., then “we’re up.”  Ms. Horton affirmatively replied to this series of text
messages from Mr. Robinson, indicating that it was “all good.”
[111]    
     Again,
as I have already indicated, I reject the incredible and unreliable testimonial
denials of Ms. Horton.  In addition, her testimony does not raise any
reasonable doubt as to her guilt for these offences.
[112]      Finally,
count 17 of the indictment charges Ms. Horton with the sexual assault of M.D. 
More particularly, this count of the indictment alleges that Ms. Horton, between
the 1st day of March 2018 and the 27th day of March 2018,
did sexually assault M.D., contrary to s. 271 of the Criminal Code.
[113]      In
order to establish the commission of this offence, the Crown must prove the
following essential elements of this offence: (1) that Ms. Horton intentionally
applied force to M.D.; (2) that M.D. did not consent to the force that Ms. Horton
intentionally applied to her; (3) that Ms. Horton knew that M.D. did not
consent to the force that Ms. Horton intentionally applied to her; and (4) that
the force that Ms. Horton intentionally applied to M.D. took place in
circumstances of a sexual nature.
[114]      Significantly, the “age of consent,” for purposes of the
offence of “sexual assault,” is 16 years of age.  Indeed, s. 150.1(1) of the Criminal
Code expressly provides that, when an accused is charged with an offence
under under s. 271 (i.e. sexual assault), in respect of a complainant under the
age of 16 years, it is not a defence that the complainant consented to the
activity that forms the subject matter of the charge.  It is clear that M.D.
was 17 years old at the time of this alleged offence.  Accordingly, the Crown
is obliged to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that M.D. did not consent to
the alleged sexual assault, and that the accused knew that she did not consent
to the alleged sexual assault.
[115]    
          
M.D. testified that, when they got to the “jacuzzi room” at the
Mississauga Inn and Suites, they started “drinking.”  She recalled that, at one
point, she and Ms. Horton and Mr. Robinson all got “naked” and got into the
jacuzzi hot tub, where they continued drinking.  M.D. testified that, at one
point while they were in the jacuzzi together, Mr. Robinson and Ms. Horton
began to “grab her” in a “sexual” way – they were “grabbing [her] butt” and
being “pushy” in touching her, while she was trying to “move away” from them. 
This made her feel “uncomfortable.”  No one asked her if she wanted her “butt”
touched.  Ultimately, M.D. just tried to get out of the jacuzzi.  M.D.
testified that she was “traumatized” by this and did not want to remember any
more of this.  M.D. explained that she suffers from PTSD (Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder) as a result of this – and has problems with her memory, in that
sometimes it just goes “blank.”  She testified, however, that she stayed in the
hotel room after she got out of the jacuzzi.  But she did not remember how long
they stayed at the Mississauga Gates Inn, or what else she may have done during
her stay at that hotel.
[116]    
          
In cross-examination, M.D. agreed that she was using drugs at the
time, but she testified that she could remember these details notwithstanding
her consumption of these drugs.  Indeed, M.D. testified that she can “remember
everything.”
[117]    
          
In cross-examination, M.D. agreed that one of the photographs
shown to her (Exhibit #22), was a picture of her and Mr. Robinson and Ms.
Horton in the hot tub in the hotel.  M.D. maintained that, when they were in
the hot tub together, Mr. Robinson and Ms. Horton were “touching her” without
her permission, and she did not “enjoy” being touched by them.  She did not
recall the picture being taken, and certainly did not take the photograph
herself, but she maintained that she looked “uncomfortable” even if she was
“smiling” for the camera.  M.D. denied that some touching was “inevitable”
given the small size of the hot tub, and she denied knowing in advance that
there would be some touching.  M.D. also denied the suggestion that no one was
sexually assaulting her in the hot tub, and similarly denied the suggestion
that she touched either Mr. Robinson or Ms. Horton in the hot tub.  M.D. steadfastly
denied the suggestion that she was just “making up” any of these allegations,
and that she was “lying.”  She maintained that she was telling the truth.
[118]               
M.D. testified that the hot tub was bigger than what defence
counsel was suggesting, and that there was “more than enough space” inside the
hot tub for everyone to be comfortable (without touching each other).  M.D.
rejected the suggestion that Mr. Robinson and Ms. Horton started kissing and
touching each other in the hot tub.  She said that she had a “clear memory”
that this “did not happen,” and that Mr. Robinson and Ms. Horton did not become
“involved” with each other in this way in the hot tub.
[119]               
When M.D. was again shown the photograph of the three of them in
the hot tub (Exhibit #22), she identified Mr. Robinson in the middle of the
photo, Ms. Horton on the right, and herself on the left.  M.D. denied that, in
this photograph, her hand was in the area of Ms. Horton’s breast.  M.D.
explained that she was “straight – not bisexual.”  M.D. testified that she
looked “uncomfortable” in the photograph, because she was “intimidated” and
felt that she had to participate in the photograph.
[120]               
In cross-examination M.D. testified that, when she started to get
out of the hot tub, both Mr. Robinson and Ms. Horton tried to “grab [her]
butt.”  M.D. then “moved away” from them physically and, shortly thereafter,
she got out of the hot tub.  She denied that she got out of the hot tub because
she “felt sick,” although she admitted giving that evidence truthfully at the
earlier trial proceedings in this case.  M.D. testified that, in fact, she felt
“uncomfortable” and may have had too much to drink that night.
[121]               
In her testimony, Ms. Horton denied that this incident in the hot
tub in the hotel room at the Mississauga Inn and Suites happened in this way. 
She testified, essentially, that the only physical contact between her and M.D.
in the hot tub happened when Mr. Robinson told them to “kiss”.  According to
Ms. Horton, she and M.D. “giggled” and briefly kissed in the hot tub.  Their
lips just briefly touched.  However, this alleged scenario was not suggested to
M.D. in cross-examination by defence counsel for Ms. Horton.
[122]               
I accept the testimony of M.D. in relation to this incident.  In
my view, M.D. provided the court with an accurate, trustworthy and reliable
account of these events in the hot tub.  I reject the testimony of Ms. Horton
to the contrary.  I find her evidence in this regard to be a manufactured
account of the event.  Accordingly, I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
that Ms. Horton sexually assaulted M.D. in accordance with the allegation made
in count 17 of the indictment.
[123]    
          
In these Reasons for Judgment, I have periodically
expressly addressed the exculpatory testimony of Ms. Horton.  I have indicated
that I have rejected her testimony and found it to be untrustworthy, incredible
and unreliable.  I have indicated that her evidence has not raised any
reasonable doubt as to her guilt in relation to the charges against her.  See: R.
v. W.(D.), 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), [1991] 1 S.C.R. 742, 63 C.C.C. (3d) 397, at pp. 757-758.  However,
I now wish to specifically address her testimony more generally and more
directly.
[124]    
          
I found the testimony of Ms. Horton to be filled with
inexplicable internal inconsistencies, and to invariably be directly contrary
to evidence that I accepted as candid, truthful, trustworthy and reliable.
[125]               
The testimony of Ms. Horton was also, in
many respects, inconsistent with the indisputable content of her many text
messages back and forth with Mr. Robinson.
[126]    
          
For example, Ms. Horton testified that she came to Toronto, with
Mr. Robinson, for a two-week vacation, in December of 2016.  But Mr. Robinson
suggested that she work as an “escort” while they were in Toronto.  Apparently,
this suggestion did not come as a surprise to Ms. Horton, even though Mr.
Robinson had not previously made this suggestion.  She also testified that she
was personally exploited by Mr. Robinson, as a sex trade worker, from December
of 2016 to May of 2018, faced constant violence and coercion from him, and
unable to escape.  However, in cross-examination, Ms. Horton had to admit that
she was not in Toronto in June of 2017, or from October 2017 to February of
2018, when she returned to Nova Scotia, by herself, and without Mr. Robinson,
to visit her daughter.  Ms. Horton then voluntarily returned to Toronto to be
with Mr. Robinson and to work with him in their sex trade business. 
Remarkably, Ms. Horton’s memory as to specific dates and events during this
lengthy time period changed over time.  Further, Ms. Horton testified that she
and Mr. Robinson wanted to bring Ms. Horton’s daughter to Toronto – an
environment that would hardly be ideal for a child.  At that point, Ms. Horton
explained that Mr. Robinson was not all bad and that it only got worse for her
“near the end,” which she could not define.  This admission undermined much of
her own narrative of the events.
[127]    
          
By way of another example, Ms. Horton testified that she had
arranged a sexual services call with a client, which included sexual
intercourse and a “blow job” and she was paid $1,000 in anticipation of receipt
of those services.  Yet, according to Ms. Horton, none of these services were,
in fact, provided, and yet the customer did not ask for his money back.  This
seems extremely unrealistic.  People do not voluntarily pay $1,000 for nothing,
and don’t expect to get their money back.
[128]               
In any event, I find myself simply unable to blindly accept the
often-repeated refrain of Ms. Horton, that she only frequently agreed with Mr.
Robinson in order to avoid a confrontation with him, and to avoid his
inevitable anger and potential violence.  I simply do not believe her evidence
in this regard.
[129]               
Rather, I am compelled to accept the reality, based on my careful
consideration of all of the evidence in this case, and beyond any reasonable
doubt, that Ms. Horton was, for a significant period of time (before and during
these offences) emotionally and romantically attached to Mr. Robinson.  In the
result, and for reasons best known only by Ms. Horton, she was quite willing to
work with Mr. Robinson in the sex trade business, and to help shamelessly
exploit these two young vulnerable women (one of whom was under 18 years of
age), so that they could benefit financially from the money that their
customers paid for their sexual services.  So intense was this romantic
attachment, that Ms. Horton herself worked in the sex trade to help support
their sex trade business and Mr. Robinson directly.
[130]    
          
In the result, I find Ms. Horton guilty on counts 1, 2, 5, 6, 8,
11-15, and 17 of the indictment.
[131]    
          
I wish to thank counsel for all of their assistance in connection
with this matter.