[1]         
In
2012, the Respondent John Belton (“Belton”) sued the Applicant Katie Spencer
(“Spencer”) in relation to alleged injuries he suffered while walking Spencer’s
horse.
[2]         
Belton
was represented at trial by the Martin & Hillyer Associates firm (“MHA”) on
a contingency fee agreement basis.
[3]         
Prior
to trial, MHA obtained Legal Expense Insurance policy (“LEI”) coverage for the
Belton claim through Omega General Insurance (“Omega”) with a Policy limit of
$100,000.00 (“Policy Funds”).
[4]         
MHA
was the policyholder.
[5]         
The
Belton trial proceeded in 2020 over an eight-week period. Belton’s claim was
dismissed.
[6]         
In
2021, a costs award was made against Belton in the amount of $469,972.52.
(“Costs Award”) This remains unpaid.
[7]         
MHA
claimed disbursements of $59,842.23 in relation to advancing the claim to
trial.
[8]         
This
was an application brought pursuant to Rule 14.05(3)(d) for the determination
of rights that depended on the interpretation of the LEI.
[9]         
The
Applicants sought several declarations relative to the LEI, those being:
[10]       In
addition to the declaratory relief noted above, the Applicants sought either a
pro rata sharing of the policy funds as between Spencer and HLA or in the
alternative, that the Applicants be awarded 100% of the funds.
[11]      
MHA
initially took the view that the Omega policy was strictly for its own benefit,
covering only its own disbursements incurred on Belton’s behalf in taking the matter
to trial. Spencer disagreed, claiming she had an interest in the policy funds
to offset her unpaid costs award.
[12]      
In
October 2021, this application was issued.
[13]      
In
responding to this application, MHA changed its initial position and asserted that
payment of their own disbursement took priority over any other costs and
was a first charge on the policy funds. In support of this proposition,
MHA relied upon a direction signed by Belton prior to trial, which provided
that in the event of an unfavourable outcome at trial, the MHA disbursements
were to be paid in priority of the defendant’s (Applicants’) costs.
[14]      
In
November 2021, the application against Omega was dismissed. Omega was ordered
to continue to hold the $100,000.00 policy funds pending further order of the
court as to disposition.
[15]      
In
December 2023, Belton advanced a position by way of a “cross application” that he
was the “beneficiary” of the proceeds of the Omega policy and that he
was entitled to the entire $100,000.00. Belton also sought
declaratory relief as against MHA that he had no legal obligation to pay the
MHA disbursements and that the direction he had signed, was not valid. Belton
also advanced an alternate position seeking a declaration that the monies from
the Policy, which were owed to him, be paid to the Applicants to satisfy
the costs of the action.
[16]      
In
June 2024, MHA made the commercial decision to abandon any claim it may have
had for the policy funds and agreed to take no steps and or make any submission
regarding the remaining parties’ entitlement to the policy funds, effectively
leaving the dispute to Spencer and Belton.
[17]      
Shortly
before the hearing of this application, the Respondent initiated a separate,
new Application. The relief requested in that Application was identical to that
sought in Mr. Belton’s cross application with the exception that in this new application,
Belton’s counsel had requested a Charging Order.
[18]      
After
hearing submission, I made a ruling that we would not be entertaining Belton’s
new application and that the application that was properly before the
court, could be determined on its merits by relying upon the evidence and submissions
previously delivered and specifically those set out in Belton’s earlier cross
application record.
[19]      
With
regards to Belton’s cross application, specifically paragraphs 1 (c), (d) and (e),
Belton agreed at the start of the hearing, that he would not be proceeding with
that relief, nor seeking any declaratory relief in relation to MHA. Issues
relating to the MHA’s retainer agreement, outstanding disbursements or
allegations of negligence, would not be argued in this Application as they were
all the subject matter of two separate actions currently before the courts. [1]
[20]       The
cover page of the LEI set out the following important details:
[21]       Paragraph
1.1 of the policy then stated that:
[22]       The
following helpful definitions were also found within the policy itself.
[23]       With
regards to the general principals of insurance policy interpretation, the Supreme
Court in Progressive Homes Ltd. v. Lombard General Insurance Co. of Canada,
2010 SCC 331 wrote:
[24]      
In
the  Ledcor Construction Ltd. v. Northbridge Indemnity Insurance Co., 2016  SCC
37 (CanLII) , the Supreme Court also wrote that the rules of interpretation for
insurance policies should be consistent with the reasonable expectations of the
parties, as long as that interpretation is supported by the language of the
policy; and that it should not give rise to results that are unrealistic or
that the parties would not have contemplated in the commercial atmosphere in
which the insurance policy was contracted, and it should be consistent with the
interpretations of similar insurance policies.
[25]      
In
summary, if the policy language is found to be unambiguous, it should be given
effect, in the context of the contract. If the language is ambiguous and if the
policy language supports it, it should be interpreted consistent with the
reasonable expectations of the parties while avoiding a surprising and
unrealistic result.
[26]      
Belton
relied upon the decision in Peter B. Cozzi Professional Corporation v Szot 2019
ONSC 1274, in support of his argument that he was the sole beneficiary of the
LEI. This was a case that also involved a LEI policy. Although I found that
this case was distinguishable on its facts, it was worthy of review. The
relevant background to that case was that Cozzi acted for Quoc Nguyen, a
plaintiff in a motor vehicle accident case. Szot was the defendant.  Following
trial, the Court determined that Nguyen did not meet the statutory threshold. Costs
of $161,790.00 were ordered against Nguyen.
[27]      
Prior
to trial, Nguyen had obtained a $100,000.00 LEI policy through his
lawyer Cozzi. It should be noted that this was different than in the
application before this court, wherein, MHA obtained the LEI and not Belton.
[28]      
Nguyen
signed a contingency fee agreement with Cozzi in which he agreed to pay all of Cozzi’s
disbursements, without regard to success of his claim and further, assigned all
the proceeds of the LEI to Cozzi, as security for those disbursements.
[29]      
Throughout
the litigation, Nguyen had a litigation guardian and required a Vietnamese
interpreter, however, in the absence of his litigation guardian and without the
assistance of an interpreter, Cozzi had Nguyen sign a direction authorizing Cozzi
to receive almost $70,000.00 for disbursements with a further direction that
the remaining balance of the policy funds be applied towards the outstanding
costs award.
[30]      
Having
paid his own disbursements, Cozzi then offered to pay the remaining balance of
the policy to Szot in full satisfaction of the Costs Order. Szot declined
that offer.
[31]      
Cozzi
then brought an application seeking the following declarations:
[32]      
Szot
(through his insurers) sought a declaration that he was entitled to proceeds of
the LEI or in the alternative that he was entitled to a pro rata share.
[33]      
As
was the case in our application, the LEI policy for Nguyen did not address the
priority of payments of adverse costs or disbursements as between Cozzi and
Szot.
[34]      
Cozzi
argued that Nguyen was the beneficiary of the LEI and as such had the absolute
authority to direct payment of those proceeds as he sought fit, relying upon
the terms of the contingency agreement and direction. Szot argued that the
purpose of the LEI was to pay costs awards and as such his Costs Order should
take priority over Cozzi’s disbursements, which had increased from $30,000.00
to almost $70,000.00 and included non-trial related expenses.
[35]      
The
Court ultimately found that the contingency agreement between Nguyen and Cozzi was
invalid, as Nguyen was a party under disability and the agreement had not been
approved by a judge. Absent an underlying agreement between Cozzi and Nguyen, there
was no support for the redirection of funds from the policy to Cozzi on account
of his own disbursements.
[36]      
Since
the insurer had already paid out the policy funds and was not seeking their
return, the analysis turned to whether Szot could assert a claim over those
funds.  Interpreting Nguyen’s LEI policy, the court found that Szot could not
assert a claim and further determined that Nguyen was a “beneficiary” of the
LEI, and as the only person entitled to the proceeds of the policy, he had the
right to determine how those funds were to be used.  It is important to note
that at paragraph 56 of the Cozzi decision, the Court wrote, “…. each case has
its own circumstances, and the unique terms of the policy should be reviewed.” Based
upon this interpretation, Nguyen was free to use the policy funds as he saw fit
and not necessarily to pay the costs award or disbursements.
[37]      
The
Cozzi decision was appealed but not on the issues of Szot’s entitlement for his
own costs or Nguyen’s apparent windfall. The Court of Appeal addressed only two
issues, the first was the enforceability of the contingency fee agreement and
the second was the dismissal of Mr. Cozzi’s charging order motion. The appeals
were dismissed.
[38]       I
would distinguish the Cozzi decision from the case at bar because:
[39]      
The
LEI was a standard form contract, written in easily comprehensible language. It
employed bolded text alerting the reader that to defined terms within the LEI.
[40]      
 I found most of the language of the LEI to be
clear and unambiguous, except for a lack of clarity in determining how policy
funds were to be divided as between competing claims for costs of the action
and disbursements.
[41]      
 Paragraph
1.1 of the LEI provided a clear plan of action:
[42]      
Returning
to the issue of priority of payment as between the costs awarded or
disbursements which was not set out clearly in the policy, I found that the
reasonable expectation of the parties would be that there would be a pro
rata sharing of the available policy funds. This interpretation would avoid
any surprising or unrealistic results, because in most cases where there has
been an unsuccessful outcome at trial, both sides have been put to significant costs
and the
purpose of an LEI policy is to assist in reducing the impact of those costs on
both sides. It would make little sense, absent specific wording to that effect
in the policy itself, to allow one set of costs to be paid in priority to the
other or for one to eclipse the other.
[43]      
Based
upon a plain and ordinary reading of the policy with the interpretation being
as noted above, the payees of the proceeds of this insurance policy would be Spencer/Elite
and Martin & Hillyer, and not Belton himself. While the payment of the LEI
policy funds benefit Belton by ultimately reducing his own indebtedness for the
costs associated with his unsuccessful litigation, they were not meant to be
paid to him, to do with as he pleased, including as was suggested in Belton’s submissions,
using the funds to purchase groceries if he wanted. To be clear on this point,
what the LEI did not say was that Belton was a beneficiary of the policy
but rather, Belton was the claimant ( as defined) who signed a contingency fee
agreement (as defined) with MHA who was the policy holder (as defined) and the
loss of Belton’s case, triggered the payment of the policy funds to the
Defendant Spencer and her insurer Elite (as defined) and MHA for their own
disbursements (as defined).
[44]      
For
the foregoing reasons this court makes the following declarations:
[45]      
Additionally,
this court interprets the LEI as requiring a pro rata sharing of
the available policy funds as between Defendant’s Costs and Own Disbursements
(as defined).
[46]      
In
this case, since MHA was no longer seeking their own disbursements from the
policy fund, their pro rata share was nil, accordingly the remaining
$100,000.00 policy amount shall be paid to the Applicants to offset their
costs.
[47]      
If
the parties cannot agree on costs of this application, the Applicants shall
deliver their costs submissions of no more than 2 pages, double spaced, (not
including offers to settle and bills of costs) within 14 days of the date of
release of this decision.
[48]      
The
Respondent Belton shall deliver his costs submission, also of no more than 2
pages, double spaced (not including offers to settle and bills of costs) within
7 days thereafter.
[49]      
If
required, the Applicant shall deliver any reply to submissions, of no more than
1 page, double spaced within 3 days thereafter.
[50]      
If
a submission is not delivered within the aforenoted time frame, the party who
had the opportunity to make it, will be deemed to take no position.