[1]              
This endorsement concerns the ongoing Companies’ Creditors
Arrangement Act (“CCAA”) proceedings involving JTI-Macdonald Corp. (“JTI”),
Imperial Tobacco Canada Limited and Imperial Tobacco Company Limited
(collectively, “Imperial” and Rothmans Benson & Hedges Inc. (“RBH”). JTI,
Imperial and RBH are collectively referred to as the “Tobacco Companies”. This
endorsement relates to all three Tobacco Companies.
[2]              
Each of Deloitte Restructuring Inc. (“Deloitte”), in its capacity as
Court-appointed Monitor of JTI, FTI Consulting Canada Inc. (“FTI”), in its
capacity as Court-appointed Monitor of Imperial and Ernst & Young Inc.
(“EY”) in its capacity as Court-appointed Monitor of RBH brought a motion for
an order (CCAA Plan Amendment Order No. 1) approving the proposed amendments as
reflected in the Third Amended and Restated Plan of Compromise and Arrangement
in each of the CCAA proceedings.
[3]              
CCAA Plans were unanimously approved by voting creditors at three
separate, sequential meetings of Affected Creditors of JTI, Imperial and RBH
(the “Meetings”) on December 12, 2024. The Monitors then brought motions for
orders sanctioning the CCAA Plans and ancillary relief, which were heard from
January 29 to 31, 2025 (the “Sanction Hearing”).
[4]              
The Court’s decision on the Sanction Hearing is under reserve.
[5]              
At the Sanction Hearing, the Tobacco Companies advised that the issue of
allocation under the CCAA Plans remains unresolved as between them.
[6]              
The Tobacco Companies have now reached an agreement in principle to
resolve the allocation issue.
[7]              
Pursuant to the CCAA Plans, the Tobacco Companies are to make upfront
contributions on or before the Plan Implementation date equal to the aggregate
of each Tobacco Companies’ cash and cash equivalents generated from all sources
by each Tobacco Company prior to the Plan Implementation Date, plus cash
security deposits, less the sum of $750 million.
[8]              
The allocation of the $750 million holdback to be retained by the
Tobacco Companies to fund working capital (the “Working Capital Holdback”)
remained unresolved at the time of the Sanction Hearing. The Tobacco Companies
have now agreed in principle that on the Plan Implementation Date, RBH will
retain the entire Working Capital Holdback. In exchange for RBH, JTI and JTI
Macdonald TM Corp. (“JTI-TM”) have agreed to withdraw all of their objections
to the sanctioning of the CCAA Plans.
[9]              
Pursuant to section 20.4(a) of the CCAA Plans, the Monitors now move for
CCAA Plan Amendment Orders to approve certain amendments to the CCAA Plans to
implement this agreement in principle (the “Amendments”).
[10]          
As a result of the agreement in principle, the Tobacco Companies take
the position that section 5.2 of the CCAA Plans is to be intentionally deleted.
[11]          
In addition, the Tobacco Companies require that section 5.4 of the CCAA
Plans be amended to: (i) provide that the Working Capital Holdback is to be
retained by RBH as the “RBH Retained Amount”, (ii) permit RBH to deal with the RBH
Retained Amount in its sole discretion, including to transfer or distribute
such monies outside of Canada in such manner as RBH may determine; and (iii)
clarify that any such transfers or distributions of the RBH Retained Amount
will be deemed to be permitted transfers for the sole purpose of Article 11 of
the CCAA Plans.
[12]          
Certain administrative changes to effect the Amendments may also be
required.
[13]          
None of the amendments affect any Affected Creditor or Unaffected
Creditor. The amendments only impact the allocation of the Working Capital
Holdback among the Tobacco Companies.
[14]          
No Claimants oppose the motions.
[15]          
The only opposition to the requested relief is from the Heart and Stroke
Foundation (Heart & Stroke”).
[16]          
Heart & Stroke makes its submissions as a social stakeholder. It
submits that the CCAA Plan Amendment Orders should not be granted because the
proposed amendments to the CCAA Plans do not cure the unfairness and
unreasonableness of the CCAA Plans arising from the narrow scope of the Cy-près
Foundation.
[17]          
In making its submissions, Heart & Stroke relies on the Responding
Factum that was referenced at the Sanction Hearing, oral arguments made at the
Sanction Hearing and its written submissions for this motion. Heart &
Stroke does not raise any new issues on this motion.
[18]          
The Province of Ontario submitted that Heart & Stroke’s objection to
the proposed amendment to the Plan constituted an abuse of process.
[19]          
Abuse of process is a flexible doctrine which grants the court inherent
power to prevent the misuse of its procedure in a way that would bring the
administration of justice into disrepute. It may be used to bar the relitigation
of issues previously decided and to promote judicial economy and the integrity
of the court’s process: Toronto (City) v. C.U.P.E., Local 79, 2003 SCC
63, [2003] 3 S.C.R. 77, at paras. 37, 51.
[20]          
Heart & Stroke previously brought a motion for leave to appoint
representative counsel for “Future Tobacco Harms Stakeholders” in this
proceeding. In a decision dated June 23, 2023, McEwen J. dismissed that motion,
in part on the basis that any claims of the Future Tobacco Harms Stakeholders
were no different in nature from the unascertained and unasserted claims of the
Pan-Canadian Claimants: 2023 ONSC 2347, at para. 86.
[21]          
As a result of McEwen J.’s decision, Future Tobacco Harms Stakeholders
do not constitute a distinct class of creditors in this CCAA process. Heart
& Stroke is neither an Affected Creditor nor an Unaffected Creditor. The
court need not consider whether the proposed amendments to the plan are
materially prejudicial to their interests.
[22]          
Heart & Stroke opposes the amendments to the plan on the basis that
they do not adequately address the needs of Future Tobacco Harms Stakeholders.
If the court were to adopt this argument, the effect would be to treat Future
Tobacco Harms Stakeholders as a class of creditors whose approval is required
to sanction the plan. In this way, Heart & Stroke’s submissions are an improper
attempt to undermine McEwen J.’s decision.
[23]          
Heart and Stroke is a social stakeholder in this proceeding, but its
status does not give it standing to raise objections on issues that do not
affect it. In Parsons v. Canadian Red Cross Society (2001), 2001 CanLII 24094 (ON CA), 140 O.A.C.
348, the Court of Appeal held that, where a party has no legal rights that are
impacted by a particular decision, that party has no standing to appeal that decision.
By analogy, where a party’s rights are not impacted by an amendment to a
proposed plan of arrangement, that party has no standing to object to the
amendment.
[24]          
The proposed amendments to the plan fix the allocation of the Working
Capital Holdback. None of the amendments sought on this motion affect Heart
& Stroke as a social stakeholder. The proposed amendments have no impact on
the scope of the Cy-près Foundation. The issues raised by Heart &
Stroke on this motion were raised in the Sanction Hearing. The court’s decision
on the motion to sanction the plan is under reserve. Heart & Stroke’s
objections will be addressed in the court’s decision on that motion.
[25]          
Heart & Stroke advanced arguments that had no bearing on the
question of whether the motion to amend the plan should be granted, and which challenged
the court’s previous decision regarding the status of Future Tobacco Harms
Stakeholders. For these reasons, Ontario’s abuse of process concern was not
without merit.
[26]          
In my view, Heart & Stroke’s submissions were ill-advised and are
rejected.
[27]          
The sole issue on these motions is whether the court should grant the
CCAA Plan Amendment Orders.
[28]          
Section 20.4(a) of the CCAA Plan requires the Monitors to notify
Affected Creditors and the Tobacco Companies and obtain court approval of any
amendment, restatement, modification or supplement to be made following the
Meeting Orders that is not solely: (i) administrative; or (ii) error
correcting.
[29]          
The Monitors submit that the proposed amendments are substantive and not
merely curative and therefore that the court approve them. They submit that the
amendments do not affect and are not materially adverse to the financial or
economic interests of Affected Creditors or Unaffected Creditors. The
amendments only impact the allocation of the Working Capital Holdback among the
Tobacco Companies. The Affected Creditors and Tobacco Companies received notice
of these motions on February 27, 2025. All three Tobacco Companies, along with JTI-TM,
support the amendments.
[30]          
Sections 6 and 7 of the CCAA provide the court with authority to
sanction a plan or to alter or modify its terms. When amendments are proposed
after the creditors meeting, section 7 of the CCAA gives the court the
discretion to sanction an amended plan without convening an additional
creditors meeting if the court is satisfied that the creditors or shareholders
are not adversely affected by the proposed amendments.
[31]          
I accept the submissions of the Monitor. I am satisfied that no Affected
Creditor or Unaffected Creditor will be affected by the amendments. I am also
satisfied that each of the Monitors has adhered to section 20.4(a) of the CCAA
Plans by providing notice to the common service list and moving for the court’s
approval of the amendments.
[32]          
Each of the Monitors has filed a report recommending that the court
approve the amendments and grant the CCAA Plan Amendment Order No. 1.
[33]          
I am satisfied that the evidence establishes that the requested relief
is appropriate in the circumstances. The motions of the Monitors are granted
and the orders have been signed.
[34]          
For greater certainty, the existing Stay of Proceedings remains in
effect until such time as the decision on the Sanction Hearing has been
released.