[1]         
On
December 31st, 2024, I released reasons in this matter in which I granted
the RBC parties’ motions to have the Estate’s counsel removed from the record
and to strike out the counter-claims that had been made against Mr. Bowden and
RBC.  Leave was given to amend the claims against RBC only.
[2]         
It
is now time to fix the costs for the motion.
[3]         
 This
litigation has been going on for more than ten years.  A detailed history is
set out in my most recent decision (see 2024 ONSC 7253).  I rely on that
history, and will only outline the facts essential to understand my disposition
of the costs issues.
[4]         
The
underlying action concerned a claim for wrongful arrest made by the Plaintiff,
and his late wife, Ms. Sulochana Shanthakumar.  That action was ultimately
dismissed by Ricchetti J.  The costs of that action remain outstanding.
[5]         
However,
while that action was still before the Courts, Ms. Shanthakumar died.  After
her passing, Mr. Mylabathula, her husband, transferred a property that Ms.
Shanthakumar owned from her, through her estate and to himself.  The property
was transferred when there were costs orders outstanding.  RBC alleged that
this transfer was a fraudulent transfer and brought an action against Mr.
Mylabathula.
[6]         
Mr.
Mylabathula brought a counterclaim against RBC and against their lawyer, Mr.
Bowden.  That counterclaim included claims for general damages for harassment,
intimidation, denigration, embarrassment, prejudice, intentional infliction of
harm and racial discrimination.  I reviewed those claims and determined that,
as pled, none of them could survive.  I struck out the claims against RBC but permitted
leave to amend some of those claims on terms.  I also determined that the
action against Mr. Bowden could not survive in any circumstances, and I struck those
claims without leave to amend.
[7]         
At
the same time, there was an issue as to whether Mr. Callahan could continue as
counsel.  As I noted above, there had been some costs awards that had been
unpaid when the property owned by the late Ms. Shanthakumar was transferred to
her estate and then on to Mr. Mylabathula.  Those costs awards were provided to
Mr. Callahan when they were made by the Court.  Mr. Mylabathula claims that he was
not aware of the costs awards.  As I set out at paragraph 56 of my reasons on
this motion, Mr. Callahan’s evidence on what Mr. Mylabathula knew and when he
knew it is almost inevitably going to be necessary to determine the merits of RBC’s
claim.  As a result, I determined that Mr. Callahan could not remain as
counsel.
[8]         
 RBC
and Mr. Bowden seek substantial indemnity costs in the sum of $29,577.75
inclusive of HST and disbursements.  Those costs are sought on the basis of Mr.
Mylabathula’s conduct in making baseless and inflammatory allegations, the
refusal to admit established facts and the fact that there were unsubstantiated
allegations of racism made by Mr. Mylabathula in his claim.
[9]         
Mr.
Mylabathula argues that there is no basis for making an award of costs in
favour of RBC and that costs should be awarded in favour of the Plaintiff.  In
the alternative, Mr. Mylabathula claims that the costs sought by RBC and Mr.
Bowden are overstated and that “the costs outline delivered by RBC is
misleading and grossly misrepresents the scope of costs that RBC may be
entitled to.”  As a result, Mr. Mylabathula suggests an award of costs payable
by RBC to himself in the sum of $6,000.00 inclusive of disbursements and HST.
[10]       The
issues that I have to determine are:
[11]       I will
deal with each issue in turn.
[12]       Costs
usually follow the outcome.  Indeed, one of the factors that is considered in
awarding costs is the question of who was successful.  The question of success
is, as noted in Scipione v. Scipione, 2015 ONSC 5982, the very simple
question of who got what they asked for?
[13]       In
this case, RBC and Mr. Bowden were entirely successful.  They should be
entitled to costs.  Mr. Mylabathula’s position that he should be entitled to
costs is meritless, and RBC and Mr. Bowden are entitled to costs of both
motions as they were entirely successful on both motions.
[14]       Costs
are usually awarded on a partial indemnity basis.  Indeed, that is the standard
rule for costs:  S & A Strasser Ltd. v. Richmond Hill (Town of),
1990 CanLII 6856, (1990) 1 O.R. (3d) 243 (C.A.).  The only circumstances, other
than success greater than an offer to settle, in which a party will be entitled
to substantial (and not partial) indemnity costs is if the other party engaged
in reprehensible, scandalous or outrageous conduct.
[15]       In
this case, RBC argues that the conduct of the Plaintiff justifies substantial
indemnity costs for three reasons:
[16]       In
support of this position, RBC relies on Said v. University of Ottawa,
2014 ONSC 771 and Hawley v. Bapoo, 2006 CanLII 24333 (ON SC).  Those
cases stand for the proposition that “allegations of fraud, misconduct,
dishonesty, or racial animus have been recognized as sufficient basis to award
costs on the substantial indemnity scale…” (Hawley, para. 21).
[17]       The
problem with these cases is that this was a pleadings motion.  It was not a
disposition of the issues on the merits and, indeed, Mr. Mylabathula has been
given leave to amend his pleadings.  In those circumstances, I do not see how
the very high test for costs on a substantial indemnity basis can be met. 
While the allegations that Mr. Mylabathula has made may be scurrilous, I did
not have to adjudicate that question.  I only had to determine the question of
whether Mr. Mylabathula’s claims were legally tenable.
[18]       As a
result, I am of the view that costs should be awarded to RBC and Mr. Bowden on
a partial indemnity basis.
[19]       Determining
the quantum of costs requires a consideration of the factors under Rule 57.01
of the Rules of Civil Procedure.  In this case, the most relevant of
those factors are:
[20]       The
amount claimed in this case by Mr. Mylabathula was $1 million.  It is a significant
amount and supports a higher award of costs.
[21]       On the
complexity of the proceeding, the motions decision was lengthy and the issues
that I had to address were complex.  There were a number of different claims
that Mr. Mylabathula was advancing.  Those claims required a review of
considerable case-law.  As a result, the complexity of the proceeding is a
factor that favours a higher award of costs.
[22]       Then,
there is the importance of the issues.  In this case, the issues were a claim
of, inter alia, racial discrimination.  This is also a factor that
supports a higher award of costs.
[23]       Finally,
there are the reasonable expectations of the parties.  I am not persuaded that
Mr. Mylabathula’s claim for $6,000 inclusive of HST and disbursements is an
indication of what a reasonable party would expect to pay in this matter.  Indeed,
in the absence of a bill of costs from Mr. Mylabahtula, the amount he is
claiming is singularly unpersuasive as an indication of what a reasonable party
would expect to pay.
[24]       Having
reviewed the bill of costs provided by RBC, it appears that the total amount of
time spent on this matter was approximately forty (40) hours.  I have no doubt
that time was spent, and it is an amount of time that should have been within
the reasonable expectations of the parties, particularly given the importance
and complexity of the issues.
[25]       For
the foregoing reasons, I am ordering costs in the sum of $16,500.00 inclusive
of HST and disbursements.  Those costs are to be paid by Mr. Mylabathula to RBC
within thirty (30) days of today’s date.