[1]              
On February 7, 2023, S. Pratt J. of the Ontario
Court of Justice granted an application brought by the Crown, pursuant to s.
117.05(4)(a) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46, for the
forfeiture of several firearms and related items seized from the appellant on
September 1, 2021, by the Windsor Police Service. Pratt J. also made an order
pursuant to s. 117.05(4)(b) prohibiting the appellant from possessing any
weapons, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or explosive
substance for a period of three years.
[2]              
The appellant appeals that decision pursuant to
the provisions of s. 117.05(7), which permits an appeal to be brought to the
Superior Court of Justice.
[3]              
The appellant seeks an order allowing the appeal
and “reversing the decision” of Pratt J. and substituting therefor a finding
that there was no evidence to substantiate that it was not desirable, in the
interests of safety for the appellant to possess firearms. Or, in the
alternative, the appellant seeks an order for a new hearing on the application.
[4]              
  The appellant appeals the decision of Pratt J.
on the following bases:
[5]              
Although the amended Notice of Appeal alleged
ineffective assistance of counsel, at the hearing, that ground of appeal was
not pursued.
[6]              
The Crown submits that the evidence supported
the decision of the application judge and that Pratt J. considered all of the
evidence presented at the hearing in arriving at his decision, which was
supported by the evidence, and, accordingly, the appeal should be dismissed.
[7]              
Constable Jeffrey Pocock of the Windsor Police
Service testified that on September 1, 2021, he was dispatched to the Victoria
Park Place apartments, 150 Park St. West, for a report of a person with a gun.
The call was made by Daniel Blok-Buxton, a security guard at that building.
[8]              
The information communicated to Constable Pocock
by the police dispatcher from Mr. Blok-Buxton was that he had attended at
apartment #604, the residence of the appellant, Phillip Rodd, and while in the
apartment, he observed that Mr. Rodd  had a loaded handgun and a knife on the
table beside him. The security guard also told the police dispatcher that Mr.
Rodd claimed to be a police officer and told him that in the past, someone had
thrown something at his balcony and he had pointed the gun at him.
[9]              
Constable Pocock attended at that building along
with other officers. They then attended at apartment #604 to set up a
containment perimeter. Even before announcing their presence, Mr. Rodd opened
the door to leave, and he was ordered at gunpoint to get onto the ground and
was secured in handcuffs. Mr. Rodd was arrested for possession of a weapon
dangerous to the public peace.
[10]          
Constable Pocock entered apartment #604 to clear
it of any other persons. When he did so, he observed a black Sig Sauer handgun
in a holster on the coffee table with a loaded magazine next to it, a leg
holster (which was empty), a black folding knife and an old “slapper” once used
by police officers. Mr. Rodd’s wallet was open on the table with his Possession
and Acquisition Licence (“PAL”) visible, as well as a business card that said
“RCMP” with Mr. Rodd’s name on it and a signature.
[11]          
The apartment was searched without a warrant.
Constable Pocock determined that in the interest of public safety, any firearms
in the apartment would be seized. He testified that Mr. Rodd was cooperative
with police throughout this process.
[12]          
According to the evidence of Constable Taylor
Vansickle who also responded to the call, after the police arrested Mr. Rodd,
he indicated that he had taken the firearm out to clean it and that he intended
to secure it afterwards.
[13]          
Constable Vansickle testified that Mr. Rodd had eight
more firearms stored properly in their cases including a handgun, shotguns and
rifles. The firearm observed on the table, the Sig Sauer pistol, was the only
firearm he observed that was not properly stored.
[14]          
When asked by counsel in cross-examination
whether it was possible that Mr. Rodd had taken the firearm out to clean it
that day, the officer answered that it was possible.
[15]          
Constable Douglas Tilson testified as well. He
is the Firearms Officer for the Windsor Police Service. Constable Tilson
testified that he reviewed the reports from the arrest of the appellant and the
seizure of his firearms, and that he obtained a statement from Robert McLean
who was the manager of the apartment building. That statement was admitted into
evidence at the hearing.
[16]          
Mr. McLean confirmed in his statement that he
had received information from Mr. Blok-Buxton about the appellant displaying a
firearm in his residence. Further, Mr. McLean advised Constable Tilson that an
incident occurred in March of 2021 during which Mr. Rodd identified himself as
an “air marshal”. Mr. McLean indicated that Mr. Rodd had an incident with a
tenant who lived one floor below him. That man had thrown a bottle onto Mr.
Rodd’s balcony, smashing the bottle and spilling the contents on the balcony.
Mr. Rodd told Mr. McLean that as a result, he took his gun out in order to
protect himself if he was confronted.
[17]          
After reviewing the reports of the police
officers and that statement, Constable Tilson believed that Mr. Rodd lacked the
“personal responsibility” required to own and possess firearms and, accordingly,
he completed a “safety application” which resulted in the hearing conducted
pursuant to s. 117.05 of the Criminal Code.
[18]          
His safety concerns related to the unsafe
storage of the firearm as well as the fact that it appeared that the appellant
had been identifying himself as a law enforcement officer when he was not. Constable
Tilson was asked about a business card that was found with the appellant’s PAL.
This card had the emblem of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, along with those
words, the name of the appellant and his signature. Constable Tilson testified
that in his 30 years of experience as a police officer, he had never seen a
card like this.
[19]          
According to Constable Tilson, in order to be
properly stored in accordance with the firearm regulations, the Sig Sauer
pistol should have had a trigger lock on it and it should have been stored in a
receptacle that cannot be broken into.
[20]          
In addition to the viva voce evidence,
the Crown filed at the hearing a Firearms Follow up Report identifying the
firearms seized from the appellant that contained an appendix outlining the
grounds for the search and seizure of the firearms. The defence took no issue
with the filing of these documents.
[21]          
The statement of Mr. Blok-Buxton was also
admitted on consent. In his statement, Mr. Blok-Buxton advised the police that
he observed the firearm when he was called to the appellant’s apartment to
investigate a complaint that someone had poured grease from an apartment above
onto his balcony. He said that he saw the gun on the table with a magazine that
appeared to be loaded. Mr. Blok-Buxton is himself a registered firearm owner.
[22]          
When Mr. Blok-Buxton asked the appellant about
it, he replied saying “don’t worry about it, I’m a police officer”. In his
statement, Mr. Blok-Buxton said that Mr. Rodd told him that someone had thrown a
can of pop at his balcony on an earlier occasion and so he kept the gun staged
on the table for the next time “someone does it”. After leaving Mr. Rodd’s
apartment, Mr. Blok-Buxton spoke to the building manager and then called the
police.
[23]          
The defence did not object to the Crown filing
as part of its case, the statements of Mr. Blok-Buxton and Mr. McLean, who were
not present to testify, however they did make submissions as to the weight to
be attached to those statements.
[24]          
The defence did not call any evidence.
[25]          
In his reasons, Pratt J. noted that this was an
application pursuant to s. 117.05(4) of the Criminal Code and not a
criminal charge and, accordingly, in these circumstances, the Crown bore the
burden on a balance of probabilities to establish that it was not desirable, in
the interests of the safety of the appellant or any other person, that the
appellant possess firearms before the application could be granted.
[26]          
The application judge noted that the ownership
of firearms in Canada is not a right, but rather a closely guarded privilege
that is discretionary and subject to review at any time.
[27]          
Pratt J. considered the evidence relating to the
manner in which the firearm was located; that it was in a holster, on a table
in plain view with a loaded magazine beside it. It was not trigger-locked. Next
to the firearm was a folding knife, a short baton and rubber gloves.
[28]          
Although counsel for the appellant at the
hearing suggested that the firearm might have been taken out to be cleaned, the
application judge dismissed that suggestion because, based on the evidence, it
was holstered, there was no cleaning kit nearby, nor was there an empty pistol
case or trigger lock nearby. He found that the circumstances did not support
that the firearm had only been taken out briefly for cleaning. Furthermore,
when the appellant was first observed by the police, he was leaving his
residence and not in the process of cleaning the firearm, but rather, leaving
it unattended in his apartment in an unsafe condition.
[29]          
Pratt J. considered the evidence contained in
the statements filed, as well as the viva voce evidence in arriving at
his decision. The hearing judge concluded that the statements of Mr.
Blok-Buxton and Mr. McLean were credible and trustworthy hearsay evidence that
he could rely upon.
[30]          
He concluded that there was a basis to believe the
appellant had held himself out to be a member of law enforcement when he was not,
and that based on the totality of the evidence, on a balance of probabilities,
the Crown had met its burden to establish that it was not desirable in the
interests of safety for the appellant to possess firearms. He granted the
forfeiture application and made an order that the appellant not possess any
weapon for a period of three years.
[31]          
The Crown bears the burden on a balance of
probabilities on applications brought pursuant to s. 117.05 of the Criminal
Code, to establish that “it is not desirable in the interests of the safety
of the person from whom the thing was seized or any other person that the
person should possess any weapon, prohibited device, firearm part, ammunition,
prohibited ammunition and explosive substance, or any such thing….”
[32]          
The purpose of s. 117.05(4) of the Code “is
the protection of the public from the destructive force of firearms in the
hands of persons not equipped morally, mentally, or emotionally to handle them”:
see R. v. Kuleczka, 2023 ONSC 3876, at para. 23.
[33]          
At a hearing conducted pursuant to s. 117.05 of
the Code, the justice shall hear “all relevant evidence” pursuant to the
provisions of s. 117.05(3).
[34]          
In R. v. Zeolkowski, 1989 CanLII 72 (SCC), [1989] 1 S.C.R.
1378, at paras. 17-18, Sopinka J., delivering the decision of the Court,
determined that this meant that the court could consider hearsay evidence. The
Court determined that the term “all relevant evidence” included “all facts
which are logically probative of the issue”. However, the court must scrutinize
hearsay evidence presented to ensure that it is credible and trustworthy.
[35]          
The application judge must determine the
sufficiency of the evidence relied upon in support of the forfeiture order as
at the date of the hearing: see R. v. Peacock-McDonald, 2007 ONCA
128, 221 O.A.C. 93 at para. 40.
[36]          
This is not an onerous standard: see R. v.
Zeolkowski, at para. 18; and R. v. Peacock-McDonald.
[37]          
On appeal, when it is argued that  a verdict is
unreasonable, the appeal court must consider whether the decision is one that
could reasonably have been rendered on the basis of the evidence or whether the
decision was the result of illogical or irrational reasoning: see R. v. Li,
2013 ONCA 81, 296 C.C.C. (3d) 408 at paras. 122-123.
[38]          
If, on appeal, it is submitted that there was a
misapprehension of the evidence that caused a miscarriage of justice, the
appellant must establish that the alleged error could have affected the
outcome. This is a stringent standard: see R. v. Smith, 2021 SCC
16, 405 C.C.C. (3d) 413 at para. 2.
[39]          
A failure to consider material evidence can
constitute a misapprehension of the evidence: see R. v. A.A., 2024
ONCA 45, at para. 26.
[40]          
As for the sufficiency of a trial judge’s
reasons, the Court of Appeal for Ontario in R. v. Scott, 2022
ONCA 317, set out the test as follows, at para. 27:
[41]          
The appellant alleges that the learned
application judge misapprehended evidence which resulted in an unreasonable
finding and that he failed to consider the evidence (or lack of evidence) of
the appellant’s circumstances at the time of the hearing in making his
determination.
[42]          
The appellant acknowledges that Pratt J.
articulated the proper legal test to be applied in relation to the application
before him but submits that he misapprehended the evidence before him or failed
to consider evidence in applying that test to the circumstances of this case.
[43]          
According to the appellant, there was no
evidence before the court of any threats to other persons, nor was there any
evidence at the time of the hearing that the appellant posed a threat to his
own safety or to the safety of others.
[44]          
The evidence considered by Pratt J. included the
circumstances that led the police to investigate the appellant, that is, the
observations made by Mr. Blok-Buxton,  as well as the statements allegedly made
to him by the appellant that he was a police officer, and the observations made
by the police officers who attended at his residence.
[45]          
The appellant alleges in his factum that he was
a lawful firearm owner for over five decades, and that many of the firearms in
his possession were gifted to him. He also argues that the firearm was not
trigger-locked or stored in a case because it was being cleaned and that this
evidence was not considered by the application judge.
[46]          
The difficulty with the argument of the
appellant is that he did not testify at the hearing and there was no evidence
before the court as to the length of time that he owned firearms or what he was
doing at the time that the police attended at his residence. There were suggestions
put to the police witnesses during cross-examination that the appellant may
have been cleaning his firearm at the time that the police attended and that that
was the reason the firearm was located in a holster on a table in the living-room
of his residence.  In responding to those suggestions, the witnesses indicated
that it was a possibility, but they had no direct knowledge of whether this was
the case.
[47]          
There was no other evidence before the court as
to the reason why the firearm was located on a table with a loaded magazine
next to it. The application judge  heard evidence in the nature of hearsay,
that is, what the appellant said to Constable Vansickle, which is that he was
cleaning the firearm at the time that the police attended.
[48]          
Pratt J. rejected that evidence, which he was
entitled to do. He indicated in his reasons, reported at R. v. Rodd 2023
ONCJ 62, at para. 20 the following:
[49]          
This does not reflect a misapprehension of the
evidence, it reflects a rejection of the position of the appellant because
there was no evidence to support it.
[50]          
The application judge in his reasons clearly
assessed all the evidence including the circumstances surrounding the
attendance by the police at the residence of the appellant. Pratt J. was
concerned about the circumstances surrounding the discovery of the firearm. It
was in a holster, not trigger-locked. There was a loaded magazine beside it, as
well as a belt, a short baton (the slapper),  rubber gloves and a card that
bore the RCMP coat of arms with the words “Royal Canadian Mounted Police” and
with the name of the appellant printed on it and a signature. None of the
officers had ever seen a card like this. There was evidence that the accused
told one of the witnesses that it was okay because he was a police officer. At
another time, according to the statement of the building manager, he had
identified himself as an air marshal.
[51]          
I disagree that the learned application judge
misapprehended the evidence or failed to consider evidence. The test to be
applied on the application was whether it is “desirable in the interests of the
safety of the person, or any other person” that the subject should be permitted
to possess firearms. The application judge was required to determine, whether
based on that evidence, there is a legitimate concern that the subject lacks
the responsibility and discipline required of a firearms owner: see R. v.
Penman, 2022 ONSC 1061, at para. 70. Based on the evidence at the
hearing, it was open to the application judge to reach the conclusion that he
did.
[52]          
As to whether Pratt J. failed to consider the
evidence, or lack of evidence, as to the circumstances at the time of the
hearing that would justify the making of the order, again I disagree with the
submissions of the appellant.
[53]          
The appellant called no evidence at the hearing,
although I recognize that he was under no obligation to do so; the onus was on
the Crown. However, that left unanswered questions for the application judge.
[54]          
 The Crown relied on the evidence of the conduct
of the appellant at the time that the firearms were seized in support of their
position that he lacks the responsibility and discipline required of a firearms
owner. Although the appellant had no criminal record and was cooperative with
the police, the fact that when the police arrived at his residence, he was
leaving his apartment and there was a firearm left on a table with a loaded
magazine beside it, together with the other evidence, caused the application
judge to have significant concerns about the suitability of the appellant to
possess firearms.
[55]          
The application judge referred to the statement
of Mr. Blok-Buxton, which was admitted on consent. In that statement, the
witness told the police that Mr. Rodd told him that he “normally” kept the gun
on the table. He said: “he told me he keeps it there normally because someone
had thrown a pop can at his balcony. He keeps it staged on the table in
preparation or something for the next time someone does it.”
[56]          
This would suggest ongoing careless storage of a
firearm which could put the appellant or others at risk. There is no requirement
that the Crown show that the subject of the application will use their
firearms in a dangerous way: see R. v. Penman, at para. 70. The
record  at the hearing was sufficient to permit the application judge to reach
the conclusion that he did.
[57]          
A judge hearing an application under s. 117.05
of the Code is entitled to rely on hearsay evidence: see R. v. Zeolkowski.
Pratt J. was aware that he was required to scrutinize any hearsay evidence
to ensure it was credible and trustworthy before he accepted it.[1]
[58]          
The application judge specifically indicated
that he accepted the statements filed as credible and trustworthy. He stated
the reasons why he did so. He indicated that he heard no evidence that would
detract from their credibility or trustworthiness, nor was there evidence of
any animus or motive on the part of those witnesses to fabricate allegations.
[59]          
The onus on the Crown on a hearing pursuant to
s. 117.05(4) is on a balance of probabilities and not beyond a reasonable
doubt. The application judge properly scrutinized the hearsay evidence as he
was required to do.
[60]          
When his reasons are read as a whole, it was
open to him to reach this conclusion. Accordingly, I find there is no reason to
interfere with the ruling of the application judge on this ground.
[61]          
For all these reasons, the appeal is dismissed.