[1]              
The plaintiff, The Guarantee Company of North
America (“GCNA”), brings this motion for an extension of time to serve the
statement of claim in this action or to validate service of the statement of
claim as of March 16, 2022. The statement of claim was issued October 17, 2018.
Under the Rules of Civil Procedure, the statement of claim was required
to be served by April 17, 2019. There is no dispute that the plaintiff’s
counsel (not Mr. Esterbauer or Ms. Hodge or anyone from their firm) did not
make any attempt to serve the statement of claim on any of the defendants before
March 2022. The defendants oppose the motion.
[2]              
For the reasons that follow, the plaintiff’s
motion is dismissed.
[3]              
GCNA, a surety, issued six labour and material
payment bonds between 2014 and 2016 to Maram Building Corporation (“Maram”) in
relation to six separate construction projects for which Maram acted as the
general contractor. In addition, GCNA also issued a construction lien bond in
relation to another construction project.
[4]              
On September 16, 2014, GCNA and the defendants
entered into an Indemnity Agreement (the “Indemnity Agreement”) pursuant to
which the defendants agreed to indemnify GCNA for payments made by it in
relation to the bonds. Demcor Construction Services Inc. (“Demcor”) was a
subcontractor on the projects. Tyler Scorpion Holdings Inc. (“Tyler”) was a
holding company for Maram. Mary Tatiana Picard is the sole director and officer
of Maram and Tyler. Ms. Picard was a director of Demcor for a period of time,
although the defendants assert that she was not a director when she mistakenly
signed the Indemnity Agreement on behalf of Demcor in 2014. Ms. Picard’s
husband, Raymond Polidoro, is Demcor’s current director.
[5]              
GCNA claims that it made payments under the
bonds amounting to $409,755.20. It claims that it is entitled to
indemnification for this amount plus another $50,000 in expenses from the
defendants, jointly and severally. Between the first and second day of argument
on this motion GCNA amended its statement of claim to remove its claims for damages
for breach of trust and an accounting.
[6]              
The six projects in question were substantially
performed, or the contracts were terminated, between 2015 and 2016.
[7]              
Beginning in 2016, GCNA received about 29 claims
under the bonds. From March 2016 through October 2018, GCNA sought the
defendants’ positions on the claims, including defences, set-offs, claims or
counter-claims. Ms. Picard provided information and documents to GCNA’s
representative, Luciana Polsoni. The information provided included binders of
hard copy documents as well as electronic documents. The plaintiff alleges that
the defendants failed to provide timely information to defend some of the
claims. GCNA made payments on the claims in the period October 14, 2016 to February
21, 2018. During this time, GCNA reminded the defendants that it would be looking
to them for repayment of any amounts paid out under the Indemnity Agreement.
[8]              
On October 1, 2018, Ms. Polsoni instructed
GCNA’s counsel, Borden Ladner Gervais LLP (“BLG”), to issue a statement of
claim as soon as possible in respect of the claim on the Indemnity Agreement.
In her email to Sonny Ingram, an associate at BLG, she said that they could
serve the statement of claim after GCNA sent a demand letter to the defendants.
Mr. Ingram had carriage of a number of similar files for GCNA.
[9]              
On October 2, 2018, Ms. Polsoni sent a demand
letter dated October 1, 2018, on behalf of GCNA, to the defendants seeking
payment under the Indemnity Agreement of $409,755.20 by October 5, 2018,
failing which GCNA would “move forward with formal legal proceedings” against
the indemnitors. She also conveyed this same information to Ms. Picard in a
telephone call.
[10]          
On October 26, 2018, Ms. Picard received what
would be her final correspondence from GCNA for over for three years. Nowhere
in this correspondence does Ms. Polsoni mention that GCNA had issued a
statement of claim against the defendants.
[11]          
As noted, the statement of claim was issued on
October 17, 2018.  Mr. Ingram sent a copy of the issued claim to Ms. Polsoni the
next day. Mr. Ingram did not arrange for service of the statement of claim. The
six-month deadline for service of the statement of claim expired on April 17,
2019.
[12]          
On April 22, 2019, Ms. Polsoni sent an email to
Mr. Ingram asking for an update on the action. In her email she said that she
would “like to look at limitation dates and next steps to the extent of what I
will need to prepare and provide to you.” Mr. Ingram did not provide a written
response. Both Ms. Polsoni and Mr. Ingram swore affidavits on the motion and
were cross-examined. Neither could recall speaking about this file in the
period after this email. BLG has produced its redacted dockets for this matter
in answer to an undertaking. There is no docket entry by Mr. Ingram for
receiving this email and no docket entry for a call around this time.
[13]          
Mr. Ingram’s affidavit indicates that he was
facing personal challenges following the birth of his first child on August 11,
2019, namely: difficulties that he and his wife had raising their son during
the COVID-19 pandemic in the absence of childcare assistance; increased demands
from clients with urgent issues due to the pandemic; and difficulty accessing
paper records during the pandemic. Mr. Ingram did not disclose these challenges
to BLG. He departed BLG in January 2021.
[14]          
Upon Mr. Ingram’s departure, the file was transferred
to another associate at BLG (“second BLG associate”) in February 2021. The file
was then transferred to a third associate at BLG (“third BLG associate”) in
October 2021. There is no affidavit from either of them on this motion and no
explanation provided by the plaintiff as to why they have not provided
affidavits. Richard Yehia, the current BLG lawyer with carriage, did file an
affidavit on this motion.
[15]          
The statement of claim identifies two BLG
lawyers as lawyers of record, Mr. Ingram and a BLG partner, Richard Shaban.
Although Mr. Yehia and Mr. Ingram state that Mr. Ingram had sole carriage of
the file, they do not explain why Mr. Shaban’s name is shown on the statement
of claim.
[16]          
On February 10, 2021, Mr. Shaban docketed to the
file as follows: “Considering file status and next step; following up with
[second BLG associate] and R. Yehia.” Mr. Shaban has not filed an affidavit on
the motion and no reason was provided for why he did not do so.
[17]          
The docket report shows that on February 11, 2021,
a law clerk obtained a print-out of the court action. The second BLG associate
entered a docket on February 23, 2021, for correspondence with Mr. Ingram, Mr.
Yehia and clerks regarding “AOS”, i.e. affidavit of service.
[18]          
Mr. Yehia’s evidence is that the second BLG associate
contacted him in March 2021 and told him that she could not locate an affidavit
of service for the file. Mr. Yehia says that he advised her of the steps that
could be taken to verify service, including checking the court records. On
April 5, 2021, this associate made a docket entry as follows: “Incorporated R.
Yehia’s comments into report, research test for extension of service; sent
report to R. Shaban.”
[19]          
In his affidavit, Mr. Yehia also deposes that
the second BLG associate told him that she spoke to Ms. Polsoni who believed
that the claim had been served. The defendants object to this evidence, on the
basis that it is hearsay. I agree that it is hearsay. As noted, the plaintiff
did not give a reason why the second BLG associate did not provide an affidavit
on the motion. Ms. Polsoni does not mention this conversation in her affidavit
and on cross-examination, Ms. Polsoni said that she could not recall any
communication with anyone about the matter at BLG after her email to Mr. Ingram
on April 22, 2019, until March 2022. In these circumstances, Mr. Yehia’s
evidence on this point is not reliable.
[20]          
Mr. Yehia deposes in his affidavit that he assumed
carriage of the file on March 3, 2022. However, Mr. Yehia had involvement in
the file as early as February 10, 2021, according to BLG’s dockets. Mr. Yehia
says that he reviewed the file on March 3, 2022, and determined the statement
of claim had not been served. His evidence is that he advised his client of
this the same day by telephone call to Ms. Polsoni. Ms. Polsoni, in her
affidavit, says that it was only in or around April 2022 (not March 2022) that
she learned that the statement of claim had not been served. She says that she
relied on BLG to advance the action on behalf of the plaintiff.
[21]          
Meanwhile, on January 11, 2022, Ms. Polsoni sent
an email to Ms. Picard regarding  outstanding litigation matters. In that email
she says: “In terms of claim matters and litigation matters, the only
outstanding matters are” and lists two actions commenced by Maram’s subtrades.
She notes that one of the actions is due to be dismissed as there had been “five
years without activity.” She asks for an update on a lien action where GCNA had
issued a lien bond which was being handled by Maram. Notably, the indemnity
action commenced by GCNA against the defendants is not mentioned. This was the
first communication from GCNA to the defendants in over three years, since
October 26, 2018.
[22]          
BLG attempted service of the statement of claim
on the defendants in March 2022. When BLG was unable to serve the statement of
claim at the defendants’ last known address, Mr. Yehia contacted Ms. Picard by
email on March 16, 2022 asking for the defendants’ current addresses and attaching
a copy of the statement of claim.
[23]          
Ms. Chaytor then contacted Mr. Yehia to discuss
the matter on March 22, 2022. When it became apparent that the defendants were
unlikely to consent to an extension of the time for service, BLG contacted
LawPro. LawPro appointed counsel and the notice of motion in this matter was
served on July 8, 2022.
[24]          
Rule 14.08 of the Rules of Civil Procedure
requires that a statement of claim be served within six months of issuance.
However, a court may extend the time for service on such terms are just (Rule
3.02). Rule 1.04(1) provides that the rules “shall be liberally construed to
secure the just, most expeditious and least expensive determination of every
civil proceeding on its merits.”
[25]          
The leading case on a motion to extend the time
for service of a statement of claim is the decision of the Court of Appeal in Chiarelli
v Wiens.[1]
There the court held that the basic consideration is whether an extension of
the time for service will advance the just resolution of the dispute, without
prejudice or unfairness to either party.[2]
[26]          
In Chiarelli, the Court of Appeal said:[3]
[27]          
More recently, in Tookenay v O’Mahony Estate,[4] Justice J. Paul R. Howard
listed a number of factors that courts have considered in determining whether
an extension of time to serve a statement of claim should be granted, as
follows:
[28]          
On a motion to extend the time for service of
the statement of claim, the plaintiff must provide a reasonable explanation for
the delay.[5]
The defendants argue that the plaintiff has not done so. As noted above, the
plaintiff made no effort to serve the statement of claim until March 2022 when Mr.
Yehia sent a copy of it to Ms. Picard by email.
[29]          
The defendants divide the time from the issuance
of the statement of claim to the first attempt at service into four periods of
delay. The first period of delay is from the issuance of the statement of claim
in October 2018 to the six-month deadline for service, i.e. April 17,
2019. The second period is from April 18, 2019, to August 19, 2019 (the start
of Mr. Ingram’s personal difficulties).
[30]          
The only explanation for the delay during this
period of time given by Mr. Ingram in his affidavit is his statement that he
handled a significant volume of these actions for GCNA and his statement that:
“Through inadvertence, I mistakenly omitted to serve this Statement of Claim.”
[31]          
On cross-examination Mr. Ingram was asked for his
explanation for his failure to have the claim served and responded as follows:
[32]          
The third period runs from the start of Mr.
Ingram’s personal difficulties in August 2019 until he left the firm in January
2021.
[33]          
There is no explanation provided by Mr. Shaban
for BLG’s failure to attempt service of the statement of claim during the first
three periods of delay, notwithstanding that he is listed as a lawyer of record
on the statement of claim and was involved in the fourth period, as evidenced
by BLG’s dockets.
[34]          
The fourth period of delay runs from Mr. Ingram’s
departure in January 2021 to March 2022, when the plaintiff first attempted
service of the statement of claim. During this period four BLG lawyers docketed
to the file. Only one of these lawyers, Mr. Yehia, provided an affidavit on
this motion.
[35]          
By April 5, 2021, at the very latest (when the
second BLG associate docketed for researching the test for an extension of the
time for service and reporting to the senior lawyer) the plaintiff’s lawyers either
knew the statement of claim had not been served or they ought to have known it.
However, BLG did not take any steps to serve the statement of claim until March
2022, almost one year later. The motion was not brought promptly after BLG
discovered or ought to have discovered the error.
[36]          
Even if the plaintiff has provided a reasonable
explanation for the delay to the point where Mr. Ingram left the firm, there is
no reasonable explanation for why BLG did not determine whether the statement
of claim had been served shortly thereafter and take the necessary steps.
[37]          
In Chiarelli, the court held that on a
motion to extend time for service, “the court should be concerned mainly
with the rights of litigants, not with the conduct of counsel”.[6] [emphasis added]
[38]          
In Marche D'Alimentation Denis Theriault Ltée
v. Giant Tiger Stores Ltd.[7]
(a case involving a motion to set aside a dismissal order) the Court of Appeal held:
[39]          
The defendants submit that the “innocent client”
does not exist in this case. Based on the record before me, and for the
purposes of this motion only, I agree.
[40]          
Ms. Polsoni followed up with BLG on one
occasion, in April 2019. There is no evidence that she followed up at any time
in the years following.
[41]          
Although Ms. Polsoni said in cross-examination
that she was not a sophisticated legal person and that she did not know the
time limits of when things had to happen in litigation, it is clear from her
correspondence quoted above that she was aware that there were time limits for
the steps in an action and “limitation periods”. She knew that an action could
be dismissed after five years for delay. The plaintiff in this case is a
sophisticated business entity and Ms. Polsoni is someone who directs the
conduct of litigation in the course of her duties.
[42]          
The Court of Appeal in Chiarelli provided
the following guidance for the exercise of the court’s discretion in connection
with the issue of prejudice:[8]
[43]          
Although the plaintiff sent a demand letter in
October 2018, no copy of the statement of claim was ever provided to the defendants
such that they had no notice that a claim had been commenced until March 2022. Ms.
Polsoni’s email to the defendants of October 26, 2018, does not mention that
the action has been commenced. After that email, neither the plaintiff nor BLG
communicated with the defendants for over three years until Ms. Polsoni sent an
email to Ms. Picard on January 11, 2022, which refers to two claims against
Maram by subtrades as “the only outstanding matters”. In her affidavit, Ms.
Picard says that after years of not hearing from the plaintiff, she assumed
that GCNA would not be taking any further steps with regard to the Indemnity
Agreement. Ms. Picard’s evidence is that there was money owing to Maram by the
owners of the projects from which the payments to the subcontractors could have
been made. In these circumstances it was reasonable for the defendants to believe
that the plaintiff was not going to pursue its claims against them.
[44]          
The defendants assert that they are prejudiced
as the server that contained many of Maram’s digital records was corrupted and
became inoperable in 2021. In particular, Maram lost detailed accounting
records. Ms. Picard is unable to locate all of the relevant emails and physical
records. Demcor’s physical records relating to the construction projects were
destroyed by water damage in January 2021. Had the statement of claim been
served in time or even within a year or more after the deadline for service,
the defendants would have been on notice to preserve their documents.
[45]          
The plaintiff contends that the defendants are
not prejudiced in their ability to defend the action because GCNA preserved all
of its documents, including the documents provided to it by the defendants
which amount to thousands of pages. GCNA and the defendants were aligned in
interest in defending the bond claims, and therefore, the plaintiff says that
the defendants would have provided any relevant documents to it during the
period of time that GCNA was assessing and handling the bond claims.
[46]          
The plaintiff submits that this is a case that
can be determined entirely on the available record, as it turns on the
information that GCNA had available to it at the time that GCNA paid the
claims. The plaintiff also asserts that there are only limited defences as
there is a contractual presumption of liability.[9]
[47]          
If the matter proceeds, one of the defendants’
defences will be that GCNA failed to investigate the claims and properly adjust
and mitigate its losses under the bonds and did not act in good faith. The
defendants will argue that GCNA acted precipitously in paying out some of the
claims and did not provide enough time for the defendants to provide
information to GCNA to assist it in defending the claims. Maram will also
allege that GCNA ought to have obtained payments from the owners. Demcor will
defend on the basis that it is not liable under the Indemnity Agreement as GCNA
released Demcor by letter dated May 27, 2016. As I understand it, there is a
live issue as to whether Demcor was released from obligations pre-dating that
letter.
[48]          
At the relevant time, GCNA did not have a
written policy related to the retention of emails and electronic documents.
GCNA’s evidence is that claim file handlers (such as Ms. Polsoni) are
instructed to retain all emails and documents in the event of or in
anticipation of litigation. It is possible that GCNA’s record keepers did not
keep all relevant documents through error or because they did not believe that
a document was relevant. For instance, it appears that GCNA does not have all
of the emails from its underwriting staff relevant to the issue of the release
of Demcor.
[49]          
While GCNA has the documents that the defendants
provided to it in regards to the claims of the subcontractors, Ms. Picard’s
evidence is that GCNA would not have all of the documents relevant to the
defendants’ defences. Ms. Picard provided to GCNA only the documents that were requested
by Ms. Polsoni. In some case, Ms. Picard provided summaries without the backup
documentation.
[50]          
I am satisfied that the defendants would be
prejudiced in defending the action due to the loss of relevant documentation.
[51]          
The defendants also raised the issue of
witnesses unavailability, specifically with respect to former employees of the
defendants. However, the former employees left the defendants’ employ prior to
the commencement of the lawsuit, such that any prejudice would not be prejudice
arising from the delay in serving the statement of claim. Further, the
plaintiff has located the defendants’ former employees and GCNA’s witnesses
remain available. However, the problem that memories fade over time has been
compounded by loss of the defendants’ documents, such that the former employees
of the defendants may not have the necessary documents available to them to
refresh their memories.
[52]          
The defendants also argue that they are
prejudiced because Maram has lost the ability to commence claims in contract against
the owners of the projects to recover the amounts owing to Maram under the
contracts for the various projects. However, any such claims may have been
barred by the two-year limitation period for such claims prior to the deadline
for service of the statement of claim given that the projects were
substantially performed in or around 2015-2016. I accept that the defendants’
ability to pursue claims for contribution and indemnity against the owners is made
more difficult by the passage of time and the possibility that the owners no
longer have the relevant documents.
[53]          
I find that the defendants would be prejudiced as
a result of the plaintiff’s delay in the service of the statement of claim. The
plaintiff’s delay has put the defendants’ ability to defend the claim at risk.
[54]          
Having considered the circumstances of this case,
I am not satisfied that the extension of time for service will advance the just
resolution of the dispute, without prejudice or unfairness to the parties.
[55]          
Despite the able arguments of Mr. Esterbauer,
the plaintiff’s motion is dismissed.
[56]          
I encourage the parties to agree on costs. If
they cannot, the defendants may submit costs submissions by March 14, 2025. The
plaintiff may deliver responding submissions by March 28, 2025. Submissions are
limited to three double-spaced pages, exclusive of attachments.
[57]          
I wish to commend both counsel teams for the
quality of their written and oral advocacy.