[1]                    
Matthew Elias (“Elias”) has pleaded guilty to
and been found guilty of possession of child pornography, contrary to section
163.1(4) of the Criminal Code (count 2 on the Indictment dated March 20,
2023).  A conviction is now registered, and this Court needs to sentence the
offender for his crime.
[2]                    
The facts underlying the offence are contained
in Exhibit 1 – the agreed statement of fact.
[3]                    
On March 4, 2021, someone uploaded a child
pornography video and shared it in a chat.  The associated Internet Protocol
address that was used to upload the video was verified as being the home
address of Elias.  The video was provided to the Halton Regional Police
Service.
[4]                    
The video was of a young female, bent over,
wearing a skirt and no underwear.  The child holds her buttocks open and then
places her finger near her anus.  The camera focusses on her anal area.  The
child then lies on her back, opens her legs to the camera and exposes her
vagina.  The child masturbates and places her finger inside her vagina and then
licks her finger.  The camera focusses on her vagina.  The child appears to be
between 7 and 10 years old.  Her vaginal area has no pubic hair.
[5]                    
On September 23, 2021, police executed a search
warrant at the offender’s home.  Present at the home at the time of the search
were Elias and his parents.
[6]                    
The police found several USB drives in a dresser
in the offender’s bedroom.  Several computer devices, other electronic devices
and accessories were seized by the police.
[7]                    
The seized devices were downloaded by the police
and found to contain 22,746 child pornography images and 741 child pornography
videos.
[8]                    
To label the child pornography material as being
disturbing would be a gross understatement.  The material includes numerous
videos of the sexual abuse, rape and torture of young children under the age of
8 years old; numerous videos of female children under the age of 8 years old
who are masturbating; numerous videos of children as young as 3 years old;
numerous videos of very young female children being anally and vaginally
penetrated by adult males; numerous videos of very young female children
performing fellatio on adult males; numerous videos of very young female children
posing nude for the camera; numerous images and videos of female children
posing provocatively for the camera and engaging in sexual activity with other
children; and other videos that appear to have been taken by Elias, covertly
filmed in public areas, with the focus being on the buttocks of the
unsuspecting victims.
[9]                    
The child pornography material possessed by the
offender has been summarized by way of thorough written descriptions of a
representative sample of the images and videos (Exhibit 2, sealed, but reviewed
by this Court).  Those descriptions are shocking.  They are disgusting.  The
truly depraved nature of the child pornography that this offender possessed can
be fairly illustrated with one example from Exhibit 2 – a video of a very young
female child, no older than 5 years of age, sucking the penis of an adult
male.  The video is in slow motion and captures the adult male ejaculating into
the mouth of the child, barely out of her toddler years.
[10]                
The following information about Elias is taken
from various sources, including: (i) the presentence report (Exhibit 3), (ii)
the evidence of the offender’s father who testified at the sentencing hearing;
and (iii) the evidence of Dr. Julian Gojer, forensic psychiatrist, who provided
expert opinion evidence at the sentencing hearing by way of his report dated
September 30, 2023 (Exhibit 4) and his testimony.
[11]                
The author of the presentence report described
Elias as being polite, cooperative and forthcoming; disgusted and ashamed about
what he has done; and genuinely remorseful for his criminal conduct but lacking
insight into the reasons for his offending behaviour.
[12]                
That Elias is deeply remorseful and regretful
for his actions and has taken full responsibility for what he has done was
confirmed by Dr. Gojer in his report.
[13]                
The author of the presentence report opined that
Elias was a suitable candidate for community supervision.
[14]                
That opinion is shared by Dr. Gojer, who
testified that Elias would likely be “highly compliant” with therapy and
treatment.  Dr. Gojer testified that the offender needs, first and foremost,
sex offender therapy.  Regardless of the sentence imposed by this Court, Dr.
Gojer would be willing and able to take Elias as a patient in his own sex
offender therapy program or refer the offender to another such program,
including the one run by the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health.
[15]                
The police described Elias as being cooperative
and quiet during the arrest process.
[16]                
The offender is currently 37 years old.  He is a
Canadian citizen.  He has no children.  He is single and has never been married
or in any romantic relationship with anyone.  He has no criminal record.  He
has now been on bail for approximately 40 months, without incident.
[17]                
The offender and his entire family, including
his two siblings and their families, hold the offender responsible for the
death of his mother.  After the arrest of Elias, his mother was very
distraught.  She cried all of the time.  She was then diagnosed with stage 4
cancer and died on January 1, 2024, leaving behind the offender and his father
living in the home together.
[18]                
Since the arrest of Elias, the offender has been
completely ostracized by his two siblings and their families.  He has no
relationship of any kind with the children of his siblings.
[19]                
The offender’s sole support now comes from his
father, whom he has always lived with.  Elias has never lived independently and
has no desire to do so.
[20]                
The offender completed high school and has been
employed in the past at a local motor company.  He was laid-off from that
employment.
[21]                
Although the offender tended to minimize his
substance abuse issues with the author of the presentence report, the evidence
as a whole demonstrates that Elias has substance abuse issues with alcohol and
marihuana.
[22]                
The offender has a long history of mental health
issues, including depression, low self-esteem, loneliness, and suicidal
ideation.
[23]                
Dr. Gojer has confirmed a diagnosis for Elias of
Persistent Depressive Disorder.  The depression is linked to low self-esteem
and an associated Body Image Disorder.
[24]                
According to Dr. Gojer, the offender “has
gravitated to pedophilic interests and can be diagnosed as having a problem
with a pedophilic disorder” (the final page of Exhibit 4).  “The primary
problem is pedophilia”, is what Dr. Gojer stated in his oral testimony at the
sentencing hearing.
[25]                
Dr. Gojer, in his oral testimony, stated that,
untreated, the offender poses a “moderate risk” to re-offend.  The pedophilia
is a significant risk factor, according to Dr. Gojer.
[26]                
Exhibit 5 is a letter dated September 19, 2024
and written by the offender’s therapist, Coco Johnson, a member of the Ontario
College of Social Workers and Social Service Workers.  Since November 26, 2021,
Elias has been meeting regularly with Ms. Johnson.  The therapist confirms in
the letter that the offender “arrives on time for his scheduled weekly
appointments and takes his medication as prescribed”; that he “continues to be
depressed, is plagued with feelings of dread and he is experiencing suicidal
ideation”; that he genuinely and deeply regrets the terrible choice that he
made to watch child pornography; that he has suffered many collateral losses
since his arrest including the death of his mother, the death of his dog, and the
total estrangement of him from all of his family except his father; that there
is no doubt in Elias’ mind that what he did killed his mother; that he is
worried that his father will also die if he is not there to help his father;
that he now “better understands that children are tormented by the making of
child pornography and that by watching it he was revictimizing the children”;
and that he has long-standing feelings of depression and low self-esteem and
suicidal thoughts.
[27]                
Exhibit 7 is a lengthy letter written to this
Court by Elias.  In that letter, he apologizes to all of the children who are
the victims of his offence.  At the end of the letter, he again expresses
remorse for what he has done “to the victims of the abuse”, and he states the
following: “I know I have to be a better human being and all I can do is prove
it for however long my life will last but I am committed to being better.  I
will never forget the pain and suffering that I have caused to everyone
involved.  I truly am sorry”.
[28]                
The evidence of the offender’s father is that he
depends heavily on Elias to help him with the activities of daily living,
including laundry, grocery shopping, going to the pharmacy, yard work, and
other chores.  The father is very ill.  He cried in the witness box when asked
about his late wife.  He has diabetes, heart problems, anemia, high blood
pressure, and severe arthritis.  He takes about 15 different medications, and
he brought them all to court with him in a bag.  He is often in terrible pain,
bed-ridden, unable to leave the house for weeks at a time, unable to go up and
down the stairs at home, unable to drive, unable to sleep, and unable to do
basic things like open a water bottle.
[29]                
The father described the offender as being
completely isolated from the rest of the world.
[30]                
Finally, this Court has had Elias in front of me
on numerous occasions.  He has always appeared to me to be terribly sad,
dejected, and ashamed.  He typically holds his head down in silence.  He
strikes me as a 37-year-old man who carries the weight of the world on his
shoulders and who is struggling to survive.
[31]                
The Crown requests the following:
[32]                
The defence requests a conditional sentence
order of imprisonment for two (2) years less one (1) day in duration, to be
followed by probation for three (3) years.
[33]                        
On the subsection 161(1)(d) order, the defence
suggests that the Court should consider a shorter duration for the order
(something less than life) but also impose the order under paragraphs (a), (b)
and (c) of subsection 161(1).
[34]                
This Court hereby imposes the subsection 161(1)
order for life.  The order is made under all of paragraphs (a), (b), (c), and
(d).  The language of the order under paragraph (d) shall mirror that suggested
by the Crown in its written sentencing position document filed with the Court. 
The Crown shall provide another copy of that document to the Registrar, today,
for preparation of the sentencing paperwork.
[35]                
The order under paragraph (a) has no exceptions
to it.
[36]                
The order under paragraph (b) has no exceptions
to it.
[37]                
The order under paragraph (c) shall read as
follows: “you are prohibited from having any contact or communication, directly
or indirectly, with any person who is under the age of 16 years, unless the
person who is under 16 years of age is your child or the child of one of your
siblings and you are having the contact or communication with that
person who is under 16 years of age while you are being directly supervised by
your father or one of your siblings”.
[38]                
Both sides agreed, and this Court concurs, that
the paramount sentencing principles here are denunciation and deterrence (both
specific and general).  I would add that rehabilitation is also important in
this case, as Elias is a first offender and requires therapy and treatment for
a myriad of serious issues.
[39]                
The current subsection 163.1(4)(a) of the Criminal
Code stipulates that the offence of possession of child pornography, when
prosecuted by indictment, attracts a maximum sentence of ten (10) years’
imprisonment and a mandatory minimum penalty of one (1) year in custody.
[40]                
There is no debate in our case that there is, in
fact, no mandatory minimum sentence that Elias is facing.  Since the decision
of the Court of Appeal for Ontario in R. v. John, 2018 ONCA 702, 142
O.R. (3d) 670, Crown prosecutors in Ontario have generally conceded that the
mandatory minimum sentence of imprisonment for possession of child pornography
is unconstitutional, whether the then six-month minimum or the current one-year
minimum.
[41]                
Just to complete this discussion, in R. v.
Alexander, 2019 BCCA 100, 54 C.R. (7th) 164, the then six-month
mandatory minimum punishment under subsection 163.1(4)(a) of the Criminal
Code was found by the British Columbia Court of Appeal to violate section
12 of the Charter and, therefore, be of no force and effect.  And, in
2023, the Court of Appeal of Quebec held the same thing for the current
subsection 163.1(4)(a) of the Criminal Code – Procureur general du
Quebec c. Terroux, 2023 QCCA 731, 430 C.C.C. (3d) 1.
[42]                
It follows from the above discussion that,
subject to (i) an examination of whether a sentence of imprisonment of less
than two years in duration is a fit one in this case, and (ii) whether Elias’
service of the sentence of imprisonment in the community would not endanger the
safety of the community and would be consistent with the fundamental purpose
and principles of sentencing set out in sections 718 to 718.2 of the Criminal
Code, statutorily speaking, a conditional sentence order is available for
Elias.
[43]                
In terms of the range of sentence for possession
of child pornography, although I have read and considered all of the decisions
filed by both sides, I agree with the Crown that the governing authority for
this Court is the recent decision of Chief Justice Tulloch, for the Court of
Appeal for Ontario, in R. v. Pike, 2024 ONCA 608.
[44]                
We know several important and binding principles
from that decision.  The upper end of the sentencing range for this offence is
five (5) years in the penitentiary.  There is no lower end of the range.  The
statutory one-year minimum term of imprisonment is indeed unconstitutional. 
Conditional sentences are available, however, in deciding whether such a
sentence is consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of
sentencing, courts must pay particular attention to the severe wrongs and harms
that are caused by those who possess child pornography, their degree of moral
blameworthiness, and Parliament’s prioritization of deterrence and
denunciation.  Such particular attention will ordinarily result in a custodial
sentence and not a conditional sentence.  There must be the presence of
personal circumstances and mitigating factors that are sufficiently compelling
to make a conditional sentence proportionate in the case at hand.  There is no
presumption against a conditional sentence for possession of child pornography,
nor is there any closed-list of exceptional circumstances that must be found to
exist before a court can reasonably impose a conditional sentence.  Multiple
seemingly non-exceptional factors could collectively render a conditional
sentence a fit and proportionate response (paras. 176-183 of the decision in Pike, supra).
[45]                
With regard to the aggravating factors in our
case, I agree with the Crown that the following are all aggravating:
[46]                
Respectfully, I disagree with the Crown that
this Court can reasonably find as aggravating factors that it took Elias
“several years” to compile his collection of child pornography and/or that he
viewed the child pornography “very frequently”.  Both of those alleged
aggravating factors were put forward by the Crown for the Court’s
consideration.
[47]                
There is nothing in the agreed statement of
facts that would support either one of those alleged aggravating factors.
[48]                
At its highest, the evidence as a whole suggests
that Elias watched the child pornography approximately once per week and first
stumbled upon online child pornography sometime after he started using a
specific computer application in 2017 (page 3 of Dr. Gojer’s report marked
Exhibit 4).
[49]                
These alleged aggravating factors not being
agreed to by the offender, Elias is entitled to proof of them beyond a
reasonable doubt.  R. v. Richardson, 1992 CanLII 7710 (ON CA).  I find that the evidence falls short of
that standard of proof in this case, on these two points.
[50]                
The mitigating factors in this case include:
[51]                
I would add that there are two other factors
that must be taken into account in our case, although they are not always
viewed as mitigating factors, per se, but rather considerations that may help the court determine what a
fit sentence may be in the particular case under review: (i) Elias’ mental
illness before, during, and after the offence, and (ii) the truly devastating
collateral consequences that Elias has suffered since the date of his arrest.  R. v. Ellis, 2013 ONCA 739, at paras.
107, 116-122, and 195-201.
[52]                
On the evidence as a whole, particularly the
presentence report, the report of Dr. Gojer, and the letter written by Coco
Johnson, I find that Elias’ depression, his low self-esteem, his loneliness,
his Body Image Disorder, and his pedophilic tendencies, which are indisputably
all forms of mental illness, were the significant causal factors underlying the
commission of this offence.
[53]                
The collateral consequences suffered by this
offender have been extreme.  He has lost everything except for his father.  He
genuinely blames himself for the death of his mother.  He is entirely estranged
from his siblings and their families.  They have simply shut the doors to their
lives on this offender.  That is not meant as a criticism of anyone but simply
a statement of fact.  Deep shame and humiliation of the offender and his family
are one thing, however, what has befallen Elias here is far beyond that.
[54]                
The Crown filed and relies upon the very recent
decision of Bramwell J. in R. v. Sawatis, [2025] O.J. No. 6 (S.C.J.), a decision post-Pike, supra, principally in support of
the proposition that certain factors like stigma and the good character of the
accused are less significant in the sentencing of offenders for possession of
child pornography offences.
[55]                
This Court would make several observations about
the Crown’s reliance on that decision.  First, as indicated above, the
collateral consequences that have been suffered by Elias are much more concrete
and far more significant than the type of generalized stigma referred to by
Justice Bramwell at paragraph 25 of the decision.  Second, this Court has not
referred to or relied upon Elias’ prior good character as a mitigating factor
in this case.  Third, in the same paragraphs of Justice Bramwell’s decision,
under the same heading about good character, employment, and stigma, Her Honour
refers to an offender who “continues to engage in distorted thinking or
minimization”; such an offender, however, is not at all our offender.  In fact,
the offender in Sawatis, supra had a prior criminal record for sexual interference with and sexual
assault of a child, among other convictions, and he apparently learned nothing
from his prior counselling and treatment program in Ottawa because he then went
on to engage in a further criminal offence that victimizes children; that
offender, I say again, is not at all our offender.  That offender was described
by Justice Bramwell as having “limited” prospects for rehabilitation.  That,
however, is not at all the evidence of the professionals in our case with
regard to our offender.  In fact, the offender before Justice Bramwell could
fairly be summarized as being a total menace to the safety and sexual integrity
of children; he even engaged in the surreptitious filming of his own father’s
early teen stepdaughter.  That type of person, however, is not at all our
offender.
[56]                
One could understand why the offender in Sawatis, supra received a penitentiary
sentence of three and one-half (3.5) years.  That case, factually, is very
different from ours.
[57]                
Sentencing is not a cookie-cutter industry. 
Very often, as here, a sentencing decision will have limited precedential value
because of the uniqueness of the overall circumstances that informed it.
[58]                
The judgment of Chief Justice Wagner and
Justices Brown, Martin, and Kasirer in R. v. Parranto, 2021 SCC 46,
[2021] 3 S.C.R. 366, put it very well at paragraphs 9 through 12, set out
below.
[59]                
In all of the circumstances, respectfully, I
think that anyone who doubts the denunciatory and deterrent effect of the
sentence imposed below has failed to appreciate its severity.  The judicial
interim release order coupled with the very strict sentence imposed below will
mean that Elias will be under the thumb of the state for a total of more than
eight (8) years.  And he is now a convicted sex offender who must live with all
of the requirements of the SOIRA order.  And the subsection 161(1) Criminal
Code order is for the maximum length, life, and it is very restrictive.
[60]                
The aggravating factors have been properly
accounted for, in my opinion.
[61]                
At the same time, this sentence, on top of the
severe collateral consequences already suffered by the offender, will enable him
to enter a sex offender treatment program without delay and continue the path
to rehabilitation.
[62]                
The mitigating factors have also been properly
accounted for, in my opinion.
[63]                
I am satisfied that (i) a sentence of
imprisonment of less than two years in duration is a fit one in this case, and
(ii) that Elias’ service of the sentence of imprisonment in the community would
not endanger the safety of the community and would be consistent with the fundamental
purpose and principles of sentencing set out in sections 718 to 718.2 of the Criminal
Code.
[64]                
Taking the very helpful and binding guidance
from Chief Justice Tulloch in the recent decision of the Court of Appeal for
Ontario in Pike, supra,
and acknowledging that the overall assessment in possession of child
pornography cases will ordinarily result in a custodial sentence and not a
conditional sentence, I believe that there exists here the
presence of personal circumstances and mitigating factors that are sufficiently
compelling to make a conditional sentence proportionate.
[65]                
A seriously mentally ill man with no criminal
history has pleaded guilty to having amassed a very dense and extremely
grotesque collection of child pornography and has now endured severe collateral
consequences for his criminal actions, yet he has also been the lifeline for
his ill father, and he has taken the road towards rehabilitation, and he is
seen by all independent professionals who have dealt with him to be a good
candidate for continuing to do so in the community.
[66]                
This is a truly unique set of circumstances. 
While not any one of these factors is necessarily exceptional, the
constellation of them makes a conditional sentence order a proportionate
response in this situation.
[67]                
For these reasons, this Court imposes on Elias a
conditional sentence order for two (2) years less one (1) day in duration, to
be followed by three (3) years of probation.
[68]                
With respect to the conditional sentence order,
all of the compulsory terms apply as set out in subsection 742.3(1) of the Criminal Code, and the following
optional conditions also apply for the entire length of the sentence:
[69]                
With respect to the probation order, all of the
compulsory terms apply as set out in subsection 732.1(2) of the Criminal
Code, and the following optional conditions also apply for the entire
duration of the order:
[70]                
Elias is cautioned by this Court that the
conditional sentence order is a jail sentence that is served in the community. 
Any transgression on the part of the offender will come before this Court, and
if a breach is found it is very likely that the Court will order that Elias
shall serve the entire balance of the conditional sentence order in a
correctional facility.
[71]                
In summary,
[72]                
When a sentencing judge pays particular
attention to the severe wrongs and harms that are caused by those who possess
child pornography, their degree of moral blameworthiness, and Parliament’s
prioritization of deterrence and denunciation, which the judge must do, such an
assessment will ordinarily result in a custodial sentence and not a conditional
sentence.  Often, when prosecuted by indictment, such an assessment will result
in a penitentiary sentence.
[73]                
The individualization of the sentencing process
cannot be lost, however.  In this case, on these facts, with this offender, in
these circumstances, a conditional sentence is a fit disposition.
[74]                
I wish to thank Ms. McGuigan and Mr. Guerts and
Mr. Gilbert for their very hard work and for their most helpful submissions at
the sentencing hearing.
[75]                
Mr. Elias, I hope that you get the help that you
desperately need.