[1]           This action concerns a claim for lien in
the amount of $10,735 registered by Zagros Homes Development Inc. (“Zagros”) on
a residential lot owned by Ernest Mbenkum and his wife Alliance Lipenja
(together “the Owners”). The claim for lien is for alleged unpaid framing work.
[2]           The defendant, Cando 1 Construction Inc.
(“Cando”), was either the construction manager or the general contractor for a home
construction project on the subject property. Cando’s principal is Saeed Salimpour.
Zagros alleges it was the framing subcontractor.
[3]           Cando denies the Zagros claim stating that
there was no subcontract and, in any event, if there was, it was breached by
Zagros when Zagros sub-subcontracted its entire scope to Med Carpentry Inc.
(“Med”), thereby justifying Cando’s decision to hire Med to complete the
framing. Cando claims repayment of the $5,000 it paid Zagros as damages. The
Owners dispute the timeliness of the claim for lien and assert that, if the
Zagros lien is valid, their liability is limited to the basic holdback.
[4]           For the purpose of the eventual report, I
order that this action is now the reference action.
[5]           The following facts were derived from the
evidence and were not disputed.  In 2018 the Owners decided to demolish the
existing house on the property and replace it with a more modern house. In the
fall of that year, 2018, through a friend, they were introduced to Mr.
Salimpour. They decided to retain Cando or Mr. Salimpour as, the Owners allege,
the general contractor.
[6]           Mr. Salimpour presented the Owners with a
CCDC-2 2008 Stipulated Fixed Price Contract wherein Cando is described as the
“contractor.” The date on this document is December 21, 2018. Pursuant to this
contract, Cando was to do the construction for a fixed price of $791,000. The
Owners signed this document. Mr. Salimpour signed the document on behalf of
Cando.  It is an issue in a separate action as between the Owners and Mr.
Salimpour and Cando as to whether the Owners contracted with Mr. Salimpour as
well as with Cando.
[7]           The demolition and construction proceeded
with Cando coordinating same. It dealt with subcontractors to get the work
done. Cando and Mr. Salimpour assert that they were no more than a construction
manager not at risk.
[8]           Cando and Mr. Salimpour rendered no
invoices. The Owners paid Cando and Mr. Salimpour in cash whenever Mr.
Salimpour instructed the Owners to do so. From December 21, 2018 to September
8, 2022, the Owners paid cash totaling $1,647,607.56 in numerous installments.
For each payment, Mr. Salimpour signed a receipt entitled, “Cash Receipt for
Contractor Services.”
[9]           In October, 2020 Cando and Mr. Salimpour
were looking for a framer. Zagros was on another project. Khashayar
Mohammadzadeh, the principal of Zagros, was put in contact with Mr. Salimpour. Mr.
Salimpour asked for a quote and provided Mr. Mohammadzadeh with the plans.
[10]       In October, 2020 Mr. Mohammadzadeh
provided a quote in the name of Zagros. The document was in the form of a
contract. It was wrongly dated October 10, 2020. Mr. Mohammadzadeh emailed it
to Mr. Salimpour on October 22, 2020. The document states that it was being submitted
to the “owner.” Mr. Mohammadzadeh states in his affidavit that this was a standard
term in his quotation document, and that the quote was submitted in fact to Mr.
Salimpour.
[11]       The quote was for the specified framing
work to be done by Zagros at a fixed price, $49,000 plus HST for a total price
of $55,670, with the price to be paid at specified milestones. 20% of the price
was to be paid upon completion of the first floor wall framing. 20% of the
price was to be paid by the completion of the second floor walls. Mr. Salimpour
responded by email the same day, October 22, 2020 stating that the quotation
“generally looks good.” He asked for a 15% discount. He did not get it. Mr.
Mohammadzadeh says that Mr. Salimpour then accepted the quote verbally and that
the quote formed the contract. Mr. Salimpour denies accepting the quote.
[12]       Zagros, being already engaged on another
project, decided to subcontract its scope to Med, a qualified subcontractor Zagros
worked with previously. Med’s principal is Riccardo Agraso. Mr. Agraso agreed
to do the work. An oral subcontract was agreed upon.
[13]       After a delay, Med started its work on
November 1, 2020. Mr. Agraso gave Zagros a Med “invoice” dated November 2, 2020
in the amount of $10,000 plus HST (ie. $11,300). The document described this
amount as an “advance.” At this time Zagros paid Med $10,000 as Med wanted to
get paid for its work.
[14]       On November 14, 2020 Cando paid Zagros
$5,000 in cash. In cross-examination, Mr. Salimpour described this payment as a
requirement of Zagros for “holding a spot” for its work.
[15]       Mr. Mohammadzadeh states in his affidavit
that by November 19, 2020 Med had completed the first floor and had “started”
the second floor. He also says that thereafter Med continued on the project
“for the better part of a month.”
[16]       Mr. Mohammadzadeh in his affidavit gave
hearsay evidence he said same from Mr. Agraso, namely that, “in early December,
2020,” Mr. Salimpour made a contract with Med to have Med complete the framing
work. In his affidavit, Mr. Salimpour states that he did this when he
discovered that Zagros was doing none of the framing work. There was no further
evidence as to when Med’s work for Zagros ended and when this new Med contract
work started.
[17]       Mr. Mohammadzadeh in his affidavit gave
hearsay evidence that Mr. Agraso told him that Med was to be paid $30,000 plus
HST by Cando, that Med completed the second floor framing, the ceiling, the
roof trusses and the roofing, and that Mr. Salimpour only paid Med $12,000. Mr.
Agraso was not called to confirm this evidence.
[18]       On January 22, 2021 Zagros registered a
claim for lien in the amount of $10,735. The stated last date of supply on the
claim for lien is November 24, 2020. Mr. Mohammadzadeh states in his affidavit that
he “terminated” the subcontract and that about $18,000 worth of the Zagros
scope was done at that time. He states that, on the advice of counsel, he
“low-balled” the value of the work done at “$14,000” in the hope of getting
paid. ($14,000 x 1.13) - $5,000 = $10,820 which is just over the amount of the claim
for lien.
[19]       On February 24, 2021 Zagros purported to
perfect its lien by commencing this action. On May 21, 2021 Cando and Mr.
Salimpour delivered a statement of defence and counterclaim. They admitted in
paragraph 3 that “Cando was the general contractor retained by [the Owners] to
construct the new house.” The counterclaim was for the return of the $5,000
paid to Zagros.
[20]       Another lien claimant on this project
obtained a judgment of reference from Justice Vermette on August 3, 2021. The
first trial management conference was conducted by me on March 14, 2022. The
parties to the within action were served with the notice of trial and attended.
The Owners delivered their statement of defence and crossclaim on May 16, 2022.
[21]       I conducted further trial management
conferences on June 3, 2022, July 10, 2023 and November 6, 2023. The other lien
claim was resolved. At the trial management conference on November 6, 2023 I
made orders for necessary interlocutory steps in this action. At the trial
management conference on March 25, 2025 I scheduled a one-day summary, virtual trial
in this action to take place on August 15, 2024.
[22]       On August 15, 2024, the day of the trial,
Mr. Kostyniuk’s computer failed. As a result, I adjourned the trial to December
3, 2024 and gave directions for the serving and uploading of the affidavit of
Mr. Agraso, who appeared on the Zagros witness list.
[23]       On December 3, 2024 the trial took place
virtually. Zagros called only Mr. Mohammadzadeh who submitted two affidavits.
Mr. Agraso did not appear. Cando and Mr. Salimpour called only Mr. Salimpour
who submitted two affidavits. The Owners called only Mr. Mbenkum who submitted
one affidavit.
[24]       Based on the evidence and submissions, I
find that the following are the issues to be determined:
[25]       Before I analyze the issues, I will
comment on the credibility of the witnesses.
[26]       Generally, I found Messrs. Mohammadzadeh
and Mbenkum credible. Their affidavits contained important detail and
corroboration. For instance, Mr. Mohammadzadeh went into the quoting process
and contract negotiation and attached the quotation document. Mr. Mbenkum was
careful to attach the signed prime contract document and all of the receipts
Mr. Salimpour signed for the Owners’ cash payments.
[27]       Mr. Mohammadzadeh was also frank. He conceded
and explained inconsistencies in his evidence such as the wrong date on the
quotation document and the reference in this document to the “owner.” In
cross-examination, he conceded not having a site diary or Med time sheets to
time the exact end of Med’s supply under Zagros. He conceded that Zagros had no
workers on site. Also, the fact that Mr. Mohammadzadeh paid Med $10,000 when
Zagros only received $5,000 from Cando showed that he was a man of integrity
and trustworthiness.
[28]       Mr. Salimpour, on the other hand, was not
credible. His affidavits lacked detail and corroboration. There was only one
exhibit. His evidence contained glaring contradictions that he did not explain.
In cross-examination, he insisted on portraying himself and his company as nothing
more than a construction manager not at risk, with the Owners contracting
directly with trades, including Med. That contradicted the fixed price general contract
Cando signed with the Owners as indicated in the Mbenkum affidavit, a document that
described Cando as the “contractor” with responsibility for the project. It
contradicted paragraph 3 of the Cando/Salimpour statement of defence and
crossclaim which admits that Cando “was the general contractor.” It
contradicted the receipts Mr. Salimpour gave the Owners in return for the cash
payments to Cando and Mr. Salimpour, each of which described the cash as being
for “contractor services.”
[29]       There was also a glaring contradiction in
Mr. Salimpour’s evidence about Cando’s $5,000 payment to Zagros. In his first affidavit,
he described that payment as a mistaken payment to Zagros for work done,
mistaken because, unbeknownst to Mr. Salimpour allegedly, it was Med doing the
work. In cross-examination, he changed his evidence and described the payment
as being due to Zagros’ insistence on a payment to “hold a spot” for an
eventual contract, suggesting that the framing had not started when the payment
was made. In the end, Mr. Salimpour came across as a person lacking integrity
and capable of saying anything to suit his interests.
[30]       Therefore, whenever the evidence of Messrs.
Mohammadzadeh and Mbenkum, on the one hand, and Mr. Salimpour, in the other,
conflicted, I preferred to evidence of the former. The evidence of Messrs.
Mohammadzadeh and Mbenkum did not conflict.
[31]       Zagros asserts it had an oral subcontract
with Cando in accordance with the terms of the quotation Zagros emailed on
October 22, 2020. Cando and Mr. Salmipour deny accepting that document and deny
that there was a subcontract with Zagros.
[32]       In Continental
Homes Inc. v. 2646576 Ontario Inc., 2024 ONSC 6219 (CanLII) at paragraphs 47 and 48 I summarized the
law concerning contract formation with construction contracts:
[33]       There was no dispute that the October 22,
2020 Zagros document and the conduct of the parties on October 22, 2020 met the
requirements of an offer, consideration, mutual intention to create a legal
relationship and certainty of essential terms for a construction contract. The
issue is whether Cando and Mr. Salimpour accepted the document as the contract.
[34]       Having reviewed the evidence and
submissions, I conclude that Mr. Salimpour did accept the document as the contract.
First, Mr. Mohammadzadeh stated in cross-examination that, after the
negotiation over Mr. Salimpour’s requested discount, Mr. Salimpour verbally
accepted the document as the contract on October 22, 2020. Mr. Salimpour
asserted he did not accept it. As stated earlier, I found Mr. Mohammadzadeh generally
more credible than Mr. Salimpour.
[35]       Second, Mr. Salimpour’s conduct at this
time, looked at objectively, indicated that he indeed accepted the document. In
his email of October 22, 2020 Mr. Salimpour stated expressly that he found the
document acceptable except for the price. As for the price, there was no evidence
that the two men negotiated further after Mr. Salimpour failed in his attempt
to get the lower price of $47,500. If Mr. Salimpour rejected the quotation
after the failed negotiation on price, he would have dismissed Zagros at this
point and sought a different framer. Instead, he invited Zagros to start
working, which it did through Med on October 28, 2020.
[36]       As I found in Continental Homes at
paragraph 50, acceptance can be implied from the circumstances and the conduct
of the offeree. I referred to a case, Saint John Tug Boat Co. Ltd. v. Irving Refining Ltd., 1964 CanLII 88 (SCC), [1964] SCR 614,where
the Supreme Court found an enforceable contract when the offeree simply started
using the tug boats without formally authorizing the written contract that had
been offered. That is comparable to this case where Mr. Salimpour instructed
Zagros to start working rather than dismiss it for an unacceptable price.
[37]       Mr. Turton made several
arguments which I do not accept. He referred me to the Business
Names Act, RSO 1990, c B.17 section 2(6), the subsection that requires
corporations to use their registered names on contracts. Zagros did not use its
full, registered name on the quotation document. That may be the case, but I
was shown no authority for the proposition that such a failure rendered the document
unenforceable as a contract. Mr. Turton also argued that Cando and Mr.
Salimpour could not accept the document because it referred to the offeree as
“the owner.” Mr. Mohammadzadeh stated that this was a standard term of his
quotation document that he mistakenly did not change. The evidence shows that Mr.
Salimpour was not misled by this mistake as he embarked immediately (within
minutes) on negotiating with Mr. Mohammadzadeh the subcontract. Mr. Turton also
pointed out that Zagros rendered no invoices to Cando. That may be the case;
but it is of no consequence, in my view, as the project appeared to be largely run
on a cash basis with no invoices. Indeed, Cando appeared to render no invoices to
the Owners and was paid twice the amount of the contract price.
[38]       The next issue to be
determined is the party that contracted with Zagros. I reject Zagros’ argument
that it contracted with Mr. Salimpour personally. Mr. Salimpour is indeed the
principal of Cando. However, there was no evidence of a personal undertaking or
commitment by Mr. Salimpour to Zagros to perform the obligations of the
contract document. There was in fact positive evidence that Cando was the
contracting party. The receipt for the $5,000 that was paid to Zagros was
signed by Mr. Mohammadzadeh as having been received from Cando, not Mr.
Salimpour. Furthermore, the general contract on its face specified that it was Cando
that was the general contractor responsible for the project delivery, not Mr.
Salimpour. Logically, therefore, it would be Cando that would contract with
subcontractors such as Zagros to get the work done, not Mr. Salimpour.
[39]       On the other hand, I also
reject the point made by Cando and Mr. Salimpour that Zagros contracted with
the Owners. As just stated, the general contract specified that Cando was the
general contractor with responsibility for the project delivery. This included
the hiring of subcontractors to assist in the work. There was no reason,
therefore, for the Owners to contract with Zagros. Also, there was no evidence
that Messrs. Mohammadzadeh and Mbenkum met or talked at any time, much less
contracted with each other.
[40]       For these reasons, I find
that Zagros entered into a subcontract with Cando in accordance with the terms
and conditions of the October 22, 2020 Zagros document. I will call it “the
Subcontract.”
[41]       There is nothing in the Subcontract that
prohibited Zagros from subcontracting its scope to another subcontractor as
long as the terms and conditions of the Subcontract were met. There was also no
evidence that such a restriction should be implied. Indeed, if anything, it
should be the other way. I take judicial notice that the right to subcontract
is a common term of construction contracts and a common practice. It
facilitates efficient allocation of resources. Furthermore, Mr. Salimpour
confirmed in cross-examination that Med was a good framer that completed
Zagros’ scope well. Therefore, I find that Zagros did not breach the
Subcontract by subcontracting as it did with Med.
[42]       It follows from this that it was Cando
that breached, indeed fundamentally breached and repudiated, the Subcontract when
it terminated the Subcontract and contracted directly with Med. Mr. Salimpour said
he “was not interested in” having such a complete sub-subcontracting of the
framing scope to Med at a lower cost, with Zagro collecting the difference in
the Subcontract price. I find this explanation essentially an admission by Mr.
Salimpour of his envy at Zagros’ business acumen. His personal envy did not
justify his conduct in terminating the Subcontract.
[43]       In the leading case of Heyday
Homes Ltd. v. Gunraj, 2004 CanLII 34324 (ON SC) at para. 342,
Master Sandler articulated the now well-known principle that contract
repudiation exists where a party evinces an intention no longer to be bound by
the terms of the contract, and that the innocent party may accept the
repudiation and terminate the contract. That is what happened here. Cando
subcontracted with another party for no other reason than to get the work done
at a lower price. There could be no clearer expression of a contract breach
showing an intention not to be bound by the terms of the Subcontract. Zagros
accepted the repudiation and terminated the Subcontract and registered its
claim for lien.
[44]       In D
& M Steel Ltd. v. 51 Construction Ltd., 2018 ONSC 2171 (CanLII) at
paragraph 49, Justice Perell aptly summarized the law of construction contract
damages. In paragraph 49 he stated that, upon a contract repudiation by the
“owner,” or in our case the “contractor,” the contractor has no claim in
damages and the subcontractor is entitled to abandon the work and to a lien for
the unpaid value of the work performed and materials supplied plus damages for
breach of contract.
[45]       I will
apply this principle here. Having repudiated the Subcontract, Cando is not
entitled to damages. I, therefore, dismiss its set-off and counterclaim.
[46]       For its
part, Zagros claims breach of contract damages for the unpaid price of the work
it performed through Med. That value is tied of course to the terms of the
Subcontract. The onus rests on Zagros to prove its damages.
[47]       The Subcontract
price was specified to be paid at milestones. 20% of the Subcontract price of
$55,670, or $11,134, was to be paid upon completion of first floor wall
framing. There was circumstantial evidence that this was done. On November 2,
2020 Med rendered an “invoice” for an “advance” of $11,300, namely the
equivalent of the amount due for the first floor wall framing.  Mr.
Mohammadzadeh at discovery said he attended at the site although he had no
notes or records of such attendances. He paid Med $10,000 on or about November
2, 2020. This was done, according to Mr. Mohammadzadeh, because Mr. Agraso was pressing
to be paid for work Med had done. Coming from Mr. Mohammadzadeh, this evidence
was credible. This all indicates that the first floor wall framing work was
done at this time or shortly thereafter. I, therefore, find that Med completed
the first floor wall framing creating a payment entitlement of $11,134.
[48]       Zagros
claims that it completed, through Med, work amounting in total to $15,820 (ie. $14,000
x 1.13 = $15,820). This leaves $4,686 (ie. $15,820 – 11,134 = $4,686) of the
claim to be proven. This is 42%, or less than half, of the Subcontract price that
was to be paid upon completion of the second floor wall framing, $11,134.
[49]       Mr. Mohammadzadeh stated in his affidavit
that Med started the second floor framing by November 19, 2020. He also stated
that Zagros “continued on the project for the better part of a month”
thereafter. As stated earlier, I found Mr. Mohammadzadeh generally credible.
Also, Mr. Salimpour did not dispute these statements. This is sufficient circumstantial
evidence that Zagros through Med did at least $4,686 worth of work on the
second floor wall framing.
[50]       As a result, I find that Zagros has met
its onus of establishing that it did $15,820 worth of work and that Cando
should pay Zagros $10,820 (ie. ($15,820 - $5,000) in breach of contract
damages.
[51]       Whether Zagros has a lien for $10,735 as
claimed turns on the issue of timeliness. It is undisputed that the new Construction
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.30 (“CA”) applies. Section 31 of the new CA
specifies that, where there is no certification of substantial performance and
no certification of the subcontract and contract termination has not happened,
as in this case, the subcontractor must preserve its claim at the conclusion of
60 days following the last date of supply.
[52]       Zagros registered its claim for lien on
January 22, 2021. 60 days prior to this registration date is November 23, 2020.
Therefore, Zagros must prove it supplied on or after November 23, 2020 to have
its claim for lien found to be timely. Did it do so?
[53]       In his affidavit, Mr. Mohammadzadeh stated
that the Cando subcontract with Med was made “in early December, 2020,” but he
admitted this information came entirely from Mr. Agraso, thereby rendering this
evidence hearsay. Despite Mr. Mohammadzadeh’s otherwise general credibility, this
critical hearsay evidence was simply not reliable given Mr. Mohammadzadeh’s clear
interest in establishing such a late last day of supply to prove the Zagros lien.
[54]       In argument, Mr. Kostyniuk candidly
admitted that there was no evidence establishing that Zagros’ last day of
supply fell on or after November 23, 2020. There was no site diary and no time
sheets from Med proving this point. There was no evidence from Mr. Agraso.
[55]       The onus rests on the lien claimant to
prove the essential elements of its claim for lien. I find that Zagros has
failed to do so in relation to the timeliness of its claim for lien. I declare,
therefore, that Zagros lien is expired and should be vacated.
[56]       In conclusion, for the reasons stated, I
rule that Cando must pay Zagros $10,820 in breach of contract damages, and I declare
that the Zagros lien has expired and must be vacated.
[57]       I allowed the parties a few days after the
argument to serve and file their costs outlines. The Zagros cost outline shows
$17,596.39 in partial indemnity costs, $25,904.62 in substantial indemnity
costs and $33,321.04 in full indemnity costs. The costs outline of Cando and
Mr. Salimpour shows partial indemnity costs of $12,707.18. The costs outline of
the Owners shows $5,871.15 in partial indemnity costs, $7,612.76 in substantial
indemnity costs and $9,354.37 in actual costs.
[58]       I encourage the parties to confer and come
to an agreement on costs. If they cannot agree, written submissions on costs must
be served, filed and uploaded in accordance with the following schedule:
[59]       These submissions must address the issue
of prejudgment interest as well.