[1]              
On February 3, 2025, I released my decision and
reasons granting the defendants’/moving parties’ motion for summary judgment
and dismissing the plaintiffs’ claim against them. This is my decision on costs
in relation to that motion.
[2]              
 Fixing costs is a discretionary exercise
under s. 131 of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990 c. C. 43. Rule 57
outlines, in a non-comprehensive list, factors that guide the exercise of this
discretion. Relevant factors include the results of the proceeding, the
principle of indemnity, the amount an unsuccessful party could reasonably
expect to pay, the complexity of the proceeding and the importance of the
issues.
[3]              
Ultimately, I must fix an amount of costs that is proportionate,
and that is fair and reasonable for the unsuccessful party to
pay: Boucher v. Public Accountants Council for the Province of
Ontario, 2004 CanLII 14579 (ONCA) at para. 26. A costs
award should “reflect what is reasonably predictable and warranted for the type
of activity undertaken in the circumstances of the case, rather than the amount
of time that a party’s lawyer is willing or permitted to expend”: Apotex
Inc. v. Eli Lilly Canada Inc., 2022 ONCA 587 at para. 65.
[4]              
The moving parties sent costs submissions on February 6, 2025, seeking costs
on a partial indemnity basis in the amount of $45,604.77. Ms. Furney advised
Mr. Kestenberg that he had wrongly included a claim for cross examinations and
transcript review, when no cross examinations had occurred. Mr. Kestenberg acknowledged the error, advising the court
that 3.8 hours had been mis-docketed, and revised his costs outline
accordingly. The revised costs sought were $44,620.31.
[5]              
The moving parties argue that the action was devoid of merit from the
outset, and that the plaintiffs increased the costs at every step, requiring
multiple court attendances, seeking delay, and threatening motions they did not
pursue. They argue that their rates are already discounted, as the case
involves a LawPro-funded defence, that the Furneys, as regular litigants,
should have contemplated a costs award of this quantum, that the litigation
claimed about 10 million dollars against the defendants, making it very
important to them. In addition, allegations of negligence are, by their nature,
of great importance to the defendant lawyers.
[6]              
Ms. Furney provided responding submissions on February 11, 2025, well in
excess of the permitted page numbers specified in my reasons. She asks that no costs,
or significantly reduced costs, be awarded to the moving parties because, in
part, they had made “false claims for cross-examination and transcripts that never
occurred, which constitutes a material misrepresentation to the court.”  The
Furneys rely on Young v. Young, 1993 CanLII 34 (SCC), 1993 4 SCR 3 for this proposition. I do
not find that the Young case stands for that proposition. More
importantly, I do not find the moving parties intentionally misrepresented anything
to the court. As stated above, counsel immediately acknowledged the error in
the costs outline, advising the court that 3.8 hours had been mis-docketed, and
revised the costs outline accordingly. The amount in issue was under $1,000. I
do not view the mistake in docketing and the costs outline as a
misrepresentation, but as an error that was immediately corrected and
explained.
[7]              
The Furneys also argue the defendants have been oppressive and intimidating.
The Furneys allege the defendants have participated in coordinated efforts with
others to destroy their family. They repeat many of the unsubstantiated bald
allegations made in their statement of claim, now extending those allegations
to counsel on this motion and threatening further claims.
[8]              
The Furneys deny their conduct was vexatious. They also assert the
amount claimed by the defendants is disproportionate. They argue that
self-represented parties should not be subjected to excessive cost awards, as
this would undermine access to justice. They rely on Davies v. Clarington
(Municipality), 2009 ONCA 722. There, the Court of Appeal reiterated the
importance of assessing the overall reasonableness of costs awards to ensure
they do not produce a result contrary to the objective of access to justice.
[9]              
I note that in the defendants’ original costs outline, “review of
transcripts” was included as part of the description in a portion of the time
spent preparing the factum. Although that description was removed from the
revised costs outline, the hours spent remained the same. I have determined
that, to be certain that there has been no undiscovered docketing error in that
time period, that portion of the costs outline should be reduced by an amount
similar to that included by mistake and attributed to attendance at the
cross-examination.
[10]          
In all other respects, the costs claimed are reasonable and
proportionate. The statement of claim was lengthy and posed some challenges to
navigate. Last-minute requests were made by the plaintiffs, including a
last-minute request in respect of fresh evidence.  Reviewing the claim,
preparing a defense, preparing and reviewing motion materials, attending CPC court
and a case conference, were all necessary steps. The time spent at each stage,
subject to the reduction I have made in respect of transcript review, was
reasonable. There is no reason to reduce the fees.
[11]          
The Furneys are experienced, regular litigants. They are aware that
costs generally follow the cause. The amount of costs claimed here should have
been in their contemplation for a motion of this nature, given the nature and
extent of the pleadings and the motion materials. Given the reasonableness and
proportionality of the costs sought, they do not present an access to justice
issue.
[12]          
I order the plaintiffs to pay costs to the defendants of $43,500, on a
partial indemnity scale, inclusive of disbursements and HST, within 30 days.