[1]              
The respondent moves for security for costs in
this appeal from a decision of the Small Claims Court.  The appellant opposes
this request and seeks various declaratory orders as well as an order for
certain accommodations.
[2]              
In her Small Claims Court action, the appellant
alleges the respondent damaged her motor vehicle during snow removal
operations.  On September 11, 2024, Deputy Judge Paquette granted a motion
brought by the respondent and struck the appellant’s claim as statute barred. 
He also fixed costs of $500 against the appellant.
[3]              
On October 09, 2024, the appellant filed her
appeal of the motion judge`s decision.  On October 25, 2024, the respondent
served this motion for security for costs.  At a hearing on November 29, 2024,
I appointed myself to case manage this appeal and to hear all motions pursuant
to r. 37.15 of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194.  I
set out a timetable for the delivery of responding and reply materials and
fixed January 27, 2025, for the hearing of the motion.
[4]              
On January 01, 2025, the appellant filed the
transcripts necessary for her appeal.  Prior to argument of this motion, the
respondent filed a new motion record, returnable the same day as the motion for
security for costs, seeking an order dismissing the appeal for delay and asking
that the appellant be declared a vexatious litigant.  I declined to hear this
new motion because it had not been contemplated when the timetable was put in
place and because the appellant did not have enough time to adequately
respond.
[5]              
Rule 61.06 addresses security for costs in
appeals.  The rule provides as follows:
[6]              
Rule 56.01 sets out factors the court may consider
in determining security for costs.  It provides as follows:
[7]              
If the moving party satisfies the court that
security for costs is warranted, the onus shifts to the responding party to
demonstrate an order should not be made.  This may be achieved by either
demonstrating they have sufficient assets in Ontario to make unnecessary an
order for security for costs or by leading evidence of their impecuniosity.  With
respect to the latter, the responding party must also “show why justice demands”
they be allowed to proceed without posting security, notwithstanding their
impecuniosity:  Warren Industrial Feldspar Co. Ltd. v. Union Carbide Canada
Ltd., 1986 CanLII 2683 (ON SC), 54 O.R. (2d) 213 [1986] O.J. No. 2364 (Ont. H.C.J.).
[8]              
If the responding party fails to meet its onus,
the court must then determine the amount and form of such security: Rules of
Civil Procedure, r. 56.04.
[9]              
The respondent argues security for costs should
be ordered because the appeal is frivolous and vexatious, there is an
outstanding costs award in this proceeding and the appellant`s behaviour
suggests a deliberate strategy to prolong this litigation and increase costs. 
The respondent further submits the appellant has failed to meet her onus under Warren
Industrial Feldspar. The respondent asks that the appellant post $20,000 as
security for costs of this appeal.
[10]          
The appellant argues her appeal has merit
because the motion judge misinterpreted the law and failed to consider material
evidence in dismissing her claim.   She also submits the respondent`s behaviour
has increased the costs of this litigation and the costs sought are accordingly
excessive and disproportionate to the issues in dispute.
[11]          
An appeal is frivolous if it is “devoid of merit
or with little prospect of success.” It is vexatious if it is “taken to annoy
or embarrass the respondent, or conducted in a vexatious manner, including an
oblique motive for launching the appeal”: Heidari v. Naghshbandi, 2020
ONCA 757, at para. 10.  The motion judge need only reach a tentative conclusion
about these two questions: Heidari, at para. 9.
[12]          
The appellant argues the motion judge misapplied
the no-fault automobile insurance provisions of the Insurance Act,
R.S.O. 1990, C.I.8.  The Insurance Act prevents the owner of a damaged
motor vehicle from suing in tort the person that caused the damage.  Instead,
the owner is required to make a claim against their own insurer: Insurance
Act, s. 263(5)(a).
[13]          
The appellant relies on paragraph 263(5)(a.1) of
the Insurance Act to support her argument that she is not required to
seek recovery from her own insurer.  The provision reads as follows:
[14]          
The appellant submits the motion judge’s reasons
do not show that he considered what she believes to be ample evidence of the
respondent’s negligence.  At issue on this appeal will be the applicability of
paragraph 263(5)(a.1) to the facts of this case.
[15]          
That provision was enacted by the legislature to
cover a gap in the no-fault insurance regime.  Prior to the amendment, car
rental companies could in rental contracts require the renter to reimburse them
in full for damages sustained to the vehicle, regardless of whether the renter
was at fault for the damages.  Paragraph 263(5)(a) then prevented the renter
from seeking recovery from the party that caused the damage: Quality Car
Rentals Inc. v. Sedaghat, 2019 ONSC 5431, at paras. 15, 16 and 18.
[16]          
In this case, there does not appear to be
evidence of an agreement between the parties that would engage the fault or
negligence provisions.  In my view, at this stage the prospect of success for
the appeal appears to be low.
[17]          
But I am not persuaded that the appellant’s
conduct thus far has been vexatious.  She brought her appeal within the
prescribed time limits.  She paid for and delivered the necessary transcripts. 
She has not brought any interlocutory motions.  The fact the transcripts were
filed a day late is of no moment, especially considering the appellant is
self-represented.  The appellant has other proceedings outstanding involving
the respondent and has brought other proceedings both in this court and before
administrative tribunals involving other parties.  However, on this record I am
unable to conclude this appeal has been brought in a vexatious manner.
[18]          
Pursuant to r. 63.01(1) of the Rules,
enforcement of the motion judge’s decision was automatically stayed upon the
filing of the notice of appeal.  This necessarily extends to the order for
costs: Hurst v. Hancock, 2019 ONSC 2888 at para. 23.  It would
accordingly be an error to consider the appellant’s non-payment of the costs
award, which she is not currently obliged to pay because of the stay, as a
factor in ordering security for costs.
[19]          
The respondent argues the appellant is engaged
in a deliberate strategy to prolong and drive up the costs of this proceeding. 
This is accomplished, according to the respondent, by filing “extraordinarily
lengthy pleadings and written submissions…”  The respondent further submits it
will be nearly impossible to recover its costs if it is successful on appeal.
[20]          
As I have already explained, the appellant
brought her appeal within the time required and promptly paid for and delivered
the necessary transcripts.  Her written material, while sometimes lengthy, is
well organized, clear, and easy to understand.  The appellant has not brought
any interlocutory motions pending her appeal.  It is the respondent that
brought this motion for security for costs as well as a motion to declare the
appellant a vexatious litigant and to dismiss the appeal for delay.  I am not
persuaded that the appellant has done anything thus far in this appeal to
unnecessarily lengthen it or drive up the costs.
[21]          
The respondent further relies on Henderson v.
Wright 2016 ONCA 89 to support its argument there is otherwise good reason
to order security for costs.  Strathy C.J.O. (as he then was) confirmed that
security can be ordered where the appeal has a low chance of success, and it
would be nearly impossible to recover costs from an appellant who can otherwise
pay the costs: Henderson, at para. 27.
[22]          
In that case, the appellant was a bartender who
was paid in cash, making proof of his income very difficult.  Further, his only
asset was a ¼ interest in a cottage property, which interest was worth
approximately $50,000.  Strathy C.J.O. concluded it would be difficult for the
respondent to access that asset to satisfy a costs award.  However, the
appellant could access it to post security for costs.
[23]          
I pause to consider the amount of security
sought by the respondent.  While parties are free to fund their litigation as
they see fit, they must be mindful that courts will generally only order costs
that are fair and reasonable and what the unsuccessful party in the particular
case ought to have expected to pay.  This necessarily involves a measure of
proportionality.
[24]          
In this case, the respondent moved to strike the
claim in Small Claims Court because they argued it was statute barred, for
reasons I have already discussed.  The motion judge heard oral submissions and
adjourned the case to receive and consider written submissions.  After
considering those submissions, the motion judge granted the motion in a brief
written decision, consisting of seven paragraphs.  He ordered the appellant to
pay $500 in costs.  That award appears to confirm how very brief the
proceedings were in the Small Claims Court.
[25]          
These proceedings are straight-forward.  The
appeal turns on whether paragraph 263(5)(a.1) allows the appellant, in the
circumstances of this case, to pursue a claim in tort outside the no-fault
regime.   In Henderson, Strathy C.J.O. concluded $15,000 in security for
costs was appropriate.  That is far from the case here.   In my view, security
for costs in the amount sought by the respondent is excessive and
disproportionate to the issues engaged in this appeal.  At this stage I
conclude the hearing of this appeal will require no more than a day, at most,
taking into consideration the need to make accommodation for certain of the
appellant’s requests.
[26]          
In addition, unlike Henderson, I cannot on
this record find it would be nearly impossible to recover costs from the
appellant despite an ability to pay.  The fact the appellant does not appear to
own real property in Ontario does not lead to the conclusion it would be nearly
impossible to collect costs from her.  Ordering security for costs in these
circumstances would require them to be ordered every time an appeal had a low
chance of success, and the appellant did not own real property.  In my view,
that is not the test.
[27]          
Accordingly, I am not persuaded I should
exercise my discretion to order security for costs for other good reason
pursuant to r. 62.06(1)(c).
[28]          
For these reasons, the respondent’s motion for
security for costs is dismissed.
[29]          
The appellant asked for certain declaratory relief,
including what she perceives to be inappropriate conduct on the part of counsel
for the respondent as well as medical accommodations.  I have already
considered the materials filed by the appellant regarding her accommodation
request and confirm I have already implemented her requests.  As the case
management judge on this matter, I will continue to ensure the appellant’s
accommodation requests are appropriately addressed.
[30]          
As I indicated at the hearing of this motion,
the next step in this proceeding will be a case conference with myself.  At
that time, we can finalize the timetable for argument of the appeal.  I will
also hear from the parties with respect to costs of this motion, and any other
matters they may wish to raise.
[31]          
I accordingly ask the trial coordinator to
contact the parties to schedule a 1.5-hour attendance before myself via
videoconference.