[1]              
The plaintiff claims damages suffered in a motor vehicle collision as a
result of the defendants’ alleged negligence.
[2]              
The defendants bring a motion for summary judgment dismissing this
action.
[3]              
For the reasons that follow, I dismiss the motion and direct that this
matter proceed to trial before me if I am available.
[4]              
There is only one issue which is whether there is a genuine issue for
trial.
[5]              
In accordance with r. 20.04(2) of the Rules of Civil Procedure,
R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, the court shall grant summary judgment if the court is
satisfied that there is no genuine issue requiring a trial.
[6]              
In determining whether there is a genuine issue requiring a trial, the
court shall consider the evidence submitted by the parties and a judge may
exercise any of the following powers under r. 20.04(2.1): (1) weighing the
evidence; (2) evaluating the credibility of a deponent; and (3) drawing any
reasonable inference from the evidence.
[7]              
The Supreme Court of Canada in Hryniak v. Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7,
[2014] 1 S.C.R. 87, at para. 49, succinctly explained when there will be
no genuine issue for trial:
[8]              
In order to defeat a motion for summary judgment, the responding party
must put forward some evidence to show that there is a genuine issue requiring
a trial. Indeed, each side must “put their best foot forward” with respect to
the existence or non-existence of material issues to be tried: Mazza v.
Ornge Corporate Services Inc., 2016 ONCA 753, 62 B.L.R. (5th) 211, at para.
9. Furthermore, “a summary judgment motion cannot be defeated by vague
references as to what may be adduced if the matter is allowed to proceed to
trial”: Diao v. Zhao, 2017 ONSC 5511, at para. 18.
[9]              
In Mayers v. Khan, 2017 ONSC 200, Glustein J. held that summary
judgment on issues of liability in the context of motor vehicle accidents may
be consistent with the principles of summary judgment if it can fully
resolve the action: aff’d 2017 ONCA 524. The Court recognized that each
case will depend on its own facts, with the court determining whether the
evidence led on the motion enables the court to find with confidence that there
is no genuine issue requiring a trial. If conflicting evidence with respect to
liability can be addressed with fairness and confidence under the Hryniak
principles, summary judgment is appropriate: see also Ozimkowski v. Raymond,
2019 ONCA 435.
[10]          
On January 2, 2018, a three-vehicle collision occurred during a day when
there were weather and road conditions, including blowing snow and snow drift.
[11]          
The Defendant, Rosemary Hilton ("Ms. Hilton"), was travelling
on Haldimand Road 55 when she hit a snow drift. As a result, her vehicle slid
to the right.
[12]          
Several minutes later, the Defendant, Mark Arbour ("Mr.
Arbour"), was traveling on the same road when he also veered to the right
after hitting a snow drift. Mr. Arbour was able to avoid impacting Ms. Hilton's
vehicle and his vehicle stopped a couple of feet behind Ms. Hilton’s. Following
this, these two Defendants left the scene with a passerby and went to a nearby
work yard.
[13]          
Shortly thereafter, the Plaintiff, Alberto Sim ("Mr. Sim"),
was traveling on the same road. He encountered the same snow drift which caused
his vehicle to veer to the right.  He hit Mr. Arbour’s vehicle and then Mr.
Arbour’s vehicle hit Ms. Hilton’s.
[14]          
The Defendants were not at the scene of the accident at the time of the
aforementioned collision and returned after a period of time with the tow
truck.
[15]          
No officer attended at the scene, but the parties did relate the
circumstances of the collision to Constable Musk who prepared a Motor Vehicle
Collision Report some time afterwards.
[16]          
The Motor Vehicle Collision Report contained each of the parties’ signed
statements.
[17]          
As a result of the collision, Mr. Sim struck the side of his face
against the airbags and lost consciousness. Emergency personnel revived Mr. Sim
and took him to the hospital where medical personnel treated his injuries.
[18]          
His alleged injuries include whiplash/concussion, chronic pain,
post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety disorder, major depressive disorder, and
specific phobia of driving. His medical records indicate that he suffered
significant psychological impairment as a result of the accident. He says he sees
his physicians regularly to receive ongoing treatment to manage his pain,
emotional distress, and cognitive limitations. He receives medication and
steroid injections.
[19]          
He says he has ongoing difficulty carrying on the normal activities of
life. He could not return to work and has difficulty with day to day living.
The Social Security Tribunal concluded that he has a severe and prolonged
disability due to his impairments such that he has qualified for Canada Pension
disability payments.
[20]          
The Insurer’s examination diagnosed him with major depressive disorder
and severe and specific phobia related to driving.
[21]          
There is a significant and material fact in dispute which cannot be
resolved on this record, in particular the location of the vehicles at the time
of the collision.[1]
[22]          
The Defendants’ overall contention is that their vehicles were pushed
off the road and were not on the road or even the gravel shoulder beside the
road at the time of the collision. Ms. Hilton’s evidence is that she veered off
the road approximately three feet and into a snowbank where she got stuck. Mr.
Arbour’s evidence is that he veered off the road into a farmer’s field
approximately 50 yards off the road, although they both agree that Mr. Arbour’s
car was a few feet behind Ms. Hilton’s when it came to a rest.
[23]          
Mr. Sim’s contention is that Mr. Arbour’s vehicle was partially on the
road in circumstances where he could not see it until shortly before impact because
of blowing snow and the absence of any hazard signal. He says that he did not
see the obstruction in time to avoid the collision. He says that he saw Mr.
Arbour’s car approximately two to three seconds before he hit it when it was
approximately ten feet away.  He says he did not have time to react.
[24]          
At his discovery, the Defendants asked Mr. Sim if weather conditions
that day generally affected his visibility throughout his drive. He said that they
did not. However, suddenly visibility became severely reduced immediately prior
to the collision.
[25]          
He said that there were no other issues with visibility and that the car
traveling behind him was approximately three cars away.
[26]          
I have reviewed the entire transcript of Mr. Sim’s discovery. He maintained
throughout that the car he hit was partially on the road. He was asked many
times and he did not waiver at all as to this fact or the driving conditions.
He also maintained that two feet of the car he struck was on the road and said
that it then moved onto the shoulder completely after he hit it as did his. He
had difficulty recalling where the first vehicle (Ms. Hilton’s) was and whether
it was on the road or on the shoulder, but eventually he gave evidence that the
first car was completely on the shoulder.
[27]          
Mr. Sim says that in 2023 he returned to the site of the accident and
placed his car in the same position that he recalled Mr. Arbour’s being in and
he took photographs. Although this is clearly after the fact and does not
represent what actually occurred during the accident, these pictures show the
position that he recalled Mr. Arbour’s car being in, which is partly on the
road. As well, the photographs do not show a ditch. Rather, there is a gravel
shoulder and then a very gentle slope into grass.
[28]          
The Defendants relied heavily on the Vehicle Collision Report and the
Occurrence Report prepared by the officer to support their evidence that their
vehicles were not on the road. The officers’ notes as well as his drawing state
that all vehicles were in a “ditch” to the side of the road. The officer did
not provide an affidavit; rather, these documents were attached as Exhibits to
Mr. Arbour’s affidavit.
[29]          
It is not clear that the officer who prepared these documents attended
at the site or that he based his notes and drawing on any observation of the
site. The Defendants took the position that the Occurrence Report and Vehicle
Collision Report show that the officer did not attend at the site based upon
the following wording therein:
[30]          
Additionally, the evidence from Ms. Hilton’s and Mr. Arbour’s discovery
also supported this as they said they spoke to the officer at the tow shop.
[31]          
 Mr. Sim’s counsel submitted that he read the report to show that the
officer arrived at the scene based upon the arrival time on the report but I
note that the box that he referenced did not say where the officer arrived. If
the vehicles were already on route to Len’s towing prior to police arrival, the
officer could not have observed where the vehicles were.
[32]          
In my view, neither the Occurrence Report nor the Vehicle Collision
Report indicate with any clarity the basis upon which the officer prepared his
notes and the drawing.
[33]          
Additionally, although no one raised any admissibility issues as to the
use that can be made of the Vehicle Collision Report and the Occurrence Report,
and whether they are admissible for the truth of their contents, there is no
evidence that anyone served any Ontario Evidence Act notice to seek to
admit the Vehicle Collision Report and the Occurrence Report as business records.
[34]          
Even if these reports were admissible for the truth of their contents as
business records, or as some form of information and belief based upon r.
20.02(1), if the officer did not attend at the site, they could only be
admissible as to what the parties told the officer. If Mr. Sim told the officer
that the vehicles were in the ditch, then that statement to the officer could
be admissible as an admission against interest. However, these documents do not
reveal who told the officer what. Although there are signed statements from the
parties as part of these reports, none of their signed statements make any
mention of the vehicles being in a ditch, or even off the road, which is what
the officer wrote.
[35]          
I also note that the Vehicle Collision Report where the officer sets out
the description that includes the vehicles in the ditch has a time of
preparation of 12:17 pm, whereas Mr. Sim’s handwritten statement taken by the
officer has a time stamp of 3:43 pm, which is after the time of the Vehicle
Collision Report. I also note that during Ms. Hilton’s discovery, she initially
said that if there was a ditch there, she didn’t see it. Then she was asked
questions that used the word “ditch” and simply answered them, but her initial
evidence is that there was no ditch. When examined, Mr. Arbour denied there was
any ditch but rather insisted there was a farmer’s field: “It wasn’t a ditch.
It was not a ditch.”
[36]          
Additionally, when the officer spoke to Mr. Sim, it was post-accident in
the hospital. When Mr. Sim was asked why he didn’t correct this report when he
saw it, he said he didn’t check the statement because he was very sick and
didn’t have time and didn’t pay attention to it. He said he had not read the
police report until the day of his discovery.
[37]          
Without the officer’s testimony, these reports are not helpful on this
motion. They are certainly not determinative.
[38]          
There are also some inconsistencies between Mr. Arbour’s and Ms.
Hilton’s evidence.  Mr. Arbour says his vehicle came to a stop about 50 yards
away from the road and that it was not obstructing the roadway in any way. He
also stated that Ms. Hilton’s vehicle was not located on or near the road and
that it was deep into the farmer’s field. As noted above, Ms. Hilton’s evidence
is that her vehicle was approximately three feet off the road when she went
into a snowbank. If Mr. Arbour’s vehicle was a few feet behind Ms. Hilton’s and
Ms. Hilton’s evidence is believed, then Mr. Arbour’s vehicle could not be 50
feet off the road.
[39]          
There is a clear credibility and/or reliability issue here as to where
Mr. Arbour’s car was that cannot be resolved on this record.
[40]          
The Defendants argue irrespective of the factual disputes, and
credibility issues, that this is a case of a driver who has rear ended another,
such that there is a reverse onus. They argue that the plaintiff has not met
his burden. They say that it is irrelevant whether Mr. Arbour’s car was
partially on the road or not.
[41]          
The Defendants rely on the following authorities.
[42]          
In Beaumont v. Ruddy, 1932 CanLII 147 (ON CA), [1932] O.R. 441 (C.A.), the court held
that, "[g]enerally speaking, when one car runs into another from behind,
the fault is in the driving of the rear car, and the driver of the rear car
must satisfy the Court that the collision did not occur as a result of his
negligence": at para. 8.
[43]          
In Iannarella v. Corbett, 2015 ONCA 110, 124 O.R. (3d) 523, the
Court of Appeal reaffirmed the decision of Beaumont and held that once
it is established that a rear-end collision occurred, the onus shifts to the
driver of the following motor vehicle to establish that he or she was not
negligent. This analysis would apply even where an emergency situation is
alleged: at para. 19.
[44]          
In Ozimkowski v. Raymond, 2018 ONSC 5779 aff’d 2019 ONCA 435, the
trial judge affirmed that the driver of the rear vehicle is required to
anticipate that, for whatever reason, the vehicle ahead may stop. At para. 29,
the trial judge quoted the following:
[45]          
The trial judge acknowledged that there are cases where the conduct of
the vehicle in front may contribute in whole or in part to the accident and
that such cases involve “unusual circumstances in which negligent acts of third
parties or the [driver of the vehicle in front] have been sufficiently
inappropriate, sudden, or unexpected to a reasonable driver so as to absolve
the [following driver] and overcome the [front driver’s] burden of disproving
negligence”: at para. 30. The court also indicated that it is not enough to
overcome the burden by a mere suggestion of liability, there must be a real air
of reality: at para. 31.
[46]          
In my view, the above authorities are not applicable and there is no
reverse onus here. These authorities are all situations where both cars were on
the road actually driving. In such cases, it makes sense that there is a
reverse onus because the driver from behind is responsible to not follow too
closely and to ensure that he can stop. It is unclear why this would apply to
the situation where the car in front is not moving, the plaintiff was never
following too closely, and the allegation is that the vehicle was parked partially
on the road without hazard lights on during white out conditions: see Maritime
Processing Co. Ltd. v. Hogg (1978), 1978 CanLII 3844 (NS SC), 32 N.S.R. (2d) 451 which involved a
collision involving cars parked on a road because of weather conditions. The
court did not apply the reverse onus to the driver who collided with them. In
fact, none of the cases cited below that involve vehicles parked on the road or
on the side of the road applied the reverse onus.
[47]          
The definition of negligence was set out in the case of Ryan v.
Victoria (City), 1999 CanLII 706 (SCC), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 201, at para. 28, as follows:
[48]          
The Defendants say that the collision occurred because Mr. Sim failed to
apply his brakes and take any action to avoid the collision once he saw Mr.
Arbour’s vehicle.
[49]          
However, Mr. Sim has raised a triable issue as to whether the accident
occurred because of the Defendants’ negligence, at least in part, for the
following reasons:
[50]          
Even if the reverse onus applies, based on the above, there is a triable
issue as to whether there were unusual circumstances in which alleged negligent
acts of Mr. Arbour and Ms. Hilton, in failing to put on their hazard lights, were
sufficiently inappropriate, so as to absolve Mr. Sim and overcome his burden of
disproving negligence: Ozimkowski v. Raymond at para 31.
[51]          
I note here that where a car is following too close, and a car in front
of it stops suddenly, there are brake lights that notify the driver behind. If Mr.
Arbour’s vehicle was slightly on the road and the reverse onus applies, it is
unclear why his failure to put on hazard lights would not be relevant.
[52]          
Below I review the cases relied upon by the Defendants which all involve
a constellation of facts where the court made a finding in all the
circumstances. While these cases are relevant, they are not determinative
because the facts are not entirely the same.
[53]          
The case David v. Chivers-Wilson, 1999 CarswellOnt 4453 (Sup.
Ct.), aff’d 2001 CanLII 6526 (ON CA), involved a stopped vehicle on the
shoulder of the road.  A snowmobile, driving along the shoulder struck the
parked vehicle. This was a trial decision where the judge concluded that the
plaintiff had ample time to see the vehicles and more than enough time to avoid
a collision. Indeed, the trial judge found that the plaintiff noticed the
parked car when he was 60 feet away which is also different than the case
before me. The trial judge found that the accident was caused by the plaintiff
who had alcohol in his system and was carrying a passenger on a snowmobile that
could not comfortably carry a passenger, and that he was swerving up and down
snowbanks at a high speed.  There is no suggestion that Mr. Sim was impaired by
alcohol or engaged in this kind of swerving driving on the shoulder of the
road.
[54]          
The case of Cargill v. Thorm (1990), 39 O.A.C. 45, involved an
individual, D1 who parked on the side of the road because of white out
conditions. A police cruiser D2 pulled in behind and activated a large flashing
arrow sign on the roof indicating that traffic should move to the left. The
officer also activated his four-way flashers and his emergency roof lights to
protect the driver in front of him. He was then struck in the rear by another
driver, D3. The sole issue at trial was the liability of D1. The trial judge
found D1 liable as to 30 % on the basis that she abandoned her car at that
location, failed to notify the police, failed to engage her signal lights or
post any advance warning of the location of her vehicle. The Court of Appeal
reversed the trial judge because the police officer, D2 had arrived at the
location shortly after D1 had departed and so there was no reason to notify the
police. The failure to leave on her signal lights would not have been of any
assistance in this case because D3 struck D2 whose car was already well
illuminated. These are not the facts here. The Defendants did not have their
lights on and no one else’s vehicle illuminated the area.
[55]          
Kuipers v. Gordon Riley Transport (1967) Ltd., 1976 CarswellAlta
69 (Sup. Ct.), is a trial decision where a number of vehicles were involved in
accidents where there were stationary vehicles on the shoulder or slightly
encroaching on the road. The court held that the sole effective cause of the
accident was the defendant who rear-ended the car in front. However, this case is
also distinguishable. The court found as a fact that the rear end driver was
driving at an excessive speed and that he knew, even before he reached the area
where he hit the plaintiff, that visibility was restricted because he had
encountered whiteout conditions elsewhere. He continued at an excessive speed
knowing he was approaching an area of even more restricted visibility. After he
entered the whiteout area, he continued without reducing his speed knowing that
visibility was extremely restricted and knowing that traffic within the
whiteout area would be travelling slower. He said he “hoped” the whiteout
conditions would be only of a short duration. As well, he was driving a vehicle
with a heavy load which would make it more difficult to stop. The trial judge
also found as a fact that the defendant would have driven into the plaintiff’s
vehicle whether or not it was stationary or travelling at a slow speed. Here,
Mr. Sim says the whiteout was sudden, he has given no evidence that he
continued hoping that the conditions would be short, and he was not driving a
vehicle with a heavy load.
[56]          
The case Nadeau et al. v. Peters et al., 2015 ONSC 4419, involved
a situation where the car that struck the other vehicle was following too closely,
and as a result, could not stop on time. The driver was charged with following
too closely, and convicted, under the Highway Traffic Act, R.S.O. 1990,
c. H.8.  There is no issue here that Mr. Sim was following anyone too closely.
[57]          
Ingratta v. McDonald, 2024 ONSC 371, involved a rear end
collision where road conditions were poor due to slush and freezing rain. In
consideration of the facts leading up to the rear-end collision, the court
considered that the defendant was aware of the slush and freezing rain that
affected road conditions. In light of this knowledge, the defendant owed other
users of the road a duty of care not to cause a collision. The resulting
standard of care required that the defendant travel at a speed that would allow
him to safely come to a stop when necessary, taking the weather and road
conditions into account. The court considered evidence of damage to the
vehicles and concluded that the defendant had breached the required standard of
care. The defendant in that case was aware of the road conditions in advance. When
examined, he admitted that the driver in front had done nothing improper to
contribute to the accident. Here, although Mr. Sim’s evidence is that the road
conditions were windy with blowing snow once in a while, creating patches of
snow, he said this did not affect visibility until there was a sudden snow
drift.
[58]          
The Defendants also argue that the plaintiff is at fault because he
should have taken better care given the weather conditions. They say that he
took no steps to attempt to avoid the vehicles, to steer his vehicle in another
direction, or use the brakes. He was driving 70 km per hour which they say was
too fast for the conditions. I note here that Mr. Arbour testified that he was
driving 90 km per hour in the same conditions and that Ms. Hilton also did not
brake in the same conditions.
[59]          
With respect to Mr. Sim’s failure to put on his brakes, he says that he
did not do so because he thought that it would cause the car to spin and would
create more danger in the icy conditions and that a car was following him.
[60]          
Even if Mr. Sim failed to take care by travelling at too fast a speed in
the circumstances that arose or by failing to apply the brakes, that is an
issue of contributory negligence.
[61]          
There is a triable issue as to whether Mr. Sim would bear 100 % of the
liability.
[62]          
The motion is dismissed.
[63]          
This is a case which requires a trial. I am seized of that trial if I am
available when it is scheduled.
[64]          
The parties are encouraged to settle costs but may make submissions as
follows: the plaintiff within 5 days and the defendant within 5 days
thereafter.