[1]         
Bennington Financial is a commercial leasing
company. Its customers select equipment. Bennington then buys that equipment
and rents it to the customer.
[2]         
In March 2021, Bennington leased ten heavy duty
bins to the defendants. The defendants made payments under the lease from March
2021 until February 2022, but failed to make further payments.
[3]         
Bennington made demands and tried to recover the
bins and resell them. The defendants refused to surrender the bins or advise
where they were located. Bennington brought this action against the defendants,
and now brings this motion for summary judgment.
[4]         
Bennington commenced this action on October 27,
2022.
[5]         
The defendants defended this action on November
25, 2022. The statement of defence asserts that the defendants were misled, in
that the agreement is not a lease “but rather is structured as a finance
contract, with terms less favourable to the defendants than were represented.” Among
other things, the defence asserts that the defendants were induced into the contract
based on false representations. In short, the defendants allege that Bennington
“failed to provide the defendants with proper notice and disclosure of the
terms of the Agreement, breached the duty of good faith and reasonableness in
contractual relations, and that the Agreement is fraudulent, invalid, and
should otherwise be set aside.”
[6]         
The defendants issued a third party claim
against the leasing agent, Mayo & Associates Ltd., on December 5, 2022 (see
court file CV-22-2130-00A1).
[7]         
Bennington first advanced this summary judgment
motion with a simplified procedure motion form and supporting affidavit dated March
2, 2023. The motion was originally returnable on May 18, 2023. The defendant,
Christopher Graham, delivered a responding affidavit dated May 12, 2023.
[8]         
The motion did not proceed on May 18, 2023, but
was re-scheduled to proceed as a long motion on December 19, 2023. It did not
proceed that day because counsel for the defendants was seeking to get off the
record, and the plaintiff consented to the adjournment. Chozik J. adjourned the
motion to April 29, 2024.
[9]         
On March 28, 2024, Emery J. signed an order
removing Steinbergs LLP as counsel of record for the for the defendants (see
court file CV-22-2130-00A1). The order recites Mr. Graham’s address, including
his email address.
[10]      
I can see no endorsement in Case Center to indicate
what happened on the April 29, 2024 return date of this motion.
[11]      
In an endorsement dated September 19, 2024, Mills
J. noted that the defendants had not attended the motion brought by the third
party to dismiss the third party claim, for failure to appoint counsel or serve
a notice of intention to act in person. Mills J. noted that the defendants had
been properly served with that motion. Mills J. said she had been advised that
Mr. Graham had communicated with counsel by email regarding the motion. She made
an order dismissing the third party claim (see court file CV-22-2130-00A1).
[12]      
Coats J. addressed this motion at triage court on
September 12, 2024, and then again on September 26, 2024. Her endorsements on
both dates indicate that no one appeared for the defendants. Her endorsement on
September 26, 2024 set the hearing of this motion for January 9, 2025, and the
matter came before me on that date. Mr. Graham attended the hearing, which was
held by video.
[13]      
Under rule 20.04(2)(a), “The court shall grant
summary judgment if … the court is satisfied that there is no genuine issue
requiring a trial with respect to a claim or defence.” I am required to first
determine if there is a genuine issue requiring a trial based only on the
evidence before me, without using the enhanced fact-finding powers contained in
rule 20.04(2.1).  “There will be no genuine issue requiring a trial if the
summary judgment process provides [the judge] with the evidence required to fairly
and justly adjudicate the dispute and is a timely, affordable and proportionate
procedure, under Rule 20.04(2)(a)”: Hryniak v. Mauldin, 2014 SCC 7, at
para. 66.
[14]      
In this case, there is no need to resort to the
enhanced fact-finding powers. As I will explain, the defendants’ evidentiary
materials do raise factual disputes, but these are fully answered in the reply
affidavit filed by the plaintiff.
[15]      
The plaintiff provided an affidavit of Melanie
Darling dated March 2, 2023. She says that Mr. Graham completed an application
for financing on his own behalf, and on behalf of 2724112 Ontario Inc. (“272”).
Mr. Graham also signed a lease dated March 22, 2021. In the lease, he and 272
are styled as co-lessees. Two signatures that purport to be Mr. Graham’s
signature are indicated, one on behalf of 272 and one on his own behalf. The
plaintiff purchased the bins for approximately $50,000 inclusive of taxes and
registered its ownership under the PPSA. The payments were to begin on March
22, 2021. The defendants made payments under the lease until April 2022 – the
last payment being on April 22, 2022. The affidavit goes on to calculate the
amount owing under the lease to be $61,792.45.
[16]      
In his responding affidavit, Mr. Graham says
that the signature on the credit application is not his, and considerable
information is missing. He also denies executing the lease agreement (exhibit D
to the Darling affidavit), although he admits to executing the second page of
it. I note that this page starts at paragraph 13, and Mr. Graham’s signature
appears twice on this page – once on behalf of 272 and once on his own behalf. Mr.
Graham’s affidavit does not suggest he was unaware of the content of paragraphs
1 through 12.
[17]      
Mr. Graham’s affidavit goes on to state that the
credit approval and funding processes the plaintiff followed did not include
expected steps, such as a Know-Your-Customer meeting and forms, a signed credit
application with net worth statement and financial statements from the borrower,
pre-approval, credit review, a bill of sale including serial numbers, proof of
insurance, and registration of security. Mr. Graham said he did not receive the
welcome letter attached to the Darling affidavit and suggests that this was
because his email was compromised or hacked at the time it was sent. None of
these points are material, in that they do not impact the enforceability of the
agreement between the parties.
[18]      
Mr. Graham’s affidavit further states that he
never signed delivery or acceptance of the bins and the plaintiff withdrew the
first payment prior to delivery of the bins, contrary to the wording in the
purchase order. He includes an email string from April 2021 (not April 2022 as
indicated in paragraph 18 of his affidavit) that shows that delivery was an
issue at that time. He says in an April 17, 2021 email to the leasing agent, “I
have not even received the Bins and I am making payments.” He asked to have the
payments stopped. The leasing agent replied on April 19, 2021, saying that the
bin vendor had indicated “the bins are ready to ship but haven’t gone out at
your request. … I’m afraid the lenders position will be that they put out funds
on March 22 [2021] to accommodate your request and lease payments commence
based on when the lender is directed to pay the supplier.” The defendants
continued to make payments for a year after that. They cannot now use this as a
basis to suggest they are not bound by the contract.
[19]      
Mr. Graham’s affidavit then says that the
payment amount was increased without notice in May 2021, although particulars
of the increase are not provided. He says that 272 never agreed to the
increase. Again, however, the defendants continued to make payments until April
2022. There is no evidence that the defendants objected to the increased amount
at the time.
[20]      
Mr. Graham’s affidavit then says he tried to
arrange financing to buy out the leases but was never given a correct buyout
amount. He says he only determined that the interest rate was 29.8% when he
received the buyouts and did calculations, and he never agreed to that rate. I
am not persuaded that these factors would allow the defendants to escape
liability for their contract.
[21]      
A reply affidavit from Ms. Darling includes a
transcript from a recorded call in which Mr. Graham confirmed that he had
signed the lease. In this call, the plaintiff’s representative advised Mr.
Graham that the lease would commence with the first payment being taken on
March 24, 2021, and Mr. Graham acknowledged this. Mr. Graham confirmed his
email address. Regarding delivery of the bins, the plaintiff’s representative
said, “So, we understand you either have the equipment or making arrangements
to obtain the equipment so we will submit the deal for payment to the vendor
and commencement of your agreement.” Mr. Graham merely said, “thank you” in
response.
[22]      
All of the possible defences raised by Mr.
Graham are answered in the reply affidavit. Most importantly, given that the
defendants made payments under the lease for over a year, they cannot now try
to escape their obligations under the lease.
[23]      
The defendants’ materials do not criticize Ms.
Darling’s calculation of the amount owing.
[24]      
The hearing on January 9, 2025 was difficult
because Mr. Graham did not present his position in a logical way, and he
frequently spoke over me. He began his oral submissions by advising that he had
had his identity stolen and describing the legal and other difficulties that
this had caused him. He re-iterated some of the points raised in his affidavit.
He said the plaintiff had not followed its own procedures. He also made many
factual assertions that were not contained in his affidavit. He said he
purchased the leased items and did not lease them. This is not consistent with
his own affidavit. When I advised him that his materials said nothing about his
identity theft, Mr. Graham said that he had more materials that, as I understand
it, he had given to his previous lawyers, and he blamed them for not putting
these materials before the court. Mr. Graham did acknowledge being aware that
his lawyers were not acting for him in this matter, although, as I understand
it, he did not become aware of this immediately in March 2024 when they got off
the record. Mr. Graham suggested he had not received emails about this matter.
He did acknowledge being made aware of this hearing by way of an email from
plaintiff’s counsel’s office in December 2024. I raised the prospect of an
adjournment, and Mr. Graham did not seem to want an adjournment.
[25]      
Mr. Graham left the Zoom meeting before the
hearing for this motion was finished, saying, “Do as you wish. Do what you
want.” He said he had a private investigating team and detectives working
around him. He said, “Anything that can be done can be undone.” He then thanked
the Court for its time and left the meeting.
[26]      
Given Mr. Graham’s comments, and given that he
is self-represented, I carefully considered whether it might be appropriate to give
him an opportunity to file additional materials; however, in light of the
procedural history, the non-specific nature of Mr. Graham’s description of the
evidence that he would like to put before the court, and the lengthy period of
time he has had to respond to this motion, this would not be appropriate or
fair to the plaintiff.
[27]      
The plaintiff has established that there is no genuine
issue requiring a trial. The defendants have not raised a genuine issue
requiring a trial. The plaintiff is entitled to judgment for the requested
amount.
[28]      
I will accept written submissions on interest
and costs.
[29]      
The Darling affidavit calculated interest only
to March 2023. The draft judgment uploaded to Case Center by the plaintiff on
January 8, 2025 is for the same amount calculated in the March 2023 affidavit. If
the plaintiff is content with that amount, I do not need further submissions on
pre-judgment interest, as this is favourable to the defendants.
[30]      
I will receive submissions on post-judgment interest,
but my inclination is that post-judgment interest at the presumptive rate under
the Courts of Justice Act is more appropriate than post-judgment
interest at the contractual rate of 26.82%.
[31]      
The plaintiff may file further submissions on
interest and costs, consisting of three double-spaced pages (in addition to a
costs outline and copies of any offers to settle). This is to be served and
filed by February 28, 2025. The plaintiff should also file a draft judgment in
Word format. The defendants may file responding submissions on interest and
costs with the same page limit. This is to be served and filed by March 10,
2025. No reply without leave.