[1]              
This is a status hearing.  The Plaintiff,
A.B., must show cause as to why the action should not be dismissed for delay.
The applicable test was set out in Faris v Eftimovski which
requires the Plaintiff to demonstrate: “first, that there is an acceptable explanation
for the delay in prosecuting the action; and second, that if the action were
allowed to proceed, the defendant would suffer no non-compensable prejudice”[1]. The test is conjunctive and requires a plaintiff to prove both
elements of the test[2].
[2]              
The action seeks damages for sexual assault
alleged to have been committed by the Defendant, Mariano De Marinis (“De
Marinis”), on February 15, 2015. Following a first criminal trial, De Marinis
was convicted on November 16, 2017 and sentenced on May 1, 2018. De Marinis
appealed his conviction and sentence.
[3]              
Prior to the criminal appeal being heard, the
Statement of Claim in this civil action was issued on July 31, 2018.  After
requesting indulgences, the Defendants delivered their Statements of Defence at
the end of November 2018. Following communications between counsel regarding
the timing of productions and examinations for discovery, the parties ultimately
consented to a timetable which was endorsed by Master Kaufman (as he was then)
at a case conference on January 23, 2019 (the “Timetable Order”).  A.B. and De
Marinis produced their documents on February 28, 2019 in accordance with the
Timetable Order. The Defendants, 8537283 Canada Inc. c.o.b. as Kavali’s
Nightclub and Aydin Kharaghani (the “853 Defendants”), produced their documents
on March 6, 2019. There have not yet been any examinations for discovery or a
mediation. After the Defendants indicated that they would not consent to an
extension of the Timetable Order on or about May 2024, A.B. requested a case
conference.  At the case conference on July 4, 2024, this status hearing was
scheduled.
[4]              
With respect to the De Marinis’ criminal
matter, the appeal from the first trial was heard on November 27, 2019.  On May
14, 2020, the Court of Appeal set aside De Marinis’ conviction and ordered a
new trial. The second trial commenced on October 18, 2021 and concluded on July
11, 2022. In reasons issued on October 12, 2022, De Marinis was acquitted.
[5]              
A.B.’s position is that she has always
intended to pursue her claim and has diligently prosecuted the action.  She
provides three reasons explaining why the action has not yet been set down for
trial: 1) the delay in the criminal proceedings involving De Marinis; 2) the
defendants’ conduct and positions; and, 3) delay with the production of Wagg
documents.
[6]              
 A.B.’s explanation for the delay is rooted in her position that the
parties agreed to “effectively stay” the action because the parties were
waiting on the Wagg productions to conduct examinations for discovery,
and those productions could not be obtained until the criminal proceeding was
over. A.B. also submits that the Defendants will not suffer any non-compensable
prejudice if she is permitted to continue the action as the parties have
already exchanged affidavits of documents, documents have therefore been
preserved and the evidence from the criminal proceeding, including the evidence
of potential witnesses, has also been preserved.
[7]              
De Marinis’ position is that A.B. has failed
to provide an acceptable explanation for the delay and failed to produce
evidence of any agreement between the parties to stay the action pending the
conclusion of De Marinis’ second criminal trial. De Marinis submits that A.B. had
many options available to her but she and/or her lawyers deliberately decided
to place the matter on hold for three years.  De Marinis does not rely on
“case-specific prejudice” but submits that there is non-compensable prejudice
inherent in the long delay alleged in this case. He also submits that A.B. has
a remedy against her lawyers if the action is dismissed and this is a factor
that the Court can consider at this hearing.
[8]              
The 853 Defendants also take the position that
A.B. has failed to provide an acceptable explanation for the delay and deny
that there was an agreement to hold the action in abeyance pending the second
criminal trial. The 853 Defendants submit that the criminal proceeding and
delay in obtaining the Wagg productions did not prevent A.B. from moving
her action forward, in particular against the 853 Defendants, as those
defendants were not parties to the criminal proceedings and A.B.’s evidence is that
she always intended to proceed with the action regardless of the outcome of the
criminal proceeding. They deny that they are to blame for the delay and allege
that A.B. stymied their motion for summary judgment. With regards to prejudice,
the 853 Defendants take the position that A.B. has focused her argument
entirely on De Marinis and has failed to establish that the 853 Defendants
would not suffer prejudice if the action continued.
[9]              
In his factum, De Marinis also challenged the
admissibility and/or relevance of certain evidence submitted by the Plaintiff
on this motion and alleged that there was extensive interference with the
cross-examinations of the three deponents as well as refusals to answer proper
questions. As a preliminary matter at the hearing, De Marinis also objected to
the delivery of answers to undertakings/advisements delivered by the Plaintiff
last Friday as well as caselaw responding to the evidentiary issues. De Marinis
submitted that if the answers/documents had been provided previously, he would
have asked further questions on cross-examination and/or made different
arguments in his factum. That said, De Marinis did not request an adjournment
or seek leave to conduct further cross-examinations.
[10]          
As part of my analysis, I have considered that
the Defendants did not have an opportunity to test the answers to
undertakings/advisements during cross-examinations and I have also considered any
admissibility issues and/or weight to be given to the evidence as applicable. With
respect to concerns about the different record filed with the Court
(approximately 5400 pages per De Marinis’ counsel) as compared to the condensed
record uploaded to Case Center (approximately 500 pages), I confirmed that the
record that was filed with the Court is the official record for purpose of this
hearing.  At a previous case conference, due to the volume of the filed
materials, I previously directed that a condensed record be uploaded to Case
Center as well as compendiums by each party as necessary – all of which I have
reviewed as part of my review of the materials.
[11]          
The correspondence exchanged between the parties provides important
context regarding the manner in which the action unfolded.  A.B. also relies on
some of the correspondence to support her position that the parties agreed to
an “effective stay” pending the outcome of De Marinis’ second criminal trial. While
A.B. identified five specific exchanges as part of the answers to advisements,
those emails were previously attached as exhibits to Doreen Navarro and Julie
Mouris’ affidavits and were therefore always part of A.B.’s record for this
hearing. Notwithstanding De Marinis’ objections to some of the evidence, his
counsel also conceded that the correspondence between counsel is properly
before the Court except that certain statements set out therein should not be
admitted for the truth of their contents (i.e. advice of discussions between
counsel without corroborating affidavit evidence of those conversations). 
Subject to that caveat, which I agree with, the correspondence between the
parties’ counsel is therefore properly before the Court.
[12]          
Before turning to my analysis, I will therefore provide a more fulsome
summary of the litigation history with reference to some of the key
correspondence.
[13]          
The Defendants did not file any responding affidavits but the moving
party’s affiants were cross-examined. A.B.’s evidence is that: she has always
intended to prosecute the action; the result of the 2nd criminal
trial did not change that intention; she has been frustrated by the delays in
the action; she is motivated by a desire for justice and to prevent other women
from having a similar experience; and, she wants to proceed with the action as
expeditiously as possible.
[14]          
The first part of the Faris test requires a contextual approach
guided by the Reid factors such that the Court determines the outcome
that is just in the circumstances.  The Reid test considers the
following: has the plaintiff provided a satisfactory explanation for the delay,
is the delay caused by inadvertence, did the plaintiff move promptly to bring
the motion/hearing and has the plaintiff demonstrated that the defendants would
not be prejudiced in presenting their case to trial.[3]
 A.B. does not rely on inadvertence and the Defendants did not raise any issues
with delay in bringing this hearing.  The outcome of this hearing therefore turns
on the factors regarding the explanation of the delay and the element of
prejudice.
[15]          
In determining whether or not to end an action or allow it to proceed, a
judge must also balance two fundamental underlying policy considerations: a)
that civil actions should, if possible, be decided on their merits rather than
terminated on procedural grounds[4]
and, b) that actions should be resolved in a timely and efficient manner in
order to maintain public confidence in the administration of justice and this
requires “all parties to play their part in moving actions forward, and for
counsel to act in a way that facilitates rather than frustrates access to
justice”[5].
[16]          
While the plaintiff bears the primary responsibility for the conduct of
the action, the defendant’s conduct in the litigation is a relevant
circumstance including circumstances where a defendant resists to move the
matter along or where the defendant’s conduct reflects a contentment with the
pace of the litigation[6].
[17]          
The first criteria relates to whether or not A.B. has provided an
“acceptable”, “satisfactory” or “reasonable” explanation for the delay.  On
similar motions, in emphasizing that a contextual approach is warranted, the
Court of Appeal has stated that the exercise is “not a “blame game”, where
counsel should be required or encouraged to take a defensive stance and justify
their conduct of the litigation on a month-by-month basis” (Carioca’s v Canadian
Pacific Railway Limited, 2015 ONCA 592 at paras 45-46).  Appellate courts
have found that it is an error to apply too exacting a standard when
considering the explanations provided and that the explanations need not be
compelling, convincing or cogent (Kupets v Bonavista Pools Limited
2015 ONSC 7348 (Div. Ct.) at paras 18-19; Carioca’s v Canadian
Pacific Railway Limited, 2015 ONCA 592 at paras 52).
[18]          
A.B. submits that the only delay I need consider in this case is any
delays after February 2024.  The Plaintiff relies on the Defendants’ alleged
agreement to the timetable order in February 2024 in support of her argument
that any delay up to February 2024 was vitiated and relies on the Stokker[7]
case among others to support this position.  I am not satisfied that the
principle set out in the Stokker case applies to the circumstances of
this matter.  I will therefore consider the explanation for the material period
of alleged delay that is at issue in this case which is from October 2020 to
approximately July 2023.
[19]          
As referenced above, the root of A.B.’s explanation for the delay is
that the parties agreed to “stay” the action pending the completion of De
Marinis’ criminal matter as the parties required the Wagg productions
before proceeding with examinations for discovery. The Defendants do not dispute
that there was such an agreement pending the outcome of De Marinis’ appeal from
the first criminal trial.  The main point of contention is that they dispute
any such agreement after the Court of Appeal ordered a new trial in May 2020.
[20]          
In my view, A.B. has provided a satisfactory explanation for the delay.
[21]          
Although there was some disagreement between the parties at the outset,
it is clear based on the exchanges between counsel that by the Spring of 2020, the
parties were in agreement that before proceeding with the examinations for
discovery in this action, they required the Wagg productions. Based on
the communications, the parties agreed that the Wagg productions were
required not only to ensure that the examinations were productive but also to
avoid having to return for further examinations after the Wagg
productions were received. This outcome is exactly the position that De Marinis
advocated for from the outset of the civil action. In addition, the
communications between the parties also support that A.B. and the 853
Defendants agreed that the Wagg productions were required before 853’s
summary judgment motion.
[22]          
The Defendants are correct that this “agreement” was never expressly confirmed
in writing between the parties after the Court of Appeal ordered the new criminal
trial in May 2020 and that A.B. never brought a motion seeking to stay the
proceedings. There is no doubt that either of these steps would have been
prudent in the circumstances. However, in my view, the communications between
the parties and MAG regarding the Wagg orders make it clear that the
parties understood that MAG would not release the Wagg productions until
the final outcome of the criminal proceedings, including a potential re-trial
and further appeals. MAG raised legitimate concerns about releasing the
productions before the criminal proceedings were fully resolved, including to
ensure that fairness in the criminal proceedings was maintained – something
that De Marinis no doubt fully appreciated and supported. The Defendants submit
that there is a disjunction between the Wagg orders and the steps in the
civil action but I do not agree.  In my view, there is a direct link between
the Wagg orders and proceeding with examinations for discovery because
the parties indicated they required the Wagg productions in order to
proceed with examinations.
[23]          
All of the parties consented to the terms of each of the Wagg orders.
The parties may not have fully appreciated the potential duration of the delay resulting
from the criminal proceeding when the first Wagg order was consented to
in February 2020 given that the outcome of De Marinis’ appeal was not yet
known. However, by the time they consented to the Wagg order dealing
with the A.V. files in September 2020, the parties were fully aware that a new
criminal trial would take place. The Defendants did not protest or raise any
concerns about potential delays, nor did they suggest at that time that the
agreement should be revisited such that discoveries or 853’s motion for summary
judgment should proceed.  In my view, the absence of any such protestation
confirms that the agreement remained in place after the new criminal trial was
ordered and that the terms of the agreement were understood.  At a minimum, it
signals that the parties were content to await the outcome of the criminal
proceedings in order to have the Wagg productions before any
examinations for discovery took place in accordance with their previous positions.
[24]          
The Defendants submit that they never agreed to hold off on the
examinations (or the advancement of the civil action) in perpetuity and that it
wouldn’t make sense for the agreement to have been open-ended in terms of its
duration because what if it took 10 years for the criminal matter to conclude? The
Defendants also submit that the parties never contemplated a delay of this
duration when they agreed to wait for the Wagg productions.  While the
Defendants are correct that the “agreement” did not have a specific duration,
this argument cuts both ways; there is certainly no correspondence to suggest
that the agreement was only valid until the Court of Appeal rendered its
decision. Furthermore, the criminal proceedings did not take 10 years to conclude. 
 There is no evidence that De Marinis’ new trial took an inordinate amount of
time to unfold.
[25]          
The facts of this case are therefore distinguishable from the facts in
the Home Town[8]
case where the Court held it was not appropriate to await the outcome of
another proceeding that was “marred by delays”. The facts are also
distinguishable from the case of Business Development Bank of Canada v. I
Inc.[9]
as this is not a case where the Plaintiff made a unilateral decision to hold
this action in abeyance. The Defendants submit that, in accordance with the Court’s
findings in the BDC case, A.B. could have done a number of things to
advance the action while the parties awaited the Wagg documents such as
requesting a status hearing pursuant to Rule 48 before the expiry of the 5-year
deadline. In view of my finding that the parties agreed to wait for the Wagg
productions prior to proceeding to examinations for discovery, it is not clear
what A.B. could have done to move the action forward. Yes, she could have taken
procedural steps to confirm the parties’ agreement such as seek an order for a
stay or to amend the timetable.  But in my view, that was not required given
the agreement.
[26]          
Furthermore, the test on this motion is not to hold the plaintiff to a
standard of perfection or critique the decisions made by counsel. I must only
be satisfied that A.B.’s explanation for the delay is reasonable. It is also
somewhat disingenuous for De Marinis to suggest that A.B. could have taken
steps such as a status hearing, especially given that De Marinis takes the
position that the court’s recommencement of issuing dismissal orders in May
2024 is what triggered him to withdraw his agreement in principle to the draft
timetable in February 2024. I also note that any party may bring a motion for a
status hearing and it is not incumbent on a plaintiff to do so. The suggestion by
the 853 Defendants that A.B. could have proceeded with examinations for
discovery or pursued the action only against them is also disingenuous in view
of their response in October 2023 that it was premature to proceed with
examinations in the absence of the Wagg productions.
[27]          
I will briefly address the period between Justice Bell’s acquittal of De
Marinis in October 2022 and the delay of about nine months in A.B.’s counsel
notifying MAG about the outcome of the trial, which was required to trigger the
Wagg productions.  The explanation provided for this delay is that A.B.’s
counsel reviewed the evidence from the second trial, including the transcripts
of that proceeding, and that they wanted to conduct some research. A.B.’s
counsel allege that they did so as quickly as possible in view of their
schedules, including a parental leave by Ms. Mouris. In terms of a general
timeline, transcripts of the criminal proceeding were requested in early
February 2023 and received by March 7, 2023; transcripts were reviewed until
approximately May 2023 and research was conducted until about August 2023. The
answers to undertakings suggest that approximately 121 hours was docketed by A.B.’s
lawyers and students from October 1, 2020 to August 2023. A.B.’s counsel also
explained that they didn’t find out who had assumed carriage of this matter at
MAG until September 7, 2023.
[28]          
The Defendants challenge these explanations and, as mentioned above, did
cross-examine the affiants on their affidavits. The Defendants submit that there
is no causal connection between the review of evidence in the criminal
proceeding and delays in the civil trial, especially in view of A.B.’s evidence
that she intended to pursue the civil matter regardless of the outcome of the
criminal proceedings. They further point to various admissions by A.B.’s
counsel that the file was adequately resourced.
[29]          
The explanations provided during this nine-month period are not without question
marks.  For example, even if a review of the evidence in the criminal matter
was required, A.B.’s counsel could have notified MAG of the outcome of the
criminal proceeding in late-2022 once the criminal appeal period had lapsed so
that MAG could at least start to gather the Wagg productions.  That
said, in considering the overall circumstances I am satisfied that the
explanations provided during this nine-month period are also satisfactory. In
addition, this delay of nine months would not in any way warrant the dismissal
of the action when considering the overall context. Furthermore, there is no
evidence to suggest that A.B. is accountable for her counsel’s delay in
notifying MAG to request the Wagg productions.[10]
[30]          
The Defendants’ responses in the Fall of 2023 and early 2024 are also
material when considering the reasonableness of the explanation for delay.  When
A.B.’s counsel proposed a timetable to move the matter along, the 853
Defendants responded by suggesting that examinations for discovery were
premature as the Wagg productions were not complete (though some
documents had been received).  De Marinis’ new counsel suggested a series of
fresh steps, including the amendment of pleadings. None of the Defendants
raised any concern about the delay or expressed surprise that A.B. was moving
forward with the action. In addition, both sets of Defendants did, in my
view, agree to the timetable proposed by A.B. in February 2024 subject only to
there needing wiggle room in the timetable if issues arose with productions
which would necessitate an adjournment of the examinations.  This is further
reinforcement of the parties’ “agreement” that they only wanted to proceed with
examinations once all productions, including Wagg productions, had been
exchanged. The Defendants’ reaction in late-2023 and early 2024 is entirely
consistent with the explanations for the delay offered by A.B. and that there
was an agreement between the parties to await the conclusion of the criminal
proceedings and the receipt of the Wagg productions to move the civil
action forward.
[31]          
Even if I am wrong in finding that there was such an agreement between
the parties, there does not need to be an agreement for me to find that the explanations
offered by A.B. for the delay are satisfactory. All that is required is an
acceptable explanation for the delay. In the overall context, A.B.’s belief in
and of itself that there was such an agreement would, in my view, be entirely
satisfactory to explain the delays.
[32]          
The last Reid factor and the second part of the test considers whether
the defendant’s ability to defend the action has been prejudiced by the
plaintiff’s delay and “not as a result of the sheer passage of time”[11].
While a plaintiff has the onus of demonstrating that a defendant would not suffer
any non-compensable prejudice, and a defendant is not required to offer
evidence of actual prejudice, the conduct of a defendant should be considered
by the court including whether the defendant’s actions “are consistent with a
finding of prejudice”[12]. 
A defendant’s passivity or “lack of display of any sense of urgency undercuts
the claim of actual prejudice”[13].
[33]          
De Marinis does not rely on “case-specific prejudice” but relies on the
prejudice “inherent in long delays” and that the more time that passes, “the
more difficult it is to defend the case. Memories fade and even if the
documents are not lost, their significance becomes shrouded”[14].
De Marinis also submits that while there is no limitation period on sexual
assault claims, those actions are not immune from the principles requiring
expeditious justice, especially since the Rules now provide that an
action must be set down within five years rather than the previous two-year
deadline[15].
De Marinis highlights that A.B. did not commence the action until almost three
and a half years after the alleged assault and that as at the date of the
status hearing, more than nine and a half years will have passed since the
alleged incident.  De Marinis submits that this case was “dead on the vine” and
as there was no resistance by the Defendants, the Defendants’ conduct is not a
relevant factor[16].
[34]          
The 853 Defendants submit that A.B. has failed to meet her burden as
against them on the element of prejudice.  In particular, they submit that although
A.B. argues that the evidence from the criminal proceedings has been preserved,
A.B. has not made any effort to establish what evidence has been preserved as
against the 853 Defendants who were not parties to the criminal proceedings. In
their submissions at the hearing, the 853 Defendants also alleged that there
may be potential prejudice to them, such as witnesses not being available etc..
The latter argument can be easily disposed of since the 853 Defendants did not produce
any evidence of actual or case-specific prejudice.
[35]          
I am satisfied that A.B. has met the onus of establishing that the
Defendants would not suffer any non-compensable prejudice. Affidavits of
documents have been exchanged and evidence from the criminal proceeding has
been preserved, including testimony from A.B., De Marinis and other potential
witnesses that were interviewed as part of the criminal proceeding.  The Wagg
productions, including video surveillance from Kavali’s, will be available to
the parties. In fact, the judge from the first criminal trial noted that there
was a “remarkable degree of precision available because communication by text
messages and social media has been preserved and because there are time stamped
video recordings from the surveillance cameras located in the bar”. These findings
are relevant to all of the Defendants, including the 853 Defendants, to satisfy
the Plaintiff’s onus.
[36]          
In addition, as A.B. pointed out during the hearing, the 853 Defendants
plead in their Statement of Defence that they investigated the incident as part
of the club’s standard practices. Based on their own pleading, the 853
Defendants appear to have preserved the evidence.
[37]          
 Although there was some indication that A.B. may have further documents
that weren’t previously produced in her affidavit of documents and/or that
there may be requests for further productions, I am satisfied based on the
overall evidence that A.B. has met her burden. Also, as indicated above, the Defendants
have not produced any evidence of fact-specific prejudice including evidence
that some of the relevant documents may no longer be available.
[38]          
In addition, the Defendants did not display any sense of urgency on the
pace of the litigation.  From the outset, the Defendants – especially De
Marinis – insisted on having the Wagg productions prior to proceeding
with examinations for discovery. That position was also adopted by the 853
Defendants, both in respect of discoveries and their potential motion for
summary judgment. The Wagg productions could not be produced until the
criminal proceedings were fully completed in order to preserve the integrity of
the criminal proceeding and protect De Marinis’ rights. The civil action was
not “dead on the vine” and A.B. did not deliberately delay the action and was
not trying to get a “break” from the action. She was essentially faced with the
reality that the criminal proceeding had to take priority and be fully resolved
until the next step in the civil action (the examinations) could proceed.
[39]          
Prior to the Defendants taking the position that the Plaintiff had to
bring a status hearing, the Defendants did not raise any concerns about delays
or potential prejudice arising from the delays. The Defendants awaited the
outcome of the new criminal trial in silence.  They never suggested that examinations
for discovery should now proceed or that further steps should be taken in the
civil action, whether this be to proceed with 853’s motion for summary or
otherwise. While I have found that this silence and lack of protestation
supports A.B.’s position that the parties had agreed to await the outcome of
the criminal proceedings and receipt of the Wagg productions to take
next steps, this silence also undercuts any claims of prejudice.
[40]          
The same conclusion can be reached by examining the Defendants’
responses in the Fall of 2023 and early 2024 when A.B.’s counsel sought to set
a timetable for the remaining steps in the action.  Not only did the 853
Defendants continue to assert that examinations were premature, but both sets
of Defendants agreed to the timetable in February 2024. Contrary to the 853
Defendants’ submissions, the only caveat to the Defendants’ agreement on the
timetable was that they may need to further delay the examinations if any
“production issues” arose.  De Marinis went one step further and suggested that
the Plaintiff take further steps in the action. The explanation now offered by
De Marinis for resiling from the timetable and insisting that a status hearing
take place is not very compelling and contradictory to his position that A.B. could
(or should) have brought this status hearing sooner. De Marinis has not
produced any evidence to support that if the administrative dismissals weren’t
on pause, his response in early January 2024 would have been different. A.B. is
also quite correct that if the parties had proceeded with the timetable
suggested by her counsel in early 2024, this action would now be ready to set
down for trial. Overall, the Defendants’ conduct, responses and positions are
inconsistent with any suggestion that they are prejudiced by the delays.
[41]          
I also agree with A.B.’s submission that in view of the fact that the
delays served to protect De Marinis’ rights in the criminal proceeding, it
would be unjust in the circumstances to dismiss A.B.’s civil action.
[42]          
I recognize that this is now a six-and-a-half-year-old action and that
the alleged incident occurred in 2015.  However, in my view, the delays in this
case do not amount to the level of inordinate delays that warrant the dismissal
of the action.  A fair trial remains possible. A.B. has satisfied the second
element of the test.
[43]          
For the reasons set out above, the Plaintiff’s motion is granted and the
action shall proceed.
[44]          
 I have reviewed the draft timetable set out in the Plaintiff’s draft
order.  The next steps in the action are premised on the Plaintiff bringing a
motion to amend the statement of claim but it does not include a deadline to
set the action down for trial which is required to avoid any further issues
with the administrative dismissal of the action.  The parties shall confer to
discuss next steps and try to reach agreement on a timetable. The draft
timetable should strive to complete all steps such that this matter is set down
for trial by early 2026. A consent timetable order may be sent to my attention
at  Ottawa.associatejudges@ontario.ca
for review within 30 days, or alternatively, if the parties do not agree, they
may request a case conference before me to be scheduled at my earliest
availability.  In the meantime, this action shall not be dismissed by the
Registrar pursuant to Rule 48.14. I have also signed the draft Order for the
remaining Wagg productions and that Order shall be issued.
[45]          
The Plaintiff seeks costs on a partial indemnity scale totaling
$72,980.94. The Plaintiff submits that she was forced to put her best foot
forward and assemble a comprehensive record, including the evidence from the
criminal trials (i.e. transcripts) and the parties’ productions (i.e. the
affidavits of documents) as the Defendants refused to explain on what basis
they were opposing the status hearing. A.B. also submits that this motion was
important as it involves the continuing of the action. A.B. also points to the
fact that the Defendants resiled from their previous agreement to a timetable
in February 2024, that they should not have resisted the motion in the absence
of prejudice and that this was a hotly contested motion involving cross-examinations.
 The Plaintiff also relies on a Rule 49 offer made in July 2024 which attempted
to resolve the matter without a hearing.
[46]          
The partial indemnity costs sought by De Marinis at the hearing total
$64,071.58 inclusive of HST and disbursements. De Marinis submits that he
should be allowed costs even if the action is allowed to proceed and relies on various
cases including Koepcke v Webster[17]
and Business Development Bank of Canada v I Inc.[18]
in support of his position.  In those cases, the Court found that it was
appropriate for the defendants to oppose the motions and compel the plaintiffs
to show cause as, for various reasons, the Court was providing an indulgence to
the plaintiffs by allowing the actions to proceed.  In the alternative, De
Marinis submits that if the action proceeds, there should be no costs of this
motion. De Marinis also relies on the voluminous nature of the Plaintiff’s
productions on this motion and the conduct of the Plaintiff’s counsel on
cross-examinations. A reminder that the size of the Plaintiff’s record went
from approximately 5,400 pages (materials as filed) to about 500 pages
(condensed materials uploaded to Case Center at my directions). De Marinis
submits that this is indicative that the Plaintiff filed significant irrelevant
materials in support of the hearing.
[47]          
The costs sought by the 853 Defendants if they had been successful at
the hearing are $14,824.61 on a partial indemnity scale inclusive of taxes and
disbursements. They also rely on the voluminous record of the Plaintiff, the
conduct during cross-examinations and the BDC case. They submit that it
was reasonable for the Defendants to require that A.B. show cause and that it
would be unreasonable to require the Defendants to pay costs if the Plaintiff was
granted an indulgence.
[48]          
I do not agree with the Defendants that this is a case where I am
granting an “indulgence” to the Plaintiff. In view of my findings above, this
case is distinguishable from the caselaw, including the Koepcke case
where the Court found that the plaintiffs had “failed to share their plans to
hold the action in abeyance”. I am also not convinced that it was appropriate
for the Defendants to contest the motion in view of the parties’ agreement to
await the Wagg productions and outcome of the criminal proceedings before
completing discoveries or in view of the fact that in February 2024, the
parties had essentially agreed to a timetable to move this action forward. In
the circumstances, I see no basis for departing from the usual practice that
the successful party should be granted its costs.
[49]          
That said, and notwithstanding that De Marinis seeks costs in a similar
range, I have concerns with the quantum of costs sought by the Plaintiff in
keeping that this was a status hearing that, while important to all parties,
did not raise complex issues. Based on A.B.’s costs outline, there were
multiple timekeepers involved in the matter which increases the risk of
duplication of effort and puts into question whether the work was allocated in
the most cost-effective manner.  The voluminous nature of the record could have
been reduced from the outset.  It was not  necessary for the Plaintiff to
include all of the transcripts from the criminal proceedings plus all documents
exchanged in the civil action to prove that all evidence was preserved. Also, given
that the Plaintiff has the burden on this motion, I do not agree that it was
incumbent on the Defendants to articulate the basis for their opposition and
that in the absence of same, all of the documents needed to be included in the
record.  That said, A.B. did attempt to resolve the matter and sent a detailed
letter in support of her position. I also question whether cross-examinations
were necessary.
[50]          
In view of all of the circumstances, and pursuant to the exercise of my
discretion under section 131 of the Courts of Justice Act and the principles
set out under Rule 57, I am of the view that costs in the amount of $20,000
all-inclusive payable by the Defendants, on a joint and several basis, to the
Plaintiff are appropriate.