[1]              
This matter was scheduled for a 6
week trial. The parties settled the action on the eve of trial. However, they
did not settle the issue of costs. Rather, the settlement provided that “The
plaintiffs’ partial indemnity costs will be paid after assessment”.
[2]              
The plaintiff seeks the all-inclusive partial indemnity amount of
$281,587. The bill of costs includes fees of $170,799 plus HST and
disbursements of $78,655 plus HST.
[3]              
The parties are now disputing
whether the assessment should be conducted by an assessment officer or by a
member of this Court.
[4]              
As this matter settled
before trial, this Court has only a cursory knowledge of the facts. The action was
a claim by the plaintiff against its solicitors in respect of advice given in
the context of a commercial venture that became litigious. The underlying facts
date back to 2002. The litigation in which the negligent advice was allegedly
given was commenced in 2007 and was eventually dismissed in 2017 by the Court
of Appeal, which dismissed the proceeding  on a limitation period issue. This
litigation then ensued. It too went to the Court of Appeal on an interlocutory
dispute. Aside from addressing facts back to 2002, there is a long procedural history
to this matter.
[5]              
The defendant submits
that it was the intention of the parties to have an assessment by an assessment
office and not have this Court fix the costs. Counsel points to Rule 57.04 of
the Rules
of Civil Procedure,
R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194 (
“Rules”) that provides that where the parties settle, and costs remain an issue,
the assessment of any costs may be determined by an assessment officer. The
defendant asserts that the assessment of these costs requires evidence both to
appreciate the nature of the litigation, and to review the work of the nine
lawyers who docketed on the file over many years. In response, the plaintiff submits
that the issue of costs is straightforward. It further asserts that that the
simplest, least expensive, and most expeditious process for fixing costs is for
this Court to do so.
[6]              
This is not a situation
where this Court has made an award of costs and now must fix the amount: Rule
57.01(3). Rather, the parties specifically left costs to be assessed following
the settlement of the proceeding. This falls squarely within Rule 57.04 which
reads as follows:
[7]              
As is clear from Rule
57.04, the Rules Committee specifically contemplated this situation and assigned
the task to the assessment officers who are imminently qualified.
[8]              
Nonetheless the
plaintiff asks that I use my discretion to have a member of this Court fix the
costs under Rule 57.03. In doing so, the plaintiff refers to Rule 57.01(7) and
says the simplest, least expensive, and most expeditious process for setting
costs would be if this Court does so. I disagree. When a court fixes costs, it
has already reviewed the record, heard argument and is familiar with the
matters in dispute. That is not this case.
This Court, like an assessment officer, would have to start at square one.
[9]              
As the court noted in Boucher
v. Public Accountants Council for the Province of Ontario, 2004 CanLII
14579 (ON CA), assessing costs is not a formulaic exercise, but the relevant
factors vary depending on the factual matrix of each case: Boucher at
para. 38. I accept the defendant’s comments that a certain amount of evidence
will likely be needed to determine what is a fair and reasonable award
of partial indemnity costs in
the circumstances. I accept that this may take several days, although the
conduct of any assessment will be up to the assessor of those costs. To have
this Court assign a judge for several days to address the assessment of this
matter takes the judge away from the other tasks of this Court and undermines
the division of labour contemplated in Rule 57.04.
[10]          
Accordingly, I order that the
costs of this matter are to be referred to an assessment officer to be assessed
on a partial indemnity scale in favour of the plaintiff.
[11]          
In the often quoted statement from
Sparling v. Southam Inc. (1988), 1988 CanLII 4694
(ON SC), 66 O.R. (2d) 225 (H.C.J.)
(approved by the SCC in Sable Offshore Energy Inc. v. Ameron International Corp., 2013 SCC 37 (CanLII), [2013] 2
SCR 623, at para. 11) the policy in favour of settlement was described this way:
[12]          
The settlement in this case has
not fully embraced the policy in the above quote - the parties still seek to
burden themselves with more costs and to increase the strain on our
overburdened civil justice system. While I appreciate that the parties have
settled a lengthy piece of litigation and that they are entitled to have an assessment
officer assess those costs under rule 57.04, it would have been better had they
settled the entire dispute including costs. Before the parties embark on the assessment, I would ask the parties to reconsider if they can resolve the costs
without the need for an assessment.