[1]         
The defendants move
to strike out the Amended  Statement of Claim (the “Statement of Claim”) in
this proceeding as disclosing no reasonable cause of action because: (i) it
amounts to a collateral attack on a proceeding of the Ontario Securities
Commission (the “ OSC”) that culminated in an OSC Order and Settlement Agreement
in September 2000;  (ii) it is an abuse of process because it seeks to
relitigate the issues addressed in the OSC Order and Settlement Agreement;
(iii)  it violates the ultimate 15 year limitation period contained in the Limitations
Act;[1]
and  (iv) because it is drafted in a way so as to violate the rules of pleading
with respect to several of the causes of action which it pleads.
[2]         
As set out in
greater detail below, I grant the motion and strike out the Statement of Claim
with leave to amend.
[3]         
In my view, the
Statement of Claim does not amount to a collateral attack on the OSC Order or
Settlement Agreement because it does not actually seek to set those aside.  It
does, however, amount to an abuse of process because it implicitly challenges
the factual findings on which the OSC Order is based and which are contained in
the Settlement Agreement.
[4]         
The Statement of Claim
also violates the 15 year ultimate limitation period contained in the Limitations
Act.  The Statement of Claim pleads no facts that occurred after 2002.  The
plaintiff argues that documents came to his attention  in May 2020 that created
a cause of action.  I do not accept that submission.  The Statement of Claim
pleads many facts of which the plaintiff was aware at the time they occurred
which gave him a cause of action.  Moreover, the 15 year ultimate limitation
period can only be avoided if the defendants wilfully concealed facts from or
misrepresented facts to the plaintiff  so as to mislead him about the existence
of a cause of action.  Case law has required active conduct on the part of a
defendant for courts to find wilful concealment or misrepresentation.  Apart
from a bald allegation to that effect, the plaintiff has not pleaded any
material facts to support the allegation of wilful concealment or
misrepresentation.
[5]         
In light of my
findings about abuse of process and the limitations period which dispose of the
Statement of Claim in its entirety, I do not find it necessary to address the
arguments about the way in which particular causes of action are pleaded.
[6]         
The plaintiff G.
Scott Paterson (“Paterson”) was a highly successful individual in the Canadian
investment banking industry during the 1980s and 1990s.  Between 1985 and 1987
Paterson worked at Dominion Securities Pitfield. During that time he became one
of its top-ranked advisors.
[7]         
The Defendant Royal
Bank of Canada (“RBC”), is a Canadian chartered bank that acquired Dominion
Securities Pitfield in 1987 at which time the latter was continued as  RBC
Dominion Securities Inc. (“RBC DS”).  The personal defendants Anthony S. Fell,
Bryce W. Douglas, Neil Selfe, R. Jamie Anderson, and the two “Doe” Defendants were
directors, senior officers and employees of RBC and/or RBC DS during the time in
which the acts that this action is based on occurred.
[8]         
Paterson left
Dominion Securities Pitfield in 1987 at about the time RBC acquired it because he
perceived that it had reneged on a commitment to him.  After leaving Dominion
Securities, Paterson became a leading advisor at Richardson Greenshields. In
1988 he joined that firm’s investment banking group.  After moving to Midland
Walwyn, he was recruited by Yorkton Securities Inc. as Executive Vice President
in 1995.  By 1998 he was the Chair and Chief Executive Officer of Yorkton.
[9]         
Paterson became a
prominent individual in the Canadian investment banking industry. He
transformed Yorkton from a small mining focused boutique brokerage to become
one of Canada’s leading investment banks.  He served on numerous boards and
agencies in the securities industry including as Governor of the Investment
Dealer’s Association, Director of the Investor Protection Fund, a director of
the Canadian Securities Institute, the Canadian Security Advisor Council, and
the Canadian Venture Exchange (“CDNX”) as well as a Vice Chair of the Toronto
Stock Exchange.
[10]      
In September, 2000
the OSC began an investigation and commenced an enforcement proceeding relating
to Paterson and Yorkton. The OSC alleged that Paterson and Yorkton acted in
conflict of interest, failed to disclose material information, and engaged in
conduct contrary to the public interest with respect to four transactions.
[11]      
On December 17,
2001, the OSC entered an Order,[2]
which found that Paterson’s conduct was contrary to the public interest,
pursuant to sections 127(1) and 127.1 of the Securities Act.   On
December 19, 2001, Paterson entered into a Settlement Agreement with the OSC in
relation to the enforcement proceeding.  Pursuant to the Order and the
Settlement Agreement, Paterson agreed to:
[12]      
Yorkton also
executed a settlement agreement approved by an OSC order.
[13]      
Almost 21 years
later, on May 13, 2022 Paterson commenced this action. The action claims damages
for civil conspiracy, defamation, injurious falsehood, and interference with
economic relations based on allegedly secret conduct that he says the defendants
engaged in between 1995 and 2002.  The overall nub of the claim is that the
defendants engaged in a campaign to defame Paterson.  As part of that campaign, 
 Anthony Fell, the then Chair of RBC DS and other defendants pressured the then
Chair of the OSC and other OSC members, executives and staff to investigate Paterson
to which pressure the OSC succumbed. Paterson further alleges that the
defendants encouraged OSC investigators to disclose information obtained in
their investigations or leak it to journalists.
[14]      
Paterson says that
the impetus to the claim at this relatively late stage was a note that he
received from an anonymous whistleblower on May 14, 2020. The note read as
follows:
[15]      
Attached to the note
was a memo dated November 20, 1998 from the defendant Bryce Douglas who was Vice-Chair
of RBC DS at the time.  The memo attached an article from Canadian Business
about Paterson. In the memo, Douglas says, among other things:
[16]      
The plaintiff moves
to strike the Statement of Claim on the grounds that it amounts to a collateral
attack on the OSC Order and Settlement Agreement, is an abuse of process, is
time-barred as being beyond the 15  year ultimate limitation period under the Limitations
Act[3]
as well as for more particular defects about the way certain causes of action
are pleaded.
[17]      
The defendants move
to strike the Statement of Claim on four bases, namely that it:  (i) is a
collateral attack on the OSC Order and Settlement Agreement; (ii) amounts to an
abuse of process; (iii) is time-barred; and (iv) discloses no reasonable cause
of action due to defects in the way it pleads a variety of causes of action.
[18]      
Striking for abuse
of process is governed by two provisions, Rule 21.01(3)(d) and Rule 25.11.  The
former provides that a defendant may move to have an action stayed or dismissed
on the ground that
[19]      
Rule 25.11 provides:
[20]      
In addition, the
defendants move to strike the Statement of Claim as disclosing no reasonable
cause of action under Rule 21.01(1)(b).  This Rule applies to the challenges in
relation to the ultimate limitations period and the challenges to the way in
which particular causes of action are pleaded.
[21]      
The principles to be
applied to a motion to strike under Rule 21.01(1)(b) are not in dispute and may
be summarized as follows:
[22]      
The defendants first
submit that the Statement of Claim should be struck out because it is a
collateral attack on the OSC Order.
[23]      
Collateral attack is
a subset of abuse of process.[11]
 Courts have defined it narrowly as “an attack against an order in proceedings
other than the proceeding in which the order was made with the object of
reversing, varying or nullifying the order.”[12] 
The challenge cannot be one to the order more generally but must be
specifically aimed at reversing, varying, or nullifying the order in a
technical sense.
[24]      
The Supreme Court of
Canada’s decision in Toronto (City) v. C.U.P.E., Local 79,[13]
provides a good example of the distinction between collateral attack and abuse
of process more generally. In that case, a person employed as a recreation
instructor for the City had been convicted of sexually assaulting a boy under
his supervision. After his conviction, the City terminated his employment. The
employee grieved his dismissal in a labour arbitration in the course of which he
contested the correctness of his conviction. The labour arbitrator accepted his
version of events and ordered that he be reinstated. On judicial review up to
the Supreme Court of Canada, the courts reversed the arbitrator’s decision. In
the Supreme Court of Canada,  Arbour J.,  writing for the majority, declined to
treat this as a case of collateral attack because
[25]      
Similarly here, the
defendants’ complaints about the Statement of Claim are not that it contests
the legal force of the OSC Order and Settlement Agreement but rather that the Statement
of Claim amounts to an implicit attack on the correctness of the factual basis
of the OSC Order and Settlement Agreement. As the Supreme Court of Canada did
in C.U.P.E. Local 79, I believe the better approach is to go directly to
the doctrine of abuse of process.
[26]      
Abuse of process is
a discretionary principle. It is used to bar proceedings that are inconsistent
with the objectives of public policy. It engages the inherent power of the
court to prevent a misuse of its procedure in a way that is manifestly unfair
or brings the administration of justice into disrepute. The doctrine applies to
prevent violations of the principles of judicial economy, consistency, finality,
and the integrity of the administration of justice. There is a degree of
overlap between the terms frivolous, vexatious and abuse of process.[15]
[27]      
In my view, the
claim amounts to an abuse of process in three principal ways:
[28]      
Paterson claims
damages of $275 million[16]
from the defendants which he says arise because he lost his position as Chair
and CEO of Yorkton; was forced to sell his interest in Yorkton at book value and
thereby lost a “favourable rate of return on his equity ownership capital”; and
suffered an “immediate decline in his income” following the Order, from which
he “was never able to recover”.[17]
[29]      
These are all losses
directly attributable to the Settlement Agreement.  By claiming those damages
from the defendants he is seeking to set aside the financial consequences that
he agreed to in the Settlement.   As part of the Settlement, Paterson agreed to
resign as Chair and CEO of Yorkton”, agreed not to be an officer or director of
a registrant for two years, and agreed to sell his equity in Yorkton at book
value.
[30]      
Paterson submits
that his damage claim does not arise out of the Order because he is claiming
damages that arose after the two years during which he agreed not to be an
officer or director of a registrant.[18]
[31]      
I am unable to
accept that submission. Neither the Settlement Agreement nor the Order speak to
their consequences or the duration of those consequences.  They merely record
Paterson’s agreement to accede to certain terms.
[32]      
Paterson states in paragraph
91 of the Claim that:
[33]      
The fact
that the OSC order may have had effects that were longer term or more
detrimental than Paterson subjectively believed when he agreed to it, is, in
effect, an admission that the long term consequences flowed from the OSC
Settlement.  He is now seeking to transfer those long-term consequences to the
defendants.  Paterson’s subjective belief about what the consequences of the
Settlement would be when he agreed to it does not give him  a  cause of action
if the actual consequences turn out to be more serious.
[34]      
The overall thrust
of the claim is to undermine the integrity of the OSC process. Paragraph 79 of
the claim alleges that after a CDNX  investigation had exculpated Paterson, the
defendants took “improper steps to encourage and to pressure the OSC” to
investigate and take proceedings against Paterson. Those improper steps
included the defendant Anthony Fell, the then Chair of RBC DS, communicating
personally with the Chair of the OSC and other senior OSC members executives
and staff to “personally apply pressure to them to proceed with their own
investigation of Paterson; the OSC eventually succumbed to this pressure from
the defendants” and began an investigation.
[35]      
Paragraph 80 of the
claim alleges that “the defendants caused the OSC to conduct an exhaustive
investigation.” At paragraph 81, the Statement of Claim alleges that as a
result of the defendants’ improper pressure on senior OSC executives the
defendants:
[36]      
Paragraph 82 of the
claim says that after 14 months of investigation, the OSC was not able to show
that Paterson had breached any securities laws, rules or policies and then goes
on to state in paragraph 83:
[37]      
The overall thrust
of the claim is to suggest that the OSC was the pawn of the defendants. It alleges
that only the defendants’ improper pressure led to an investigation and a
proceeding against Paterson. This attacks the integrity of the OSC process.  It
would require the court to investigate the OSC process to determine whether the
OSC made decisions on its own or whether it was subject to improper pressure
from the defendants.  Although a complaint of that nature is not prohibited as
such, it is a complaint that would usually be presented as part of an appeal,
judicial review or other process to which the OSC is a party and has a right to
make submissions.  That is not the case here.
[38]       Paragraphs 84 to 86 of the claim
implicitly try to re-litigate the facts underlying the Settlement Agreement.
Paragraph 84 tries to understate the significance of the issues that the OSC
pursued by stating that they raised “novel questions of suggested conflicts of
interest or nondisclosure in relation to Paterson’s or Yorkton’s involvement as
equity investors at the early stages of events…” The Statement of Claim then
further undermines the integrity of the OSC process by stating that:
[39]      
This would require
the court to compare Paterson’s conduct to that of RBC and RBC DS and determine
whether the conduct was sufficiently similar to render unfair the exercise of
the OSC’s public interest jurisdiction against Paterson but not against RBC or
RBC DS.
[40]      
Paragraph 85 of the
claim goes on to try to resituate each of the four transactions that the OSC
investigated by adding facts to diminish Paterson’s responsibility. By way of
example, paragraph 85 (b) refers to a transaction in respect of which the claim
points the finger at Yorkton’s head securities trader and states that “the only
concern involving Paterson was supervision of the head trader.” Subparagraph (c)
speaks of a transaction in which the OSC noted that Paterson had made a profit
of $400,000 calculated on a last in first out basis
[41]      
Paterson's
position that he had in fact lost $1 million on the transaction was recorded as
his position in paragraph 66 of the Settlement Agreement. Regardless of Paterson’s
position,  the OSC found that his conduct was warranted the exercise of its
public interest jurisdiction; presumably because the impugned transaction
reduced Paterson’s overall loss by $400,000.  Once again, this requires the
court to determine whether the exercise of the OSC’s public interest
jurisdiction in these circumstances was somehow improper.
[42]      
In paragraph 85 (d)
of the Claim, Paterson challenges a fourth transaction for which he was
sanctioned by describing the issue as:
[43]      
This requires the
court to determine what measures Yorkton had put in place, compare Yorkton’s
measures to those of other banks and financial institutions at the time and
then determine whether the exercise of the OSC’s public interest jurisdiction
was somehow unfair in light of that comparison.
[44]      
Paterson may argue
that his Statement of Claim does not, strictly speaking, require re-litigation
of any of these issues.  That position would only make the Claim even more
abusive.  It would oblige the court to accept what are in effect defences to
the complaints that the OSC raised against him and impugn the OSC process
without examining the correctness of Paterson’s allegations.
[45]      
The
decision of Justice Doherty in the Court of Appeal in Toronto (City of) v.
Canadian Union of Public Employees,[20]
is particularly relevant to the case at hand because it explains how courts
should determine whether a subsequent proceeding amounts to an abuse of
process.  In CUPE, Doherty J.A. described abuse of process as relating
to “the adjudicative
process in its various manifestations’ including administrative tribunals.[21]  
The concept therefore applies to the OSC.
[46]      
Justice Doherty went
on to explain that the abuse of process analysis is a balancing exercise that weighs
the interests of the party who seeks to re-visit an issue with the competing
interests of the previously successful litigant, the institutions responsible
for the adjudicative process, those collaterally affected by the re-litigation
such as witnesses and the community at large.[22]
[47]      
The interests of the
litigants and the institution responsible for the adjudicative process are
perhaps easier to discern.  The interests of the community at large include  the
broader perception that the process as a whole achieves results which are
consistent, fair and accurate;[23]
and the interest in finality which   re-litigation uproots.[24]
[48]      
There is no doubt
that revisiting the Settlement Agreement and the OSC Order would cast
significant doubt on the perception that the OSC process achieves results that
are consistent, fair and accurate.
[49]      
There is also no
doubt that revisiting the Settlement Agreement and the OSC Order would uproot
finality.  Both the parties and public at large have a legitimate interest in
finality.  The litigants need to get on with their lives.[25] 
They need a certain level of comfort that they no longer have to retain records
about certain events and a sense of closure that certain issues have been dealt
with and will not be reopened.
[50]      
In addition,  re-litigation
drains both individuals and institutions of their resources.  As Doherty J.A.
explained:
[51]      
At the same time,
Doherty J.A. recognized that giving excessive weight to finality can also lead
to injustice.  As a result, when deciding whether to permit re-litigation the
adjudicator must decide “whether finality concerns should outweigh an
individual litigant’s claim that the justice of the specific case warrants re-litigation.”[27] 
He described that exercise as intensely fact specific.[28]
[52]      
Applying these
principles to the Statement of Claim strengthens my view that it amounts to an
abuse of process.  In balancing society’s need for finality against the justice
of a particular case requiring re-litigation, it is significant to bear in mind
that the OSC proceeding culminated in an agreement that Paterson voluntarily
entered into.  In the year before the settlement, Paterson earned $16 million. 
In the years leading up to that he can also be assumed to have been a high
income earner from the description of his position and role set out in the
Statement of Claim.  That meant Paterson had the economic resources to afford
first rate legal counsel and to defend himself in a formal hearing at the OSC
had he wanted to do so.  Had he failed at the OSC, he also had the means to pursue
appeals or judicial review as far as the law permitted.   He chose to avoid a
hearing entirely and chose to settle.
[53]      
Assessing Paterson’s
allegations about the OSC process requires an assessment of conduct that
occurred 24 years ago and a determination of whether that conduct justified the
OSC’s exercise of its public interest jurisdiction.  Implicit in that exercise
is an evaluation of the reasons for which particular decisions were made 24
years ago.  Many of the defendants are now in their mid-80s or older. 
Witnesses have moved on or died.  Documents will no doubt have been destroyed
or will have gone missing.  All of that means that any litigation would require
large scale reconstruction of events and reasons for doing things.  The results
of that process today will be expensive, time-consuming and, in all likelihood,
less reliable than the inquiry was 24 years ago.
[54]      
The only new
evidence that Paterson has to justify  that inquiry is the whistleblower note and
the Douglas memorandum.  Neither of those documents suggest that the Chair or
other senior officers of RBC DS applied pressure to the Chair of the OSC or
other OSC staff.  There is nothing in Paterson’s Statement of Claim or motion
materials to explain what material facts the allegations of improper pressure
are based on.  Nor is there anything to explain why those allegations could not
have been brought forward at an earlier stage.  All we have are bald
allegations of impropriety.
[55]      
If someone seeks to
attack the propriety of an adjudicative process 24 years after the fact, they should
be required to provide some level of particularity in pleading beyond bald
allegations.  If it were otherwise, anyone could attack any proceeding at any
time by issuing a statement of claim with salacious allegations of injustice or
corruption.  I note in this regard that Rule 25.06(8) requires that allegations
of fraud, misrepresentation, malice or intent be pleaded with full particulars.
[56]      
On the present
constitution of the action, the court would be required to embark on this
inquiry without giving the OSC the chance to defend itself because it is not a
party.  All, at the end of the day, to impugn the validity of a Settlement
Agreement that Paterson consented to and in respect of which he agreed not to
make any inconsistent public statement.
[57]      
In the foregoing
circumstances, balancing the interests of finality against the interests of
justice in the individual case comes down decidedly in favour of finality.
[58]      
The defendants’
second fundamental challenge to the Statement of Claim arises out of the Limitations
Act s. 15 (2) of which provides:
[59]      
This is frequently
referred to as the “ultimate” limitation period because it imposes a strict
prohibition on proceedings commencing more than 15 years after the act or
omission in question occurred.  The 15 year period begins on the day the act
occurred, not on the day the plaintiff knew or ought to have known of the act.
[60]      
The Statement of
Claim contains no allegations of conduct by the defendants after 2002.  The
ultimate limitation period therefore expired in 2017.  The Statement of Claim
was not issued until 5 years later on May 13, 2022.
[61]      
The purpose of the
ultimate limitation period has been described as reflecting the need to
“balance the concern for plaintiffs with undiscovered causes of action with the
need to prevent the indefinite postponement of a limitation period.”[30]
[62]      
Paterson tries to avoid
the ultimate limitation period by seeking to further amend the Statement of
Claim to take advantage of an exception to the ultimate limitation period that
is found in section 15(4)(c) of the Limitations Act and which provides:
[63]      
Paterson proposes to
further amend his Statement of Claim to bring himself within this provision by
adding paragraph 107A which  alleges that the defendants:
[64]      
On the facts of this
case, I am persuaded that the 15 year limitation period should apply to
preclude the claim.  The general thrust of the Statement of Claim is that the
defendants mounted a campaign against Paterson both before and after the OSC
settlement to detrimentally affect his career.  Regardless of the proposed
amendment in paragraph 107A, the Statement of Claim makes clear that Paterson
knew or ought to have known about the defendants’ conduct in this regard at the
time the events occurred.  While there may be details of which Paterson was not
aware, Paterson was aware of a sufficient number of instances before 2002 of
statements by the defendants that were designed and intended to harm his career
that it would not be inequitable to apply the 15 year limitation period to him.
[65]      
By way of
example, the Statement of Claim contains the following allegations:
[66]      
As a
result of the foregoing, Paterson had formed the view no later than 2004 that
the defendants had caused the OSC to investigate him.  He knew before 2004 that
the defendants had defamed him to members of the press and members of  a
“select and particularly significant and influential community”.
[67]      
In my view, the
amendment that Paterson proposes to the Statement of Claim does not assist him
in in avoiding the ultimate limitation period.
[68]      
Paterson submits
that the defendants wilfully wronged him, safe in the knowledge that their
wrongdoing would not be uncovered for some time due to the way in which they
acted.  As a result, he submits  that it is not plain and obvious that
fraudulent concealment could not delay the running of the ultimate limitation
period in relation to Paterson’s Claim, and that the determination of such a
matter ought to be decided by a trial judge rather than at the pleadings stage.[43]
[69]      
Paterson, however,
has the burden of proving that section 15(4) applies.[44]
 The Statement of Claim contains nothing but a bald allegation of concealment
and misrepresentation.    There are no material facts about what was concealed,
how the defendants went about concealing it or how the defendants
misrepresented their conduct to Paterson.  Moreover, the concept of the
defendants having concealed information from Paterson or having misled Paterson
would seem to contradict many of the paragraphs that Paterson expressly pleads
in his Statement of Claim.
[70]      
The exception to the
ultimate limitation period requires that the person against whom the claim is
made “wilfully conceal” from the plaintiff that injury, loss, or damage has
occurred, that it was caused by or contributed to by the defendant or that the
defendant “wilfully mislead” the plaintiff about the appropriateness of a
proceeding as the means of remedying the injury, loss or damage.  Both require
active conduct by defendants.  Passive nondisclosure does not suffice.
[71]      
In Johnson v.
Studley,[45]
the plaintiffs
argued that the absolute limitation period did not apply because the defendants
had fraudulently concealed information. In response Perell J explained:
[72]      
Other cases have come
to a similar conclusion holding that mere nondisclosure is not sufficient to
fall within section 15 (4) of the Limitations Act.[46]
[73]      
Courts have
interpreted the meaning of “wilfully conceals” in s. 15(4)(c)(i) with reference
to the doctrine of fraudulent concealment.[47]
The doctrine of fraudulent concealment is “not a rule of construction”, but “an
equitable principle aimed at preventing a limitation period from operating as
an instrument of injustice.”[48]
 As a result, the Supreme Court of Canada has noted that it requires the court
to consider “whether it would be, for any reason, unconscionable
for the defendants to rely on the advantage gained by having concealed the
existence of a cause of action.”[49]
[74]      
When
considering this, however, courts must also be alive to the purposes of
limitation periods.  As the majority of the Supreme Court of Canada noted in Pioneer Corp v. Godfrey,[50] 
three purposes come to mind:
[75]      
All three purposes
militate against Paterson here.  I would be inclined to uphold the value of
certainty in the absence of any material facts that suggest wilful concealment
or misrepresentation by the defendants.  Indeed, as noted earlier, the Statement
of Claim as pleaded suggests Paterson was aware of the essential facts to make
out a claim for defamation no later than 2004 and probably earlier.  Paterson
had enough information at an earlier stage  to have been able to bring an
action had he acted with diligence.  I am not persuaded that there is
sufficient new information that could not have been discovered earlier that justifies
bringing the action only after more than 15 years of past.  As noted earlier,
the only such new information is the whistleblower memo, the Douglas memo and
the allegation that the Chair of RBC DS pressured the Chair of the OSC.  The
information contained in the Douglas memo and the whistleblower note is not
materially different than what Paterson admits he knew between 1995 and 2002.  With
respect to the allegation that the Chair of RBC DS pressured the Chair of the OSC,
 Peter C. Newman had already told Paterson that RBC had caused the OSC to
investigate him.  The new element in the Statement of Claim is that the Chair
of RBC DS was allegedly among those who did the pressuring.  The Statement of
Claim does not, however, explain the source of that information, when it was acquired,
or how it was acquired, all of which are material facts relevant to determine
whether the claim discloses a reasonable cause of action despite its late date.
[76]      
Turning back to the
principles relating to striking a pleading under rule 21.01 (1) (b):  Bringing
this action now based on a bald allegation of concealment when the Statement of
Claim itself reveals that Paterson knew, before 2002, almost all of what he now
alleges and does so without pleading any material facts about concealment or
misrepresentation, would make this claim “so obviously at odds with precedent,
underlying principle and desirable social consequences” that the court can say
with confidence that it cannot succeed.[51]
[77]      
Given that my
findings on abuse of process and the limitation period dispose of the entire
Statement of Claim, I do not find it necessary to address the more specific
pleadings issues that the plaintiff has raised with respect to particular causes
of action.
[78]      
For the reasons set
out above, I strike the Statement of Claim in its entirety as an abuse of
process and as being time-barred by s. 15 (2) of the Limitations Act.  Although
I do not believe that those flaws can be corrected by an amendment, the strong
inclination of courts is to grant leave to amend when striking a Statement of
Claim even if the court is doubtful about the ability of amendments to
remediate the defects.  I therefore strike out the Statement of Claim with
leave to amend.
[79]      
Each side sought its
costs in the event they were successful on the motion.  Both sides’ costs struck
me as reasonable given the different cost structures of their respective
firms.  In my view, however, the appropriate award here is to require each side
to bear its own costs.  Although I have found that the Statement of Claim
amounts to an abuse of process with respect to the OSC proceeding and have
found that Paterson knew he had a cause of action in the early 2000s, at the
same time, the Douglas memo suggests that there was a level of animus towards
Paterson that should not be rewarded with costs.