[1]              
This case focuses on what parenting order is in the best interests of
two young children, Yasmine nine and Nasir six who have been residing with both
parents in an equal shared parenting arrangement since September 2020. Child
Support (CS) and Equalization of Net Family Property (NFP) were also issues.
Equalization was resolved.
[2]              
The parties have been embroiled in a high conflict dispute over
parenting since separation in May 2019, exacerbated by their very different
personalities and parenting styles.
[3]              
The Report of the OCL completed in April 2020 described Ms. Hassan as
kind, gentle, nurturing, loving and very attentive towards the children. She is
also described as being extremely protective and hypervigilant resulting in a
refusal to allow Mr. Jones time alone with the children.  Her extreme distrust
of Mr. Jones resulted in a steadfast desire to have primary residence of both
children with minimal access to their father. That position changed over time,
but her hypervigilance and lack of trust did not.
[4]              
Mr. Jones was described as similarly kind, gentle, nurturing, loving and
attentive towards his children. However, he was also observed to be highly
reactionary and defensive when discussing the family situation and unable to
communicate with the mother in a respectful manner. Mr. Jones’ behaviour during
the trial, confirms these observations.  It was Mr. Jones’ position then as it
was at trial that he should be able to share parenting of the children without
restrictions.
[5]              
The OCL concluded the parents were unable to cooperate and communicate
in an amicable and effective manner with respect to their children.
Unfortunately, that inability persisted up to and during the trial.
[6]              
The trial took place over five days ending in February 2024.  Given new
previously undiscoverable evidence, permission was granted to reopen the trial
and further evidence was heard on August 29, 2024.
[7]              
This case is a good example of the challenges faced by the court,
including the trial judge, when two litigants embroiled in a five year long
high conflict parenting dispute, represent themselves.
[8]              
Over the five years since separation in May 2019, the parties had 15
court appearances before eight different judges – five procedural motions, four
motions, one adjourned motion, one case conference (CC), one settlement
conference (SC) and three trial management conferences (TMC). After the trial
concluded in February 2024, there were two further procedural motions
requesting urgent motion dates, both of which were refused.
[9]              
Despite detailed instructions by experienced SC and TMC judges,
including links to resources for self-represented parties, provision of written
guides for self-represented parties and detailed instructions regarding
uploading materials to CaseLines (CL), the trial began
with no trial record, no pleadings on CL, no separate trial bundle on CL and
literally hundreds of documents mostly consisting of text communications
between the parties most without labelling or dates. No up-to-date financial
statements (FS) were provided by the parties, nor any recent Notices of
Assessment or Tax Returns.
[10]          
In Ilaslan v Poirier, 2024 CarswellOnt 699 (S.C.J.), Audet, J.
was confronted with a very similar situation. She states at paras. 5 and 6:
[11]          
Justice Audet concludes at par 9:
[12]          
I would add to those comments that the difficulties faced by
self-represented litigants and by extension the courts, have been exacerbated
by the expectation that the pleadings, financial statements, net family
property statements and other required documents will be appropriately drafted
and uploaded to the electronic court file and in addition, any documents to be
referred to at trial be uploaded to CaseLines, now CaseCentre, the Ontario
document sharing platform, to be accessed by the judge. This can be a difficult
task for a self-represented party even after detailed instructions have been
provided, as was the case for Ms. Hassan and Mr. Jones.
[13]          
Both parents testified at trial.  No other witnesses were called. Both
parties also filed numerous text, email and Instagram exchanges which primarily
served to highlight the conflict between them.
[14]          
Based on the evidence I make the following findings of fact.
[15]          
The parties met in 2009 and were married June 3, 2012. The have two
children, Yasmine, now nine and Nasir, six.
[16]          
The relationship was characterized by many disagreements and arguments
often focused on Ms. Hassan’s distrust of Mr. Jones’ parents and family
members. She believed they were following her and had bugged the home.
[17]          
Mr. Jones worked full time as a personal support worker for adults with
special needs at Ottawa Carleton Life Skills organization. Ms. Hassan was home
with the children. She arranged and took them to appointments, play dates and
was responsible for the housework.  Mr. Jones assisted at night after he got
home from work.
[18]          
Ms. Hassan left the family home with the children and went to live with
her sister on May 11, 2019, a few days after what she perceived was a sexually
inappropriate incident between Yasmine and her father.
[19]          
The incident was fully investigated by the Police, Children’s Aid
Society (CAS) and the child was physically examined at the Children’s Hospital
of Eastern Ontario. Mr. Jones submitted to two polygraph tests. No charges were
laid, and the CAS closed the file.
[20]          
Mr. Jones had almost daily visits with the children supervised by their
mother.  The frequency and duration of visits were controlled by her. There
would often be arguments in front of the children.
[21]          
On October 18, 2019, after the Police and CAS investigation concluded,
Mr. Jones acted unilaterally and removed Yasmine from Woodroffe Public School
where she was attending junior kindergarten and brought her to his parents’
home in Cumberland where he was residing.  Ms. Hassan called the police, but
they did not intervene as the child was safe in the care of her father. There
was no court order or separation agreement at that time.
[22]          
The next day Mr. Jones and Yasmine ran into Ms. Hassan and her sister at
Walmart which led to a verbal and physical altercation. The Police were called.
Mr. Jones left with Yasmine and kept her in his care.  Nasir remained in the
care of his mother.
[23]          
Ms. Hassan filed an Application on November 13, 2019, requesting orders
for parenting time and decision making, child and spousal support, possession
of the home and equalization of net family property. Mr. Jones filed an Answer
requesting the same relief.
[24]          
There was communication between the parties and with counsel.  Mr. Jones
wanted a 50/50 time sharing arrangement.  Ms. Hassan objected as she was still
breast-feeding Nasir and felt both children should be in her primary care. She
made offers which were not accepted.  Mr. Jones had no parenting time with
Nasir and Ms. Hassan had no parenting time with Yasmine. Both parties were
entrenched in their positions.
[25]          
A Case Conference was held on November 27, 2019.  The issues were
discussed with the focus on parenting. On consent an order was made for a
referral to the Office of the Children’s Lawyer (OCL), disclosure and release
of Ottawa Police records.
[26]          
The OCL accepted the referral, and a report was provided to the court dated
April 30, 2020, recommending the father have primary residence and
decision-making responsibility for Yasmine and the mother for Nasir, with a
detailed graduated parenting arrangement ultimately resulting in an equal
shared parenting schedule. In addition, each parent was to have some time alone
with each of the children.
[27]          
Ms. Hassan did not agree with the OCL recommendations and was concerned
that some of the information provided to the investigator by Mr. Jones was not
verified. No Dispute was ever filed.
[28]          
The parties could not agree, and permission was granted for an urgent
motion in early June 2020 on the basis that the mother had not seen her
daughter in over six months and the father had not seen his son, nor had the
children seen each other. To that point the only parenting time each parent had
with the child not in their care was through daily FaceTime calls. Despite
recommendations by the clinical investigator from the OCL and negotiations
between the parties, there was no agreed upon parenting arrangement.  There was
also an outstanding issue of the school Yasmine should attend in September
2020.
[29]          
The urgent motion did not proceed. On June 8, 2020, the parties, who
were both represented by counsel at that time, signed Partial Interim Minutes
of Settlement agreeing to begin parenting time as recommended by the OCL with
adjustments to prevent the separation of the children. Exchanges were to take
place at the maternal grandmother’s home, unless otherwise agreed.  The motion
to determine Yasmine’s school proceeded on June 12, 2020. There was no
agreement on decision making.
[30]          
After over six months the children were able to reside together, and
each parent was able to spend time with both children.
[31]          
On June 29, 2020, Justice M. Smith ordered Yasmine attend Robert Hopkins
School close to the mother’s proposed residence with the maternal grandmother,
with the exchanges to take place at the school and on the weekends at the
maternal grandmother’s home.
[32]          
At the end of June Ms. Hassan advised Mr. Jones that her brother had
tested positive for COVID-19, and she and the children might have had contact
with him while he was contagious. She proposed the children remain in
quarantine with her while awaiting test results or the regular shared parenting
schedule continue with his home under quarantine as well. Mr. Jones wished to
continue the regular schedule, however he then refused to return the children
to their mother despite the fact Ms. Hassan and Yasmine tested negative.  He
wanted negative test results for all members of Ms. Hassan’s household and an
agreement that she would comply with strict protocols for limiting exposure to
other persons. Ms. Hassan was given permission for an urgent motion and on July
10, 2020, Justice MacEachern ordered the agreed upon parenting schedule be
immediately reinstated. Ms. Hassan had not seen the children for two weeks.
[33]          
In August 2020, Ms. Hassan moved to her mother’s home to be closer to
Yasmine’s school for senior kindergarten.
[34]          
By September 2020 the schedule had evolved into a 2/2/3 shared parenting
arrangement which continued.
[35]          
Ms. Hassan became increasingly concerned about Nasir not wishing to go
for parenting time with his father.  Mr. Jones contacted the police in December
2020 when Nasir did not come for visits.  The CAS was also involved. The
conflict between the parties continued.
[36]          
On July 15, 2021, a consent order was made settling spousal support and
child support arrears payable by Mr. Jones.  Mr. Jones was also ordered to pay
ongoing child support of $633.31 per month on an annual income of $42,654 for
both children on a temporary basis to be adjusted by July 1st each
year. The parties were to enroll in a high conflict parenting course. Each
parent was to have two non-consecutive weeks of summer vacation commencing in
2022 with a mid-week visit with the other parent in 2022.  Other orders were
made disbursing funds held in trust from the sale of the matrimonial home.
[37]          
In August/September 2021, Mr. Jones moved with a new partner to
Gatineau.  Ms. Hassan expressed concern about his anger and was worried about
how he was treating the children. In addition, he was not always following the
parenting schedule. He was often late bringing the children back. Ms. H called
the police on several occasions.
[38]          
In March 2022, Mr. Jones and his partner broke up and he moved back to
his parents’ home in Cumberland where he continues to reside.  He lost his job
in September 2022. He indicated he was overwhelmed and needed to take a break
to get his mind straight. He did not immediately look for new employment but
collected Employment Insurance. He stopped paying child support. He testified
he saw therapists during this time.  He provided no further information in this
regard.
[39]          
Ms. Hassan continued to work as an educational assistant.  She did not
pursue the issue of child support, nor did Mr. Jones. No motions were brought.
[40]          
In the summer of 2022, despite reminders by Ms. Hassan, Mr. Jones did
not comply with the court order for her to have mid-week visits on his weeks
with the children.  Ms. Hassan ultimately acquiesced and there were no mid-week
visits for either party.
[41]          
There was further conflict regarding parenting time over Christmas as
the temporary court order did not address Christmas holidays. Mr. Jones felt he
should have some time over Christmas, as Ms. Hassan does not celebrate that
holiday, but Ms. Hassan wanted to continue the regular schedule as per the
court order.
[42]          
The difficulties in communication and cooperation persisted throughout
2023. Ms. Hassan continued to contact the police complaining about Mr. Jones
overholding the children and issues of parenting.  There were seven such
complaints between January 2022 and July 2023 as confirmed by letter from the
OPS dated July 6, 2023, including a complaint that Mr. Jones had caused a
bruise on Nasir’s forearm in March 2023. The CAS was called but no action was
taken.
[43]          
The conflict escalated to the point that at a TMC on June 5, 2023,
Justice MacEachern indicated concern with Mr. Jones’ conduct and ordered a
transcript of the conference, not to include settlement discussions.  She noted
he was angry, disrespectful, and profane towards the court and Ms. Hassan.
Permission was granted for Ms. Hassan to bring an urgent motion to change the
parenting schedule such that Mr. Jones’ parenting time would be supervised,
given her concerns regarding Mr. Jones’ anger, mental health, and the safety of
the children in his care.
[44]          
The urgent motion was heard July 17, 2023, and Justice Engelking denied
Ms. Hassan’s request to make changes in the existing parenting arrangement
pending trial.
[45]          
In her Endorsement, Justice Engelking made the following comments which
are supported by both parents’ testimony at trial and in the text messages and
email exchanges between the parties.
[46]          
Mr. Jones was ordered to enroll in and complete an anger management
course or specific counselling directed at learning to regulate anger. There
was no evidence at trial that Mr. Jones had participated in an anger management
program or had any such counselling.
[47]          
Two further TMCs were held dealing largely with procedural matters but
as indicated above, the trial began with little or no regard to most of the
instructions and assistance offered by several judges regarding trial
preparation.
[48]          
When the trial recommenced August 29, 2024, the 2-2 3 parenting schedule
continued.  Mr. Jones’ circumstances had changed.  He had
obtained part time weekend employment as a support worker for adults at a group
home, close to his parents’ residence where he continued to reside.  He had
also been hired as a school bus driver for three schools including the
school the children attend.  While he was training for the new positions Ms. Hassan
agreed to take the children for some of his parenting time during the summer.
The new positions were to begin in September.
[49]          
Mr. Jones’ plan when the children are with him on weekdays is for them
to accompany him on the school bus from 6:30 AM until they are dropped off at
school at 7:45 AM. He will pick them up after school at 2:30 PM on his route
which ends at 4:45 PM.  He organized both his hours at the group home and
driving the school bus to fit the current 2-2-3 parenting schedule. He will not
work at the group home on weekends the children are with him.
[50]          
Mr. Jones did not file an up-to-date Financial Statement nor provide any
pay stubs from his new employment. He estimated he would earn approximately
$1500/2 weeks driving the school bus and $800/2weeks at the group home,
approximately $5000 per month. He was unclear whether those amounts were net or
gross.
[51]          
Ms. Hassan argues that the children being on the bus with him for such
long periods of time is not in their best interests, particularly as she lives
minutes away from the school.
[52]          
She also expressed significant concern about Mr. Jones’ inability to
control his temper which was evident during the trial.  From statements made to
her by the children she is also concerned that the children are exposed to his
anger towards her and to his outbursts at times during arguments with his
parents. Although statements made by the children could not be admitted as to
their truth, the state of mind of the children is of concern.
[53]          
There were many outbursts by Mr. Jones during both phases of the trial.
As at the TMC with Justice MacEachern, Mr. Jones was rude, profane, and
disrespectful mostly towards Ms. Hassan but also towards the court at times.
Although he testified he has seen three therapists largely to cope with the
high conflict situation and what he described as continual harassment by Ms. Hassan,
he presented no independent corroborative evidence.  In addition, there was no
evidence he had enrolled in an anger management program or received counselling
directed at learning to regulate anger as ordered by Justice Engelking on July
17, 2023.
[54]          
Ms. Hassan submitted a draft order at the end of the first stage of the
trial requesting a form of shared decision making but with the ultimate
decisions to be hers for health, education, and religion. For parenting time,
she proposed two options.  Her preferred option was for the children to have
their primary residence with her with Mr. Jones to have a mid-week overnight
visit and every second weekend Friday – Monday. If Mr. Jones accessed
counselling for his anger issues, she would agree to continue the shared
parenting time arrangement on a 2-3- 2 basis or the current 2-2-3 basis.
[55]          
Mr. Jones argued the equal shared parenting arrangement should continue
with joint decision making and a week on/week off parenting time schedule, and
specified orders for holiday time during the summer, Christmas, Eid and March
break.
[56]          
Ms. Hassan’s position on child support changed several times during the
trial. She acknowledged that Mr. Jones lost his job in September 2022 and was
on Employment Insurance in 2023. Initially she did not request child support
until he was employed. Later she requested income be imputed to him but was
unclear as to a time frame.  She then stated she wasn’t requesting any child
support. However, after the trial re-commenced in late August 2024, she argued
income should be imputed to Mr. Jones for 2023 and child support be calculated
on that basis. She did not make any submissions as to the basis for imputing
income or how child support should be calculated given the shared parenting
time schedule.
[57]          
After losing his job in September 2022, Mr. Jones stopped paying child
support. He collected Employment Insurance and did not obtain employment again
until September 2024. He argued, Ms. Hassan should have paid him child support
until he obtained employment, but he was prepared to forgo an argument for
retroactive child support.
[58]          
There was no evidence or argument by either party
regarding special or extraordinary expenses.
[59]          
As was emphasized
to both parties throughout the trial, pursuant to s. 16 (1) of the Divorce
Act, R.S.C. 1985, c.3 (2nd Supp), as am, the court’s sole
consideration in making a parenting order is the best interests of the child or
children.
[60]          
Section 16 (2)
indicates:
[61]          
As noted in s. 16(3) all factors related to the circumstances of the
child must be considered including:
[62]          
Family violence is defined under s. 2 of the Divorce Act as:
[63]          
Based on some of the text and email exchanges, concerns about both
parents’ arguments, outbursts, and anger in front of the children and Mr. Jones’
disrespectful and at times profane outbursts towards Ms. Hassan during the
trial, I find there has been some family violence in this case.
[64]          
In considering the factors relating to family violence under s.16(4), I
am unable to find there is family violence directed towards either of the
children who I have no doubt both parents love dearly.  However, I do find on a
balance of probabilities a risk of emotional harm due to the children’s
exposure to the ongoing conflict. Ms. Hassan’s hypervigilance and numerous
calls to the police and/or CAS on matters such as a scratch on Nasir’s arm
(March 2024), coupled with Mr. Jones’ verbal outbursts, anger, and disrespect
towards their mother put the children at risk.
[65]          
The report of the OCL completed April 30, 2020, noted “the children have
been exposed to the conflict between their parents… for quite some time” - when
they were together, at supervised visits and “they continue to yell and
belittle one another over the FaceTime calls” (visits).
[66]          
Although there is no recent evidence of major arguments in front of the
children, the conflict, lack of trust (Ms. Hassan) and lack of respect (Mr.  Jones)
continues. Both parents’ ability to cooperate on issues and to make decisions
together in the children’s best interests is severely compromised. As stated by
the OCL Investigator:
[67]          
In considering the other best interests factors listed under s. 16 (3),
it is important to note the only objective third party evidence in this case
was the previously referred to April 30, 2020, report of the clinical
investigator from the OCL, and the children’s report cards.
[68]          
Although it is now almost five years old, the OCL report is of
assistance in considering the nature of the children’s relationships with their
parents and other family members, the children’s needs, the ability of the
parents to meet the needs of the children and their ability and willingness to
communicate and cooperate. Some of those factors have been referred to above.
[69]          
When the parties separated, Yasmine had just turned four and Nasir was
under two years old. Ms. Hassan had been their primary caregiver, but both parents
were actively engaged with their children. Post separation, since September 2020,
the parents have had equal parenting time on a 2-2-3 schedule.
[70]          
It was of note that in presenting their evidence at trial neither parent
focused on their children’s personalities, likes/dislikes, activities, friends
etc. Their focus was on undermining, finding fault and blaming one another.
[71]          
Ms. Hassan described the children as doing well in school, active, with
lots of friends and involved in outside activities.
[72]          
Mr. Jones was more descriptive indicating Yasmine is a gorgeous, happy,
enthusiastic easy-going child. She and Nasir are very close.  He described
Nasir as more assertive. He doesn’t hesitate to say what he wants.  Both are
loving and kind and have a “beautiful spirit”. They are involved in lots of
activities – sports, singing, dancing and do well in school.
[73]          
Mr. Jones commented it was a miracle how well the children have weathered
the separation and seem to be “pretty unphased”. This was the description of a
loving attentive father but someone with little insight into the potential
impact of the ongoing conflict on his children.
[74]          
The OCL Investigator made the following comments. At the time Yasmine
was residing with her father and Nasir with his mother.
[75]          
The end of year (June 2024) report cards regarding both children are
very positive. Nasir who completed Senior Kindergarten, is described as “an
active and contributing member to our classroom” who makes “excellent
contributions to classroom discussions…” (Exhibit 37).
[76]          
Yasmine who completed Grade 3, was noted as “excellent” in 5 of 6
Learning Skills and Work Habits and received As or Bs in all subject areas. 
She was noted to be “a friendly and motivated student who…shows responsibility
by maintaining a positive attitude towards learning and consistently gives her
best in all that she does.” The teacher also noted “When Yasmine is involved in
a conflict, she labels her emotions and quickly solves the issue at hand. It
has been a pleasure working with Yasmine this year.” (Exhibit 36)
[77]          
The investigator observed no parenting concerns in either home and found
both Ms. Hassan and Mr. Jones to be very loving, nurturing parents capable of
meeting the daily needs of their children.
[78]          
She also noted Mr. Jones was living with his parents.  The relationship
of the children with their grandparents was noted to be a protective factor and
important.  Mr. Jones continues to live with his parents, although he indicated
an interest in obtaining independent housing now that he has returned to work.
Mr. Hassan has concerns that here is often arguing between Mr. Jones and his
parents in front of the children, based on statements they have made to her.
[79]          
Ms. Hassan continues to reside with her mother and sister. She has no
intention of moving. The relationship of the children with her extended family
is equally important.
[80]          
As noted in OCL Report, both parents present as “attentive, kind,
gentle, nurturing, loving and protective” towards the children. However, as
noted above, Ms. Hassan’s hypervigilance and inability to trust the father
“significantly interferes with her ability to support the children’s
relationship with their father.” Similarly, although Mr. Jones’ indicates
support for the children’s relationship with their mother, “it was he who
unilaterally removed Yasmine from the mother’s care without thought as it the
impact that this would have on the mother-daughter relationship not to mention
the child’s emotional well-being.”
[81]          
The lack of trust and conflict between the parties has not abated since
the report of the OCL and continues to present a risk to the children’s mental
and emotional health.
[82]          
The OCL Investigator also had concerns about the potential impact of
negative feelings each parent has about the other on the children’s
relationship with their parents.
[83]          
There is no evidence that either parent has engaged in the counselling
recommended over four years ago by the OCL Investigator - for Ms. Hassan to
assist in coping with her anxiety and hypervigilance and in not transferring
her negative feelings regarding the father to the children, and for Mr. Jones to
cope with his anxiety, the stress of the separation, his relationship with the
mother and not transferring his negative feelings regarding the mother to the
children.
[84]          
Mr. Jones indicated he had seen several therapists but there was no
independent evidence as to who, when and the nature of the therapy.
[85]          
Despite the concerns of the investigator and the significant evidence of
a lack of trust and an inability to cooperate or communicate respectfully, the
children have had a 2-3-2 parenting schedule for the over four years and there
is no recent evidence of either child refusing to go to visits with the other
parent.
[86]          
Unfortunately, although the children are now nine and six years old,
there was no evidence as to the children’s views and preferences.
[87]          
In this case, pursuant to s. 16.3 of the Divorce Act, the court
may make an order providing for decision-making responsibility or any aspect of
that responsibility to either parent or to both parents.
[88]          
The court has a wide discretion in formulating a framework for
decision-making that promotes the best interests of the children, considering
the unique circumstances of each case.
[89]          
The options include:
[90]          
Based on all the evidence, I find it contrary to
the children’s best interests in this high conflict case to consider an order
for joint decision-making responsibility in all or any
areas. There has never been an ability to cooperate or communicate effectively
for any period of time about any significant decisions. I find both parents
responsible for this dynamic as outlined above.
[91]          
In determining an appropriate order in this case, I note the following:
[92]          
An order delineating specified area of decision
making must be detailed and can be complex. I am not satisfied Mr. Jones would
be able at this time to abide by its terms.
[93]          
In addition, given the history and pattern of
parental conflict in this case which has now escalated to the point of Mr. Jones
engaging in extremely disrespectful, angry behaviour
and outbursts, an order granting each party specified areas of decision making
will provide further areas for conflict which is not in the children’s best
interests.
[94]          
Most major decisions have already been made. 
The children are well settled in their school. They are being raised in the Muslim faith although Mr. Jones wishes to have some parenting time at
Christmas as his family is Christian which can and should be accommodated. They
have a doctor and dentist. Both are enrolled in extracurricular activities
which they enjoy.  At this point in time there are not many major decisions to be made.
[95]          
Therefore, regarding any future medical, dental and educational decisions, Ms. Hassan will inform
Mr. Jones, consult with him and attempt to make a joint decision, failing which
she will have the final say.
[96]          
Decisions regarding extra curricular activities
shall be shared as outlined below.
[97]          
Day to day decisions will be made by the parent
having charge of the children.  The details of the order will be outlined
below.
[98]          
Pursuant to s. 16. 2 of the Divorce Act:
[99]          
As noted above, a 2-2-3 shared parenting time
schedule has been in place for over 4 years. Despite the conflict, lack of
trust and lack of respect between their parents, the children are doing well at
school and in the community.
[100]      
The recent school report cards (June 2024)
indicate the children are thriving and in fact excelling both academically and
in learning skills and work habits.
[101]      
As noted above there has been a significant
recent change in Mr. Jones’ circumstances.  He has obtained employment at a
group home and driving a school bus.  He arranged his hours so the 2-2-3
parenting schedule could continue.  His school bus route includes the
children’s school.
[102]       Mr.
Jones’ plan when the children are with him on weekdays is for them to accompany
him on the school bus from 6:30 AM until they are dropped off at school at 7:45
AM. He will pick them up after school at 2:30 PM on his route which ends at
4:45 PM.  He organized both his hours at the group home and driving the school
bus to fit the current 2-2-3 parenting schedule. He will not work at the group
home on weekends the children are with him.
[103]       This
schedule will necessitate the children getting up at
approximately 5:30 AM and being on the school bus for approximately 3.5 hours a
day.
[104]       In
addition, Mr. Jones indicated his desire to move out his parents’ home,
hopefully by the end of 2024. His future living situation
and residence is unclear.
[105]       The
considerations noted above with respect to decision-making
apply as well to parenting time.
[106]        I
note the following:
[107]      
Based on the above and all the evidence, I find
that it is in the best interests of the children who benefit greatly from the
relationship with each parent, to continue with a shared parenting time
schedule.  I also find it is in their best interests to adjust that schedule to
minimize the number of exchanges and the communication/contact between the
parents. I do not find it in the children’s best interests to be spending 3.5
hours a day every weekday on the school bus.
[108]      
Therefore, commencing the Saturday after March
break, March 15, 2025, the children will be with Mr. Jones from Saturday at 2:30
PM until Tuesday when they are dropped off at school.  He will remain the
parent in charge of the children until the end of that school day when they
will be picked up at school by Ms. Hassan who will have them in her care from
2:30 PM Tuesday to 2:30 PM Saturday.
[109]      
The details of the order will be outlined below.
[110]      
The positions of the parties on this issue were
unclear as indicated above.  In addition, the documentary evidence was
difficult to locate in the CaseLines file and was not up to date.  Neither
party filed an up-to-date Financial Statement or Notices of Assessment. No tax
returns were referred to.
[111]      
The following are the most relevant, trustworthy
documents I was able to locate in the file. Most of these documents were not
referred to or marked as Exhibits at trial.  The parties primary focus was on
parenting and not child support.
[112]      
Ms. Hassan works as an Educational Assistant for
the School Board
[113]      
Mr. Jones worked for Ottawa Carleton Life Skills
program as a Developmental Services worker from March 2010 to September 2022.
[114]       When the trial reconvened in August 2024, Mr. Jones had obtained part
time weekend employment as a support worker for adults at a group home, close,
to his parents’ residence and had also been hired as a school bus driver for 3
schools, both positions commencing September 2024. Mr. Jones did not file an
up-to-date Financial Statement nor provide any documentation
or pay stubs from his new employment. He estimated he would earn approximately
$1500/2 weeks driving the school bus and $800/2weeks at the group home. There
are approximately 38 weeks in the school year so his income from driving the
school bus would be $750 x 38 = $28, 500. If he worked 50 weeks at the group
home his income would be $20,000. Total annual income would be $48,500.
[115]       As
there has been and will continue to be a shared
parenting time schedule for the children pursuant to s. 9 of the Federal
Child Support Guidelines, SOR/97-175, as am.
[116]       Neither
party provided any evidence of increased costs of a
shared parenting time schedule, which has been in effect for over four years.
[117]       Both
parties reside with their parents at this time and there was no evidence of any
special or unusual considerations or circumstances of
either spouse or the children.
[118]       Therefore,
I find it reasonable that child support payable be determined by taking into
account the amounts set out in the applicable tables for each party.
[119]       As
noted above, Ms. Hassan now argues income should be imputed to Mr. Jones for
2023 and 2024 as he should have been able to obtain
employment and retroactive child support should be calculated on that basis.
[120]       Section
19(1)(a) of the Child Support Guidelines, O. Reg. 391/97 as am. states:
[121]       In
this case I am not prepared to impute income to Mr. Jones for intentional
underemployment or unemployment for the following reasons:
[122]       When,
Mr. Jones began his new employment in September 2024, there was an obligation
to once again pay child support. It is not possible based on the evidence
provided to accurately determine his income. However, based on his testimony, I
am prepared to impute income to him of $48,500 annually.
[123]       The
most recent evidence of Ms. Hassan’s income was her July 2023 sworn FS
indicating an income of $22,043.
[124]       Therefore
Mr. Jones is to pay Ms. Hassan child support for the two children in the amount
of $732/month based on his annual income of $48,500. Ms. Hassan is to pay Mr. Jones
child support for the two children in the amount of $337/month. The set off
amount payable by Mr. Jones to Ms. Hassan is $395/month, commencing September
1, 2024.
[125]       Mr.
Jones is to pay outstanding retroactive child support of $395 x 6 months
(September 2024 – February 2025) = $2370 to Ms. Hassan within 60 days.
[126]       Commencing
March 1, 2025, and on the first of each month thereafter, Mr. Jones is to pay
the set off amount of $395 per month to Ms. Hassan as child support for the two
children.
[127]       There
will be a mandatory disclosure clause as outlined in the temporary order and
child support is to be adjusted accordingly.
[128]       Details
will be outlined in the order below.
[129]       Therefore,
based on the evidence, legislation and jurisprudence, I make the final order
attached below which of necessity in this high conflict case must be detailed
and multi-directional.
[130]       In
this high conflict case on the issues of parenting and child support, Ms. Hassan
was somewhat more successful on parenting and Mr. Jones
on child support. Neither was completely successful on either issue.
[131]       Both
parties were self-represented. Neither party was well prepared, and neither was
willing or perhaps more accurately able, to follow the directions provided by
experienced judges at SCs and TMCs.
[132]       The
significant challenges faced by the court included, as
noted above, the trial began with no trial record, no pleadings on caselines,
no separate trial bundle on caselines and literally hundreds of documents
mostly consisting of text communications between the parties most without
labelling or dates. No up-to-date financial statement (FS) was provided by
either party, nor any recent Notices of Assessment or Tax Returns.
[133]      
Both parties behaved unreasonably.
[134]       I
do not find this an appropriate case to order costs.
[135]       There
will be no costs payable by either party.