[1]              
This action, along with a parallel action brought in Quebec, alleges a price
fixing conspiracy in respect of packaged bread sold across Canada.
[2]              
On July 24, 2024, the Plaintiffs reached a settlement in
principle with the Defendants, Loblaw Companies Limited, George Weston Limited,
Weston Foods (Canada) Inc., Weston Bakeries Limited, Loblaws Inc. and Weston
Food Distribution Inc. (collectively, “Loblaw”) for
the national class (the “Settlement Agreement”). All claims relating to
packaged bread that were made or that could have been made in the actions against
Loblaw are included in the Settlement Agreement, and are proposed to be settled
without admission of liability. The Settlement
Agreement is subject to approval by the Superior Court in Ontario and the
Superior Court in Quebec.
[3]              
If the Settlement Agreement is approved and so that it can be put
into effect in accordance with its terms, the settlement amount of $500 million
will be allocated 78% to the within Ontario action and 22% to the Quebec action.
The settling Defendants will also provide significant co-operation to the
Plaintiffs in their ongoing prosecution of the actions against the non-settling
Defendants. The Plaintiffs and the newly defined Settlement Class Members will provide
the settling Defendants with a full and final release of their claims.
[4]              
The Ontario action and Quebec action have each previously been certified
or authorized. However, those orders are not precisely aligned with each other in
respect of the purchasers included in the class or the length of the class
periods. The Quebec class, as authorized, includes bread produced or retailed
by any of the Defendants purchased between January 1, 2001 and December 19,
2019. The Ontario class, as certified, includes bread manufactured and produced
by any Defendant that was sold by a Defendant retailer that was purchased
between November 1, 2001 and December 31, 2021.
[5]              
The Parties have consented, for settlement purposes only, to an amended certification in
Ontario, to: (i) expand the Ontario Settlement Class to include
purchasers of packaged bread manufactured by the Defendant bakeries but
purchased through a chain of commerce that did not include the Defendant
retailers, and extend the start date of the Settlement Class Period to include
all of 2001; and to, (ii) identify a Common Issue specific to
the swettling Defendants.
[6]              
The Parties also propose a consent modification to the Quebec class
period as set out in the Quebec action to impose an end date of December 31,
2021 for settlement purposes only, to be addressed by the court in Quebec.
[7]              
This court has authority under s. 8(3) of the Class
Proceedings Act, 1992, SO 1992, c. 6 (“CPA”), to “amend an order
certifying a proceeding as a class proceeding.” It
likewise has authority under s. 12 of the CPA s. 12 to “make any
order it considers appropriate respecting the conduct of a class proceeding to
ensure its fair and expeditious determination and…may impose such terms on the
parties as it considers appropriate.”
[8]              
The Plaintiffs seek an Order appointing themselves to represent
the settlement class in Ontario. Each of them qualifies as a purchaser within
the expanded Ontario Settlement Class. The Plaintiffs also seek an order
extending the appointment of counsel in the Ontario action as Ontario Class
Counsel for the expanded settlement class.
[9]              
In addition, the Plaintiffs seek orders establishing an opt-out
procedure, an objection procedure, and a 45-day deadline by which members of
the settlement class can exclude themselves from the Ontario action or object
to or comment on the Settlement Agreement. This deadline is designed to
accommodate scheduling in Ontario of a settlement approval hearing.
[10]          
The Settlement Agreement provides for the appointment of an Ontario Settlement
Administrator and a Quebec Settlement Administrator. In addition, it provides
for separate Notice Plans and separate Pre-Approval Notices.
[11]          
The large size of the settlement classes at issue in the two actions is
an important consideration in retaining two separate administrations. Virtually
every adult in Canada is a potential settlement class member; according to 2021
census data, this amounts to roughly 23.9 million claimants in Ontario and 7.1
million claimants in Quebec. The magnitude of the class and potential inquiries
and claims that will be managed if the Settlement Agreement is approved will call
for English speaking as well as French speaking administrators. Additionally,
the administrator for the Ontario action that covers all of Canada except
Quebec, must be capable of communicating with potential indigenous participants.
[12]          
Furthermore, the difference in the opt-out procedure required under
the Quebec legislation and the CPA provides another important
consideration in separating the administrations. The Pre-Approval Notice will
be given first in Ontario. It will advise of the opt-out opportunity for all
potential members of the settlement class who purchased packaged bread at any
point throughout the 20-year Settlement Class Period. On the other hand, because
the opt-out process has already run for the previously authorized Quebec class,
the opt-out procedure to be run in connection with the Settlement Agreement in
Quebec will only apply to first time purchasers of Packaged Bread in the
two-year (2) period added to the Settlement Class Period for Quebec. The
potential for confusion to potential class members is significantly reduced by
having separate Pre-Approval Notices and Notice Plans.
[13]          
Class counsel in Ontario recommend
RicePoint Administration Inc. dba Verita Global, an experienced Canadian notice
and claims administrator, be appointed pursuant to the Settlement Agreement for
the settlement class. This recommendation flows from, among other things, a combination
of its: experience, track record, support systems, personnel, language
capabilities (including English, French, and Indigenous), anti-fraud controls,
pricing formula, and ability to satisfy the insurance requirements provided for
in the Settlement Agreement. Class Counsel is of the view that Verita Global will
provide effective, efficient and cost-effective administration of the Settlement
Agreement.
[14]          
The Notice Plan recommended by Verita Global has been proposed by
class counsel, reviewed by counsel for the Settling Defendants, and agreed to
by the parties. It has been tailored to reach packaged bread purchasers in all
of Canada outside of Quebec. The Notice Plan takes a multi-faceted approach. It
includes a diverse electronic media campaign utilizing dedicated settlement
websites, newswire, and electronic media, including Facebook, Google, national
indigenous news/media sites and industry sites/publications. It also includes a
targeted newspaper campaign directed at business purchasers; and a direct email
campaign to members of the Ontario Settlement Class where contact information
is available.
[15]          
Class counsel advises that it has employed similar approaches to
notice successfully in other price-fixing cases and believes the proposed
Ontario Notice Plan will provide broad-based and cost-effective notice to members
of the Ontario Settlement Class.
[16]          
Pre-Approval Notices have also been proposed by class counsel.
These have been reviewed by counsel for the Ontario Settling Defendants and
agreed to by the parties. Thes Notices advise the class members of the principal
elements of the Settlement Agreement. This includes the Distribution Protocol,
the settlement certification, the date of the settlement approval hearing,
along with their right to participate in that hearing, and their right to opt
out or object to the Settlement Agreement. In my view, the Notices will provide
the proposed class with an overview of information relevant to the proposed
settlement and will direct those class members to obtaining any additional
information should they need it.
[17]          
In addition, the order sought by the Plaintiffs includes an assurance
that the rights and defences of the non-settling Defendants are not prejudiced
by the settlement, together with an assurance that the rights of all parties
are not prejudiced by the settlement in the event it does not become effective.
The order also limits actions that may be brought against the parties and the
various settlement service providers in the performance of their duties.
[18]          
Finally, the pre-approval Order will declare the proposed settlement
null and void if the complementary pre-approval Order is not granted by the
Superior Court of Quebec. I will also provide that the pre-approval Order sought
here will be set aside if for any reason the Settlement Agreement does not
become effective.
[19]          
There will be an Order to go as submitted by
class counsel and as reproduced in Schedule ‘A’ hereto.