[1]              
After conducting surveillance of Mr. Stewart for
several days over the course of three weeks, police executed a search warrant
at 64 Mossgrove Crescent, Brampton, and of a grey Audi A4 that was owned by Mr.
Stewart.  Police seized a loaded firearm from inside the glove compartment of
the Audi. Police charged Mr. Stewart with possession of a loaded restricted
firearm.
[2]              
Mr. Stewart re-elected to have a judge alone
trial. The Crown called the surveillance officers and officers who conducted
the search. Mr. Stewart testified that he did not know that the firearm was in
the glove compartment and that his uncle, Mr. Downey, had borrowed his Audi the
previous evening. Stanley Stewart, Mr. Stewart’s father, also testified that
Mr. Downey regularly borrowed Mr. Stewart’s Audi.
[3]              
The sole issue to determine in this case is
whether the court is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Stewart had
knowledge and control of the firearm located in the glove compartment of his
Audi.
[4]              
I will begin my reasons by reviewing the
evidence. I will then review the positions of the parties and the legal principles
and conclude with my analysis applying the facts to the law.
[5]              
The police investigation into Mr. Stewart commenced
on January 29, 2022. Observations were made on January 29 and 31, and February
1, 17 and 21, when the search warrant was executed. In determining if Mr.
Stewart possessed the firearm on February 21, 2022, it is helpful to briefly review
what the police did and did not observe.
[6]              
On January 29, 2022, DC Shaw provided the
surveillance officers with a run sheet that contained a photograph of Mr.
Stewart taken in May 2019. The run sheet indicated he was 21 years of age with
a date of birth of April 28, 2000. The run sheet contained his height and
weight and that he resided at 64 Mossgrove and drove a grey Audi A4. None of
the officers had any prior experience with Mr. Stewart.
[7]              
On this date, police conducted surveillance at
64 Mossgrove from 6:20 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. 64 Mossgrove is a detached residence with
a two-car garage and has a driveway. When police arrived, the Audi was not in
the driveway. At 9:16 p.m., PC Prajapati and DC Shaw observed the Audi arrive
at 64 Mossgrove. Four persons exited the vehicle, but police could not identify
anyone.
[8]              
On January 31, 2022, police conducted
surveillance from 5:30 p.m. until 9:30 p.m.
[9]              
DC Shaw testified that at 5:49 p.m., he observed
Mr. Stewart exit the residence, start the Audi and then return to the
residence. DC Shaw testified that Mr. Stewart looked very similar to the
photograph in the run sheet.
[10]           
At 6:22 p.m., Mr. Stewart exited the residence, entered
the driver seat of the Audi and left. DC Shaw did not recall how far he was
from the Audi and agreed that he identified Mr. Stewart by comparing the person
he observed to the information in the run sheet.
[11]           
At 6:22 p.m., DC Prajapati observed the Audi
travel southbound on Mossgrove. The Audi stopped at Japan Buffet at
approximately 6:49 p.m.
[12]           
At 6:49 p.m., DC Callan observed Mr. Stewart
exit the Audi and walk into the Japan Buffet. He identified Mr. Stewart using
the run sheet. Mr. Stewart was wearing a shiny puffer style jacket. He
testified that male had the same facial descriptors and same hair. DC Callan
testified that that the male he observed looked very similar if not the same to
the photo contained in the run sheet.
[13]           
DC Callan testified that at 6:54 p.m., Mr.
Stewart returned to the Audi. He could not recall how close he was, but he
stated that he had an unobstructed view of Mr. Stewart exiting the restaurant
and entering the vehicle. There was no one else with Mr. Stewart.
[14]           
PC Prajapati followed the Audi from Japan Buffet
to Parkhill Court.  At 7:02 p.m., DC Shaw observed the Audi park outside of 1
Parkhill. An unknown male exited the residence and went to the passenger side
window. DC Shaw did not see anyone in the passenger seat, and he did not actually
see Mr. Stewart. He stated that he was deducing that it was Mr. Stewart based
on the prior observations and that Mr. Stewart did not exit the vehicle.
[15]           
After this interaction, the police observed the
Audi return to 64 Mossgrove. At 7:24 p.m., DC Callan observed Mr. Stewart exit
the Audi and enter 64 Mossgrove. There was no one with him when he got out of
the car. DC Callan testified that he was not sure how far he was from the
vehicle but that he had an unobstructed view of the vehicle and residence.
[16]           
On this date, police conducted surveillance from
4:23 p.m. to 7:25 p.m.
[17]           
DC Shaw testified that at 4:43 p.m., the Audi
pulled into the driveway and Mr. Stewart exited the driver’s seat and entered
64 Mossgrove. He was wearing a white ski mask, white jacket, blue jeans and had
a blue backpack.
[18]           
DC Shaw stated that he remembered the ski mask
but could not recall if it was over Mr. Stewart’s face or not. He stated that
Mr. Stewart’s hair was the same as the day prior. In cross-examination, DC Shaw
described the ski mask as like a hat with a turtleneck with an open circle. DC
Shaw agreed that Mr. Stewart’s hair was covered while wearing the ski mask but
stated that he could still see the braided hair. He agreed this was not in his
notes and there was no note of how thick the ski mask was, and he could not
recall if the ski mask was up or down.  DC Shaw testified that he did not know
where he made this observation.
[19]           
At 7:03 p.m., DC Shaw observed Mr. Downey exit
64 Mossgrove and walk past DC Shaw. DC Shaw testified that Mr. Downey is quite
a bit older than Mr. Stewart — at least 10 or 20 years older.
[20]           
DC Shaw observed Mr. Downey walk down the street
towards an unknown male who exited a cab. There was a verbal exchange and both
males went their separate ways around 7:03 p.m.
[21]           
In cross-examination, DC Shaw stated that after
his observation of Mr. Downey, he did not recall if the police listed him as a
suspect, but they were aware of his activities and his presence at 64
Mossgrove. DC Shaw agreed that he conducted a police data search with respect
to Mr. Downey and obtained an offence detail report. DC Shaw was shown a report
that was completed after the search. He agreed that if Mr. Downey’s charges
from July 1, 2021, which involved firearms, were on the report then he would
have seen that, but he did not have an independent recollection of that. He
also agreed that if the CPIC report indicated that Mr. Downey was on a firearm
prohibition he would have reviewed that as well, but he made no note of that.
[22]           
On this evening, surveillance officers also
observed a beige Hyundai and a black Charger at the address and other persons
entering and leaving 64 Mossgrove.
[23]           
Police conducted surveillance from 10:55 a.m.
until 3:15 p.m.
[24]           
At 11:22 a.m., D.C. Prajapati observed the Audi
in the driveway of 64 Mossgrove.
[25]           
At 11:27 a.m., DC Callen observed Mr. Stanley
Stewart arrive in a Beige Acura. He exited the vehicle and entered the residence.
In cross-examination, he described Mr. Stanley Stewart as a male Black, fair to
medium complexion, muscular build 5”10”. He did not recall his hair style.
[26]           
At 12:15 p.m., DC Prajapati observed Mr. Stanley
Stewart exit 64 Mossgrove and enter the Acura and leave. DC Prajapati testified
that he knew it was not Mr. Stewart because this man was taller and he did not
have braids, his hairstyle was stubble, but not bald and Stanley Stewart was
approximately 20 years older than Mr. Stewart.
[27]           
At 1:17 p.m., Mr. Stanley Stewart returned to
the residence driving the Acura. DC Callan observed him going in and out of the
garage at 64 Mossgrove. DC Callan distinguished Mr. Stanley Stewart from Mr.
Stewart because Mr. Stewart was 20 to 30 years younger, and Mr. Stanley Stewart
did not have braided hair. He had very little hair.
[28]           
At 1:33 p.m., DC Callan observed Mr. Stewart
exit the residence. Mr. Stewart got into the driver’s seat of the Audi for a
moment and then re-entered the residence.
[29]           
At 1:40 p.m., Mr. Stewart, a female and a child
exited the residence. The female entered the front passenger seat and Mr.
Stewart got into the driver’s seat. The child was in the rear seat of the car.
[30]           
The Audi travelled from Mossgrove and parked in
front of 129 Gatesgill St. DC Callen observed the female exit the vehicle
carrying the child. Mr. Stewart also exited the vehicle carrying a car seat
into 131 Gatesgill.
[31]           
At 1:51 p.m., the same female and Mr. Stewart
exited 31 Gatesgill and entered the Audi. DC Callen followed the Audi to Steeles
Ave. At that point, PC Prajapati followed the Audi to 2070 Steeles Ave. The female
passenger exited the vehicle. DC Prajapati could not see the driver. DC Prajapati
then followed the Audi to 35 Finchley.
[32]           
At 2:28 p.m., DC Callan observed the Audi parked
in front of 35 Finchley. Mr. Stewart exited the vehicle and walked up to and
entered the side door of 35 Finchley. No one else was with him at that time. At
2:48 p.m., an unidentified male exited 35 Finchley. That male entered a white
Accord and left the area. There were no further observations of Mr. Stewart on
that date.
[33]           
Police conducted surveillance from 10:37 a.m.
until. 8:42 p.m.
[34]           
 When police arrived, the Audi was parked in the
driveway. At 10:57 a.m., PC Prajapati observed Mr. Stewart exit the residence
and enter the driver’s seat of the Audi. No one else was with him. DC Prajapati
testified that he could not recall where he was when he made this observation,
but he had a visual of the front door and the parked cars.
[35]           
DC Prajapati stated that based on the
description he had, he determined this was Mr. Stewart. At this point, he was
aware that Stanley Stewart lived at the residence. He also testified that there
were no other males Mr. Stewart’s age, height or hairstyle that he could have
confused with Mr. Stewart. DC Prajapati agreed that he took no photos.
[36]           
DC Prajapati observed Mr. Stewart drive away in
the Audi and head south bound on Mossgrove. DC Callen testified that he
followed the Audi to an A & W at Sandalwood and Hurontario at 11:01. a.m. DC
Callen testified that he was at times able to see that it was Mr. Stewart
driving the vehicle while he conducted surveillance based on the lighting and traffic.
[37]           
 DC Prajapati testified that he later observed
the Audi parked in the driveway. He did not see Mr. Stewart get out of the car.
[38]           
At 11:38 a.m., DC Prajapati observed a white Hyundai
SUV. An unknown passenger exited and walked up to the Northside of the Mossgrove
residence.
[39]           
At 12:30 p.m., DC Callan observed an unknown
person exit the residence and enter a Black Acura. The vehicle left the area
and DC Callen did not follow it.
[40]           
At 12:55 p.m., DC Shaw observed Mr. Stewart exit
64 Mossgrove wearing a blue coat, socks and sandals. He entered the driver’s
seat of the Audi and drove to Cedar Valley.
[41]           
At 2:00 p.m., DC Callen observed the Audi park
in front of 32/34 Cedar Valley Blvd. At 2:34 p.m., DC Callen observed Mr. Stewart
enter the Audi and leave the area. DC Callen had no notes of Mr. Stewart
exiting the Audi.
[42]           
DC Prajapati and DC Shaw testified that the Audi
returned to 64 Mossgrove at 2:36 p.m. Mr. Stewart exited the vehicle and
entered the residence. DC Shaw testified that Mr. Stewart was wearing a blue
coat with socks and sandals. DC Shaw said there was no one else present. DC
Shaw testified that he recalled areas that he was in when he made observations
but could not recall where he was at the time he made this observation.
[43]           
At 2:54 p.m., DC O’Neil observed Mr. Stewart,
and an unknown party enter the Audi. The Audi travelled to Mary Brown’s Chicken
and then returned home at 3:15 p.m. He had no description of the unknown party.
[44]           
Prior to the execution of the search warrant,
police conducted surveillance at 64 Mossgrove. When DC O’Neil arrived at 2:04 p.m.,
the Audi was not there.
[45]           
DC O’Neil testified that Mr. Downey came out of
the residence and was with an unknown male. Mr. Downey got into the driver’s seat
of the black Acura, and they left the area. DC O’Neil knew Mr. Downey from
having previous dealings with him. Based on the other officer’s observation.
[46]           
DC Shaw testified that at 4:30 p.m., he observed
a vehicle arrive at the residence. Mr. Downey got out of the passenger side of
the vehicle and went back inside 64 Mossgrove.
[47]           
At 5:32 p.m., a vehicle was parked at the curb
in front of 64 Mossgrove. Mr. Downey got into the passenger side of the
vehicle. It was not the Audi. At 5:33 p.m., Mr. Downey exited the vehicle and
went back into the residence.
[48]           
At 5:39 p.m., Mr. Downey got into another
vehicle that was parked at the curb as a passenger. It was not the Audi. At
5:44 p.m., Mr. Downey exited the vehicle and returned to the residence.
[49]           
DC O’Neil testified that at 6:49 p.m., the Audi returned
to 64 Mossgrove. Mr. Stewart parked across the street from the residence. He
exited the vehicle and entered the residence. At 7:22 p.m., Mr. Stewart
returned to the Audi and had his phone on and went to the rear driver panel and
examined the car. He then got into the driver’s seat and left the area.
[50]           
DC Prajapati testified that he observed Mr.
Stewart at 7:38 p.m. at 70 Oak Meadow. Mr. Stewart agrees that he went to 70
Oak Meadow to see his cousins. Mr. Stewart returned to the residence at 8:42
p.m.
[51]           
All the officers testified that the tactical
team entered 64 Mossgrove first and secured the residence. The tactical team
entered at 9:22 p.m. They breached the door and did a call out to have the
occupants come out. Mr. Stanley Stewart and Mr. Stewart came to the door and
were detained. Two other persons were found in the residence, Rose Crawley and
Jennifer Corman. They were escorted out of the residence.
[52]           
There is no dispute that the room where the
officers found the car keys for the Audi was Mr. Stewart’s bedroom. Mr. Stewart
identified it as his room as did Mr. Stanley Stewart. DC Prajapati testified
that he found the Audi key on the floor between the bedframe and the closet
door. The photograph depicts where he found the key. He notified the DC O’Neil who
took a photograph and the key. DC Shaw testified that he believed there might
have been a small bag of marijuana in a drawer in the desk of the room.
[53]           
DC O’Neil assigned DC Walkey to search the
vehicle. The Audi was parked in the driveway. DC O’Neil photographed the
vehicle prior to DC Walkey commencing the search.
[54]           
DC Walkey used the keys to unlock the Audi. He
commenced his search at the front driver’s side, then went to the rear driver’s
side, then the trunk, and then the rear passenger and then the front passenger
seat. He used latex rubber gloves during the search.
[55]           
DC Walkey testified that when he opened the
glove compartment, he saw the firearm that was depicted in exhibit 4, p. 8.
When he found the firearm, he called over DC O’Neil to take a photograph the
way it was found. After the photograph was taken, DC Walkey proved the firearm
safe and put it on the passenger seat, which is depicted in exhibit 4, p. 9. The
magazine was seated in the firearm with bullets but there was not a bullet in
the chamber. DC Walkey turned the firearm over to DC O’Neil.
[56]           
DC Walkey searched the center console and found
a small digital scale and a black wallet. When he opened the wallet there was a
health card and driver’s licence in Mr. Stewart’s name. A photograph of the
wallet in the console and the identification were photographed by DC O’Neil and
marked as exhibit 4, p. 11.
[57]           
DC Walkey agreed that the car was very clean. He
also agreed that he had difficulty getting into the trunk. The lock was inoperable,
and he had to use the emergency opener. He did not take note of any other item
in the vehicle.
[58]           
DC Shaw also interviewed Mr. Stewart the day he
was arrested. A photograph taken that day was marked as an exhibit. A
comparison of the two photographs shows a striking resemblance.
[59]           
On February 23, 2022, DC Ferraro collected swabs
and tested for fingerprints. There were no fingerprint results. When checking
the firearm, DC Ferraro observed 12 rounds of 9 mm Luger FC and 5 rounds of
Luger Harnady. The magazine was seated well in the firearm and the laser was
functioning. The swab and the firearm were sent to the Center of Forensic
Science. It was agreed by the parties that the firearm was tested for DNA and
no results were obtained.
[60]           
Mr. Stewart testified that he resided at 64
Mossgrove with his father, his father’s girlfriend, his aunt, his grandmother,
his brother and his uncle, Mr. Downey.
[61]           
Mr. Stewart agreed that he lived in the bedroom
as indicated by the police. His brother used the bedroom beside him when he did
not stay at his girlfriend’s place. He also agreed that his uncle’s room was in
the basement. He agreed that the room was locked but not all the time.
[62]           
Mr. Stewart testified that he had no criminal
record. He testified that he worked for his father and did snowplow work. He
also testified that he was an athlete growing up and was ranked nationally in
boxing. He has commenced the process to obtain his professional license for
boxing. He is close to his father because his father raised him and is his
boxing coach.
[63]           
Mr. Stewart testified that he has a girlfriend
and a daughter who is almost five years of age.
[64]           
Mr. Stewart testified that he purchased the Audi
in the summer before police arrested him. It was a used 2013 Audi A4 sedan. He
paid $13,000. He explained that he put down a down payment and financed the
rest, paying approximately $216 per month. He also paid $250 per month for
insurance.  He does not own the Audi now because his girlfriend was in an
accident, and it was written off.
[65]           
Mr. Stewart testified that he kept the main set
of keys on the rack near the front door of the house like everyone else in the
family so that they could move cars in the driveway if needed. He had a spare
set of keys that was kept in a drawer in the dining room on the main floor, but
he stated that if someone borrowed his car, they would use his primary key.
[66]           
Mr. Stewart testified that his girlfriend would
sometimes take the car, and he would stay back to watch his daughter. Most of
the time he would drive her.
[67]           
Mr. Stewart also testified that his brother
would also use the car. He testified that his brother Marcel is 30 years old.
He has a girlfriend who lives in Vaughn, and he would go back and forth and if
he was at the house, Mr. Stewart would let him use the Audi. His brother did
not own his own vehicle.
[68]           
His father would use his car if his father’s car
was at the mechanics.
[69]           
Mr. Stewart also testified that he let his uncle
Mr. Downey use his Audi. Mr. Downey did not own a car. His uncle used it
approximately two to three times a week. He stated that most of the time it
would be at night. In cross-examination he explained that Mr. Downey usually
used it after 10:00 p.m. There had been a couple of times during the day when
he went to the liquor store.
[70]           
Mr. Stewart testified that there had been times
that his uncle just took the Audi, but Mr. Stewart did not like that. He wanted
his uncle to ask him when he took his car. He agreed that most of the time his
uncle would ask to borrow the Audi.
[71]           
Mr. Stewart explained that his uncle would give
him cash here and there usually between $50-$60, and there were times when he
would fill up the gas tank. He agreed in cross-examination that his uncle was
giving him $100 to $150 a week to use the car but he was not counting. He said
on average he would say $100. When it was suggested to Mr. Stewart that his
uncle was financing the entire car payment, Mr. Stewart said he was not looking
at it like that. He had his own job, but his uncle gave him cash to use the
car. His uncle didn’t offer to finance his car. Mr. Stewart testified that he
did not find it strange that his uncle gave him money to use the Audi because
his uncle didn’t have a car.
[72]           
In cross-examination, Mr. Stewart explained that
he learned about $12,000 to $15,000 a season for snow plowing. He also worked
for his dad when he needed help. He would get paid about $150 a day. He did not
keep track of how often he worked. It was not every day. There were not set
schedules, which gave him the flexibility to train. He said on average he
worked for his dad two days a week but sometimes more. He also agreed that he
was supporting his child. He agreed that $400 a month from his uncle was a
meaningful amount of money.
[73]           
Mr. Stewart said that he let his uncle use the
Audi because he gave him money and that prior to this incident he was a decent
uncle to Mr. Stewart. He was nice to his daughter.
[74]           
Prior to this incident, Mr. Stewart agreed that
he told his uncle not to crash his car. He did not really express any other
types of concerns. He agreed that he never stopped his uncle from using his car.
The only time he would not let his uncle use the car was if Mr. Stewart needed
to use it. Later in cross-examination, Mr. Stewart stated that he had told his
uncle “not to take his garbage” (i.e. criminal activity) to his car. Mr. Stewart
agreed that he knew that his uncle had been in trouble with the law, and he had
been in and out of jail most of Mr. Stewart’s life. Mr. Stewart testified that
he did not know that his uncle had been charged with firearm offences in July
2021. Mr. Stewart’s lawyer told him that after he was charged. Mr. Stewart did
not know what criminal offences he was involved in but knew he went to jail.
Mr. Stewart agreed that he did not want any part of his uncle’s criminality
because he did not want to mess up his boxing career.
[75]           
Mr. Stewart agreed that he while he told his
uncle he didn’t want him to bring any garbage around his car, he was his uncle,
and Mr. Stewart did not hold his criminal record against him. He stated that at
the time he wasn’t concerned about that, but he should have been. He was pretty
much hoping that his uncle wouldn’t get him tied up in anything that his uncle had
going on. He said he was his uncle, and he was giving him money and he wasn’t
looking too much into it.
[76]           
Mr. Stewart agreed that his father had warned
him about his uncle using the car, but he didn’t pay attention. He stated that
it was a generalized conversation about people crashing your car.
[77]           
Mr. Stewart agreed that he knew that his uncle
did not have a licence but explained that while he knew he shouldn’t have lent
him his car, he was his uncle, and he was pretty much hoping nothing would
happen to the car.
[78]           
Mr. Stewart testified on the day police executed
the search warrant he and his father were working out in the basement when they
heard a loud bang. They went up stairs and it was the police. He was told get
on the ground and was arrested.
[79]           
Mr. Stewart testified that the first time he
learned the firearm was in the glove compartment of the Audi was at his bail
hearing. He stated that he initially suspected that it was his uncle because he
drove Mr. Stewart’s car the night before. Mr. Stewart testified that his uncle
asked if he could use the car around 11:00 or 11:30 at night and after that Mr.
Stewart went to sleep. He did not know how long his uncle had the car for. Mr.
Stewart said he was shocked because he would not partake in anything that would
steer him away from his boxing career. He denied putting the gun there. He
stated that he did not go into the glove compartment and did not think to check
it.
[80]           
Mr. Stewart testified that he rarely went into
the glove compartment and that he did not keep things in there. Mr. Stewart
said the glove compartment was able to lock but he didn’t remember if it was
locked or not. He stated that he had no reason to lock it because he didn’t put
anything in there. He stated that he could count on one hand how many times he
had been in the glove compartment.
[81]           
Mr. Stewart testified that he had a photo of his
insurance and did not have a physical copy of it. He explained that he got
stopped and was given a warning for not having the actual slip and he was
stopped again and was given a ticket. He stated that he also had a photograph
of the registration for the car but kept the paper in a drawer in his room with
his other finance papers. The Crown did not introduce any ownership or
insurance papers seized from the Audi to undermine Mr. Stewart’s evidence on
this point.
[82]           
In cross-examination, Mr. Stewart was shown a
piece of paper in the glove compartment that was an invoice from Top Notch Motors
dated January 2022. Mr. Stewart testified that he got an engine replacement
under the warranty. He agreed the invoice was in his name. He did not recall
when he got it replaced.  He testified that he kept his things for the gym in
the trunk of his car. He would keep his licence in the arm rest.
[83]           
Mr. Stewart agreed that prior to his arrest, his
family knew that he did not want to be mixed up in any criminality and he had told
his uncle that he did not want to have any part in any criminality.
[84]           
Mr. Stewart did not recall going out to inspect
the car at 7:22 p.m. on the date police executed the search warrant as the
surveillance officers testified but he agreed that it was possibly him. He also
agreed that he drove to 70 Oak Meadow to visit his cousins.
[85]           
Mr. Stewart also agreed that his uncle was known
to drive an Acura. He testified that it was one of his friend’s car. He stated
that he would drive the car in the daytime as he believed that person needed
the car at night.
[86]           
Mr. Stewart said when his father picked him up
when he obtained bail, his father lectured him all the way home about people
using his car. When he got home there were some family members who were there
to see them. After that he went downstairs and confronted his uncle. There was
no result, his uncle did not say anything. His father came downstairs and
intervened and deescalated the situation. Mr. Stewart said he has confronted
his uncle two more times, and he just brushed Mr. Stewart off and did not give
him any straight answers. They don’t talk anymore. He lives in the basement,
and nobody talks to him anymore. Mr. Stewart testified that he believes that
either his uncle or someone who was with his uncle in the car with him put the
firearm there.
[87]           
Stanley Stewart (“Stanley”) is Mr. Stewart’s
father. He testified that they have a close relationship as he has been a
single father to Mr. Stewart since he was three years old. He has kept his
children active when growing up. Stanley coaches Mr. Stewart with his boxing so
they train and travel together.
[88]           
Stanley owns a renovation company. He has one or
two employees and will bring his boys in to work as well.
[89]           
Stanley confirmed that Mr. Stewart’s bedroom is
S1 on exhibit. He also confirmed that Mr. Downey rents a room in the basement.
He has rented that room for about five years when he was not in custody.
Stanley explained that Mr. Downey was in and out of custody and he would stay
with them when he was out of custody.
[90]           
Stanley owns an Acura SUV. He stated that
sometimes his girlfriend would use it, and the boys may use it to go to the store,
but he does not loan out his car. He stated that he would not loan his car to
Mr. Downey because he doesn’t have a licence, and he isn’t on his insurance.
Stanley stated he did not want to jeopardize his commercial insurance.
[91]           
Stanley testified that Mr. Stewart purchased the
Audi about 8 months prior to his arrest.
[92]           
Stanley testified that Mr. Stewart would let his
brother use the car to go to his girlfriend’s house to pick up his son to visit
but he would not let him take the car if he was staying over night.
[93]           
Stanley testified that Mr. Downey did not own a
vehicle. He would use multiple means to travel. He would walk, ride bike, uber,
and Mr. Stewart would sometime loan his car. Stanley said Mr. Downey borrowed
the Audi a couple of times a week, but it wasn’t on a schedule. He testified that
this had been going on for months prior to Mr. Stewart’s arrest. He agreed in
cross-examination that he wasn’t keeping track of when Mr. Downey used the Audi,
but he was pretty confident that it was at least two to three times a week.
[94]           
In cross-examination, Stanley testified that he
knew that Mr. Downey drove the Audi in the evening because Mr. Stewart worked
for the city of Brampton snow plowing and they went to the gym in the early
evening to train. He recalled Mr. Stewart complaining that Mr. Downey took the
car without asking.
[95]           
Stanley could not say when the borrowing of the
Audi started. He stated that at some point he had to speak to Mr. Stewart
because he noticed a pattern. He explained that it wasn’t just Mr. Downey, Mr. Stewart
would let his cousins and brother drive the Audi. It became a situation where Mr.
Stewart was free with his vehicle, and it was not good practice. He agreed that
it was not good practice, particularly as it related to Mr. Downey, given his
criminal history. Stanley stated that it wasn’t just Mr. Downey’s illegal
activity — he also wasn’t licenced. If the car was pulled over it could get
impounded or if it was in an accident, it wouldn’t be insured.
[96]           
Stanley testified that he spoke to his son
multiple times about letting others use his Audi. Stanley knew that his brother
was offering Mr. Stewart compensation, and he didn’t know if this was the incentive,
but his son wasn’t listening. When he spoke to his son, Mr. Stewart would try
to give Stanley a justification for why his uncle needed to use the car.
[97]           
Stanley stated that he has never seen his son
with a firearm, and he has never seen Mr. Downey with a firearm. Stanley
testified that Mr. Downey had a lock on his room. He did not find this
suspicious. Mr. Downey is a grown man and wanted his privacy. Stanley stated
that there were other people coming into the house and Stanley trained others
in the basement where Mr. Downey’s bedroom was located.
[98]           
Stanley testified that on the day police
executed the search warrant, he and Mr. Stewart were in the basement training
when they heard a loud bang. They went upstairs and the police handcuffed them
both and took them outside. Police detained him in a police cruiser and after
an hour he was allowed to go back to his house. He was told the search warrant
was on the table and that his son was arrested on a firearm charge.
[99]           
Stanley said he was upset and confused when he was
told that his son was arrested for the firearm. He started thinking “did my
brother get this kid into trouble?” Stanley said he thought of his brother
because he has been in a lot of trouble in his life, and he knew that he has
been charged with weapons and guns and it was his first thought. He didn’t
think his son had anything to do with weapons.
[100]        
In cross-examination, Stanley testified that his
first thought was not that his son got into trouble. He knew that Mr. Downey
had used his son’s vehicle.
[101]        
The next time Stanley saw his son was at the
bail hearing on zoom 10 days later. Mr. Stewart was released on a house arrest
under Stanley’s supervision. Stanley picked him up at Maplehurst and drove him
home. Some family members were there when he got home.
[102]        
After some time, Stanley went upstairs. He then
heard a commotion in the basement. He went down and heard Mr. Stewart screaming
and cursing at Mr. Downey. Stanley tried to diffuse the situation and told Mr. Stewart
to go upstairs.
[103]        
Stanley testified that he also confronted his brother
about the firearm. He did not get any response. Mr. Downey basically ignored
him. Stanley testified that he has tried many times to have a conversation with
him about the firearm and he did not get much information. Stanley testified that
this has put a major strain on their relationship. He explained that they were close,
and he has looked out for his brother when a lot of his other family members
would not take him in. This incident has torn the family apart.
[104]        
When asked how he felt about his brother he said
he has mixed feelings. He is his older brother and was always close to him
growing up, so he has brotherly love. He is also upset with him because he
believes he got his son into trouble.
[105]        
Both parties agree that the only issue in this
case is whether the Court is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr.
Stewart possessed the firearm
[106]        
The Crown submits that it has proven beyond a
reasonable doubt that Mr. Stewart had constructive possession of the firearm.
The Crown submits that the defence evidence should not be believed, nor should
it raise a reasonable doubt. Mr. Stewart tried to distance himself from using
the glove compartment and was inconsistent in his evidence about whether he
told his uncle not to be involved in any criminal activity when using his car.
[107]        
The Crown submits that the only reasonable
inference that can be drawn from the evidence is that Mr. Stewart possessed the
firearm. He owned the Audi. He was the last person seen to drive the Audi. The
firearm was in the glove box positioned in a way that was easily accessible to the
driver. Importantly, the Crown submits that it does not make sense that Mr.
Downey would leave a loaded prohibited firearm in a vehicle that he did not
have access to, given its value.  The firearm could be found by his nephew or
anyone else who used the Audi.
[108]        
The defence submits that there is another
reasonable explanation for the firearm being found in the glove compartment - Mr.
Downey put the firearm in the glove compartment the night before when he used
the Audi.
[109]        
The defence submits that there is no basis to
disbelieve Mr. Stewart’s evidence that Mr. Downey used the Audi the previous
evening.
[110]        
The defence submits that Mr. Stanley Stewart’s
evidence corroborated Mr. Stewart’s evidence. Stanley Stewart’s evidence that
Mr. Downey used the Audi and gave his son cash was unchallenged. Mr. Downey had
a criminal history that included charges involving firearms.
[111]        
It is also the position of the defence that the
surveillance evidence does not undermine Mr. Stewart’s evidence that his uncle
routinely borrowed the Audi. On January 29, 2022, the police could not identify
who was in the Audi. The defence also submits that there are failings with the
police’s identification evidence. The police officers only looked at the run
sheet on the first day. Mr. Stewart has a brother who is of similar build and
has similar hair and cousins who also used the Audi. The defence submits that
the police jumped to the conclusion that it was always Mr. Stewart driving the
Audi, particularly DC Shaw, who claimed to be able to identify Mr. Stewart when
he was wearing a white balaclava. In addition, only one officer could recall
how far they were away when they made their observations, which further lessens
the reliability of the officer’s evidence.
[112]        
The defence submits that when all the evidence
is considered, the inference that Mr. Stewart had knowledge and control of the
firearm is not the only reasonable inference and therefore he must be
acquitted.
[113]        
Mr. Stewart, like all persons charged with a
criminal offence in Canada, is presumed innocent until proven guilty. The Crown
must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Stewart is guilty of the offence
set out in the indictment. That burden of proof remains on the Crown throughout
the trial. There is no onus on Mr. Stewart to prove anything.
[114]        
The standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt
is exacting. It is more than probable or likely guilt and falls much closer to
absolute certainty than it does to proof on a balance of probabilities.
Ultimately, I may find Mr. Stewart guilty only if I am sure that
he committed the offence alleged.
[115]        
The Crown “is not required to prove or disprove
beyond a reasonable doubt any single fact, or any item of evidence, unless that
fact or item is an element of the offence or an element of a defence”: R. v. B.D., 2011
ONCA 51, 226 C.R.R. (2d) 92, at para. 96.
[116]        
In this case, the Crown argues that Mr. Stewart
constructively possessed the firearm: that he had the firearm in any place, whether
that place belongs to or is occupied by him, for the use or benefit of himself
or for others.
[117]        
The Court of Appeal in R. v. Choudry,
2021 ONCA 560, at para. 19, set out the relevant legal principles for
constructive possession:
[118]        
The Crown asks this court to infer from the
surrounding circumstances that Mr. Stewart had the requisite knowledge for
possession. The approach to be taken when considering circumstantial evidence
was discussed by the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Villaroman, 2016
SCC 33, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 1000, at para. 30. To be satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt of the guilt of Mr. Stewart, I must be satisfied that there is no other
reasonable explanation for the firearm being in the glove compartment other
than Mr. Stewart knew and had a degree of control over the firearm. It is not
enough that the inference of guilt is the strongest inference; it must be the
only reasonable inference.
[119]        
Alternative inferences need not be based on
proven facts. The court must consider “other plausible theories” or “other
reasonable possibilities” that are inconsistent with guilt. The Crown may need
to negate the reasonable possibilities, but the Crown need not “negate every
possible conjecture, no matter how irrational or fanciful which might be
consistent with the innocence of the accused”: Villaroman, at para. 37.
[120]        
Justice Hill pointed to several factors that the
court may consider in determining possession in R. v. Anderson-Wilson, 2010 ONSC 489, at para.
74:
[121]        
The line between plausible theory and speculation
is not always easy to draw but the basic question is whether the circumstantial
evidence, viewed logically considering human experience, is reasonably capable
of supporting an inference other than that the accused is guilty: Villaroman,
at para. 38.
[122]        
In this case, defence evidence was called; as
such the court must also consider the principles established by the Supreme
Court of Canada in R. v. W.D., 1991 CanLII 93 (SCC), [1991] 1 S.C.R. 742:
[123]        
There is no requirement that I consider these
principles in the above order, but I must apply the basic elements of the test:
R. v. Minuskin (2003), 2003 CanLII 11604 (ON CA), 68 O.R. (3d) 577 (C.A.), 181 C.C.C. (3d) 542, at
para. 22. In the final analysis, I must be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
on the whole of the evidence that Mr. Stewart possessed the firearm to find him
guilty of the offence.
[124]        
 The Crown submits that the only reasonable
inference to be drawn from the evidence is that Mr. Stewart had knowledge and
control over the firearm found in the glove compartment. In support of its
position, the Crown relies on the following evidence:
[125]        
Based on the Crown’s evidence, a reasonable
inference could readily be drawn that Mr. Stewart possessed the firearm.
However, Mr. Stewart called defence evidence, which I must also consider in
determining if the only reasonable inference is that Mr. Stewart had knowledge
and control over the firearm.
[126]        
Ultimately, I am left with a reasonable doubt
that the only reasonable inference is that Mr. Stewart knew the firearm was in
the glove compartment when I consider the defence evidence along with the rest
of the evidence. I have come to this conclusion for the following reasons.
[127]        
First, I accept Mr. Stewart’s evidence that
others used the car, and that Mr. Downey used it frequently. The Crown did not
challenge that others may have used the car but submitted that it was not a
communal car and Mr. Stewart controlled who had access. Mr. Stewart was not
seriously challenged about his evidence that his uncle used the Audi approximately
two to three times a week. There was nothing internally inconsistent in Mr.
Stewart’s evidence. Nor was there any inconsistency between his evidence and
the other evidence in this case. He was responsive to the questions that were
put to him. He did not try to avoid answering difficult questions. I found that
his answers about why he would let his uncle, whom he knew had a criminal
history and no insurance, use his car to be honest — his uncle was family and
gave Mr. Stewart money to use the Audi. The only inconsistency in Mr. Stewart’s
evidence was that in examination in chief he said his concerns with letting Mr.
Downey use the Audi was that he would crash it. In cross-examination, he then
said he also warned Mr. Downey not to use it for any criminal activity. I do
not view this as an inconsistency that significantly undermines Mr. Stewart’s credibility.
Mr. Stewart never suggested that he was unaware of his uncle’s criminal
activity. His uncle has been in and out of custody Mr. Stewart’s whole life. He
still cared for his uncle and his uncle gave him cash which went a long way to helping
cover the expense for the Audi for a young man with limited income.
[128]        
Mr. Stewart’s evidence that he let his uncle
borrow his car frequently was corroborated by his father Stanley Stewart. I
recognize that Stanley Stewart had an interest in supporting his son, given
their close relationship. I found Mr. Stewart to be a straightforward no
nonsense witness. His evidence was not challenged by the Crown in any meaningful
way. Stanley Stewart was clear that he had warned his son about letting anyone
use his car prior to his son’s arrest but was aware that Mr. Stewart continued
to let his uncle use the Audi. He also confirmed that Mr. Downey gave his son
cash and used the Audi mostly at night because Mr. Stewart worked in the days
for the City of Brampton or worked for him and they trained in the early
evenings.
[129]        
I do not find that the surveillance evidence
undermines Mr. Stewart’s evidence that his uncle borrowed the Audi
approximately twice a week and that others borrowed his car. The surveillance
occurred on five days over a three-week period. On the first date, four people
were seen exiting the Audi but the police could not identify who was driving. Importantly
the surveillance was not done at night.
[130]        
I also have some concerns about the quality of
the surveillance evidence, given that many of the surveillance officers
testified that they did not have the run sheet with them when they identified
Mr. Stewart. At the time, the police were not aware that other family members,
including Mr. Stewart’s brother and cousins who were of a similar age, also
used the car based on Mr. Stewart’s and Stanley Stewart’s evidence, which I
accept.
[131]        
Second, I do not find that the receipt from
January 2022 found in the glove compartment undermined Mr. Stewart’s evidence
that he could count on his hand the number of times he accessed the glove
compartment. As a matter of common sense and life experience it is not uncommon
for people to keep receipts for their car repairs in the glove compartment. It
is also a matter of common sense and life experience that owners of vehicles do
not check their glove compartment daily as compared for example to the console
or even the side pocket of the door.
[132]        
Third, Mr. Downey has a lengthy criminal history
that includes firearm charges. DC Shaw testified that if the detailed print out
showed that Mr. Downey had outstanding firearm charges from July 2021. He
stated that if that was on the printout at the time he would have been aware of
that and the fact that Mr. Downey was on a firearm prohibition at the time of
the investigation.
[133]        
Fourth, I accept Mr. Stewart’s evidence that he
was not aware of exactly what charges his uncle had outstanding or had been
convicted of but knew that his uncle had a lengthy criminal past. His evidence
on this point was not challenged. It makes sense that Mr. Stewart let his uncle
use the Audi. He was family, and importantly Mr. Downey gave Mr. Stewart money
when he used the Audi.
[134]        
Fifth, there are no fingerprints or DNA on the
firearm.
[135]        
Six, the firearm was not visible in the sense of
sticking out from under a seat where Mr. Stewart would have been expected to
see it when he drove the Audi that evening, as was the case in R. v. Ali,
2008 ONCA 741, at para. 4.
[136]        
I agree with the Crown that it seems very
unlikely that a person would leave a valuable, illicit, and dangerous item such
as this firearm in the glove compartment of someone else’s car. But the evidence
and theory raised by the defence raises a reasonable doubt. This is not a case
where the accused is alleging that a prior renter or random person left a
firearm in a vehicle: R. v. Ali, [2023] OJ. No. 6116 (C.J.), at para.
202. It is plausible that Mr. Downey, who had outstanding gun charges would
view leaving the firearm in his nephew’s car as a safe place. There is evidence
that Mr. Downey used the vehicle the evening before. The vehicle was owned by a
member of the family so if the firearm was found, there was not the same risk
of the matter being reported to police as if it was in a random person’s
vehicle. Mr. Stewart did not want to get into trouble with the police nor would
it be likely that he would want to turn in a family member. Mr. Downey may not
have wanted to have the firearm in his room or on his person given his
outstanding charges and his firearm prohibition. It is also plausible that Mr.
Downey would not have checked the glove compartment on a regular basis to see
what was in the glove compartment.
[137]        
While I think it quite likely that Mr. Stewart knew
the firearm was in the glove compartment and therefore possessed the firearm in
the Audi, I am not sure that is the only reasonable inference to be drawn from
all the evidence and therefore I am left with no option but to acquit Mr. Stewart.