[1]          The
Plaintiff agreed to purchase a home to be constructed by the Defendant in a new
development planned in Aurora, Ontario. The sale did not close on the closing
date. The Defendant says it was ready, willing, and able to close the
transaction, and that the Plaintiff was not and defaulted under the sale
agreement. As a result, the Defendant terminated the sale agreement, claimed
forfeiture of all sums paid to it by the Plaintiff, and reserved its right to
seek to recover losses sustained because of the Plaintiff’s default.
[2]          The
Plaintiff commenced this action seeking: (i) repayment of deposits, upgrades
and all other funds paid to the Defendant (approximately $230,000); (ii) damages
of $1.0 million for negligent and/or fraudulent misrepresentation, undue
influence, and bad faith; and (iii) punitive and exemplary damages of $100,000.
[3]          During a
continued examination for discovery, a representative of the Defendant indicated
that it may have made offers to purchasers in the development to “walk away”
from their deals and have their deposits returned and their sale agreements
terminated. Such a “Walk Away Offer” was not made to the Plaintiff. The
Defendant’s representative also confirmed that the Defendant had put a pause on
the development prior to the Plaintiff’s closing date (the “Development
Pause”), with construction expected to re-start after the Plaintiff’s
closing date.
[4]          The Plaintiff
brings a motion for leave to amend her statement of claim in connection with the
Walk Away Offers and the Development Pause. The Plaintiff argues that the
proposed amendments arise out of new information learned in January 2023, are
relevant to the legal and factual issues in the action, and are necessary for a
proper and fair adjudication of this matter. The Plaintiff also argues that the
Defendant will suffer no prejudice if leave to amend is granted.
[5]          If the amendments
are permitted, the Plaintiff also asks that the Defendant deliver a further and
better affidavit of documents, answer refused questions, and have a
representative re-attend for examination if requested by the Plaintiff.
[6]          The
Defendant argues that the motion should be dismissed since the proposed amendments
raise new causes of action for which the limitation period has expired, and the
new causes of action are prima facie unmeritorious. It also argues that
the refused questions do not need to be answered, as they are irrelevant,
disproportionate, and untimely.
[7]          Rule 26.01
of the Rules of Civil Procedure provides that, on a motion at any stage
of an action, the court “shall grant leave to amend a pleading on
such terms as are just, unless prejudice would result that could not be
compensated for by costs or an adjournment” (emphasis added).
[8]          The
principles regarding pleading amendment motions may be summarized as follows:
[9]          Where a limitation period has run its course, allowing or
disallowing the amendment depends upon whether the allegations of the proposed
amendment arise out of the already pleaded facts, in which case the amendment
will be allowed, but if they do not the amendment will be refused. An amendment
of a statement of claim to assert an alternative theory of liability or an
additional remedy based on facts that have already been pleaded in the statement
of claim does not assert a new claim for the purposes of section 4 of the Limitations
Act, 2002.[12]
[10]      The starting point is to consider
the substance of the Plaintiff’s claim before she sought the pleadings
amendment (i.e. what acts or omissions that would give rise to the Defendant’s
liability were already at issue in the action?). The Court must then determine
whether the existing pleading already contains the factual matrix to support
any claim to which the proposed amendment relates, or whether the amendment
seeks to put forward additional facts that are necessary and material to a new
and different claim.[13]
[11]      I have reviewed the statement of
claim issued on June 3, 2019 generously and with allowance for drafting
deficiencies.
[12]      The two primary causes of action
alleged in the claim are the torts of negligent misrepresentation and
fraudulent misrepresentation.  The Plaintiff alleges that the Defendant made the
following representations to her orally and/or in marketing material:
[13]      The Plaintiff alleges that she
relied on these representations where she entered into the sale agreement.
[14]      The Plaintiffs asserts that she
visited the development in September 2018, about six months prior to the
closing date, and was “shocked and dismayed” that there were only two (2) homes
built on the north side of the development instead of the 19 represented by the
Defendant.
[15]      The Plaintiff did not close the
purchase of the home from the Defendant. She alleges that the Defendant failed
to promptly and efficiently, or at all, build a community, which it had
represented it would do. She says she relied on the negligent, reckless, and/or
fraudulent misrepresentations of the Defendant, and would not have entered into
the sale agreement if she knew the house was not going to be part of a
community at closing.
[16]      In addition to the claim of misrepresentation,
the Plaintiff also seeks a return of all the amounts she paid to the Defendant,
together with damages due to the Defendant’s bad faith conduct and undue
influence it exerted on her when she entered into the sale agreement.
[17]      Although not specifically
referenced in the statement of claim, when read generously, I believe that the
Plaintiff is claiming that the Defendant breached the duty of honest
performance in terminating the sale agreement and retaining her funds, and that
she is entitled to damages and return of the funds as a result of this breach.
This can be seen in her allegation that it would be unconscionable and against
public policy to allow the Defendant to benefit from the sale agreement that
she signed based on the Defendant’s misrepresentations. As well, she says the taking
of the funds is evidence that the Defendant’s behaviour was high handed and
justifies an award of exemplary and punitive damages.
[18]      With respect to undue influence,
the Plaintiff alleges that the Defendant pressured her to enter into the sale
agreement when she attended at the Defendant’s presentation center, knew or
ought to have known that she has limited knowledge of the English language and
that she trusted and relied on their representations, and that they knew or
ought to have known she did not obtain legal advice and did not provide her
with an opportunity to obtain such advice.
[19]      The proposed Amended Statement of
Claim has 21 new paragraphs, 12 of which deal with the Development Pause, seven
(7) of which deal with the Walk Away Offers, and two (2) which deal with both.
The Plaintiff also proposes to amend her prayer for relief to include
“fundamental breach” as a basis for which she is seeking damages from the
Defendant.
[20]      The Plaintiff argues that the
amendments simply provide particulars of allegations already pled in the claim,
simply provide additional facts upon which the existing causes of action in the
claim are based, do not raise a new cause of action, and/or seek alternative
relief out of the same or similar set of facts already pleaded.
[21]      When looking at the facts pled in
the statement of claim and the causes of action (negligent and/or fraudulent
misrepresentation, breach of duty of good faith contract performance, and undue
influence), I do not see how the proposed amendments with respect to the
Development Pause are anything other than new facts and new causes of action.
[22]      The Development Pause amendments contain
the following facts:
[23]      The Plaintiff repeatedly argues
that the amendments arise from new facts learned in January 2023. However, she
also argues that the amendments simply expand upon existing facts and causes of
action contained in the original statement of claim. She points to references
in the statement of claim that the closing date was extended a number of times,
including the last extension that she says she did not receive notice of from
the Defendant, and the delay in the construction of the development.
[24]      In my view, even read generously,
the facts contained in the Development Pause amendments summarized above go
beyond the factual matrix pled in the original statement of claim and
constitute new facts that the Plaintiff wishes to rely on in her action. She is
now pleading substantially different facts, such as that her house was
uninhabitable and contrary to the terms of the sale agreement. Such facts are
nowhere to be found in the original statement of claim.
[25]       In terms of causes of action, I
read the Development Pause amendments to contain the following causes of
action: (a) fundamental breach of the sale agreement through a material change
to the terms of the agreement which the Plaintiff did not consent to or accept;
(b) breach of the Defendant’s actual and/or implied obligations pursuant to the
sale agreement, including obligations to comply with rules, policies and
procedures with Tarion; (c) breach of certain statutes; and (d) breach of a
schedule to the sale agreement regarding construction of the dwelling.
[26]      Again, even read generously, I do
not see the original statement of claim containing any of these causes of
action. At its core, the statement of claim contains claims in tort for
negligent and/or fraudulent misrepresentation, and breach of the duty of good
faith in how the Defendant terminated the sale agreement. The Development Pause
amendments go way beyond these causes of action and establish fresh new contractual
and statutory claims.
[27]      As I have found that the
Development Pause amendments contain new facts and causes of action, the next
step is to determine whether, as alleged by the Defendant, a limitation period
has expired with respect to such causes of action.
[28]      On September 28, 2018, the
Plaintiff e-mailed a representative of the Defendant and stated that she was
shocked that this was a “barren area” and that it was “a jungle without any
other neighbors!”  She noted that she had “purchased this house to be located
in a residential community in which we can feel safe and a part of a
community!” The Plaintiff ended the e-mail stating that “this isn’t still a
residential area and we are not going to close the house under this
circumstance”.
[29]      In response, on October 5, 2018, a
customer care representative for the Defendant sent a responding e-mail to the
Plaintiff and noted that “the home and lot that you purchased will be completed
with some outstanding seasons items and balance of homes will fill in over
time” and that “with the pause to build out model homes and catch up with our
initial construction program, our construction and sales program will restart
early in 2019.”
[30]      This October 5, 2018 e-mailed
noted that there had been a “pause” and that the Defendant had to “catch up”
with its initial construction program, which would restart in early 2019. The
sale agreement was scheduled to close on February 21, 2019.
[31]      This e-mail was included in the
Plaintiff’s affidavit of documents sworn July 17, 2020.
[32]      The issue of the Development Pause
was canvassed by the Plaintiff’s former counsel when the Defendant’s
representative was first examined on August 20, 2020. During the examination, counsel
asked the following questions about the October 5, 2018 e-mail:
[33]      Additionally, during the continued
examination of the Defendant’s representative held on January 27, 2023, the
Plaintiff’s current counsel continued to ask questions regarding the October 5,
2018 e-mail:
[34]      The basic limitation period is
that a proceeding shall not be commenced after two years from the day which the
claim was discovered.[15]
A claim is discovered on
the earlier of,
[35]      The evidence before me is that the
issue of a Development Pause was first mentioned to the Plaintiff on October 5,
2018 in the email. The e-mail was known to the Plaintiff, as it was disclosed
as part of her affidavit of documents sworn July 17, 2020, and her counsel
asked questions of the Defendant’s representative on August 20, 2020. During
the examination, the Defendant undertook to provide any correspondence
regarding the October 5, 2018 exchanged by two of the Defendant’s employees.
This was produced on February 12, 2021.
[36]      I have reviewed the answer to the
undertaking, and none of the emails provided any new information regarding the
Development Pause.
[37]      Based on this evidence, any claim centered
on the Development Pause by the Plaintiff was discovered at the earliest as of
October 4, 2018 e-mail, and at the latest as of August 20, 2020 when its then
counsel asked questions of the Defendant’s representative on the issue of the
email and the Development Pause.
[38]      As the Plaintiff’s notice of
motion to amend her statement of claim to include the Development Pause
amendments was served on February 9, 2023, it was outside the 2-year limitation
period.
[39]      As a result, I find that the
causes of action proposed to be added to the statement of claim relating to the
Development Pause are statute barred, and thus constitute non-compensable
prejudice to the Defendant. Accordingly, the Plaintiff’s request to amend her
statement of claim with respect to the Development Pause is hereby dismissed.
[40]      The proposed amendments to the
statement of claim provide that the Plaintiff had recently learned of the Walk
Away Offers made by the Defendant to other purchasers, and that no such offer
was made to her.
[41]      The Defendant does not allege that
the amendments related to the Walk Away Offers are statute barred. The evidence
bears this out. The first mention of the notion of a walk away being offered is
in an internal e-mail disclosed by the Defendant to the Plaintiff in its
response to undertakings dated February 21, 2021. The notice of motion for this
motion was served on February 8, 2023.
[42]      As a result, the motion to amend
the statement of claim in connection with the Walk Away Offers was brought
within 2 years of the earliest day that the Plaintiff could have learned of the
Walk Away Offers.
[43]      The Defendant argues that the amendment
regarding the Walk Away Offers should not be allowed, as the causes of action
alleged by the Plaintiff are prima facie unmeritorious. It says that
settlement offers made to other purchasers does not give the Plaintiff a cause
of action.
[44]      To summarize, the Plaintiff
alleges in the proposed amendments that:
[45]      I am not convinced that the
Plaintiff’s proposed cause of action relating to the Walk Away Offers is prima
facie unmeritorious. The Defendant argues that it had no obligation to make
the same or similar offers to all purchasers in the development. The Defendant
has put forward no precedent in support of this argument.
[46]      The Plaintiff, in the original
statement of claim, seeks damages for breach of the duty to act in good faith,
and seeks punitive damages. The Supreme Court of Canada in Bhasin v. Hrynew made it clear that “good faith contractual performance is
a general organizing principle of the common law of contract”, that there is a
“common law duty which applies to all contracts to act honestly in the
performance of the contractual obligations”, and that “parties generally must
perform their contractual duties honestly and reasonably and not capriciously or
arbitrarily”.[17]
[47]      This
cause of action has already been pled, and the facts relating to the Walk Away
Offers fleshes out the reasons they are seeking damages for breach of this duty.
I believe that the trial judge will be in the best position to determine
whether failure to make a Walk Away Offer by the Defendant resulted in a breach
of the duty to act honestly in performance of the sale agreement. I do not
believe the materials before me establish that a claim based on the Walk Away
Offers is prima facie unmeritorious to the point that the Plaintiff
should be refused from pursuing it at trial.
[48]      As a
result, the Plaintiff’s request to amend the statement of claim concerning the
Walk Away Offers is granted.
[49]      As I have granted the Plaintiff’s
request to amend its statement of claim with respect to the Walk Away Offers,
the Defendant will have an opportunity to amend its statement of defence.
[50]      The Plaintiff requests that, after
the amended pleadings have been exchanged, the Defendant be required to deliver
a further and better affidavit of documents. I agree with this request. The
Defendant is required to disclose every document relevant to any matter in
issue in the action that is or has been in its possession, control or power.[18]
They are also required to serve an affidavit disclosing to the full extent of
the Defendant’s knowledge, information and belief all documents relevant to any
matter in issue in this action that has been in the Defendant’s possession,
control or power.[19]
It is possible that the Defendant will have documents in its possession,
control or power with respect to the Walk Away Offers that it will be required
to disclose and produce in accordance with the Rules of Civil Procedure.
[51]      The Court has the power to order
service of a further and better affidavit of documents.[20]
I hereby exercise such power and order the Defendant to deliver a further and
better affidavit of documents following the exchange of the amended pleadings.
[52]      With respect to the request to re-examine
a representative of the Defendant for discovery, given the pending exchange of
amended pleadings and a further and better affidavit of documents, I believe
that the Plaintiff is entitled to continue its examination of a representative
of the Defendant. The Plaintiff must be provided an opportunity to pose
questions of the Defendant on the amended pleadings to ensure that it has
access to the principles of discovery as established by the Rules of Civil
Procedure and applicable case law.
[53]      With respect to refusals, a number
of questions regarding the Walk Away Offers were refused, or were taken under
advisement and are now deemed to be refused under the Rules. Given that
the questions relate to a matter that will be addressed in the amended
pleadings, I believe that certain of the questions are relevant and should be
answered. However, I am concerned about the disclosure of personal and
confidential information of other purchasers who are unconnected to this action,
which includes communications such purchasers had with the Defendant.
[54]      At this time, I believe it would
be prudent for the parties to revisit the refused questions once they have
exchanged their amended pleadings, the Defendant has delivered its further and
better affidavit of documents, and the Plaintiff will have an opportunity to
ask further questions on re-examination. It may be that a number of documents
sought by the Plaintiff in the refused questions will be disclosed in the
further and better affidavit of documents, and that such refused questions will
now be answered due to the amended pleadings and further document discovery.
[55]      As a result, I will not at this
time render a decision on the matter of the refusals from the January 27, 2023
continued examination for discovery.
[56]      For the reasons set out above, the
Plaintiff’s motion: (a) to amend the statement of claim with respect to the
Development Pause is dismissed; (b) to amend the statement of claim with
respect to the Walk Away Offers is granted; (c) to require the Defendant to
deliver a further and better affidavit of documents is granted; (d) for a
representative of the Defendant to attend to be re-examined is granted; and (e)
for refused questions to be answered is adjourned sine die and can be
addressed in the future if necessary.
[57]      With respect to costs, I strongly
urge the parties to come to an agreement. If, after good faith efforts and keeping
in mind the Three C’s of communication, cooperation and common sense, they are
unable to do so, they may contact my Assistant Trial Coordinator to obtain my
direction on the exchange of written submissions.