[1]              
The Plaintiff is a lender and creditor,
the Defendants are borrowers and debtors. The Defendants are in default under a
series of loans.
[2]              
The Plaintiff moves for summary judgment on the various
debts and enforcement of a mortgage. Those debts and mortgage, with the
remedies sought thereon, are detailed in Schedule ‘A’ to this endorsement.
[3]              
The Defendant, Michael Dunn, has appeared on his
own behalf and filed an affidavit in response to the motion. He does not deny
the loans or the debt. Rather, he indicates that he is not in a financial
position right now to pay the amounts owing and needs more time. He also
indicates that he has made good faith efforts to resolve the matter with the Plaintiff
and to perhaps renegotiate the terms of the loans, but to no avail.
[4]              
I sympathize with Mr. Dunn. He has already paid
off a substantial amount of the debt he owed the Plaintiff by selling his
condominium and applying the proceeds to pay off a mortgage and to partly pay
down a line of credit. With all of that, however, he remains in a difficult
financial position.
[5]              
The loans are due and payable and the debts are
owing. The Plaintiff has put into the record the necessary supporting
documentation. From a legal point of view, there does not appear to be any
viable defense to the Plaintiff’s claim and little that the court can do for
Mr. Dunn and the other Defendants.
[6]              
Rule 20 of the Rules of Civil Procedure
provides for summary judgment where there is no genuine issue requiring a trial.
It is the civil litigation system’s primary means of avoiding
protracted and expensive litigation when there is no contentious issue of fact
that needs to be determined by hearing witness testimony: Irving Ungerman
Ltd. v. Galanis, 1991 CanLII 7275 (ON CA), [1991] O.J. No. 1478 at paras. 19-20 (CA). Consistent with the principle of proportionality in Rule 1.04(1.1),
matters need not proceed to trial unless it is genuinely required: Cuthbert
v. TD Canada Trust, 2010 ONSC 830 (CanLII), [2010] O.J. No. 630, at para. 10 (SCJ).
[7]              
The Supreme Court of Canada has instructed that
the summary judgment rule is to be liberally construed to secure the most
expeditious and least expensive determination of the civil proceeding on its
merits: Hryniak v. Mauldin, [2014] 1 S.C.R., at para. 5.
[8]              
Although sending this claim to trial as Mr. Dunn requests would
potentially buy more time for the Defendants, it would be contrary to the
Supreme Court’s guidance and a diversion of court time and resources. It is
incumbent on me to take the most efficient route to judgment and to ensure that
the Plaintiff’s rights, as well as those of the Defendants, are fully
respected.
[9]              
The fact is that there is no need for a full trial of the issues.
The Plaintiff will have judgment on the debts as claimed.
[10]          
The documentation in the record provides that the
Plaintiff is entitled to substantial indemnity costs in respect of its
enforcement of these loans. Counsel for the Plaintiff has submitted a Bill of
Costs setting out a costs claim of $14,774.88, including all fees,
disbursements, and HST.
[11]          
Under the circumstances, that amount is not
unreasonable given the legal effort that the Plaintiff was required to invest in
order to enforce its rights under the loan documentation.
[12]          
There will be a Judgment to go as submitted by
Plaintiff’s counsel and amended by me.