[1]         
John McAteer has objected to applications by the
respondents to pass their accounts as estate trustees for the estates of their late
father and mother. Although the respondents formally held various roles
individually, for the purposes of this proceeding, both counsel dealt with them
as a collective group. I do so for convenience below.
[2]         
After the parties’ father died, the respondents
acted as attorneys for property under powers of attorney for their
incapacitated mother until she passed away. The applicant seeks to have the
respondents account for the period in which they acted as attorneys for
property for their mother while she was alive.
[3]         
The respondents also see directions concerning a
proposed interim distribution. Both sides also seek directions on the terms or
scope of mediation.
[4]         
The parties disagree about whether the applicant
ought to be entitled to production of documents concerning the period for which
he seeks an accounting. The respondents particularly object to production of
documents concerning the affairs of corporations in which the mother held
interests and about various transactions that were conducted by those
corporations under the respondents’ charge before the mother passed away.
[5]         
I am very concerned about proportionality and
the risk that accounting inquiries can amount to expensive fishing expeditions.
The applicant does not yet have leave to require the respondents to pass their
accounts for the time when they acted under powers of attorney. Leave is required
under s. 42 (4)6 of the Substitute Decisions Act, 1992, SO 1992, c 30.
[6]         
I am also sympathetic to the possibility that
the respondents might have complete answers to the request for leave.
[7]         
The overarching principle, however, is that
people who act as personal representatives, as fiduciaries, are accountable to
the penny. The only way to hold them to account and to protect the vulnerable
people under their charge is through transparency. To paraphrase Justice
Brandeis, “Sunlight disinfects.”[1]
[8]         
Mr. Battiston makes several submissions that are
impactful. The applicant may be barred from this claim by a release that he
signed. This application may be an after-thought. The applicant seemingly did
not complain when he was paid millions of dollars and signed on to the
transactions that he now questions. The application may be an abuse of process
if it was brought too late or if it overlaps with the applicant’s separate
oppression remedy claim involving the management and affairs of the most
significant corporation in which the parents had interests.
[9]         
But the respondents have not moved to dismiss
the application on any of these grounds. Rather, these points, and others, are
really responses to the applicant’s request for leave to proceed or defences to
an accounting if ordered. If I thought there was a narrow issue of law that
could end the application without spending a lot of time and effort on
production and discovery or without being drawn into an analysis of the merits,
I might have considered scheduling a quick motion. But none of the grounds
raised by Mr. Battiston really stand on their own apart from an assessment of
the merits. A motion would then become just another expensive battleground with
the same production and discovery issues as are raised before me now.
[10]      
Not every case can be resolved summarily.
Accountings are notoriously fact heavy. I accept that they are expensive if
opposed. I do not agree with Mr. Battiston however when he submits that there
should be an initial evidentiary threshold to be met by the applicant before he
can call on the other beneficiaries to bear the cost of the production
exercise. First, this would reverse the burden on the fiduciaries to account transparently.
In addition, the leave requirement in the statute already functions as a
screening device. An additional screen is not needed. Furthermore, the court
can always consider the proportionality of a production request without an
initial assessment on the merits.
[11]      
I do not agree with Mr. Sidlofsky that an
accounting by the attorneys for property is necessarily required to complete
the accounting of the two estates. Each estate received assets and liabilities
and dealt with what they received. Here, the issues raised deal with the
interregnum during which the estate trustees functioned as attorneys for
property before their mother’s death. The accounting for the father’s estate
will end before the issues with the attorneys for property begin. The issue for
the attorneys for property is what did they do with the assets they received
from the father’s estate. That does not help with the accounting for their
prior duties on behalf of the father’s estate. There is a stronger argument
that it would be instructive or helpful to the judge to see the full continuum
to understand the opening position of the mother’s estate. I am not sure that
this is needed to account for the mother’s estate. But I can see where at least
some information about what happened before the mother passed away would be
helpful. That may just require some information. It does not compel an
accounting by the attorneys for property for the mother.
[12]      
It may be that at the end of the day, the court
completely agrees with respondents and finds that the entire process or
elements of it were unnecessary or even abusive. The fact that another
beneficiary has already passed away before receiving the funds his parents
wanted him to have is
[13]      
But indemnity for legal costs will not heal lost
time or injured feelings. It is up to the respondents to assess whether the
non-monetary costs of the proceeding are a greater detriment to them than the
monetary costs of settling. A judge cannot know or fix the emotional impact of
a family dispute. Only the parties can assess whether it is better to pay some
money to end the case rather than suffering the non-monetary costs and harm of
continuing to litigate. Parties can criticize the legal system for being slow
and expensive. But if they are unwilling to pay or take what the other side
offers to settle, then they are deciding that the non-monetary costs and harm
does not outweigh the priority they put on the money. This is not a criticism
of anyone’s position. It is a simple recognition of the cost-benefit analysis
that every civil litigant undergoes. Every case can settle. If you don’t want
to pay or take what is offered by the other side, that is a choice to prefer
incurring the systemic cost, delay, and non-monetary harms of the ongoing
proceeding.
[14]      
Looking at the refusals chart prepared by the
parties, I find that all of the documents sought are relevant and must be
provided with the exception of item No. 2. Counsel has represented in writing
that the unsigned copy of the form sought in No. 2 is identical to the filed
version. I take counsel at their word unless there is very good reason not to
do so. All counsel understand how serious it would be if they were later found
to have made a misrepresentation to the other side or to the court.
[15]      
The documents sought are all part and parcel of
a proper accounting by legal representatives who control corporations as
fiduciaries for their principals. I agree with Mr. Sidlofsky that fiduciaries
who manage corporations on behalf of a principal are always acting in that
capacity and cannot rely upon the corporate personality of the corporation to
avoid accountability.
[16]      
The fact that the documents may overlap with
production sought in the applicant’s oppression remedy proceeding could actually
reduce the cost and inconvenience of finding and producing them. That is, were
the respondents already producing in the oppression application the documents
sought in this case, the documents would be sitting available to them in files
(or e-files) without much cost or effort to locate them.
[17]      
But, as I understand the state of play in the
oppression proceeding, the scope of production is not yet finalized. So, there
is not much duplication of effort now.
[18]      
In any event, under Rule 31.1 of the Rules of
Civil Procedure and the common law “implied undertaking of confidentiality”
documents produced in one legal proceeding cannot be used in another legal
proceeding. The promise of confidentiality protects the privacy of litigants
who are compelled by law to produce their confidential documents in the litigation.
Mr. Battiston did not respond to Mr. Sidlofsky’s invitation to waive the
confidentiality obligation that prevents Mr. Sidlofsky from using in this
proceeding documents that the respondents may produce in the oppression proceeding.
The applicant therefore has no practical choice but to seek the same documents
in both proceedings if they are relevant to the issues in both.
[19]      
Mr. Battiston criticizes the applicant’s
requests for production by “corporations” because the applicant does not
specifically identify which corporation’s records are sought. The information
about what the respondents did as attorneys for property is in their hands. The
corporations involved are all corporations in which the father’s estate or the
mother had an interest. Any transactions that were conducted affected the
mother’s financial interests (whether her assets, liabilities, revenue or
expenses, past, current or future, whether opportunities or existing).
Everything they touched as attorneys for property for their mother is relevant
to the accounting sought.
[20]      
Accountability is the price of undertaking a
fiduciary position. Attorneys for property must be prepared to account for
their activities to show that they acted solely in the best interest of their principal
and that they engaged in no self-dealing or conflicts of interest in violation
of their fiduciary duties. This may sound onerous; but it is necessary.
Moreover, it is not so onerous. In the ordinary course attorneys for property are
indemnified for any professional assistance that they require to help them
account. They can also seek compensation for the time they spend on their
duties in most cases. The law protects them and values their willingness to
devote their selfless efforts to protect a vulnerable person. But it also
insists on strict performance including transparent accountability.
[21]      
I do not accept as a matter of law or fact that
documents are not available just because a corporation has been sold. Parties
are required to produce everything in their possession, power, or control.
While parties may have no visibility into a corporation after it has been sold,
that does not say anything about what records they already have in their files,
on their computers, or with their accountants or other professionals. It is
common, for example, for former directors to keep copies of financial
statements and tax returns to protect themselves from liability in case the
buyer or the taxman comes knocking in future. Case law is clear that production
obligations trump contractual confidentiality clauses barring extreme cases
like trade secrets. So, even if, in selling corporations, the respondents
agreed to keep historical corporate information confidential, that obligation
is subject to production obligations required by law.
[22]      
I would want to see evidence of due diligence
and very best efforts to search for documents before accepting as a fact that a
party has no documents for a business he, she, or it sold.
[23]      
Similarly, I do not accept that the applicant is
limited to receiving only audited financial statements for corporations where
they exist. Passing accounts involves an assessment of receipts and
disbursements, relating both to capital and revenue transactions. Audited
financial statements do not necessarily (or usually) include that level of
detail. Barring precedents to the contrary, of which I am unaware, I agree with
Mr. Sidlofsky that the same documents as are routinely required to be produced
by an estate trustee to provide a full accounting for an estate of a deceased person
(including bank statements and transaction details) ought to be required where
a corporation is being managed by a fiduciary who may be required to account.
[24]      
Had there been evidence to suggest that the
applicant’s concerns might have been satisfied by the review of a less
significant swath of documents, I might have tried to stage or limit production
to try to save time and money. But I do not have that type of evidence here and
I do not think it is available. Rather, what is sought is not yet too granular
and is sensible and normal for a passing of accounts.
[25]      
The respondents also ask the court to approve an
interim distribution of $1 million to each beneficiary. They propose to set off
against this interim distribution amounts claimed by the estate from each
beneficiary. That will wipe out the proposed distribution to the applicant.
[26]      
The applicant concedes that he owes $350,000
claimed by the respondents (without the $25,000 in additional unparticularized
interest) and a further $34,000 in relation to a car loan. But he denies that
he owes a further $500,000 (approximately) claimed by the estate trustees
related to a loan from the deceased father to the applicant.
[27]      
The applicant says that his father forgave the
loan before he died. He points to the fact that the mortgage given to secure
the loan was discharged long ago. In addition, he says that the loan was not
shown as an asset of the father’s estate in its original listing. This suggests
that the loan was not shown in the father’s books and records as being an
outstanding claim at the time of his death.
[28]      
The respondents counter that the father was
meticulous in recording loans to his children to ensure that each child’s
accounts would be equalized on his death. There is no record of this loan being
forgiven.
[29]      
As there is at least a contested issue about the
loan, the respondents ask to hold the $500,000 in trust pending the outcome of
their claim on the loan.
[30]      
The applicant submits that the respondents are
seeking execution before judgement. They have not brought a claim on the loan
on behalf of the father’s estate. The applicant says a lawsuit is statute
barred. In any event, there is no evidence that the loan, if it is due, cannot conveniently
be withheld from a later distribution by the estate. It is too convenient that
the respondents chose a quantum for an interim distribution that almost exactly
matches what they claim from him.
[31]      
I am not prepared to rule summarily in the
absence of evidence and argument about whether the estate trustees ought to be
entitled to withhold the amount claimed in a proposed multi-million-dollar
distribution. Instead, they can find a way to agree with the applicant in the
mutual interest of all of them; or they can exercise their business judgement
as they see fit and run the risk of doing so; or they can incur the cost and
delay of coming to the court on proper material to allow a decision to be made
on the merits in a fair process. I have no evidence on the facts in dispute. I
have no law on which limitation period is applicable. As the loan was
apparently secured by a mortgage, might the 10-year real property limitation
period apply? I have no law on whether a debt that is statute-barred can still
be enforced by estate trustees through the self-help remedy of setoff. I have
no way to assess the strength of the claim to the debt; or the financial
ability of the estate to pay now and set off against later distributions; or the
financial ability of the applicant to repay such a significant sum if he
receives it and it is found later that he does owe the debt.
[32]      
Similarly, I am not going to order these parties
into mediation when they disagree about the scope of what is to be covered in
the process. Moreover, I agree with Mr. Sidlofsky that a mediation before he
has production to which his client is entitled is not optimal for success
(unless the respondents are willing to pay to avoid disclosure and I see no
indication of that.)
[33]      
These parties do not appear to be in settlement
mode yet. When both sides are ready to talk, they can do so without anyone’s
intervention. If they want a judge engaged, they can always convene a case
conference under Rule 50.13.
[34]      
The parties are to agree on an order that gives
the respondents no more than 45 days to collect and produce the relevant
documents as ordered and then sets a schedule for the remaining proceedings.
All the passings of accounts (including the request for leave) should be heard
together or one after the other with common processes leading to the hearing.
Oral examinations (either for discovery or cross-examinations) are needed. Then
will there be a hearing on the record or a trial? Usually, it is sensible to
try to have the matter heard on the record leaving open the possibility that
the judge orders a trial of one or more issues under Rule 38.10 if necessary.
But oral evidence is also very normal for a passing of accounts. Perhaps a
hybrid trial with affidavits standing as evidence in chief will work.
[35]      
I direct counsel to meet by phone,
videoconference, or, preferably, in person, to try to work through procedural
issues to schedule these applications for the earliest resolution that is fair
to all. The parties are reminded that in Ontario, their lawyers are required to
cooperate on procedural and scheduling matters to try to ensure a fair hearing
for everyone. Sending emails loaded with tone and copied to clients is not a
useful way to cooperate. Clients have minimal input on scheduling matters.
Scheduling issues are generally dealt with cooperatively between and among the
lawyers and the court.
[36]      
If the parties cannot agree on a schedule by March 7,
2025 either can arrange an early case conference with me through my Judicial
Assistant. In that case, the order should simply compel the production of
documents as sought (except #2 on the chart) within 45 days of today and
dismiss without prejudice the requests for approval of an interim distribution
and orders concerning mediation.