[1]              
N.D.H. is
charged with the following offences involving the same complainant between
January 20, 2020 and May 25, 2023:
[2]              
A ban on the
publication of the complainant’s identity and any information to serve to
identify her is in effect.
[3]              
This is the decision
of the court in this case.
[4]              
The ultimate
question in this case is whether the Crown has proven the case beyond a
reasonable doubt. The key issues are credibility and reliability.
[5]              
The test in a
criminal trial is not which side I believe more but whether the Crown has
proven the offences beyond a reasonable doubt. All of the evidence must be
considered in determining whether the Crown has met its burden.
[6]              
N.D.H. is presumed
to be innocent unless and until the Crown has proven the offences beyond a reasonable doubt.
Reasonable doubt lies far closer
to absolute certainty than it does to a balance of probabilities.
[7]              
In assessing the
credibility of the witnesses in this case, I also apply the principles
articulated by the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. W.D. as applied by
subsequent cases and commentary such that:
[8]              
In this case the
complainant and her mother testified for the Crown. The defendant also testified.
[9]              
In assessing
credibility of these witnesses, I have considered the general integrity and
intelligence of the witness, each witness’s opportunity to observe, capacity to
remember and accuracy in statements, some of which
will be referenced in this case.
All of the witnesses appeared to be honestly endeavoring to
tell the truth.
[10]          
The important
issues in this case are that of the witnesses’ credibility and reliability. A
valuable means of assessing the credibility of a witness is to examine the
consistency between what the witness
said in the witness box and what the witness
has said on other occasions, whether on oath or not. I also have assessed what is testified to in the context of all the evidence in the case and not on an isolated basis
including any inconsistencies and whether these are inconsequential or material
and significant to the case. The court has paid careful attention significant
inconsistencies to it when assessing the reliability of the witness's testimony
as will likewise be referenced.
[11]          
The role of
confirmatory and contradictory evidence can be especially important when
assessing the evidence of some witnesses. Confirmatory evidence need not
directly implicate the accused or confirm
a Crown witness’
evidence in every respect. Confirmatory evidence should be capable of restoring the trier's faith
in the relevant aspects of the witness' account. This will be commented upon
later in this decision.
[12]          
The defence
admitted at the outset of trial both identity and jurisdiction in this case.
The offences are all alleged to have occurred in the defendant’s home.
[13]          
N.D.H. and S.C. met online and soon commenced a relationship. S.C. is the mother of the
complainant, R.C. and a younger daughter, E.C. S.C. and her young daughters all
came to reside together with the defendant at the residence owned by the defendant in the City of Brantford where the defendant’s, mother, G. also resided.
[14]          
The residence
they occupied is a two-story home over a period of five to six years. The
entrance, kitchen and living room areas were on the main level, bedrooms were
on the 2nd story and there was a basement that was used mainly for
storage, some gym equipment and a room dedicated to “Betty Boop” collectibles
of G’s.
[15]          
All of the
individual’s bedrooms were on the 2nd story. The complainant, R.C. and her
younger sister together had one room. In this room, the children initially
slept in a bunkbed and then each had their own separate bed in the same room. The door of the children’s room had been removed early on and there was no
door on this room at all relevant times.
[16]          
The defendant and
S.C. had the master bedroom that also had a sitting area with a television. G.
had her own bedroom. All rooms were in close proximity to each other, and all
witnesses agreed that the floors,
stairs, doorways throughout the home including
the bunkbed were creaky and the sounds of movement
was readily heard throughout the home.
[17]          
During the period
that the parties lived at this home, the defendant worked at a fast-food
restaurant except for a brief time toward the end of the relationship. He now
works as a labourer at a steel manufacturing business. The mother, S.C. also
worked initially on various shifts which varied during day and evening hours
and overnights as a PSW. She was eventually successful getting regular
full-time hours. Both children regularly attended school and an after-school
program from 3:00 to 5:00 pm. The relationship and these living arrangements ended when these charges arose.
[18]          
During submissions, the Crown indicated
that the time-period of the offences, based on the cross-examination of the complainant,
were now narrowed to the period of May 2022 to May of 2023.
[19]          
S.R., the
complaint’s mother, testified for the Crown. Overall, this court was impressed
with her testimony which can be characterized as fair, balanced
and reliable. She provided her
[20]          
She testified
as to the relationship with the defendant
and then moving
with her children
to the residence of the defendant where G also resided and took on a significant role as to the care of
the children over the years. She also testified as to the layout and creakiness
of the home. She is and was an attentive mother and no doubt is a dedicated, caring and perceptive person
as a PSW. She enjoyed a close relationship with her children
and was in frequent communications particularly with G by telephone while
she was at work. This court found that she did not in any way influence the testimony of the complainant
that may cause the court any concern.
[21]          
The complainant,
C.R., testified by CCTV at this trial. She is now 11 years of age. The video
interview of her with the investigating
officer from May 26, 2023 was
admitted during and formed part of her testimony.
[22]          
In summary,
her testimony is that sometimes, when her mother
was home and she was busy
and when she was away at work during the day and at nighttime, the defendant
would keep bothering her to do “fun time” which she said was “rub” or “ice
cream”. This happened “two or one times” a week. She could not recall, when she
gave her police interview, when the last time this happened nor the first time
it happened. She said that she had been saying “no” alot to the defendant’s
requests for fun time and that the defendant punished her by taking her phone
away. She would get her phone back “for saying yeah” so she could text her dad
and stuff.
[23]          
She indicated
that the defendant would ask for fun time “every time Mom goes to work”. She indicated “either, I would answer a yes or no or maybe,
I don’t know actually” and later said “the other day he asked, I
said no…then he asked
again. But I normally say yes to make
him stop bothering me”. She
said there was one time that “rub” occurred on the defendant’s bed when her mom was at work. She went onto the bed and the defendant took out his penis, the defendant would not really say anything and then his
penis exploded with white stuff.
[24]          
She indicated
that this sexual activity happened lots of times, but she did not remember them
all. Once it was “ice cream”, he made “it exploded in my mouth, I didn’t want to do it” and she spit it out. She later
said it was one time that it exploded in her mouth because the other times
[25]          
The evidence of
the complainant at times was difficult to follow, somewhat vague and unclear in some respects. For example, the assertions of “ice cream”
events varied. The other “rub” activities and “ice cream”
collectively always occurred
when her mother
was at work which would imply a substantial frequency. In
cross-examination she agreed that her mother almost always tucked her into bed,
except for one of two occasions when the defendant did.
[26]          
The complainant’s testimony was initially
that these events happened when her
mom was away because “she had to be with N”. She then disagreed
that G was the main person who babysat
her and her sister when her mother went to work and said it was both G and the
defendant. She later agreed she testified at the preliminary inquiry that G
would be the one who really watched over her and her sister and babysat her.
[27]          
The were some features of significance and inconsistencies in relation to the rub incidents
which she initially testified to and
indicated occurred while always
lying on the bed.
She testified to a rub incident
occurring in the “Betty Boop’ room. She later admitted there was no bed in that
room. She testified this event occurred when lying on the floor in the room.
The evidence of all other witnesses was that there was no bed in that room. The
complainant also admitted she indicated to police
that the defendant started to yell at her during the rub incident.
She then testified it would be a “mid-yell” but had
also testified the defendant didn’t yell. She later agreed she was not actually
sure if the defendant yelled or not.
[28]          
Such inconsistencies on significant features
of these allegations remained unexplained and unresolved.
[29]          
These
discrepancies could neither be explained away as confusion or arising from an
intense cross-examination. Outside of the allegations of sexual misconduct, the
complainant had also testified that at the preliminary inquiry the defendant
took away the electronic devices only
[30]          
The significant
frequency, nature and the locations of assaults as described by the complainant were difficult to clearly understand or reconcile when others were always in the home including the complainant’s sister
and G. and given the nature of the home. The evidence raised by the defence was
established and uncontroverted – such frequent movements in and within the home generally
would not go completely unnoticed given that creakiness and sounds between
the beds, rooms, the stairways and the floors in the home, especially over many months and possibly years, given the number
of occupants and the complainant sleeping in the same room as her sister
in a room without a door.
[31]          
The complainant was somewhat muted,
waivered, and disjointed in her efforts
to articulate what may have transpired. None of these
comments are criticisms of the young complainant in any
way. The video of the interview of the complainant was also filed
as an exhibit as was the transcript of the interview, both
of which the court subsequently revisited to come to as clear as possible an appreciation and understanding of the complainant’s
evidence. Fairly and realistically stated, it was difficult to find this court could be sure what actually happened;
when, where and how many times and over what period based on
the testimony of the complainant.
[32]          
The complainant’s
testimony ultimately left this court with important concerns on significant points
and issues. For example, if the misconduct alleged occurred with the substantial frequency of one or two times
a week over a substantial period of months or years, this factually is substantially different than just on one or two times a week over a relatively short period of time.
[33]          
The factual
context of the evidence may become an important backdrop when assessing the
reliability and veracity of the allegations and totality of the evidence.
Shifting contexts in the evidence alert the court to be more careful to assess
the reliability and associated concerns of the evidence. Such is the case here.
Our Court of Appeal has in the past commented on the changing number of allegations by a complainant such that this may reflect
a carelessness with the truth and
goes to reliability of the evidence.
[34]          
In the end, the
complainant’s admission on cross-examination that she was not sure how many
times the misconduct happened per week. This added to the reliability concerns
of the testimony of the complainant that were apparent from her in-chief
evidence.
[35]          
The
cross-examination of the complainant also focused on the approximate two-month
period of time from the taking-away of the tablet and the cell phone of the
complainant by the defendant to the time of making the allegations giving rise to these charges.
The defence submitted this supported the basis of
the motive for the complainant to fabricate an allegation since she was
upset to have her cell phone taken from her.
[36]          
The evidence
from all witnesses
was that the complainant’s search history on an electronic device she shared with her younger
sister led to the devices
being taken away, her cell phone kept from her, and she wanted her cell phone back. This upset the complainant since
she used the phone
daily to play games, watched YouTube videos, and contacted her friends and her
father.
[37]          
The inappropriate
internet search history by the complainant was discovered by the defendant and made known to G and the complainant’s mother.
There was some evidence that the
complainant may have attributed the searches to her younger
sister. It matters
not for this decision
to consider this evidence nor does the court make a finding in this regard.
There was also some suggestion by defence during the trial to link the basis of
the nature of the allegations with the nature of the subject internet search.
This court places no consideration of this feature in this decision. Simply
put, the nature of the search is not relevant.
[38]          
The same can be
said as to the complainant’s evidence in relation to G. who had much more frequent
presence and involvement in the lives of both children. G’s significant involvement in relation to both children was substantiated by the testimony
of the complainant’s mother. There were some other significant discrepancies between earlier
statements to police
and at a preliminary
inquiry. It will not be necessary to address this further other than to note this has been considered
by this court. The court finds the taking away of the electronic devices by G
and the defendant from the complainant, did upset the complainant who wanted
her cell phone returned.
[39]          
In the context of
the other evidence in this case, this feature also looms as a significant
feature in the evidence. This court finds this evidence
did tend to support the defence, particularly
[40]          
This court is
mindful that the complainant was testifying to events that would have taken
place as a young person
who is now eleven years
of age who is relating
matters from two or more years ago now. This court is most aware that the presence of inconsistencies or testimonial features of children, particularly as to peripheral or apparent problematic matters such as time and location
and specific details, should be considered in the context
of the age of the witness at the time of the events to which the witness is
testifying. The court must always take care to consider all of the
circumstances and not conflate nor consider evidence
in the same way as adult or even adolescent witnesses.
[41]          
In addition, this court is most mindful
and cognizant to avoid impermissible stereotypes or making finding
not on the evidence or absence of evidence. Victims
of sexual assaults
do not have to raise the alarm or continuously fight back. It is well-recognized
by the court that to do so otherwise entertains such pernicious and impermissible stereotypes. This type of reasoning simply should not be permitted. See R.
v. Davidson, [2018] O.J. No. 3426.
[42]          
Furthermore, even
though there is evidence that the complainant maintained substantial and
ongoing contact with N.D.H. after all incidents complained of, this court
places no consideration on this evidence in this case. The court must not place any reliance on stereotypical
views as to how victims
of sexual assault
would behave including any expectation that a victim
of sexual abuse would make attempts to avoid the perpetrator. See R.
v. A.B.A., [2019] ONCA 124 and R. v. A.R.J.D., 2018 SCC 6
[43]          
I have also
carefully reviewed the defence evidence of N.D.H. who testified. He denied any sexual
impropriety or associated conducted with the complainant. He was also cross-examined
at length.
[44]          
N.D.H. is certainly not a sophisticated witness. He was certainly nervous
and most anxious throughout his testimony. He had a simple, unsophisticated, and unforced manner
throughout both his evidence
in chief and on cross-examination. He was respectful and not combative, both in chief and in cross-examination. He was
responsive and polite at all points in his testimony.
[45]          
There was a
cogency and coherence in the defendant’s evidence with few, if any
inconsistencies or problematic features, that undermined his credibility or
reliability This court finds there is no basis for the rejection of his evidence.
I am mindful of the Crown’s final submissions
in relation to the case of R. v. J.J.R.D.
The court in this case cannot come to a rejection
of the defendant’s testimony based
on the findings as mentioned earlier regarding the evidence of the complainant.
[46]          
I am also aware
that it is my duty to evaluate the accused’s evidence in the context of all of
the evidence adduced at trial. I have assessed the accused’s evidence in light
of the whole evidence and, in so doing,
compared his evidence
with that of all other
witnesses. This court
cannot and ought not to reject his evidence on this record.
[47]          
This court does
not reject the evidence of N.D.H. On this basis alone, an acquittal is granted.
[48]          
Even if the court rejected
N.D.H.’s evidence in relation to all of these incidents, this court finds
there were concerns with the overall credibility and reliability of the
evidence of C.R. as mentioned. The problematic features of her evidence as outlined earlier
do not leave the court with
confidence in the reliability of her evidence.
In view of these doubts
and concerns, the proof of the
offences is insufficient. The court cannot make a finding of guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt on this evidence.
[49]          
In summary,
based on the test established in R. v. W(D), I cannot reject
the evidence of the
defendant. I find the Crown has not discharged its burden to prove essential
elements of the
[50]          
For these reasons provided, the charges against
N.D.H. are dismissed.