[1]           The respondent brings
this urgent motion to reinstate his parenting time with eleven-year-old RK.  Yamashita
J. granted the respondent leave to bring the motion and Coats J. scheduled the
motion hearing.
[2]           The respondent commenced
the underlying motion to change seeking a variation of the final order of
Fowler J. dated October 11, 2019.  The applicant has responded to the motion to
change and makes her own claims.  By order dated April 27, 2023, Mills J.
struck out the respondent’s pleading, and thereafter the applicant was granted
leave to proceed with her claims by way of an uncontested trial in writing.
[3]           On June 25, 2024, Coats
J. ordered that, for a six-month period, the respondent’s parenting time with
RK be contingent on the respondent’s adherence to Soberlink blood alcohol testing
protocols, that any applicable reading above zero (or a “fail”) would be deemed
non-compliant, and, upon there being evidence of the respondent’s non-compliance,
his “entitlement to further parenting time shall be suspended forthwith”.  She
further ordered that, upon such suspension, the onus would be on the respondent
to bring a motion to lift or vary the suspension.  The respondent complied with
that order respecting the Soberlink testing and took no steps to have the order
set aside or varied.
[4]           Soberlink reported “fails”
(i.e., alcohol in the blood) for the respondent on July 10, 2024, August 3,
2024, September 27, 2024, and October 25, 2024, which dates were either during or
around his parenting time with RK.
[5]           The respondent has had
no parenting time with RK since November 8, 2024.
[6]           The sole issue for
determination on this motion is whether I should lift the suspension of the respondent’s
parenting time with RK.
[7]           The applicant opposes
the respondent’s motion and submits that it should be dismissed because the respondent
has breached five court orders and remains in non-compliance with them.  She
argues that it would be unjust for the respondent to be granted the relief he
seeks while he remains in breach of court orders and has had his pleading
struck out.  She also argues that the respondent made a material
misrepresentation when seeking leave ex parte to bring this urgent
motion by failing to disclose his breach of court order and the striking out of
his pleading.
[8]           The respondent denies
that he is in breach of any court orders other than those that, in total,
require him to pay $10,500.00 in costs.  He admits that his non-compliance with
those orders is serious and relevant to this motion, but argues that he is
nonetheless entitled to parent his child.  The respondent also argues that he is
unemployed, has no money, and therefore can’t afford to pay the court-ordered
costs.  He further submits that his non-disclosure to the court was due to his
counsel’s inadvertence and her misunderstanding of court procedures.  Ms.
Fuller says that she wasn’t provided with the previous court orders, including
the one striking out the respondent’s pleading, and, when she submitted her
request for leave to bring this urgent motion, she “just thought I was seeking
a date”.  The respondent further submits that his four Soberlink testing
“fails” in July through October 2024 are inconsequential because he passed the
other seventy-five tests.
[9]           For the reasons set out
below, I am dismissing the respondent’s motion and therefore need not address
his request for police enforcement.
[10]         Rule 1(8) of the Family
Law Rules, O. Reg. 114/99, provides that, where a party fails to obey an
order in a case or related case, the court may order that he is not entitled to
any further court order.  Rule 1(8.4) of the Family Law Rules provides
that, where a party’s pleading is struck out, he is not entitled to participate
in the case in any way.  In my view, the operation of these rules is sufficient
to dispose of the respondent’s motion, but there are additional factors that
strongly militate in favour of its dismissal: the respondent’s non-compliance
with numerous court orders, his conduct in the litigation, his material
non-disclosure when seeking leave, and the numerous “fails” in the Soberlink
testing mandated by the June 25, 2024 Coats J. order.
[11]       I do not accept the respondent’s
arguments that his non-compliance with previous court orders, the fact of his
pleading having been struck, his non-disclosure when seeking leave to bring
this urgent motion, and his Soberlink testing “fails” are inconsequential when
compared to his right to parent RK.  I address each of those arguments as
follows.
[12]       It is beyond well established that
court orders must be followed unless they are stayed or overturned (see: Perley-Robertson,
Hill & McDougall LLP v Eureka 93 Inc., 2024 ONCA 872, at para. 8). 
However someone may choose to view the importance and/or significance of an
extant court order, that order must be complied with.
[13]       Even if there is a scale of important
or significant court orders, the respondent’s non-compliance with the court
orders in the case-at-bar goes beyond what could be characterized as
inconsequential.  A review of the applicable court orders reveals more than
“one-off” or trifling non-compliance, or “simple” non-payment of costs orders. 
Indeed, that non-compliance ultimately resulted in the striking out of the
respondent’s pleading and leave being granted to the applicant to proceed with
her claims by way of an uncontested trial.
[14]       I do not accept the respondent’s proffered
explanation that the only reason why he hasn’t complied with the costs orders
is his inability to pay them because he has no money and is unemployed.  Among
other things, as candidly admitted by Ms. Fuller, there is before me “no
evidence of [the respondent]’s financial circumstances whatsoever”.
[15]       It is settled law that, in civil or
family cases, a party moving ex parte must fully and frankly disclose
all material facts, including those that do not support his position (see: Amato
v Hall, 2024 ONSC 2422, at paras. 13 and 17).  The failure to make such
disclosure is, in and of itself, sufficient grounds to set aside the resulting
order (see: Amato, at para. 15).  The relevant inquiry is not whether
the subject order would have been granted had the omitted facts been disclosed,
but whether those facts might have had an impact on the granting of the order
(see: Amato, at para. 16).
[16]       In the case-at-bar, when seeking
leave to bring this urgent motion, the respondent failed to make full and frank
disclosure: he failed to disclose that his pleading had been struck and that he
had failed to pay $10,500.00 in costs orders.  In my view, that non-disclosure
was material because those omitted facts, most certainly, might have had an
impact on the granting of leave to bring this motion.  I do not accept the
respondent’s argument that his failure to be candid was an inadvertent and
inconsequential slip by his counsel, who didn’t receive evidence of the
previous court orders and didn’t understand the applicable court procedures. 
The duty of candour and honesty on parties who move ex parte includes
the obligation to search for, marshal, and disclose to the court all relevant evidence
and information.  In addition, counsel are duty-bound to ensure their knowledge
of and compliance with applicable court procedures. In the context of material
non-disclosure on an ex parte motion, the respondent’s proffered “oops” explanation
is simply not good enough.
[17]       I also do not accept the
respondent’s argument that his request for leave to bring this motion was “just
to get a date”.  The process to request leave to bring an urgent motion as set
out in the Notice to the Profession and Parties requires the party
seeking leave to file the materials for the proposed motion to be reviewed by a
judge of this court in determining whether the requested leave should be
granted.  In Milton, if such leave is granted, the judge can schedule a hearing
date for the motion or put the motion onto a Triage Court list for scheduling. 
In the case-at-bar, Yamashita J. granted the requested leave and put the
respondent’s urgent motion onto the January 30, 2025 Triage Court list for
scheduling.  Therefore, the respondent’s explanation that Ms. Fuller’s filing
of his motion materials in accordance with the applicable procedure for seeking
leave to bring an urgent motion was “just to get a date” is neither credible
nor acceptable.  In addition, I note that the respondent had still not served
his motion materials on the applicant by the January 30, 2025 Triage Court
attendance and was subsequently ordered by Coats J. to do so.
[18]       Even if the procedure before
Yamashita J. was “just to get a date”, the duty of full and frank disclosure still
applies.  Indeed, in my view, that duty should apply to any ex parte step
in a legal proceeding where the court is called upon to adjudicate an issue that
may affect the rights of a person who has not been served.  Moreover, where a request
is submitted for leave to bring an urgent motion, the rights of the opposing
party are clearly affected, but so too are the rights of other litigants in
other cases because the court is being asked to permit the proposed urgent
motion to “jump the queue” ahead of every other matter where the litigants are
waiting for a scheduled hearing or are waiting to have their hearing
scheduled.  In addition to the obvious fairness issues, the court, in being
asked to adjudicate the issue on an ex parte basis, must also be
provided with full, honest, and candid disclosure of all relevant facts and
information.
[19]       I also do not accept the
respondent’s argument that his Soberlink testing “fails” during the currency of
the June 25, 2024 order of Coats J. is inconsequential when compared to his
right to parent his child.
[20]       It is trite law that, when making
parenting orders, the court’s sole consideration is the child’s best interests. 
Based on a plain reading of the June 25, 2024 Coats J. order, it is clear that
RK’s best interest are aligned with the complete lack of any alcohol in the
respondent’s blood before or during RK’s parenting time with him.  Anything
other than a zero testing result before that parenting time would automatically
result in no parenting time.  Anything other than a zero result during that
parenting time would automatically result in the respondent’s relinquishment of
care and control of RK to the applicant.  Evidence of anything other than a
zero result at any time would automatically result in the forthwith suspension
of parenting time, with the onus on the respondent to bring a motion to lift or
vary that suspension.  Therefore, the respondent’s proffered characterization
of his four “fails” as inconsequential to this motion is neither reasonable nor
acceptable.
[21]       The respondent’s motion must therefore
be dismissed.  However, in my view, such dismissal should be without prejudice
to the respondent’s ability to re-bring the motion after he has paid all
outstanding costs orders.
[22]       The applicant, having successfully
opposed the respondent’s motion, is entitled to her costs, which she seeks on a
partial recovery basis in the all-inclusive amount of $12,500.00 (the full
recovery amount in her bill of costs is $18,351.20).  The respondent’s bill of
costs sets out a full recovery amount of $20,291.98, but he submits that the
appropriate amount of costs on this motion is $12,500.00 on a partial recovery
basis.  There are no relevant offers to settle.
[23]       Taking into consideration the
factors set out in rule 24(14) of the Family Law Rules, including,
without limitation, counsel’s hourly rates, the time spent, and the factual and
legal complexity of this motion, I find the all-inclusive amount of $10,500.00
to be fair, reasonable, and proportionate in the circumstances.  While the amount
of the unsuccessful respondent’s claimed costs matches the applicants’ exactly,
it is but one factor that I have considered in setting the appropriate quantum
of costs.  I consider the claimed amount of $12,500.00 to be excessive given
the low legal and factual complexity of the motion.
[24]       I therefore make the following
orders: