[1]              
An accidental fire on February 3, 2022, caused
extensive damage to a residential rental property owned by John Shane and
leased to clients of Ontario Aboriginal Housing Services (“OAHS”).
[2]              
Mr. Shane seeks damages caused by the fire
against OAHS in contract and negligence. He claims that he had a contract with
OAHS to cover any damages to his rental units caused by their clients and in
the alternative, claims that OAHS was negligent by not sufficiently identifying
the needs of and supporting the tenants.
[3]              
Mr. Shane is an experienced residential
landlord. At the time of the fire, he owned 70 units in 13 buildings in
Sudbury. His relationship with OAHS began in April 2020. Mr. Shane had
previously rented to people with chronic homelessness and was familiar with the
issues and challenges presented by these tenants. At the time of the fire, he
had 15 tenants who were OAHS clients in approximately ten units. Mr. Shane
maintained a traditional landlord/tenant relationship with OAHS clients.
[4]              
Mr. Shane also testified that he had made the
business decision to reduce his property insurance coverage as he paid off the
mortgages on his buildings. He made sure to have regular electrical inspections
and checked fire alarm systems. At the time of the fire, he did not carry
property insurance on any of his residential buildings.
[5]              
OAHS is a non-profit corporation which provides
support, including housing support to Indigenous clients experiencing chronic
homelessness. At the material time, OAHS recruited landlords to rent to their
clients. As incentives to landlords, it assisted clients in directing the rent
directly to the landlord.  In this way, landlords were ensured that rent would
be paid in full and on time. OAHS also supported the clients as they
transitioned from homelessness to independent living. The program was designed
to provide support in the areas of mental health and addiction. This support
took many forms including the provision of furniture and food from time to
time, connecting clients with various community services and through weekly
visits to monitor and assist the clients’ transition to the rental unit. OAHS
also communicated frequently with property managers to address concerns and
issues that might jeopardize the tenancy, including any damage to the unit.
Whether OAHS also provided a promise to the plaintiff to cover property damage
caused by these tenants is the primary issue in this trial.
[6]              
In January 2022, OAHS introduced the Residential
Unit Supply Agreement (the “RUSA”). The RUSA created a new relationship between
OAHS and property owners who supplied units to OAHS. The property owners were
no longer the landlords. OAHS placed their clients in the units supplied by
property owners. Pursuant to the RUSA, OAHS would cover property damage claims
if the damage was caused by the client. The property owners were obliged to
carry “all risk” insurance for accidental damage to property. OAHS sent Mr.
Shane a draft of the RUSA.  Mr. Shane declined to enter into the Agreement. He
said that it was complicated, and he wanted legal advice before he considered
it.
[7]              
Mr. Shane purchased the residential property on
Bancroft Drive in December 2021. He entered into discussions with Brad Farr, a
Supervisor at OAHS, prior to the closing of the transaction in early December
2021.
[8]              
Mr. Shane intended to rent the units from
December 2021 until May 15, 2022, and then undertake renovations to the
building. Mr. Farr identified the S family as suitable tenants for the
three-bedroom unit upstairs, who moved into the unit on December 10, 2021. The
tenants in the upper unit of the property were members of the S family, a mother
in her 60's as well as an adult son and daughter. Mr. Shane met the S family
for the first time in mid-January 2022 when he went to the unit and spoke with
them and assured himself that the smoke detectors were working and that the
tenants knew how to find and work the fire extinguisher. At this visit, he also
learned that none of the members of the family owned a cell phone.
[9]              
On the evening of February 3, 2022, at
approximately 8:30 p.m., a grease fire started in the kitchen of their unit
while the son was cooking. The fire spread past the kitchen, throughout the
unit. The S family left the unit and went to a neighbours’ apartment. The
neighbours called emergency services. Firefighters attended the property.
[10]          
The unit occupied by the S family suffered
significant damage from the fire. The second unit in the house also rented to
an OAHS client sustained extensive water and smoke damage. The tenants from
both units were displaced by the fire.
[11]          
Mr. Shane alleges that he had an oral contract
with OAHS to cover any property damages caused in any way by the program
participants. The plaintiff states that the oral contract was made in telephone
calls with OAHS representatives and is also supported by the defendant’s past
practice in dealing with property claims and is consistent with their dealings
with other property owners.
[12]          
OAHS denies that it promised to pay for all
damages to the property caused by the OAHS tenants and that their past practice
with Mr. Shane’s property damage claims was not consistent with any agreement
as alleged. OAHS says that their policy and their past practice with Mr. Shane
and other landlords was to consider property damage claims on a case-by-case
basis.
[13]          
For the reasons that follow, I find that the
parties did not enter into an oral agreement with respect to the responsibility
of OAHS for damages to the rental property caused by the tenants/clients of
OAHS.
[14]          
The plaintiff testified about his direct calls
with OAHS employees and his experience with making claims to OAHS for
reimbursement for property damage. He also called two other landlords who gave
evidence about their experience with OAHS.
[15]          
Mr. Shane recounted his calls he had with OAHS
employees starting in May 2020, after he received an email from OAHS asking if
he was interested in renting to OAHS clients. He testified that he told OAHS
that he needed an incentive to rent to their clients because he had prior
experience renting to people with chronic homelessness and was familiar with
the challenges and the greater risks of damages.  He stated that he required a
promise that rent would be paid in full and on time, that OAHS would drop by
several times per week and report to him if there were damages to the units and
that the costs of any property damage caused by or linked to an OAHS client
would be covered by OAHS.  Mr. Shane recalled dealing with a Case Manager,
Sophie Huneault, and a Supervisor, Cindy Deschatelets, about potential tenants
and that they agreed that OAHS would cover damages. Mr. Shane said in these
discussions, OAHS representatives did not mention or stipulate that property
damage claims would only be considered on a case-by-case basis or were subject
to any conditions, including fault or intention of a tenant, a budget, nor that
there was an obligation to keep the unit for OAHS clients after repairs were
made.  Mr Shane explicitly denied that Ms. Huneault ever told him that property
claims were subject to a budget.  He asked: “why would I accept that?” Mr.
Shane admits that he understood there was an approval process for damage claims
and that OAHS had denied claims for certain items and work.
[16]          
Mr. Shane argues that the past agreement
practice of OAHS with respect to his claims for property damage is consistent
with his position that OAHS had agreed to pay for all property damage.
[17]          
On at least six different occasions, between May
2020 and February 2022, Mr. Shane requested compensation for property damage
caused by various OAHS clients. These claims included pest infestations, broken
doors and windows and a broken radiator caused by a tenant leaving a door open
in the winter, all of which Mr. Shane attributed to tenant behaviour.
[18]          
When Mr. Shane made claims for property damage,
OAHS Case Managers and Supervisors investigated the circumstances of the damage
to determine the involvement of the tenant and reviewed the supporting
documentation including receipts, invoices and pay stubs for labour.  The email
correspondence shows that there were back and forth discussions about these
claims and various items were the subject of negotiation.  The correspondence
shows that OAHS declined certain expenses or items and in response, Mr. Shane
sometimes reduced his claim.  He stated that he didn’t seek reimbursement for
all of the damages, because he wanted to work with the tenants out of the
“goodness of his heart”.
[19]          
In all instances prior to the fire, OAHS had
covered some or all of the plaintiff’s claims for tenant caused damages. The
total amount OAHS reimbursed Mr. Shane for six different claims made prior to
the fire was approximately $8,000. There is no dispute that claims were made,
and some were paid. Throughout email correspondence on all of these claims, Mr.
Shane admitted that he made no reference to an agreement or promise by OAHS to
cover damages.  Mr. Shane stated that he considered that OAHS became his
property insurer with respect to their clients.  Mr. Shane acknowledged that
where he sought reimbursement from OAHS, he knew he had to show that the damage
was caused by their clients and that it was “above and beyond” normal
situations.
[20]          
The plaintiff called two other landlords to
testify about their experience with OAHS and their claims for property damage.
[21]          
Joe Levesque is a Sudbury landlord with six
rental properties and 24 residential units. He and his mother Karen Levesque,
who is the property manager both gave evidence about their experience with
OAHS. Mr. Levesque had telephone discussions with Ms. Huneault.  He stated that
the fact that OAHS would arrange for the rent to be paid directly to him was
very persuasive. He also testified that Ms. Huneault said that OAHS would be
responsible for any damage to the residential unit caused by the OAHS
participant.
[22]          
In the first year of renting to OAHS clients,
from January 2020 to March 2021, there was some minor property damage caused by
the tenants. Mr. Levesque did not make any claim for reimbursement with respect
to these items. However, in March 2021, one of the OAHS participants left the
unit with significant property damage, estimated at $4,000.00. There were back
and forth negotiations with OAHS and ultimately Mr. Levesque submitted a claim
for a reduced amount to OAHS. In discussions with Mr. Farr, it appeared that
OAHS agreed to pay this reduced claim, although he indicated that the decision
was not his to make and still required consideration from the Director. 
However, when Mrs. Levesque said that she did not have an apartment available
for another OAHS client, the discussions on the payment of the claim ended.
Mrs. Levesque testified that she understood that had they kept a unit available
for an OAHS participant, OAHS would have reimbursed them for the claim for
damages. The Levesque claim was never paid.
[23]          
In any event, Mr. Levesque decided he no longer
wanted to rent to OAHS participants because he was not prepared to take on the
risk.
[24]          
Mr. Levesque carried property insurance on his residential
units. Mrs. Levesque testified that they would have made an insurance claim had
there been any “big” damages to the units of OAHS participants. She indicated
that she assumed damages caused by an accidental fire would be covered through
an insurance claim, not through a claim to OAHS.
[25]          
Sheik Fareedun was the other property owner to
give evidence about his dealings with OAHS.  He owned 32 residential units.
Between April 2022 and May 2023, he rented to five or six OAHS clients. Mr.
Fareedun’s agreement with OAHS was largely governed by the RUSA that he signed
in April 2022.
[26]          
Mr. Fareedun stated that he sought reassurance
from OAHS that the challenges associated with renting to OAHS clients would be
addressed. In response, OAHS pointed to provisions in the RUSA that provided
that Mr. Fareedun would supply units to OAHS for their program on certain
terms:
[27]          
Mr. Fareedun understood that he was responsible
to insure his property against accidental damages caused by such things as fire
and flood. However, in the event of deliberate damage caused by the OAHS
client, OAHS was responsible.
[28]          
Mr. Fareedun also stated that in his initial
conversations with a Case Manager at OAHS, the Case Manager indicated that OAHS
would cover up to $5,000 towards repairs for damages caused by the
participants. He thought this amount was insufficient but was ultimately
reassured, given the size of the units and the support from Case Managers. Mr.
Fareedun signed the agreement and there is no mention in it of any caps on
damages.
[29]          
At some point there was a gun incident in one of
the Fareedun units which resulted in damage to the radiator pipes. Hot water
flooded the building and caused significant damage. Mr. Fareedun made an
insurance claim for the repairs. He also made a claim to OAHS for amounts not
covered by his insurance. Notwithstanding assurances from the OAHS
representatives that they would take care of the damages, Mr. Fareedun was not
happy with their process. The end result was that Mr. Fareedun’s insurer dealt
with OAHS and Mr. Fareedun was reimbursed his deductible from the insurance
claim.  Mr. Fareedun ended his relationship with OAHS in May 2023.
[30]          
Mr. Fareedun indicated that he maintained
property insurance before entering into the Agreement with OAHS, as he said, it
was something that a sensible, reasonable and prudent property owner would do.
[31]          
The defendant called two Case Managers and two
Supervisors who had been employed by the OAHS in the years 2020-2023.  The
first line of contact between landlords and the OAHS was a Case Manager. The
Case Manager reported to a Supervisor who reported to the Director.
[32]          
The four witnesses from OAHS detailed their
conversations directly with Mr. Shane and/or their usual practice in speaking
with and dealing with landlords on the issue of property damage to units
occupied by OAHS clients. Each one of them clearly denied ever making any
promise in this respect to Mr. Shane.
[33]          
Ms. Huneault was the first OAHS person involved
with Mr. Shane as a Case Manager. She stated that she did not receive any
specific training about dealing with landlords other than observing some calls.
She said Mr. Shane did not ask questions about property damage and she
explicitly denied ever making any promise or guarantee to him with respect to
reimbursement or responsibility for property damage.
[34]          
Ms. Huneault testified that whenever a claim was
made, she repeated that there were no guarantees, that claims for reimbursement
would be considered on a case-by-case basis and that OAHS would do their best
to support landlords so as to ensure the best outcome for their clients. She
was not involved in decision making regarding claims, but she understood that
management mainly considered whether the tenant would be evicted or whether
another tenant from the program could move into the unit and that it was likely
that OAHS would decline a claim if the client could not stay in the unit, or
another client could not take the unit. Ms. Huneault’s role was focussed on
speaking with the client to get their side of the story and to gather proof of
a claim to forward to management.
[35]          
Ms. Deschatelets was the Supervisor in April
2020 when Mr. Shane first agreed to accept OAHS clients as tenants. She also
had telephone discussions with Mr. Shane about property damage. Ms.
Deschatelets explicitly denied that she made any promise on behalf of OAHS with
respect to property damage. She said that she had not received any training on
how to answer questions about damages and she was not able to answer direct
questions from landlords about damages.
[36]          
Ms. Deschatelets was convinced that Mr. Shane
understood her role with respect to damage claims, that only management could
approve claims and understood that there were no guarantees.
[37]          
Ms. Deschatelets said that the OAHS tried to
manage the risks posed by tenants by working closely with them and providing
support. She testified that she never deviated from her message to Mr. Shane
that damage claims would be considered on a case-by-case basis. She stated that
she gave the same answer to all landlords.
[38]          
Katryna McLeod was the next Case Manager who
dealt with Mr. Shane starting in April 2021, around the time that the S family
moved into his unit. Ms. McLeod testified that at no time did she or would she
have said that damages would be covered by OAHS. She explained that she would
advise the Supervisor if there were damage claims. Ms. McLeod testified that
she was not part of any discussions or decisions about damage claims. Ms.
McLeod is currently a Supervisor at OAHS. She now has discussions about damages
with property owners pursuant to the RUSA. If OAHS is satisfied that the client
deliberately caused the damage, OAHS pays to repair pursuant to the term of the
RUSA.
[39]          
Mr. Farr was the last OAHS Supervisor who worked
with Mr. Shane.  He dealt with Mr. Shane when the decision was made to rent to
the S family. Although Mr. Farr was not part of the initial conversations with
Mr. Shane, on more than one occasion, he had discussions with Mr. Shane about
claims for the repair of property damage. He testified that in discussions with
Mr. Shane, he made it clear that property claims would be considered by the
Director if the damage was deliberately caused by the tenant, if the unit could
continue to be used for an OAHS client and if there was enough money in the
budget. Mr. Farr stated that the Director consistently focussed on these three
factors. It was the Director’s decision to make.
[40]          
Mr. Farr had several conversations with Mr. 
Shane about the process for validating his claims for damage. On occasion, Mr.
Shane reduced his claim when he could not produce sufficient or adequate proof
of the cost of repair. The evidence of property damage claims made by Mr. Shane
all appear to be related to damages intentionally caused by the tenant. Mr.
Farr spoke to Mr. Shane the night of the fire. Mr. Shane advised that he did
not have insurance on the building.
[41]          
Counsel did not differ on the principles
applicable to the interpretation of oral contracts as set out by Pepall J. in UBS
Securities Canada Inc. v. Sands Brothers Canada Ltd. (2008), 2008 CanLII 19507 (ON SC), 45 B.L.R. (4th)
105 (Ont. S.C.) (“UBS (Ont. S.C.)”), at para. 40, aff’d 2009 ONCA 328,
95 O.R. (3d) 93 (“UBS (ONCA)”), citing G.H.L.
Fridman, The Law of Contract, 5th ed. (Toronto: Carswell,
2006), at p. 15:
[42]          
More recently, when seeking to determine if an
oral contract was made, courts have set out “four criteria for the court to
consider”:
[43]          
The onus of proving an oral contract is firmly
on the party alleging the oral contract.
[44]          
The task of the court is to determine if the
parties shared a common intention. This is an objective inquiry. Evidence of
one party’s subjective intention is not sufficient: UBS (ONCA), at para.
47.
[45]          
The plaintiff must show on the totality of the
evidence that the parties had a common intention to create an obligation on the
part of the defendant to be responsible for property damage caused by their
clients. This evidence will include the testimony of both the plaintiff and the
representatives of the defendant as to what they understood the terms of the
agreement to be and whether their conduct was consistent with a common
intention or not. The weight of the testimonial evidence will also be assessed in
light of all of the other evidence.
[46]          
The jurisprudence on rectification provides a
helpful analysis here because “[r]ectification is predicated on the existence
of a prior oral contract whose terms are definite and ascertainable”: Performance
Industries Ltd. v. Sylvan Lake Golf & Tennis Club Ltd., 2002 SCC 19,
[2002] 1 S.C.R. 678, at para. 31.
[47]          
 In McLean v. McLean, 2013 ONCA 788, 118
O.R. (3d) 216, leave to appeal refused, [2014] S.C.C.A. No. 76, where there was
a claim for rectification, Weiler J.A. speaks to the test for rectification
which is based on finding an objectively manifested common intention. The
requirement for finding a common intention in a claim for oral contract as we
have here, is the same requirement for finding a common intention in a claim
for rectification, simply because a claim in rectification requires the finding
of a prior existing oral contract.
[48]          
A party may manifest an intention through their
actions. McLean, at para. 59, citing
Chartbrook Ltd. v. Persimmon Homes Ltd., [2009] UKHL 38, [2009] 1 A.C. 1101 (H.L.).
[49]          
The plaintiff claims that there was an oral
contract fixing responsibility for tenant-caused property damage. I will deal
first with intention.
[50]          
Whether there was a meeting of the minds of the
two parties is partly based on the reliability and credibility of the witness
testimony. Thus, the credibility and reliability of Mr. Shane and the OAHS
witnesses is relevant to the finding of whether the parties shared a common
intention.
[51]          
I will first assess the evidence of each OAHS
witness.
[52]          
In this case, the four witnesses recalled their
own various telephone calls which took place three to four years ago. None of
the witnesses relied on any notes taken at the time of these calls.
[53]          
Ms. Huneault was a confident witness,
identifying when she had clear recollections and other times when she could not
recall clearly. For example, Ms. Huneault clearly recalled that Mr. Shane
specifically addressed issues related to needle bins, cleanliness and broken
locks on doors.
[54]          
I am satisfied that Ms. Huneault’s discussions
with Mr. Shane were informed by statements from management on occasion that
there were not sufficient funds in the budget, and/or the circumstances of who
or what caused the damage was relevant to the Director’s decision. Ms. Huneault
was consistent in her evidence about the limits of what she knew. She knew that
property damage claims were not guaranteed, and I am satisfied that she passed
this information on to Mr. Shane.
[55]          
Ms. Deschatelets was clear when she testified
that she did not know all of the factors considered by management when a
property claim was presented. I am satisfied that she had limited knowledge of
what conditions were placed on property claims and that therefore she could not
and did not make any promises to Mr. Shane. I accept that Ms. Deschatelets
encouraged Mr. Shane to collect the best information in the form of quotes or
invoices so she could present his claim to management, and that was the best
she could do.
[56]          
Ms. McLeod was not part of the plaintiff’s
initial discussions with the agency. However, her evidence was consistent with
Ms. Huneault’s, that as a Case Manager, she was not part of any decision making
with respect to property claims. I accept Ms. McLeod’s evidence which was also
consistent with that of Ms. Huneault’s and Ms. Deschatelets, that the only
guarantee from OAHS to the landlord was with respect to the direct payment of
rent, there was no guarantee from the agency for coverage of property damage.
[57]          
Mr. Farr dealt directly with Mr. Shane but not
in the initial dealings. However, I am satisfied that he reliably recollected
the agency policy and his own communications with landlords relating to claims
for property damage. He was clear that he had no idea what was in the budget
for claims, and that he did not control the process for claims. In this respect
his evidence is consistent with the other witnesses. I accept his evidence that
he understood that property claims were subject to certain conditions and that
the case managers and supervisors were not part of the decision-making process.
They advocated on behalf of the landlord to obtain reimbursement for tenant
caused property damage. Mr. Farr no longer works for OAHS and there was no
motivation for him to mislead the court or fabricate his evidence.
[58]          
The testimony of the OAHS representatives was
clear and consistent and was not impeached in any way on cross-examination on
what they knew or what they conveyed to the plaintiff. Their recollections were
not challenged, and they had no motivation to lie or fabricate evidence. They
gave their evidence in a straightforward manner. There was internal and
external consistency in their evidence. It would make no sense for any of them
to make the alleged promise since each one of them testified that they were not
exactly sure what factors were considered by the Director when claims were
made. The OAHS representatives testified that they “advocated” on behalf of the
landlords who suffered property damage, a sign that they knew and conveyed that
there was no guarantee of reimbursement. Only one of the witnesses continues to
be an employee of OAHS.
[59]          
I will now turn to Mr. Shane’s evidence.
[60]          
Mr. Shane was vague in his recollection of
exactly what was said or promised by OAHS representatives regarding the alleged
promise. He did not link any specific statement or words to any specific
individual. He contradicted himself on whether the promise by OAHS was to cover
all damages to the unit or damages deliberately caused by the tenant. His rationale
for insisting on such coverage was based on his experience with similarly
situated tenants and his expectation that there was a greater risk involved.
When challenged on cross-examination about statements made by OAHS
representatives setting out the specific conditions under which OAHS would
reimburse property damage claims, Mr. Shane replied more than once: “Why would
I accept that?” He did not go on to explain why some risks were more tolerable
than others. For instance, Mr. Shane did not explain why he was comfortable
with the risk associated with carrying no property insurance on any of his
residential rental units.
[61]          
Mr. Shane could not explain why, in his many
email communications with OAHS on the very issue of claims for property damage
prior to the fire in the S unit, he never once referred to a promise by OAHS to
reimburse him for property claims or his understanding of an agreement between
the parties that OAHS would be responsible for any property damage.
[62]          
Mr. Shane’s evidence that a promise was made by
one or more OAHS employees in phone calls is simply not credible. Where his
evidence differs from the evidence of the four OAHS representatives, I prefer
the consistent and more logical evidence of the OASH representatives. Each OAHS
representative denied ever making a promise to Mr. Shane regarding
reimbursement for all property damage. Each one of them had experience in
telling Mr. Shane that his claims would only be considered on a case-by-case
basis under certain circumstances and that the Director retained discretion.
They believed that Mr. Shane understood that OAHS retained discretion to make
decisions on damage claims.
[63]          
I turn now to the plaintiff’s position that the
past practice of OAHS is consistent with the plaintiff’s version of the
agreement. The various emails show that neither the OAHS representatives nor
Mr. Shane made any reference to any promise or guarantee to pay. Mr. Shane said
this agreement was implied. OAHS had a clear pattern of carefully considering
the circumstances of the damage, requiring proof that the tenant deliberately
caused the damage and refusing certain items on claims.
[64]          
OAHS witnesses explained how they would advocate
on behalf of landlords, in service of their clients’ interests. They conveyed
this message to Mr. Shane. Their conduct clearly shows that the OAHS
representatives with whom Mr. Shane regularly interacted had neither
decision-making authority nor even the ability to clearly define the
circumstances under which a claim would be successful. The practice, with which
Mr. Shane was familiar, is not consistent with an agreement made by OAHS
representatives that all tenant caused property damage would be reimbursed.
[65]          
I considered the evidence from the two other
landlords. There is no evidence that the circumstances and/or agreements
between OAHS and the other landlords informed Mr. Shane at the time he entered
into his agreement with OAHS initially or when he rented to the S family.
[66]          
The other landlord witnesses had experiences
that are clearly distinguishable from Mr. Shane’s experience. Mr. Fareedun
“supplied” units to OAHS pursuant to the RUSA that clearly spelled out the
respective responsibilities of the parties for property damage. Mr. Fareedun’s
experience when he did experience significant property damage was to make his
first claim to his insurer and look to OAHS for the deductible.  This approach
was consistent with the RUSA and not helpful to Mr. Shane’s claim.
[67]          
Mr. Levesque’s experience was different as well.
With respect to one claim for property damage, OAHS alerted the landlord that
reimbursement was conditional upon the unit remaining available for an OAHS
client.  Mrs. Levesque, who had not been a party to calls with OAHS, testified
that she had not been aware of this pre-condition.
[68]          
However, there are similarities between Mr.
Shane’s and Mr. Levesque’s experience. These similarities do not assist Mr.
Shane in demonstrating that OAHS made a promise to cover property damage. The
evidence shows that OAHS retained and exercised a discretion on when, how and
in what circumstances, they would reimburse for property damage. The evidence
is consistent with OAHS’s position that it said it would and it did consider
claims on a case-by-case basis.
[69]          
There is no evidence on which an objective,
reasonable bystander could conclude that in all the circumstances, that the
parties intended to contract, or shared a common intention with respect to
responsibility for property damage: Downey, at para. 90, citing UBS
(ONCA), at para. 47.
[70]          
Mr. Shane’s subjective view that the risk of
renting to this cohort, without an agreement from OAHS was too high, is not
evidence of a meeting of the minds or a common intention of a clear term
imposing responsibility.
[71]          
When looking at the past conduct of the parties,
there is no manifestation in either the words or actions of OAHS of an
intention to cover all property damage. OAHS considered Mr. Shane’s claims for
minor property damage in certain circumstances, always retaining the discretion
to cover a claim if the damage was caused deliberately by the tenant, if budget
allowed and if they were satisfied that the unit would remain accessible to
OAHS clients. Mr. Shane may have wanted greater reassurance than this, but
there is no record or agreement that he asked for or received more. The various
messages that were relayed by OAHS representatives, that claims would be dealt
with on a case-by-case basis, that budget was a factor, and OAHS required that
damaged units remain available for OAHS clients, belie that a promise was made
by OAHS to take responsibility for all damage caused by tenants. The messages
demonstrated that the OAHS representatives, with whom Mr. Shane communicated,
did not clearly or consistently convey when or if there would be reimbursement
for damage claims. In addition, the agency representatives clearly communicated
to Mr. Shane that it had no motivation or interest in covering property damage
claims if the unit was no longer going to be made available for OAHS clients.
[72]          
The terms of an alleged oral contract must be
clear. I am satisfied that there was no meeting of the minds with the common
intention of creating a clear and binding term setting out OAHS’ responsibility
for property damage caused by their clients. See Ronen Benin v. DrawSplash
Inc., 2014 ONSC 2659, at paras. 36-37.
[73]          
I agree with counsel for the plaintiff when he
said that none of the OAHS witnesses had a complete understanding of what
senior management took into account when claims were considered on a
case-by-case basis. It follows that they could not have conveyed a clear
promise of anything with respect to responsibility for property damage nor
would they have been motivated or inclined to do so. The best they could say,
when challenged, was that they understood that claims would be considered on a
case-by-case basis.
[74]          
Considering all of the evidence, I am not
persuaded that Mr. Shane received a promise by anyone from OAHS to cover
property damage either caused by the tenants or in the units of the OAHS units.
As an experienced businessperson and property owner, Mr. Shane made the
decision to rent to OAHS clients, notwithstanding the higher risk of property
damage, in return for the rent guarantee and the support in place for the
tenants. He availed himself of the opportunity to claim reimbursement for
damage deliberately caused by the tenants. He is not credible when he says that
he had reason to assume that OAHS was his insurer.
[75]          
In effect, I conclude from the evidence of the
phone conversations, the past practice of the parties in relation to claims and
the rest of the evidence, that Mr. Shane was prepared to accept the risks posed
by this tenant group without any agreement on the part of OAHS to reimburse him
for property damage.
[76]          
The claim in contract fails.
[77]          
The plaintiff claims that OAHS had a duty of
care towards him to ensure that participants were equipped to live
independently, were aware of safe cooking practices and would at least
understand the importance of contacting authorities in a timely way in the
event of a fire. The claim in negligence was clearly a secondary or alternative
claim to the main claim of an oral contract. Very little emphasis was made on
this issue either in evidence or in argument.
[78]          
The evidence showed that Mr. Shane approved each
tenant from OAHS. He specifically tried to avoid tenants with certain
characteristics. In addition, Mr. Shane personally or his property managers/contractors
ensured that the fire and smoke alarms in each unit worked and that the tenants
knew of the location of the fire extinguishers. Mr. Shane also specifically
approved the S family as tenants after meeting them. He noted that they did not
have cell phones. He addressed this issue with OAHS.  He was aware of their
circumstances and recent experience.
[79]          
OASH representatives made frequent visits or
attempts to visit the S family once they moved into the unit. Not all attempts
were successful.
[80]          
The only evidence about the fire is the Fire
Marshall’s report. There was no direct evidence from the Fire Marshall or
anyone who had knowledge of the circumstances of the fire. The author of the
report simply noted on the form that the fire was “not intentional”.
[81]          
There was scant evidence in support of an
alleged scope of the duty of care. There was no evidence about the cooking
skills or lack of such skills of members of the S family or that their personal
circumstances contributed in any way to the kitchen fire. There is no evidence
of a breach of a duty of care owed by OAHS to the plaintiff. The claim in
negligence is not made out on the evidence.
[82]          
Mr. Shane claims damages for losses occasioned
by the fire including cost of repair of the units and the loss of rental
income. OAHS refused to make payment in respect of this claim.
[83]          
In view of the finding that the defendant bears
no liability for losses from fire, there is no award for damages. Usually, the
court would assess damages in any event. However, a full assessment is not
possible. No documentary evidence was before the court on the issue of damages.
[84]          
Mr. Shane bought the house for $171,000 in December
2021. The Fire Marshall estimated the damage to the house at $153,000. Mr.
Shane has modified his claim in this action over time. It was not clear at the
time of trial what the exact claim was. On the eve of trial, sales receipts and
text messages supporting labour costs were produced to the defendant. They were
not admitted into evidence given the late delivery.
[85]          
The plaintiff’s evidence was that he, his wife,
his brother and two contractors have worked to repair the house. They did not
require or obtain a building permit. They did not retain a general contractor.
The did not obtain quotes for the work. Mr. Shane testified that he had spent
approximately one and half to two years of work on the house, and $72,000 in
materials. He also testified that he paid his contractors hourly pursuant to
text messages which outlined their hours of work, and that total labour expense
was $200,000. He testified that his net loss of rental income was approximately
$88,600. The upper unit, where the fire took place, has been rented since
September 2023 and the lower unit has been rented since November 2024. It is
impossible to assess the damage claim on the basis of this oral evidence.
[86]          
The claim for damages from the fire based on an
oral agreement that OAHS would be responsible for property damage caused by
their clients is dismissed. Similarly, the claim for damages based on
negligence of OAHS is dismissed.
[87]          
I have received the Bills of Costs from counsel.
If counsel cannot agree on costs, within 15 days, they may make brief written
submissions, two pages in length, making reference to any relevant offers.