[1]              
This was a hearing in writing to
fix the costs of a proceeding which was dismissed on consent with costs to be
agreed or fixed by the court. The
reason for dismissal was because the Workplace Safety and Insurance Appeals
Tribunal (WSIAT) determined that the plaintiff’s right of action
against these defendants had been taken away by legislation. I received submissions in writing.
[2]              
The plaintiff was a California
based actress starring in a movie, “The Perfect Girlfriend” which was filming in Ottawa, Ontario
in 2014. During filming, the plaintiff was apparently bitten in the face by a canine actor
and sustained what she alleged
to be a career threatening
injury. The Plaintiff commenced this action seeking more than $5 million in
damages in 2016 just before the expiry of the two year limitation period.1
[3]              
In their Statement of Defence, the Defendants pled that the action was barred by Ontario’s
Workplace Safety and Insurance Act (“WSIA” or “the Act”).2 The provincial scheme
for workers compensation benefits
(WCB) in force
in Ontario and established by the Act is complex.
[4]              
In those cases, the legislation
provides that workers covered by the insurance scheme do not have the right to
sue employers or other workers for workplace accidents.3 This result,
however, depends upon the status of the worker, the industry, the nature of the
employment relationship, and other factors. In
some cases where there is a cause of action against someone other than an employer
or worker covered
by the Act, the Act may not apply or the injured
person may have an election between benefits and litigation. In other cases, the right to sue is vested
in the employer or the Board.4
[5]              
The exclusive jurisdiction to
determine whether or not the Act applies, the right of action is taken
away and liability is limited is conferred on the Workplace
Safety and Insurance Appeals Tribunal (“WSIAT”). The legislation also provides that a WSIAT decision is final, not subject to appeal and may not be reviewed by any
court. It follows that whenever there
is litigation concerning a work place accident and it may be barred in whole or
in part, it is in the interest of both parties and the administration of
justice to obtain a WSIAT ruling as soon as possible.
[6]              
Despite the pleading that the
action was precluded by statute, all of the normal pre-trial steps in the litigation were concluded before
the Defendants brought
an Application to WSIAT to determine the question and stay the proceedings. For example, a Motion for security for costs was argued in July of 2017. Thereafter discoveries took place in the fall of 2018. Mediation
took place in March of 2020. The Plaintiff set the action
down for trial in October
of 2021. By that point the
litigation had continued for 5 years.
[7]              
It was not until Trial Management
Court (“TMC”) on May 10, 2022 that the Defendants advised the Court they would be commencing a WSIAT Application. It was not until October of 2022 that the Application was
launched.
[8]              
The Tribunal held a two day
hearing in late 2023 and gave a decision in March of 2024.5 At that
time the Tribunal held that the right of action of the Plaintiff to sue the
Defendants had been “taken away by the Act.”
It ruled that the Plaintiff was a worker who could pursue benefits under the Act but could not sue
these defendants.
[9]              
A subsequent request for
reconsideration was denied. That
decision was conveyed to the parties by the Chair of the Tribunal on September
13, 2024.
[10]          
Subsequently, on September 25, 2024 at Trial Management Court, I was advised by Mr. Santini the parties consented to an
Order dismissing the action with costs to be agreed upon or fixed by the Court. I signed that Order.
[11]          
The parties were unable
to agree on costs and I have now received
written submissions.
[12]          
It is the position of the
Defendants that “this action should never have been commenced” and they submit they should be entitled to substantial indemnity costs fixed at $104,107.10.6 The Defendants
submit that there had been a determination made by a WSIB adjudicator about
entitlement to benefits upon receipt of the employer’s accident report in 2014. They argue that this was known or should
have been known to the plaintiff with the application of simple due diligence.
[13]          
It seems the Plaintiff did not make a claim for benefits
but had she done so, she would have
qualified and it would have been apparent
the action was barred by the legislation. The Defendants also
state that the delay in bringing the Application was due to the Plaintiff’s
failure to produce the WSIB file although she had undertaken to do so at
discoveries. The Defendants took the
position at the May 10, 2022 TMC
they required the answer to that undertaking before launching its
WSIAT Application. They state that
they launched the Application as soon as they obtained the disclosure.
[14]          
For her part, the Plaintiff argues
that only a modest costs award
is appropriate because the
Defendants delayed in bringing the Application. The parties had completed all of the steps in the
litigation including production, discoveries and mediation and the Plaintiff
had set the action down for trial before the Defendants
brought the WSIAT Application. The Plaintiff argues that the production of the
WSIB file was not necessary and discoveries were not necessary for the
Defendants to proceed before the Tribunal. Furthermore, it was not self evident
that WSIAT would rule against the Plaintiff. She did not believe herself to be an
employee or a “worker” within the meaning of the legislation because her
services as an actress were provided through her personal services corporation in California. In addition to negligence, the action was advanced pursuant
to the Occupier’s Liability Act7 and the Dog
Owner’s Liability Act8. There was
a two day contested WSIAT hearing.
[15]                
The Plaintiff refers the Court to the decision
in Boyd v. Taj Mahal
Stables Inc.9 The facts are
very similar. Justice
Ray at paragraph 11 observed
that had the defendants proceeded
promptly before the WSIAT as anticipated in the statement of defence, considerable time and expense
would have been avoided.
He rejected the submission that they had to wait until discovery
observing that it was always in the employer
defendant’s power to produce proof that WSIB premiums were paid
and insurance in place. He concluded there were no special circumstances to deny the defendants
[16]            
This decision was followed in Olesiuk
v. Hilltop Water Service.10 I would note that in both of those cases, however, it
appears the employer denied the plaintiff was an employee. In the case at bar, by contrast the
Defendants always pleaded that the Plaintiff was an employee. It remains the case, however, that the
Defendant NB Thrilling Films 4 Inc. had filed a report with the WSIB, had access to the particulars of its own insurance coverage and should not have had to wait for production of the file by
the Plaintiff in order to advance the WSIAT Application.
[17]          
It seems to me that if pursuing this action knowing
it might turn out to be precluded
by the legislation is
“reprehensible”11, it is equally reprehensible to run up all of the
costs necessary to ready the action for trial before bringing the WSIAT
Application. The Defendants pleaded the statute in defence and could
have brought the WSIAT application at any time. While I agree
that as in Boyd, the resulting wasted costs are a factor to be
considered, I would not penalize the Defendants greatly because the
responsibility to clarify if the action is statute barred is shared by both parties.
Section 31 (1) of the Act provides
that “a party to an action or an insurer
from whom statutory accident
benefits are claimed under section 268 of the Insurance Act may apply to
the Appeals Tribunal” to determine the question. It was open to either
the Plaintiff or the Defendants to bring the Application at any
time. This partially, if not
entirely, blunts the complaint about delay and wasted costs.
[18]          
I
agree with the Plaintiff that costs of the WSIAT hearing itself are not recoverable as costs
of the action. The Tribunal does not award costs and the Court should not do an
end run around the legislative scheme by awarding those costs as costs of the
action.
[19]          
There was a Motion
for security for costs. The Defendants were presumptively entitled
to a security for costs order because the Plaintiff was not resident in
Ontario. The motion was not granted because the Plaintiff was able to satisfy
the judge that there was adverse costs insurance in place. The policy stood in place of security but
the Defendants continued with the motion. Justice Hackland indicated he would award
costs to the Plaintiff if the Plaintiff requested them (which she did not).
There was no suggestion in that endorsement that the Defendants were entitled to
costs. In light of that Endorsement,
Justice Hackland effectively dealt with the costs of the motion and did not reserve them to the trial judge. The Defendants are not entitled
to recover costs of the unsuccessful Motion as costs
of the action.
[20]          
In conclusion, the Defendants are entitled to costs of the action
on a partial indemnity scale and not on a higher scale. I would remove the costs associated with
the WSIAT hearing and the
[21]          
The costs outline discloses
that the actual costs incurred
by the Defendants (inclusive of
[22]          
For the foregoing reasons,
costs payable by the Plaintiff to the Defendants are fixed at