[1]              
This case is primarily about whether an assessor, appointed pursuant to
the Substitute Decisions Act, 1992, S.O. 1992, c. 30 to conduct an
assessment of an individual’s capacity to manage their own financial affairs,
must provide disclosure of materials collected and reviewed prior to the
assessment. It is also about whether the assessor and the Consent and Capacity
Board (the “Board”) considered the correct factors relevant to the management
of property.
[2]              
The Appellant, Daniel Komsky (the "Appellant") seeks to appeal
the Board’s August 20, 2024, decision (the "Decision") finding him
incapable of managing his property. The Board made the Decision on that date to
uphold the prior finding of incapacity made by designated Capacity Assessor,
Akiko Okamoto (the "Respondent") on March 1, 2024.
[3]              
The Appellant also alleges that his right to procedural fairness was
breached, and on these grounds the Board’s finding of incapacity to manage
property should be quashed.
[4]              
Despite the passionate and able arguments of the Appellant’s counsel, for
the reasons that follow I dismiss the appeal.
[5]              
Before turning to the issues, I set out the background facts.
[6]              
The Appellant is a 69-year-old man who currently resides at Rekai
Wellesley Central Place which is a long-term care home located in Toronto. He
has resided there since 2015. Prior to that, the Appellant resided in another
long-term care home, the Trilogy Long Term Care Residence located in Toronto,
beginning in or around 2008.
[7]              
On April 27, 2008, the Appellant was found in an unresponsive state
while in an alcohol rehabilitation program at the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health ("CAMH"). He had suffered a large subdural hematoma and
anoxic brain injury. The Appellant has also suffered from a long history of
documented alcohol abuse.
[8]              
His sister and her husband had a power of attorney but revoked it in
2012. This led to concerns by a Geriatric Addictions Specialist with the
Community Outreach Programs in Addictions (the “GAS”) that he might be
vulnerable to financial exploitation on account of his memory deficits due to
chronic subdural hematoma and alcoholism.
[9]              
On March 15, 2012, Ms. Marilyn White-Campbell, a Geriatric Addictions
Specialist with GAS, requested that the Appellant undergo a capacity
assessment, for the purpose of determining whether the Public Guardian and
Trustee (the "PGT") should be appointed as the Appellant's statutory
guardian of property. Ms. White-Campbell expressed concerns about the Appellant's
ability to manage his finances and was worried that he was being financially
exploited by his sister and brother-in-law due to his cognitive deficits.
[10]          
On May 3, 2012, registered capacity assessor Tony Andrew Cheung
("Mr. Cheung") met with the Appellant and found that the Appellant
was incapable of managing his property.
[11]          
The PGT subsequently assumed statutory guardianship of the Appellant's
property and has been his guardian of property since the 2012 finding of
incapacity.
[12]          
The Appellant receives $300 in “PIN” money from the PGT and $30 per week
in spending money, while all other aspects of his property management including
payment of bills have been handled directly by the PGT since 2012.
[13]          
The Appellant contacted the Respondent on December 19, 2023, on his own
accord, requesting a capacity assessment for himself, seeking to terminate the
PGT’s statutory guardianship pursuant to s. 20(1)(4)(i) of the Substitute Decisions Act.
[14]          
The Respondent met with the Appellant on February 24, 2024, and found
that the Appellant remained incapable of managing his property.
[15]          
In her assessment, the Respondent found the following with respect to the
Appellant: (a) He had difficulty regulating his emotions; (b) He lacked the minimal
skills required to understand and manage decision making demands of his
financial circumstances; (c) He was unable to understand basic financial
documents or manipulate numbers accurately; (d) He lacked organization and
problem solving skills and reasoning capacity; (e) He lacked insight into how
his cognitive difficulties affect his financial decision making; (f) He was unable
to realistically appraise risk and outcomes of a decision or lack of decision;
and (g) He was unable to implement strategies to compensate for cognitive
deficits or seek assistance for matters beyond his capability.
[16]          
On July 18, 2024, the Appellant appealed the assessor’s finding to the Board
pursuant to s. 20.2 of the Substitute Decisions Act.
[17]          
Pursuant to s. 20.2(5), the Board was entitled to confirm the finding of
incapacity, or it could determine that the person is capable and substitute its
own decision for that of the assessor.
[18]          
On August 13, 2024, a hearing (the “Hearing”) convened before the
Presiding Member, Thomas Merrifield. The Board heard oral evidence from both the
Appellant and the Respondent, and it considered seven exhibits, including both
the 2012 and 2024 capacity assessments, the Wellesley Central Place Cumulative
Patient Profile, the Appellant's PGT Account Statement, and PGT Consolidated
Portfolio Report.
[19]          
In addition, the Respondent testified and identified three main concerns
with respect to the Appellant’s ability to appreciate the reasonably foreseeable
consequences of decisions relating to the management of his property: 1) his
lack of emotional regulation; 2) his deficient organizational and
problem-solving skills; and 3) his lack of appreciation of his own limitations.
[20]          
In the Respondent’s view, the above three concerns, in conjunction with the
Appellant's severe short-term memory deficiencies, rendered him unable to apply
relevant information to his circumstances and weigh the risks and benefits of
decisions regarding the management of his property.
[21]          
The Board upheld the Certificate of Incapacity issued by the Respondent on
March 1, 2024.
[22]          
It found that at the time of the assessment on February 24, 2024, the
Appellant lacked the ability to appreciate the reasonably foreseeable
consequences of a decision or lack of decision, in relation to the management
of his property, and was therefore incapable of managing his property. The
Board also found that the incapacity continued to exist at the time of the
Hearing.
[23]          
Pursuant to s. 80 of the Healthcare Consent Act, 1996, S.O. 1996,
c. 2, Sched. A, a party that appeared before the Consent and Capacity Board has
a statutory right of appeal to the Superior Court of Justice from any of the
Board's decisions on questions of law or fact or both.
[24]          
As set out in Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v.
Vavilov, 2019 SCC 65, [2019] 4 S.C.R. 653, at para. 23:
[25]          
Both parties agree that on issues of law, the correctness standard means
that a reviewing court need not show deference to the reasoning process of the
lower court or tribunal and must undertake its own analysis of whether the
decision was legally correct: Dunsmuir v. New Brunswick, 2008 SCC 9,
[2008] 1 S.C.R. 190; H.L. v. Canada (Attorney General), 2005 SCC 25,
[2005] 1 S.C.R. 401; and S.S. v. Mottaghian, 2021 ONSC 137 (CanLII) at
para 7-13.
[26]          
When an appellant raises a question of mixed fact and law, where a
discrete question of law can be extricated from the question of mixed fact and
law, the correctness standard will apply to the question of law; however, where
a discrete question of law cannot be extricated from the factual
considerations, the higher standard of “palpable and overriding error” will
apply: Mottaghian, at para. 11.
[27]          
“Palpable” means an error that is obvious. “Overriding” means an error
that goes to the very core of the outcome of the case. An error is palpable if
it is plainly seen and if all the evidence need not be reconsidered in order to
identify it, and an error is overriding if it has affected the result: Hydro-Quebec
v. Matta, 2020 SCC 37, [2020] 3 S.C.R. 595, at para. 33.
[28]          
Issues of procedural fairness are a question of law reviewable on the
standard of correctness. What the reviewing court must decide is whether there
was an appropriate level of procedural fairness having regard to the principles
established in Baker v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration),
1999 CanLII 699 (SCC), [1999] 2 S.C.R. 817; JS v. Gelber, 2022 ONSC 2088, at para. 24.
[29]          
In Baker v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration),
without being exhaustive, the Supreme Court of Canada listed relevant factors
to determine what the doctrine of procedural fairness requires in any
particular case. These include the following: (a) the nature of the decision;
(b) the significance of the decision to the party affected; ( c) the statutory
scheme under which the decision is made, including the role the decision plays
under that scheme; (d) the reasonable or legitimate expectation of the party
challenging the decision; and (e) the procedure of the board and its autonomy
to make its own procedure. When considering whether there is procedural
fairness, the process leading up to the administrative tribunal's decision may
also be considered: Irwin v. Alberta Veterinary Medical Association,
2015 ABCA 396, 609 A.R. 299.
[30]          
Also relevant to the doctrine of procedural fairness are the principles
of natural justice. These are flexible and also contextual depending on the
particular circumstances, but the minimum requirements are the following: (a) adequate
notice of what is to be determined and the consequences; (b) an opportunity to
make representations; and (c) an unbiased tribunal: Zettel v. University of
Toronto Mississauga Students’ Union, 2018 ONSC 1240.
[31]          
The assessment by the Respondent was part of the process leading to the
Board’s decision.
[32]          
The Appellant says he was denied procedural fairness because prior to
the assessment by the Respondent, he was not provided with the previous 2012 assessment
and certain records including financial statements from the PGT, his health
records and other information.
[33]          
He is essentially raising the argument that there was an obligation on
the assessor to provide disclosure.
[34]          
The issue is, taking into account the relevant factors set out above in Baker
v. Canada, was there an appropriate level of procedural fairness given that
the Appellant was not provided with this information prior to the assessment.
[35]          
Under s. 6 of the Substitute Decisions Act:
[36]          
As set out in Starson v. Swayze, 2003 SCC 31, [2003] 1 S.C.R.
722, at para. 78, the test for capacity involves considering:
[37]          
Section 20.2 of the Substitute Decisions Act also provides that a
person who has been found incapable of managing his or her property may apply
to the Board for review. There is also an appeal from the review decision of
the Board to the court pursuant to s. 80 of the Health Care Consent Act.
[38]          
The fact that there is a further process, after the assessor’s
determination whereby the assessor’s decision can be challenged is relevant. In
Baker, the court held that there should be greater procedural protection
when there is no appeal procedure and or where the decision is determinative of
the issue: Baker, at para. 24. This is not the case here.
[39]          
The Substitute Decisions Act also specifies its own
procedural safeguards to ensure a capacity assessment is carried out fairly in
ss. 16 to 78, namely surrounding how the request to be assessed is received,
the right to refuse, and the information the assessor must explain to the
person being assessed: HM (Re), 2021 CanLII 92497.
[40]          
The Substitute Decisions Act does not say that the assessor must
provide all the information that he or she gathers to the individual. The
Appellant argues that this case is different than other cases because here, the
Appellant was already subject to a guardianship order such that he did not have
access to his financial records for some time, which would not be the case
where a capacity assessment is de novo. However, the Substitute
Decisions Act has provisions that contemplate a person who is already
subject to a guardianship order seeking to set aside that guardianship by
obtaining another assessment. The Act does not specify in these circumstances
that any disclosure of financial records or other information is required prior
to the assessment.
[41]          
The Respondent referenced the Guidelines for Conducting Assessments of
Capacity, Part III.1 (Referral Information and Informant Interview.) These
Guidelines set out that it is the job of the capacity assessor to record,
verify, organize and summarize the relevant information gathered from the
person being assessed, as well as from family, professional caregivers or
multi-disciplinary consultants and review of objective records. The assessor
then evaluates this wealth of multidimensional information within the appropriate
legal framework to arrive at an opinion about mental capacity.
[42]          
The Guidelines state:
[43]          
The Appellant raised an issue as to how the Respondent could place these
Guidelines before the court at this appeal. This is proper because the
Guidelines are established by the Attorney General and prescribed by Regulation
under the Substitute Decisions Act. An assessor must comply with them
pursuant to s. 3 of O. Reg. 460/05 Capacity Assessment.
[44]          
Accordingly, the purpose of collecting the information pursuant to the Substitute
Decisions Act was not to disclose same to the Appellant prior to the
Capacity Assessment. The material was collected to assist the Respondent to
assist her with her understanding and to cross-reference the material to her
own observations. It was also collected to present same to the Appellant during
the assessment itself, to determine if he was capable of reviewing,
understanding and/or analyzing the information contained therein.
[45]          
There is no caselaw or authority for the proposition that an assessor
must provide disclosure of records collected in advance. A determination that
this is required would have far reaching consequences in the field.
[46]          
The Appellant references by analogy the obligation on a physician to
provide a patient with sufficient information about the nature of proposed
medical treatment, expected benefits and material risks and side effects, in
the context of the capacity to consent to medical treatment: Starson v. Swayze,
cited in S.S. v. Mottaghian.
[47]          
The reason why a patient must be given information about proposed
medical treatment is so that the person can make an informed decision. This is
not entirely comparable to a person undergoing an assessment of their capacity
to manage their property because there is no decision that such person is being
asked to make about their financial circumstances at that time.
[48]          
Even in cases involving the capacity to consent to medical treatment,
there is no requirement that assessors provide disclosure to the party being
assessed of the nature sought here. And in all of these cases there is an issue
or concern as to capacity at the outset which is why the assessment is being
done.
[49]          
Thus, the legislature, in setting out the legislative scheme, knew that
assessments of parties would be done by a qualified assessor where there were
concerns about the party’s capacity, and did not provide for any disclosure
obligation.
[50]          
Another relevant feature here is that the process set out in the Substitute
Decisions Act with respect to assessments does not resemble judicial
decision making. It is not an adversarial process at all. The more the process
provided by the legislation resembles judicial decision making, the more likely
it is that the procedural protections closer to the trial model will be
required: Baker, at para. 23.
[51]          
The nature of the decision was an assessment that the Appellant
requested.  He was seeking to become autonomous again. From his perspective,
the assessment was very important. As set out in Baker, at para. 25, the
more important the decision is to the individual and the greater the impact on
their life, the more stringent the procedural protections will need to be.
[52]          
The Appellant further argues that the level of participatory rights in
this case should also be influenced by the fact that the Appellant has certain
medical conditions. This made it more difficult for him to respond quickly to
questions about documents he had not seen in over 12 years, since the PGT had
been managing his affairs all that time.
[53]          
He relied upon JS v. Gelber for the proposition that sensitivity
to the mental status of a person needs to be taken into account in determining
the level of participatory rights or procedural fairness. However, this case
was not about the level of participatory rights at all and certainly did not
involve the kind of participatory rights that the Appellant seeks here. In
fact, this case did not involve any argument that an assessor or Board provide
disclosure to the party in question. What happened in this case is that the
Board did not hear the Appellant’s appeal because when the Appellant issued the
Notice of Appeal, he was no longer a patient, and so the Board interpreted s.
60 of the Substitute Decisions Act to preclude an appeal in those
circumstances. The Board argued that he was not deprived of any right of appeal
because he received a Form 33 which indicated that a patient who wishes to
challenge a Notice of Continuance should file a Form 18 and he could have done
that. Justice Koehnen was concerned that this was not necessarily intuitive to
a layperson, let alone a layperson that the respondent said was incapable.
[54]          
The Appellant did not have a legitimate expectation that the Respondent
would provide him with all the materials that she had collected in advance of
the assessment.
[55]          
The Appellant was aware that the Respondent was collecting information
and speaking to certain members of his medical care team, and he never
requested that she share that information with him. He gave her consent to do
so.
[56]          
With respect to the PGT financial documents, the assessor had asked the
Appellant on several occasions to obtain his account statement from the PGT.
When she followed up, he did not have a clear explanation as to why he did not
have it, but on the day of the hearing he said he tried calling the PGT who
hung up on him. His relationship with the PGT is somewhat strained.
[57]          
Then, because he had not obtained these documents from the PGT, the Respondent
gave them to him for his review. Each time she encouraged him to take as much
time as he needed to review it. After about five minutes of the Appellant
reviewing the said statement, he said he was not sure what to make of it.
[58]          
She explained the document line by line to him, going to the date and
then even explained the figures in brackets were funds coming out of his
account and that figures not in brackets were funds coming into his account.
She testified that she took the time to explain this because it was the first
time that he was reviewing this document. After this brief explanation, he
could identify what was coming in and going out of his account. He acknowledged
the entry that showed the $300 monthly PIN money and said that some of his
money was used to purchase beers and that the rest was disbursed into his
weekly allowance of $30.
[59]          
She followed this process with other documents as well.
[60]          
It is also relevant that the Respondent is a qualified assessor under
the regulations and she testified that in her view the time she gave him was
sufficient time for him to examine it, and he did so very carefully. She is an
expert and I accept her evidence on this point as did the Board.
[61]          
It is also relevant that the assessor chose the procedure based upon the
Substitute Decisions Act, using pre-populated forms and legislation that
did not require this disclosure.  In Baker, the court indicated that
while following statutory procedure is not determinative, important weight must
be given to the choice of procedure made by the assessor: at para. 27.
[62]          
Her assessment also indicates that because he did not remember the
assessment was occurring that day, she offered to reschedule the interview for
another day. However, he did not wish to do this, even in circumstances where
he knew he had not received the information collected by the Respondent. Again,
had he had a reasonable expectation that he should have received this material,
he could have accepted the offer to have the interview on another day.
[63]          
Apart from issues related to the failure of the Respondent to provide
this material to the Appellant in advance, the Appellant has not raised any
other issues as to how the procedural safeguards were not met. The capacity
assessment was not forced on him. He requested it and provided consent for the
Respondent to work with the Director of Clinical Services at Wellesley Rekai
Centre to assist in gathering health records and providing collateral
information prior to the assessment.
[64]          
Prior to performing the Capacity Assessment, the Respondent provided the
Appellant with “rights advice” pursuant to s. 78 of the Substitute Decisions
Act and advised that he may refuse the assessment at any time, which he
declined. The Appellant was also offered regular breaks during the Capacity
Assessment which he declined.
[65]          
The Appellant did not request, nor did he require any special
accommodations for the Capacity Assessment, such as to assist with his vision
and/or hearing. He did wear eyeglasses and appeared to have no issue reviewing
the documents presented to him by the Respondent during the course of the
Capacity Assessment.
[66]          
In my view, the Appellant was not deprived of procedural fairness
because the Respondent did not provide the information in advance. Balancing
all the criteria, procedural fairness did not require the disclosure of this
material in advance of the assessment.
[67]          
Further there was an appeal to the Board which took place six months
after the assessment. The record assembled by the Appellant contained all the
materials that were before the Assessor. The Appellant could have studied the
materials prior to the hearing before the Board, so that he could demonstrate
that he had the ability to understand the information in these documents and
that the failure to provide them to him in advance is what affected the outcome
of the assessment by the Respondent.
[68]          
He specifically raised the Respondent’s failure to provide him with the
documents in advance. The Board noted the Respondent’s testimony that the
Appellant had difficulty understanding financial documents without assistance
and explanation from her. He had difficulty adding up his monthly income, even
with the use of a calculator. He could not understand simple invoices that he
would likely encounter if he was handling his own finances. The Board, however,
noted and accepted the Appellant’s explanation that he had difficulty reviewing
and understanding some financial documents provided to him because he had no
recent experience with them as the PGT had been dealing with them.
[69]          
The Board also noted that the Appellant appeared to show improvement
from the findings of the 2012 assessment in the area of understanding
information in regard to his finances. The Board further noted that although he
struggled, he was able, with prompting from his counsel, to highlight the main
sources of his income and primary expenses.
[70]          
At least in part because of the concerns raised by the Appellant, the
Board said it had difficulty accepting that there was clear and compelling
evidence that the Appellant lacked the cognitive ability to satisfy the first
branch of the test. It made no finding that the Appellant was unable to
understand the information relevant to making a decision.
[71]          
Rather, its finding of incapacity was based upon the second branch of
the test, that the Appellant did not have the ability to appreciate the reasonably
foreseeable consequences of a decision or lack of decision.
[72]          
To the extent that there had been any unfairness in the process utilized
by the Respondent, the appeal before the Board has made that issue moot since
it did not rely upon the Respondent’s conclusion with respect to the
Appellant’s ability to understand the financial information that he complains
he should have been shown prior to the assessment. It also did not conclude
that the did not have the ability to understand this information.
[73]          
Therefore, the Respondent’s unfamiliarity with the documents, and the
impact he says this had on him, did not affect the outcome before the Board.
[74]          
The Board correctly considered both parts of the test and correctly
noted that the onus was on the assessor to prove on a balance of probabilities
that the Appellant lacked the capacity to manage his property. The Board also
correctly noted that under s. 2 of the Substitute Decisions Act, there
is a presumption that a person is capable of managing his or her property.
[75]          
The Appellant argues that it is not enough to simply set out the correct
test. If the Board set out the correct test but did not apply it correctly,
this is still an error of law. The Appellant cites the following principle set
out in Housen, at para. 27, citing Canada (Director for Investigation
and Research) v. Southam Inc., 1997 CanLII 385 (SCC), [1997] 1 S.C.R. 748, at para. 39:
[76]          
The Appellant argues that the Board made the following two legal errors
in its application of the test:
[77]          
I have already addressed the first issue under procedural fairness. In
short, there was no legal obligation on the Respondent to provide this
information in advance and the failure to do so did not constitute procedural unfairness.
[78]          
As noted, the primary reason why the Board concluded that the Appellant
did not have the capacity to manage his financial affairs was that he could not
appreciate the reasonably foreseeable consequences of a decision or lack of
decision, specifically in relation to the management of property because of: a)
his lack of emotional regulation; b) deficient organizational and
problem-solving skills; and c) lack of recognition of his own limitations, in
conjunction with his severe short term memory deficiencies.
[79]          
The Board noted the evidence that showed that when he was emotionally
escalated, the Appellant required a great deal of redirection to stay on topic.
The Director of Clinical Services at the long-term care facility where he
resided and a representative of the PGT (to whom he frequently made calls)
confirmed their similar experiences.
[80]          
He often requested more funds from the PGT and became emotionally
escalated when his request was delayed or refused. Nurses observed that when he
was emotional, he was under the influence of alcohol. He was unable to explain
how he spent his PIN money in general, but ultimately said that he spends it on
beer.
[81]          
The way he participated in the hearing also confirmed this. During the
hearing, he could not contain his emotions. He required significant redirection
when discussing a high phone bill. He interrupted on numerous occasions while
the Respondent was testifying and when his counsel was asking questions. It
took a great deal of redirection from his counsel and the Board before he
stopped interrupting.
[82]          
Although the Board referenced his lack of emotional regulation, it also correctly
stated that this would not by itself support a finding that he was unable to
appreciate the consequences of his financial decisions.
[83]          
I agree that this factor was a relevant factor because to properly
manage his financial affairs, and understand the reasonably foreseeable
consequences of financial decisions, he would have to be able to stay on topic
and not be distracted by his emotions when making such a decision.
[84]          
With respect to the deficiencies in his organizational skills, the Board
noted that the Appellant’s struggles date back many years. Prior to the 2012
assessment, a family member had been looking after his financial affairs. It is
only when someone with the Community Outreach in Addictions became involved was
it evident that a family member may have taken advantage of him. The Board
concluded that these incidents suggested that he did not recognize he was being
taken advantage of or he was unable to organize himself to address and resolve
issues.
[85]          
While the above incident was historical, the Board noted the same kind
of behaviour in the present. He had been very upset during the Capacity
Assessment by the amount of his phone bill “to the point where he was unable to
focus and required a lot of redirection. He was obsessed with his belief that a
resident who had previously lived in his room had somehow used his identity to
set up another account, and it was applied to his account.” Although he
reported that he knew this and it had been going on for years, he advised the
Respondent that he did not report this to the telephone company or the PGT. He
took no action despite his strong belief for many years. If his concerns were
valid, then he was failing to take steps to ensure that he was not being taken advantage
of financially by someone.
[86]          
The Board also noted that the Appellant had difficulty remembering the
appointment for the assessment. The assessor called him the day before the
assessment as a reminder, but he was surprised to hear it was happening when
she arrived at his residence the next day.
[87]          
Further, he had been unable to obtain the PGT statement despite
reminders which began six weeks before the assessment. He said he wrote down
the instructions because his memory was very bad. Ten days before the
assessment, when the assessor contacted him again, he simply advised he had
been unable to obtain them and gave no reason. She encouraged him to contact
the PGT and request them again. Then as noted, when he attended, he still did
not have them and claimed that the PGT hung up on him.
[88]          
While this may not appear to be his fault, the Respondent had been in
contact with him and was following up. He could have advised her in the first
place that he was having difficulty with the PGT and simply asked the Respondent
to provide him with the material. His failure to take this step does exhibit a
lack of problem-solving skills which are important for financial management.
[89]          
In my view, this was the most significant of the concerns noted by the
Board.
[90]          
The Appellant suffers from medical conditions, in particular an anoxic
brain injury, alcoholism and short-term memory deficiencies. However, he failed
to recognize that these medical conditions could impact his ability to manage
his financial affairs.
[91]          
During his assessment he insisted that there would be no issues with his
handling of his financial affairs. He brushed aside questions related to any
limitations he might have because of his medical condition. He kept referencing
his previous thirty-year career as a stock trader and insisted that this meant
he would not have to engage or consult with a financial advisor, but he could
not explain how registered retirement savings plans work. He failed to take
into account his medical issues that post-dated this career. Even though he had
left his financial affairs in the hands of others for at least 12 years, he
failed to demonstrate any awareness or insight into the fact that his cognitive
and mental abilities were not the same after his subdural hematoma.
[92]          
At the Board hearing, he continued to insist that his thirty-year career
as a stock trader meant he could manage on his own even though he could not
explain how RRSPs work. As well he failed to connect his subsequent medical
issues to his current ability to manage his financial affairs. The Board
concluded that his abilities were greatly diminished.
[93]          
When asked what he would do if he could manage his own affairs, he said
that he would liquidate his assets, put them in a bank account, and invest them
because of his past expertise. He denied the need to obtain any advice and
assistance from professionals.
[94]          
He could not appreciate the possibility of dissipating his assets if he
were to invest them on his own without assistance. When asked about his
investment plan, he simply said, “I can do it.” When asked whether he could
lose all his money, he simply said “it won’t happen.”
[95]          
The Board correctly concluded that his lack of insight meant that he
would be unlikely to seek assistance. In fact, he denied the need to do so.
[96]          
In my view, the Board took into account matters directly related to his
ability to manage his financial property and so did not err in its application
of the test.
[97]          
Here I accept the submission of the Respondent’s counsel that the
assessor and the Board are experts in their field and their conclusions about
what factors are relevant to the determination of whether the Appellant had the
ability to reasonably foresee the consequences of a decision or failure to make
a decision are entitled to deference. I see no basis to interfere with their
decisions.
[98]          
The Appellant’s argument regarding the Board’s palpable and overriding
error is the same as his argument in respect of the error of law.
[99]          
The Appellant argues that the Board made a palpable and overriding error
because of his position that the factors the assessor and the Board took into
account are unrelated to property.
[100]       I
have already addressed this above. In my view, the matters they took into
account were proper matters to consider in its assessment of this matter.
[101]       The
appeal is dismissed.