[1]              
This case is about a condominium unit (the
“Property”) owned by Mr. Qasem Mahmud, who died in June 2017 without a will. 
The main issue is whether Mr. Mahmud held the Property in trust for one of the
Respondents, the Arabic and Islamic Education Foundation of Ottawa (“Foundation”).
[2]              
The matter proceeded by way of Application. The
Applicant, Otessa May, filed an affidavit in her capacity as Estate Trustee for
the Estate of Qasem Mahmud and was cross-examined. The Respondents provided
evidence from two affiants, Taysir Alsousi (a personal respondent and member of
the Board of the Foundation) and Monzer Zimmo. Each was cross-examined.
[3]              
For the reasons that follow, the Application is
allowed. There is neither an express trust nor a purchase money resulting trust
in favour of the Foundation. Therefore, the Foundation does not have a
beneficial interest in the Property.
[4]              
On September 14, 1988, Mr. Mahmud signed a
declaration of trust, which states:
[5]              
The parties agree that Mr. Mahmud was not the
legal owner of the Property when he signed the declaration of trust. He
purchased the Property for $109,161 about two weeks later, on October 3, 1988. The
agreement of purchase and sale was not in evidence. The deed indicates that the
Property was transferred to Qasem Mahmud “in trust,” but without any reference
to the Foundation or its predecessor, the Islamic School of Ottawa (“School”)
[6]              
At no point did Mr. Mahmud sign a new
declaration of trust or transfer the title of the Property to the Foundation or
its predecessor, the School.
[7]              
When he purchased the Property in 1988, Mr.
Mahmud took out a mortgage. The mortgage was renewed in 1993 and fully
discharged in 2007. As I describe in more detail below, there is a dispute
between the parties as to who paid the mortgage.
[8]              
In 2007, the Islamic School of Ottawa changed
its name to the Arabic and Islamic Education Foundation of Ottawa. Other than
COVID-related interruptions, the Respondents state that the organization’s
activities and operations continued as before and were not affected by the name
change. The Applicant disagrees. She submits that there is no evidence the
Foundation continues to operate a school.
[9]              
Mr. Mahmud died in June 2017. The Respondents
have continued to occupy the Property since that time. Mr. Alsousi testified
that one of Mr. Mahmud’s children “walked in and decided to put the place [up]
for sale.”  In September 2017, Mr. Alsousi changed the locks on the door of the
Property.
[10]          
The Application raises the following issues:
[11]          
Neither party made arguments based on unjust enrichment.
[12]          
Four requirements must be satisfied before a court will find an express
trust:
[13]          
The Applicant submits that the trust fails on three fronts. First, the
conditions for the construction of a trust were not met because Mr. Mahmud did
not own the Property when he signed the declaration of trust. Second, because
the School ceased to exist in 2007, there is no certainty as to the object or
beneficiary of the trust. Third, the requisite formalities were not met at s. 9
of the Statute of Frauds, R.S.O. 1990, c. S.19, (the “Act”).
[14]          
The other aspects of the tests are not in dispute.
[15]          
Because the written declaration of trust was signed before Mr.
Mahmud had ownership of the Property, he was not legally
enabled to declare a trust in September 1988, when he signed the declaration. As
the Court of Appeal explained in Ruben, supra, at para. 58:
[16]          
The Respondents submit that Mr. Mahmud, as a
layperson, simply signed the declaration of trust when he was asked to do so by
the bank. He would not have known it would be insufficient to create a trust. Over
the years, Mr. Mahmud continued to sign and receive documents referring to the
Property as being “in trust.” The Respondents state that, through these
documents, Mr. Mahmud effectively declared himself to be a trustee.
[17]          
In support of this position, the Respondents
referred to documents including:
[18]          
The Respondents rely on Elliott Estate (Re),
2008 CanLII 63993 (ON SC), at para. 39, where the court held that a trust may
be constituted through a declaration of self as trustee and that it is not
necessary to use technical or legal terms to do so. It is sufficient that the
individual or organization demonstrate the intention to become a trustee.
[19]          
Importantly, a self-declaration alone is not
sufficient to establish an express trust. As the court also explained in Elliott,
supra all of the other requirements of an express trust must be met: see
para. 42.
[20]          
The important factual distinction between Elliott,
supra and the present case is that this matter involves land. As a result,
the formality requirements in the Act are engaged. Section 9 of the Act
requires that all declarations of trust of lands be proved by a writing signed
by the party who is by law enabled to declare such trust.
[21]          
I have considered the documents referred to by
the Respondents, many of which contain the words “in trust” or “trust.” At
least one of these documents is signed by Mr. Mahmud, who appears to identify
himself as a trustee.
[22]          
While these documents may be evidence of Mr.
Mahmud’s (undisputed) intention to hold the Property in trust, they do not
otherwise meet the requirements for establishing an express trust. This is because
they do not identify the beneficiary and they provide no certainty that the
Foundation or School is the object of the trust. Moreover, while many of the
documents refer to the Property, they do not clearly identify it as the subject
of the trust.
[23]          
In sum, the requirements for establishing an
express trust have not been met. There is no valid written declaration of
trust. While certain documents suggest that Mr. Mahmud intended to hold the
Property in trust, those documents do not satisfy the three certainties or
otherwise meet the test for establishing a trust.
[24]          
The Respondents’ alternative argument is that
there is a resulting trust in favour of the Foundation, based on its financial
contributions to the purchase of the Property.
[25]          
A purchase money trust is a type of gratuitous
transfer resulting trust, which arises when a person advances funds to
contribute to the purchase price of the property, but does not take legal title
to that property.  As the Supreme Court explained in Nishi v. Rascal
Trucking Ltd., 2013 SCC 33 (CanLII), [2013] 2 SCR 438, at para. 1:
[26]          
This presumption can be rebutted if the
recipient of the property proves, on a balance of probabilities, that the
person making the contribution (in this case, the Foundation) intended to make
a gift to the person taking title (in this case, Mr. Mahmud). The relevant time
for ascertaining intention is the time of the acquisition of the property, when
the funds were advanced: Andrade v. Andrade, 2016 ONCA 368 (CanLII) at
para. 63.
[27]          
According to the Applicant, the Respondents have
not met their onus of showing that they contributed to the purchase of the
Property at the time it was acquired. First, there is no evidence showing that
the Foundation contributed to the down payment of the Property when it was
purchased or that it assisted with the closing costs, legal fees, or any other
expenses related to the acquisition of the Property at the time it was
purchased. Second, any evidence about the Foundation’s contribution to the
Property is sporadic and insufficient. The bank statements are mainly addressed
to Mr. Mahmud. To the extent any mortgage payments were made, the Respondents
have not shown that these were made by the Foundation or the School (rather
than by Mr. Mahmud in his personal capacity). Finally, while the Respondents
undertook to provide information about their financial contribution, they have
failed to fully do so.
[28]          
The Respondents state that they have provided
all available information. The organization has simply not maintained more
detailed records. According to the Respondents, the available evidence shows
that they made mortgage payments and received invoices related to the Property,
subsequent to its acquisition. While the Respondents acknowledge that they have
the burden of establishing a contribution to the purchase money, they note that
the Applicant has provided no evidence to show that Mr. Mahmud made any
contributions in his personal capacity.
[29]          
It is helpful to break down the evidence and
consider it over three periods: (a) from the date of purchase in 1988 to
December 1991; (b) from December 1991 to January 1995; and (c) from February
1995 until the mortgage was paid off in 2007.
[30]          
The Respondents have not established that they
contributed to the purchase price of the Property at the time it was acquired or
that they made mortgage payments from 1988 until at least December 1991. There
is very limited evidence for that period and none that establishes the
Respondents’ made payments towards the purchase of the Property. Specifically:
[31]          
As discussed at para. 17, the Respondents rely
on a number of other documents that contain the words “trust” or “in trust.”
Significantly, none of these documents show that any mortgage or other payment
in respect of the Property was made by the Foundation or the School.
[32]          
For this period of time, the Respondents again rely
on the documents listed in para. 30 above. They also provided a bank statement
dated December 1991. This statement shows a debit labelled “MTG/HYP,” which
corresponds to the monthly mortgage for the Property at that time.
[33]          
I accept that the Respondent made a payment in
December 1991 in the amount of the monthly mortgage for the Property. As I
discuss in more detail below, based on Mr. Zimmo’s evidence, I am satisfied
that this payment was made from the Foundation’s bank account, not by Mr.
Mahmud personally.
[34]          
The Respondents are effectively asking the court
to infer, from a single bank statement in 1991, that the Foundation consistently
paid the mortgage or otherwise contributed to the purchase of the Property,
including from 1991 to 1995. In my view, the Respondents have not met the
burden of proof and a single bank statement is not sufficient to establish that
the Foundation made multiple mortgage payments. Not only is the documentary
evidence insufficient to support this inference on a balance of probabilities,
there is also no direct evidence to support the Respondents’ position over this
period.
[35]          
On a balance of probabilities, the evidence
shows that the Foundation paid an amount equivalent to the mortgage from
February 1995 to September 2007. This conclusion is supported by the 16 bank
statements provided by the Respondents, for sporadic dates through 1995, 1996,
1997, 1998, and 2007. Each statement has a debit entry labelled “MTG/HYP.” It
was not disputed that the amounts debited correspond to the monthly mortgage of
the Property at the relevant time. While more complete financial records would
have been helpful, the information provided shows that the Foundation made
payments equivalent to the amount of the mortgage at various points in time
between 1995 and 1998. There is also one statement from 2007. When the 16 bank
statements are considered on a balance of probabilities, I find it is more
likely than not that the Foundation made monthly mortgage payments from
February 1995 to December 1998.
[36]          
This is substantiated by Mr. Zimmo, who
testified that he was involved in preparing annual financial statements for the
Foundation or its predecessor from 1998 to 2007. Each statement identifies
mortgage payments made by the Foundation during the course of the year in
question. Each statement also identifies the Foundation’s bank account number,
which corresponds to the number that appears on the bank statements relied on
by the Respondents. Mr. Zimmo was cross-examined about his credentials and
alleged financial expertise, but he was not questioned about the accuracy of
the statements he helped prepare. His evidence establishes that the Foundation
made payments equivalent to the mortgage on the Property from at least 1998 to
2007. It also identifies the Foundation’s bank account number, confirming that
the payments came from the Foundation’s account (and not from Mr. Mahmoud,
personally).
[37]          
Importantly, there is no evidence to show that
the Foundation or its predecessor contributed to the purchase price of the Property
at the time of its acquisition. However, based on the 16 bank statements and
Mr. Zimmo’s evidence, I find that the Foundation or its predecessor made
payments in the amount of the monthly mortgage of the Property in December 1991
and then from February 1995 until the mortgage was discharged in September
2007.
[38]          
Can these payments give rise to a purchase money
resulting trust? In my view, they cannot. This is because, at law, the relevant
time for assessment of a claim for a proprietary interest through a purchase money
resulting trust is at the time of the property acquisition. The presumption of
a resulting trust applies only if contributions were made at the time of
purchase: Andrade, supra at para. 63.
[39]          
The payments proven in evidence were made years
after the Property was acquired. Moreover, it is not clear that those payments contributed
to the purchase of the Property. While the mortgage was in Mr. Mahmud’s name, the
Foundation or its predecessor occupied and had the use of the Property.
[40]          
The Foundation’s subsequent mortgage payments might
be relevant to other types of claims, but they do not establish a purchase
price resulting trust.
[41]          
Given my conclusion that the Foundation does not
have a beneficial interest in the Property, it is not strictly necessary for me
to address this argument. However, I will do so briefly.
[42]          
According to the Applicant, the Respondents have
not come to the litigation with clean hands because: (a) the Respondents
provided incomplete financial disclosure and, in particular, failed to comply
with their undertaking to provide complete bank statements from 1998 to 2007;
and (b) Mr. Alsousi changed the locks to the Property and prevented the
Applicant from accessing it.
[43]          
While more complete financial information would
have been helpful, I cannot conclude that the Respondents’ failure to provide
more information in answer to their undertakings is clear evidence of misconduct
or wrongdoing. The Respondents submit that they answered their undertakings by
providing all available financial information. I have been given no reason to
conclude otherwise. The disclosure the Respondents provided does not support
their assertion that the Foundation made all the mortgage payments for the
Property. However, the fact that their position was not fully supported by the
documents they disclosed is not the same as coming to the litigation with
unclean hands.
[44]          
It is regrettable that one of the personal
Respondents resorted to changing the locks on the Property. Mr. Alousi’s
evidence is that he believed the Applicant would attempt to sell the Property.
There was a clear dispute about who owned or had an interest in the Property
and both parties appear to have taken steps to assert their position. There
were certainly better options available to both parties. The actions in
question were unfortunate and not behaviour the court wishes to condone.
However, in the circumstances, it would not be a basis to exercise my
discretion to deny equitable remedies to the Foundation, had they successfully
established a beneficial interest in the Property.
[45]          
The Applicant argues that, because the express
trust failed, the Property is the subject to resulting trust in favour of the
Estate. Importantly, the deed to the Property was held by Mr. Mahmud. Because the
Respondents’ express and resulting trust arguments have failed, the Estate
simply owns the Property. Nothing in these circumstances gives rise to a
resulting trust in favour of the Estate.
[46]          
For the reasons provided, the Application is allowed.
[47]          
If the parties are unable to agree on costs,
they may each submit a cost outline, attaching a draft bill of costs and any
authorities, within 20 days of the release of these reasons. The cost outline
submitted by each party shall not exceed three pages in length.