[1]              
After the completion of a judge alone trial and
findings of guilt on August 8, 2024, I found that the Applicant’s s. 7 Charter
right to full and complete disclosure was breached.[1] As a result, pursuant to
s. 24(1), on December 16, 2024, I declared that a mistrial was the appropriate
remedy.
[2]              
However, the Applicant had sought a mistrial
only respecting the two counts for which he was convicted. The third count, the
subject of an acquittal at trial, remained at issue and I invited the parties
to make further submissions respecting the appropriate scope of this Charter
breach remedy.
[3]              
The Crown contends that a mistrial should apply
across the entire Indictment. That, regardless of the acquittal on the third
count, the introduction of new evidence from the identified witness whose
evidence was not adequately disclosed prior to the first trial, could remedy the
complainant’s evidentiary deficiencies found by this court during the first
trial. In essence, with this new evidence in play, the fairest approach would
be to permit a re-trial on all counts as the Applicant could not be legally
prejudiced and a more fulsome search for the truth would result.
[4]              
For the reasons that follow, the Applicant’s
specifically requested relief will be granted. A mistrial is declared with
respect to counts 1 and 2 of Indictment CR-23-63. Count 3, wherein an acquittal
was entered, will not be disturbed.
[5]              
On February 2, 2022, the Applicant was arrested and
charged with two counts of sexual assault and one count of common assault with
respect to T.P.’s complaints. The trial of these allegations occurred before me
on May 27th – May 30th, 2024. As noted, my trial judgment
was rendered on August 8, 2024, wherein the Applicant was found guilty of two
of three counts, namely a sexual assault and common assault. He was acquitted
of the second allegation of sexual assault.
[6]              
On April 26, 2022, Mr. Birtch was arrested
respecting the complaints of a different complainant, M.P. He was charged with three
counts of sexual assault. On January 15, 2025, that judge alone trial before
another jurist resulted in findings of guilt on two counts of sexual assault.
The Applicant is pending sentencing on those matters.
[7]              
These two separate prosecutions were the product
of two separate police investigations, involving two different investigative teams.
The Applicant was prosecuted on two separate Indictments with two separate
Crown counsel involved. Further, disclosure respecting each of these sets of
allegations was separated. The Crown established two different files on their
electronic disclosure ‘hub’ for which the Applicant’s counsel was granted
access. He had the same defence counsel for both sets of charges.
[8]              
As part of the M.P. investigation, witness
T.W.S. was audio interviewed on June 25, 2023. T.W.S. had been a long-time
friend of the Applicant. As this statement revealed, she was also known to both
complaints and discussed their relative allegations with each of them. With
respect to complainant T.P., T.W.S. revealed what she knew about her
relationship with the Applicant, as told to her by the Applicant. When speaking
to T.P., she revealed the Applicant’s disparaging commentary about her, his acknowledged
sexual violence, that he was cheating on her throughout, that he posed a risk
to her daughter, and that she needed to get away from him. While T.P. responded
by defending the Applicant, days later she nonetheless came forward and made her
complaint to police. T.W.S. believed that T.P. was only intending to seek a
restraining order from the police but, when the Applicant was charged, she now
had to “play the victim”.
[9]              
T.W.S.’s police audio statement was not
disclosed to the defence until March 13, 2024, approximately 2 ½ months before
the commencement of the T.P. related trial. No explanation for this delayed
disclosure was provided by the Crown. This statement was electronically
disclosed in audio format. However, the T.W.S. statement was disclosed as part
of the M.P. prosecution file only. Despite references to T.W.S.’s
communications with complaint T.P., this file was not disclosed as part of the
T.P. prosecution file. No evidence was provided for why this statement was not
disclosed as part of the T.P. prosecution file. The suggestion was merely that
it was disclosed in a manner consistent with its receipt as part of separated
police investigations and Crown prosecutions.
[10]          
During the Applicant’s trial involving
complainant T.P.’s allegations, witness T.W.S. was not called as a witness.
[11]          
On August 8, 2024, as noted, I found the
Applicant guilty of two counts on the T.P. related trial. I rejected his
evidence in its entirety, finding that it could not raise a reasonable doubt. However,
upon my review of the totality of the remaining evidence that I did accept, contrasting
T.P.’s evidence with that of the Applicant’s son’s evidence at trial, I found
that a reasonable doubt was present on the third count and, therefore,
acquitted the Applicant of the second allegation of sexual assault.
[12]          
On June 13, 2024, defence counsel “accessed” the
T.W.S. audio statement from the Digital Disclosure Hub for the M.P. prosecution
file for the first time.  This was fifteen days after the completion of the T.P.
trial. Counsel, however, did not review that statement at that time.
[13]          
On August 23, 2024, the M.P. prosecution Crown
disclosed a transcript of the June 25, 2023, T.W.S. statement in anticipation
of calling her as a witness in the M.P. related trial. The Applicant advised
that only then, sixteen days after the T.P. related trial judgment on August 8,
2024 was rendered, was this statement reviewed in preparation for the M.P.
related trial commencing on September 3, 2024.
[14]          
When that trial was completed, and before the
date set for sentencing respecting the T.P. trial findings, the Applicant
brought this mistrial application.
[15]          
On December 16, 2024, I found that regardless of
counsel’s lack of expected thorough disclosure review prior to the T.P. trial
matters, the Crown failed in its obligation to provide adequate and complete
disclosure with respect to that matter. T.W.S.’s statement was clearly relevant
to the T.P. prosecution on a Stinchcombe basis and without adequate
disclosure he was deprived of the opportunity to make full answer and defence. As
a result, he was deprived of the reasonable and expected opportunity to
question T.P.’s motivation for her complaint and/or to raise improper collusion
between T.W.S. and the complaint(s).
[16]          
The remaining issue simply relates to the proper
scope for the mischief relief that I found to be appropriate. Naturally, the
Applicant seeks a mistrial only on the counts for which he was found guilty.
The Crown contends that the fairest approach is to declare a mistrial across
the board, so that the fresh evidence can proceed allowing for a fulsome assessment
of T.P.’s allegations.
[17]          
A mistrial is a discretionary remedy in common
law and it is also available, as used here, as a s. 24(1) Charter breach
remedy. Until sentencing has been imposed and endorsed, a trial judge is not functus
officio, even in the face of an acquittal.[2]
As a result, I am satisfied that I have the jurisdiction to grant a mistrial on
all or merely some of these trial counts.
[18]          
The Crown submits that my credibility and
reliability findings at trial, which informed my W.(D.) analysis on
reasonable doubt, are “no longer final and dispositive, in light of new
disclosure”. Fundamental fairness to both the Applicant and the Crown requires
a global mistrial declaration.
[19]          
To make this argument, the Crown must rely upon
the prospect that T.W.S. could provide evidence which might advance T.P.’s
credibility and reliability respecting the third count, which in my trial
judgment reasons was referred to as the “bedroom incident”. From an evidentiary
and substantive basis, this argument is untenable for the following reasons:
[20]          
Overall, it is difficult to conceive of a
circumstance whereby T.W.S.’s evidence could do anything to reform or buttress
T.P.’s credibility and reliability in relation to Count 3. On the face of her
police statement, if T.W.S. provided any probative evidence at trial it would be
focused upon the complainant’s motivation for making the complaint, or whether
she was subjected to undue influence by T.W.S. herself. In any new trial,
T.W.S.’s evidence would predominantly be a centre piece of T.P.’s cross-examination
respecting her complaint motivations and possible collusion.
[21]          
During argument I specifically queried of the
Crown how T.W.S.’s evidence, as it is known by way of the now available
disclosure, could reform T.P. from third stage W.(D.) perspective
relating particularly to the ‘bedroom incident’. No particular salutary evidentiary
details were provided. Instead, I was asked to consider the unpredictability of
the trial process, an uncertainty that is difficult to particularize in the
hypothetical but has the potential to materialize at trial.
[22]          
Unfortunately, while I concede that trials are unpredictable,
my primary task is to redress the harm occasioned by the breach of the Applicant’s
fair trial interests, not the potential tactical advantage to the Crown
occasioned by their own misconduct. The prospect that the Crown should be
permitted a second opportunity to secure a conviction on Count 3, when their conduct
caused harm to the fair trial interests of the Applicant and, where the
additional evidence suppressed by that Charter breach is not apparently
advantageous to the Crown on its face, unduly lessens the effectiveness of this
Charter based mistrial remedy. Further, because the Count 3 allegations are
relatively more serious than those of the first two counts, the cost of raising
a Charter complaint should not, in these circumstances, come with the
risk that a mistrial application may ultimately result in a completely new
trial with an inconsistent verdict on that more serious count. Here, the
benefit of finality, an avoidance of the risk of unnecessary inconsistent
verdicts and judicial economy all support to the Applicant’s requested relief.
[23]          
In the totality of these circumstances, I
believe that the only appropriate remedy to redress this Charter breach
is to grant the Applicant’s requested relief. This disposition represents a fit
and meaningful redress to this Charter disclosure-based breach. I
believe the principles of fundamental justice are best reflected by a new trial
that best enables the right to make full answer without, at best, needlessly
prolonging the trial or, at worst, permitting a potential unwarranted Crown
advantage.
[24]          
This regrettable confluence of events has
resulted in a breach of the Applicant’s s. 7 Charter rights which, as I
found previously, can only meaningfully be addressed by a mistrial declaration.
[25]          
Giving proper effect to this Charter remedy
requires an appropriate balancing of the parties’ respective interests in the
context of the misconduct occasioned. Here, I believe that a proper balancing
yields to the Applicant. The Crown’s disclosure breach created the necessity
for a retrial. It should not also create a second opportunity at conviction
where this court’s reasons could not, on the face of this evidentiary record,
have been reasonably disturbed by the introduction of T.W.S.’s evidence.
[26]          
The Applicant’s application, in its totality, is
therefore granted. A mistrial is granted with respect to Counts 1 and 2, alone.