[1]              
The applicant, Edgewater Park Lodge Inc.
(hereinafter “Edgewater” or the applicant), operates a restaurant on its
property under the name “Red Canoe Restaurant”, registered under the Business
Names Act, which has been valid and maintained since July 31, 2018. The
lodge and restaurant are located in Kearney, Ontario, in the District of Parry
Sound.
[2]              
The respondents, Robert and Carol Cadman,
operate a restaurant under the name “Red Canoe Family Restaurant”. This
restaurant is a sole proprietorship that has been owned by the respondents
since October 2022.  The business name was registered on August 25, 2023. The
restaurant is located in South River, Ontario, also in the District of Parry
Sound.
[3]              
The application seeks a mandatory or permanent
injunction against the respondents’ use of the name “Red Canoe Family
Restaurant” or any similar variation of the name. The applicant also seeks to
compel the cancellation of the business name pursuant to section 6(3) of the Business
Names Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. B. 17 (hereinafter “BNA”) and compensation
in the statutory amount of $500 under section 6(2) of the BNA on the
basis that the business name is the same or deceptively similar to their own.
[4]              
The applicant relies, in part, on the tort of
“passing off” to ground their argument for the above requested remedies.
[5]              
The applicant also relies on Rule 1.04 of the Rules
of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194 (hereinafter “the Rules”)
to address any concern that the court might have with the fact that the issue
comes before the court by way of an application rather than an action,
maintaining that there are no genuine facts in dispute that would require a
trial in this matter.
[6]              
The respondents’ position is that the
application must fail as it ought to have been an action, and Rule 1.04 cannot
save it. The respondents submit that there are facts in issue that cannot be
addressed in an application. The respondent relies on the argument that “The
Red Canoe Family Restaurant” is not similar to “Red Canoe Restaurant” as a fact
in issue, and questions whether Kearney is “in the area” of South River.
[7]              
The respondent, Robert Cadman, registered the
business name “The Red Canoe Family Restaurant” on August 25, 2023.
[8]              
The respondent, Robert Cadman, operates the
business as a sole proprietor.  The business is not incorporated.
[9]              
The respondent, Carol Cadman, submits that she
is not a proper party to this application as she is not the registrant and/or
user of the name “The Red Canoe Family Restaurant”. She seeks to have the
application dismissed against her as having no legal or factual basis.
[10]          
However, in his affidavit of December 12, 2023,
at paragraph 3, he states “My wife, Carol Cadman (“Carol”) and I own the
restaurant together” and when cross-examined on that pleading, on January 11,
2024, at question 13, page 3, he confirms:
[11]          
The applicant requested to strike the third
respondent named on the application as “ABC Corporation” as the record
establishes that the business has not been incorporated.  ABC Corporation shall
be struck from this application.
[12]          
The applicant claims that the respondent has
directed attention to his business in such a way as to cause or be likely to
cause confusion between their business and services and those of the applicant,
that is, the respondent’s business name is deceptively similar to the
applicant’s business name.
[13]          
The applicant claims that the corporation has
suffered and will continue to suffer damages and irreparable harm including:
[14]          
The applicant’s restaurant has been in operation
since 2018 under the registered name “Red Canoe Restaurant”.  This registration
was most recently renewed effective July 19, 2023, with an expiry of July 29,
2028. The restaurant is on the property of Edgewater Park Lodge Inc., which has
been incorporated and in operation since 2011.
[15]          
The applicant learned of the respondents’
restaurant by way of a news article on or about July 21, 2023, wherein the
headline read: “South River mainstay Antonio’s Grill reopens as the Red Canoe
Family Restaurant.”
[16]          
The two businesses are restaurants operating
approximately 55 kilometres from each other.  This is acknowledged by Mr.
Cadman in his cross-examination.
[17]          
At the time of this application, the respondents’
business “The Red Canoe Family Restaurant” is not in operation, but it is
anticipated that it will re-open.
[18]          
The applicant pleads that Edgewater has been
operational since 2011 and enjoys significant goodwill with a blend of new and
repeat guests. Further, that the “Red Canoe Restaurant” on the property has
been in operation since 2018 and similarly enjoys goodwill.
[19]          
The applicant further pleads that Edgewater’s
Red Canoe Restaurant has adequately and necessarily distinguished the goods and
services from that of its competitors and relies on Google Reviews of the
restaurant touting a rating of 4.2/5.
[20]          
The Google Reviews provided in the applicant’s materials
are admissible as best evidence on the argument related to the goodwill enjoyed
by Edgewater’s Red Canoe Restaurant.
[21]          
The applicant is concerned that the respondents’
restaurant will tarnish the name of Edgewater’s restaurant. The applicant
relies on social media posts and comments expressing “an apparent distaste for
Mr. Cadman and his business.”[1]
They copy several of the reviews into the pleadings. While some of the Facebook
posts and Google Reviews are not verified, they are in the public domain with a
connection to the name “Red Canoe Family Restaurant”.  Even if the court does
not accept them for the truth of the content of the review, they are evidence
of interaction with the respondent and are references to a local restaurant
with “Red Canoe” in the name connected to Mr. Cadman.
[22]          
Insofar as Mr. Cadman does not deny interaction
with the Facebook posts, the court accepts those conversations as some reliable
evidence that there is some confusion as to the distinction between the two
restaurants and the nature of the interactions with members of the public.
[23]          
In Exhibit “A” to the affidavit of Cathy
McNichol dated February 20, 2024, Mr. Cadman responds to a Facebook post dated
October 3, 2022, indicating that there are two restaurants with Red Canoe in
their name in the area, and that there is a Red Canoe Restaurant in Kearney,
but his is the Red Canoe Family Restaurant in South River. The
respondents emphasize the word “family” as a sufficiently distinguishing
feature in the business name.
[24]          
In one reply comment, Mr. Cadman writes: “There
is only 2 red Canoe restaurants in this area there is red Canoe that is
in Kearney and we are the red Canoe family restaurant in a restaurant in South
River” [emphasis added].  Again, this is in October 2022.
[25]          
That Mr. Cadman engages with the community in an
attempt to clarify or distinguish his restaurant from that of the applicant, is
evidence of confusion within the community about whether there is any affiliation
or connection between the two.
[26]          
The applicant further relies on a Google search
for “Red Canoe Restaurant”, which yields search results and image search
results are a mix of both restaurants. Exhibits “K” to Pamela Porter’s
affidavit shows a Google search for “red canoe restaurant” with the first 6
results.  It returns 4 results for Edgewater’s Red Canoe Restaurant, and 2
results relating to the respondent and his restaurant. Exhibit “L” shows a
search for “the red canoe family restaurant” which yields a “People also
searched for” section that links the respondent’s restaurant name with the
location of the applicant’s restaurant.  It also shows a section of “Images
from the Web” which includes 2 photos of the respondents, Bob and Carol Cadman
at their restaurant and 3 photos relating to the applicant’s restaurant (the
restaurant from the outside, a lunch menu, and the restaurant logo).
[27]          
The applicant relies on further hearsay evidence
that one of their employees received a gift certificate for the respondent’s
business in South River. There appears to have been no attempt by the applicant
to seek an affidavit from the prior employee for this evidence.  The court
places little to no weight on this submission.
[28]          
The applicant pleads that signage, social media
posts, and “other advertising materials” is causing or has caused: confusion in
the marketplace, suppliers and customers mistaking one restaurant for the
other, suppliers and customers believing the applicant sold its business to the
respondent, potential customers attending the respondent’s restaurant in error,
negative views, opinions or reputation being erroneously attached to the
applicant’s business because of the behaviour of the respondent, and the
goodwill of the applicant’s business being adversely affected.
[29]          
The applicant chose to bring this matter as an
application and not an action. The applicant does not seek punitive or general damages.
They seek $500 in compensation as prescribed by statute under section 6 of the BNA. 
It states that:
[30]          
On a plain reading, section 6(1) does not specify
that the entitlement to compensation is limited to a person who brings an action.
[31]          
Section 6 (3) states that “[i]n giving a
judgement for a plaintiff in an action brought subsection (1), the court shall
order the Registrar to cancel the registration that was the cause of the
action” (emphasis added). This subsection contemplates an action.  The
applicant asks that the court apply the general principle of liberal
interpretation under section 1.04 of the Rules to consider it applicable
to the application in this case.
[32]          
Rule 1.04 states: “These rules shall be liberally
construed to secure the just, most expeditious and least expensive
determination of every civil proceeding on its merits.”
[33]          
Further, the court will reference Rule 2.01
which states the following:
[34]          
Legislature intended the Rules to be
construed in a liberal fashion in order to reach a just determination of every
civil proceeding on its merits even in the face of procedural errors where the
matter can be heard fairly and in the least expensive, most expeditious manner.
[35]          
The applicant relies on the common law doctrine
of “passing off”.  At the common law, the doctrine of “passing off” is heard as
an action where evidence is called on the elements required to prove, on a
balance of probabilities, the elements of the action.
[36]          
The Supreme Court of Canada in Ciba-Geigy
Canada Ltd. v. Apotex Inc, 1992 CanLII 33 (SCC), [1992] 3 SCR 120 (hereinafter “Ciba-Geigy”),
held that there are three (3) necessary components in a passing off action: “the
existence of goodwill, deception of the public due to a misrepresentation, and
actual or potential damage to the plaintiff.”[2]
[37]          
The first element requires a plaintiff to
establish that its business enjoys a reputation of goodwill in the minds of
consumers that directly associate with the plaintiff’s wares, goods, or
services with a distinctive selling, marketing or identifying feature that they
rely on to distinguish the plaintiff’s wares, goods, or services from their
competitors.
[38]          
This requires evidence of goodwill, and evidence
of the distinctive nature of the wares, goods, and services of the applicant. In
this case, the nature of Edgewater’s Red Canoe Restaurant is a restaurant. The
respondent’s Red Canoe Family Restaurant is also a restaurant. They are in the
same industry. The respondent submits that because they also advertise that
they serve pizza and the applicant does not, that it is sufficiently different.
It is the only menu difference that the respondents note.
[39]          
The second component requires a finding that the
business alleged to be “passing off” leads or is likely to lead the public to believe
there is an association between the businesses or their products. Although the
original requirement of an “intent to deceive” has died out, there remains the
requirement, at the very least, that confusion in the minds of the public be a likely
consequence by reason of sale, by the defendant of a product under the
guise of implication that it was the plaintiff’s product or equivalent.[3]
[40]          
The Supreme Court notes “[t]he purpose of the
passing-off action is thus also to prevent unfair competition. One does not
have to be a fanatical moralist to understand how appropriating another person’s
work is, as that is certainly what is involved, and is a breach of good faith.”[4]
[41]          
The respondents operate a restaurant, just as
the applicant does. In and of itself, that is not a problem. They are entitled
to operate a restaurant. In fact, there is a restaurant in very close proximity
to the respondents’ restaurant.  This does not pose any problem.  However, the
respondents conduct their restaurant business under the name “The Red Canoe
Family Restaurant” and within the District, just 55 kilometres away, is a
restaurant owned by the applicant that has been in business since 2018 under
the name “Red Canoe Restaurant.”  Herein lies the problem.
[42]          
The respondents’ position that the names are not
similar is, quite simply, disingenuous. The respondents’ submissions on
February 7, 2025, also contradict the evidence that in October 2022, Mr. Cadman
described the restaurant in Kearney (the applicant’s) as being “in the area”.
[43]          
The common law doctrine of passing-off typically
refers to an action. The applicant, however, is not seeking punitive or general
damages.  The primary remedy being sought is that of an injunction.
[44]          
The Ontario Court of Appeal in 1711811
Ontario Ltd. v. Buckley Insurance Brokers Ltd, 2014 ONCA 125, at paragraphs
49-59, reviews the differences between these types of injunctions. The court
does not have the authority to grant the temporary relief in the form of an
interlocutory or interim motion as there are no other proceedings to bring such
a temporary order to a close.
[45]          
A permanent or mandatory injunction, as is being
sought, is the final remaining injunctive remedy. A permanent injunction is an
extraordinary remedy. To obtain a permanent injunction, the applicant must
prove, on a balance of probabilities, that it has a legal right to the
injunction and that an injunction is an appropriate remedy.
[46]          
A permanent injunction is granted after a final
adjudication of rights.[5]
[47]          
“…[I]f an action for such a remedy were sufficiently
commenced, the proceeding by which such an order would be granted would involve
leading and weighing of evidence, consideration of possible defences to the
claim, and, if proven, consideration of the terms of the relevant order with
all appropriate limitations.”[6]
[48]          
In considering Rules 1.04 and 2.01, I find that any
concerns the court had about the originating process being an application
rather than an action can be remedied.  This matter can achieve the just, most
expeditious and least expensive determination of this proceeding on its merits
by way of this process.
[49]          
I find that there are no central facts at issue
that would require a trial, and there are no viable defences to be raised at
trial.  The two businesses offer the same products – that is, they are both
restaurants.  They operated in relatively close proximity to one another. 
There is some evidence that satisfies me on a balance of probabilities that the
respondents were aware of or ought to have been aware of the applicant’s
restaurant prior to naming and opening their restaurant.  I am also satisfied
on a balance of probabilities that the name is deceptively similar that it
causes or may cause confusion in customers, and with, at the very least, a
potential for harm to the applicant’s business.
[50]          
The respondents are free to operate their
restaurant, they simply cannot operate it with a name that is deceptively
similar to another in their area.
[51]          
THIS COURT ORDERS that a permanent injunction is
hereby granted:
[52]          
THIS COURT ORDERS that the respondents shall
immediately remove or cause to be removed all Facebook postings and other
social media pages identifying their or any business as “The Red Canoe Family
Restaurant”.
[53]          
THIS COURT ORDERS that the respondents shall,
within 30 days of this order, pay to the applicant damages in the statutory
amount of $500.00 pursuant to section 6(1) of the Business Names Act.
[54]          
The applicant was entirely successful on the
motion.  Therefore, he is entitled to costs.  However, based on submissions
made by the parties during the hearing of the motion, the parties shall provide
their submissions with respect to the issue of costs in writing, limited to
three (3) typewritten pages, excluding attachments, as follows:
[55]          
Submissions received beyond these deadlines will
not be considered.