[1]      
This
action was tried before a judge and jury in May 2024.  The jury returned its
verdict on May 31, 2024, awarding various heads of damages to the Plaintiffs.
[2]      
The
parties have agreed to the form of final Judgment.
[3]      
Costs
as between the Defendant Gurpreet Kaur Toor (“Toor”) and the Defendant Wawanesa
Mutual Insurance Company have been resolved as between them.  As between the Plaintiffs
and the Defendants, it is agreed that disbursements in the sum of $65,616.47
are appropriate, but they have been unable to decide the appropriate amount of
legal costs.  A hearing was necessary to determine that final matter.
[4]      
This
action arose out of a fatal motor vehicle accident that occurred on May 31,
2014.  On that day, a number of young friends had been drinking alcohol and
made the unfortunate decision to drive a car.  The driver, Gurjap Toor made an ill-advised
turn in front of a large truck, which caused a fatal collision, killing his
friend Kharmveer Gill and seriously injuring another.
[5]      
This
action was brought by Kharmveer Gill’s family for damages under the Family
Law Act, which included claims for loss of care guidance and companionship,
as well as for the support that Kharmveer Gill was expected to provide his
parents.
[6]      
The
matter was complicated by the fact that the owner of the car, Toor, maintained
that her son Gurjap Toor did not have her consent to operate the vehicle on the
night in question. Accordingly, Wawanesa was added as a party pursuant to an
OPCF44R Endorsement under the automobile insurance policy of Hartej Gill, who
is Kharmveer Gill’s mother.
[7]      
The
driver and owner of transport truck that were involved in the accident were let
out of the action shortly before trial.
[8]      
The
Plaintiffs were successful at the trial. The jury returned verdicts awarding
all the Plaintiffs’ damages for loss of care guidance and companionship, Hartej
Gill was awarded damages for past and future loss of financial support that she
could have expected from her son, and for the loss of his household services. 
Kharmveer Gill was found only to be five percent (5%) contributorily
negligent.  The jury also found that Gurjap Toor did have Toor’s consent to use
the car, therefore absolving the Wawanesa Mutual Insurance Company of any
liability in the matter.
[9]      
The
Plaintiffs seeks their costs on a substantial indemnity basis throughout.  They
rely on the Victims’ Bill of Rights, 1995, S.O. 1995, c.6. This would
result in an award of $395,670.60 plus taxes and disbursements.
[10]   
In the
alternative, the Plaintiffs seek their substantial indemnity costs from the
date of a mediation in April 2019, as a result of the offers made on that day,
and their partial indemnity costs beforehand.  In the further alternative, they
seek substantial indemnity costs from the date of the pre-trial, as a result of
the offers made that day, and partial indemnity before.  Finally, in the
further alternative, they seek partial indemnity up to the delivery of their first
offer under r.49 of the Rules of Civil Procedure, on December 16, 2021,
and their substantial indemnity costs thereafter.
[11]   
Toor
acknowledges that the Plaintiffs are entitled to their costs.   It is her
position that the defence should pay partial indemnity costs up to December 16,
2021, and then substantial indemnity costs thereafter.  They also argue though,
that the costs claimed are excessive and not reasonable.
[12]   
The
Defendant submits that a reasonable costs award would be $200,000 plus H.S.T.
and disbursements.
[13]   
The
following issues must be determined:
[14]   
The
applicable sections of the Victims’ Bill of Rights are as follows:
[15]   
It is
agreed that Gurjap Toor pleaded guilty to impaired driving causing death and
impaired driving causing bodily harm, both offences under the Criminal Code
of Canada.   Despite this, Gurjap Toor did not defend this action.  Gurjap
Toor did not resist the lawsuit, nor did he participate in the trial, other
than to be a witness.  Gurjap Toor was noted in default and the verdict of the
jury was made against both him and Toor.
[16]   
It is also
agreed that Toor, who did actively defend the lawsuit, was not charged with any
criminal offence.  Also, the Victims’ Bill of Rights was not pleaded by
the Plaintiffs.
[17]   
I find
that in this case, the Victims’ Bill of Rights would apply. The
Plaintiffs were victims of a crime perpetrated by Gurjap Toor. They sought
redress from him as well as others that were involved in the accident.  The Victims’
Bill of Rights does not state that it does not apply if the person
convicted of the crime did not defend the lawsuit.
[18]   
The
applicability of the Victims’ Bill of Rights is also supported in the
case law. In the decision of Evans v Sproule, 2008 CanLII 58428 (ON SC), [2008] O.J. No. 4518, the
Plaintiff commenced a civil claim for damages arising from a sexual assault.
The assault was committed by an on-duty police officer.  The victim sued both
the officer and the Toronto Police Services Board. The officer was convicted of
indecent assault and resigned from the police force. The officer did not defend
the action and default judgment had been entered against him. The police
services board was found vicariously liable for the officer’s actions and the
Plaintiff was awarded damages accordingly.
[19]   
In
considering costs, Justice Chapnik found that s.4(6) of the Victims’ Bill of
Rights applied prima facie to both the officer and the police
services board. The Plaintiff was awarded solicitor and client costs for the
entirety of the action.
[20]   
In K.T.
v Vranich et al., 2011 ONSC 683, the Plaintiff commenced an action for
damages arising from a sexual assault by her manager at the bar where she
worked.  She sued the assaulter, the bar and the property owner.  The assaulter
pleaded guilty to sexual assault.  None of the defendants defended the action. 
The trial judge found the individual defendant liable and the bar vicariously
liable for his conduct.  The property owner was found to have no liability. The
judge was then required to assess the damages and determine costs.  Even though
neither the assaulter, nor his employer defended the action, the judge awarded
costs on a substantial indemnity basis, in accordance with the Victims’ Bill
of Rights Act.
[21]   
In Macleod
v Marshall et al., 2018 ONSC 5100, a trial judge was asked to set costs
following a three-week jury trial, where the Plaintiff was successful.  The
Plaintiff was the victim of sexual assault at the hands of a priest.  In
addition to the priest, he sued the priest’s religious order, the school board
and the local diocese. The religious order admitted vicarious liability for the
actions of the priest early in the proceedings.
[22]   
The
Plaintiff sought substantial indemnity costs pursuant to the Victims’ Bill
of Rights.  He argued that such an order shall be made unless it would not
be in the interests of justice.  In this case, the religious order argued that
costs on a partial indemnity basis were in the interests of justice.
[23]   
Justice
Gans agreed with the Plaintiff. He relied on a long line of legal authority
that awarded substantial indemnity costs to the victims of sexual assault, even
without reference to the Victims’ Bill of Rights. He found it would not
be in the interests of justice to deny the Plaintiff his full costs.
[24]   
Finally,
in Doran v Melhado, 2016 ONSC 2010, a lawsuit was commenced by the
Plaintiff as a result of damages he sustained when assaulted by Mr. Malhado.  
Mr. Malhado had earlier been found guilty of assault, contrary to the Criminal
Code.   The Plaintiffs brought a motion for summary judgment as to
liability, which Mr. Malhado did not defend. The Plaintiff was successful.  A
short trial ensued on the issue of damages.  All parties agreed that the
Plaintiff was entitled to his costs, but they disagreed on the scale. The
Plaintiff sought substantial indemnity, citing the Victims’ Bill of Rights.
[25]   
In his
decision, Justice Emery noted that elevated costs were appropriate in
circumstances where it is authorized by statute.  He points to the opening
words of s.131(1) of the Courts of Justice Act, which state:
[26]   
Justice
Emery than stated that s.4 of the Victims’ Bill of Rights is such an act.
  Having heard no evidence that it would not be in the interests of justice to
make such an award, he found compelled to award costs on a substantial
indemnity basis throughout.  In fact, he stated that even considering the
overall principle of proportionality, substantial indemnity costs were
appropriate. He stated:
[27]   
In the
end, while substantial indemnity costs were awarded, when reviewing the various
factors under r.57.01, he found that it was “fair and reasonable” that these
substantial indemnity costs be set at $65,000 plus taxes and disbursements, and
not the sum of $128,000, as requested.
[28]   
The applicability of the Victims’ Bill of Rights has also
been rejected.  In Shukster v Young, 2015 ONSC 7525, the Plaintiff sought
to amend her Statement of Claim to include a claim for a declaration that she
was a victim of crimes seeking redress from the Defendant, a
person convicted of a crime as within the provisions of the Victims’ Bill of
Rights, and then sought costs on a substantial and indemnity basis pursuant
to said Act.   She then sought summary judgement on that amendment.
[29]   
Ms. Shukster was injured as a passenger in a car driven by
Mr. Young.  Mr. Young was not licensed and was not driving the car with the
consent of the owner. Ms. Shukster made a claim against Mr. Young pursuant to
the Motor Vehicle Accident Claims Act, and reached a settlement of
$200,000, inclusive of interest, being the maximum amount that could be paid
pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Accident Claims Act.   Mr. Young pleaded
guilty to dangerous driving and taking a motor vehicle without consent, both
criminal offences.
[30]   
In this case, the motions judge dismissed the motion. He
found that such an amendment was a new cause of action. 
It was sought 13 years after the action in question.  He found that it would
cause non-compensable prejudice to Mr. Young.  The late amendment prevented him
from obtaining legal advice on the issue of the Victims’ Bill of Rights. 
It was particularly important in this case as the authority of the Motor
Vehicle Accident Claims Fund to defend an action on behalf of an uninsured
defendant is restricted to the defense of the claim of negligence only.  The
additional costs sought would fall outside this mandate. Also, the statutory
limitation period had expired.  The motions judge noted that the enhanced costs
under the Victims’ Bill of Rights can only be awarded where it is not
an injustice to do so.   He found that he had insufficient evidence from the
moving party to show that an enhanced costs award was not an injustice.
[31]   
In
this case, I do find that an award of substantial indemnity costs throughout is
appropriate.  I have seen no evidence, nor heard any submissions that would show
that such an award would not be in the interests of justice.  Although Toor was not convicted by a criminal offence, Gurjap
Toor was. Also, Toor is liable for the actions of Gurjap Toor by virtue of s.192
of the Highway Traffic Act.  This section states:
[32]   
This
liability is not dissimilar to the vicarious liability on the part of the
police services board, an employer or a religious order.
[33]   
As for
the Plaintiffs’ failure to plead the Victims’ Bill of Rights, this is
not fatal to the Plaintiffs’ position on costs.  The Plaintiffs did claim
substantial indemnity costs.  They also pleaded that Gurjap Toor committed an
offence contrary to the Criminal Code.  The Defendant was given an
opportunity to address the Victims’ Bill of Rights in their costs
submissions. There is no prejudice to the Defendants just because the Victims’
Bill of Rights was not pleaded in the Statement of Claim.
[34]   
Given
my decision that substantial indemnity costs are appropriate throughout, it is
not necessary to determine this issue.
[35]   
Before
I determine the appropriate costs, it would be prudent to determine whether the
Plaintiff should be compelled to provide their CFA.
[36]   
Mr
Kirby requested to see Mr. Katz’ CFA with the Plaintiffs.  Mr. Katz refused. 
Mr. Kirby asks that I draw an adverse inference from that refusal.
[37]   
In Block
v Brown et al., 2022 ONSC 3199, Justice Shaw was asked to determine costs
of an action. She was asked to consider the terms of the contingency agreement,
which the Plaintiff did not produce. The Defendant submitted that the
contingency fee agreement was important so as to ensure that any costs award
did not exceed what was actually charged.  After reviewing the caselaw,
including several decisions from the Court of Appeal for Ontario, at para. 76, Justice
Shaw concluded that a contingency fee agreement is an agreement between counsel
and their client.  The contents thereof have little impact on what she was
required to review to ensure that a fair and reasonable costs order was made.
[38]   
  I note that in ss. 20 and 20.1 of the Solicitors
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S.15, it is stated that a
contingency fee agreement should not impact a costs award. Specifically, s. 20(1)
provides that a contingency fee agreement does not affect the amount, or any
right or remedy for the recovery, of any costs recoverable from the client by
any other person. Section 20.1(1) specifies that in calculating the amount of
costs for the purposes of making an award of costs, a court shall not reduce
the amount of costs only because the client’s solicitor is being compensated in
accordance with a contingency fee agreement:  Bondy-Rafael v Potrebic, 2019
ONCA 1026, at para. 56.
[39]   
Mr.
Kirby referred me to the decision of Selby v Naray, 2023 ONSC 6302,
where Justice McCarthy laid out those circumstances in which the contents of a
contingency agreement should be disclosed.   He indicated that it is difficult
to give any weight to the hourly rate charged and hours worked when it has
little to do with what is charged to the client. While contingency agreements
are a normal occurrence, it is with an understanding that the costs awarded
will defray or offset the costs charged to the client under the contingency fee
agreement.  In the case before him, Justice McCarthy was concerned because the
fees claimed were approximately 39% of the overall net recovery for damages,
which is more than the conventional contingency fee arrangement.
[40]   
In the
case before me, such a concern is not present.  Mr. Katz maintains their
contingency fee is approximately 30%. The amount of the award by the jury
amounts to $2,154,000 plus interest and
disbursements. The highest amount sought by the Plaintiffs is $512,000,
inclusive of fees, taxes and disbursements.  This is less than 25% of the
award.  This will not offend the principle of indemnity.
[41]   
Accordingly,
I draw no adverse inference from the failure of Mr. Katz to produce the CFA. In
the end, I am bound by the Courts of Justice Act, and the Rules,
and the principles espoused therein, when determining costs.
[42]   
As
indicated, s.131 of the Courts of Justice Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, states that subject to an act or the rules, the costs of,
and incidental to, a proceeding are in the discretion of the court.
[43]   
I have
already discussed the Victims’ Bill of Rights. Also at play is r.57.01(1) which lists a broad
range of factors for the court to consider, including the result achieved in
the proceeding, the complexity of the proceeding, the importance of the issues
and whether any step in the proceeding was improper, vexatious, or
unnecessary.
[44]   
As stated
by Armstrong J.A. in Boucher v. Public Accountants Council for the Province
of Ontario (2004), 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R. (3d) 291 (Ont. C.A.), fixing costs involves more than
merely calculating the docketed hours and using the cost grid. At para. 24.,
Armstrong J.A. cites approvingly to para. 4 of the Court of Appeal’s decision
in Zesta Engineering Ltd. v. Cloutier, 2002 CanLII 25577:
[45]   
The
purpose of an award of costs are to indemnify the successful party of the legal
costs they incurred, to encourage settlement, to deter frivolous actions or
defences and to discourage unnecessary steps that unduly prolong litigation: 1465778
Ontario Inc. v 1122077 Ontario Ltd., 2006 CanLII 35819 (Ont. C.A.), at
para. 26; Fong v Chan (1999), 1999 CanLII 2052 (ON CA), 46 O.R. (3d) 330 (Ont.C.A.), at para. 22.
[46]   
The
overriding principle is that the amount of costs awarded must be fair and
reasonable in the circumstances:  Davies v. Clarington (Municipality),
2009 ONCA 722, at para. 51-52; Burr v Tecumseh Products of Canada Limited,
2023 ONCA 135, at para. 127.
[47]   
I must
approach costs in a two-step manner. First, I must undertake a critical
examination of all the relevant factors as indicated above. Then, I must take a
step back and consider the result produced and question whether, in all the
circumstances, the result is fair and reasonable: Apotex Inc. v. Eli Lilly
Canada Inc., 2022 ONCA 587, at para. 60.
[48]   
All
parties agree that the Plaintiffs were successful and are entitled to their
costs.  The jury awarded the total sum of $2,154,000 in damages.
[49]   
Mr.
Katz was the counsel of record for the entirety of the file.  It is important
to note that it took 10 years between the date of this tragic accident to the
date the jury released its verdict.  During that period of time, Mr. Katz’ rate
range from $600 per hour to $800 per hour.  His substantial indemnity rate changed
from $540 to $720 per hour.  He had an articling student and various clerks
assist him throughout who billed out at $150 to $175 per hour. These rates are
also reasonable and help to reduce the overall cost of the action and trial.
[50]   
Mr.
Katz has been practicing for 25 years and is certified as a specialist in civil
litigation.  He is highly regarded by his peers.
[51]   
Mr.
Kirby is also very experienced and in fact, has been practicing longer than Mr.
Katz. He is also well regarded by his peers. Over the period of this file, his
rate ranged between $325 to $372 per hour. The lower fee charged by Mr. Kirby
is not a reflection of his experience or expertise, but more a reflection of an
agreed upon fee to be paid by an institutional client.
[52]   
The
Plaintiffs have provided their lawyer’s dockets which show time that is the
equivalent of $439,634, exclusive of tax.    He claims a total of 861 hours
between all the members of his firm involved.  This is over a 10-year period,
and includes pre-litigation investigation, pleadings, communications,
preparation and attendance at discoveries, review of productions both before
and after discoveries, retaining of experts, preparation and attendance at mediation,
pre-trial preparation and attendance at 6 separate pre-trials, and then
preparation and attendance at trial.   This was on behalf of seven clients.  As
indicated, he utilized the services of clerks and a student.   His costs up
until his trial preparation started in earnest in April 2024, were only
$153,300, which is not unreasonable given the 10 years of work invested. The
cost of trial was $286,334, which covered a 13-day jury trial.   During a
trial, it is normal for counsel to work prior to trial on that day, and to
continue their preparation in the night. There is also substantial preparation
required for every day of trial.  The amount of time invested in this file does
not seem unreasonable.
[53]   
By
contrast, Mr. Kirby charged his client approximately $155,000 for the entire
file, which included a companion action which was settled earlier.  That being
said, the issues and most of the witnesses would be similar between the two actions,
allowing for a significant savings.  Mr. Kirby’s fees are approximately thirty
percent (30%) of Mr. Katz’s fees.
[54]   
The
hours spent by either party, are not as disparate as the fees would indicate. 
The Plaintiff’s have claimed 861 hours. If Mr. Kirby’s total cost of $155,000
are divided by an average of his hourly rates throughout, it shows he worked
approximately 440 hours – or approximately half of Mr. Katz’ hours. It is not
unusual for defence counsel to not spend as much time on trial as the Plaintiff,
given their burden of proof, and the Defence accepted that in their
submissions.  The Plaintiff’s fees are expected to be higher.  Given Mr.
Kirby’s lower hourly rate, the disparity is not as great as it would appear at
first glance.  Given the length of the action, the length of the trial, the
issues at play, the experience of counsel and the number of Plaintiffs, the
Defendants should not have been surprised by the costs claimed.
[55]   
Kharmveer
Gill, the young man who was killed, was found to be contributorily negligent,
but only by five percent (5%).  I will take this into account in setting
costs.
[56]   
The
trial was made more complex by the number of Plaintiffs and claim for loss of support
that was unique to the Plaintiffs’ culture. In addition, the Defendants raised
the issue of whether Gurjap Toor had his Mother’s consent to drive. That was
not an issue raised by the Plaintiffs but was an issue to be litigated between
the two Defendants.
[57]   
The
trial lasted 13 days. There were twenty-one witnesses, only four of which were
called by the Defendants. There was expert evidence on economic losses.   
While this trial was not one of the most complex that this court sees, there particular
aspects of the trial as stated herein, that made this matter more complex than
a “usual” motor vehicle accident claim for damages.
[58]   
The
parties agree that the first offer to settle that would fall within rule 49
occurred on December 16, 2021.  On that day, the Plaintiffs offered to resolve
the action for the sum of $782,725 plus interest, costs, disbursements, and
taxes.  Clearly, the Plaintiffs received a more favourable award from the
jury.
[59]   
I have
also considered the number of offers that the Plaintiffs made, and the number
that the Defendants made, as a sign of their reasonableness throughout.
[60]   
Both
parties made efforts to resolve the matter at mediation and at the various
pre-trials, the details of which I will not disclose.  As for offers to settle,
outside of mediation or a pre-trial, the Plaintiffs made several attempts.  Toor
did not make an offer until May 6, 2024, on the eve of trial.   The Plaintiffs
submit that this was the first offer (outside of mediation or pre-trials) that
Toor made in almost 10 years.
[61]   
I also
note that as the trial approached, the offers made by the Plaintiffs were
significantly less than what the jury awarded.
[62]   
If I
were to award substantial indemnity costs through out, that would amount to
$395,670.60 plus taxes and disbursements. If I adjust it for the finding of
contributory negligence, and reduce this amount by five percent (5%), that
would result in a costs award of $375,887.07, plus disbursements and taxes, for
a total of $490,368.86.
[63]   
The
Defence maintains that the sum of $200,000 for legal costs, plus taxes is
reasonable in this case.  I disagree.  Those costs would not even cover the
cost of trial for the Plaintiffs.  The length and complexity of the trial
itself justifies more than the fee proposed by the Defence.
[64]   
I also
note that the substantial indemnity costs (reduced by 5%) are still less than
25% of the total award.  The Plaintiffs were successful.  They offered to
settle the action for a fraction of what they were awarded.  There were
numerous Plaintiffs.  There were unique cultural issues at play. Their claim
was complicated by a dispute over consent, which was not their issue.  This
matter took ten years, from the date of this tragic accident to the day the
jury gave their verdict.
[65]   
Stepping
back, and considering the Plaintiff’s success, the amount of time involved, and
the reduction by 5% to take into consideration contributory negligence, I am
satisfied that the substantial indemnity cost award is fair and reasonable in the
circumstances.
[66]   
Based
on the foregoing, I find that costs of this action should be paid to the
Plaintiffs on a substantial indemnity basis, calculated as follows: