[1]              
The applicant, Project Freeway Inc. (“Project Freeway” or the “Vendor”),
sold shares of a business to the respondent, ABC Technologies Inc. (“ABC” or
the “Purchaser”), for cash consideration plus an earn out.  The earn-out was to
be paid over three years depending on the performance of the acquired
business.  The earn-out clause also contains a trigger which accelerates the
payment of the total potential earn-out in certain circumstances.  The issue on
this application involves the interpretation of the share purchase agreement
and whether the acceleration of the total potential earn-out has been
triggered.
[2]              
The clause in question provides that the full earn-out shall immediately
become payable if the Purchaser “directly or indirectly, sells, transfers or
licenses a material portion of the assets of the Business of the Target
Companies in one or a series of transactions to any Person other than an
Affiliate of the Purchaser.”
[3]              
Following the close of the transaction, the Purchaser entered into Sale
Leaseback (“SLB”) transactions with the acquired real property and started
factoring receivables of the acquired business.  After the Purchaser informed
the Vendor that the contribution margin target for the first earn-out payment
had not been attained, the Vendor enquired about the SLB transactions (of which
the Vendor was already aware).  The Purchaser acknowledges that these
transactions were done with arm’s length parties. However, the Purchaser takes
the position that these are normal course financing transactions and not the
type of transaction that would trigger the acceleration of the total potential
earn-out.
[4]              
  For the reasons set out below I have determined that neither the SLB
transactions nor the factoring arrangement triggered the clause in the SPA that
would require the immediate payment by the Purchaser of the full earn-out
payment.
[5]              
In May 2022, representatives from the Windsor Mold Group Companies (the
“Target Companies”) and the Purchaser entered into negotiations regarding the
proposed sale of 100% of the shares of the Target Companies to the Purchaser.
[6]              
On October 14, 2022, the Target Companies and the Purchaser, among
others, entered into a non-binding letter of intent which described the terms
of the share deal pursuant to which the Purchaser would acquire the shares of
the Target Companies.
[7]              
The Vendor was incorporated on December 19, 2022 for the purpose of
acting as the seller of the shares of the Target Companies under the share
purchase agreement.
[8]              
The Purchaser, a major automotive systems and components manufacturer,
bought the shares of the Target Companies under the share purchase agreement.
[9]              
ABC Technologies Holdings Inc. (the “Purchaser Guarantor”) is the parent
company of the Purchaser and the guarantor of the Purchaser’s obligations under
the share purchase agreement.
[10]          
On or about December 21, 2022, the purchaser, ABC, and the Purchaser Guarantor
entered into a share purchase agreement with, the vendor, Project Freeway,
among others (the “SPA”).
[11]          
Excerpts from the SPA are attached as Appendix A.
[12]          
 Under the SPA, ABC purchased shares from Project Freeway in the Target
Companies, carrying on the business of manufacturing plastic injection tooling
and molded products (the “Business”) at various locations in Canada, the United
States and Mexico.
[13]          
The SPA provides that the compensation the Purchaser must pay the Vendor
for the shares of the Target Companies consists of (i) the base purchase price
of USD$165,000,000 on Closing; and (ii) up to an additional USD$26,461,000 (the
“Full Earn-Out Payment”) in three tranches based on the financial performance
of the Business of all the Target Companies (except one) over the following two
years.  The financial performance of the Target Companies is calculated in
accordance with the definition of “Contribution Margin” in the SPA.
[14]          
The SPA also contains a provision that accelerates the earn-out making
the Full Earn-Out Payment immediately due in certain circumstances.  Among
other things, if the Purchaser sells a material portion of the assets of the
Business of the Target Companies to arm’s length parties without the Vendor’s
prior written consent, the earn-out is accelerated.
[15]          
The Purchaser engaged in the following two transactions after Closing
(during the First Earn-Out Period):
[16]          
There was no prior written consent provided by the Vendor in respect of
the Purchaser’s SLB transactions and Factoring Arrangement.
[17]          
In February and March 2023, prior to the Purchaser entering into the SLB
transactions and prior to the Closing of the SPA, there were site visits done
by WP Carey in connection with the SLB transactions.  The site visits were
facilitated by David Mastonardi, the President and CEO of Windsor Mold Inc. at
the time.  Douglas Bierer, the president and sole director of Project Freeway,
was also aware in early 2023 and prior to the closing of the SPA transaction
that the Purchaser was considering entering into the Sale and Leaseback
transactions.
[18]          
On or about March 1, 2023, the transactions contemplated under the SPA
closed.
[19]          
On or about May 12, 2023, ABC Technologies (a publicly traded company at
the time) issued a press release, which was posted on SEDAR.  The press release
discloses the acquisition of the shares of WMG Technologies Holdings Inc. and
its subsidiaries (“WMGT”) pursuant to the SPA.  In the press release, ABC
Technologies also stated that it entered into a sale and leaseback transaction
for gross proceeds of $97.9 million on April 18, 2023 in connection with ABC’s
acquisition of WMGT.
[20]          
The First Earn-Out Period expired on or about August 31, 2023.
[21]          
In November 2023, the Purchaser provided Project Freeway with the First
Earn-Out Statement, which illustrates that the Contribution Target Margin was
not met.
[22]          
On or about December 11, 2023, Project Freeway’s counsel emailed ABC’s
counsel requesting further information on the SLB transactions.
[23]          
Counsel for the Purchaser responded to Project Freeway’s letter on or
about December 14, 2023, stating that “in response to your concerns regarding
the sale leaseback transaction, we interpret “material portion of the assets of
the Business” in section 3.10(12)(a) of the SPA to address assets [of the
Business] which would be material to the operation of the earn-out.  The sale
leaseback transaction resulted in new legal ownership of the sites but did not
impact the occupancy or use of the sites by WMG or the operation of the WMG
business and had no impact on WMG’s failure to meet its specified targets for
the first earn-out period.”
[24]          
On February 13, 2024, Project Freeway’s counsel responded to the
December 14, 2023 letter indicating that they disagreed with the Purchaser’s
interpretation of section 3.10(12)(a) of the SPA.  The letter states that
“[p]roperly constructed, there is little or no question that – as a result of
the [SLB] Transaction – Section 3.10(12)(a) mandates payment of the entire
Earn-Out Payment for the remaining partial and full Earn-Out Periods, to [Project
Freeway], immediately.”
[25]          
On or about February 9, 2024, Project Freeway submitted an Earn-Out
Objection Statement in respect of the First Earn-Out Period.
[26]          
Project Freeway did not mention or complain about the Factoring
Arrangement until it was included in Mr. Bierer’s affidavit in May 2024.
[27]          
The only issue before the Court on this application is whether the sale
of the WP Properties pursuant to the SLB transactions and/or the sale of the
Target Companies’ customer agreements pursuant to the Factoring Arrangement
triggered the Full Earn-Out Payment under section 3.10(12)(a) of the SPA.
[28]          
Project Freeway brings the application under Rules 14.05(3)(d) and (h)
of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, for the
determination of rights that depend on the interpretation of certain provisions
of the SPA.
[29]          
Project Freeway is of the view that the Full Earn-Out Payment was
triggered under section 3.10(12)(a) of the SPA when the Purchaser entered into
the Sale Leaseback transactions and/or when the Purchaser sold the Target
Companies’ customer agreements under the Factoring Arrangement.  The Purchaser
takes the position that the Full Earn-Out Payment was not triggered by either
of these transactions.
[30]          
A sale leaseback transaction occurs when a company sells its commercial
real estate to an investor for cash and enters into a long-term lease with the
new property owner.  The leases entered into by ABC with the Carey Landlords
are 20-year leases, with 10-year renewal terms.
[31]          
A factoring transaction involves a company selling its accounts
receivable to a third party in exchange for advance payment.  ABC describes it
as a way for the company to get money faster from the sale of parts.
[32]          
ABC’s unchallenged evidence in respect of both the SLB transactions and
its Factoring Arrangement, was that they had no impact on the Target Companies’
performance or the calculation of the Contribution Margin for the earn-out
regime.
[33]          
Section 3.10(12)(a) of the SPA provides:
[34]          
The parties differ on their interpretation of the above section of the
SPA.  Both parties cite Sattva Capital Corp. v. Creston Moly Corp., 2015
SCC 53, [2015] 3 S.C.R. 419, but have different interpretations of the outcome
here when the principles of Sattva are applied.  The Supreme Court of
Canada in Sattva, at paras. 47 to 50, stated that when interpreting a
contract, the contract must be read as a whole “giving the words used their
ordinary and grammatical meaning”.  Further, a “practical, common-sense
approach” must be employed, and the court must try to “ascertain the objective
intent of the parties”:
[35]          
It is also important that a contract be interpreted in a way that
“accords with sound business principles” and avoids “a commercially absurd
result:” Weyerhaeuser Company Limited v. Ontario (Attorney General),
2017 ONCA 1007, 77 B.L.R. (5th) 175, at para. 65.
[36]          
In Weyerhaeuser, the Court of Appeal provided the
following summary of the principles of contractual interpretation, at para. 65:
[37]          
The Vendor states that section 3.10(12)(a) of the SPA is a “complete
code” with respect to the acceleration of the Earn-Out payments.  The Vendor’s
position is that the parties agreed to clear and unambiguous contractual
language in section 3.10(12)(a).  The Vendor states that the contracting
parties are presumed to intend the legal consequences of their words and that
the court should not read in an additional “materiality” component.
[38]          
The Vendor submit that on a plain reading of section 3.10(12)(a)(B), if
the Purchaser sells or transfers a material portion of the assets of the
Business of the Target Companies to any arm’s length person, the Full Earn-Out
Payment becomes due and payable to the Vendor.  The Vendor says that the Sale
and Leaseback transactions and the Factoring Arrangement fall within the
language of this provision and therefore the Full Earn-Out Payment ought to be
paid.  The value of the Sale and Leaseback transaction is significant (about
$97.9 million, or approximately 59% of the purchase price under the SPA).
[39]          
The Vendor says that section 3.10(12)(a) provides a “bright line test”
for determining when the Full Earn-Out Payment is to be paid and captures the
bargain struck by the parties to the transaction.
[40]          
The Vendor also contrasts the language in section 3.10(12)(b), which
contemplates that the Purchaser shall not breach certain covenants “in a manner
which materially impairs the ability of the Vendor Shareholders to earn
Earn-Out Payments” with the preceding section 3.10(12)(a).  The Vendor submits
that given the proximity of the terms and the sophistication of the parties it
would be improper to read in “materially impairs the ability of the Vendor
Shareholders to earn Earn-Out Payments” into section 3.10(12)(a).  The Vendor
notes that the absence of words in some areas of a contract, while present in
others, is presumed to have meaning:  Pass Creek Enterprises Ltd. v.
Kootenay Custom Log Sort Ltd., 2003 BCCA 580, at para. 17.
[41]          
In Bhatnagar v. Cresco Labs Inc., 2022 ONSC 1745, at para. 40, Kimmel
J. noted that:
[42]          
The Purchaser does not dispute that both the Sale Leaseback Transactions
and the Factoring Arrangement were sales to arm’s length third parties without
the written consent of the Vendor within the meaning of section 3.10(12) of the
SPA.
[43]          
The Purchaser’s position is that the SLB transactions and Factoring
Arrangement should be viewed as (i) non-substantive; (ii) ordinary financing
steps; (iii) publicly disclosed for months without complaint by the Vendor; and
that (iv) there is no evidence of any impact on the business other than to
generate extra cash for the business.
[44]          
The Purchaser submits that the Vendor should not be entitled to a
windfall.  The other two tranches of the earn-out are still outstanding and to
be determined based on the performance of the Business.
[45]          
The Purchaser says that the Vendor knew about these transactions before
they occurred.  Among other things, the SLB transaction was publicly disclosed
in the April 2023 press release. The Vendor did not complain about the SLB
transactions until after it was notified that the Contribution Margins in
respect of the first earn-out had not been met. Further, senior management of
the Vendor was advised of the Purchaser’s intention to enter into the SLB
transactions and participated in the Sale Leaseback transactions process by,
among other things, facilitating site inspection visits for WP Carey.
[46]          
The Purchaser agrees that the premises where auto parts are made is
important, as are the customer accounts.  However, the Purchaser submits that
this does not address what is meant by “material” within the meaning of section
3.10(12).  The Purchaser’s position is that “material” must have a meaning
behind it – specifically, it has to impact the calculation of the Contribution
Margin and Earn-Out.  The Purchaser submits that “material” cannot simply mean
big or expensive; it must mean something within the context of the Earn-Out.
[47]          
The Purchaser asks the Court to examine the purpose of the provision in
light of the SPA as a whole.
[48]          
The Purchaser submits that section 3.10 of the SPA balances various
interests.  On the one hand, the Vendor has the opportunity to receive the
Earn-Out assuming the Contribution Margins are met.  On the other hand, the
Purchaser is to have operational freedom to run the business as it sees fit as
long as it does not impair the Contribution Margin and Earn-Out.
[49]          
The Purchaser further submits that the court should have regard to the
non-binding Letter of Intent (“LOI”) entered into between the parties on
October 14, 2022.  The Purchaser agrees that action cannot be taken under the
LOI; however, it submits that it is still important to have regard to objective
evidence of the parties at the time of the definitive agreement.  The Purchaser
points to para. 58 of Sattva, where the Supreme Court of Canada states:
[50]          
The Vendor submits that the Entire Agreement clause precludes
consideration of the LOI.  However, as noted by the Court of Appeal in Ontario
First Nations (2008) Limited Partnership v. Ontario Lottery and Gaming
Corporation, 2021 ONCA 592, at para. 62, “[a]n entire agreement clause
alone does not prevent a court from considering admissible evidence of the
surrounding circumstances at the time of contract formation.”
[51]          
I agree that regard may be had to the LOI for the purpose of
ascertaining background facts at the time the SPA was entered into.
[52]          
The evidence of John Loehr, the Chief Transformation Officer at ABC
Technologies, was that when the parties executed the LOI they had not negotiated
the final terms of the Earn-Out.  However, they had agreed on certain
principles, which were contained in Exhibit A to the LOI, including certain
covenants related to the Earn-Out:
[53]          
The covenants in the LOI accord with the Purchaser’s interpretation of
the SPA.  Specifically, the word “material” in the context of section
3.10(12)(a) should be interpreted as material to the Earn-Out.  That is, the
Purchaser ought to be free to run the Business as it sees fit, provided that it
does not negatively impact the Contribution Margin or Earn-Out.  In the context
of the earn-out provision, the prohibition on selling or transferring a
“material portion of the assets of the Business” logically refers to the sale
or transfer of the assets of the Business that would be material to the
Earn-Out.
[54]          
The fact that the parties contemplated that the Purchaser should be able
to operate the Business as it sees fit, provided that it does not negatively
impact the Contribution Margin or Earn-Out, is supported by language in
sections 3.10(12)(a) and 3.10(13).  Specifically, in section 3.10(13)(a), the
SPA provides that the Purchaser “shall not be prohibited in any way from
closing, merging or consolidating any of the Acquired Facilities with any of
the Purchaser’s or its Affiliates’ facilities” as long as the Contribution
Margin of the product line is tracked to the next facility.  In section
3.10(12)(a), the “for greater certainty” language provides that the parties
agree that a limitation on the ability of the Purchaser to sell a material
portion of the assets of the business “shall not limit the Purchaser’s right to
complete mergers, amalgamations or other internal reorganizations with or among
the WM Group and Affiliates of the Purchaser and shall specifically exclude a
change of control of the Purchaser Guarantor.”  It would be commercially absurd
if the Purchaser could complete mergers and other internal reorganizations, or
close and consolidate facilities without Project Freeway’s consent, but could
not engage in ordinary course financing transactions.
[55]          
Further, the fact that the Vendor was aware that the Purchaser intended
to enter into the SLB transactions prior to the close of the SPA supports the
interpretation propounded by the Purchaser.  The evidence of David Mastronardi,
the President and Chief Executive Officer of Windsor Mold Inc. at the time of
the transaction, was that “while [he] was aware of the SLB transaction and assisted
ABC in facilitating WP Carey’s diligence for the SLB transaction, [he] did not
view the SLB as a transaction of significant concern.”  Mr. Bierer was also
aware that ABC was considering entering into an SBL transaction with WP Carey
prior to the close of the transaction.  It is notable that “Knowledge” of the
vendor parties under the SPA “refers to the actual knowledge of ... Douglas
Bierer and ... David Mastronardi [among 3 others].”  The key players
negotiating the deal knew about the intent of the Purchaser to enter into the
SLB transactions.  If there was a concern that the full earn-out may be
triggered when the Purchaser proceeded with these ordinary course financing
transactions, presumably one of the sophisticated parties or counsel would have
raised it.
[56]          
I agree with the submission of the Purchaser that the SLB transactions
and the factoring arrangement are ordinary course financing steps that did not
impact the operation of the business.  Following the close of the SLB
transactions, and the close of the factoring agreements, the acquired business
continued to operate in the same place, with the same equipment, employees, and
customers as the day prior to the close of these financing transactions.  The
only thing that changed under the SLB transactions was the legal ownership of
the sites.  The only thing that changed under the factoring arrangement was
that the Purchaser was able to realize more quickly on its receivables.  I
agree with the Purchaser, and the record supports, that the SLB transactions
and factoring arrangement would not impact whether the Contribution Margin
Target was attained during the relevant earn-out period.  Because the SLB
transactions and the factoring arrangement do not impact the ability of the
Business to hit the Contribution Margin targets, it is difficult to see how
they could be “material” within the meaning of section 3.10(12).  The Earn-Out
regime must have a purpose to it, which as noted earlier, is a balance between
providing the Purchaser with the operational freedom to run the business as it
sees fit as long as it does not impair the Contribution Margin and earn-out.
[57]          
As noted in Sattva, at para. 49, “the goal of the exercise [of
contractual interpretation] is to ascertain the objective intent of the
parties.”  When I consider all the circumstances, including the LOI terms
(objective evidence of the parties’ intentions at the time of the definitive
agreement), the purpose of the earn-out provision in the SPA, and the fact that
the key principals at the Vendor were aware of the Purchaser’s intent to enter
into SLB transactions, I am satisfied that the word “material” in section
3.10(12)(a) of the SPA means material to or within the context of the earn-out
regime.  Adopting the interpretation propounded by Project Freeway would result
in a significant windfall to Project Freeway where there was a shortfall in the
first Contribution Margin, which was not caused or impacted by the SLB
transactions and/or the Factoring Arrangement.
[58]          
Accordingly, I am satisfied that the SLB transactions and the Factoring
Arrangement did not trigger the Full Earn-Out Payment.
[59]          
Project Freeway shall pay ABC’s costs fixed in the amount of $300,000.