[1]              
The Applicant seeks to set aside the decision of arbitrator
Deborah Anschell dated February 24, 2023 under the Ontario New Home
Warranties Plan Act, RSO 1990, c. O.31 (the “Act”).
[2]              
The Applicant is a residential developer who arbitrated a finding
by the Respondent, the regulator mandated with administering the Act, that
there were “chargeable conciliations” – i.e. defects requiring the builder to
remedy – in one of its houses. Following a two-day hearing, the arbitrator dismissed
the Applicant’s challenge, issuing 19 pages of reasons for doing so.
[3]              
Counsel for the Applicant submits that the arbitration procedures
under the Act are unfair but mandatory, leaving parties with no choice. However,
arbitration is not exactly mandatory. In fact, the Act is silent on dispute
resolution. As Respondent’s counsel points out, arbitration is a process
offered by the Respondent as a convenience for builders if they desire to
pursue it. It does not displace or prevent litigation if a builder decides to
go that route.
[4]              
Under this arrangement, the courts are always
open for disputing parties to use. Contrary to Applicant’s counsel’s
submission, the chargeability decision by the Respondent was, although not a
judicial-type decision, an exercise of a statutory power and potentially
subject to administrative law remedies: Nicholson v. Haldimand-Norfolk
Regional Police Commissioners, 1978 CanLII 24 (SCC), [1979] 1 SCR 311. Judicial review was
certainly an option.
[5]              
I do not say that a reviewing court would necessarily
invoke its discretion to grant the remedy sought, or that it would determine
that the public interest requires judicial intervention in the instant case: Chippewas
of Sarnia Band v. Canada (Attorney General) (2000), 2000 CanLII 16991 (ON CA), 51 OR (3d) 641, at
para 258 (CA). But given that the Applicant’s challenge entails, inter alia,
arguments about natural justice in the Respondent’s wielding of statutory authority
and allegations about the Respondent’s bias in exercising that authority,
arbitration was not the Applicant’s only choice; judicial review was available
as an avenue for it to consider: 2122157 Ontario Inc. v. Tarion Warranty
Corporation, 2016 ONSC 851 (Div Ct).
[6]              
The Applicant is an experienced builder and a veteran of previous
arbitrations under the Act. It engaged in the process freely, was represented
by counsel, and signed the arbitration agreement that underpins the process of
its own accord and without coercion or duress. The arbitration agreement states
that the arbitral award is final and binding. It provides for no appeal on any
issue of fact or law.
[7]              
The Applicant challenges the award on four grounds: a) the
arbitrator exceeded her jurisdiction; b) the Applicant was denied procedural
fairness; c) the arbitrator was biased; and d) the arbitrator failed to state
reasons for the decision.
[8]              
There is no merit to any of these grounds. I am compelled to
agree with counsel for the Respondent, who characterizes this Application as a textbook example of an attempt at an appeal masquerading as a set-aside
proceeding.
[9]              
For the reasons that follow, I dismiss the Application.
[10]          
Section 46 of the Arbitration Act, 1991, SO 1991, c. 17 provides
a narrow set of grounds on which an arbitration award can be set aside. The set-aside
remedy is essentially limited to cases of arbitrator’s error of jurisdiction, arbitrator’s
bias, arbitrator’s misconduct, or arbitrator’s legal incapacity. Section 45 of
the Arbitration Act further provides that appeals of an arbitral
decision – whether on questions of fact, law, or mixed fact and law – are
permitted only where specifically authorized in the governing arbitration
agreement.
[11]          
A set-aside application such as this one
does not call for a substantive review of the arbitral award. In fact, “[i]t
requires that the court not interfere with the arbitrator’s award as long as
the issue decided was properly before the arbitrator”: Mensula Bancorp Inc.
v. Halton Condominium Corporation No. 137, 2022 ONCA 769, at para. 5. The only
task for the court under section 46 of the Arbitration Act is to
determine whether a specific ground set out in that section is present. If a
ground is present, the court can ask whether the matter is so prejudicial that it
will exercise its discretion to set aside the award.
[12]          
The four allegations put forward by the Applicant are presented
in a way that reflects grounds for setting aside an award as provided in
section 46. Each will therefore be examined in order to determine whether they
are actually present in the challenged award or in the arbitral process in
which the parties engaged.
[13]          
The Applicant submits that the arbitrator lost
jurisdiction when she included as part of the warranty claim certain defects
raised by the Respondent that the Applicant argues were not part of the
original claim. As Applicant’s counsel explains it, there are matters
considered by the arbitrator in her decision that were raised for the first
time at conciliation – i.e. subsequent to the Respondent’s issuance of the
original warranty claim – and which were therefore not chargeable to the
Applicant.
[14]          
Since the arbitrator’s authority flows from the
arbitration agreement, which is premised on the issues raised by the original
warranty claim as issued by the Respondent, inclusion of newly added claims could
amount to an excess of the arbitrator’s decision-making jurisdiction: The
Piazza Family Trust v. Veillette, 2011 ONSC 2820, at para. 63 (Div Ct). Under section 46(1)(3) of the Act, exceeding jurisdiction by going
outside of the four corners of the arbitration agreement would constitute a
ground for setting aside the arbitral award: Cricket Canada v. Bilal
Syed, 2017 ONSC 3301, at para. 31.
[15]          
Respondent’s counsel points out that while
deciding a matter outside of the basic agreement to arbitrate would indeed be a
jurisdictional issue, the Applicant’s complaint about the decision at issue refers
to a matter squarely within the arbitrator’s agree-upon jurisdiction. The
Applicant itself raised this very question before the arbitrator. Its own “Request to Arbitrate” listed “re-introduced or new issue raised at
the conciliation” as part of its request, and explained “We consider these to
be new items not raised before the inspection date.” The arbitrator duly
addressed the question as raised by the Applicant, and concluded that the warranty
claim defects put forward by the Respondent were indeed chargeable to the
Applicant.
[16]          
The arbitrator’s reasons for decision in this
regard are thorough. She reviewed the evidence in the record before her and was
attentive to each party’s testimony in respect of the items challenged by the
Applicant. For each challenged item, the arbitrator referred to the warranties
in issue – the One-Year Workmanship and One-Year Materials Warranties – as well
as to the Respondent’s Construction Performance Guidelines. She then concluded
each of the items were all properly warranted.
[17]          
The arbitrator also reviewed the descriptions of
each of the items on the Pre-Delivery Inspection form, the 30-Day Form, and the
Warranty Assessment Report, all of which were in the possession of, and were
well known to, the Applicant. This review entailed a careful consideration of
construction details described in those documents. The arbitrator determined
that the disputed items were consistently described in each document and that there
were no new items introduced at conciliation or otherwise after the fact.
[18]          
The Applicant also contends that the arbitrator
exceeded her jurisdiction by relying on the Builder Bulletins, a source
published by the Respondent which is generally used to supplement the Ontario Builders
Code. Applicant’s counsel submit that these are non-binding advisory documents
that were not agreed to under the arbitration
agreement.
[19]          
In response, Respondent’s counsel submits that
this is simply not the case. The Builder Arbitration Form (“BAF”) Rules that
govern arbitrations under the Act provide that all arbitrations must be
determined on the basis of the Act, the regulations thereunder, and the Builder
Bulletins. There is nothing hidden or obscured in this agreement. By agreeing
to the BAF Rules in the arbitration agreement, the Applicant agreed that the sources
incorporated in the BAF Rules, including the Builders Bulletins, apply.
[20]          
The arbitrator therefore did nothing wrong or
unexpected in applying the chargeability conditions found in a Builder Bulletin.
In fact, she was required to apply those conditions because they are the
conditions that the Applicant was obligated to follow.
[21]          
To put the matter at its most basic, “[i]f an
arbitration agreement provides that an arbitrator shall resolve a particular
question and the arbitrator does so, the court has no authority to set aside
the award on the basis that the arbitrator’s decision is unreasonable or
incorrect”: Alectra Utilities Corporation v. Solar Power Network Inc.,
2019 ONCA 254, at para. 26.  73 What the Applicant asks this
Court to do is not to consider whether the arbitrator had jurisdiction over the
several disputed construction items – that is the question asked of the
arbitrator and answered by the arbitrator. Rather, what the Applicant seeks is
for this Court to determine that the arbitrator was incorrect in her assessment
of that question.
[22]          
That determination, however, would amount to
interference with a conclusion that the arbitrator reached on issues that were
directly within her jurisdiction. As the Court of Appeal put it in Alectra,
at para. 41, “It was for the arbitrator, not the court, to interpret and
apply the substantive provisions of the [arbitration agreement], and it is of
no moment whether the arbitrator did so reasonably or unreasonably, correctly
or incorrectly.” The arbitrator’s ruling in respect of the impugned items is
not appealable, and her decision was properly within her jurisdiction.
[23]          
The Applicant alleges two bases for finding that
there was procedural unfairness in the arbitration process. The first is a
complaint that its employee who was most knowledgeable about the house in
issue, Jane Smith, was excluded from the pre-arbitral conciliation process at
the request of the homeowner. Instead of Ms. Smith, the Applicant sent another
one of its employees to discuss the building issues with the Respondent’s
representative. It is the Applicant’s view that the exclusion of Ms. Smith was
a procedural defect that should lead to the arbitration award being set aside.
[24]          
Counsel for the Respondent states that the
Applicant has filed no evidence in the record from Ms.
Smith explaining how the conduct of the arbitration resulted in a procedural
unfairness. Indeed, Ms. Smith herself was a witness who testified at the
arbitration hearing and the arbitrator expressly considered her evidence at the
hearing. The Applicant apparently did not raise any objection to the procedural
fairness of the arbitration with the arbitrator.
[25]          
It is apparent from the way Applicant’s counsel
has put this argument that the objection is not to the fairness of the arbitral
proceeding. Rather, it is to the fairness of the conciliation process that
preceded the arbitration. The arbitrator specifically considered that issue,
and found that the Respondent is not in a position to order a homeowner to
allow an individual into their home that the homeowner does not want in their
home.
[26]          
In other words, the issue that the Applicant now
raises is one that, again, was specifically asked of the arbitrator and
answered by the arbitrator. It is not now subject to being re-considered in the
guise of a procedural fairness point. The arbitrator herself engaged in no
procedural unfairness. What the Applicant seeks is, essentially, an appeal of
the arbitrator’s decision on an issue of unfairness in the Respondent’s
investigative and conciliation process. That is not a tenable position, as no
appeal is authorised under the Act.
[27]          
The other issue of supposed procedural irregularity
raised by the Applicant is, once again, that the arbitrator unfairly relied on
a Builders Bulletin in reaching her decision. As discussed above, the Applicant
was obliged under its vendor agreement with the
Applicant, and by the regulations under the Act, to comply with the
Respondent’s Builder Bulletins. It had notice under the arbitration agreement that
the BAF Rules would apply, and it agreed to the application of those Rules.
[28]          
There is simply no discernable argument that the
arbitrator’s reliance on the provisions of a Builders Bulletin was unfair. The
Applicant may not agree with the result that the arbitrator came to. But the
arbitrator’s conclusion, as opposed to the process, does not provide a basis to
set the ruling aside.
[29]          
The Applicant alleges that the arbitrator was
biased in reaching her decision. But it submits no evidence in support of this
allegation. Rather, it seeks to have the court come to
this conclusion based on the content of the arbitrator’s reasons for decision.
[30]          
I fail to see how the arbitrator’s reasons and
conclusion create a reasonable apprehension of bias. To
set aside an award for arbitrator bias, there is an onus on the Applicant to
introduce evidence that is not only substantial, but that reveals a consistent pattern
of bias by the arbitrator. As Justice Lax said in A.T. Kearney Ltd.
v. Harrison, 2003 CanLII 32908, at para. 7, “The
threshold for a finding of real or perceived bias is a high one since it calls
into question both the personal integrity of the adjudicator and the integrity
of the administration of justice.”
[31]          
An apprehension of bias must be “measured by whether a reasonably
informed bystander could reasonably perceive bias on the part of an
adjudicator”: Calabrese v. Weekes, 2003 CanLII 3311, citing Jaffasweet
Juices Ltd. v. Michael J. Firestone & Associates, [1997]
O.J. No. 4585, at para. 38 (Gen. Div.). Essentially, the Applicant’s argument
is that the arbitrator was biased because she did not accept the arguments that
Ms. Smith was improperly excluded from the conciliation and that the Respondent
warranted items allegedly not included on the homeowners’ original 30-Day Form.
[32]          
In other words, the bias identified by the Applicant is precisely the
substantive grounds on which it lost the case. But as Justice Himel observed
pointedly in Calabrese, at para. 37, “The court does not have
jurisdiction to set aside an award which is, in essence, an attempt to appeal
the decision of the arbitrator, where no right of appeal exists.”
[33]          
The other ground of bias argued by the Applicant is that arbitrator
Anschell is a member of the roster of approved BAF arbitrators and, by
inference, this leads to an apprehension that she is pre-disposed to side with the
Respondent. Again, the Applicant has introduced no evidence to support this
contention other than the general observation that there is an approved list of
arbitrators from which parties are invited to choose.
[34]          
The Applicant itself nominated arbitrator Anschell. It selected her from
the roster list as its first choice. Further, it never asked her to recuse
herself, nor did it object to her at the arbitration hearing. Moreover, the
arbitrator signed the nomination form confirming that she had no conflict of
interest in being appointed as arbitrator, and, to be clear, the Applicant
alleges no particular conflict of interest. In other words, the Applicant takes
issue with the general fact that the arbitrator is on the BAF roster – a fact
that would pertain to every available arbitrator.
[35]          
The Respondent points out, and it is certainly the case, that
arbitrator rosters are commonplace. It is self-evident that there are perfectly
valid reasons for this specialized process to employ a roster of approved
arbitrators. Builder Bulletin 41 explains that the purpose of the roster is to
ensure that arbitrators and mediators are independent, have relevant
experience, are familiar with the issues in new home construction, and have an
understanding of how the Act works.
[36]          
To ask whether familiarity with the subject area and knowledge of
the applicable law reflects improper bias is to answer its own question. There
is no bias made out here. The arbitrator is an approved name on the roster of
arbitrators precisely because she can be counted on to be insightful and
objective in regard to the subject matter at hand.
[37]          
Section 38(1) of the Arbitration Act, 1991, SO 1991, c. 17,
requires arbitrators to provide reasons for decision. It is well established
that the written reasons need not review each and every argument raised by the
parties, and need not recite each and every statute or judicial decision
referenced by the parties. “Rather, the reasons must show, when read in context
of the record and the submissions, that the trier has “seized the substance of
the matter”.  The degree of detail in any particular case may vary with
the circumstances”: Farmer v. Farmer, 2021 ONSC 5913, at para.
113.
[38]          
In fact, the adequacy or inadequacy of reasons is not generally a
sufficient ground for quashing an otherwise valid decision. The Supreme Court
of Canada has explained that the purpose of reasons is to demonstrate
“justification, transparency and intelligibility”: Dunsmuir v. New Brunswick,
2008 SCC 9 (CanLII), [2008] 1 SCR 190, at para. 47. The Supreme Court has gone on to explain that, “[I]f
the reasons allow the reviewing court to understand why the tribunal made its
decision and permit it to determine whether the conclusion is within the range
of acceptable outcomes, the Dunsmuir criteria are met”:  Newfoundland
and Labrador Nurses’ Union v. Newfoundland and Labrador (Treasury Board),
2011 SCC 62 (CanLII), [2011] 3 SCR 708, at para. 16.
[39]          
I find that there is no basis here to challenge the arbitrator’s
reasons. As indicated at the outset, arbitrator Anschell provided 19 pages of
reasons. In the course of those reasons, she discussed the evidentiary record,
engaged in appropriate fact finding, addressed the grounds set out in the
Request for Arbitration, and considered the Applicant’s various arguments.
[40]          
In short, the arbitrator’s reasons provided a logical and transparent
basis for her decision. The Applicant has failed to identify anything in
particular that is lacking in those reasons. It is apparent that it is the
conclusion, and not the reasons, that the Applicant dislikes. But as already
explained, disagreement with the arbitrator’s conclusion is not a proper basis
for setting aside the decision.
[41]          
The Respondent has sought to adduce evidence of the context in which it
operates and in which chargeable conciliations such as those in dispute between
the parties arise. That evidence is presented by way of an affidavit of Shannon Hayman, the official at the Respondent responsible for
administering the BAF process. The Applicant objects to the admissibility of
this affidavit, arguing that Ms. Hayman’s testimony amounts to a usurpation of
the court’s role as fact finder and decision maker.
[42]          
Given the way the matter has unfolded, I do not need Ms. Hayman’s
evidence. As a general matter, however, I will say that it was not improper for
the Respondent to seek to introduce affidavit evidence from the
statutory administrator as to how the Act works.
[43]          
The Act operates in a specialized and somewhat
technical field in which a “non-argumentative orienting statement” about the statutory
scheme may be helpful: Bernard v. Canada
Revenue Agency, 2015 FCA 263, at para. 21. To the extent that
this kind of context evidence provides a neutral summary of steps and procedures,
it can be admitted without it threatening to unduly interfere with the Court’s
decision or to transform the Application into a hearing de novo: Scott v. Toronto (City), 2021 ONSC 858,
at para. 19 (Div Ct).
[44]          
 On the other hand, an affidavit submitted for the purpose of providing context
for the parties’ arguments should not contain ‘spin’ and should not paint one
side’s view of the process in a positive light and the other’s in a negative
light. Likewise, it should not contain legal analysis or superfluous
explanations about routes of appeal/review or other such matters within the court’s
basic competence. There do appear to be some of these types of statements in
Ms. Hayman’s affidavit, which I would excise if I were admitting it into the
record.
[45]          
Under the circumstances, I see no need to admit Ms. Hayman’s affidavit
into the record. The Respondent’s case stands on its own without this proposed evidence.
I have not relied on it in reaching my decision.
[46]          
The Application is dismissed.
[47]          
The parties may make written submissions on
costs.
[48]          
I would ask counsel for the Respondent to
provide me with brief submissions by emailing them to my assistant, and serving
them on the Applicant, within two weeks of today. I would also ask counsel for
the Applicant to provide me with equally brief submissions by emailing them to
my assistant, and serving them on the Respondent, within two weeks after
receiving the Respondent’s submissions.