[1]              
This was an urgent Application for what was
described as a Norwich order and a Mareva Injunction.  These are extraordinary
orders which are available in particular circumstances and may sometimes be
obtained without notice.  For the reasons that follow, such powerful and
sweeping orders are not appropriate on the facts of this case and I decline to
grant the relief.
[2]              
The Applicant is a recent graduate of Carleton
University and a business owner.  According to her affidavit evidence, she
first met the Respondent through the Tinder dating application and renewed her
acquaintance in 2024 when she inquired about an iPhone he was advertising for
sale on social media.  Her affidavit discloses that over a period of time she
was induced to invest her savings with the Respondent who misled her about his
business and investing acumen and the nature of certain investments.
[3]              
It is the evidence of the Applicant that she
invested a total of just under $35,000 and she has not been able to recover
those funds or obtain an accounting from the Respondent.  If the affidavit
evidence is accurate, she was induced to place investments with the Respondent
through a series of misrepresentations, outright lies and false promises.  In short,
she was defrauded of most of her savings.
[4]              
Importantly, however, for purposes of this
hearing, the Applicant knows who the Respondent is, he resides in Ottawa, his
mother resides in Ottawa and the investment funds were for the most part
transferred by the Applicant to the Respondent’s bank account with the
Toronto-Dominion Bank.
[5]              
 A “Norwich order” is a form of pre-action
equitable discovery in which an action is allowed against a third party solely
for the purpose of discovering the identity of a wrongdoer.[1]  Normally, it is sought
in an action (or application) against the party holding the information and
while it is important that equitable remedies remain flexible, in this case the
identity of the alleged wrongdoer is known, his whereabouts are known and the
bank account into which the funds were transferred is also known.   A Norwich
order is not appropriate.
[6]              
Interlocutory injunctions, particularly on an ex
parte basis are available in specific circumstances where it is necessary
to preserve the rights of the parties in pending litigation.  Mareva injunctions
are available where it appears a party has assets within the jurisdiction and
may be in the process of dissipating those assets or putting them beyond the
reach of the court.[2]
[7]              
While prima facie proof of fraud may be
sufficient to infer that dissipation is likely, that is not sufficient to
justify execution in advance of judgment unless the tests of irreparable harm
and balance of convenience are also met.  Here, where what is sought would be a
monetary judgment within the limit of the Small Claims Court, damages are the
only remedy that is available.  A Mareva injunction is not justified on the
evidence before the court.
[8]              
There are more surgical and targeted remedies
available than the sweeping injunctive relief contained in the draft order. 
For example, if there is an identifiable fund whose ownership is in dispute or
some risk that evidence may be destroyed, an order under Rule 45.01 or 45.02
may be available.  In the instant case, however, the Applicant will be entitled
to a monetary judgment if she is successful, and she will then have the usual
remedies available to judgment creditors.  There is no identifiable fund to be
preserved as there might have been if the Respondent had invested the funds and
was holding them in an investment account.  Based on the evidence that the
Respondent was demanding the Applicant bring him drugs and food at one point,
this seems unlikely.
[9]              
There is a further consideration and that is
proportionality.  Without in any way diminishing the impact of losing $35,000
to an individual litigant such as the Applicant, bringing an ex parte injunction
application followed by a motion on notice to continue the injunction and then
a separate action for damages is almost certain to run up legal fees and costs
in excess of the amount in dispute.
[10]          
Seeking a Norwich order and a Mareva injunction
in support of a Small Claims action is an inherently expensive way to proceed. 
I would not suggest that these forms of relief should never be available, but
the Applicant may be further ahead to simply sue the defendant, serve him and
proceed with her action.
[11]          
There is no guarantee that the Respondent will
not defend the action and of course there is no guarantee that a judgment can
be easily enforced.  But, even if I granted the remedies the Applicant is
seeking, there is no guarantee the funds she invested are available to be
preserved or frozen.[3]
[12]          
Equitable remedies are necessary where legal
remedies are insufficient.   In this case, there is a straightforward route to
pursue damages.  Reliance on more exotic pre-action remedies is likely to be
disproportionate and unnecessary.
[13]          
I sympathize with the situation the Applicant
finds herself in.  The use of dating aps and social media to target victims of
fraud has become a veritable epidemic.[4] 
I understand her need to recover her savings and her counsel’s hope for an
instant fix.  The court cannot, however, grant automatic ex parte orders
freezing the bank accounts of alleged fraudsters in circumstances such as
these.
[14]          
The Application is dismissed.  I understand
counsel is in the process of issuing a claim in Small Claims Court.