[1]              
This case conference was requested
by Mr. Sergio Grillone. Mr. Grillone, an Ontario lawyer (administratively
suspended), is self-represented in this proceeding. A court reporter was
present.
[2]              
Mr. Grillone requested this case
conference to seek advice and directions with respect to his proposed appeal
from the scheduling Endorsement of Justice Kimmel of this Court dated January
20, 2025, following on an earlier case conference conducted by Justice Kimmel
on January 17, 2025. As more particularly described below, his chief complaint
is that the Registrar has declined to accept his proposed Notice of Appeal dated
January 30, 2025 and should be directed to accept the Notice in order that he
can proceed with his proposed appeal.
[3]              
In his Request Form filed to
schedule this case conference, Mr. Grillone also stated that he was seeking an
order recusing Justice Kimmel from determining this matter on the basis of a
reasonable apprehension of bias which, he submits, is clear on the face of
Justice Kimmel’s January 20, 2025 Endorsement.
[4]              
All of the relief being sought by
Mr. Grillone is opposed by the Trustee in Bankruptcy and all creditors.
[5]              
As a preliminary matter, this case
conference came on before me rather than Justice Kimmel with the result that
Mr. Grillone’s proposed recusal motion in respect of Justice Kimmel is moot and
is not being pursued.
[6]              
Mr. Grillone was adjudged a
bankrupt by order dated October 12, 2023 following a contested bankruptcy trial
before Justice Kimmel: 2023 ONSC 5710. His appeal from that bankruptcy order
was dismissed by the Court of Appeal for Ontario. Regrettably, this bankruptcy
proceeding has been the subject of many motions and appearances both in this
Court and in the Court of Appeal.
[7]              
On December 13, 2024, Mr. Grillone
appeared at a case conference requested by him to schedule two proposed motions.
First, he sought to bring a contempt motion against a representative of one of
the creditors, Bluecore, and its counsel in this matter. Second, he sought to
bring a motion pursuant to rule 59.06 for an order setting aside the bankruptcy
order on the grounds of an alleged fraud perpetrated against the Court.
[8]              
The Endorsement of this Court in
respect of the December 13, 2024 case conference directed Mr. Grillone to first
file his motion materials before the Court would consider his scheduling
request. Mr. Grillone undertook to file those materials by December 31, 2024.
[9]              
As reflected in the December 13,
2024 Endorsement, the direction of the Court was to the effect that after Mr.
Grillone’s motion records had been served, those parties were to advise whether
they intended to bring motions pursuant to rules 2.1, 2.2 and/or 37.16, or an
application pursuant to section 140 of the Courts of Justice Act, and/or
whether it would be their position that Mr. Grillone was required to obtain
leave to bring his motions on any other basis, such as section 215 of the Bankruptcy
and Insolvency Act. Bluecore and the Trustee were directed to advise Mr.
Grillone of such, and serve their notices of motion, as applicable, no later
than January 10, 2025.
[10]          
Further, as reflected in Justice Kimmel’s
January 20, 2025 Endorsement, Mr. Grillone (and other parties) also attended at
a case conference before Associate Justice Ilchenko of the Bankruptcy Court
shortly after December 13, 2024, at which Mr. Grillone sought to schedule other
motions and request relief, including a stay of the bankruptcy order, that
appeared to overlap with matters addressed at the December 13, 2024 case
conference before this Court.
[11]          
Accordingly, Associate Justice
Ilchenko directed that Mr. Grillone also serve any motion materials in respect
of the proposed relief he was seeking from the Registrar in Bankruptcy by
December 31, 2024 in order that all of those matters could be addressed by
Justice Kimmel at the January 17, 2025 case conference.
[12]          
Mr. Grillone did not serve any
motion materials by the December 31, 2024 deadline, and indeed had not done so
by the time of the January 17, 2025 case conference before Justice Kimmel.
[13]          
As reflected in Justice Kimmel’s Endorsement
of January 20, 2025, Mr. Grillone served, on January 9, 2025, a Notice of
Motion exceeding 30 pages in length, without supporting evidence, seeking
findings of contempt of court and sanctions against Bluecore and its counsel,
other creditors and their counsel and the Trustee in Bankruptcy, for allegedly
knowing and intentionally breaching the bankruptcy order. Mr. Grillone’s Notice
of Motion also sought orders under rule 59.06(2) setting aside the bankruptcy
order on the basis of fraud (that was alleged to have both pre-dated and post-dated
the order), perjury, and alleged criminal activity, and fully discharging Mr.
Grillone.
[14]          
Justice Kimmel’s consideration of
the issues, and the directions given, are fully set out in the Endorsement of
January 20, 2025. Among other things, Justice Kimmel noted that it was the
position of Bluecore, supported by the Trustee and by another creditor, Omega
Process Servers, that Mr. Grillone’s January 9, 2025 Notice of Motion is scandalous
and vexatious on its face, and there was no affidavit in support, with the
result that the appropriate course of action was for the Court to invoke the
process contemplated by rule 2.1.02(1) to dismiss or stay Mr. Grillone’s motion.
Bluecore further submitted that it was unfair to require Bluecore or any party
to formally bring a motion for a stay or dismissal of Mr. Grillone’s proposed
motion, since he remains an undischarged bankrupt and to force parties to incur
additional costs that will never be recovered was highly prejudicial and simply
unfair.
[15]          
The Trustee further submitted that
Mr. Grillone requires leave to proceed with his motion for a finding of
contempt against the Trustee, as required by section 215 of the BIA. If
Mr. Grillone served and filed motion materials to seek that required leave, the
Trustee intended to bring a motion for security for costs and for an order that
Mr. Grillone not be permitted to proceed with either of his motions for
contempt or for a section 59.06 order, or for the motion for leave pursuant to
section 215 of the BIA, until he had satisfied any order for security
for costs made.
[16]          
The Trustee further submitted that
Mr. Grillone, as an undischarged bankrupt, lacks standing to seek much of the
relief he is purporting to advance ostensibly for the benefit of the estate and
its creditors, and that time and money should not be wasted responding to a
motion that Mr. Grillone lacks the standing to bring.
[17]          
Justice Kimmel considered the
positions and submissions of all parties and determined that the rule 2.1
motion to stay or strike needed to be dealt with first, since, depending upon
the outcome, that may be no need to address the other contemplated preliminary
motions or the proposed motions of Mr. Grillone.
[18]          
The rule 2.1 Requests for a Stay
or Dismissal of Mr. Grillone’s proposed motion, served by Bluecore and Omega, (two
creditors in the bankruptcy estate), had already been served on Mr. Grillone
and received by the Court. Such requests are expressly contemplated by rule
2.1.01(6). Accordingly, Justice Kimmel made the scheduling directions in
accordance with rule 2.1.01, all set out in the Endorsement.
[19]          
Justice Kimmel directed the
Registrar to give Notice to Mr. Grillone to advise him that the Court was
considering making an order staying or dismissing his January 9, 2025 Notice of
Motion because it appears on its face to be frivolous or vexatious or otherwise
an abuse of the process of the court pursuant to rule 2.1.02(2) (and by
incorporation 2.1.01(3)), and under rule 36.17 and rule 2.1.02(3) (if the
existing rule 37.16 order of the Court of Appeal was no longer in effect)
prohibiting Mr. Grillone from making any further motions, without leave.
[20]          
As contemplated by rule 2.1.01(3)2,
the notice advised Mr. Grillone that he may, within 15 days, file with the
court a written submission responding to the notice and that, pending the
outcome of the written hearing under rule 2.1.01(3) or further order of the
court, no further steps shall be taken with respect to Mr. Grillone’s proposed
motion and the registrar was directed to accept no further filings from Mr.
Grillone with the exception of his written rule 2.1 submissions, if any.
[21]          
Mr. Grillone did not file a
submission within the 15-day period, and indeed has not filed one even as of
the date of this case conference. On the contrary, it is his position, as noted
at the outset of this Endorsement, that he wishes to appeal the Endorsement of
Justice Kimmel dated January 20, 2025, with the result that he has not taken,
and will not take, any steps as directed therein until his proposed appeal is
determined.
[22]          
At this case conference, I advised
Mr. Grillone of my preliminary concern with his proposed appeal that it was
premature in that the only thing that Justice Kimmel’s endorsement did was to
direct the registrar to provide notice to Mr. Grillone that the court was
considering making an order. The rule 2.1 process had not been completed and Justice
Kimmel had not made any order as to whether Mr. Grillone’s proposed motions
should be stayed or dismissed on the basis that they were frivolous or
vexatious or otherwise an abuse of the process of the court. Similarly, the
Court had not made any determination as to whether Mr. Grillone should be
prohibited from making further motions in the proceeding without leave.
[23]          
Mr. Grillone disagreed and
maintained his position that he has a right of appeal to the Court of Appeal
(without any requirement for leave) from Justice Kimmel’s Endorsement directing
the Registrar to advise Mr. Grillone that he may file a written submission,
responding to the rule 2.1 notices. Put differently, his position is that he is
entitled to challenge “the invocation” of the rule 2.1 process itself, whether
or not it has been completed and irrespective as to whether any determination
or order thereunder has been made.
[24]          
It follows, in Mr. Grillone’s
submission, that until his appeal is determined by the Court of Appeal, the
rule 2.1 process is automatically stayed, and no steps can be taken with
respect thereto.
[25]          
I specifically asked Mr. Grillone
whether, given my concern that his proposed appeal was premature since no order
had been made pursuant to either rule 2.1 or 36.17 and that the written
submission process contemplated by rule 2.1 should be completed as a first
step, he wished to request an extension of the 15 day period prescribed by rule
2.1.01(3)2 to file a written submission in response to the notice, in order
that I could entertain such an extension request.
[26]          
Mr. Grillone stated that he did
not wish to request any extension and would not be filing any submission.
[27]          
Accordingly, I must address two
issues:
[28]          
I will address these issues in
order.
[29]          
With respect to his proposed
appeal, Mr. Grillone submitted at the case conference and in his aide memoire
filed in advance that:
[30]          
It is Mr. Grillone’s submission
that an appeal as of right lies to the Court of Appeal pursuant to section
183(2) of the BIA. That section provides that “courts of appeals
throughout Canada, within their respective jurisdictions, are invested with
power and jurisdiction at law and in equity, according to their ordinary
procedures, except as varied by this Act or the General Rules, to hear and
determine appeals from the courts vested with original jurisdiction under this
Act”.
[31]          
Pursuant to Rule 31(1) of the
Bankruptcy and Insolvency General Rules, “an appeal to a Court of Appeal
referred to in subsection 183(2) of the Act must be made by filing a notice of
appeal at the office of the registrar of the court appealed from, within 10
days after the day of the order or decision appealed from, or within such
further time as a judge of the Court of Appeal stipulates”.
[32]          
Rule 31(2) provides that “if an
appeal is brought under paragraph 193(e) of the Act, the notice of appeal must
include the application for leave to appeal”.
[33]          
Section 193 of the BIA
provides that an appeal lies to the Court of Appeal from any order or decision
of a judge of the court:
[34]          
As I understand Mr. Grillone’s
submission, it is that to the extent that a decision made pursuant to rule 2.1
(which is a provincial rule of civil procedure) “compels” him to file
submissions in response to a notice advising him that the court is considering
making an order that his motion appears on its face to be frivolous or
vexatious or otherwise an abuse of process, such violates the doctrine of
paramountcy since he has a statutory right of appeal under the BIA.
[35]          
I have considered all of Mr.
Grillone’s submissions. In my view, the relevant provisions of the BIA
and the General Rules do not assist him, leaving aside entirely for present
purposes the additional issue of whether, in the circumstances of this case,
leave would be required for such an appeal in any event given the order made by
the Court of Appeal in this proceeding and/or operation of section 215 of the BIA
which provides that, except with leave, no action lies against the Trustee with
respect to any action (which I do not need to determine).
[36]          
The simple yet fundamental reason
that these provisions do not assist him is that no order has been made pursuant
to rule 2.1, and there has been no determination from which any appeal lies.
[37]          
Put differently, Justice Kimmel’s
Endorsement of January 20, 2025 does not compel Mr. Grillone to file a
submission in response to the notice (or indeed to do anything else). It merely
repeats the steps specifically enumerated in rule 2.1, and reminds Mr. Grillone
that he may (emphasis added) file a written submission of no more than
10 pages in length, pursuant to rule 2.1.01(3)2. It also directs that, in terms
of sequencing, the rule 2.1 process should be completed before the Court
considered any motions for security for costs and for leave, as a result of the
order of the Court of Appeal, section 215 of the BIA, rule 37.16 and/or
for failure to pay outstanding costs orders.
[38]          
Mr. Grillone has elected not to
file any submission as part of the rule 2.1 process. That is his right.
However, it does not follow in my view that he has an automatic right of appeal
to challenge the effect of rule 2.1.01(1) that provides, on its face that “the
court may, on its own initiative, stay or dismiss a proceeding …” before the
court has made any decision as to whether to do so or not. The endorsement of
Justice Kimmel directs the Registrar to provide Mr. Grillone with notice of the
court’s concerns and an opportunity to provide submissions in response to the
court’s concerns. Providing notice and an opportunity to respond is the
beginning of a summary process, not the end.
[39]          
It follows that the rule 2.1
process that is already underway is not stayed by Mr. Grillone’s purported
appeal. In my view, to conclude otherwise would circumvent the very purpose and
object of rule 2.1 in the first place. It would bifurcate the summary process
intended under rule 2.1 before the reviewing judge reached any conclusion
regarding whether the proposed motion is frivolous or vexatious. This case
represents a perfect illustration of a situation to which the rule should
apply. Rule 2.1 is intended to be a summary (i.e., in-writing) process pursuant
to which the court may stay or dismiss a proceeding if it appears on its face
to be frivolous or vexatious or otherwise an abuse of the process of the court.
[40]          
The very objective is to provide a
mechanism to bring to an end frivolous, vexatious or abusive proceedings without
requiring other parties to incur the significant expense of responding,
particularly in a case like this where the moving party is a bankrupt and the
recovery of any costs is highly unlikely, and without requiring the court to
expend scarce judicial resources determining an endless loop of frivolous,
vexatious or abusive proceedings.
[41]          
Because Mr. Grillone has
repeatedly stated that he will not file submissions as part of this process, I
must proceed to consider the second issue; namely, whether Mr. Grillone’s
proposed proceeding as framed in his Notice of Motion dated January 9, 2025 is
frivolous, vexatious or otherwise an abuse of the process of the court, such
that it should be stayed or dismissed pursuant to rule 2.1.01.
[42]          
In my view, the proposed motion
should be dismissed.
[43]          
It has been observed that rule 2.1
is not for “close calls”. If a proceeding is to be dismissed under rule 2.1, and
while the rule should be interpreted and applied robustly so that a motion
judge can effectively exercise his or her gatekeeping function to weed out
litigation that is clearly frivolous, vexatious or an abuse, the frivolous,
vexatious or abusive nature of the proceeding must be apparent on its face, and
there should generally be a basis in the pleadings to support the resort to the
attenuated process of rule 2.1: Scaduto v. The Law Society of Upper Canada,
2015 ONCA 733, 343 O.A.C. 87, at paras. 8-9.
[44]          
Mr. Grillone’s Notice of Motion is
not entirely linear and in parts is hard to follow. At its core, however, it
includes the following:
[45]          
In my view, there are numerous and
significant problems and deficiencies in the proposed motion.
[46]          
First, it is still not supported
by any affidavit or other evidence. None was served or filed:
[47]          
Mr. Grillone offers no explanation
for the lengthy and continuing delay, which is contrary to the order made last
December imposing the deadline of the end of December and which is of
significant concern, particularly given the allegations of intentional and
fraudulent conduct on the part of parties, counsel and the Court officer, the
Trustee in Bankruptcy.
[48]          
Justice Kimmel set out in the
January 20 Endorsement, the positions of the named Respondents to the proposed
motion as follows:
[49]          
To assist Mr. Grillone, Justice
Kimmel then set out in her Endorsement some of the issues that he may wish to
address in any submission as follows:
[50]          
I share all of these concerns.
[51]          
As noted above, Mr. Grillone has
declined the opportunity to make any submission, with the result that all of
these concerns, previously outlined for him, remain and are unanswered by him.
[52]          
For all of these reasons, I find
that the proposed motion is frivolous, vexatious or otherwise an abuse of the
court. In so doing, I have been mindful of the cautionary approach endorsed by
the Court of Appeal in Scaduto and echoed by this Court in Gao v.
Ontario WSIB, 2014 ONSC 6497, 61 C.P.C. (7th) 153 at paras. 18
and 22, to the effect that:
[53]          
Notwithstanding the application of
these considerations to this particular case, I am unable to reach any
conclusion other than that the proposed motion is frivolous, vexatious and/or
an abuse of the process of the court.
[54]          
I also observe, while I do not
rely on any such observation to reach the conclusion as I have done in respect
of rule 2.1, that Mr. Grillone has already been found by both this Court and
the Court of Appeal to have engaged in a litigation strategy that is of
concern.
[55]          
As observed by Brown JA (2023 ONCA
844 at paras. 12, 15, 15, 23 and 56), Mr. Grillone’s conduct on the stay and
security for costs motions and his litigation strategy on the appeal raised:
[56]          
Benotto, J.A. similarly concluded
on the motion for rule 37.16 order in the Court of Appeal (2024 ONCA 244 at
para. 12) that:
[57]          
In her Endorsement of January 20,
2025, Justice Kimmel observed that the January 9, 2025 Notice of Motion
appeared, on its face, to be a continuation of that litigation strategy and
observed that:
[58]          
I also reach the same conclusion.
The costs orders remain unpaid. Mr. Grillone declines to make submissions in
the rule 2.1 process, but maintains his position that he has an automatic right
of appeal that stays that whole process as a result of having filed his Notice
of Motion.
[59]          
Yet that Notice of Motion is
still, as noted above, unsupported by any evidence. As observed by Justice
Kimmel, it is primarily focused on an alleged illegal development scheme
carried out by the principal of Bluecore and his counsel, with the involvement
of other creditors and their counsel and the Trustee in Bankruptcy who is a
Court officer.
[60]          
The allegations are extremely
serious - fraud, forgery, perjury, contempt of court, obstruction of justice,
suppression of evidence and extortion (among others). Yet they remain
unsupported by any evidence.
[61]          
Moreover, and also as observed by
Justice Kimmel, the relevance of many of these allegations to the core relief
sought by Mr. Grillone (i.e., an order setting aside the bankruptcy order and
discharging him from bankruptcy) is not apparent on the face of the Notice of
Motion or at all. This is a challenge for Mr. Grillone even if he was able to
overcome the issue of standing arising from the fact that he remains an
undischarged bankrupt and purports to be pursuing relief against the Trustee
and two creditors or their principals, ostensibly for the benefit of other
creditors of the estate.
[62]          
For all of these reasons, Mr.
Grillone’s Notice of Motion dated January 9, 2025 is dismissed pursuant to rule
2.1.01.
[63]          
Mr. Grillone has no right of
appeal from the Endorsement of Justice Kimmel dated February 20, 2025.
[64]          
Mr. Grillone’s proposed motion is
dismissed pursuant to rule 2.1.01.
[65]          
Order to go in accordance with
these reasons.