[1]         
Mary Jane Hockney passed away December 23, 2014.
[2]         
Ms. Hockney signed a will in 2011. In a codicil
dated April 16, 2012, Ms. Hockney appointed her lawyer Mary Kneeland as her
sole estate trustee.
[3]         
Ms. Kneeland drafted both the will and the
codicil for Ms. Hockney.
[4]         
Ms. Hockney left the residue of her estate to
her seven grandchildren equally. Most were still minors at the date of Ms.
Hockney’s death.
[5]         
The evidence for this application was given by
beneficiary Emma Hockney. I will refer to her below as “Ms. Hockney” and I will
refer to the deceased Mary Jane Hockney as the “Deceased.”
[6]         
The assets of the Deceased consisted of
approximately $255,000 in cash or cash equivalents. She had minimal liabilities
at the date of death. That works out to about $36,400 per beneficiary subject
to payment of liabilities, taxes, and ongoing costs of administration.
[7]         
By letter dated December 31, 2014, lawyer
Kneeland advised the applicant grandchildren that she was the Estate Trustee
and that the will divided the estate into seven parts. Lawyer Kneeland advised
that debts and taxes had to be paid before the residue can be distributed.
[8]         
On April 22, 2015, lawyer Kneeland advised that
probate was delayed. She also advised that she was acting as counsel to the
estate. She mentioned that some specific legacies of “other assets” had been
distributed to other beneficiaries.
[9]         
On June 17, 2015, lawyer Kneeland provided a
copy of the will to Ms. Hockney. She promised a further letter setting out
details of the assets brought into the estate and the outstanding bills.
[10]      
On February 16, 2016, lawyer Kneeland advised
Ms. Hockney that she would “soon be able to dispense part of your inheritance.”
She said there was ongoing delay obtaining probate because the court was not
happy with the forms Ms. Kneeland had submitted. She also advised that TD Bank
had the estate’s funds. She said that tax returns for 2014, 2015, and a “final”
tax return would be prepared by the Deceased’s tax preparer. She also
reiterated that she would be invoicing the estate for her legal work separate
from her work as the Estate Trustee.
[11]      
On August 18, 2016, lawyer Kneeland apologized
to Ms. Hockney “for the delay in this matter.” She advised that she needed to
ask the bank “and other agencies” to reissue statements because part of her
file “mysteriously disappeared” when she painted her office. She included in
the letter a general statement of the assets and liabilities of the estate. The
statement showed about $255,000 in bank accounts and mutual funds and about
$4,000 in monies paid out by the estate. She committed to provide a “more
detailed summary.”
[12]      
By letter dated May 7, 2017, lawyer Kneeland
provided Ms. Hockney and the other beneficiaries with cheques of $15,000 each.
($15,000 x 7 = $105,000). She blamed the delay on carelessness of H&R Block
and the need to deal with TD Bank to transfer funds before she could write
cheques.
[13]      
On February 20, 2018, Ms. Hockney complained to
the Law Society of Ontario seeking to address the ongoing delay. Eight months
later, on October 18, 2018, the Law Society of Ontario told Ms. Hockney that it
had cautioned lawyer Kneeland about communication, delay, and practice
management.
[14]      
The Law Society of Ontario apparently told Ms.
Hockney that a caution was a significant professional governance action.
[15]      
A few days later, on October 29, 2018, lawyer
Kneeland wrote to Ms. Hockney to confirm oral conversations she had had with
some beneficiaries. She said that she was still dealing with taxes and would
have to consult an accountant to persuade Revenue Canada to allow medical
expenses claimed on behalf of the Deceased. She wrote that:
[16]      
I cannot tell if the loss of the file by the tax
preparer replaced Ms. Kneeland’s prior loss of the file or was a second loss of
the file in this one estate.
[17]      
Ms. Hockney heard nothing further from the Law
Society of Ontario.
[18]      
On September 5, 2019, lawyer Kneeland advised
that taxes were not yet settled. She blamed delay on eye surgery that she had
to undergo and the retirement of the financial officer at the bank.
[19]      
On March 3, 2022, another beneficiary made
another complaint to the Law Society of Ontario. The Law Society of Ontario
advised that it obtained an undertaking signed by lawyer Kneeland dated February
22, 2022 committing her to complete the administration of the estate either by
December 31, 2022 or, if she was required to pass her accounts, then she would
complete the estate administration by June 30, 2023.
[20]      
The undertaking also committed lawyer Kneeland
to report in writing to the beneficiaries before March 31, 2022 and every three
months thereafter to June 30, 2023.
[21]      
Lawyer Kneeland sent reporting letters dated
March 25, 2022, June 22, 2022, July 29, 2022, and to some beneficiaries on
October 3, 2022.
[22]      
No money, no accounting, and no peep has been
heard from lawyer Kneeland since October, 2022 despite efforts by beneficiaries
to follow-up with her. Counsel advised me that the Law Society of Ontario told
the beneficiaries that it had closed its file.
[23]      
The beneficiaries have heard nothing further
from lawyer Kneeland or the Law Society of Ontario despite the significant
professional governance action taken in 2018 and the written undertaking in
which lawyer Kneeland solemnly committed to the governing authority to complete
the administration of the estate by December 31, 2022 or at latest June 30,
2023.
[24]      
In September, 2024 the applicants commenced this
proceeding to require Ms. Kneeland to account and to complete the
administration of the estate. They have made eight efforts to serve Ms.
Kneeland.
[25]      
The process servers left their business cards at
Ms. Kneeland’s door and were called at least twice by a woman who would not
give her name. The caller ID displayed on one call was Paul Kneeland. On
another call, the caller asked the process server to leave materials inside her
screen or storm door. Counsel for the applicants also sent materials and
details about yesterday’s hearing by email to the two email accounts that
lawyer Kneeland used to communicate with the beneficiaries.
[26]      
I am satisfied that lawyer Kneeland has been
duly notified of this proceeding and is evading service. Service of the
application record is validated and further service to the same two email
addresses will be deemed good service in this application.
[27]      
To say that the story told by the applicant
beneficiaries is shocking on several levels does not properly express the
outrage that the story ought to evoke.
[28]      
For more than a decade a lawyer has apparently
been holding and refusing to account for about $150,000 in trust money. Lawyer
Kneeland undertook to serve her Deceased client who trusted her lawyer to carry
out her testamentary wishes to distribute her estate to her grandchildren.
[29]      
Rather than faithfully carrying out her client’s
wishes and reporting transparently as a fiduciary in accordance with her
obligations as estate lawyer and Estate Trustee, the lawyer has held $150,000
and has now gone silent. She has ducked service and failed to attend this
proceeding.
[30]      
And where is the Law Society of Ontario?
[31]      
The Law Society website shows that lawyer
Kneeland is still a licensed lawyer although she is under administrative
suspension. That usually means she owes fees to the Law Society. The website
shows that there are no active discipline proceedings against the lawyer and
she has no discipline history.
[32]      
I draw no conclusions as the Law Society of
Ontario is not a party to this proceeding. It has not been notified that its
conduct could part of the narrative of this case. It has not been given an
opportunity to respond.
[33]      
But doesn’t someone, somewhere owe these
beneficiaries a response?
[34]      
I order Ms. Kneeland to pass her accounts as Estate
Trustee of the estate of Mary Jane Hockney by commencing a proper application
by April 30, 2025. The fact that I have given her time to prepare her legal
proceeding does not authorize Ms. Kneeland to delay a moment more in carrying
out her duties to the beneficiaries and to the estate.
[35]      
Order to go as sought in paras. 1 (b), (c), and
(d) of the Notice of Application dated September 19, 2024. This order is
distinct from the orders concerning the progress of this application that
follow. Ms. Kneeland should expect strict enforcement of this order that she
pass her accounts forthwith.
[36]      
If Ms. Kneeland intends to participate in this
proceeding going forward, she is required to deliver a Notice of Appearance.
[37]      
Ms. Kneeland shall deliver a Notice of
Appearance in accordance with the Rules of Civil Procedure on or before
March 7, 2025.
[38]      
If Ms. Kneeland delivers a Notice of Appearance
within the time ordered, counsel for the applicants may schedule a case
conference with me on notice to Ms. Kneeland on a date convenient to both sides
if possible. If they cannot agree on a date by March 14, 2025, then counsel for
the applicants may pick a date unilaterally on any day thereafter at 8:30 a.m.
by Zoom and advise me accordingly. At the case conference I will assist the
parties to schedule the steps for the rest of the application.
[39]      
If Ms. Kneeland fails to deliver a Notice of
Application by March 7, 2025, then the applicants may deliver to me in writing
any further evidence on which they rely, a factum, if necessary, and a draft
order for final judgment on a default basis. No further notice to Ms. Kneeland
will be required if she does not appear as ordered.
[40]      
The scale and quantum of costs of today’s
appearance, if any, are reserved to the judge who decides the final resolution
of this application.
[41]      
The applicants may deliver a draft order to
implement this endorsement for my signature without seeking approval of the
form or content by Ms. Kneeland.
[42]      
The applicant may communicate with my office by sending
emails to my Judicial Assistant.