[1]              
The Plaintiffs Kyriakoula Arsalides and Eliana
Arsalides (“Kyriakoula,” “Eliana,” and together the “Plaintiffs”) allege fraud against
Maria Surovova and her company, Maria Mortgage Services Inc. (together, the
“Surovova Defendants”). They say that the Surovova Defendants carried out a
mortgage churning scheme through which Ms. Surovova induced them to place a
series of mortgages on their properties and transfer the proceeds from those
mortgages to her, and also induced Eliana to transfer proceeds from the sale of
her condominium to her. Ms. Surovova did all this under the pretext that she
would apply the funds transferred to her against the Plaintiffs’ mortgages. In
fact, it is alleged, she made no payments against the mortgages, and simply
misappropriated the funds for her personal use. The Plaintiffs say they suffered
losses of approximately $2.6 million.
[2]              
This matter was tried before me virtually. For the
reasons below, I grant judgment in favour of the Plaintiffs against the
Surovova Defendants.
[3]              
Ms. Surovova chose not to attend the trial. She was
well aware of the trial dates and start time. She was copied on all
correspondence regarding trial scheduling, including correspondence regarding
the “to be spoken to” and long trial scheduling court attendances in February
2023, which she chose not to attend. The trial dates were set in March 2024, almost
a year ago, at a pre-trial conference presided over by Wilson J. (as she then
was). Ms. Surovova was made aware of the scheduled trial date at that time. In
January 2025, Ms. Surovova requested an adjournment of the trial before
Chalmers J. Her request was denied. In anticipation of the trial, she received
affidavits from the Plaintiffs. One week before the trial, she received an
email from court staff confirming the details of the trial.
[4]              
Seven minutes before the scheduled start of the trial,
she emailed court staff to advise that she had a sore throat, could not speak, and
therefore could not attend. Court staff told her via prompt email reply that
she had to attend the trial hearing to request an adjournment. She emailed back,
reiterating that she could not do so because she was unable to speak. Court
staff once again informed her that she had to attend the trial hearing to
request the adjournment.
[5]              
At the scheduled start time of trial, Ms.
Surovova was not present. Court staff contacted her by telephone and told her,
for the third time that morning, that she had to attend virtually to request an
adjournment. She told court staff that she would do so. She did not. Court
staff called a second time and she did not answer her phone. Matters were held
down for an additional 15 minutes after she first advised she would join
virtually. She did not ever join the hearing.
[6]              
I then ordered that the trial proceed without
the Surovova Defendants being present, in accordance with rule 52.01(2)(b) of the
Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194. Rule 52.01(2)(b) provides
that where an action is called for trial and the plaintiff attends trial but
the defendant does not, the trial judge may dismiss any counterclaim and allow
the plaintiff to prove the claim. In my view it is abundantly clear, based on
the chronology set forth above, that Ms. Surovova knew that the trial would be
held on January 30, 2025, commencing at 11 am, and chose not to appear.
[7]              
Additionally, I ordered that the Statement of Defence
of the Surovova Defendants be struck pursuant to rule 52.01(2)(d), which
provides that where an action is called for trial and a party fails to attend,
the trial judge may also “make such other order as is just”. This court has
held that the enumerated choices available to me as the trial judge in rule
52.01(2) “are not meant to be exhaustive,” and that the court also has “the
inherent authority to strike the statement of defence” of a defendant who does
not attend trial, as such a pleading “is of no assistance to the court and, on
principle, should be struck. It is illogical that the pleading stand in place
of the defendant” (Mignelli v. Scavo, 2004 CanLII 14032 (ON SC), at
para. 5). To be sure, I am not required to strike Ms. Surovova’s defence (see Berky
v. Cruz, 2016 ONSC 4067, at paras. 3-10). However, in light of Ms.
Surovova’s blatant and intentional disregard of the court’s processes, I am of
the view that striking her defence is appropriate. In the circumstances, it would
not be fair or appropriate for Ms. Surovova to be able to choose not to attend trial
and still derive the benefit of having a pleading before the court.
[8]              
My view is underscored by the fact that in June
2023, Ms. Surovova was ordered to either retain new counsel or service a notice
of intention to act in person within 30 days, failing which the court could
strike out her defence. To this day, Ms. Surovova has taken neither step. Maria
Mortgage Services Inc. was likewise ordered to appoint new counsel or seek an
order granting it leave to be represented by a person other than a lawyer
within 30 days, failing which the court could strike out its defence. To this
day, Maria Mortgage Services Inc. has taken neither step. It would be open to
me to strike the Surovova Defendants’ Statement of Defence on these bases alone,
even if Ms. Surovova had attended at trial.
[9]              
As a consequence of their Statement of Defence
being struck, the Surovova Defendants are noted in default and are deemed to admit
the truth of the allegations against them in the Statement of Claim.
[10]          
I further ordered that the Plaintiffs could provide
their trial evidence by way of affidavit. A previous Endorsement of Chalmers J.
granted leave to the Plaintiffs to provide their evidence in chief by way of
affidavit, subject to the trial judge’s discretion. I ordered that it was
appropriate to proceed on this basis, and we did so.
[11]          
I grant judgment in the Plaintiffs’ favour. Although
I have struck the Statement of Defence of the Surovova Defendants, I have,
nonetheless, put the Plaintiffs to the proof of their claim. The evidence
contained in the affidavits they tendered at trial supports a judgment on liability
and damages.
[12]          
Based on the evidence before me, I make the following
factual findings:
[13]          
I find, based on the record before me, that the
Plaintiffs trusted and relied on Ms. Surovova and transferred mortgage proceeds
to her in the belief that she would direct those funds to the mortgage lenders
to pay down the mortgages.
[14]          
I further find that Ms. Surovova provided no
information to the Plaintiffs about how she used the funds they paid to her,
despite repeated requests. She has not repaid any of the amounts to the
Plaintiffs. There is no evidence to suggest that she directed any of the funds
to the lenders.
[15]          
I am satisfied that the elements of civil fraud
are made out in the record before me. These elements are well established: (a) there
must be a false representation made by the defendant; (b) there must be some
level of knowledge of the falsehood of the representation on the part of the
defendant, whether through knowledge or recklessness; (c) the false
representation must have caused the plaintiff to act; and (d) the plaintiff’s
actions must have resulted in a loss (Bruno Appliance and Furniture, Inc. v.
Hryniak, 2014 SCC 8, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 126, at para. 21).
[16]          
The first of these elements is clearly
established in the record. Ms. Surovova made several false representations to
the Plaintiffs that the mortgages were necessary and that the money the
Plaintiffs paid to her would be applied against their mortgages.
[17]          
Turning to the second element, Ms. Surovova knew
those statements to be false at the time she made them. She never applied the
payments against the Plaintiffs’ mortgages, and it is clear that she never
intended to. The record contains emails which demonstrate that she was trying
to deceive them.
[18]          
The third element is also satisfied. Her false
representations to the Plaintiffs are what caused them to act. It was only in
response to her representations that they took out additional mortgages,
extended or renewed their existing mortgages, and sold Eliana’s condominium. It
was only in response to the representations that they forwarded the net
proceeds from these mortgages and the condominium sale to her.
[19]          
It is clear that the Plaintiffs’ actions
resulted in a loss to them. The record establishes that between 2016 and 2018,
the Plaintiffs transferred $1,611,886.43 to Ms. Surovova, through ten payments made
between June 15, 2016 and September 20, 2018. These amounts went from the
Plaintiffs’ bank accounts to Ms. Surovova’s accounts and were received by Ms.
Surovova. Additionally, the Plaintiffs incurred $1,054,172.70 in fees,
interest, penalties, and other charges on the various mortgages. Their total
damages are $2,666,059.13.
[20]          
I am accordingly satisfied that the record
demonstrates that the Surovova Defendants committed civil fraud against the
Plaintiffs.
[21]          
I am also satisfied that the elements of breach
of fiduciary duty are made out.
[22]          
The Supreme Court of Canada has identified three
characteristics of a fiduciary relationship: (a) the fiduciary has scope for
the exercise of some discretion or power, (b) the fiduciary can unilaterally
exercise that discretion or power so as to affect the beneficiary’s legal or
practical interests, and (c) the beneficiary is peculiarly vulnerable to or at
the mercy of the fiduciary (Lac Minerals Ltd. v. International Corona
Resources Ltd., 1989 CanLII 34 (SCC), [1989] 2 S.C.R. 574, at pp. 645-646).
[23]          
These elements are all found in the relationship
between the Surovova Defendants and the Plaintiffs. She was their mortgage
broker. She had scope to exercise her power, and did so by acting on the
Plaintiffs’ behalf when setting up the various mortgages. She arranged for the
mortgages from start to finish, including by finding the lenders and preparing
the mortgage paperwork. She insisted that communications between the Plaintiffs
and the lenders flow through her. She could, and did, unilaterally exercise her
power so as to affect the Plaintiffs’ interests, including by telling the
Plaintiffs that they needed to extend, renew, or take out additional mortgages,
and by negotiating mortgage terms that affected the Plaintiffs’ interests (such
as by imposing penalties and fees upon discharge). The Plaintiffs were
vulnerable to her: it is clear that they trusted her when she told them they
needed to increase their mortgage debt, and that they relied on her and trusted
her to deal with the mortgage proceeds as she said she would. She had a
fiduciary duty to them. It is a tremendous understatement to say that her
conduct, described above, violated that duty.
[24]          
I find the Surovova Defendants liable for civil
fraud and breach of fiduciary duty.
[25]          
The total damages to the Plaintiffs are
$2,666,059.13, as detailed above. The Plaintiffs previously settled this
litigation against some of the defendants other than the Surovova Defendants
for $1,000,000.00. I accordingly award the balance of the damages incurred by
the Plaintiffs, in the amount of $1,666,059.13, to be paid by the Surovova
Defendants.
[26]          
I find that the Surovova Defendants obtained
these funds from the Plaintiffs by false pretences and/or fraudulent
misrepresentation, and through fraudulent misrepresentations by Ms. Surovova
while she was acting as the Plaintiffs’ fiduciary.
[27]          
In exercising my discretion to fix costs under
section 131 of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c C.43, I
may consider the factors enumerated in Rule 57.01 of the Rules of Civil
Procedure, R.R.O. 1990, Reg 194. Those factors include the result achieved,
the amounts claimed and recovered, the complexity and importance of the issues
in the proceeding, the principle of indemnity, the reasonable expectations of
the unsuccessful party, and any other matter relevant to costs.
[28]          
In Apotex Inc. v. Eli Lilly Canada Inc.,
2022 ONCA 587, the Court of Appeal for Ontario restated the general principles
to be applied when courts exercise their discretion to award costs. The Court
held that, when assessing costs, a court is to undertake a critical examination
of the relevant factors, as applied to the costs claimed, and then “step back
and consider the result produced and question whether, in all the
circumstances, the result is fair and reasonable” (at para. 60; see also Boucher
v. Public Accountants Council (Ontario) (2004), 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R. (3d) 291 (C.A.), at
para. 24). The overarching objective is to fix an amount for costs that is
objectively reasonable, fair, and proportionate for the unsuccessful party to
pay in the circumstances of the case, rather than to fix an amount based on the
actual costs incurred by the successful litigant.
[29]          
Applying these considerations here, I am of the
view that the Plaintiffs are entitled to recover costs from the Surovova
Defendants. The Plaintiffs were entirely successful against the Surovova
Defendants in this action. It is appropriate that they receive their costs.
[30]          
The costs sought are reasonable. Having regard
to the action as a whole, the hourly rates and amounts billed by counsel for
the Plaintiffs are reasonable given the complexity and nature of the file.
Counsel allocated work on the file to more junior team members where
appropriate. Having regard to the trial specifically, the affidavit evidence
tendered at trial was of great assistance to the court and enabled the matter
to be heard efficiently.
[31]          
The disbursements are also reasonable and the
Plaintiffs are entitled to recover them from the Surovova Defendants.
[32]          
As discussed above, prior to trial, the
Plaintiffs settled this action against some of the other defendants. Up until that
settlement was reached, the Surovova Defendants were two of several defendants.
It is therefore appropriate that they pay their pro-rated share of costs for
that time period, calculated based on their judgment apportion of 62.5%.
[33]          
However, once the settlement with the other defendants
was reached, the Surovova Defendants became the only remaining Defendants. From
that point onward, all of the Plaintiffs’ costs were incurred in relation to
the prosecution of the case against the Surovova Defendants alone. It is
therefore appropriate that those costs be allocated to the Surovova Defendants
alone.
[34]          
Having regard to the scale of costs, in my view
the pre-settlement costs are properly calculated on a partial indemnity basis.
Although the Surovova Defendants’ conduct was not exemplary during this time
frame – for instance, Maria Mortgage Services Inc. did not comply with a
court-imposed deadline for obtaining counsel – generally, their conduct did not
rise to the level that warrants sanction in the form of a substantial indemnity
costs award.
[35]          
However, the conduct of the Surovova Defendants in
relation to the trial is another story altogether. As detailed above, Ms.
Surovova was copied on all correspondence regarding the scheduling of this
trial. Despite this, she did not attend various court dates. She did not attend
at trial. She tried to get this trial adjourned once before Chalmers J. and
twice before court staff on the morning of trial itself. She was told three
times by court staff that she had to attend in person. She told them that she
would do so. She did not. She tried to obstruct the prosecution of the
Plaintiffs’ claim. She absented herself from important court attendances. She
sought repeated and eleventh-hour adjournments. This conduct reflects a lack of
respect for the judicial process. It is appropriate for this court to show its
disapproval of Ms. Surovova’s conduct through an award of substantial indemnity
costs.
[36]          
I accordingly order that the Surovova Defendants
pay the Plaintiffs costs and disbursements of $215,603.52, inclusive of HST,
within 30 days of the date of this judgment. This amount breaks down as
follows:
[37]          
The Surovova Defendants are to pay the
Plaintiffs damages in the amount of $1,666,059.13. The Surovova Defendants
obtained these funds from the Plaintiffs by false pretences and/or fraudulent
misrepresentation, and through fraudulent misrepresentations by Ms. Surovova
while she was acting as the Plaintiffs’ fiduciary.
[38]          
The Surovova Defendants are to pay the
Plaintiffs their costs in the amount of $215,603.52, inclusive of HST, within
30 days of the date of this judgment.
[39]          
The Plaintiffs may provide me with a draft order
reflecting these Reasons and the discontinuance of the action against the Surovova
Defendants by Theodore Arsalides.