[1]              
Judy Faulkner (“Ms. Faulkner”) is a successful real estate agent in
Ottawa, Ontario. She claims that she and Faulkner Real Estate Ltd. (“FRE”), her
real estate brokerage, have suffered damages of approximately $2.2 million
caused by exposure to mould at her office. Her landlord was the Defendant,
Satko Corporation (“Satko”) and the property manager for the building was the
Defendant, Waterford Group Property Group Ltd. (“Waterford”).
[2]              
On or about February 2014, Ms. Faulkner observed that about two sq ft of
the carpet in the southwest corner of her office was wet and that some of her
documents placed on this area of the carpet may have had mould on them. A
second water leak occurred around September 2014 and a third leak occurred in
June 2015 in the same area.
[3]              
Ms. Faulkner claims that she suffered memory problems, brain fog, and
fatigue as a result of breathing mycotoxins released by the mould in her
office. She seeks general damages, past and future loss of income on her behalf
as well as loss of income on behalf of FRE as a result of Sue Dunston, a key
agent, in leaving her brokerage because she was told there was toxic mould in
the office.
[4]              
The Defendants deny that the Plaintiffs have proven on a balance of
probabilities that the air in Ms. Faulkner’s office contained any mould spores
or mycotoxins or that any of her symptoms were caused by exposure to mould in
her office. All three air tests showed that the air in Ms. Faulkner’s office
space did not contain any mould greater than the amount found in fresh outside
air and in amounts similar to other offices in Ottawa. In addition, the
quantity of mould found in the air of Ms. Faulkner’s home exceeded the amount
in her office.
[5]              
The Defendants also deny that any of Ms. Faulkner’s symptoms were caused
by exposure to mould spores or mycotoxins in her office. They submit that I
should accept the evidence of Dr. Markus, an expert in occupational medicine, who
testified that the symptoms reported by Ms. Faulkner were not caused by exposure
to mould in her office.
[6]              
Ms. Faulkner also claims that the landlord and property manager were
negligent in finding the source and repairing the leak in the concrete wall and
in remediating the drywall and carpets in the leased space to ensure that all of
the mould was removed. The Defendants deny that they were negligent and submit
that they took reasonable and increasingly intensive steps by retaining
contractors, an engineering firm, and mould remediation experts to find and
stop the water infiltration and to remediate the areas of the office that were
affected by the water infiltration.
[7]              
Ms. Faulkner and FRE also claim for damages as a result of the
landlord’s negligent misrepresentation that the lab results of the initial
testing for mould by Paracel were “good”. One of the samples of drywall tested
showed had stachybotrys mould growing on the backside of the drywall. The mould
was not found growing in FRE’s office space Finally, FRE claims that the
landlord breached the terms of the lease by failing to provide a mould free
environment and by failing to take reasonable steps to find and stop the water
infiltration.
[8]              
Ms. Faulkner started working as a real estate agent in Ottawa for Royal
LePage for 17 years. She received many awards for being a top real estate agent
in Ottawa and in Canada.
[9]              
In July 2000, Ms. Faulkner established FRE as a real estate brokerage.
FRE became a very successful real estate brokerage under Ms. Faulkner’s
management. FRE attracted many other real estate agents and grew to approximately
17 agents by 2015.
[10]          
On April 1, 2009, FRE entered into a 10-year commercial lease with Satko,
for 2,750 sq ft of office space on the ground floor of 333 Preston Street, a Class
A office building in Ottawa. Part of the office space was 3 to 4 feet below
grade with planters outside the south wall.
[11]          
Waterford was the property manager for the building at 333 Preston Street
during the relevant time period.
[12]          
  The chronology of the events is based on the evidence given at trial
and summarized in the Defendants’ and Plaintiffs’ “Chronologies”. The Plaintiffs’
chronology is not substantially different from the Defendants’ but includes
some additional information.
[13]          
Ms. Faulkner testified that she believed that the first leak of water
into part of the leased premises occurred sometime between the late autumn of
2013 and February 2014 but she could not recall the exact date. She testified
that at that time she observed an area about 2’ x 2’ of damp carpet in the
southwest corner of the premises. She recalled finding documents on the damp
carpet which may have had mould on them. These documents were never tested for mould
or given to the Defendants.
[14]          
Kim Reid, Waterford’s former employee who is now deceased, sent an email
which was part of Satko’s business records advising Brian Hubbell of Pinchin
Remediation (“Pinchin”) that Ms. Faulkner first reported water penetration into
part of her office in February 2014. The first actions to investigate the water
leak were taken on February 24, 2014, when the Defendants retained Mynott
Construction (“Mynott”) to investigate the source of the water leak. I find
that on a balance of probabilities the first water penetration into the leased premises
occurred in February 2014.
[15]          
On February 24, 2014, the Defendants collectively retained Mynott to
investigate the source of the water leak. Mynott took 3 samples of the drywall,
approximately 2 inches in diameter, from behind the baseboard in the southwest
corner of the office space and sent the samples to Paracel Laboratories (“Paracel”)
for testing.
[16]          
On March 3, 2014, Mynott received the Paracel lab results and forwarded
them to Satko. The report indicated that all 3 samples tested positive for mould
and sample number #3 showed a high amount of stachybotrys spores on the back
side of the drywall. Shortly after this, Barry Wilkinson verbally advised Ms.
Faulkner that the Paracel report results were “good”.
[17]          
In late August 2024 to early September 2014, a second water leak
occurred. FRE again reported noticing wet carpet in the southwest corner of her
office.
[18]          
On September 24, 2014, the Defendants contacted Cleland Jardine, an
engineering firm in Ottawa, to investigate the source of the water infiltration.
[19]          
On October 1, 2014, Cleland Jardine provided the Defendants with a
proposal to investigate the source of the water infiltration. Cleland Jardine was
authorized to proceed with their investigation and completed a document review
as part of its investigation. During the week of October 20, 2014, Cleland
Jardine performed water testing on the exterior of the building outside of Ms.
Faulkner ’s office. On October 27, 2014, Cleland Jardine provided their
investigation report.
[20]          
On November 6-8, 2014, Waterford’s employees excavated the soil from the
exterior area of the concrete foundation wall immediately outside the southwest
corner of Ms. Faulkner’s office. Waterford hired the contractor Simluc to
perform waterproofing work on the exposed concrete wall. After Simluc’s work
was completed, Waterford’s employees performed water testing in the area
immediately outside of the foundation wall adjacent to Ms. Faulkner’s office.
Water was not observed to be leaking into Ms. Faulkner’s office space at that time.
[21]          
On November 14, 2014, before the remediation to the indoor office space
occurred, FRE retained EHS Partnerships Ltd.(“EHS”) to conduct airborne mould
sampling in her leased office space. Ms. Faulkner was told that the air quality
in her office was satisfactory. This was confirmed by a written report on
November 17, 2014. The EHS air quality report stated that it did not find any
excessive mould spores in the office air. The report further stated that the types
of mould in the office air were the same but the amounts were lower than the
quantity of mould in outside fresh air and was similar to the amount of mould
in the air of other office spaces in Ottawa. The report also stated that there
were “no concerns regarding a mould contamination within the office area”
[22]          
On the weekend of November 15-16, 2014, Waterford’s employees removed
and replaced the drywall in the southwest corner of the office space. The 2’ x
2’ carpet tiles were cleaned but not removed.
[23]          
On November 28, 2014, the Defendants provided FRE with a copy of the
Paracel lab results from March 3, 2014, which indicated that a high level of stachbotrys
mould had been detected on the backside of the 2 inch diameter drywall sample
taken by Mynott.
[24]          
On June 3, 2015, Ms. Faulkner attended her first appointment with Dr.
Matheson, a doctor of naturopathic medicine. Ms. Faulkner complained of having
memory problems, brain fog, and fatigue. Dr. Matheson diagnosed Ms. Faulkner as
suffering from mould toxicity at this first meeting without conducting any blood
or urine tests and significantly, she admitted that she was unaware that the
office air tests were negative for mould, as they did not find any mould in
amounts  greater than outside air.
[25]          
On June 3, 2015, Dr. Matheson provided Ms. Faulkner with a letter
stating that she was treating Ms. Faulkner for exposure to mould mycotoxins,
which was a medical toxicity issue caused by continuous overexposure to mould
in her workplace office. In her medical opinion, Dr. Matheson stated that Ms.
Faulkner should not be working in this environment and needed to leave this
office space as soon as possible. In addition, Dr. Matheson stated that
remediation was not possible within a reasonable timeframe. On June 8, 2015, Ms.
Faulkner forwarded a copy of this letter to her landlord and asked if FRE could
vacate the premises immediately without penalty.
[26]          
On June 4, 2015, George White of RIFDS was retained by FRE to take air
and surface/subsurface samples to search for mould in her office. Mr. White has
extensive experience with moulds from working at Agriculture Canada for many
years, identifying various types of mould. He is a mycologist.
[27]          
Mr. White’s air test also did not detect any mould in the office air
that was greater than outside air. The results of his air testing were the same
as EHS’s results from November 2014, namely that no excessive airborne mould
was discovered.  At the time of Mr. White’s visit, the carpet in the southwest
corner was dry and there was no musty odour. He tested the carpet for mould and
he found a few Penicillium and Aspergillus spores but he did not detect any stachybotrys
spores on the carpet sample.
[28]          
On June 11, 2015, Ms. Faulkner informed the real estate agents working
at her office that there was toxic mould in the office and that she was being
treated for mould toxicity. However, she testified that she did not tell the
other real estate agents in her office that the air quality testing performed
by both Mr. White and EHS did not detect any mould in the office air greater
than outside air. Ms. Faulkner offered to pay for the cost of consultations and
treatment for mould toxicity with the naturopath, Dr. Matheson for any of the
real estate agents in her office. Several of FRE’s agents went for a consultation.
[29]          
On June 22, 2015, FRE reported a third water leak in the same location.
At this time, FRE reported that there was wet carpet and mouldy documents on
the floor in the southwest corner of the leased space.
[30]          
On June 23, 2015, the Defendants retained       (“Pinchin”), a
professional mould, indoor air quality investigation and remediation company,
to collect air and surface samples to test for mould.
[31]          
On June 25, 2015, two days before the remediation work was completed by
Pinchin and the office was found to be safe for occupancy, Sue Dunton, a top
real estate agent with FRE, moved her team from FRE’s office space.
[32]          
On June 27, 2015, Brian Hubble, a senior project manager from Pinchin
attended at the office premises. He observed approximately 6" in² of light
spotting of mould growth on the backside of the drywall next to Ms. Faulkner’s
office. The drywall materials were dry at the time of this inspection.
[33]          
Approximately two sq ft of carpet was wet at the time of the assessment
along the south wall. A mould sample was taken from the wet carpet in the southwest
corner. The carpet sample did not identify mould growth, but the paperwork
placed on the carpeting was water damaged with visible mould growth. He
expected that the carpet under the papers would have some mould spores. The
papers were dry at the time of the inspection. The papers were sealed in a
banker box and removed from the office area. Neither party tested these papers
for mould. Notwithstanding the presence of some minor mould growth on the
backside of the drywall and a few spores found on two carpet tiles, the indoor
air quality was not affected by elevated mould spores.
[34]          
On June 27, 2015, after office hours, Drytech performed mould
remediation work under Pinchin’s supervision. A containment area was
established in the corner of the office and the drywall material was removed to
a height of 32 inches on the south and west walls of Ms. Faulkner’s office. In
addition, approximately 65 sq ft of carpeting materials were bagged and removed
off-site for cleaning or replacement.
[35]          
Air testing was performed at this time by Pinchin which did not disclose
any mould spore concentrations greater than outdoor air, both inside the
containment area and in the office space. The area was inspected and deemed to
be clean without visible mould growth anywhere and without detecting any mould
spores in the office air greater than outside air after the work was completed
on June 27, 2015. However, the containment area remained erect to maintain a
controlled environment until the wall investigation and water testing was
completed.
[36]          
On June 29, 2015, Dr. Matheson contacted Mr. White to inquire about his
impressions of the mould in Ms. Faulkner’s office. Mr. White replied to her stating
that “this is a tough one to call” because he did not notice any visible mould
in the office area and the area where the carpet was wet in the corner of the
office was not large relative to the whole office area. He also agreed that
spore dispersal was not an issue. He testified that he raised the possible Microbial
Volatile Organic Compounds (“MVOCs”) issue to see if there would be any
reaction from the other side; he testified that he was “seeing if we strike any
nerves”. Mr. White never did any testing to determine if there were any MVOC’s
or mycotoxins in the office air. He agreed that he was acting as an advocate
for Ms. Faulkner when he raised the MVOC’s as a possible cause of Ms. Faulkner’s
symptoms and agreed that he was only putting forward a theory. Mr. White never
detected a musty odour on any of his visits to the office.
[37]          
On June 29, 2015, the Defendants retained the engineering firm of Cleland
Jardine to perform water testing on the exterior concrete wall of the leased
premises. In early July 2015, Cleland Jardine performed water testing on the
exterior concrete wall adjacent to Ms. Faulkner’s office and on the concrete
wall around the corner of the building.
[38]          
On June 30, 2025, Mr. Moffett from Waterford advised Ms. Faulkner that
the office area was “perfectly safe” for occupancy.
[39]          
On July 10, 2015, Pinchin provided its investigation and remediation
report. The report indicated that before the renovations were carried out, it
found Aspergillus, Penicillium, and Chaetomium mould spores in the carpet along
the south wall and a few spores of stachybotrys. They also discovered a heavy
growth of stachybotrys, Penicillium, and Ulocladium mould spores on the back of
the drywall on both the south and west walls in the southwest corner of the
office space.
[40]          
On July 17, 2015, FRE retained Mr. White of RIFDS to review and comment
on Pinchin’s report. On July 28, 2015, Mr. White again conducted an air test
for mould and tested samples materials in the problem area for the presence of mould.
He did not discover any mould spores in his air test that were different from
the outside fresh air. When Mr. White visited Ms. Faulkner’s office again on
August 5, 2015, he testified that he was not aware of any substantial risk to
any occupant’s health. He testified that that if he was testifying before the
Labour Board, he would have to say that there was no reason to suggest that
people could not work in that space.
[41]          
Sometime between August 17 to 19, 2015, Sue Dunton, her assistant
Jennifer Watt, and Kerri McGee resigned from FRE. In her resignation letter she
stated that she had several reasons for leaving FRE that in her testimony she
stated that an important reason for leaving was her belief that FRE’s office
was contaminated with toxic mould. She didn’t feel it was appropriate to bring
clients into an office space with toxic mould.
[42]          
From August 21 to 27, 2015, Bassi Construction performed exterior repair
work to the concrete wall both adjacent to Ms. Faulker’s office and around the
corner under the supervision of Cleland Jardine. On August 24, 2015, Cleland
Jardine confirmed to the Defendants that further water testing had been carried
out and that the source of the leak had been found on the concrete wall around
the corner from Ms. Faulkner’s office and the leaking issue had been resolved. Cleland
Jardine discovered that there was a defect in the concrete wall around the
corner from Ms. Faulkner’s office. The water entered through the defect in the
concrete wall, went under two block concrete walls, which supported an air vent
next to Ms. Faulkner’s office, and under the drywall to wet approximately two
sq ft of the carpet in Ms. Faulkner’s office. The leak occurred occasionally
depending on the amount of rainfall and the direction of the winds.
[43]          
On August 25, 2015, the interior remediation work was completed, and all
of the work was completed in early September 2015.
[44]          
Between September 9 to 14, 2015, the real estate agents Suzanne Labonte,
Natalie Baizana, Whitney Hamilton, and Ian Fortugo also resigned from FRE.
[45]          
On October 1, 2016, approximately one year later, FRE terminated its
lease with Satko and on October 31, 2016, FRE paid the early termination
penalty and vacated the leased premises.
[46]          
The following issues must be decided:
[47]          
The Plaintiffs’ claim for damages is based on the Defendants’
negligence, negligent misrepresentation, and breach of the lease. In Hemmings
v. Peng, 2024 ONCA 318 at para. 60, the Ontario Court of Appeal set out
what the plaintiff must prove to succeed in a claim for damages that are based
on negligence. The components are: a) a duty of care; b) breach of the standard
of care; c) damage sustained; and, d) that damages sustained were caused in
fact and law by the breach.
[48]          
Factual causation must be shown on a “but for” basis on a robust and
commonsense examination of the evidence (paras. 61-63 of Hemmings). In
this case, the Plaintiffs must prove that their injuries would not have
occurred “but for” the negligent conduct of Satko or Waterford. Legal causation
is the reasonable foreseeability test. There must be a real and not far-fetched
risk of harm.
[49]          
As a result, the Plaintiffs must show that the Defendants owed them a duty
of care, which is not disputed and that they breached the standard of care
causing the Plaintiffs’ damages. Ms. Faulkner also bears the onus of proving
that her symptoms, namely memory loss, brain fog, and fatigue, were caused by
exposure to mould in the leased premises.
[50]          
The two main problems with Ms. Faulkner’s claim that her symptoms of
brain fog, memory problems, and fatigue were caused by exposure to mould or
mycotoxins in her office are:
[51]          
In late 2013, Ms. Faulkner testified that she began experiencing
incidents of memory loss, brain fog, and fatigue. She reported the symptoms to
Dr. Comerton, her family doctor, on January 22, 2014, and again on April 9, 2014.
In the same time period, Ms. Faulkner’s mother, with whom she was very close,
had developed dementia and had to retire from the real estate business. Ms.
Faulkner testified that she was very similar to her mother as they could wear
each other’s clothes and her mother was a mentor to her.
[52]          
Ms. Faulkner was fearful that she was suffering early dementia like her
mother. Dr. Comerton recommended the following:
[53]          
Dr. Comerton testified that she was not able to provide any medical
opinion on whether any of Ms. Faulkner’s symptoms were caused by a possible
exposure to mould.
[54]          
The first water leak at Ms. Faulkner’s office occurred in February 2014
where approximately two sq ft of the carpet in the southwest corner of the
office was wet. The papers that had been placed on the wet carpet may have had mould
growing on them. Mynott Construction was retained to determine the cause of the
water leak. Mynott took three 2 inch diameter samples of the drywall behind the
baseboard in the southwest corner. The lab results indicated that it detected a
high level of stachybotrys mould spores growing on the back side of one of the
drywall samples.
[55]          
No remediation efforts were undertaken by the Defendants until a 2nd
water leak occurred in August 2014 in the same area of Ms. Faulkner’s office.
In early November 2014, the exterior of the area outside of Ms. Faulkner‘s
office was excavated and exterior waterproofing work was applied to the concrete
wall.
[56]          
On November 14, 2014, before the remediation work in the interior of the
office space began, EHS attended the premises and took air samples to test for mould.
The air test results did not find any mould in the office air that were greater
than outside fresh air and the air quality was similar to other offices in
Ottawa.
[57]          
Two other air tests for mould were conducted on the office air. They
also found the same result, namely that no mould spores were detected in the
air in Ms. Faulkner’s office space. An air sample was taken by Mr. White on
June 4, 2015, before the third water leak occurred and by Pinchin on June 27, 2015,
after remediation work had been done, with the same result.
[58]          
To summarize, while a small area of mould was observed on the back of the
drywall in the southwest corner of Ms. Faulkner’s office, all of the air tests
conducted did not find any mould spores in the office air. In addition, Mr.
White tested for mould in the HVAC system for the office air and did not
discover any mould in that area. The HVAC system brought in 90% of outside
fresh air and 10% of recycled air.
[59]          
The Plaintiffs did not find any evidence of any mould spores in the
office air, but they rely on the theory that some moulds produce mycotoxins or
MVOCs which are toxic, in particular the stachybotrys mould. They allege that
mycotoxins released by the stachybotrys mould caused Ms. Faulkner’s symptoms. Stachybotrys
mould was detected on a small area on the back of the drywall just outside of Ms.
Faulkner’s office. Mr. White testified that the stachybotrys mould is found in
very wet areas and that the mould spores may have been carried under the office
wall and into the carpet in Ms. Faulkner’s office, which was observed to be wet.
[60]          
Mr. White testified that he did not do any testing for mycotoxins in Ms.
Faulkner’s office and as a result, did not detect the presence of any
mycotoxins from any mould, including stachybotrys. He testified that it was
only a theory and that he raised this suggestion to see what kind of response they
would receive from the landlord.
[61]          
Ms. Faulkner relies on the opinions of Dr. Matheson and Dr. Armstrong, a
family doctor with restrictions on her medical license, to prove that exposure
to mould in her office caused her symptoms. Dr. Matheson is a naturopath and
not a medical doctor. She cannot prescribe any medicinal treatments to patients
and can only prescribe naturopathic treatments. For example, she prescribed
taking charcoal and vitamins to treat Ms. Faulkner’s symptoms.
[62]          
Dr. Matheson diagnosed Ms. Faulkner to be suffering from mould toxicity
from her office at their first meeting on June 3, 2015, without knowing that
the air testing in Ms. Faulkner’s office failed to find any mould spores
greater than that in outside fresh air. A similar air test result was obtained
by George White and also by Pinchin’s air test in June 2015, namely that no mould
spores were found in the office air greater than outside air. Dr. Matheson was
also unaware that George White found that Ms. Faulkner’s home had a greater
amount of mould than her office. Dr. Matheson did not have any special
knowledge about mycotoxins or MVOCs and she also agreed that she did not have
any expertise in mould remediation. She was not qualified to testify as an
expert witness but rather as a treating naturopath.
[63]          
Ms. Faulkner also relies on the opinion of Dr. Armstrong, a treating
medical doctor, whose practice is restricted to “alternative and complementary
medicine” and whose license is restricted by the College of Physicians and
Surgeons of Ontario (the “College”). As a result of a complaint filed against
her in 2014, all of Dr. Armstrong’s patients must be a patient of another
licensed medical doctor and any treatment she prescribes had to be reported to
the monitoring Doctor. Dr. Armstrong was facing a further discipline hearing
before the College (to be held shortly after the completion of this trial) for
failing to follow the restrictions on her medical license.
[64]          
Dr. Armstrong had practiced in Texas, USA for 8 years from 1978 to
approximately 1986. On December 4, 2015, she voluntarily agreed to surrender
her Texas Medical License in lieu of further disciplinary action. She was under
investigation by the Texas Medical Board after it was advised that the College
of Ontario had taken disciplinary action against her. The Texas Medical Board
did not recognize that Dr. Armstrong had any specialty certification from the
American Board of Medical Specialties.
[65]          
Dr. Armstrong represented that she had special knowledge and education
in the areas of environmental medicine and stated that she was “Board
Certified” by the International and American Board of Environmental Medicine (the
“IABEM”). In cross-examination, Dr. Armstrong was unable to identify any IABEM
website, she was unable to identify a directory to verify her membership or
credentials, she was unsure of the location of the IABEM other than stating
that it was “somewhere in the New York State”. The only way she could contact
it was by calling an individual that she claimed was part of the IABEM.
[66]          
Dr. Armstrong also testified that she was a member of the American
Association of Environmental Medicine (the “AAEM”); however, in
cross-examination, she admitted that her membership in the AAEM had lapsed
prior to the 2020 pandemic and that she had not participated in any continuing
education or competency assessment since then. She did not have any
certification from the American Board of Medical Specialties as having any special
expertise in the area of environmental medicine or in diagnosing or treating mould
toxicity.
[67]          
Dr. Armstrong has not persuaded me that she has any special expertise or
certification in environmental medicine from any American Association or from
any Canadian Medical Entity. In the Province of Ontario, the designation as a
specialist in occupational medicine includes environmental medicine. Dr.
Armstrong is not recognized by the College in Ontario as a specialist in
environmental or occupational medicine. She was not qualified as an independent
expert witness in this trial, but rather testified as a treating physician.
[68]          
Dr. Armstrong’s opinion that Ms. Faulkner’s symptoms were caused by
exposure to mould in her office was largely based on urine samples that were
sent to Real Time Laboratories (“RTL”) in Texas for testing for mycotoxins in
her urine. She first met Ms. Faulkner in January 2016, approximately 6 months
after the interior remediation of Ms. Faulkner’s office had been completed by
Pinchin (on or about the end of June 2015). The source of the exterior leak in
the foundation wall was located and repaired by the end of August 2015. As a
result, Ms. Faulkner was not exposed to any additional mould in her office from
the end of June 2015 but certainly from the end of August 2015. Dr. Armstrong
was unable to explain why the lab tests for mycotoxins in Ms. Faulkner’s urine
were much higher in 2023, approximately 8 years after the remediation work had
been completed in her office and when Ms. Faulkner had not been at that office
for years.
[69]          
 The RTL lab in Texas was owned and operated by Dr. Hooper, who
testified that mould, and especially the stachybotrys mould, excreted a toxic
organic compound, namely the mycotoxin trichothecene. He testified that the trichothecene
found in Ms. Faulkner’s urine, even 8 or 9 years after she had allegedly been
exposed to mould, showed that Ms. Faulkner continued to suffer from mould
toxicity.
[70]          
While Dr. Hooper expressed this opinion, he was not accepted as an
expert witness namely as a pathologist for a number of reasons, including that
his medical license as a pathologist had been suspended by the California
Medical Board since January 2016.
[71]          
The California Medical Board found that Dr. Hooper had been negligent,
grossly negligent, and incompetent as a pathologist based on six complaints
that had been filed against him. The California Medical Board required that his
work be supervised by another pathologist until he took additional training or
courses. Dr. Hooper never took any additional training or courses and as a
result, his medical license continues to be suspended. The Texas Medical Board
imposed the same suspension of his medical license.
[72]          
Dr. Hooper’s evidence was restricted to giving evidence about the
laboratory test results when testing Ms. Faulkner’s urine for mycotoxins. Dr.
Hooper agreed that it was not possible to determine if any of the mycotoxins
found in Ms. Faulkner’s urine were due to environmental causes or exposure to
mycotoxins found in food.
[73]          
Dr. Hooper testified that on June 1, 2016, his lab reported a level of
the mycotoxin trichlothecene in Ms. Faulkner’s urine of 0.05 ppb. However, on
September 13, 2022, approximately 6 years later, with no additional exposure to
mould from her office, his lab reported that the level of trichlothecene in Ms.
Faulkner’s urine had increased to 0.238 ppb, a much higher level (4.76 times
greater). Dr. Hooper’s explanation for why RTL detected much higher levels of trichlothecene
in Ms. Faulkner’s urine some 6 years after she left the office was that the
mycotoxin had been hiding in cells in Judy’s body. This explanation was not
supported by any scientific study and does not make sense.
[74]          
Dr. Markus, the Defendants’ expert witness, testified that a study that
he reviewed found that the mycotoxin produced by the stachybotrys mould,
trichlothecene, had a half-life in the human body of between 7 to 80 minutes.
This means that at its longest, half of the amount of trichlothecene in Ms.
Faulkner’s body would be removed after 80 minutes. The amount of trichlothecene
in Faulkner’s urine would not be increasing, as reported by Dr. Hooper’s lab
results, but should have decreased very rapidly unless there was some other
source of the mycotoxin or his lab results were not accurate.
[75]          
The Defendants called Dr. Michael Markus, who was qualified by the court
to give expert opinion evidence in the areas of occupational medicine and on
the causation of symptoms that occur as a result of exposure to mould in the
workplace.
[76]          
Dr. Markus graduated from the University of Toronto medical school in
2001. After  graduating from medical school, he completed the five-year
occupational medicine residency program at the University of Toronto in 2006.
On August 9, 2006, he obtained his Board certification recognizing him as a
specialist in occupational medicine by the College. He was a member of the
Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada’s examination committee to
approve medical doctors as specialists in occupational medicine from 2012 to
2020. He has been the Chair of this examination committee from 2021 to the
present. He testified that in Canada, the specialty in occupational medicine
includes environmental medicine. In addition, he has lectured on occupational
medicine at the University of Ottawa’s Department of Medicine from 2017 to the
present.
[77]          
 Dr. Markus testified that the symptoms reported by Ms. Faulkner were
not associated with or caused by exposure to mould. He testified that
symptoms associated with mould exposure were a runny nose, a tickle in the
throat (similar to hay fever), skin rashes, itchy eyes, and asthma. These
symptoms typically go away if the exposure to mould stops. In severe cases, mould
exposure could manifest as hypersensitive pneumonitis, an inflammatory lung
condition, and in the case of immune-compromised individuals, could result in a
bacterial infection requiring intensive hospitalization. Ms. Faulkner did not
report having any of the symptoms that are associated with mould exposure as
she complained of having memory problems, brain fog, and fatigue.
[78]          
Dr. Markus also testified that urine mycotoxin testing did not have
any role in diagnosing mould exposure. He stated that the reason why urine
mycotoxin testing cannot be used as a diagnosing tool was because:
[79]          
Dr. Markus also relied upon several authoritative texts to come to the
above conclusions, including:
[80]          
I accept the expert evidence of Dr. Markus and prefer it over the
evidence of the naturopath Dr. Matheson and Dr. Armstrong for the following
reasons:
[81]          
For the above reasons, I accept the expert evidence of Dr. Markus, a
specialist in occupational medicine, which includes environmental medicine,
that the symptoms reported by Ms. Faulkner (namely brain fog, memory problems,
and fatigue) were not caused by mould or mycotoxins in her office. Dr. Markus’
opinion was not contradicted by any other expert witnesses, and I accepted his
opinion as being more persuasive than the evidence of Dr. Armstrong and the
naturopath, Dr. Matheson. In addition, his opinion was supported by the
evidence that all three of the air tests for mould in Ms. Faulkner’s office
found no evidence of mould greater than outside fresh air.
[82]          
The test to be applied in claims of negligence was set out in Hemmings
referred to at paras. 47 and 48 of this decision. The Plaintiffs must prove
that the Defendants owed the Plaintiffs a duty of care, breached the standard
of care, that damages were sustained, and that the damages were caused in fact
and law by the breach.
[83]          
There is no dispute that the Defendants owed the Plaintiffs a duty of
care. Whether the Defendants breached the standard of care when trying to find
the source of the water leak and in remediating the premises is disputed. On
issue #1, I have found that Ms. Faulkner’s symptoms were not caused by mould in
her office space as there was never any mould or mycotoxins detected in the
office space air.
[84]          
Even if it is assumed that the Defendants breached the required standard
of care in the manner in which they repaired the water leak and remediated the
office space, the Plaintiffs must prove that their injuries would not have
occurred in the absence of the Defendants’ breach of the standard of care: the
“but for” test. The injuries complained of by Ms. Faulkner, namely suffering
from mould toxicity, were not caused by any breach of the standard of care by
the Defendant, because the Plaintiffs failed to prove that there was any mould
or mycotoxins in the office air or that any mould or mycotoxins caused the
symptoms complained of by Ms. Faulkner.
[85]          
Vas Kanellos testified that the cause of the water ingress is the
responsibility of the property owner to correct or to engage appropriate
specialized experts to do so. The Defendants did engage contractors but waited
until the fall of 2014 to attempt to repair the water leak. They also retained
the engineering firm CJ to investigate the cause of the leak.
[86]          
 Mr. Kanellos was never advised that the source of the leak was a defect
in the concrete wall around the corner from Ms. Faulkner’s office and that the
water had leaked from there under two concrete block walls and under the office
wall. The leak was also intermittent and had not occurred during the first 5
years of the lease and each leak was separated by several months. I am not
persuaded that the engineering firm of Cleland Jardine was negligent in failing
to locate the leak in the fall of 2014 but rather was caused by a defect in the
concrete foundation wall around the corner from her office.
[87]          
I also find that the Defendants took reasonable steps to locate the
source of the leak and to repair the leak by retaining a competent engineering
firm to supervise contractors to do the work. The Defendants delayed conducting
the repair work until the fall of 2014 when the first leak had occurred in
February 2014 and a second leak occurred in August 2014. This delay may have
amounted to a breach of the standard of care but it did not cause any damages
because the air test performed by FRE in November 2014 did not detect any mould
in the office air. As a result, no damages were caused by the delay in
effecting the repairs.
[88]          
After the leak occurred on June 22, 2015, CJ was again retained and this
time acted promptly and located the source of the leak as a defect in the
concrete wall around the corner from Ms. Faulkner’s office, which was repaired
by Bassi Construction between August 22 to 27, 2015.
[89]          
For the above reasons, I find that the Defendants were not negligent
when repairing the water leak and in remediating the office space. In any event,
if they breached the standard of care in effecting the repairs, it did not
cause any damage to the Plaintiffs because they failed to prove that there was
any mould or mycotoxins in the office air and failed to prove that the symptoms
complained of by Ms. Faulkner were caused by mould or mycotoxins present in  her
office.
[90]          
I have previously held that the Plaintiffs have failed to prove that
there was any mould or mycotoxins in the office air and failed to prove that Ms.
Faulker’s symptoms were caused by exposure to mould in her office. As a result,
the presence of mould in the office air was not the reason that Sue Dunton left
FRE. Even though the air testing of the office space air did not detect any mould
or mycotoxins, Ms. Faulkner believed that there was mould in the office air
that caused her symptoms based on her diagnosis by the naturopath, Dr.
Matheson. Ms. Faulkner shared her diagnosis by Dr. Matheson that she was
suffering from mould toxicity caused by exposure to mould in her office with
her other real estate agents in her office, including Sue Dunton. However, Ms.
Faulker did not advise Sue Dunton or any of the other real estate agents that
the air test tests that had been conducted in the office did not discovered any
mould in the office air, different from outside fresh air.
[91]          
Sue Dunton testified that she left FRE for a number of reasons including
that Ms. Faulkner’s behaviour had changed dramatically at that time and she did
not feel it was safe or appropriate to bring clients into her office if it was
contaminated with toxic mould. Sue Dunton and her team moved out of the office
on June 25, 2015, after the third water leak had occurred. This was two days
after Drytech International had performed mould remediation work at the office
and the source of the water leak had been detected in early July 2015.
[92]          
I find that the major factors causing Sue Dunton to leave FRE were (1) a
false belief that the office air was contaminated by toxic mould, when the air
tests did not detect any mould different from outside air; (2) that Ms.
Faulkner shared her diagnosis and her belief that she was  suffering from mould
toxicity caused by exposure to mould in her office; (3) Ms. Faulkner’s offer to
pay for the costs of treatments with the naturopath, Dr. Matheson; and finally (4)
Ms. Faulkner’s offer to all of the agents that they were free to leave FRE if
they so desired.
[93]          
I also find that Sue Dunton’s and the other real estate to agents’
decision to leave FRE was not reasonably foreseeable by the Defendants based on
three incidents of wet carpet in one corner of a 2,750 sq ft office over a 16-month
period. The remediation work was performed either on the exterior of the
building or during non-business hours. After the 3rd water leak a
tarp containment area, was erected during the remediation work in July 2015, which
affected a maximum of 6% of the total office area for approximately two months.
Throughout the 16-month time period, the air tests all confirmed that the air
in the office space was not affected by mould and was therefore safe for
occupancy. It is unfortunate the that the information that the office air was
not affected by mould spores and was similar to outside fresh air and was safe
for occupancy, was not shared with Sue Dunton and the other real estate agents
who ultimately left FRE. Even Mr. White, the mycologist, who was retained by Ms.
Faulkner to investigate for mould in her office, testified that if he was
testifying before the Labour Board, he would have to say that the office space was
a safe workplace. This was after Pinchin had completed the remediation work in
July to August 2015.
[94]          
For the above the reasons, I find that the departure of Sue Dunton from
FRE was not caused by the presence of any toxic mould in the office air but
rather by a mistaken belief that there was toxic mould in the office air.. This
mistaken belief was based on Dr. Matheson’s diagnosis without being aware that
all of the air tests for mould in the office air were negative and on Ms.
Faulkner’s belief that her office air was toxic because she believed her
symptoms were caused by of the presence of mould spores or mycotoxins in the
office air. I also find that the departure of Sue Dunton and the other real
estate agents from FRE was not foreseeable by the defendants given that all of
the office air tests did not detect any mould spores and the defect in the
concrete wall, which caused the leak was repaired.
[95]          
I find that describing the initial Paracel test results as “good” was a
general statement of Mr. Wilkinson’s opinion which did not provide Ms. Faulkner
with a complete picture of the situation. The appropriate answer would have
been to provide a copy of the Paracel test results to Ms. Faulkner. The Paracel
test results detected a high level of stachybotrys mould on the back of a 2
inch diameter piece of the drywall in the southwest corner of Ms. Faulkner’s
office but the premises were dry on inspection and there was no visible mould
in the office interior.
[96]          
I find that even if Mr. Wilkinson’s statement was misleading and was
relied on by Ms. Faulkner, there are no consequences from it because the leased
premise was in fact in a “good” state and fit for occupancy as was confirmed by
the air quality testing which confirmed that there were no mould spores in the
office space air.
[97]          
For the above reasons, I find that the statement that the Paracel mould
tests results were “good” was incomplete and was relied on by Ms. Faulkner, but
the leased premises were in fact in a good state and fit for occupancy as
confirmed by the air testing which did not find any mould in the air greater
than outside fresh air.
[98]          
For the same reasons given in issue #4, I find that Satko did not breach
the terms of the lease as the premise was always fit for occupancy based on the
air tests, which did not disclose any toxic mould spores in the office air.
[99]          
If liability had been proven against either of the Defendants, then I
would have assessed damages as outlined below.
[100]       I
find that the calculation of the loss of profits on the commissions received by
Andrew Carter and Sue Dunton should be tied to Andrew and Sue’s anticipated
departure or retirement age and not the retirement age of Ms. Faulkner.
[101]       I
also agree with the Defendants’ submission that FRE had an obligation to
mitigate the damages caused by Sue Dunton’s departure. To mitigate her damages,
Ms. Faulkner may have been required to change her business structure to attract
established realtors to replace the lost commission income caused by Sue
Dunton’s departure.
[102]       I
assess the following amount of damages:
[103]       For
the above reasons the plaintiff is awarded $4,000 as a reduction of rent for a
period of two months, namely for July and August 2015. All other claims for
damages are dismissed.
[104]       The
Defendants shall have 10 days to make submissions on costs, the Plaintiff shall
have 10 days to respond, and the Defendants shall have 7 days to reply.