[1]           The defendant, Fancamp Exploration Ltd.
(“Fancamp”) brings this motion for an order granting it leave to amend its
statement of defence. The motion is opposed by the plaintiffs, primarily
because it is quite late, namely two weeks before the scheduled pretrial
conference and eleven weeks before the scheduled five-day trial.
[2]           Mr. Kamaleddine was a consultant for the
defendants providing research and development services for Fancamp’s mining
projects. The Magpie Mines Inc. (“Magpie”) is a subsidiary of Fancamp. Fancamp
terminated the consulting agreement on November 21, 2018.
[3]           Mr. Kamaleddine and his consulting firm,
FFK Consulting Services Inc. (“FFK”), commenced this action on April 16, 2019
seeking recovery of the liquidated damages specified by the agreement and
unpaid invoices. The defendants retained one lawyer and served a joint
statement of defence on June 21, 2019.
[4]            There were productions and discovery, and
the plaintiffs set the action down for trial on August 3, 2023. On November 29,
2023 the plaintiff filed a Confirmation Form. In February, 2024, Fancamp
changed lawyers to the ones it has now. On April 1, 2024 these lawyers served a
notice of motion on behalf of Fancamp seeking to amend the statement of claim
and add a counterclaim. These amendments included the ones now being sought.
[5]           On April 2, 2024 the case came before
Justice Wilson in a case conference resulting from trial scheduling court. The
Fancamp motion was discussed along with a motion by Magpie’s lawyer for a
removal order. Her Honour made an endorsement stating that she was not prepared
to delay fixing the trial date and that “motions if necessary, should have been
brought prior to the action being set down for trial.” Her Honour scheduled a
pretrial conference for March 12, 2025 and five-day trial starting May 12,
2025.
[6]           Fancamp scheduled its motion for the first
available date, February 25, 2025. On January 10, 2025 Fancamp amended its
notice of motion removing the proposed counterclaim and served it with a brief
affidavit sworn by its president. The plaintiffs waited until February 24,
2025, the day before the return of the motion, to serve and upload a responding
motion record. The defendants served and uploaded a reply motion record. These
late filings grossly violated the rules, but I reluctantly allowed them as the
records were not lengthy.
[7]           Mr. Fisher argued that Justice Wilson had
“ruled” on this motion and barred it. She did no such thing. Her endorsement
simply stated that she would not allow the motions to stop her from scheduling
the trial. She proceeded to schedule the trial. I move on to the substance of
the motion.
[8]           Rule 26.01 makes it mandatory that the
court “at any stage of an action” grant leave to amend pleadings on such terms
as are just, “unless prejudice would result that could not be compensated for
by costs or an adjournment.”
[9]           Prejudice is the issue in this motion. There
are two types of relevant non-compensable prejudice: actual prejudice such as
the loss of a witness relevant to the amendments; or a presumption of prejudice
resulting from an inordinate delay in moving for the amendments. There is no
dispute that it is the second type of prejudice, the presumption of prejudice
resulting from a delay in bringing the motion, that is the issue in this motion.
The moving party must rebut this presumption with an adequate justification for
the delay and proof of the absence of prejudice to the opposite side; 1588444
Ontario Ltd. v. State Farm Fire and Casualty Company, 2017 ONCA
42 (CanLII) at para. 39.
[10]       Was the delay in bringing the motion
inordinately long? It was. The relevant time period is from the commencement of
the action to the commencement of the motion to amend; see Loney v.
John Doe, 2024 ONCA 748 (CanLII) at para. 17. In this case that was
five years, namely the time period required by Rule 48.14 to have the action
ready and set down for trial without an administrative dismissal order. In
addition, I note that the motion was brought four years and ten months after
the statement of defence was served, and eight months after the action was set
down for trial; and is being heard eleven weeks before trial. In Family
Delicatessen Ltd. v. London (City), 2006 CanLII 5135 (ON CA) at para. 6, prejudice
was presumed after a delay of six years. This delay, therefore, raises a
presumption of prejudice that needs to be rebutted.
[11]       Was there an adequate explanation for the
delay? The explanation proffered by the plaintiffs was that they left the
pleadings up to their previous lawyers who overlooked bringing this motion.
This was the explanation that Master Muir found acceptable in 1632097
Ontario Limited v. 1338025 Ontario Inc., 2011 ONSC 5909 (CanLII) at para. 10. On the
other hand, in Horani v. Manulife Financial Corporation, 2023 ONCA 51
(CanLII) at para. 34 the Court of Appeal was less impressed with this
explanation. Suffice it to say here that the explanation was only passable.
[12]       However, the core issue on this motion is
whether there is non-compensable prejudice to the plaintiffs given the proximity
of the trial. In Horani, supra., para. 35 the Court of Appeal held that
there was non-compensable prejudice with the proposed amendments in that case (ie.
the addition of a punitive damage claim) in an amendments motion heard six
weeks before a 32-day trial, as the proposed amendments depended on new facts,
would have affected the way the respondent conducted its litigation and would
likely jeopardize the trial as a result, a trial already delayed. In short,
there is non-compensable prejudice with an amendments motion heard close to
trial that significantly changes the landscape of the case for the respondent.
The Court upheld the motion’s judge dismissal of the motion.
[13]       Do the proposed amendments in this motion
so significantly change the landscape of the case for the plaintiffs that they
will suffer such non-compensable prejudice? The proposed amendments have the
following main features:
[14]        Rule 26.01 requires the court to grant
leave to make amendments to pleadings at any stage “on such terms as are just”
unless the proposed amendments cause non-compensable prejudice to the
respondent. Based on my above noted review of the proposed amendments in this
motion, I have concluded that the most just result would be to grant Fancamp
the requested leave except for the last sentence of new paragraph 39. That last
sentence of new paragraph 39 creates non-compensable prejudice for the plaintiffs
for the reasons stated.
[15]       For these reasons, I grant Fancamp the
requested leave except for the last sentence of new paragraph 39. The
scheduling of the remaining pleadings and any limited discoveries concerning
these amendments can be dealt with at the pretrial conference on March 12,
2025.
[16]       Concerning costs, Fancamp served and filed
a bill of costs showing $8,860.57 in partial indemnity costs, $13,029.42 in
substantial indemnity costs and $14,419.04 in actual costs. The plaintiff filed
no costs outline. Mr. Fisher stated that, in the event of a loss by the
plaintiffs, the costs should be determined by the trial judge given the
immediacy of the trial.
[17]       I have decided to award no costs. While
largely successful, Fancamp does not deserve costs. It inordinately delayed
this motion and gave only a passable explanation for the delay. They lost on an
important part of their motion. The result is largely an indulgence for the
defendants. I so order.