[1]         
On December 23, 2023, the police received a
report of a suspicious vehicle parked at a convenience store in Meaford. Cst.
Lewis attended. The Applicant was in the driver’s seat and appeared to be
asleep. He was arrested for impaired operation, and ultimately charged with
possession of fentanyl which was found on his person. He was also charged with
possession of psilocybin, possession of methamphetamine for the purpose of
trafficking, and possession of fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking as a
result of drugs found in a search of his vehicle.
[2]         
The Applicant argues that the drugs should be
excluded from evidence as a result of s. 8, 9 and 10(b) Charter breaches.
[3]         
Cst. Lewis, Cst. McIsaac, Cst. Innes and Sgt.
Starzecki testified on the application.
[4]         
As of December 23, 2023, Cst. Lewis had
approximately six months of service. When he attended the scene, he knocked
fairly loudly on the driver’s side window, but there was no response. When he
opened the door, he inquired as to what was going on and whether Mr. Telford
was okay. Mr. Telford lifted his head and he was holding keys in his right
hand. He said he had a history of losing consciousness. EMS personnel were on
the scene and conducted an assessment of Mr. Telford. They asked him if he knew
where he was and he incorrectly stated that he was in Owen Sound, which is 30
km away. The car was filled with various belongings, including liquor bottles.
Mr. Telford said he was living in the vehicle.
[5]         
Cst. Lewis listened during the EMS assessment,
and at one point stepped away to call Cst. McIsaac to inquire when he would
arrive on scene. Cst. Lewis testified that his grounds to arrest for impaired
operation were that Mr. Telford was unconscious on arrival, he thought he was
in Owen Sound, he said he had not been parked there for long whereas dispatch
had received a report that he had been there for one hour, he fumbled getting
out his health card, in getting out of the vehicle, he held on to the door for
balance, he swayed as he walked, and there was a slight slur to his speech.
There was an odour of alcohol, and the EMS personnel also reported smelling
alcohol.
[6]         
As soon as the EMS completed their assessment,
Cst. Lewis arrested Mr. Telford at 9:22 p.m.
[7]         
Before being put in the cruiser Mr. Telford was
searched incident to the arrest. A zip lock baggie containing a pink substance
was found in one of his pants pockets. As an inexperienced officer, Cst. Lewis
was not sure what kind of illicit drug it was. Cst. McIsaac arrived on scene at
9:17 p.m. He assisted with the arrest.
[8]         
Following the arrest, Cst. McIsaac remained at
the scene, waiting for a tow truck to pick up Mr. Telford’s vehicle. He then
followed the tow truck to the Meaford detachment of the OPP, where there was a
garage in which he would be able to search the vehicle incident to arrest. At
11:47 p.m., Cst. McIsaac began his search of Mr. Telford’s vehicle at the
Meaford detachment.
[9]         
Following the arrest, Cst. Lewis drove Mr.
Telford to the Chatsworth detachment, arriving at 10:05 p.m. He went to
Chatsworth because he had been advised that Cst. Kieswetter would attend there
to do a breath test.
[10]       Sgt. Starzecki was the supervising officer that night. He was at the
Chatsworth detachment when Cst. Lewis brought Mr. Telford in. Cst. Lewis showed
him the baggie seized from Mr. Telford at the scene in the search incident to
arrest. Sgt. Starzecki, who had five years of experience in drug
investigations, believed that the substance in the bag was fentanyl. He advised
Cst. Lewis to arrest Mr. Telford for possession of fentanyl. At approximately
10:21 p.m., Cst. Lewis advised Mr. Telford he was charged with possession of
fentanyl, and he was cautioned and again advised of his right to counsel.
[11]       An agreed statement of fact was filed that included:
[12]       At approximately 11:42 p.m., Cst. Kieswetter advised Cst. Lewis that
the breath sample indicated there was no alcohol. Cst. Lewis then spoke to Sgt.
Starzecki, who reviewed his complete involvement that evening, and the decision
was made to make a demand for a drug recognition evaluation (“DRE”). The demand
was made at 12:11 a.m. At 12:16 a.m., Cst. McIsaac advised Sgt. Starzecki that,
in a search of the vehicle, he had uncovered a large amount of what appeared to
be fentanyl. Sgt. Starzecki then decided that he would go to the Meaford
detachment to supervise the vehicle search. He arrived at 1:04 a.m.
[13]       Cst. Innes, qualified DRE officer, was located in Kincardine. It
was, therefore, decided that Mr. Telford would be transported from Chatsworth
to the Walkerton detachment, which was roughly halfway between the two
locations.
[14]       Cst. Innes performed the DRE between 1:38 a.m. and 2:31 a.m. and
determined that Mr. Telford was under the influence of a narcotic analgesic and
cannabis. As such, he read a demand for blood at 2:33 a.m. Blood samples were
taken at the Walkerton Hospital at 3:01 a.m. which tested positive for illicit
drugs, including fentanyl.
[15]       Following the DRE, Mr. Telford was returned to the Chatsworth
detachment at 3:58 a.m. Cst. Lewis had to do a CPIC check and prepare documents
such as a notice of possible suspension of his licence, documents related to
the impoundment of his vehicle and the release documents. He testified that, as
an inexperienced officer, it took him longer than it would now.
[16]       By 6:03 a.m., the decision had been made to release Mr. Telford, and
Cst. Lewis called his emergency contact. There was no answer, but the emergency
contact called back at 7:00 a.m. Cst. Lewis then awakened Mr. Telford,
explained the release and related documents to him, and he was released at 7:20
a.m.
[17]       Ms. Shahabi submitted that Mr. Telford was detained almost
immediately, given that Cst. Lewis smelled alcohol after he opened the door of
Mr. Telford’s vehicle. It is a reasonable inference that, with an individual
who reports a history of losing consciousness and who was found unconscious,
the EMS personnel took the lead role and conducted their assessment, which
included taking Mr. Telford’s blood pressure. Cst. Lewis was listening during
most of the assessment.
[18]       I do not believe that Mr. Telford was being detained by the police
during the EMS assessment. Mr. Telford was co-operating with EMS personnel and
voluntarily remaining in place. If I am incorrect, and this can be considered a
detention, the obligation to advise of the right to counsel immediately must take
into account the fact that Mr. Telford was being assessed for what could be a
serious medical condition. In that context, it would not have been appropriate
for Cst. Lewis to interrupt and delay the medical assessment to advise Mr.
Telford that he was being detained and had the right to counsel.
[19]       At the conclusion of the EMS assessment, Cst. McIsaac was also on
scene. The officers had a brief discussion and concluded that there were
grounds to arrest for impaired operation.
[20]       There were various strong indicators that Mr. Telford was impaired,
as set out above at paragraphs 4 and 5. Ms. Shahabi in effect asks me to reject
much or all of this evidence, due to the fact that his BAC proved to be zero.
[21]       Nothing was elicited in cross-examination that would cause me to
doubt the credibility and reliability of Cst. Lewis’ and Cst. McIsaac’s evidence.
The fact that they detected a smell of alcohol, yet the blood alcohol
concentration (“BAC”) was zero, is explained by the fact that Mr. Telford was
living out of his vehicle, and it contained a number of liquor bottles.
[22]       The fact that the BAC was zero does not negate the compelling
evidence that Mr. Telford was, in fact, impaired. There were, therefore,
reasonable and probable grounds for his arrest for impaired operation.
[23]       My analysis that concludes that there were reasonable and probable
grounds for arrest also effectively determines this issue.
[24]       Cst. McIsaac began his search of the vehicle at 11:47 p.m. By this
time, Mr. Telford had been arrested for impaired operation and possession of
fentanyl. A search of the vehicle incident to those arrests was clearly lawful.
In fact, Cst. McIsaac located what tested to be fentanyl and methamphetamine, which
can cause impairment.
[25]       Section 320.28(2) C.C. provides that a police officer may, by demand
made “as soon as practicable”, submit to a DRE evaluation. Section 320.28(4)
C.C. provides that the DRE officer may make a demand that the person provide a
blood sample.
[26]       The OPP DRE 12 Step Guide indicates that step one is a breath test
for alcohol. The officer qualified to administer that test was in Chatsworth.
The DRE evaluation officer travelled to Walkerton to conduct the evaluation
there at the earliest opportunity. While the DRE evaluation was conducted 4.5 -
5.5 hours after Mr. Telford had been driving, much of the delay was the result
of this being a rural area which necessitated considerable travel time. The
results of the blood test were, however, supportive of the DRE opinion that Mr.
Telford was impaired by drugs.
[27]       Cst. Lewis was under no obligation to attempt to facilitate a call
to duty counsel from his cruiser immediately following the arrest. There was no
obligation to provide Mr. Telford with the officer’s own cell phone.
[28]       Cst. Lewis testified that he and Cst. McIsaac were the only officers
in their zone working that evening. While no officer had a specific note or
recollection, on balance, I am satisfied there were no additional officers at
the Meaford detachment that evening. As such, I accept as reasonable Cst.
Lewis’ explanation that, for officer safety reasons, one officer would not take
an accused person to a vacant detachment to make a call.
[29]       It was, therefore, necessary to take Mr. Telford to Chatsworth. Cst.
Lewis testified that, while he arrived at the Chatsworth detachment at 10:05
p.m., duty counsel was not called until 10:32 p.m., and Mr. Telford did not
speak to duty counsel until 10:43 p.m.
[30]       Cst. Lewis acknowledged that upon arriving at the station, he
prioritized making notes and consulting Sgt. Starzecki regarding the nature of
the substance seized from Mr. Telford’s pants. Cst. Lewis explained that the
consultation with Sgt. Starzecki was because he knew duty counsel would want to
know details of all the charges. In addition, some time was taken in
re-arresting Mr. Telford for possession of fentanyl based on the pink substance
found in the baggie that was found on his person at the time he was initially
arrested.
[31]       I agree that there was about a 20-minute unreasonable delay, and
that this breached Mr. Telford’s s. 10(b) right to instruct counsel “without
delay”, which the courts have interpreted to mean “immediately.”
[32]       As this is the only Charter breach that I find, it is
convenient to now address s. 24(2). In reviewing the Grant factors, this
is not a close call.
[33]       The seriousness of the breach is at the low end of the scale. Cst.
Lewis was an inexperienced officer acting in good faith. There was no attempt
to question Mr. Telford prior to him consulting duty counsel. The breach had no
practical impact on Mr. Telford’s Charter protected rights. Nothing that
duty counsel could say or do would have any impact on the vehicle search for,
and discovery of, drugs. Drugs such as fentanyl are a public health hazard, and
the evidence sought to be introduced is physical evidence. Society has a strong
significant interest in an adjudication on the merits. Taking these factors
into account, it is clear to me that admitting the drugs and other items seized
would not bring the administration of justice into disrepute.
[34]       Ms. Shahabi had submitted that Mr. Telford should have been released
after it was determined, at 11:39 p.m., that his BAC was zero. For reasons set
out above, I do not accept that submission. This leaves the delay from 3:58
a.m. on December 24, 2023, until he was released at 7:20 a.m. Cst. Lewis,
during this time, was engaged in discussions leading to the decision to release
Mr. Telford and in completing tasks that had to be completed before Mr. Telford
could be released.
[35]       Cst. Lewis called Mr. Telford’s emergency contact just after 6:00
a.m., but the contact did not call back until 7:00 a.m. to indicate she would
pick Mr. Telford up, and he was released at 7:20 a.m. There was no point in
awakening Mr. Telford earlier, as it would be unsafe for him to leave the
detachment, on foot, in the cold and darkness of winter. There was no
unreasonable delay in releasing Mr. Telford and, as a result, there was no Charter
breach.
[36]       The application to exclude evidence is, therefore, dismissed.