[1]              
The Applicant (“Melis”) and the Respondent (“Yavuz) started
cohabiting on July 21, 2021. They came to Canada together from Turkey as
political refugees in 2022. Melis gave birth to the parties’ one child, CBP, on
March 15, 2023.
[2]              
The parties then separated on March 27, 2023 when CPB was 12 days
old, after Yavuz assaulted Melis and was subsequently arrested.
[3]              
CBP is now 23 months old.
[4]              
CBP has been in Melis’ sole care since the separation. Melis
moved with CBP to Newfoundland & Labrador at the end of February 2024,
after having served Yavuz with a Notice of Relocation.
[5]              
Yavuz has chosen not to participate in these proceedings. He has
not sought any parenting time with CBP since he was 12 days old.
[6]              
Since the parties are not married, the orders being sought are to
be made pursuant to the Children’s Law Reform Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.C.12
(“CLRA”) and the Family Law Act, R.S.O., 1990, c.F.3 (“FLA”)
[7]              
The issues to be determined at this uncontested trial are as
follows:
[8]              
On March 27, 2023, Yavuz was charged with uttering death
threats/bodily harm toward Melis; assault; assault with a weapon; and mischief
under $5,000 by Yavuz against Melis.
[9]              
Yavuz’s criminal Release Order required that a) he not be within
100 meters of any place where Melis lives, works, or goes to school except pursuant
to a family court order; b) he not be between 10 metres of the family apartment
except to retrieve his personal belongings on two occasions only in the
presence of a uniformed police officers; c) he not possession any weapons or d)
he not apply for a weapons licence.
[10]          
On April 9, 2023, Melis issued the within Application seeking,
among other things, sole decision-making responsibility with respect to the
child; primary residence of the child; child support retroactive to the date of
separation; an order dispensing with Yavuz’s consent to enable her to obtain
government-issued documentation for the child and travel; and costs.
[11]          
On August 23, 2023, Yavuz was charged with 6 additional charges
of failing to comply with his Release Order.
[12]          
Melis served the within Application on Yavuz on September 14,
2023. Yavuz did not file an Answer or Financial Statement.
[13]          
On November 2, 2023, Melis’ counsel sent Yavuz a letter reminding
him that the deadline within which he had to serve and file an Answer was past due
but provided him with a further extension to serve and file his responding
pleading by November 7, 2023, failing which Melis would request an uncontested
trial.
[14]          
Yavuz did not respond to this letter, nor did he serve or file
responding pleadings.
[15]          
On December 15, 2023, Melis served a Notice of Relocation on Yavuz
advising of her intention to relocate with the child to Newfoundland and
Labrador. Yavuz did not file an objection to Melis’ Notice of Relocation.
[16]          
At the end of February 2024, Melis moved with the child and her
new partner to Newfoundland & Labrador. Once moved, Melis’ counsel reached
out against to Yavuz and offered him virtual parenting time with the child.
Virtual parenting time was arranged to take place on February 23, 2024. Upon
connecting to the zoom link on February 23, 2024, Yavuz immediately
disconnected when he saw the child near Melis’ new partner.
[17]          
Since February 2024, Yavuz has not made any further request for
parenting time with the child.
[18]          
Yavuz has not seen CBP since the separation.
[19]          
Pursuant to Rule 10(5) of the Family Law Rules, if a
respondent does not serve and file an answer, the consequences set out in
paragraphs 1-4 of rule 1(8.4) apply. The consequences set out in Rule 1(8.4)
include the court dealing with the case in the party’s absence.
[20]          
Given Yavuz’s failure to serve and file responding pleadings,
despite being reminded by her counsel, Melis proceed with her claims by way of
an uncontested trial.
[21]          
Melis filed a Form 23C, sworn on June 27, 2024, two separate 35.1
Affidavit for parenting, sworn on August 9, 2023 and June 27, 2024 respectively,
and draft orders.
[22]          
Melis seeks sole decision-making responsibility for the parties’ child,
that CBP continue to reside primarily with her in Newfoundland & Labrador
and an order that Yavuz’s parenting time take place on supervised basis only,
to be facilitated between him and the maternal grandparents. She also seeks an
order dispensing with Yavuz’s consent to enable her to obtain government-issued
documentation for the child and to allow her to travel without Yavuz’s consent.
In addition, Melis seeks a restraining order against Yavuz.
[23]          
Pursuant to s.21(1) of the CLRA, either parent is
permitted to apply to a court for decision-making responsibility with respect
to a child and for parenting time.
[24]          
Even though CBP is no longer habitually resident in Ontario, this
court has jurisdiction to make a parenting order with respect to the child
pursuant to s.22(1) of the CLRA because CBP was physically present in
Ontario at the commencement of Melis’ application for the order and there is no
application respecting decision-making responsibility parenting time with
respect to CBP pending before an extra-provincial court in Newfoundland & Labrador
where CBP is habitually resident.
[25]          
Section 24(1) of the CLRA sets out that the court is only
to consider the child’s best interests in making a parenting order. In
considering the best interest factors, set out in s.24(3) of the CLRA,
the court is to give primary consideration to the children’s physical,
emotional and psychological safety, security and well-being: s.24(2).
[26]          
The best interest factors set out in s.24(3) of the CLRA
include, but are not limited to the following:
[27]          
Melis has been the child’s primary caregiver since his birth.
Upon Yavuz being charged criminally, the child was left solely in Melis’ care,
from the time he was 12 days old.
[28]          
Melis deposes that she has suffered family violence at Yavuz’s
hands during their relationship, including during her pregnancy and after his
birth. The physical and verbal abuse endured by Melis was described as
including Yavuz assaulting her with a knife, threatening to kill her and the
child and being verbally abusive. Despite the terms of the criminal Release
Order, Melis deposes that Yavuz breached the conditions and sent her
threatening messages through third parties. Melis argues that Yavuz is
unpredictable and violent and, as a result, she fears for her safety and that
of the child.
[29]          
After the assault incident on March 27, 2023, the Toronto
Children’s Aid Society (“CAS”) initiated a child protection investigation. The
CAS advised Melis that they considered CBP to be safe in her care.
[30]          
Yavuz continued to make threats toward Melis and her family in
Turkey. As a result, Melis contacted the police on a number of occasions due to
his breach of the no-contact criminal conditions.
[31]          
I find that it is in the child’s best interests for Melis to have
sole decision-making responsibility over the major and day-to-day decisions
that impact CBP based on the factors set out in s.24(3) of the CLRA and for
the following reasons:
[32]          
Given the history of family violence, which includes Yavuz not
complying with the no-contact conditions of his criminal Release Order, I am
also persuaded that it is in the child’s best interests to only have supervised
parenting time with Yavuz if Yavuz seeks parenting time in the future and for
such time to be at the discretion of Melis, with the supervision requirements
to include Yavuz paying for the cost of supervision. I am also persuaded that
if requested, Yavuz is to have virtual parenting time with the child once every
month to be facilitated through the maternal grandparents and Yavuz.
[33]          
Given the lack of contact between the child and Yavuz sinceCBP’s
birth, he will need to build a relationship with CBP if he intends to re-enter
his life, since no bonding or attachment between the child and Yavuz has
occurred.
[34]          
Melis shall be given authority to obtain any government issued
documentation for the child without the need for Yavuz’s consent, such as a passport,
birth certificate, social insurance number, driver’s licence, etc. Melis shall
also be authorized to travel with CBP without notifying Yavuz or obtaining his
consent in advance.
[35]          
Pursuant to s.31 of the FLA, every parent has an
obligation to provide child support for a child, to the extent that the parent
is capable of doing so.
[36]          
An order of child support is meant to recognize that each parent
has an obligation to provide support for the child and apportion the obligation
according to the child support guidelines: s.33(7). A court making an order for
the support of a child shall do so in accordance with the child support
guidelines: s.33(11).
[37]          
Since the parents are not married, the provincial child support
guidelines apply. Since CPG is habitually resident in Newfoundland and
Labrador, the Newfoundland and Labrador Provincial Child Support Guidelines apply,
Newfoundland and Labrador Regulation 40/98 (“NL Guidelines”).
[38]          
Melis seeks child support for CBP in accordance with the Ontario Child
Support Guidelines, O. Reg. 391/97, specifically for $304 a month, based on
an imputed income for Yavuz of $35,000 a year. However, since CBP is resident
in Newfoundland, the NL Guidelines apply.
[39]          
Melis has no employment history in Canada and was in receipt of
Ontario Works.
[40]          
Yavuz worked in the construction industry as a general labourer.
Melis deposes that he has no health problems and asks the court to impute him
with a minimum wage income of $35,000 a year.
[41]          
Melis has no information about Yavuz’s income since he did not
file an answer to her claims. The only information on the record is that during
the parties’ relationship, Yavuz worked in the construction industry as a
general laborer and that he solely paid the parties’ rent and grocery expenses
since she earned no income.
[42]          
Yavuz has not paid any child support to Melis since separation on
March 27, 2023. Melis seeks retroactive child support to the date of
separation.
[43]          
When determining whether to impute income to a payor, the court
has regard to s.17 of the NL Guidelines, which allows the
court to impute income to a parent as it considers appropriate in the
circumstances. The circumstances include intentional under-employment or
unemployment.
[44]          
 The general principles regarding financial support of
children under the NL Guidelines was recently referred to by the
Court of Appeal of Newfoundland & Labrador in Drover v. Drover, 2020
NLCA 9 (CanLII), at paras. 11 and 12, which I have reproduced below:
[45]          
In the case at bar, Yavuz has chosen not to participate in these
proceedings. The court, therefore, has no evidence on record as to his prior
income earning capability. The best evidence on which the court can rely is
Melis’ affidavit which states that Yavuz’s income was used solely to pay rent
and groceries. She asks the court to impute a minimum wage income on Yavuz.
[46]          
Pursuant to s.3(2) of the NL Guidelines, the amount of
child support set out in the applicable tables, according to the number of
children under the age of majority to whom the order relates and the income of
the parent against whom the order is sought, and the amount, if any, determined
under s.7 is presumptive. In other words, there is no discretion in the NL
Guidelines for the court to order any other amount of child support other
than what is set out in the tables, if the children are under the age of
majority.
[47]          
As a result, Yavuz is obliged to pay child
support for CBP pursuant to the NL Guidelines based on an imputed
minimum wage income of $35,576 in the table amount of $299 a month for one
child starting on March 1, 2025 and on the first day of each month going
forward.
[48]          
Melis also seeks retroactive child support from
the date of separation, being March 27, 2023 to be paid to her within 30 days
of the order.
[49]          
In D.B.S. v. S.R.G., 2006 SCC 37 (CanLII), [2006] 2
S.C.R. 231, the court looked at three
scenarios where retroactive child support might be ordered, one of which, is
where there has not already been a court order for the payment of child
support. This is the situation in the case at bar.
[50]          
Bastarache J. found that s. 15.1 of the Divorce Act, does
not expressly provide for retroactive support orders. In
the context of a claim for child support where no previous order has
been made or agreement reached between the parties for the payment of one
parent to another for child support, this court has
jurisdiction to award retroactive child support under s.
15.1 of the DA on a contextual reading of the statute.
The court found that there is no restriction in the DA as to the date
from which a court may order that an order of child support may take
effect.  In this respect, retroactive support for a child is
compensation for what is legally owed. D.B.S., paras. 81-84.
[51]          
In this case, the parties are not married. The jurisdiction to
order retroactive child support is set out in s.34(1)(f) of the FLA.
[52]          
The majority in D.B.S. confirmed bedrock principles
relating to the obligation of separated parents to pay child support. The amount of
support payable under this obligation depends on their ability or their
income according to the governing support regime that applies to
them.
[53]          
Bastarache J. observed that the mere fact of parenting places a
great responsibility upon parents. They are immediately responsible as
guardians and providers upon the birth of a child. Bastarache J. further
observed that the parent and child relationship is one that engages not
only moral obligations, but also legal obligations; support is an
obligation that arises automatically upon the birth of a child; D.B.S.,
at paras. 36-37.
[54]          
In D.B.S., the
court set out the two steps to decide the issue of retroactive child support. The court must first determine
whether a retroactive award
should be made on the facts of the case. This determination, in my view, is a
question about entitlement. The second step is to decide the amount of support that would
adequately quantify the obligation of the payor to pay support during the
intervening time. This step requires the court to determine the date from
which retroactive child support should be
payable, as the amount payable each month is fixed by the table amount
according the CSGs for the payor’s income in each year of the
retroactive period.
[55]          
 There are several
factors to consider in determining whether retroactive child support should be
ordered. These factors are often referred to as the D.B.S. factors and
can be summarized as follows:
[56]          
In this case, Melis issued the Application on April 29, 2023,
about one month after the separation. I find that Melis did not delay in her
attempt to secure child support.
[57]          
I further find that Yavuz has engaged in blameworthy conduct.
Yavuz’s conduct was blameworthy because he consciously chose to ignore his
child support obligations: Put simply, a payor parent who knowingly avoids or
diminishes his support obligation to his children should not be allowed to
profit from such conduct: D.B.S., at para. 107. Yavuz was aware that he
was the only parent working and when he was no longer able to live with Melis
and the child because of his criminal charge conditions, he was aware that the
child would become Melis’ sole responsibility.  He took no active steps to see
the child despite the fact that he was a newborn and he took no steps to
provide any support for the family financially.
[58]          
The present circumstance of the child is that he has now
relocated to a new province and is being looked after by Melis, along with her
new partner. Melis has done her best to provide for the child financially.
There is no doubt, based on the evidence on record, that the child has
undergone hardship since the separation.
[59]          
Since Yavuz chose not to respond to Melis’ Application or
participate in these proceedings, despite being given opportunities to do so,
the court has no proper evidence on record from Yavuz as to whether hardship
would be occasioned by a retroactive child support award.
[60]          
The court should attempt to craft the retroactive award in a way
that minimizes hardship: D.B.S. at para. 116. While hardship for the
payor parent is much less of a concern where it is the product of his own
blameworthy conduct, it remains a strong one where this is not the case. In the
case at bar, it is Yavuz’s own blameworthy conduct that has resulted in
retroactive child support being owed by him.
[61]          
I find that this is an appropriate case where child support
should be awarded retroactive to April 1, 2023.
[62]          
Based on the evidence on record, I find that
Yavuz should be imputed with the Ontario general minimum wage income from the
separation, March 27, 2023 onward as follow:
[63]          
 Accordingly, I find that Yavuz owes Melis
retroactive child support of $5,379 for the period April 1, 2023 to and
including February 1, 2025, calculated as follows:
[64]          
Pursuant to s.35 of the CLRA, the court may make a final
order against any person if the applicant has reasonable grounds to fear for
his or her own safety or for the safety of any child in his or her lawful
custody.
[65]          
Similarly, s.46 of the FLA authorizes the court to make a
final restraining order against a person if the applicant has reasonable
grounds to fear for his or her own safety or for the safety of any children in
his or her lawful custody. Such an order can be made against a person who was
cohabiting with the applicant.
[66]          
Section 46(3) of the FLA sets out that the provisions of
the restraining order can deal with contact, communication or coming without a
specified distance of the applicant or contain any other provision that the
court considers appropriate.
[67]          
Melis seeks a restraining order so that a) Yavuz not be able to
contact or communicate with her directly or indirectly exclude through the
maternal grandparents to arrange for parenting time and b) for Yavuz not to
come within 200 meters of her or CBP’s residence, workplace or place of
education without her written consent or in accordance with a family court
order.
[68]          
In Newfoundland & Labrador, the Children’s Law Act,
RSNL 1990 c.C-13 and the Family Law Act, RSNL 1990, c.F-2, allow the
court to make restraining orders as set out in the Ontario statutes.
[69]          
The legal principles for the court to apply when making a
restraining order were set out by Sherr, J. in A.M. v. S.D., 2020 ONCH
479 (CanLII) at para. 95:
[70]          
I find that Melis has both a subjective and objective basis to
fear for her safety from Yavuz. As stated, he physically assaulted her with a
weapon and uttered death threats and threats of bodily harm against her.
Further, when he agreed to conditions regarding his release which included
having no direct or indirect contact with Melis, Yavuz, continued to threaten
her through family members and directly.
[71]          
I have considered whether a no-contact order pursuant to s.28 of
the CLRA would be sufficient to protect Melis. I considered that Yavuz
did not follow the criminal court’s release order. The court is not confident
that Melis would be safe from Yavuz without the more robust protection that a
restraining order provides. The court is hopeful that the restraining order
does not have to be indefinite. If Yavuz can show compliance with this order
for one year, it will consider that a material change in circumstances has
occurred and will give strong consideration to changing the restraining order
to a no-contact order under s.28 of the CLRA.
[72]          
This court makes the following final order: