[1]              
The motions before me are brought in eight different actions. The issue in
each is the same: whether the third party claims commenced by the defendants
Domenic Santaguida, 1155324 Ontario Inc. c.o.b. as Vittoria Trattoria, 2361212
Ontario Limited, and Mervin Blostein (collectively, Vittoria Trattoria) against
the third party Maurizio Martignago,[1]
are barred by the ultimate limitation period in s. 15 of the Limitations
Act, 2002, S.O. 2002 c. 24, Sched. B.
[2]              
The underlying facts are not in issue. On April 12, 2019, a fire
occurred at various properties in the ByWard Market in Ottawa. The fire is
alleged to have begun on the roof of 37 William Street where Vittoria Trattoria
is located.
[3]              
Mr. Martignago is an architect who was involved in a renovation at 37
William Street in 2001. It is alleged that certain architectural work
contributed to the spread of the 2019 fire.
[4]              
In 2021, various lawsuits were commenced arising from the fire, naming
Vittoria Trattoria as defendants. In 2023, Vittoria Trattoria commenced third
party claims for contribution and indemnity against Mr. Martignago arising out
of his role in the 2001 renovations.
[5]              
Mr. Martignago contends that, correctly interpreted and applied, the
15-year ultimate limitation period must result in the dismissal of the third
party claims because the 2001 renovation work occurred 18 years before the
fire. Vittoria Trattoria argues the third party claims are not statute-barred because
s.18 of the Act deems the date of alleged wrongdoing to be the date on
which Vittoria Trattoria was served with the statements of claim giving rise to
its claims for contribution and indemnity – that is, in 2021 – not the date on
which the underlying act or omission occurred.
[6]              
For the following reasons, the motions are dismissed.
[7]              
The Act establishes an ultimate limitation period of 15 years:
[8]              
 Section 18 of the Act governs claims for contribution and
indemnity. Section 18 provides:
[9]              
Mr. Martignago argues that the third party claims are barred by the
ultimate limitation period in s.15 of the Act because the alleged roof
renovation work took place more than 15 years before the third party claims
against him were issued. With respect, this interpretation ignores the clear
and unambiguous language of s.18.
[10]          
Section 18(1) of the Act is a deeming provision relating to
contribution and indemnity claims. The Court of Appeal for Ontario has
confirmed that, when read in combination with s.4 (the basic two-year
limitation period) and s.15, s.18 establishes the date of service of the injured
party’s statement of claim as the presumed commencement date for the basic
two-year limitation period and the actual commencement date for the ultimate
15-year limitation period with respect to contribution and indemnity claims: Placzek,
at para. 24.[4]
[11]          
A claim for contribution and indemnity under s.1 of the Negligence
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. N.1 is not a damage claim arising out of a tort, but
instead is a statutory claim, founded on principles of restitution and unjust
enrichment: Placzek, at paras. 35-38. It follows that the “acts or
omissions” on which the claim for contribution and indemnity is based are “the
failures by the other concurrent tortfeasors to pay their fair share of the
injured party’s damages before the contribution and indemnity claimant’s liability
to the injured party has crystallized: Placzek, at para. 42.
[12]          
Prior to the enactment of the Act, the weight of authority in
Ontario indicated that a cause of action for contribution and indemnity under
s.1 of the Negligence Act did not accrue, and the limitation period did
not begin to run, until the injured party obtained judgment against the person
claiming contribution and indemnity: Placzek, at para. 43.
[13]          
As Sharpe J.A. observed in Canaccord Capital Corp. v. Roscoe
(2013), 2013 ONCA 378 (CanLII), 115 O.R. (3d) 641 (C.A.), at para. 17, the reform of the law of
limitations in Ontario was “aimed at creating a clear and cohesive scheme for
addressing limitation issues, one that balances the plaintiff’s right to sue
with the defendant’s need for certainty and finality.” And, as described by
Paciocco J.A. in Mega International, at para. 73, “[t]here is an element
of injustice in using a limitation period to deny a claim that could not have
been discovered with reasonable diligence”; “the court should be reluctant to
adopt a legislative interpretation that effectively permits the possibility of
such an injustice, unless that is the outcome clearly dictated by the
legislation.”[5]
[14]          
On a plain reading, s.18 does not permit “the possibility of such an
injustice.” Section 18 expressly dictates that in the case of contribution and
indemnity claims, the two-year limitation period presumptively commences
on the date of service of the statement of claim, but the 15-year ultimate
limitation period actually commences on the date of service of the
statement of claim. Mr. Martignago argues that on “a correct interpretation” of
ss.15 and 18, since the plaintiffs in these matters were barred by the ultimate
limitation period from bringing a claim against him, so too is Vittoria
Trattoria. With respect, Mr. Martignago’s interpretation flies in the face of
the plain language of s.18, the scheme of the Act, and judicial
interpretation of s.18.
[15]          
Mr. Martignago relies on the Court of Appeal’s decision in Wong v.
Lui, 2023 ONCA 272. In my view, Wong does not assist Mr. Martignago.
At issue in that case was the interpretation of s.15(4)(b), and specifically,
whether the motion judge erred in failing to conclude that for s. 15(4)(b) to
apply, the claim must arise while the plaintiff is a minor.  The Court of
Appeal held that s.15(4)(b) only postpones the running of the ultimate
limitation period for minors who have claims that arose when they were minors,
concluding that the motion judge’s interpretation failed to take into account
of and was inconsistent with the plain language, scheme, legislative history,
and object of the entire Act: Wong, at paras. 17, 43.[6]
The Court of Appeal reiterated that the purpose of the ultimate 15-year
limitation period is “to balance the concern for plaintiffs with undiscovered
causes of action with the need to prevent the indefinite postponement of a
limitation period and the associated costs related to record-keeping and
insurance resulting from continuous exposure to liability”: Wong, at
para. 25.
[16]          
The Court of Appeal in Wong added, at para. 26:
[17]          
Similarly, it would be unfair to bar a person’s right to make a claim
for contribution and indemnity before they are in a position to pursue a third
party claim, that is, before the statement of claim has even been served. That
is the unfairness that s.18 guards against by expressly deeming the date of
service of the statement of claim as the actual commencement date for the ultimate
limitation period.
[18]          
The third party claims are not statute-barred by
the 15-year ultimate limitation period in the Act. The r. 21 motions are
dismissed.
[19]          
In the event the parties are unable to agree on
costs, they may make written submissions limited to a maximum of three pages,
excluding relevant attachments. Vittoria Trattoria shall deliver its costs
submissions by March 6, 2025. Mr. Martignago shall deliver his responding costs
submissions by March 20, 2025. If no submissions are received within this
timeframe, the parties will be deemed to have settled the issue of costs
as between themselves.