[1]              
Kyle Trepanier was involved in a motor vehicle
collision on October 9, 2022. The sole passenger in his vehicle, Emma Roy, died
from her injuries. Mr. Trepanier’s trial for criminal charges arising from this
incident is scheduled for May 20-24 and July 2, 2025.
[2]              
The Crown seeks a ruling declaring that an ante
mortem statement of Emma Roy made to Christopher Prieur on October 7, 2022,
is admissible according to the principled exception to the hearsay rule as
prior discreditable conduct.
[3]              
The material aspects of the statement the Crown seeks
to tender are:
[4]              
There are two issues to be determined:
[5]              
I conclude that the evidence sought to be
admitted by the Crown does not satisfy the requirements of threshold
reliability. The content and circumstances of the making of the statement do
not negate the possibility that the declarant was untruthful or mistaken. The
Crown application is dismissed.
[6]              
The factual allegations relied upon by the Crown
are as follows:
[7]              
Ms. Roy made a statement to Christopher Prieur
on October 7, 2022—two days before the motor vehicle collision, about Mr.
Trepanier’s driving. The Crown seeks to have this statement admitted for the
truth of its contents at the upcoming trial.
[8]              
Mr. Prieur provided statements to the police on November
10, 2022, and December 1, 2022. He also testified at examinations for discovery
on December 19, 2024, where he was cross-examined by counsel for Mr. Trepanier.
The evidence at the voir dire regarding the proffered statement emanates
from transcripts of these statements and the discovery.
[9]              
I make the following findings regarding the
circumstances surrounding Ms. Roy’s statement:
[10]          
Mr. Prieur testified at the examination for
discovery about the following aspects of conversation during the drive,
evidence I accept on this application:
[11]          
Mr. Prieur testified that he later discovered
that Ms. Roy had been staying with Mr. Trepanier during her trip to Ottawa.
[12]          
Regarding their relationship, Mr. Prieur stated
that Ms. Roy had never stopped him from going on her phone, but this ended on
October 5, 2022, when she started acting strangely. He explained that he was no
longer permitted to touch her phone. The day before the motor vehicle collision,
he had to look at Ms. Roy’s phone and discovered that she had been talking with
Mr. Trepanier. He saw a reference to Ms. Roy and Mr. Trepanier cuddling on a
couch. Mr. Prieur testified that he felt sad when he discovered this.
[13]          
In cross-examination, Mr. Prieur acknowledged that
Ms. Roy’s view was that there would be, at least, a time-out. He wished to
remain a couple. They did not see eye-to-eye on things. Ms. Roy had previously
been talking with an older boyfriend about working things out with him, but
this did not happen. Mr. Prieur acknowledged that Ms. Roy was not open with him
about Mr. Trepanier and had repeatedly lied about where she had stayed in
Ottawa and with whom. He agreed that this made him feel a little jealous and
angry. He clarified that the lying developed towards the end of their
relationship.
[14]          
Mr. Prieur agreed that Ms. Roy was lying about
the trip to Ottawa in the same conversation when she told him about Mr.
Trepanier driving at 260 km/h.
[15]          
The Crown seeks admission of Ms. Roy’s ante
mortem statement under the principled exception to the hearsay rule. The
Crown submits that it is relevant to the following issues:
[16]          
The Crown also argues that the statement may be
relevant in assessing defence evidence and rebutting possible defence evidence
that Mr. Trepanier is a prudent and responsible driver.
[17]          
In submitting the foregoing, the Crown submitted
that the statement is not tendered for any purpose connected to any propensity
reasoning.
[18]          
The Crown argues that the proffered evidence
satisfies the criteria of necessity and reliability. The Crown maintains that necessity
is satisfied as Ms. Roy is deceased. The Crown contends that threshold
reliability is satisfied as per R. v. Bradshaw, 2017 SCC 25, such that
the hearsay is sufficiently reliable to overcome the dangers arising from the
difficulty of testing it.
[19]          
Threshold reliability can be established by
factors supporting procedural reliability, substantive reliability, or some
combination of both. The Crown acknowledges that given the nature of the
statement, procedural reliability factors play no role in establishing
threshold reliability. For example, Ms. Roy's statement was neither recorded
nor given under oath, and no warning about the consequences of lying had been
provided.
[20]          
The Crown submits that the following substantive
reliability factors, satisfy threshold reliability on the balance of
probability:
[21]          
The Crown argues that the foregoing indicia of
reliability are buttressed by corroborative evidence; specifically,  the pre-collision
data downloaded from Mr. Trepanier’s Genesis that shows he was driving at
approximately 200 km/h five seconds before the October 9, 2022, collision.
[22]          
The defence submits that Ms. Roy’s statement is
inadmissible.
[23]          
The defence argues that the statement is irrelevant;
therefore, the analysis required for its admission pursuant to the principled
exception to the hearsay rule is unnecessary. The defence submits that the
statement is unnecessary because Mr. Trepanier’s driving behaviour on October
5, 2022, is not at issue.
[24]          
The defence further submits that Ms. Roy’s
statement is not corroborated. The defence cites Bradshaw for the
proposition that corroborative evidence must go to the truthfulness or accuracy
of the content of the hearsay statement that the moving party seeks to rely on.
[25]          
The defence submits that the cross-examination
of Mr. Prieur during the examination for discovery revealed the following
factors that diminish the threshold reliability of the statement:
[26]          
The defence submits that the nature of the
relationship is the sole factor of substantive reliability available to the
Crown in support of its application for admission of the statement. That said,
on the day of the statement, the defence argues that Ms. Roy was not confiding
to Mr. Prieur but was lying to him, a fact he discovered days later when he
searched Ms. Roy’s phone without her permission. The defence submits that the statement
was not made in a confiding relationship, where it would be doubtful that the declarant
would not lie.
[27]          
In conclusion, the defence submits that because
cross-examination is unavailable, the hearsay dangers in this case cannot be
overcome due to the complete lack of circumstantial guarantees of reliability
or corroboration.
[28]          
Evidence may only be admitted if it relates
logically to an issue in the case. Regardless of whether it is in hearsay form,
evidence is inadmissible if irrelevant. See R. v. Blackman, 2009 SCC 27,
at para 29.
[29]          
I find that the proposed evidence of Ms. Roy's ante
mortem statement is not relevant. I do not accept that the evidence is
necessary for the narrative. The events are understandable without Ms. Roy's
statement being admitted for the truth of its contents. I also do not accept
that the proffered evidence of Mr. Trepanier’s driving on October 5, 2022, is relevant
to his alleged driving behaviour on October 9, 2022, without engaging in
propensity reasoning. Without engaging in propensity reasoning, it cannot be
said as a matter of logic and common sense that the proffered evidence
regarding his driving on October 5 makes it more likely that he was driving at
a high rate of speed on October 9.
[30]          
For the same reasons, I do not accept that the ante
mortem statement of Ms. Roy regarding Mr. Trepanier’s driving on October 5
is of assistance in assessing the credibility/reliability of witnesses concerning
the events of October 9 or the validity of the pre-crash event data downloaded
from Mr. Trepanier’s car following the collision.
[31]          
It may be that certain defences will arise during
the trial that render Ms. Roy's out-of-court statement relevant. For example,
the statement may be relevant to rebut evidence that Mr. Trepanier is a prudent
or reasonable driver should that evidence be tendered in his defence. It may be
relevant if the accused puts his character into issue. It may be relevant to
challenge Mr. Trepanier’s credibility.
[32]          
Given the ongoing and developing nature of
trials, determining relevance is challenging. I agree with the Crown that
relevance must be assessed within the context of other evidence at trial and
that establishing relevance cannot be an exacting standard. See Blackman,
at para 38.
[33]          
While the evidence is irrelevant at present, it
may become relevant as the evidence develops at the trial. As such, I will
assess the admissibility of the proffered statement considering the criteria of
necessity and reliability.
[34]          
The necessity criterion requires the party
seeking admission of hearsay evidence to prove, on the balance of
probabilities, that it is reasonably necessary to resort to the hearsay
exception. As Ms. Roy is deceased, the necessity criterion is satisfied.
[35]          
The reliability criterion must similarly be
satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, by the party seeking admission of
the hearsay statement. This requirement is usually met where the party seeking
admission establishes that there is (a) no concern about the truth of the
statement because of the circumstances in which the statement was made
(substantial reliability), or (b) no real concerns arise from the hearsay
statement because the circumstances permit testing of its truth and accuracy by
means other than contemporaneous cross-examination (procedural reliability).
[36]          
The Crown concedes that given the nature and
circumstances of the statement made by Ms. Roy to Mr. Prieur, no procedural reliability
factors favour admission. I agree with this concession—there is no basis upon
which to rationally evaluate the truth and accuracy of the hearsay statements based
on traditional procedural safeguards such as recording the statement, an oath,
or a warning about the consequences of lying.
[37]          
Substantive reliability is established when the
hearsay statement is unlikely to change under cross-examination. To determine
whether the party proffering the statement has established substantive reliability,
I should consider (a) the circumstances in which the statement was made and (b)
any evidence that corroborates or conflicts with the statement. See Bradshaw,
at para. 30.
[38]          
The Crown’s submission is that the statement was
made in the context of a trusting, confiding relationship between Ms. Roy and
Mr. Prieur—one where Ms. Roy would confide the unalloyed truth to Mr. Prieur. I
disagree that the relationship between Ms. Roy and Mr. Prieur at the beginning
of October 2022 was close and trusting. The evidence of Mr. Prieur in
cross-examination revealed that Ms. Roy was lying to Mr. Prieur about where and
with whom she was staying during her trip to Ottawa. She was concealing the
nature of her nascent relationship with Mr. Trepanier. She took steps to
prevent Mr. Prieur from learning the truth of the situation by preventing Mr.
Prieur from accessing electronic messages on her phone. I do not accept that
she lacked a motive to lie to Mr. Prieur about Mr. Trepanier. The evidentiary
record discloses that Ms. Roy lied to Mr. Prieur about her time with Mr. Trepanier.
[39]          
Moreover, the ante mortem statement
regarding the relationship occurred in a tense, stressful conversation between
Ms. Roy and Mr. Prieur. The two were in the midst of a potential break-up. Ms.
Roy wanted, at the very least, a pause in the relationship, while Mr. Prieur
wanted their relationship to continue and for the two of them to try to work on
it. The nature of these circumstances does not enhance the reliability of Ms.
Roy’s statement.
[40]          
I disagree with the Crown that there is any
corroborating evidence. A “trial judge can only rely on corroborative evidence
to establish threshold reliability if it shows, when considered as a whole and
in the circumstances of the case, that the only likely explanation for the
hearsay statement is the declarant’s truthfulness about, or the accuracy of,
the material aspects of the statement.” See Bradshaw at para. 44.
[41]          
The Crown asserts that the driving data
downloaded from Mr. Trepanier’s motor vehicle is corroborative of Ms. Roy’s ante
mortem statement that Mr. Trepanier was driving at 260 km/h days earlier. In
my view, the driving data regarding one date cannot corroborate an assertion
about driving days earlier. Corroborative evidence must go to the truthfulness
or accuracy of the content of the hearsay statement that the moving party seeks
to rely on. See Bradshaw, at para. 45.
[42]          
The Crown also points to Ms. Roy's demeanour
when making the statement to Mr. Prieur. Respectfully, the evidence relied upon
by the Crown is not demeanour evidence. The evidence does not describe her
demeanour, and, as a result, her demeanour cannot be considered a circumstance
enhancing the threshold reliability of the statement. The transcript of Mr. Prieur’s
testimony from the examinations for discovery on this point does not support the
Crown’s submission regarding demeanour. It reads:
[43]          
The foregoing does not describe Ms. Roy’s
demeanour when she made the statement to Mr. Prieur. It provides no
circumstantial support for the statement’s reliability.
[44]          
In summary, the hearsay danger in this case relates
to the sincerity of Ms. Roy in making the statement about Mr. Trepanier’s
driving to Mr. Prieur. The conversation commenced on the topic of the future of
their relationship—a subject fraught with conflict, emotion, and deception. At
this stage of her relationship with Mr. Prieur, Ms. Roy was lying to him about
her relationship with Mr. Trepanier. No circumstantial guarantees of
trustworthiness are capable of satisfying the threshold reliability concern. I
am not satisfied that the statement is "so reliable that contemporaneous
cross-examination of the declarant would add little if anything to the process".
 See R. v. Khelawon, 2002 SCC 57, at para 49.
[45]          
Given that the ante mortem statement of
Ms. Roy is inadmissible under the principled exception to the hearsay rule, I
need not consider the statement’s admissibility as prior discreditable conduct.
[46]          
For the above reasons, the Crown’s application
is dismissed.