[1]              
The Creditors seek an Order pursuant to section
69.4 of the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act, RSC 1985, c B-3, as amended
(the “BIA”), lifting the automatic stay and declaring that the stay
imposed by section 69.3 of the BIA no longer operates in respect of the action
bearing the Toronto Court File No. CV-22-00681963-0000 (the “Fraud Action”).
[2]              
The basis of this request for leave is that the
Creditors in the Fraud Action are seeking damages against the Bankrupt  of
approximately $500,000  for fraud, fraudulent misrepresentation, negligent
misrepresentation, misappropriation and conversion, unjust enrichment, breach
of contract, and breach of fiduciary duty in relation to the Bankrupt’s
financial advice and alleged misrepresentations made by the Bankrupt to the
Creditors as their financial advisor, and seeking a declaration under s.178 of
the BIA that any order for discharge will not release the Bankrupt from such resulting
debts and liabilities.
[3]              
The Bankrupt opposes the Motion.
[4]              
The Trustee does not oppose the Motion, and the
OSB did not intervene on the Motion.
[5]              
This Motion has urgency as Counsel for the
Creditors has advised that there is a Summary Judgment Motion in the Fraud
Action scheduled for hearing by the Order from Civil Practice Court of Dow, J.
dated October 11, 2023 which reads:
[6]              
The Additional context for this Motion is that
counsel for these Creditors, are also counsel for another group of 10 creditors
of the Bankrupt in Toronto action CV-23-00698211-000 (the “Group Action”)
in which the plaintiffs in that Action (that do not include these Creditors
Whayne and Antoine) claim that the Bankrupt guaranteed them monthly interest
payments of 5-6% of their initial investments if they invested in Legacy
Investors Group (“Legacy”) along with a co-defendant Anthonie Ruinard (“Ruinard”). 
Ruinard is not a co-defendant in this Fraud Action.
[7]              
This alleged relationship between these
Creditors, the Bankrupt, Ruinard and Legacy is also central to the relief sought
by these Creditors on this Motion.
[8]              
In Ahsan et al v. Nicholson et al, 2023
ONSC 3146, Chalmers J. granted a Mareva Injuction and a Norwich
Order, on an ex-parte basis, making the following findings of fact from
the evidence provided, including an Affidavit of Antoine Small, one of the Creditors
on this Motion:
[9]              
Also relevant to this Motion are the findings of
Associate Justice Brown on an urgent motion by the Creditors to obtain
Certificates of Pending Litigation (“CPL”) against two properties known
municipally as 78 Regent Drive, St. Catharines, Ontario L1R 3C2 (the “St.
Catharines Property”) and 397 East 28th Street, Hamilton, Ontario L8V 3J9
(the “Hamilton Property” (collectively, the “Properties”).
[10]          
Those Properties are of relevance on this Motion
as well because the motion materials filed to obtain the CPLs is based on many
of the same allegations, and the same pleadings, in the very same Fraud Action
that the Creditors seek to obtain leave to continue under s.69.4 of the BIA on this
Motion.
[11]          
In his June 7, 2022 endorsement granting the
requested CPL on each of the Properties, AJ Brown states:
[12]          
The Bankrupt did not appeal the Order of AJ
Brown.
[13]          
Much of the evidence mentioned in these reasons
of Chalmers, J. and A.J. Brown were filed by the Creditors on this Motion.
[14]          
As will be discussed below, the test for
granting leave under s.69.4 of the BIA requires a lower standard of proof than
the tests for granting a Mareva Injunction, as granted by Chalmers, J.  or
for granting the CPLs, as granted by AJ Brown.
[15]          
Also very relevant to this motion was that according
to a press release issued on November 26, 2024 by the U.S. Attorney’s Office
for the District of Arizona:
[16]          
Ruinard was easily arrested on these federal
charges by the FBI, as he was already in pre-trial custody in Arizona, as on
March 13, 2024 a Maricopa County Arizona State Grand Jury indicted Ruinard for
second degree murder, as well as for charges that Ruinard allegedly killed, and
then dismembered, burned and abandoned
the body of an 18 year old tourist in a debris burn pile in an area known as “The Pit” in the Tonto
National Forest.  Ruinard’s trial for these charges may begin as early as
February 2025.
[17]          
The Bankrupt made an Assignment into Bankruptcy on
March 26, 2024.
[18]          
The Bankrupt is a first time Bankrupt.
[19]          
On this Motion the Trustee has filed a s.170 Report
dated (as amended) on December 23, 2024 (the “s.170 Report”).
[20]          
The Trustee has also filed the Creditors Package
sent to all creditors (the “Creditors Package”) which included the Trustee’s
Preliminary Report to Creditors (the “Preliminary Report”) and the
Statement of Affairs sworn by the Bankrupt (the “Statement of Affairs”).
[21]          
Filed on this Motion as an exhibit to the
Opposition to Discharge filed by the OSB on December 20, 2024  (the “OSB Opposition”)
is a claims Register prepared by the Trustee dated April 30, 2024 (the “Claims
Register”)  indicating secured creditors totalling $422,821.00 - chiefly
mortgages by Equitable Bank in the amount of $342,820 and Wellington Hathshire
in the amount of $80,000 (the “2nd Mortgage”) on the Hamilton
Property.  It does not appear from the Claims Register, dated April 30, 2024, that
any secured creditors have filed claims with the Trustee.  However the Trustee
did not provide an updated Claims Register with the amended s.170 Report.
[22]          
The Claims Register also lists $236,164.00 in
declared unsecured creditors.  It appears that creditors have filed additional unsecured
claims totalling $2,072,040.89, of which the Trustee has admitted only
$119,430.19 to date.
[23]          
In addition on the Claims Register are listed 40
contingent creditors, including these Creditors Antoine and Whayne, whose
claims are listed in the Claims Register as filed, but not admitted, and
contingent, with a valuation of $1.00.   The largest of these is David Hope
with a claim of $450,070.22.  Several of these creditors listed with contingent
claims also appear to be Plaintiffs in the Group Action.
[24]          
As grounds of opposition to the Bankrupt’s
automatic discharge the OSB lists in the OSB Opposition s.173(1)(a),(d),(e),
and (k) facts.  I note that the following is stated in the OSB Opposition:
[25]          
Obviously, as the SIU referral was in December,
2024 there is no information yet as to the outcome of that SIU investigation,
or whether the Crown is proceeding with a prosecution of the Bankrupt under the
BIA, the Criminal Code, or other legislation.
[26]          
Also appended to the OSB Opposition, supporting
the grounds of the OSB’s opposition to discharge are:
[27]          
The Creditors have filed proofs of claim in the
Bankruptcy, but they were not appended to the Small Affidavit.  The Trustee
provided the following information requested in my October 16, 2024 Endorsement
to be provided by December 15, 2024, on January 20, 2025:
[28]          
The Trustee provided these amended proofs of
claim for the Creditors to the Bankruptcy Court Office on January 29, 2025.  In
the Proof of Claim of Antoine Small (the “Antoine Proof of Claim”)
Antoine makes a secured claim in the amount of CAD$359,511, with the unsecured
portion of the claim valued at $241,115.  In the Proof of Claim of Whayne Small
(the “Whayne Proof of Claim”)(collectively the “Proofs of Claim”)
Whayne makes a secured claim in the amount of CAD$152,302, with the unsecured
portion of the claim valued at $18,925 and the secured portion $133,377.
[29]          
Once I received the Proofs of Claim on February
3, 2025, providing evidence of the standing of the Creditors to bring this
Motion, I could complete these reasons.
[30]          
The Creditors claim that the 2nd
Mortgage may have been obtained by the Bankrupt after the registration of the
CPL on the Hamilton Property.  It is not clear why WHMIC would make an advance
under the 2nd Mortgage in the face of a CPL.
[31]          
The WHMIC Notice of Sale states that the 2nd
Mortgage was granted on December 7, 2020.  The CPL’s were granted by AJ Brown
in June of 2022.  No Abstract of Title to the Hamilton Property was filed in
evidence on this Motion showing evidence of dates of registration, or dates of
advances under the 2nd Mortgage.  The Creditors are listed on the
Schedule A to the WHMIC Notice of Sale, but there is no evidence whether the
Notice of Sale was properly served, or what other steps WHMIC has taken to
enforce on the Hamilton Property.  It is also not clear whether this action
taken by WHMIC is in breach of the terms of the Mareva Injunction
granted by Chalmers, J. on May 19, 2023.
[32]          
The Trustee states the following with respect to
the realizable assets of the Bankrupt, an in particular the Properties, in the
Preliminary Report as at March 28, 2024:
[33]          
It is not at all clear whether the Trustee has
assessed the various secured claims, registered and unregistered, including
those made by the Creditors against the Properties.
[34]          
There is no evidence before the Court who the
alleged “business partner” making a claim to the proceeds of the St. Catharines
Property is, the nature of their claim, or how the Mareva Injunction
affects the claim.
[35]          
Similarly, with respect to the Hamilton
Property, the Creditors are claiming proprietary interests to that property, as
will be detailed below, but there is no mention of that proprietary or secured
claim by the Trustee.
[36]          
At best, there will be a priority dispute to the
proceeds of the Properties between the competing secured claims of the
registered mortgagees, the alleged secured claims of these Creditors Antoine
and Whayne, and the Trustee on behalf of the other creditors.
[37]          
Unhelpfully, the Trustee did not provide an
update on creditor claims, realizations by the Trustee, and an updated claims
register in the s.170 Report it filed, late, on January 9, 2025.  The Trustee
also reports that it is not opposing the Bankrupt’s discharge, which is extremely
surprising given the evidence previously provided to the Court for this Motion,
and contained in the OSB Opposition. This s.170 Report is unacceptable.
[38]          
It is also unclear whether the Bankrupt was
operating a corporation as an investment business, was acting as a sole
proprietor, or both.  The Trustee states in the Preliminary Report:
[39]          
In the Group Action in which Chalmers, J. issued
the Mareva Injunction, there is a defendant “Nicholson Wealth and Risk
Solutions Inc. carrying on business as NWR Financial Group”.  (“NWR”). 
NWR is not a defendant to the Fraud Action.
[40]          
If the Bankrupt was a shareholder of this NWR entity,
he did not declare this shareholding on his Statement of Affairs. There is
nothing in any of the Reports of the Trustee as to whether there are amounts
payable to the Bankrupt from this NWR entity, like shareholder loans, or deferred
management income, that would be the property of the Trustee.  There is also no
information whether NWR, if it is a corporation, had retained earnings that the
Trustee could extract from the apparent sole shareholding owned by the
Bankrupt.
[41]          
There is no evidence whether this NWR entity is
also Bankrupt, but it does appear from the Chalmers, J. Endorsement to be
subject to the Mareva Injunction as a defendant in that Group Action.
[42]          
This is relevant to this Motion, as the Statement
of Claim of the Creditors in the Fraud Action is only against the Bankrupt in
his personal capacity, and this NWR entity does not appear to be a party  defendant
to the Fraud Action.
[43]          
However, if the Bankrupt was dealing with the Creditors
personally, and not through this entity, then there could be personal tax and
HST implications, and CRA to date has not been put on notice from the statement
of affairs, and has not filed a claim.
[44]          
Of note, from the evidence filed it appears that
the Properties were income properties, so their sale could result in
significant capital gain income attributable to the Bankrupt, and a significant
CRA claim in this Bankruptcy.
[45]          
There could also be directors liability
implications for HST and Source Deductions owing by this NWR entity if a corporation,
and deemed trust issues if corporate assets or funds were transferred to the
Bankrupt, or deposited in the accounts of the Bankrupt, while the corporate
entity was a tax debtor, particularly for source deductions owing to any
employees.
[46]          
To date the OSB has opposed the Bankrupt’s automatic
discharge, and counsel for these Creditors has also advised that they will also
oppose, but to the knowledge of the Court, have not done so yet.
[47]          
The asset values reported by in the s.170 Report,
including the $1800 in voluntary fee payments made to the Trustee, are:
[48]          
The Statement of Claim in the Fraud Action that
the Creditors are requesting leave to continue was issued by the Creditors in
Toronto on May 31, 2022 (the “Statement of Claim”) and is attached at
Exhibit A to the Small Affidavit.
[49]          
The jurisprudence as set out below, and in
particular, the decision of Penny, J. in Global Royalties, and Chief
Justice Morawetz in Ieluzzi (both as defined below) require the Court on
a leave motion to analyze the claims made by the Moving Party, and the response
by the Bankrupt, in their respective pleadings in the action for which leave is
sought.
[50]          
Of relevance to this leave motion, the Statement
of Claim asks for the following relief:
[51]          
The following paragraphs of the Statement of
Claim set out the nature of the misrepresentations alleged, relevant to this
leave motion:
[52]          
I note that despite the Bankrupt admitting to issuing
promissory notes to the Creditors, and the Bankrupt’s failure to make payment
under the promissory notes is one of the grounds for the claims by the
Creditors, there is no specific claim made by the Creditors in the Statement of
Claim in the Fraud Action under the provisions of the Bills of Exchange Act,
RSC 1985, c B-4 per Bank of Montreal v. Abrahams, 2003 CanLII 37259 (ON
CA).
[53]          
In the Small Affidavit, whose wording generally
follows the Statement of Claim, the alleged misrepresentations by the Bankrupt
that the Creditors are seeking leave to pursue as a s.178 debt are described as
follows:
[54]          
The Bankrupt defended the Fraud Action in the
Statement of Defence dated September 8, 2022, which proceeded to the
Examination for Discovery of the Bankrupt on February 24th, 2023. (I
have noted which paragraphs of the Statement of Defence prepared by counsel for
the Bankrupt at the time have paragraph numbering that is not consecutive, for
some reason).
[55]          
The paragraphs of the Statement of Defence, containing
both broad general denials and specific denials, relevant to this leave motion
state:
[56]          
On this Motion the Bankrupt also swore an
affidavit dated September 27, 2024 (the “Bankrupt’s Affidavit”). 
Unfortunately that affidavit did not have properly commissioned exhibits, despite
my adjourning this motion in September to October 16, 2024 for the Bankrupt to
provide one. To avoid adjourning this Motion for a third time as a result of
the Bankrupt’s inability to properly file properly sworn affidavit materials
when that opportunity was granted, I had the Bankrupt identify under oath the
exhibits as exhibits to the Bankrupt’s Affidavit for this Motion.
[57]          
The Bankrupt’s Affidavit reads, in its entirety
(there are no paragraph numbers)(emphasis added by me):
[58]          
One of the central factual issues on this motion
is the granting of the promissory notes by the Bankrupt to the Creditors.  The
terms of those notes (collectively the “Notes”) can be summarized as
follows:
[59]          
The Bankrupt admitted in the examination that he
prepared the Notes himself from online precedents.
[60]          
In the Discovery Transcript the Bankrupt makes
the following admissions relating to the US$159,900 plead in the Statement of
Defence as having been paid to the Creditors, and its application to interest
owing and not principal:
[61]          
The advances that the Bankrupt states he made to
Ruinard and/or Legacy (from the TD Bank printout at Exhibit B to the Bankrupt’s
Affidavit), using funds obtained from the Creditors, could be summarized as
follows:
[62]          
When questioned by me regarding the identity of
“Shawnette R. Reid” (“Reid”) the Bankrupt advised that she was at the
time his girlfriend.  When questioned as to how she could have been sending the
wire transfers to Ruinard Inc. on behalf of the Bankrupt, the Bankrupt advised
that the Bank account that the funds were being sent from was a joint personal
bank account for him and Reid.
[63]          
The Bankrupt did not provide any evidence that
“Ruinard Inc.”, being the alleged direct recipient of the funds advanced by the Creditors to the Bankrupt
personally, then further advanced the monies to the Legacy corporate entity.
[64]          
The Bankrupt could not provide me with the
cogent explanation as to:
[65]          
The Bankrupt explained to me he used his and
Reid’s personal bank account to deposit the Creditors’ funds and wire them to
Ruinard because it would provide a “better rate” of interest to the Creditors.
[66]          
This make no sense as an explanation for several
reasons. Firstly depository bank accounts tend to charge the lowest rates of
interest as opposed to GIC’s or term deposits.  No evidence was provided about
the rate of interest paid on that account, and the rate differential for other
types of accounts or GIC’s/term deposits.
[67]          
More importantly, if this personal joint bank
account with Reid was merely being used as a conduit for the Bankrupt to invest
the Creditors’ funds under his own name in Legacy in order to get around Whayne
and Antoine’s inability to “qualify” for the Legacy investment, why would the
rate even matter, if the monies were not meant to spend any time in the conduit
account before being wired to Ruinard by Reid?
[68]          
The only explanation anywhere in the materials
as to the $73,900 discrepancy between the total advances
made to the Bankrupt by the Creditors under the Notes, which the Bankrupt does
not deny, and the amounts sent to Ruinard Inc. by Reid in Exhibit B to the
Bankrupt’s Affidavit, was this statement in the Bankrupt’s Affidavit:
[69]          
In Giles v. Westminster Savings Credit Union
2010 CarswellBC 1378, 2010 BCCA 282, [2010] 11 W.W.R. 622, [2010] B.C.W.L.D.
5079, [2010] B.C.W.L.D. 5085, [2010] B.C.W.L.D. 5087, [2010] B.C.W.L.D. 5364,
[2010] B.C.W.L.D. 5365, [2010] B.C.W.L.D. 5367, [2010] B.C.W.L.D. 5368, [2010]
B.C.W.L.D. 5372, [2010] B.C.W.L.D. 5374, [2010] B.C.W.L.D. 5375, [2010]
B.C.W.L.D. 5377, [2010] B.C.W.L.D. 5380, [2010] B.C.W.L.D. 5386, [2010]
B.C.W.L.D. 5387, 287 B.C.A.C. 281, 485 W.A.C. 281, 5 B.C.L.R. (5th) 252, 89
C.P.C. (6th) 41 the BC Court of Appeal defined a “Ponzi scheme” as:
[70]          
One of the hallmarks of such a scheme is the
creation of a fund from advances made by investors for the purpose of
investing, and then using that fund of investor monies to instead pay purported
“returns” back to investors using their own money, instead of paying the
investors from actual returns made from their investments.
[71]          
I cannot find as a term of the Notes, or in the
materials before the Court, any mention of the agreement by the Creditors to
the creation or retention of this US$39,000 “fund” by the Bankrupt from the
advances made by the Creditors, to pay them their interest, using their own
funds.  There is also no documentation at all in evidence from Legacy/Ruinard
that required the creation, retention and utilization of such a fund.
[72]          
In any event, as set out above, it appears that
the amounts allegedly sent by Reid to Ruinard at Exhibit B to the Bankrupt’s
Affidavit cannot include the amounts advanced by the Creditors under the
February Note or the April Note, by the dates of the advances made by the
Creditors,  and dates of the wire transfers made by Reid.
[73]          
Also, nothing in evidence before the Court on
this Motion explains:
[74]          
There are no banking records put in evidence by
the Bankrupt on this Motion from the Joint Bank TD account held by the Bankrupt
and Reid from which Exhibit B to the Bankrupt’s Affidavit shows advances by
Reid to Ruinard Inc, that provides evidence that:
[75]          
Reid is not declared as a creditor on the
Statement of Affairs, nor does the Bankrupt disclose any transactions involving
Reid, including what appear to be, at minimum, these wire transfers from his
jointly held bank account with Reid.  This is
concerning as at the time of these transactions she could have fit within the
definition of a party “related to” the Bankrupt, and as a participant in these
transactions could be subject to the remedies at s.95-101 of the BIA to recoup
payments made by her, as being a person “privy to” the transactions under the
jurisprudence interpreting s.96 of the BIA.
[76]          
The 40 River Heights Drive, Brampton address for
Reid listed on these transactions at Exhibit B to the Bankrupt’s Affidavit also
appears nowhere in the Statement of Affairs, the s.170 Report or the Claims
Register as an address for the Bankrupt, or as a property the Bankrupt may have
an interest in.
[77]          
The Bankrupt in the
Statement of Defence and in the Bankrupt’s Affidavit denies that the Creditors
were mislead regarding the investments and states that “…the transfer of funds
was consistent with their agreement with LIG”.
[78]          
 There is no such agreement
between the Creditors and Legacy in evidence before the Court that
substantiates that statement, and there is no evidence there ever was any
direct agreement signed between the Creditors and Legacy, or what the terms of
that agreement were, and I cannot locate in the evidence any direct
communications between the Creditors and Legacy.
[79]          
This is
particularly acute in light of the text messages appended at Exhibit H to the
Small Affidavit where the Creditors are repeatedly demanding their written investment
agreement with Legacy, and the Bankrupt is providing an assortment of
prevarications as to why one has not been provided and makes multiple promises
to provide one.
[80]          
 These allegations
of misrepresentation are central to the Creditors claims, both in the
Bankruptcy and the Fraud Action.
[81]          
 The Bankrupt states in the Statement of Defence that the Creditors
were advised of the risks of the form of investment that the Bankrupt
recommended, and that the choice of investment was tailored by him to meet the
investment needs requested by the Creditors.  One key issue is the Bankrupt’s
assertion that returns were not “guaranteed”.
[82]          
There are no “Know Your Client” forms signed by
the Creditors, typically obtained by investment advisors to document such
knowing acceptance by the investor of investment risk appropriate to the investor,
entered into evidence by the Bankrupt that would support that assertion.
[83]          
Attached as exhibit “O” to the Small Affidavit
is the Discovery Transcript, is the Bankrupt’s sworn testimony on these issues:
[84]          
To summarize:
[85]          
The Bankrupt’s testimony is that the personal
borrowing by him was necessary so that the Creditors could make investments
they did not “qualify” for the Legacy investment because their net worth was
too low. But despite this restriction, the Bankrupt engaged in these
transactions to obscure the source of money so that the Creditors could
participate in this restricted investment in “segregated funds and trust funds
and things of that nature” despite not qualifying, presumably because they were
risky investments.
[86]          
The nature of the investments the Bankrupt
recommended to the Creditors, despite Mr Small Sr’s stated intention to retire,
was in a “private equity fund” investing in:
[87]          
In a text message at Exhibit I to the Small
Affidavit, in the context of the Creditors demanding repayment under the Notes,
the Bankrupt states:
[88]          
If that was the case, that the Creditors were
clients “new to investing”, why did the Bankrupt convince the Creditors to
invest in a “private equity fund” in the United States that engaged in “pattern
day traded funds as well as pre-existing businesses”, some of the riskiest
types of investments?
[89]          
Also, if the Bankrupt’s testimony is truthful,
that he convinced the Creditors to enter into these investments in the United
States with Legacy/Ruinard through the Creditors loaning the Bankrupt money to
make these investments on their behalf, but in the Bankrupt’s own name, then
why did the Bankrupt state in the Statement of Defence:
[90]          
But at paragraph 15-16 of the Statement of
Defence the Bankrupt pleads:
[91]          
The Bankrupt’s Testimony on the possible returns
from this recommended investment, was:
[92]          
In other words, a possible 400% per annum
return, which by any standard is an extraordinary promised return on investment. 
However, even assuming that having the personal Notes issued by the Bankrupt to
the Creditors was a legitimate way of conducting these investments, that 400%
per annum return is not in accord with the interest payable under the actual terms
of the Notes, “guaranteed” or not.
[93]          
It is also very unclear as to whether the tax
implications, and other US law implications of making these investments with
Legacy in the United States were ever explained to the Creditors by the
Bankrupt under tax treaties between the US and Canada.  There are no W-8 forms
in evidence declaring the residency of the Creditors for investment purposes in
a US “hedge fund”.
[94]          
Also, it appears clear that the Bankrupt was
instructing the Creditors in the text messages excerpted in the Chalmers, J.
Endorsement and the AJ Brown endorsement (at Exhibit B to the Small Affidavit):
[95]          
Given that the effect, if not the intention, of
the Creditors giving money to the Bankrupt personally  to invest on their
behalf in US based investments, in what appears the Bankrupt’s name, thus
disguising the beneficial ownership of the funds for both tax and anti-money
laundering purposes, there is no evidence before me that the Bankrupt explained
to the Creditors the possible grave tax and criminal implications of
participating in these transactions, in the way that the Bankrupt was
suggesting in these text messages.
[96]          
The practice of sending money “little by
little”, as described by the Bankrupt above, to get around having financial
institution transaction reporting requirements triggered, particularly where
the Bankrupt is knowingly doing so because he states he has been “red-flagged”
by “cra and anti money laundering” is colloquially known as “smurfing” or
“structuring” and can be both evidence, and an actual prohibited act, under
both US and Canadian money laundering legislation.
[97]          
It is not known to the Court on this Motion
specifically what specific money laundering activities Ruinard has been
indicted for by the US Attorney, but these texts by the Bankrupt are extremely
concerning in that additional factual context.
[98]          
It is also not known whether taxes were ever actually
paid to CRA or the IRS either by the Bankrupt  on his own behalf, or on behalf
of the Creditors, with respect to this “investment” in his name with Ruinard, which
adds yet another level of strangeness and complexity to these transactions,
even if they actually were conducted exactly in the manner that the Bankrupt
described in his Discovery testimony.
[99]          
At many places detailed above in the Bankrupt’s
Affidavit and the Statement of Defence the Bankrupt pleads or testifies that he
conducted due diligence on Ruinard and had no reason to suspect he was a fraud.
[100]      
In fact, in the Discovery Transcript, the
Bankrupt testified to the totality of the due diligence conducted as follows:
[101]      
The Bankrupt provided as exhibits to the
Bankrupt’s Affidavit documentation that he stated supported his due diligence. 
At Exhibit D to the Bankrupt’s Affidavit is a document that:
[102]      
It is unclear whether any accounting expert has
been retained by the Creditors, or whether the Trustee, an accountant, has had
the opportunity to review this document, and draw any conclusions as to its
accuracy and authenticity.
[103]      
Another document provided at Exhibit E to
substantiate the Bankrupt’s due diligence undertaken is a letter on TD
Ameritrade letterhead from a “Jordan Baker Resource Specialist” dated April 20,
2021 to “Anthonie Ruinard” personally, and not in any corporate capacity, like
Ruinard Inc. or Legacy, regarding a TD Ameritrade Account that is crudely blanked
out with a black sharpie, confirming something else also crudely blacked out
with a black sharpie, and stating that:
[104]      
This appears to be approx. $50 million less than
the shareholders equity in the abovementioned “Financial Statements” for
“Ruinard Inc.  A “Jordan Baker” does seem to exist in the “BrokerCheck by FINRA”
database, and he did seem to work at TD Ameritrade in 2021.
[105]      
Ruinard does not appear in that national
database, at all, ever. There is no evidence before Court that the Bankrupt
consulted that national database established by the US Financial Industry
Regulatory Authority, Inc. a self-regulatory organization for member
broker-dealers that is responsible under US federal law for supervising broker-dealer
member firms, under the oversight of the US Securities and Exchange Commission
(the “SEC”).
[106]      
Similarly, there is no evidence before the Court
that the Bankrupt ever checked whether either Ruinard or Legacy ever made any
filings with the SEC in the SEC’s public EDGAR database. Neither appear in that
database either.
[107]      
The Bankrupt also provided at “Exhibit E part 2”
to the Bankrupt’s Affidavit what appear to be cell phone screenshots from a T
Mobile account one page stating “Individual account-Traded funds portfolia” for
Q2 2020  that has “$1,511,325.31 (28.34%+)” but other information crudely scrawled
out with a black sharpie, in what would appear to be TD Ameritrade accounts, at
other pages having context free “+638.41%” and “+241.61%” compared to a series
of performance benchmarks, without stating what investments presumably
generated that return, over what period, for what amount invested.
[108]      
The only actual security identified is at page
16 of 20 of that exhibit “Exhibit E part 2” to the Bankrupt’s Affidavit that
states “EWLL – today’s gain/loss +$5,627,879.44”.  EWLL was the trading symbol
of Ewellness Healthcare Corporation, whose registration as a publicly traded
company was terminated on July 25, 2022 by the SEC.
[109]      
What all of this means, or what the Bankrupt
wanted these documents to show in terms of due diligence, is not clear, but
none of the usual documentation one would expect a Half-Billion US$ value
purported hedge fund would have provided to potential “qualified” investors and
advisors, like a comprehensive trading history and reported returns, or proper audited
financial statements, is in evidence on this Motion.
[110]      
In the fullness of time, in the course of the
prosecution of Ruinard by the US Attorney for Arizona, further clarity about
Ruinard’s operations and whether there actually was a “hedge fund” operated by
Ruinard that the Bankrupt sent the Creditors’ funds to will likely become
clearer.  But it has not been entered into evidence on this Motion.
[111]      
Significantly, if
Ruinard was the bad actor, and the Bankrupt had invested “his monies” with
Ruinard as well, then the Bankrupt, and by extension the Trustee due to the
assignment into Bankruptcy, could also have a claim against Ruinard/Legacy. No
such third party claim was made by the Bankrupt in the Fraud Action, not even
for contribution and indemnity, and no such asset was declared by the Bankrupt on
his Statement of Affairs.
[112]      
The allegations made by the Creditors in
relation to the Bankrupt’s alleged misappropriation of the funds they provided
to him to invest, and that he allegedly used them for personal purposes
instead, are a central part of the Fraud Action for which leave is sought.
[113]      
In a social media post made by the Bankrupt on
December 17, 2021 at Exhibit N to the Small Affidavit, the Bankrupt states the
following:
[114]      
Attached by the Bankrupt to this post are 17
photographs, including of a Lamborghini Urus automobile, a Audemars Piquet
watch, the façade of a restaurant called “Pastiche”, and a Mercedes automobile.
[115]      
The Bankrupt stated the following in the Discovery
Transcript regarding his ownership of the Audemars Piquet watch (Q.331-332):
[116]      
After reading his above Facebook post, the
Bankrupt testified:
[117]      
The Bankrupt has stated various things about his
ownership of a restaurant, after being questioned at the Discovery about the
above social media post.  This was one of the grounds for the opposition by the
OSB to the Bankrupt’s discharge.
[118]      
No restaurant ownership is declared as an asset
in the Bankrupt’s Statement of Affairs.
[119]      
The Bankrupts Testimony regarding his ownership
of a restaurant was:
[120]      
Significantly, it appears that Ruinard also made
representations that he owned a restaurant, named “Pastiche Modern Eatery”, located
at 3025 North Campbell Avenue, in Tucson, Arizona.
[121]      
The Bankrupt testified as follows regarding the
Mercedes his mother is standing beside in the social media post referenced
above:
[122]      
Apart from the blanket denials, the Bankrupt
offered no evidence on this motion as to the source of the funding to purchase the
Restaurant, the Lamborghini, purchase or lease the Mercedes, or any proof
whatsoever that the watch was fake, borrowed or a bit of both.
[123]      
The Lamborghini was declared on the Statement of
Affairs, repossessed by the financier and a proof of claim for the shortfall
filed.  The Mercedes was also declared as leased, the source of the funds used
to lease it and the Lamborghini is not clear.
[124]      
Section 69.4 of the BIA read:
[125]      
The Court has considered all materials and
arguments raised by all parties on this Motion. Any failure by the court to
refer to specific arguments and materials raised by the Parties does not
reflect that the Court has not considered those arguments.
[126]      
The lifting of a stay under section 69.4 is at
the discretion of the Court.  The test for lifting of the stay is set out
in Ma, Re (2001), 2001
CanLII 24076 (ON CA), 143 O.A.C. 52 (C.A.), at paras. 2-3(“Re
Ma”):
[127]      
In Re Mathur, 2018
ONSC 4425, (“Mathur”) Wilton-Siegel J., after quoting the
above passage from Re Ma states:
[128]      
Also in Mathur, Wilton-Siegel, J. stated
with respect to the analysis required with respect to the evaluation of the
Plaintiff’s claim for which leave is sought, and assessments of credibility:
[129]      
In Re Francisco, cited in Re
Ma, Adams J. cited the tests in Re Advocate Mines (1984),
52 C.B.R. (N.S.) 277 (Ont. S.C.) (“Re Advocate Mines”) as
providing examples where a Court can exercise its discretion under s.69.4:
[130]      
In Re Advocate Mines, Registrar
Ferron stated:
[131]      
Before granting an order to lift a stay, the moving
party must satisfy the court on any one or more of these grounds.  They do not all
need to be satisfied: Save-A-Lot Holdings Corp. v. Christiansen 2021
BCSC 2546.
[132]      
Re Sangha, 2016
CarswellBC 2770 (“Re Sangha”) which similarly lists the
categories listed by Registrar Ferron in Re Advocate Mines, quoting
the following passage:
[133]      
The test was also stated in  Stone
Sapphire Ltd. v. Transglobal Communications Group Inc., 2008
ABQB 398 (CanLII) 67, (“Stone Sapphire”) which in itself
is citing Re Advocate Mines:
[134]      
In Re Ramgulam-Rafiq, 2024 ONSC 6085
(CanLII) (“Ramgulam-Rafiq”), Associate Justice Rappos stated the
following regarding the case that the Creditors need to establish to obtain
leave:
[135]      
The Creditors also cited in their factum the
decision of Penny, J. in Global Royalties Limited v David Brook, 2015
ONSC 6277 (CanLII) (“Global Royalties”) where Penny, J. made the
following statements relevant to this motion:
[136]      
The Bankrupt made reference
to a series of cases in the Bankrupt’s Affidavit and in a “Case Law Addendum”
including Kenwood Hills Inc. 2015 ONSC 4481, Portus Alternative Asset
Management Inc. 2007 ONSC 5089, Patterson v. Kingsway Financial Services
Inc. (2006 ONCA 384, Toronto-Dominion Bank v. Canmarc Holdings Inc.
2019 ONSC 3451, G. A. Consulting v. A. D. Realty Corp. 2019 ONSC 5272, In re: M. & N. Enterprises Ltd. 2022 BCSC 1012.
[137]      
All of the Bankrupt’s
submissions are to the effect that the Debtor should be permitted breathing
space to reorganize without the distraction of ongoing litigation, and that
Bankruptcy should provide a “fresh start” to the Bankrupt.
[138]      
Except factually, in this case
there is no “reorganization”.  The Bankrupt has to date provided $1800 to the
Trustee.  The Properties have either been sold, or the Hamilton Property may be
in the process of being sold by the 2nd Mortgagee.  There are dozens of
investor creditors whose claims have not been determined yet. This is a pure
liquidation of the assets of the Bankrupt, where the “breathing space to
reorganize” argument is not relevant.
[139]      
The entire policy premise behind s.178 of the
BIA is as stated recently by the Supreme Court of Canada in Poonian v. British Columbia (Securities Commission) 2024 CarswellBC 2172, 2024 CarswellBC 2171, 2024 SCC 28,
2024 CSC 28, [2024] 10 W.W.R. 1, 14 C.B.R. (7th) 1, 2024 A.C.W.S. 2273, 495
D.L.R. (4th) 1, 91 B.C.L.R. (6th) 1 (“Poonian”):
[140]      
None of the Kenwood Hills
Inc., Portus Alternative Asset Management Inc., Patterson v.
Kingsway Financial Services Inc., Toronto-Dominion Bank v. Canmarc
Holdings Inc. G. A. Consulting v. A. D. Realty Corp., and M.
& N. Enterprises Ltd. cases cited by the Bankrupt appear to exist in
CanLii with the CanLii citations indicated by the Bankrupt. I tried to find
each of these cases in CanLii by name and/or citation and could not.  The
Bankrupt did not provide copies of these cases cited to the Creditors or the
Court.
[141]      
As an example, the only Portus
Alternative Asset Management case reported in CanLii in the entire year 2007
is 2007 CanLII 44814 (ON SC), but that case had nothing to do with leave under
s.69.4 of the BIA.    There are no cases reported in CanLii  at all, that have
the words “Portus” and “Leave” or reference s.69.4 of the BIA, in 2007 or otherwise.
[142]      
In that Portus case
C. Campbell, J. was deciding whether the court has the inherent jurisdiction to
"fill" a "functional" gap in the BIA and/or to give effect
to the provisions of the BIA itself where the provisions of the statute itself
are insufficient to fulfill the purpose of the statute.  He decided that he did
have the jurisdiction to fill those gaps in a situation where:
[143]      
Incidentally, in 2007 I was
a member of the team of lawyers at Fraser Milner Casgrain LLP appointed as
representative counsel to the investors of Portus Alternative Asset Management. 
I do not remember such a motion being brought or decided.
[144]      
In order to be certain that
there was a serious problem with the legal submissions that the Bankrupt had
made to the Court, I asked that my colleague Associate Justice Rappos, a Jurist
with exceptional computerized legal research skills, to also attempt to find
the cases cited above by the Bankrupt, to eliminate the possibility that I was
not using CanLii properly.
[145]      
AJ Rappos found:
[146]      
It is unclear where the
Bankrupt got these non-existent cases and citations, or whether the Bankrupt
used Chat GPT or other AI program to generate his fictitious legal submissions.
[147]      
I am not deciding whether
the claims made by the Creditors against the Bankrupt in the Fraud Action will
survive Bankruptcy.  I am deciding whether the Creditors meet the legal test of
being allowed to have another Court determine whether those claims are claims
under s.178(1)(d) and (e) to fulfill the overriding policy objectives of the
BIA that a fresh start should not be given for certain types of claims.
[148]      
The Trustee and the OSB are
not opposing this leave Motion.
[149]      
As I have set out in detail above,
the Creditors have set out, in great detail, the basis upon which they are
seeking an order under s.178(1)(d) and (e) of the BIA.  In particular in the Statement
of Claim in the Fraud Action, the Small Affidavit, and in the testimony of the
Bankrupt, there are ample causes of action, and material facts plead, that
prove that the Creditors have
[150]      
In this case there is
evidence from the Creditors, and from the Bankrupt himself, that there were representations
made by the Bankrupt to the Creditors about the:
[151]      
Conversely, the evidence
provided by the Bankrupt to defend this motion, and during his Discovery, does
not provide a basis for this Court to determine for the purposes of this Motion
that the claims made by the Creditors in the Statement of Claim to the Fraud
Action are frivolous, vexatious or that the Fraud
Action, if permitted to proceed to trial, have little prospect of success,
per Global Royalties.
[152]      
I find that the Creditors
have plead specific facts in the Statement of Claim, supported by the evidence
they have filed on this Motion “…which show that there are sound reasons to
lift the stay, such as a set of facts which, if believed, would fall within the
ambit of s. 178(1)(d).”  per Ieluzzi.
[153]      
The Bankrupt himself in the Statement of Defence,
in the Discovery Transcript and in the Bankrupt’s Affidavit, made the specific
admissions that I have set out in these reasons that the Creditor’s are owed
money under the Notes and that the Principal amount has not been paid.   These
admitted facts alone are strong evidence that the Fraud Action is not “…frivolous,
vexatious and if permitted to proceed to trial, has little prospect of success”.
[154]      
Additionally, in this case there other Advocate
Mines factors that also guide the Court to exercise its discretion in
granting leave under s.69.4.
[155]      
 As set out in detail above, there is an ample
factual dispute relating to the content of the of the representations made by
the Bankrupt to the Creditors, as set out above.  This cannot be resolved
without a credibility assessment given the diametrically opposed testimony of
the Creditors in the Small Affidavit and the Bankrupt in the Discovery
Transcript and the Bankrupt’s Affidavit, and the admissions and denials made by
the Bankrupt in the Statement of Defence. The Fraud Action is an action:
[156]      
There will need to be an assessment made of the
credibility of the parties by the Trier of Fact to determine which
representations are to be believed, in order to determine whether the
declarations sought under s.178 by the Creditors should be granted.
[157]      
There are also issues that need to be determined
regarding the flow of funds, and the security purportedly granted by the Bankrupt
on the Properties, which by necessity involves the determination of the
validity, enforceability, and priority of those claims in relation to other
alleged owners of property interests, and secured and unsecured creditors
claiming interests in the Properties, including the Trustee.
[158]      
I note that currently the Trustee has only
received approx. $1800 from the 
Bankrupt in the estate.  There are currently funds tied up with respect to the
sale of the St. Catharines Property with multiple claims being made to that
fund, dependant on a determination of the complex issues I have outlined in
these reasons.
[159]      
The Trustee does not have the resources to fund
that litigation, which, in addition to determining whether the claims of the
Creditors against the Bankrupt are claims to which s.178 of the BIA applies,
also by necessity will have to determine:
[160]      
These matters cannot be properly adjudicated in
the summary proof of claim process under the BIA, and also constitute:
[161]      
 The Fraud Action has the
necessary procedural and fact finding tools lacking from the Bankruptcy process
to determine many of the above claims in a context that third parties and the
priority claims involving those parties can be considered, which would not be
possible in the summary proof of claim process under the BIA.
[162]      
Also, as stated by Loo, J.
in Zheng v. Anderson Square Holdings Ltd. 2023 CarswellBC 3698, 2023
BCSC 2215, 2023 A.C.W.S. 5957:
[163]      
There is a Summary Judgment
hearing scheduled for April 2025 in the Fraud Action.  There can  be a more
expeditious and thorough determination made of these issues through that
process, rather than the summary BIA proof of claim process.
[164]      
As a result the Creditors
have satisfied the onus to prove that there are “sound reasons consistent with
the scheme of the [BIA] to relieve against the automatic stay” per Francisco.
[165]      
From the same factual context, I also find that
the Creditors have proven on an objective standard that there will be “material
prejudice to the applicant if the stay is continued or that it is equitable on
other grounds to allow the exemption” per Ma, if leave is not granted
and they will not be permitted to seek the
declaration under s.178 of the BIA, as then their claims could be discharged by
an order of discharge, without the creditors having the opportunity of proving that
it should not be, in circumstances that sound reasons exist that the
declaration could be obtained based on the pleadings in the Fraud Action.   This
would violate the fundamental overriding policy objectives of the BIA as were
set out above in Poonian.
[166]      
I also note that the Fraud
Action was commenced in May of 2022 and the date under which the Fraud Action
must be set down for Trial under R.48.14 to avoid being dismissed by the
Registrar is fast approaching.
[167]      
As the OSB has advised that they have commenced
an SIU investigation of the Bankrupt and his conduct which will by necessity
take a considerable period of time.  As a result the Creditors will suffer
further material prejudice if leave is not granted now, as the events around
the investments made by the Creditors, the granting of the Notes and the various
payments are occurred in 2021 and 2022, and given the document retention
policies of financial institutions in both Canada and the United States may
result in evidence required by the Creditors disappearing, this is further
evidence of material prejudice if leave is not granted now.
[168]      
In addition, the
determination of the Fraud Action may also have the effect of determining priorities
of secured and unsecured claims to the Properties, for the Creditors and the
Bankruptcy Estate, which could not be determined easily outside of a judicial
determination of the claims of the Creditors, due to their equitable nature.
[169]      
It is therefore appropriate
and equitable to lift the stay of proceedings.
[170]      
In the context of this Motion, on all of the
evidence before me, and in exercising my discretion as Registrar, factors as
enumerated above, I am satisfied that the relief requested by the Creditors
should be granted.
[171]      
After considering all of the factual admissions
made by the Bankrupt, and in the Bankrupt’s motion materials, which I have
summarized above and will not repeat, and after considering the Trustee’s non-opposition,
the Small Affidavit, the Bankrupt’s Affidavit, the Discovery Transcript, and
the pleadings of the parties, I find that on this issue there is sufficient
evidence before me to determine that there are “sound reasons for lifting [a]
stay" and that the Bankrupt has not provided sufficient evidence on this
Motion to prove that “it is apparent that the proposed action has little prospect
of success", because the Creditors have “… failed to show that its claim
is one that will survive bankruptcy in any event” as per Mathur.
[172]      
I find that there is a prospect of success that the
Moving Parties can prove that the claim by the Moving Parties are for a debt
that will not be released by the Bankrupt’s discharge, as such liability may
fall within the provisions of section 178(d) and (e) of the BIA as arising out
of fraud, embezzlement, misappropriation or defalcation while acting in a fiduciary
capacity, based on the above mentioned jurisprudence.
[173]      
For all of the reasons set out above, and
utilizing my Judicial discretion as Registrar under the BIA, I find that under
s. 69.4 of the BIA I may make a declaration lifting the automatic stay under
the BIA as, after considering all of the evidence on this motion, and all legal
arguments made by the Bankrupt and the Creditors, I am satisfied that:
[174]      
Accordingly I have granted the Order requested
by the Creditors that the stay of proceedings pursuant to section 69.3(1) of
the BIA be lifted so as to permit the Creditors to continue with the Fraud Action
as against the Bankrupt.  I would ask that Aitken provide to me through my ATC
a word version of the Draft Order at Tab 3 to the Motion Record of the
Creditors, so I may amend the Order to add the usual protections for the
Trustee in s.69.4 orders of this nature, and the costs award below.
[175]      
 The Creditors have filed a costs outline on
this Motion.  The “actual rate” claimed for Aitken (2021 Call) and his
assisting counsel Annelise Do Rio (2024 Call) of $13,619.50 with HST $1770.53 totalling
$15,390.03 is appropriate for the Toronto Market, particularly where there have
been two prior adjournments requested by the Bankrupt, or ordered by the Court,
for the Bankrupt to provide proper materials, which he still did not do by the
third hearing date.
[176]      
Counsel for the Creditors submitted fees of
$6431 with HST $836.03 on a partial indemnity rate totalling $7267.00.  No
Substantial Indemnity rate was provided, but is usually 1.5x the Partial
Indemnity Rate.
[177]      
The 29.2 Hours reported is appropriate given the
two prior adjourned motion dates that counsel had to prepare for. The years of
experience of the counsel and the hourly rates were also appropriate.
[178]      
Taking into account the provisions of R.57.01 as
interpreted by the Court of Appeal in Boucher v. Public Accountants Council
for the Province of Ontario, 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA) and Davies v. The
Corporation of the Municipality of Clarington et al 100 O.R. (3d) 66, 2009
ONCA 722 (“Davies”) and in particular:
[179]      
Given that the Bankrupt had been engaged in
litigation with these Creditors for 2 years prior to Bankruptcy, with his own
counsel, it could not have been out of his contemplation that opposing this
leave Motion, and requiring two adjournments to file materials, could result in
a cost award against him of at least this amount.
[180]      
I order that the Bankrupt pay costs to the
Creditors on a partial indemnity scale, in the amount of $7267.00 (including
HST).  As these costs I have ordered for opposing this motion occurred post-bankruptcy,
this costs award is not a “claim provable” in bankruptcy, and will not be
compromised by any order of discharge of the Bankrupt.