[1]              
Ukraine Airlines Flight PS752 was shot down by the Islamic Republic of
Iran in January 2020. All of the passengers were killed, including many
Canadian citizens and others with ties to Canada. It was the largest loss of
Canadian lives in aviation since the 1985 Air India bombing.
[2]              
The Applicant, Mehrzad Zarei (“Mehrzad”) had a son on the flight.
[3]              
Mehrzad and other surviving family members established the Respondent,
the Association of Families of Flight PS752 Victims (the “Association”).
[4]              
Mehrzad was also the lead plaintiff in Zarei v. Iran et al where
the court found that the defendants intentionally destroyed the aircraft by
firing two missiles into it. The court awarded damages of $107 million to the
five named plaintiffs.
[5]              
Mehrzad has had an ongoing dispute with the Association regarding
whether it has conducted itself in accordance with its constating documents.
[6]              
He asserted that the Association should be providing direct financial
support to the members and that it should also fund his efforts to enforce the
judgment he received against the Islamic Republic of Iran.
[7]              
I dismissed his Application.  I found that there was no basis for
Mehrzad’s position that it violated his reasonable expectation. Further,
Mehrzad had failed to avail himself of the remedies and options that he has to
pursue his goals under the Canada Not-For-Profit Corporations Act ("the
Act') using the Association’s democratic processes.
[8]              
The Association seeks costs in the amount of $93,354.27 on a substantial
indemnity basis for the period after it served a Rule 49 offer and $23,147.60
on a partial indemnity basis for the period before hand as well as $4,862.62 in
disbursements.
[9]              
Although he lost, the Mehrzad seeks costs in the amount of $48,944.
[10]          
For the reasons that follow, I award the Association $50,000 in
substantial indemnity costs reflecting the period after the Offer to Settle and
$5,000 on a partial indemnity basis reflecting the period before the offer to
settle as well as disbursements in the amount of $4,862.62.
[11]          
 Pursuant to s. 131(1) of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990,
c. C.43, costs are in the discretion of the court. Rule 57 of the Rules sets
out the factors which courts should have regard to when awarding costs. The
overall objective is “to fix an amount that is fair and reasonable for the
unsuccessful party to pay in the particular proceeding, rather than an amount
fixed by the actual costs incurred by the successful litigant”: Zesta
Engineering Ltd. v. Cloutier (2002), 2002 CanLII 25577 (ON CA), 21 C.C.E.L. (3d) 161 (Ont. C.A.), at
para. 4; Boucher v. Public Accountants Council for the Province of Ontario
(2004), 2004 CanLII 14579 (ON CA), 71 O.R. (3d) 291 (C.A.), at para. 26; Clarington (Municipality) v.
Blue Circle Canada Inc., 2009 ONCA 722, 100 O.R. (3d) 66, at para. 52; and G.C.
v. Ontario (Attorney General), 2014 ONSC 1191, at para. 5.
[12]          
As the successful party, the Association is presumptively entitled to
costs.
[13]          
The matter was not legally complex as it involved the court’s
discretion. The factual issues had a medium complexity as they involved
exploration of alleged misconduct of the Association over a number of years,
related to whether it was operating within its objects.  There were several
witnesses.
[14]          
The main relief sought was that the Association be compelled to provide
documentary production including the members register that would show the
members’ addresses, and that the Association call a meeting of all members to
consider Mehrzad’s position on whether the Association should provide financial
support to members.
[15]          
There was other relief sought in the Notice of Application that was not
pursued at the hearing including an order setting aside the Exemption Decision
of the Director, a mandatory order or interim injunction regarding an
alternative communication platform for the members, an order for passing of
accounts of the Association (despite there being no estate or trustee with
accounts to be approved), a representation order, the appointment of a receiver
over the Association, an interim injunction freezing all expenditures by the
Association, and the appointment of a public accountant to conduct an
accounting.
[16]          
Mehrzad abandoned all of this alternative relief at the hearing but the
Association would have had to prepare its materials and argument based upon the
issues set out in the Amended Notice of Application.
[17]          
All of these alternative claims were significant and the Association had
to prepare to address them with a thorough and serious response, and it did.
[18]          
As well, the Application was an attack on the Association’s integrity,
governance and its treatment of its members.
[19]          
The proceeding was also very important to Mehrzad. He is devastated by
the death of his son on that air flight and suffers from post-traumatic stress
disorder. Prior to the application he indicated that he could no longer work
and has no assets.
[20]          
He still has no assets but has resumed his job as a truck driver.
[21]          
The Association served a Rule 49 Offer to Settle on June 13, 2024, whereby
it offered to settle this proceeding by way of a dismissal without costs.
[22]          
Mehrzad did not accept this offer and by operation of r. 49, the
Association is entitled to partial indemnity costs to the date of the offer and
substantial indemnity costs afterwards.
[23]          
The Association is a non-profit organization. It was required to expend
significant funds on this Application. At the same time, it currently has
raised significant funds (in the millions) in respect of the downing of the flight
in support of its objects, which in part is based upon the hardship that
Mehrzad experienced as a result of this tragic occurrence.
[24]          
I did not find that the Association had acted in an oppressive manner,
because its interpretation of its objects was reasonable and it was entitled to
deference pursuant to the business judgment rule.
[25]          
As well, because of his trauma, Mehrzad was unable to work for a long
time. He does not have any assets apart from his judgment against the
government of Iran. It is unknown what the prospects of recovery are, but I
suspect they are nil.
[26]          
Mehrzad is just now putting his life together; he has just begun working
again as a truck driver and rents accommodation. He says he has no exigible
assets. He says that if there is a costs award, he will have to visit a trustee
in bankruptcy.
[27]          
He relies upon Cohen v. Kealey, [1985] O.J. No. 160, where the
court took into account the client’s ability to pay. This case is not
applicable as this is a case where a solicitor was seeking to appeal an order
of an assessment officer and not costs sought by the winning party.
[28]          
However, I do take into account the impact that the downing of the
flight has had on Mehrzad. This was a devastating occurrence. I have great
empathy for Mehrzad. While I did not find that the Association had behaved
oppressively, his wish to have the Association provide financial support is
understandable. There was certainly evidence before me that other members also
believed that the objects should be applied in this manner. In my view, it
would have been equally unassailable if the Board had concluded that it would
provide the kind of support to family members that Mehrzad requests.
[29]          
I also take into account the Association’s cost request to Mehrzad when
he sought to abandon his Application.
[30]          
As set out in my endorsement dated June 4, 2024, Mehrzad tried to
dialogue with the Association about these issues in January 2023. He sought
mediation/arbitration but the Association refused to mediate the issues and so
he indicated he wanted to hold a meeting of members. He asked for the members’
contact information which the Association refused.
[31]          
He began his Application on March 2, 2023, there was an exchange of
correspondence and he was provided with some documentation. He did not pursue
his Application and abandoned it on March 15, 2024. The Association then
presented him with a Bill of Costs in the amount of $45,000 on a substantial
indemnity basis and $26,000 on a partial indemnity basis but said it would
reduce it to $7,500 if he apologized.
[32]          
It was at that point that Mehrzad then sought to successfully revive his
Application. He felt that the costs request was an attempt at extortion. I
agree that the request for costs was excessive. Very little had occurred as of
the date that Mehrzad had abandoned the application. I view the Association’s
cost request at that time as pressure on him to provide the Apology that the Association
sought rather than being a proper reflection of the costs of the Application as
at that date. Had it not taken this unreasonable position, it may not have had
to incur these costs. This was in fact the view of one of the former Directors
on the motion who felt that the Association had not dealt with Mehrzad’s claim
appropriately.
[33]          
I do note that following the revival of the Application, the Association
sought to mediation/arbitrate. But at that point, Mehrzad indicated he wanted
to wait until the exchange of materials and also to the completion of the cross
examinations.
[34]          
In some ways both have been unreasonable. The Association should have
simply agreed to have these discussions with Mehrzad when he wanted to, and he
should have agreed once the Association relented.
[35]          
The Association primarily seeks the costs for its lead lawyer, Eric
Sherkin and its advisor on non-profit corporate governance, Natasha Smith as
well as law clerks. It does not seek cost for associates or students.
[36]          
I have reviewed the dockets and time spent and, in my view, the amounts
spent, although not improper in terms of their bill to their clients, is not
within the reasonable contemplation of Mehrzad. He spent much less time
preparing his materials.
[37]          
In view of all of the issues including the Association’s excessive cost
request when Mehrzad first wanted to abandon his Application, I award the
Association $50,000 in substantial indemnity costs reflecting the period after
the Offer to Settle and $5,000 on a partial indemnity basis reflecting the
period before the offer to settle as well as disbursements in the amount of
$4,862.62.
[38]          
Given Mehrzad’s current financial circumstances, and the impact that any
costs order may have on his fragile emotional state and ability to continue to
put his life together, with the exception of the Association’s ability to
conduct a judgment debtor examination, I stay enforcement of this order until
such time as Mehrzad collects any money from the government of Iran.
[39]          
I order that when and if Mehrzad collects any money from the government
of Iran to satisfy his judgment, he shall set aside and hold in trust the
amount of this costs award in favour of the Association. Then, he shall write
to the Association advising of this collection, whereupon the Association may
bring a short-written motion to me to lift the stay.
[40]          
As well, the Association can seek to lift the stay at any time on any
other proper basis, or change in circumstance of which it becomes aware, for
example, if Mehrzad were to bring a similar application in the future or if the
judgment debtor examination reveals that Mehrzad does have assets,
notwithstanding his submission.
[41]          
I will be seized of any of these motions relating to the stay.
[42]          
In my view this is fair. It balances the right that the Association has
to a costs award which will have consequences for Mehrzad, with the improbability
that it will be able to collect it, as well as the impact of the award on
Mehrzad who is now trying to rebuild his life.