[1]                                 
Brandon Neliko entered guilty pleas on November 2, 2023 to charges of
discharging a firearm with intent to wound, possession of a loaded firearm, and
failing to comply with a release order. The charges arise out of the discharge
of a firearm in a crowded Toronto shopping mall in August 2021.
[2]                                 
 Mr. Neliko’s sentencing was adjourned several times for an enhanced
presentence report to be prepared. Sentencing submissions were made on August
27, 2024, and I reserved my decision on sentencing. Subsequent to sentencing
submissions being made, counsel for Mr. Neliko became aware that Mr.
Neliko had been subject to numerous strip searches in custody. Sentencing was
again adjourned for Mr. Neliko to bring an application under the Canadian Charter
of Rights and Freedoms (the “Charter”) alleging a breach of Mr. Neliko’s
rights under s. 8 of the Charter and seeking a reduction of
sentence under s. 24(1). That application was argued on January 9th and
10th, 2025. I reserved my decision on the Charter application and on
sentencing until today.
[3]                                 
The Crown seeks a global sentence of 15 years’ imprisonment before
credit for presentence custody. This would be broken down as 14 years on the
charge of discharge firearm with intent (the statutory maximum), a concurrent
sentence for possession of the loaded firearm and one year consecutive for the
breach of release order. The Crown submits that the circumstances of this
offence and this offender justify a sentence higher than the upper end of the 7-to-11-year
range described in previous cases.
[4]                                 
The Crown submits that there was no breach of Mr. Neliko’s s. 8
rights and that no remedy under s. 24(1) should be granted. The Crown does
not dispute that strip searches can be properly considered as a mitigating
factor on sentence absent a Charter breach.
[5]                                 
Before the allegation of the Charter breach, Mr. Neliko submitted
that a global sentence of seven years’ imprisonment would have been appropriate.
Mr. Neliko submits that the breach of his s. 8 Charter
rights as a result of the strip searches to which he was subjected justifies a significant
reduction in that sentence. He further submits that even if the strip searches
did not amount to a breach of his rights under s. 8 of the Charter,
the strip searches were part of the harsh conditions of his detention and
should further mitigate his sentence.
[6]                                 
There are two issues to be decided in this case:
[7]                                 
Mr. Neliko argues that his rights under s. 8 of the Charter were
infringed when he was strip searched while in pre-sentence custody at the
Toronto East Detention Centre (the “TEDC”). Mr. Neliko was strip searched each
time he left the institution and returned to the institution. He was also strip
searched many times when he was not entering or leaving the TEDC.
[8]                                 
Mr. Neliko takes no issue with the searches conducted when he left and
returned to the TEDC. He submits that the other strip searches breached his
rights.  Specifically, Mr. Neliko alleges:
[9]                                 
Mr. Neliko acknowledges that the Ministry of Correctional Services
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. M.22 (the “Act”) authorizes inmate searches, including
strip searches. The legislation authorizes searches to be carried out in “the
prescribed manner”. Mr. Neliko has not challenged the legislation or the institutional
Policy and Procedures Manual that prescribes the manner of searches.
[10]                             
Mr. Neliko’s position is that the strip searches were not authorized by
the legislation and the Policy and Procedures Manual and were not conducted
reasonably.
[11]                             
 The Act governs the conduct of searches at the TEDC. Section 23.1 of
the Act provides as follows:
[12]                             
The ‘prescribed manner’ of searches is set out in the Ministry’s Institutional
Services Policy and Procedures Manual: Security and Controls – Searches [the
“Policy Manual”].
[13]                             
Mr. Neliko was transferred to the TEDC from another institution on
August 10, 2023. The strip search policy that was in effect for most of Mr. Neliko’s
incarceration at the TEDC was released on October 3, 2023.
[14]                             
The relevant portions of the Policy Manual are the following:
[15]                             
On July 31, 2024, Part 3.1 of the Policy Manual was changed to direct
that “consideration shall be given to utilizing the Whole Body X-Ray Security
Scanning System in lieu of conducting a strip search unless it would not be
effective at locating contraband or is not operationally feasible”.
[16]                             
A further section was added to delineate when a strip search of a group
of inmates could be conducted:
[17]                             
A section was added to address measures to ensure privacy during strip
searches:
[18]                             
Staff-Sergeant John Lawson, the security manager for the TEDC, testified
on the Charter application. He explained that there are different types
of searches conducted in the TEDC. Strip searches are conducted when there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there is contraband on the person of the
inmate or on the unit. If a weapon or other contraband is suspected, the inmate
or inmates are handcuffed, taken to Admitting and Discharge, and body scanned.
Following the body scan, they are strip searched in a designated area where
there is a privacy wall.
[19]                             
Staff-Sergeant Lawson initially testified that a strip search would
always be conducted following the body scan, regardless of the outcome of the
body scan. He later clarified that if the suspected contraband was located with
the body scan, a strip search might not be conducted and if the suspected contraband
was located during the scan or search of one inmate, the other inmates on the
unit would not be searched. A decision not to proceed with the strip search, or
not to search all inmates on a unit, would depend on the reason for the search
and the results of the body scan or initial searches.
[20]                             
The reason given by Staff-Sergeant Lawson for conducting both a body
scan and a strip search was that the skill of the person operating the body
scanner varies and not all operators would be able to locate contraband on the
image. Staff-Sergeant Lawson described the body scanner as helpful but
deficient in locating items such as Fentanyl or other drugs.
[21]                             
Staff-Sergeant Lawson testified that historically, the washroom area of
a unit was used for strip searches but that was no longer the practice and had
not been a practice at the TEDC ‘for years’. He testified that the washroom
area might be used if it was an emergency. He then testified that if it was a
search for contraband other than a weapon, the inmates could be strip searched
individually in the washroom area and moved to a different area while the cells
were searched.
[22]                             
Staff-Sergeant Lawson testified that a full strip search in a cell in
the presence of another inmate should never happen. He said that if an inmate
is believed to have a weapon, the inmate may be asked to strip to their boxers
before being handcuffed and taken out of the cell.
[23]                             
The area where strip searches are conducted in Admitting and Discharge
is depicted in a video of the area filed as an exhibit. The camera mounted outside
that area captures the shoulders, neck and head of the inmate being searched. There
is a window from the search area into the large working area. The window is set
high in the wall. Within the search area there is a partial wall similar to the
wall of a washroom cubicle. The wall blocks the view from the door into the
search area.
[24]                             
The records from the TEDC show that Mr. Neliko and all inmates on his
unit were strip searched 13 times from the time of his transfer to the TEDC in
August of 2023 to the last recorded strip search on October 24, 2024. It was
agreed that there was a further strip search conducted after the records were
obtained. All of the strip searches were ‘group searches.’ There was no individualized
suspicion of Mr. Neliko possessing contraband or weapons.
[25]                             
One of the searches is noted in the records to be ‘institutional’ and does
not state any further reason for the search. The other records identify suspicion
of contraband or weapons as the reason for the search. Staff Sergeant Lawson
testified that previously, units would routinely be searched, including strip
searching inmates, but more recently, strip searches are conducted only when
there is a reason to suspect that there is contraband or a weapon. Staff
Sergeant Lawson had not signed off on the record that indicated ‘institutional
search’ and did not explain the meaning of the phrase on that March 9, 2024
record. The search on March 9, 2024 predated the revision of the Policy Manual on
July 31, 2024 that specified the requirement for reasonable grounds to believe
in the presence of contraband before a group strip search can be conducted.
[26]                             
Mr. Neliko testified and described more searches than the 13 recorded in
the records. He said that it ‘felt like’ he was searched almost weekly. He
testified that he was rarely told the reason for the searches. He also
described the searches in Admitting and Discharge as being for contraband and
he said that the most recent search was for contraband.
[27]                             
Mr. Neliko described being strip searched in his cell in the presence of
his cellmate on three to four occasions. On each of these occasions, the
correctional officer stood outside the cell and directed each inmate to remove
articles of clothing and pass them through the hatch. Once each inmate was naked,
they would be asked to bend over. They were also asked to open their mouths and
show the inside of their mouths. Following these strip searches, they would be
handcuffed and brought to Admitting and Discharge for a body scan. Mr. Neliko
could not recall the name of any cellmate who was present for the strip
searches in the cell. He could not recall the names of the correctional
officers who conducted these searches. He could not give details of the dates
of the searches.
[28]                             
On about 15 to 20 other occasions, Mr. Neliko described being strip
searched in the washroom area of his unit. He was taken to the shower stall
area and directed to remove his clothes and bend over. There is a window between
the washroom area and the dayroom of the unit. A person standing at the window
would be able to see the upper body of a person standing in the stall area. He
was not taken to Admitting and Discharge for a body-scan after these searches.
[29]                             
Mr. Neliko agreed that other inmates were unlikely to deliberately look
through the window to the washroom while a strip search was being conducted.
[30]                             
Mr. Neliko was also strip searched in the Admitting and Discharge where
the body-scanner was used prior to the strip search in an area within Admitting
and Discharge with a partial cubicle type wall. He testified that while there
were only supposed to be two correctional officers present for the search,
there were often more than two in the area.
[31]                             
Mr. Neliko agreed that he had been found guilty of 18 institutional
misconducts while at the TEDC and one incident involving use of force. Mr.
Neliko testified that he had tried to stop a fight on the occasion when he was
found to have used force.
[32]                             
Mr. Neliko testified that he had not experienced the frequency and types
of strip search that he experienced at the TEDC when he was at other detention
centers. He had been detained at the Central East Correctional Center and the Toronto
South Detention Center before being transferred to the TEDC.
[33]                             
Mr. Neliko testified that the searches made him feel dehumanized,
degraded, humiliated and angry.
[34]                             
Strip searches engage s. 8 of the Charter. Section 8
protects a person from unreasonable search and seizure. The searches were warrantless,
and the onus is on the Crown to establish that the each of the searches were authorized
by law; that the law is reasonable; and that the manner in which the search was
conducted was reasonable.[1]
[35]                             
Strip searches in the correctional center context are distinguished from
searches upon arrest because of the need to prevent contraband and weapons from
being introduced or distributed in the institution.[2]
In R. v. Rootenberg, Allen J. found that it was not unreasonable for
inmates to be subject to strip searches in the detention center. She held that,
“…safety and security outweighs the interest in privacy and reduces an inmate’s
expectation of privacy”.[3]
[36]                             
Warrantless searches, including strip searches, can be conducted in the
context of a correctional center.[4]
Such searches must, however, be performed in accordance with the governing
legislation.
[37]                             
The law that governs the searches in the TEDC as set out above is s. 23.1
of the Ministry of Correctional Services Act and the Policy Manual that
prescribes the manner of search. Mr. Neliko has not challenged the reasonableness
of that law. His position is that his rights were infringed by searches that
were not authorized by law or that were conducted unreasonably.
[38]                             
Mr. Neliko argues that the searches he experienced were conducted in a way
that was contrary to the stated institutional policy because consideration was
not given to the use of the body-scanner in lieu of a strip search, reasons
were not communicated to him, and the searches were not conducted in a private
area.
[39]                             
The position of the Crown is that Mr. Neliko should not be believed when
he asserts that he was strip searched in his cell or when he says that he was
not told a reason for a strip search. He should not be believed when he says
that he was strip searched more often than the institutional records disclose.
The Crown further submits that the other searches complied with the
institutional policy and were conducted in a reasonable manner.
[40]                             
I find that the strip searches that were performed and documented by the
TEDC were not unreasonable. The records of the searches do not specify the
location of each strip search, but I accept the testimony of Staff-Sergeant
Lawson that they would have been conducted either in the area of Admitting and
Discharge (if the body scanner was used) or in the washroom area of the unit
with no resort to the body-scanner.
[41]                             
I do not accept the evidence of Mr. Neliko, that there were more than 14
strip searches conducted. Mr. Neliko testified that he recorded the strip
searches, but he did not produce his record. He was uncertain of the number of
searches and was able to say only that it ‘seemed like’ it was more frequent.
While he may have had a sense of the searched being more frequent, I do not
accept that they were more frequent.
[42]                             
I have considered the records produced by the institution. Each record
of a strip search notes a reason for the strip searches, with the exception of
a search on March 9, 2024 that is noted as being an ‘institutional search’ I
accept Staff-Sergeant Lawson’s evidence that searches are now conducted only
with a reason. The March 9, 2024 search was conducted before the Policy Manual
revision on July 31, 2024. The search would not have been in compliance with
the July 31, 2024 Policy Manual. It would have been a breach if conducted after
July 31, 2024. I cannot conclude that, at the time of the search, it was not
authorized by law. Frequent and thorough searches for contraband were permitted
prior to July 31, 2024 without the specific requirements later introduced for
group searches.
[43]                             
I have carefully considered the evidence, that strip searches were
routinely conducted even after the use of a body-scanner. The policies in place
at the relevant times required consideration of the body-scan or other less
intrusive means ‘in lieu of’ a strip search’. The evidence of Staff Sergeant
Lawson was that there is a standard practice at the TEDC of strip searching
after a body scan because there is contraband that can go undetected by the
body scan and because the operators of the body scanner are not all equally
skilled at reading the results. I cannot conclude the practice fails to follow
the policy manual. There was a consideration of the use of the body-scanner ‘in
lieu of’ a strip search, but the administration concluded that the body-scanner
was not generally adequate for searches for weapons and smaller items.
[44]                             
I have also considered the location of the searches and I have concluded
that the washroom area of the unit and the strip search area in Admitting and
Discharge meet the requirement that searches be conducted in private and in a
manner that ensures that the inmates’ chest, buttocks and genital areas are not
visible to anyone other than the searching officer and the witness. The
washroom shower area protects the inmate from view from the common area. The
Admitting and Discharge search area has a cubicle type partition to protect the
inmate from being observed by others in the area.
[45]                             
A search that required an inmate to strip to his boxers in his cell with
a cellmate to ensure that no weapons were being concealed is not contrary to
the Policy Manual and is reasonable. A strip search conducted in a cell that
required the inmate to be fully naked in the presence of a cellmate would not
meet the Policy Manual requirement that the search be conducted in private. It
would not be authorized by law and it would not be reasonable. Staff Sergeant
Lawson testified that such a search should never occur.
[46]                             
Mr. Neliko testified that he was subject to a search in his cell in the
presence of a cellmate on three to four occasions. This occurred shortly after
he was detained. He did not complain because he was unaware that it was not
allowed. He did not recall the names of his cellmates at the time of these
searches. He did not recall the names of the correctional officers who
conducted the searches.
[47]                             
Any strip search conducted without communicating any reason would also
be contrary to the Policy Manual, not authorized by law and unreasonable.
[48]                             
Mr. Neliko testified that he was generally not told a reason for the
searches. However, he also testified that searches in Admitting and Discharge
were generally for contraband. He described a recent search that was not
reflected in the records (because they were subpoenaed before the hearing). In
that recent search he was informed that the search was for contraband.
[49]                             
I have serious concerns about Mr. Neliko’s general credibility and
reliability. With respect to his evidence concerning the searches: His evidence
concerning the circumstances of the searches in the cell lacks detail that
would allow for any investigation of his assertion; He was vague about the
timing, the individuals conducting the searches and the cellmates present; He
was unable to specify the number of times that the searches occurred; His
evidence about the lack of communicated reasons for the searches was
inconsistent and similarly lacking in detail.
[50]                             
The evidence of Staff-Sergeant Lawson with respect to the general
practices surrounding strip searches was inconsistent with the evidence of Mr.
Neliko. I accept the evidence of Staff-Sergeant Lawson. I recognize that it
does not directly contradict Mr. Neliko’s assertions with respect to the
specific searches, but it provides context for the general practices and casts
further doubt on Mr. Neliko’s account of the searches.
[51]                             
I reject Mr. Neliko’s evidence that he was forced to strip naked in his
cell in the presence of his cellmate and that he was not told the reasons for
the various searches.
[52]                             
I have concluded that in all of the circumstances, Mr. Neliko’s s. 8
Charter rights were not infringed.
[53]                             
My conclusion that the number and manner of the searches did not rise to
the level of a Charter breach does not mean that the searches did not impact
on Mr. Neliko. I will take the circumstances, including the frequency of the
searches into account as a mitigating factor on sentence.
[54]                             
The Crown has argued that in the circumstances of this case, the range
of sentence is inadequate and should be increased. To address this issue, I
will set out the circumstances of the offence and the offender before turning
to the range of sentence.
[55]                             
The facts supporting the guilty pleas were admitted by Mr. Neliko and
are contained in an Agreed Statement of Facts signed by Mr. Neliko and filed as
an exhibit.
[56]                             
Mr. Neliko attended the Yorkdale Mall on August 29, 2021, with his
girlfriend, Charlotte Koehler, to go shopping. He was carrying a loaded
firearm. It is admitted that Mr. Neliko was, at the time, involved in the
drug trade. He carried the loaded firearm for protection. Shortly after he
entered the mall, Mr. Neliko saw two men, Mr. Stafford and Mr. Owusu. Mr.
Neliko immediately reached for his firearm and pointed it at Mr. Stafford. He
fired two shots in the direction of Mr. Stafford.
[57]                             
Mr. Owusu then drew his own firearm and shot three times in the
direction of Mr. Neliko. The area around both Mr. Stafford and
Mr. Neliko was crowded with shoppers. Miraculously, no one was shot.
[58]                             
After the shots were fired, the area erupted into chaos. Mr. Owusu ran
toward an exit, tripping over a baby stroller and causing injury to the baby.
Mr. Neliko fled toward an exit and broke through a locked glass door to escape.
[59]                             
Surveillance footage from the mall after the shooting shows people
running and falling. 911 calls captured calls from citizens locked down in the
mall and terrified after the shooting. One victim, Ms. Applebaum, was an older
person who tripped and fell, suffering a fracture to her cheek, broken teeth,
and bruising.
[60]                             
Mr. Neliko and his girlfriend left the area after the shooting. They
left Toronto. Mr. Neliko disposed of the gun that he used in the shooting.
Mr. Neliko was arrested the next day when they returned to Toronto.
[61]                             
The Agreed Statement of Facts signed by Mr. Neliko states that his
motivation for the shooting was a drug trafficking dispute between the parties
to the shooting.
[62]                             
In his interview with the probation officer who prepared the Presentence
Report, Mr. Neliko told the probation officer that his actions were motivated
by a threat from the other men. In his interview with the author of the
Enhanced Presentence Report he reiterated this position.
[63]                             
The position of Mr. Neliko on sentencing was that there was an element
of self-defence in the incident that could be considered as a mitigating
factor. He was clear, however, that his actions were not reasonable in the
circumstances and that the defence of self-defence was not available.
[64]                             
Mr. Neliko testified on the sentencing hearing with respect to this
aspect of the circumstances. He said that he saw Mr. Stafford reach for a
weapon. It was for this reason that Mr. Neliko immediately drew his firearm,
pointed it, and fired.
[65]                             
The evidence that Mr. Neliko fired his gun because he believed that he
was in danger is challenged by the Crown. The position of the Crown is that
this potentially mitigating factor has not been proved on a balance of
probabilities. The Crown submits that I should reject the evidence of Mr.
Neliko on this issue based on the video surveillance of the incident which does
not show either of the other two men reaching for a gun. The Crown also submits
that Mr. Neliko’s evidence was generally implausible.
[66]                             
I have carefully considered Mr. Neliko’s testimony. I have reviewed the
video of the incident. Mr. Neliko’s description of the other man reaching for a
gun is not supported by the video evidence. I accept that Mr. Neliko perceived
a threat when he saw the other man because he was engaged in a dispute with the
man over drug territory. I do not accept that he saw the man reach for a gun
because the video simply does not support that fact.
[67]                             
Mr. Neliko is 25 years old. He was born in Toronto. His parents emigrated
to Canada from Congo in 1992. Mr. Neliko’s mother attended York University and has
been employed as an early childhood educator for the past 20 years. His father
is a Christian minister.
[68]                             
Mr. Neliko spent the first five years of his life in Regent Park. When
he was five years old, the family’s apartment caught fire. The family moved
more than once after the fire. They lived in subsidized housing in low-income
areas. Mr. Neliko continued to attend school in Regent Park.
[69]                             
Mr. Neliko was exposed to violence, including gun violence, when he
lived and went to school in Regent Park. At age 16, he and his friends were
shot at and at age 20 he witnessed the shooting of his cousin. Mr. Neliko has
lost 10 friends to gun violence.
[70]                             
When Mr. Neliko was 16 years old, his family moved to a quiet
neighbourhood in Bowmanville. Although there was no violence in his new
neighbourhood, Mr. Neliko reported that the area did not feel like home, and he
was not welcomed. There were few Black students at his high school. His mother
reported that their white neighbours did not speak to them.
[71]                             
Mr. Neliko did well in school but was placed in the applied stream in
grade 9. He noted that many of the students in his applied classes were Black
while the academic stream was predominantly white.
[72]                             
After graduating from high school, Mr. Neliko briefly attended college
in Ottawa to study civil engineering. He dropped out after one semester.
[73]                             
Mr. Neliko has been stopped and detained frequently by police even when
he was very young. He was attacked by a police dog in 2020 and sustained
injuries as a result.
[74]                             
Mr. Neliko had no criminal record at the time of these offence.
[75]                             
Mr. Neliko has been in custody since his arrest in August of 2021. He
has spent 733 days in custody related to these charges[5].
During his time in presentence custody, Mr. Neliko has experienced very
frequent lockdowns and triple-bunking. Mr. Neliko has been found guilty of institutional
misconducts. These have included refusing to follow orders from the guards,
threatening and being present in a cell during an assault and a fire.
[76]                             
As I noted in my reasons for finding no breach of Mr. Neliko’s Charter
rights, the frequency of strip searches to which he was subjected remains a
mitigating factor on sentence. Mr. Neliko was frequently strip searched. The
process was humiliating and degrading.
[77]                             
In spite of the very onerous conditions of his presentence custody, Mr.
Neliko completed 14 Life Skills, Educational Session program booklets offered
by the Toronto East Detention Centre. He also participated in the Black
Employment Support Programme, ‘Inside Out’, run by the organization Urban Rez.
After graduating from the programme, he met with a worker to develop a plan to
begin an apprenticeship when he is released.
[78]                             
Mr. Neliko is enrolled in a college level business course through the
organization Amadeusz. He is described as a dedicated, capable, and engaged
participant.
[79]      In R. v. Bellissimo,[6]
the Court of Appeal held that the range of sentence for serious gun-related
offences was between seven and eleven years. In Bellissimo, the offender
fired several shots into a restaurant — seriously injuring one victim, causing
minor injuries to another, and narrowly missing a third person. The Court held
that 10 years was a proper sentence for that offender.
[80]      The range in Bellissimo has
been applied in many cases, including cases where no injury has resulted. In R.
v. Alexander,[7]
the 29-year-old offender fired a gun at a loss prevention officer in a shopping
mall. No-one was injured. He was convicted of discharge with intent to prevent
arrest and other firearms offences. He was sentenced to a global sentence of
nine years (seven years for the charge of discharge with intent). That offender
had a lengthy record and was subject to a firearms prohibition at the time of
the offences. In R. v. Ali,[8]
an offender who shot a person in the foot in the parking lot of a busy mall
received as sentence of eight years (seven years for the offence of discharge
firearm). The offender had a minor criminal record, was 26 years old at the
time and was convicted after trial.
[81]      In R. v. Osman,[9]
a 34-year-old offender with a criminal record who fired a handgun outside a
busy mall and near an elementary school and park was sentenced to six years for
discharge firearm with intent to wound and six months consecutive for breach of
a prohibition order.
[82]      In R. v. Owusu[10]
the other offender involved in this shooting was sentenced to a global sentence
of 9 years for returning fire after Mr. Neliko shot in his direction. Mr. Owusu
had two previous convictions for possession of loaded firearms. He had received
a prior sentence of 6 years imprisonment for firearms offences. Bellmore J. in Owusu
held that if not for the social context evidence and the harsh conditions of
presentence custody she would have imposed a sentence at the high end of the Bellissimo
range.
[83]                             
In R. v. Lacasse, the Supreme Court of Canada held that
sentencing ranges are nothing more than summaries of the minimum and maximum
sentences imposed in the past. They serve as a guide for the application of all
the relevant sentencing principles and objectives. Sentencing ranges are mainly
a tool used to ensure parity. Sentencing ranges are neither “averages” nor
“straitjackets”. They are historical portraits.[11]
The Supreme Court cited the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal in R. v. Keepness in
holding that: “Even when an appellate court has established a range, it may be
that a fact pattern will arise, which is sufficiently dissimilar to past
decisions that the “range”, as it were, must be expanded.”[12]
[84]                             
In R. v. Friesen, the Supreme Court explained that sentences
should depart from established ranges where Parliament raises the maximum
sentence for an offence or, society’s understanding of the severity of the harm
caused by an offence increases.[13]
In an oft-cited passage, the Court stated:
[85]                             
In R. v. Parranto, the Supreme Court affirmed this statement of
the law in Friesen.[15] The Court went on to cite the
British Columbia Court of Appeal in R. v. Smith, citing this Court’s
trial decision in R. v. Nur, in saying that “[i]t is a common phenomenon
. . . for sentences to increase and decrease as societal and judicial
knowledge and attitudes about certain offences change”.[16]
[86]                             
In R. v. Lynch, the Court of Appeal for Ontario said the
following about the role of trial judges:
[87]      I must depart from the sentencing
range in Bellissimo if I find the circumstances of this case to be so
dissimilar to other previous cases or if I find that the range of sentence “no
longer responds to society’s current understanding and awareness of the gravity
of a particular offence and blameworthiness of particular offenders”.
[88]      As the Supreme Court of Canada
explained in R. v. Friesen,[18]
"All sentencing starts with the principle that sentences must be
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of
the offender."
[89]      Related to proportionality is the
principle of parity: Similar offenders who commit similar offences in similar
circumstances should receive similar sentences. As observed in Friesen,
parity is an expression of proportionality: "[J]udges calibrate the
demands of proportionality by reference to the sentences imposed in other
cases."[19]
[90]      Section 718 of the Criminal
Code identifies the objectives of sentencing, including denunciation;
specific and general deterrence; separation of the offender from society; the
rehabilitation of the offender; the promotion of a sense of responsibility in
the offender; and an acknowledgement of the harm done to victims and to the
community.
[91]      Deterrence, denunciation, and the
protection of the public are the predominant sentencing objectives for firearms
offences. These courts have repeatedly acknowledged the need for exemplary
sentences in gun cases. Gun violence in our community is a matter of grave
concern. The circumstances of this case are a stark reminder of the pervasive
threat posed by gun violence. Residents of this city were placed at grave risk by
simply attending a popular shopping mall. As pointed out in the Community
Impact Statement, the impact of gun violence extends beyond the immediate
physical and psychological harm to the bystanders. Gun violence erodes the
sense of security and safety of members of this community.
[92]      There are significant aggravating
factors in this case. Mr. Neliko not only put his intended victim at risk but
also endangered the lives and safety of hundreds of others. Although no one was
shot, bystanders were injured physically in the aftermath of the shooting. Many
others suffered psychological harm as a result. Mr. Neliko fled the scene and
disposed of evidence. The offences were committed in the context of drug
trafficking.
[93]      There are mitigating factors. Mr.
Neliko entered guilty pleas to the offences. He expressed remorse, particularly
for the harm caused to the bystanders. I accept that he was genuinely
remorseful about the harm caused to Ms. Applebaum. Mr. Neliko is a youthful
first offender. He has a very supportive family.
[94]      A further mitigating factor is the
harshness of the conditions of Mr. Neliko’s presentence custody. The Court of
Appeal in R. v. Marshall, held that particularly punitive
pretrial incarceration conditions can be a mitigating factor to be taken into
account in arriving at an appropriate sentence.[20]
[95]       I also accept that, as outlined
in the Enhanced Presentence Report, Mr. Neliko has experienced anti-Black
racism both before and after his incarceration on these charges. He experienced
racism in the education system, including being inappropriately streamed into a
non-academic stream in high school. He witnessed violence in his community. He
was subjected to racial profiling, including police stops when he was very
young. This background provides context for his offending conduct and informs
his level of moral culpability.
[96]      I find that the upper end of the
range of sentence articulated in Bellissimo and applied since Bellissimo
remains responsive to the gravity of serious firearms offences. I also am satisfied
that the circumstances of these offences and this offender are not so
dissimilar to previous cases that I must depart from the sentencing range.
[97]      The circumstances of these
offences are extremely serious. The conduct of Mr. Neliko put many people at risk.
It was deliberate and profoundly dangerous conduct. The circumstances of the
offence and the impact on the victims and the community are aggravating and weigh
in favour of an exemplary and significant penitentiary sentence.
[98]      The circumstances of Mr. Neliko:
his youth, his background, his prospects for rehabilitation and the harsh
conditions of presentence custody including the frequency and nature of the
strip searches he experienced mitigate the sentence and require the application
of the principle of restraint.
[99]      As Bellmore J. held with respect
to Mr. Owusu, even with the mitigating factors, the profoundly aggravating circumstances
of the offences in this case would attract a sentence at the high end of the Bellissimo
range if not for the social context evidence and the harsh conditions of
presentence custody. I recognize that, unlike Mr. Owusu, Mr. Neliko is before
me as a first offender. There are also aggravating factors for Mr. Neliko that
were not present for Mr. Owusu. In particular, Mr. Neliko initiated the
shooting and he shot with intent to wound.
[100]                         
I have considered all of the circumstances and concluded that a sentence
at the high end of the range should not be imposed. I find that a global
sentence of sentence of nine years is appropriate.
[101]                         
I therefore sentence Mr. Neliko to 9  years’ imprisonment before credit
for pre-sentence custody. That sentence is to be broken down as follows: 8.5
years for discharge with intent, 5 years concurrent for possession of a loaded
firearm and 6 months consecutive for breach of a release order.
[102]                         
Mr. Neliko has been in custody since his arrest on these charges. He was
credited for 440 days of presentence custody when he was sentenced on other
charges. This leaves 835 days of presentence custody on these charges. The Crown
has argued that Mr. Neliko should not receive 1.5 to 1 credit for his
presentence custody. The Crown points to Mr. Neliko’s institutional misconducts
and submits that I should find it unlikely that Mr. Neliko would be
granted early release. I cannot make that finding. Although Mr. Neliko has been
found guilty of institutional misconducts, only one involved the use of force. There
is no basis for me to conclude that his conduct would lead him to be denied
even mandatory statutory release after serving two-thirds of his sentence. His
misconducts are not so egregious as to support that finding.
[103]                         
Therefore, Mr. Neliko shall be granted credit for pre-sentence custody
of 835 actual days, credited at 1.5 to 1 as 1,252 days. The global sentence of 9
years is the equivalent of 3,287 days. This leaves 2,035 days to serve (or just
under 5 years and 7 months).
[104]                         
I also make the following ancillary orders: a s.109 order for life; a
DNA order on the count of discharge firearm with intent; a forfeiture order for
the seized cash and an order under s.743.21 that he not communicate with
Ayobami Owusu or Isaac Stafford.