[1]              
The Defendants
(Appellants), Arsalan Minhas (“Arsalan”), Iffat Minhas (“Iffat”), Mukkarm Khalid Minhas (“Mukkarm”) and A.A.M. Logistics Inc. (“AAM”), appeal the Order of Associate Justice
McAfee, dated October 4, 2024 (the “Decision”), granting the Plaintiffs’, Saqib Minhas’
(“Saqib”) and Rija Saqib’s (“Rija”), motion for leave to issue certificates
of pending litigation (“CPLs”) on two properties, one in Brampton, Ontario (the “Brampton
Property”) and one in
Morriston, Ontario (the “Morriston Property”).
[2]              
The Plaintiffs, Saqib
and Rija, are husband and wife and live in the City of Islamabad, Pakistan.
They lived in Canada from March 2023 - March 2024.
[3]              
Saqib is a cousin of
the Defendant, Arsalan, and a nephew of the Defendant, Mukkarm. Saqib’s
father is the brother of Mukkarm. The Defendant, Iffat, is Mukkarm’s wife and
Arsalan’s mother.
[4]              
The dispute arises out of certain
dealings between the parties whereby the Plaintiffs advanced $1,400,000 to the Defendants.
The money was in part used to fund a trucking business, being AAM. The parties
agree that approximately $800,000 went toward the trucking business (although
there appears to be no formal accounting). The Plaintiffs contend that the
remainder was used to help fund the purchase the Morriston Property.
[5]              
Arsalan, Iffat and
Mukkarm are the registered owners of the Morriston Property. The purchase of
the Morriston Property closed on March 22, 2023. It was bought as a
preconstruction home for more than $4,200,000. There is a first mortgage of
$1,750,000 in favour of MCC Mortgage Holdings Inc. There is also a vendor take-back
second mortgage in favour of the developer, Gemini Homes Inc. (“Gemini”) of
$1,450,000.00.
[6]              
The Brampton Property was
purchased in 2019 by Iffat and Mukkarm.
[7]              
On June 12, 2023, the Plaintiffs
and Iffat and Mukkarm. entered into an agreement styled Constructive Trust
Agreement (“CTA”). The CTA was signed after Iffat and Mukkarm received
independent legal advice.
[8]              
The CTA stipulates that $700,000
of the $1,400,000 provided by the Plaintiffs was used to purchase the Morriston
Property. There is a debate if this is so. The Plaintiffs assert that not only
is it so but that the Defendants have failed to produce records that would show
that money provided by the Plaintiffs to AAM was used to purchase the Morriston
Property.
[9]              
The CTA states that in exchange
for the $700,000 used for the Morriston Property, that Iffat and Mukkarm transferred
their beneficial interest in the Brampton Property to the plaintiffs. Legal
title remained in the names of Iffat and Mukkarm, although the Plaintiffs could
demand the transfer of the title at any time. The CTA provided that Iffat and
Mukkarm continued to be responsible for the upkeep and for all liabilities of
the Brampton Property and could not sell the property without the consent of
the Plaintiffs.
[10]          
The Plaintiffs assert that at the
time the CTA was executed, they were advised by the Defendants that the
property was encumbered with a mortgage in the amount of $1,400,000. The
property had been purchased in 2019 for $1,570,000.
[11]          
The Plaintiffs subsequently
learned that contrary to what they say was represented by the Defendants, the
Brampton Property was encumbered with a second mortgage of $1,450,000. This mortgage
is in favour of Gemini and is a collateral mortgage to the vendor take-back
mortgage securing the Morriston Property.
[12]          
The Plaintiffs sued the Defendants
for, among other things, a declaration that the Plaintiffs are the sole
beneficial and/or equitable owners of the Brampton Property and have an
equitable interest in the Morriston Property, an order vesting title in the
Brampton property and the Morriston Property in the Plaintiffs, an accounting,
a tracing order, judgment and/or restitution against the Defendants in the
amount of $700,000.00, partition and sale and other relief. The Plaintiffs
allege, among other things, a constructive trust and/or resulting trust with
respect to the properties.
[13]          
In order to provide notice of
their claim to third parties, the Plaintiffs brought an urgent motion seeking
certificates of pending litigation (“CPLs”) over both properties.
Associate Justice McFee granted the CPLs with reasons dated September 24, 2024.
It is the orders granting the CPLs that are being appealed by the Defendants.
[14]          
Both parties agree that the
standard of review is the general appellate standard as set out in Housen
v Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33(CanLII), [2002] 2 SCR 235. That
standard applies to this Court’s review of an Associate Judge’s decision:
Zeitoun v. The Economical Insurance Group, 2009 ONCA 415.
[15]          
The appellate standard
for questions of law is correctness. Findings of fact are not to be reversed
unless the judge below made a “palpable and overriding error”. The palpable and
overriding standard is highly deferential. The error must be so significant as
to undermine the entire decision or, as one court said, “The entire tree must
fall”: Canada v. South Yukon Forest Corp. , 2012 FCA 165, at para 65. As
noted by the Supreme Court weighing evidence also gives rise to appellate
deference: “The essential point is that making
a factual conclusion, of any kind, is inextricably linked with assigning weight
to evidence, and thus attracts a deferential standard of review”: Housen, at
para. 24.
[16]          
The
deferential standard also
applies for findings of mixed fact and law, unless there is an extricable error with respect to the
characterization of the legal standard or its application, including the
failure to consider evidence or if there is an absence of evidence on the point,
 in which case the error may amount to an error of law, subject to a review standard
of correctness: Housen, paras. 11 and 36.
[17]          
For the reasons that
follow I find that Associate Justice McFee made no  error that “can be
attributed to the application of an incorrect standard, a failure to consider a required
element of a legal test, or similar error in principle” (see
Housen v.
Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33 (CanLII) at para. 36). Nor can I conclude that the Associate
Judge made a palpable and overriding error in her assessment of the evidence.
[18]          
The defendants assert in their factum
that:
[19]          
As evident from the wording of the
issues set out above, much of the Defendants’ complaints relate to Her Honour’s
assessment of the evidence and its application to the legal test. As noted,
unless there is an absence of evidence, the failure to consider evidence or an
extricable legal principle, the deferential standard applies, and the Defendants
must establish a palpable and overriding error.
[20]          
First, the motion’s judge set out
the accepted test for a CPL as summarized in Perruzza v. Spatone, 2010
ONSC 841 (Ont. S.C.J.) at para. 20. I see no error in her identifying the
applicable legal principals.
[21]          
The defendants say there is “no
evidence whatsoever” to support that the plaintiffs have raised a triable
issue. Her Honour correctly identified the test for a CPL. In doing so, she correctly
addressed whether the statement of claim raised is a triable issue in respect
of an interest in land and that the standard for establishing such a triable
issue, at this stage of the proceedings, is a low one: Halliday v. Bromley, 2019
ONSC 1670 (Ont. S.C.J.) at para. 19. She correctly noted that at this stage,
all that is required is to establish a triable issue, not to resolve the issues
in dispute.
[22]          
Her Honour reviewed the evidence
regarding the loan, the use of funds for the Morriston Property, the CTA which
not only creates a beneficial interest in the Brampton Property but also
evidences that the Plaintiffs’ money was used for the Morriston Property and
the alleged misrepresentation as to the mortgages on the Brampton Property. She
concluded that there was sufficient evidence to
establish a reasonable claim to an interest in land and that the Plaintiffs
could well succeed at trial. For example, as pointed out by the
Defendants’ counsel, the use of the Plaintiff’s money to purchase the Morriston
Property could well give rise to a finding of constructive trust over that property:
Nishi v. Rascal Trucking Ltd., 2013 SCC 33 (CanLII), [2013] 2 SCR 438,
at para 1. Similarly, the CTA clearly creates an interest in the Brampton
Property and the claim for a vesting order is a triable issue.
[23]          
In my view, Her Honour correctly
held that the claims asserted by the Plaintiffs meet the low standard applied
for establishing a triable issue involving land. Her decision was supported by
the evidence. There was no error in this regard.
[24]          
The Defendants go on to say that Her
Honour failed to consider various inconsistencies in the CTA and that a review
of the CTA would “not withstand judicial scrutiny at trial”. This is not the
standard to be applied at this stage. As Her Honour noted in the Decision, her
role is not to resolve disputed questions of fact or
issues of credibility: G.P.I. Greenfield Pioneer Inc. v. Moore, 2002 CanLII 6832 (ON
CA), [2002] O.J. No.282
Ont. C.A. at paras. 18-21. The motions judge correctly addressed the CTA for
the purpose of the motion.
[25]          
It is argued that Her
Honour failed to consider that the Plaintiffs are foreign residents and have
not posted security for costs. In this argument, the Defendants leverage off
the test as set out in Perruzza v.
Spatone, that says that
in weighing whether to discharge a CPL, a judge may consider whether the
plaintiff is a “shell corporation”. This is just one factor to be weighed in
considering the discharge or granting of a CPL. I was pointed to no case where
this factor was applied to a person, rather than a corporation.
[26]          
Nonetheless, Her
Honour considered this factor and rejected it. She expressly noted that the Plaintiffs
had advanced significant funds to the Defendants. She further noted that the Defendants
have yet to bring a motion for security for costs. In my view, Her Honour
turned her attention to these issues and was not persuaded that they were
detrimental to the issuance of the CPLs. This was part of her weighing of the
various applicable factors, an exercise to which deference is owed. I see no
legal error and no palpable and overriding error in her consideration of these
issues. Moreover, in my view, where the Plaintiffs have advanced $1,400,000 to
the Defendants, all of which was advanced within this jurisdiction, it is
difficult to comprehend how the Plaintiffs cannot be said to have assets in the
jurisdiction. The difficulty is that the assets appear to be within the control
of the Defendants, an issue which will be canvassed further when this matter
goes to trial.
[27]          
It is argued that Her
Honour failed to give sufficient weight to the fact that the Brampton Property
is under power of sale and that the CPL could impede the ability of the Defendants
to refinance. Her Honour considered the fact that the Brampton Property was
under power of sale but was persuaded that the greater risk was that there
would be a transmission of interest by the Defendants of the Brampton Property that
would prejudice the Plaintiffs. Again, this was part of her judicial weighing
of the competing factors for which deference is owed. I see no error in Her
Honour’s analysis. Moreover, I am not convinced that a CPL would impede
refinancing of the existing first mortgage and there is no evidence from the
mortgagee or an expert saying so. Moreover, from a practical perspective, there
would be little incentive for the Plaintiffs to oppose refinancing of the first
mortgage, as the alternative would be the sale of the property in circumstances
where they have no control.
[28]          
In respect of the
remainder of the issues raised, it is argued that Her Honour did not provide
adequate consideration to other factors such as the ability to claim damages,
the uniqueness of the property and the damage of leaving the CPL on the
properties. She considered each of these factors and weighed them as she saw
them. She found the property was not unique; she considered that “Arsalan and
Mukkarm have no income and that AAM has suffered severe financial losses and is
not profitable” and “absent the CPLs there may be transmissions of interest”.
In my view, I find there was no error of law in doing so and no palpable and
overriding error in her weighing of these various factors.
[29]          
For the above reasons, this appeal is
dismissed.
[30]          
I
encourage the parties to agree on costs. If they
cannot, I will receive costs submissions as follows: