[1]  
This is a tragic case of two brothers, A.G., born on June 8, 2009, and
S.G., born on December 9, 2010. This ought to have been a case of a simple
separation of two adults whose relationship was no longer sustainable by July
of 2020, which undoubtedly would have resulted in a shared parenting regime for
two young men who love both of their parents; instead, and for no good reason,
it became one of struggle, hatred, alienation, and protracted litigation.
[2]  
On July 22, 2020, this family’s life irrevocably changed. On this date, Mr.
Al Jaboury lost control over Ms. Chyher; on this date, Ms. Chyher extricated herself,
not only physically, but also emotionally from Mr. Al Jaboury. For this, both
she and the children have paid a very hefty price. While Ms. Chyher’s relationship
with A. and S. has been repaired to a certain extent, due mainly to the
intervention of the court, it has not been entirely restored. A., in particular,
continues to struggle with what he identifies as the transgressions of his
mother, and he remains angry; S. is susceptible to A.’s moods and to following
in his footsteps.
[3]  
For the reasons set out below, there will be a Final Order of, inter
alia, week about parenting time commencing March 1, 2025, and specified
holiday parenting time, as well as an order granting Ms. Chyher sole
decision-making authority over the children.
[4]  
Ms. Chyher was born on June 11, 1985. She is from Ukraine. Mr. Al Jaboury
was born on August 1, 1968, and is Iraqi, though his father has Syrian citizenship,
and his mother is Syrian. Mr. Al Jaboury came to Canada on August 22, 1998, and
has since become a Canadian citizen. Ms. Chyher was raised as a Christian. Mr.
Al Jaboury is Muslim.
[5]  
Ms. Chyher met Mr. Al Jaboury briefly in June of 2007 at the office of
her then dentist, who was Mr. Al Jaboury’s brother. Ms. Chyher and Mr. Al Jaboury
met again on January 2, 2008, when Mr. Al Jaboury’s brother invited her for coffee.
Ms. Chyher understood that Mr. Al Jaboury lived in Canada. Ms. Chyher was
studying architecture in Lviv, Ukraine at that time. Mr. Al Jaboury indicated
to Ms. Chyher that he was looking to marry, and Ms. Chyher thought that he was
interesting and serious. Although she was Christian and he was Muslin, she did
not see this as a problem; rather she felt although Islam was stricter than the
Christianity she practiced, the two had a lot of similarities.
[6]  
Over Christmas (January 6/7 by the Orthodox calendar) of 2007, Ms.
Chyher discussed the prospect of marriage with Mr. Al Jaboury with her parents,
who were not supportive of the idea. When Ms. Chyher returned to her school
campus after the Christmas break, Mr. Al Jaboury called her and they spent three
days talking, after which she agreed to marry him. Ms. Chyher expected that it
would take around three months to obtain the necessary documentation to marry
in Ukraine; however, it happened very quickly, and the pair were married on
February 8, 2008. Mr. Al Jaboury was 39 years old, and Ms. Chyher was 22. At
the time that they met, Ms. Chyher spoke Ukrainian and Russian. Mr. Al Jaboury
spoke Arabic, English and some Russian. They communicated with each other in
Russian.
[7]  
 Mr. Al Jaboury returned to Canada after the wedding and commenced the
process to sponsor Ms. Chyher to come to Canada, while she continued with her
studies in Lviv. Mr. Al Jaboury visited with Ms. Chyher in Ukraine for two
months in the summer of 2008, at which time she became pregnant with A. Ms.
Chyher completed her studies in December of 2008, and travelled to Canada on
February 16, 2009.
[8]  
Ms. Chyher immediately commenced ESL courses, which she continued until
A.’s birth in June. Mr. Al Jaboury worked throughout the relationship as a taxi
driver, as he does to this day, and, according to Ms. Chyher, he spent very
little time at home. Ms. Chyher indicated that Mr. Al Jaboury originally worked
from 3:00 a.m. to between 5:00 and 6:00 p.m., and later changed his schedule to
from 4:00 a.m. to between 6:00 and 7:00 p.m. He spent one day at home with her
after A.’s birth and then immediately returned to work. Ms. Chyher’s evidence
was that most of the time, Mr. Al Jaboury was out of the house, and that he
took no days off from work, with the exception of an approximately one-month
vacation to Ukraine when A. was about a year old, and a couple of much shorter
trips.
[9]  
From the time the children were born, Ms. Chyher stayed home to care for
them, Mr.  Al Jaboury and the home. She did all the cooking, cleaning and
childcare. Ms. Chyher’s evidence was that Mr. Al Jaboury did little at home or with
A. prior to S.’s birth. At the time of S.’s birth, Mr. Al Jaboury was required
to spend three days caring for A. as S. was jaundiced and needed to stay in the
hospital. According to Ms. Chryher, Mr. Al Jaboury was unhappy with this and
wanted to return to work. After S. was born, Ms. Chyher continued to be responsible
for the care of the children and the home. Her evidence was that Mr. Al Jaboury
spent little time with them, usually about 20 minutes in the evening before Ms.
Chyher put them to bed. When they got a little older, Mr. Al Jaboury would sometimes
take them for prayers for about an hour or spend some time with them practicing
the Quran. Mr. Al Jaboury did not take time off work, even for Eid.
[10]     
Ms. Chyher indicated that S. was a bit of an easier baby than was A., as
the latter took to breast feeding, while A. did not, and A. was not a good
sleeper. Ms. Chyher indicated that on many nights when A. cried, Mr. Al Jaboury
complained about it, and she would take him down to the basement to walk him so
that Mr. Al Jaboury could sleep.
[11]     
Ms. Chyher’s evidence is that she tried very hard to be a good Muslim wife
to Mr. Al Jaboury. While still at university, she ceased socializing with her
friends, especially male friends, changed her mode of dress and began wearing a
hijab, all at Mr. Al Jaboury’s request or insistence. Mr. Al Jaboury denied
that he demanded or required these things of Ms. Chyher, however, whether he
overtly asked for them or not, Ms. Chyher’s evidence is that she did what she
could, and what she believed was expected of her, to please Mr. Al Jaboury.
[12]     
After the boys were both in school, Ms. Chyher returned to ESL school
for half days, after which she would pick up the boys from school and continue
to provide fulltime care for them. Once Ms. Chyher became a little more
comfortable with her English, she took one evening course at Algonquin College,
from 7:00 to 10:00 p.m. twice a week for eight weeks. Ms. Chyher indicated that
she would feed the children and prepare them for bed before she left for her
course, and Mr. Al Jaboury would put them to bed on those evenings.
[13]     
In June of 2017, A. and S. began attending the Zen Karate school, which
school has become a constant in their lives. Ms. Chyher enrolled in a class a
few months later, and eventually, Mr. Al Jaboury also signed up for a class.
[14]     
A., who suffers from epilepsy, had his first big seizure in 2018 or 2019.
He was hospitalized at CHEO for about a week after the first seizure. A. has
been on different medications over the years since his diagnosis. He has been
followed by CHEO since his initial hospitalization. Ms. Chyher indicated that
the medication he has most recently been prescribed, along with the dosage he
is on, has been working for him. A.’s last big seizure was on July 2, 2023,
though he may have also had a smaller one at school.
[15]     
After A.’s diagnosis, Ms. Chyher did not leave A. alone. When A. was not
a school, Ms. Chyher was with him, especially when A. was having seizures more
frequently. Ms. Chyher described A. as having something not quite right with
him. A. struggles with language and his sentences are not as fluid as they
should be for a boy of his age. A. also says things to people sometimes without
knowing what he has said, or which are not logical. However, A.’s sleep has
improved on his current medication, and he has started to read again, which may
help with his language issues. Only very recently has A. experienced any
measure of independence, going to a math camp at Carleton University for a
week, during which he could walk around the campus freely.
[16]     
Ms. Chyher described being unhappy in her relationship with Mr. Al Jaboury
for some time. She indicated that she was sleeping on cushions on the floor of
the boys’ room since about November of 2019. At one point, Ms. Chyher thought
that she could move to the basement of the house and live separate and apart in
the same home. However, Mr. Al Jaboury kept his exercise equipment in the
basement and did not want her touching it.
[17]     
Ms. Chyher felt that Mr. Al Jaboury was manipulative towards her and
required her to engage in sexual relations when she did not want to be with
him. Although she knew of no medical diagnosis for him, Mr. Al Jaboury would
tell Ms. Chyher that he was in pain, or that his heath would be at risk if she
did not have intercourse with him, going so far as to say: “If I’m not good in
seven minutes, call an ambulance”, or telling her he was cancelling his fares
for the day to go to hospital. Ms. Chyher, who tried to avoid Mr. Al Jaboury
and did not want to be close to him, gave in on these occasions as she
understood that it was her duty as a wife.
[18]     
Ms. Chyher also described several instances of domestic violence
perpetrated against her by Mr. Al Jaboury, as follows:
[19]     
Ms. Chyher reported these incidents to the police, in or about November
of 2021, after Mr. Al Jaboury sent A. to Ms. Chyher with a video he had taken
outside her home, the whereabouts he was not supposed to know, made between
April 3 and 4, 2021. Mr. Al Jaboury was later charged with several criminal
offences, including assault x 2, uttering threats, sexual assault, forcible
confinement and mischief.
[20]     
Ms. Chyher indicated that in the spring of 2020, she was getting ready
to leave the relationship. In June, she told Mr. Al Jaboury that she was not
going to wear the hijab anymore. The first time she took it off, she was going
to karate and threw it at Mr. Al Jaboury and told him that if he wanted to wear
it, he should. When she returned home, they had an argument and she felt
compelled to put it on again. However, as of July 1, 2020, Ms. Chyher stopped
wearing her hijab, after which life became more difficult at home. The first
time she went out to a park with the kids without her hijab, A. hugged her and
told her she was pretty. After they returned home, Mr. Al Jaboury spoke to the
children about her not wearing the hijab, stating that it was improper for a
Muslim woman to not wear a hijab. Ms. Chyher indicated that after Mr. Al Jaboury
spoke to the children, A. would “look kind of sideways” at her. However, she
never resumed wearing the hijab after July 1, 2020.
[21]     
One evening a few days later, Ms. Chyher left the house after an
argument, taking only her computer and phone with her. She stayed out in her
car from 9:00 p.m. to about 3:00 a.m. and then came back home. Mr. Al Jaboury
asked her why she came back and told her to go back to where she came from. Ms.
Chyher went to sleep her sons’ room and told him to leave her alone. Mr. Al Jaboury
came and woke her up at 5:00 a.m. and began yelling at her about a divorce, as
Ms. Chyher had attempted to fill out paperwork she had found on-line for same. Ms.
Chyher locked herself in the bathroom while Mr. Al Jaboury continued to yell at
her.
[22]     
On July 22, 2020, Ms. Chyher was going to a kickboxing class at the Zen
Studio. She had a friend, Rosanne, who was going to come and try the beginner-level
class after hers, so Ms. Chyher told Mr. Al Jaboury that she intended to stay
an hour later to be with Rosanne. Ms. Chyher left the boys with Mr. Al Jaboury
and he was not happy. Ms. Chyher went to Zen, which was holding classes
outdoors during this period due to COVID. Ms. Chyher was crying and spoke to a
woman outside, who asked if things at home ever got physical, to which she
respondent “yes”. This woman told Ms. Chyher that if it ever happens again, she
could call her or come to her home.
[23]     
The class in which Ms. Chyher was participating had two teachers and
eight students. It started to rain outside, and the participants moved inside.
Mr. Al Jaboury arrived at the studio with A. and S., and started yelling at her
to go home. Ms. Chyher took her stuff and left. She didn’t really feel safe to
go home but had nowhere else to go. She went home and sat next to a glass table
and had her phone close to her. A little later, A. came into the house stating
to her: “You are a liar”. Mr. Al Jaboury came in and stated to her: “If you
have a boyfriend, leave right now.” Mr. Al Jaboury tried to take Ms. Chyher’s
phone from her, but she held on to it and called the police because she did not
feel safe. Ms. Chyher went upstairs and tried to gather some of her things. Mr.
Al Jaboury told A. to call 911 to cancel the call that had been made. Ms.
Chyher started to gather what she needed and about seven minutes later the
police arrived.
[24]     
Ms. Chyher told the police that nothing physical had happened, but that
she did not feel safe and needed help getting out. Ms. Chyher was reluctant to
go to a shelter because Mr. Al Jaboury had previously told her that shelters
were filled with drugs and homeless people and that they smelled. She did not
know what to do or where to go, so she called the woman she had spoken to at
Zen Studio, who said it was no problem for her to come to her home. Ms. Chyher
indicated that as she had no food or clothes for the kids, she did not think it
was a good idea to take them with her. The police asked her if she thought it
was safe for the boys to stay with Mr. Al Jaboury, and she agreed to this. Ms.
Chyher stated that she believed that once she got herself settled somewhere, she
would be able to return with the police and retrieve the boys.
[25]     
Mr. Al Jaboury’s evidence of what transpired on July 22, 2020, is that Ms.
Chyher told him that she was going to her kickboxing class and staying until
9:00 p.m. Although he was scheduled to have a class after hers, Ms. Chyher told
him not to come to Zen. In fact, she told him, in front of the kids, to change
gyms because she didn’t want to see him there anymore. Mr. Al Jaboury got upset
with Ms. Chyher and after about an hour, he went to Zen with the kids. Mr. Al Jaboury
told Ms. Chyher to go home and leave him alone, however, after about 15
minutes, he was unable to concentrate on his class and he also went home.
[26]     
Once at home, Mr. Al Jaboury stated that the boys went into the house
ahead of him and when he entered, Ms. Chyher was on her phone texting. He “took
the phone from her and threw it on the couch”. He stated that he then turned
around and Ms. Chyher “grabbed him from the back and saw the kids crying and
screaming.” Ms. Chyher told the kid to “go to Judy to call the police. You’re
dad tried to kill me.” According to Mr. Al Jaboury, Ms. Chyher also said to the
children: “Ok, stay with your father. I don’t care about you.”
[27]     
Ms. Chyher then went upstairs to pack a suitcase and she phoned the
police, who came to the house in seven to ten minutes. He spoke to one officer
while Ms. Chyher spoke to another. He also told the officer to speak to the
kids, which he did. Mr. Al Jaboury denies coaching the kids to say anything
against their mother, stating “how could I so in five minutes”. Ms. Chyher then
came in with a police officer to get her things and she left.
[28]     
The Ottawa Police Services Report of that date was filed as Exhibit #10
in the trial.[1]
In it, it is noted that Mr. Al Jaboury told Constable Adam Reid, inter alia:
[29]     
Constable Reid noted that “both [S.] and [A.] were never far. I observed
both to be in tears on arrival and ALJABOURY had advised them not to say
anything yet. During the interaction there was some back and forth Arabic to
which I did not understand.”
[30]     
Constable Reid went on to state: “Both children did advise me that
CHYHER was a liar. At one pint S. had made a comment that he thinks his mother
is in love with someone else. I asked ALJABOURY if he suspected CHYHER was
being unfaithful to which he responded that he only believes what he sees.”
[31]     
Constable Reid noted that Mr. Al Jaboury “again detailed the fact that
the pair had not slept together in approx 1 year. ALJABOURY explained to me
that he has a medical condition where he has tumors in his scrotum that cause
pressure on his body, requiring him to have intercourse to relieve that
pressure.”
[32]     
Constable Reid noted that Ms. Chyher reported, inter alia, that:
[33]     
 On page 7 of the report, Constable Reid noted that after Ms. Chyher collected
her things, she “left a calendar with the dates to provide medication to A. as
he has seizures.” Constable Reid noted on page 8 of the report: “CHYHER
expressed to police that the children were safe at home with ALJABOURY and that
she will be taking the proper steps to seek a divorce.”
[34]     
Although Mr. Al Jaboury was quite focused in his testimony on Ms. Chyher
having said “your father is going to kill me”, and the detrimental effect of it
on the children, there is no mention of this in the OPS report, either from him
or the children. When questioned by Mr. Al Jaboury’s lawyer on this, Ms. Chyher
did not recall making such a statement, but conceded that she may have said it at
some point during the chaos. Ms. Chyher confirmed that she was afraid of Mr. Al
Jaboury and did not feel safe, which is what she said to the police.
[35]     
The police provided Ms. Chyher with some information about how to access
a women’s shelter and reported the incident to the Children’s Aid Society of
Ottawa. Ms. Chyher stayed a couple of nights with the woman from the boxing
class, and then moved into a shelter.
[36]     
On July 23, 2020, Ms. Chyher met with a Child Protection Worker from the
Society, Ms. Conquest, who also provided her with information about accessing a
women’s shelter. Ms. Conquest’s note contains the following information
reported to her by Ms. Chyher:
[37]     
Ms. Conquest notes that Ms. Chyher informed her that she “does not want
to return to the relationship, wants to show her sons that the way Amar treats
her is not acceptable”. Ms. Chyher informed Ms. Conquest that she wanted the
boys back with her, “possibly 50/50”.
[38]     
Ms. Chyher had noted to Ms. Conquest on July 23, 2020, that she worried
about Mr. Al Jaboury coaching the children. She had already experienced him
speaking to the children against her about not wearing the hijab, and A. coming
into the house on July 22, 2020, calling her a liar, about what she did not
know.
[39]     
Ms. Chyher testified that after she left the home, Mr. Al Jaboury called
and texted her incessantly, up to as many as 80 times in one day. Mr. Al Jaboury
admitted to this, stating by way of explanation: “she’s my wife, the mother of
my kids”, and “loyalty is like that” and “she should come back home.” Mr. Al Jaboury
indicated that he was contacting Ms. Chyher telling her to “please call the
kids, talk to the kids, come back and fix the problem”. Ms. Chyher did not
answer or respond to his calls or messages, and she did not attempt to speak to
the children by telephone because she knew that Mr. Al Jaboury was always
present with them. Ms. Chyher feared that Mr. Al Jaboury would be telling them
what to say if she tried to talk to them.
[40]     
Ms. Chyher’s lack of communication with the boys was characterized by
Mr. Al Jaboury in his evidence as Ms. Chyher not having interest in the
children after she left. Nothing, however, could be farther from the truth. Ms.
Chyher very much wanted to speak to and see her children. On July 11, 2020, Ms.
Chyher had registered the children for a summer camp at Zen Studio, which was
to begin on the Monday after she departed the house. Ms. Chyher wanted the
children to be with her, but testified that she did not go to the camp to pick
them up because: a) she feared they may react negatively due to Mr. Al Jaboury’s
influence on them and not come with her, b) initially had nowhere to live, and
c) she did not have access to A. epilepsy medications, which she had left at
the home with Mr. Al Jaboury.
[41]     
Mr. Al Jaboury indicated that he stayed home with the kids for a few
days, and then received a call from David Dash, the proprietor of Zen Studio,
reminding him about the summer camp starting on Monday. A. and S. began summer
camp and Mr. Al Jaboury went back to work. Mr. Al Jaboury extended the camp for
the remainder of the summer. He took the boys to and picked them up from camp
daily.
[42]     
Although Mr. Al Jaboury did admit in his testimony that he thought Ms.
Chyher texted him once and “asked about taking the kids sometimes”, he did not
provide any evidence about making any arrangements for her to do so. In fact,
Mr. Al Jaboury provided absolutely no explanation for the children not seeing
their mother after she left the home on July 22, 2020.
[43]     
Ms. Chyher’s counsel also wrote to Mr. Al Jaboury on July 29, 2020[2],
requesting the return of the children to Ms. Chyher’s care, as their primary
parent of many years, and stating: “When the children return to Ms. Chyher’s
full-time care, a parenting schedule setting out the time the children spend in
your care will be important and we look forward to discussing same with you.” Again,
Mr. Al Jaboury provided no evidence as to why the children were not returned to
Ms. Chyher’s care or why a parenting schedule was not immediately arranged. Mr.
Al Jaboury indicated only that he never stopped Ms. Chyher from seeing the
kids, as he asked her many times to come to the home to do so.
[44]     
 Ms. Chyher indicated that she did try to speak to A. and S. while at
camp by phone through one of the camp counsellors. They both refused to speak
with her, telling Ms. Conquest at a home visit on August 26, 2020, that they
were not interested. Ms. Conquest’s note of her interviews with A. and S. on
that date is illustrative of their state of mind only one month after Ms.
Chyher had left the home. Regarding her private interview with A., Ms. Conquest
noted:
[45]     
Regarding her interview with S., Ms. Conquest noted the following
regarding Ms. Chyher:
[46]     
The evidence of both parents confirms that there was then a tremendous
gap during which the children had no contact with Ms. Chyher, from July 22,
2020, until after an urgent motion was heard by Justice Summers in December of
2020. Again, there is no explanation from Mr. Al Jaboury as to why the children
were kept from Ms. Chyher for five months after she left him.
[47]     
Ms. Chyher commenced her Application seeking a divorce, child and
spousal support, custody of or access to the children, a restraining order
against Mr. Al Jaboury, equalization of the net family properties, and
exclusive possession and/or sale of the matrimonial home on August 20, 2020.
[48]     
As indicated, on December 22, 2020, after an urgent motion, Justice Summers
granted an order requesting the involvement of the OCL in the matter on
consent, and, not on consent, placed A. and S. in the primary care of Ms.
Chyher with parenting time to Mr. Al Jaboury on a rotating four-week schedule
as follows, with Week 3 commencing immediately and Week 1 commencing as of
January 4, 2021:
[49]     
The exchange of the children was to be in a neutral public location.
[50]     
In the motion, Mr. Al Jaboury argued that Ms. Chyher had physically and
emotionally abused the children and turned them against her. In her endorsement
of December 22, 2020, which was elaborated on by her endorsement of January 13,
2021, Justice Summers indicated that she “was not persuaded by the evidence
that Ms. Chyher has harmed the children and find it more probable that Mr. Al
Jaboury is exerting negative influence.”[3]
In her further endorsement dated January 13, 2021, Justice Summers expanded on
her reasons for returning the children to Ms. Chyher’s care, which included that
all evidence supported the fact that she was their primary caregiver for all
their lives, that she was a good mother and that her witnesses were more
believable than those proffered by Mr. Al Jaboury.
[51]     
After the December 22, 2020, order, the parties agreed for the exchange
of the children to occur in front of the Ottawa Police station on Elgin Street.
However, although Mr. Al Jaboury brought A. and S. to the exchange location,
they refused to go with Ms. Chyher, causing a scene which Mr. Al Jaboury videotaped,
for his own reasons.
[52]     
The failed exchange was brought to the attention of Justice Summers, and
she released a further endorsement on December 23, 2020, on consent, requiring
Mr. Al Jaboury to deliver the children to the Zen Martial Arts Studio at 6:00
p.m. that day into the care of Bakhtawar-Abdul Kaalique, a staff member at Zen,
and then leave the studio. Ms. Chyher was to pick A. and S. up from Ms.
Kaalique at 6:30 p.m. However, again, the children refused to go with Ms.
Chyher, after creating yet another scene. M. Chyher was convinced that this
attempted exchange was a set up by Mr. Al Jaboury, as he appeared at the door
of studio to pick them up without being called by anyone. On December 23, 2020,
Justice Summers also noted the parties’ agreement to engage Valerie Morinville
to conduct a custody and access assessment.
[53]     
A third attempt at an exchange was arranged for the next day where Mr.
Al Jaboury would not be in attendance. The children were brought by a taxi
driver friend of his to a gas station, where they were met by Ms. Kaalique, her
sister and Ms. Chyher. On this occasion, the boys did get into the back of Ms.
Chyher’s car and return home with her.
[54]     
What occurred next can be described as nothing less than a nightmare for
Ms. Chyher. The children, who had previously been sweet, loving and
affectionate with her, shouted at her, did not listen to her, did not show her
any affection, were exceedingly rude to her and refused to call her “mom”. Ms.
Chyher described January and February of 2021 as a “crazy time”. The children
were sometimes in school and sometimes taking classes on-line because of
COVID-19 restrictions. There was an anonymous call made to the CAS about Ms.
Chyher which she was pretty sure originated from Mr. Al Jaboury. Additionally,
Mr. Al Jaboury was texting and calling the children on the hour and would
become upset and yell at them for not calling.  Eventually, Ms. Chyher was able
to get the calls down to every two hours. The boys were very angry at her and
blamed her for everything. They were especially difficult after visits with Mr.
Al Jaboury. Ms. Chyher described that on one occasion when the kids were
speaking to their father on speaker phone while in her car, he stated to them:
“Go home, the police are coming.” Upon arriving at home, Ms. Chyher was met
with three police officers and the CAS.
[55]     
Ms. Chyher indicated that the police or CAS were involved with her on
five occasions after the children returned to her and that they ran away on
three occasions, once to a nearby Tim Horton’s, where Mr. Al Jaboury was
present with them, once away from the house to only be found nearby with Mr. Al
Jaboury, and once from Zen Studio to Mr. Al Jaboury’s house. This exceedingly
difficult behaviour that the children were exhibiting continued until December
of 2021, when Justice Audet made an order reducing Mr. Al Jaboury’s parenting
time and required it to be supervised.
[56]     
In the interim, Ms. Morinville, who was qualified as an expert on
parenting assessment after a voir dire, and whose reports were found to
be admissible in the trial, commenced her initial parenting assessment in or
about February of 2021. On May 3, 2021, Mr. Al Jaboury brought another urgent
motion before Justice Summers requesting an order changing the children’s
primary residence to him and Ms. Chyher sought an order suspending Mr. Al Jaboury’s
parenting time, pending the outcome of the assessment, both of which motions
Justice Summer dismissed on June 16, 2021.
[57]     
Ms. Morinville completed her parenting assessment report, which was
released on September 3, 2021. In addition to listening to approximately five
hours of recordings offered up by the parties, Ms. Morinville interviewed
several collaterals and reviewed a copious number of records, including those
of the OPS, CAS, CHEO, the children’s schools and doctors. In the “Discussion
and Recommendations” portion of her report, Ms. Morinville noted the following
observations:
[58]     
Ms. Morinville recommended, inter alia, that Ms. Chyher have
final decision-making authority over the children’s education and Mr. Al
Jaboury have final decision-making authority with respect to the children’s
religion, as well as joint decision-making over medical decisions, with Ms. Chyher
being responsible for mental health appointments. In relation to the parenting
schedule, Ms. Morinville recommended that the children reside primarily with
Ms. Chyher and that Mr. Al Jaboury’s parenting time be twice weekly, fully
supervised, as well as for four hours each Eid, with notice from him to Ms.
Chyher a minimum of seven days before Eid. Ms. Morinville also recommended that
Mr. Jaboury participate in several services, including individual trauma-based
therapy, the New Directions program followed by a repeat of Caring Dads, the
Parenting Through High Conflict course at Ottawa Family Services, and parenting
education classes on raising adolescents. She also recommended that [S.] and
[A.] participate in reunification therapy with both parents and in the Child
Witness program at the Western Ottawa Community Resource Centre, and that Ms.
Chyher participate in the Parenting Through High Conflict program, receive some
in-home supports from the Family Resiliency Program, and attend parenting classes
on disciplining children.
[59]     
As indicated, Ms. Morinville’s report was released on September 3, 2021.
On December 8, 2021, Justice Audet heard an urgent motion brought by Ms. Chyher
regarding the temporary parenting regime. In her decision on the motion, released
on December 15, 2021, after reviewing the legal test to vary a temporary order,
Justice Audet found at paragraph 18: “I come to the clear and unequivocal
conclusion, based on all the evidence before me, that the children will be at
risk of severe emotional harm if the current parenting arrangements remain in
place for any length of time, and if the children do not immediately access the
services that they need to repair the damages they have already suffered, and
avoid the complete and irreparable breakdown of their relationship with their
mother.”
[60]     
Justice Audet varied the temporary order to one where the children would
continue to reside primarily with their mother, but that Mr.  Al Jaboury’s
parenting time would be fully supervised by a trained supervisor twice weekly,
and for four hours on Eid with seven days’ notice to Ms. Chyher. It was
additionally ordered that the children not have telephone, text or have social
media contact with their father, at any time; their contact was limited to
during his supervised parenting time. Additionally, on consent, the parties
were to commence reunification therapy with Ms. Victoria Hasbani for the
children and both parents.
[61]     
Justice Audet also permitted Ms. Chyher to register A. at Merivale High
School and S. at Carlton Heights Public School for the January 2022 school
term. The children had been attending the Ottawa Islamic School from the time
they were removed from their previous school and placed there by Mr. Al Jaboury
following a report the school had made to the CAS regarding physical
discipline/abuse by him on A., as reported by A. to his teacher. Ms. Morinville
had recommended a change from the Ottawa Islamic School as it did not appear to
be meeting the boys’ academic needs at the time. Ms. Chyher also testified that
she was not comfortable with the OIS.
[62]     
Mr. Al Jaboury’s parenting time remained as set out in Justice Audet’s
order from the time it was made until the hearing of the trial was completed.
Mr. Al Jaboury had parenting time twice weekly supervised by Renew Supervision
Services. The parties also engaged in Reunification Therapy with Ms. Hasbani commencing
in the late winter/spring of 2022 and ending in January of 2023. Ms. Chyher’s
evidence was that only after these changes were made and services were put into
place did the relationship between her and her sons improve.
[63]     
Ms. Chyher indicated that she saw a change in the kids within two weeks
of the visits with Mr. Al Jaboury being supervised; they were more relaxed, and
there was less tension, especially with A., after returning from their father. Ms.
Chyher also found Ms. Hasbani’s involvement to be very helpful. Although Ms.
Chyher still feels anger from A., she indicates that things improved to the
point of having a nice time with him. He is now willing to accept a scratch on
his back from Ms. Chyher but is still resistant to hugs or kisses. S. is more
open to affection with Ms. Chyher. She describes S. as a happy boy, including
in her home.
[64]     
The litigation nevertheless continued, with scheduled trials adjourned on
a couple of occasions. On March 30, 2023, Justice M. Smith endorsed at a TMC/SC
that the parties agreed to an updated Parenting Plan Assessment Report from Ms.
Morinville, as well as to appointment of the OCL to represent the children, the
latter being something which Justice Audet declined to order in December of
2021, until sufficient time had passed with the children only having supervised
contact with Mr. Al Jaboury. On April 13, 2023, Justice M. Smith removed the
scheduled trial from the September 2023 trial sittings and added it to the
January 2024 trial sittings. Justice Smith also indicated in his endorsement of
that date: “The trial issues to be limited to the parenting.” No further
motions were to be brought without leave of the court.
[65]     
On November 17, 2023, Ms. Morinville’s “Parenting Plan Assessment Update
to September 2021 Report”, was released. Again, Ms. Morinville’s assessment was
extremely thorough, and included many interviews with those involved with or
providing services to the children/family, and the review of additional
records, including most significantly Renew Supervision Observations Reports
regarding Mr. Al Jaboury’s supervised parenting time. In the “Discussion and
Recommendations” section of her report, Ms. Morinville made the following
observations:
[66]     
At the end of her assessment, Ms. Morinville made the following recommendations:
DECISION MAKING
[67]     
When queried at trial about her recommendation for
continued supervision of Mr. Al Jaboury’s parenting time, Ms. Morinville stated
that she had very serious concerns about parental alienation, or what is now
termed “children who resist contact”. Ms. Morinville indicated that those terms
are bandied about in family litigation, but that true cases of parental
alienation, which she described as one parent behaving in such a way as to
negate or destroy the children’s relationship with the other parent, are rare.
Ms. Morinville stated that in the approximate 150 assessments that she has
conducted, this case is the only one in which she can say true parental alienation
is occurring. Ms. Morinville indicated that the recommendations she made in November
of 2023 regarding Mr. Al Jaboury’s parenting time were not ones which she
wanted to make. In fact, she was hoping to be in a position to make
recommendations to expand Mr. Al Jaboury’s parenting time and eliminate
supervision. However, she did not see any change from her September 2021
report, except that Mr. Al Jaboury’s insidious undermining of Ms. Chyher was
more covert than it had previously been. Ms. Morinville was exceedingly
concerned about what could happen without supervision, if this continued to
happen under full supervision.
[68]     
Regarding her recommendation that supervision be in
place to S.’s 14th birthday, which was, in fact in December of 2024,
Ms. Morinville indicated that it was to mitigate Mr. Al Jaboury’s negative
influence and allow Ms. Chyher to continue building her relationship with the
children. Although Ms. Morinville considered the children’s expressed views and
preferences in coming to her recommendation, it was her view that what they
wanted (a shared parenting regime) was not in their best interests because it
would not support their relationship with their mother. It was her hope that by
the time supervision could be lifted and parenting time increased, both the
boys’ relationship with Ms. Chyher and their level of maturity would be strong
enough to sustain the gains made in 2022 and 2023.
[69]     
The OCL for the boys received clinical assistance from
a social worker, Ms. Nathalie Cooper, who was called to testify twice, once
during the original sitting days in February of 2024, and again when the trial
was briefly reopened on August 6, 2024. On February 2, 2024, Ms. Cooper
indicated that she was assigned to the file on July 17, 2023, and she interviewed
the children on two occasions and conducted observation visits with both Ms.
Chyher and Mr. Al Jaboury. She also reviewed materials outlining the nature of
the case prior to meeting with the family members.
[70]     
Ms. Cooper found the views and wishes of the children
to be independently held. Both A. and S. expressed frustration that their time
with Mr. Al Jaboury was so limited. While neither were particularly bothered by
the presence of a supervisor for their father’s parenting time, they did not
see any necessity for it. Essentially, A. and S. were both very tired of being
in the middle of their parents’ dispute. They wanted to live with each parent
on a week about basis.
[71]     
On a positive note, both A. and S. were able to
identify positive things about both parents and each home. They expressed
loving their mother’s Ukrainian food as well as the Middle Eastern food cooked
by Mr. Al Jaboury. Both wanted their parents to not say anything negative about
the other parent, however, A. made it clear that if they do it is the opinion
of the person stating it and not his.
[72]     
Ms. Cooper’s observation visits in each home were also
positive, and she did not note any change in the children’s behaviour based on
in whose home they were during the visit.
[73]     
Ms. Cooper described the boys as polite and articulate.
She indicated that they were very clear and consistent in their desire to have
a shared parenting schedule.
[74]     
When Ms. Cooper met with S. on May 24, 2024, to update
the court in August, he had recently torn his meniscus and was on crutches. He
was still expressing a desire to have a 50/50 shared parenting schedule with no
supervision. A.’s views also remained clear and consistent, and he expressed
wanting his parents to communicate “no matter how much they hate each other.”
[75]     
Mr. Al Jaboury and Ms. Chyher also testified on August
6, 2024, mostly having to do with S.’s injury and surgery, and Mr. Al Jaboury’s
complaint about a lack of information sharing by Ms. Chyher. Ms. Chyher’s
evidence is that S. injured his knee while playing basketball outside of Zen around
4:00 in the afternoon on March 5, 2024.  They put his leg up and iced it that
evening to see if it would improve. It did not, so Ms. Chyher took S. to CHEO
the following morning (March 6, 2024), where X-rays were taken and a MRI was
scheduled for March 17, 2024. The boys were visiting with Mr. Al Jaboury later
on March 6, and they told him about the injury and the impending MRI at that
time.[4]
On March 10, 2024, Mr. Al Jaboury and S. discussed how his leg was doing, and
him not wanting surgery.[5]
 On March 13, 2024, S. informed Mr. Al Jaboury that the doctor said he needs
surgery, and that he had a MRI on Monday and found out on Tuesday.[6] On March 20, 2024, S.
advised Mr. Al Jaboury that he was going to have his surgery on April 4, 2024.[7] On April 3, 2024, S. reminded
Mr. Al Jaboury that he was having surgery the next day, and stated that he
needed to be up at 5:00 a.m. to go to the hospital.[8] On April 14, 2024, Mr. Al
Jaboury and the kids discussed S.’s leg and when he would return to the doctor
for a check up.[9]
On April 21, 2024, S. advised Mr. Al Jaboury that he had an appointment
scheduled for the next day at 1:00 p.m. to learn about exercises he would need
to do.[10]
 On May 1, 2024, Mr. Al Jaboury and S. discussed how S.’s leg was doing.[11] On May 5, 2024, Mr. Al
Jaboury and S. discussed his leg and S. informed his father that his next
appointment was in a couple of weeks.[12]
On May 12, 2024, S. advised Mr. Al Jaboury that his leg was getting better and
didn’t hurt anymore.[13]
[76]     
Notwithstanding that Mr. Al Jaboury had the information
that was being provided to him by S., he was critical of Ms. Chyher, insisting
that she should be informing him of developments and appointments. For her
part, Ms. Chyher indicated that she did not contact Mr. Al Jaboury prior to May
3, 2024, because there was still a restraining order in place relating to his
criminal charges, and she did not otherwise contact him because she believed he
had access to S.’s “MyChart”, just as she did. She expected that Mr. Al Jaboury
would take whatever steps were necessary to do so. She also knew that Mr. Al
Jaboury was aware of the surgery date, and she assumed he would know, given
S.’s age, that the surgery would be done at CHEO.
[77]     
Ms. Chyher was also adamant that based on her history
of Mr. Al Jaboury’s control and degradation of her, she does not want any
direct contact with him, though she indicated she would be willing to
communicate via a parenting application regarding the children in future. She
does not want to receive calls, texts or messages from Mr. Al Jaboury which
degrade her, as she has in the past.
[78]     
For his part, but for making one call to CHEO, Mr. Al
Jaboury made no efforts to obtain access to S.’s MyChart, notwithstanding that
he had received the invitation to it in December of 2023. He particularly took
no steps to rectify the situation between the date of S.’s injury of March 5,
2024, and the date of his surgery of April 4, 224. Indeed, he had not taken any
steps to August 6, 2024. Nor did Mr. Al Jaboury provide any evidence that he
reached out to Ms. Chyher directly for information. Although Mr. Al Jaboury
testified that he would have wanted to be present at S.’s surgery, the date of
which he clearly knew from at least March 20, 2024, he made no effort to find
out more or arrange it on his own. While it would have been optimal for Ms.
Chyher to advise Mr. Jaboury that surgery was recommended and to provide him
the date and location for surgery, she cannot, under the circumstances, be held
solely responsible for the lack of communication. Mr. Al Jaboury did very
little to ascertain the health status of his son. Indeed, he relied on Ms.
Chyher to ensure what needed to be done was done.
[79]     
Mr. Al Jaboury also testified on August 6, 2024, that
the outcome of his criminal trial, which was received on May 3, 2024, was not guilty.
[80]     
Ms. Chyher’s position at trial was that she should be
awarded final decision-making authority over the children for all matters, except
for religion with each parent making decisions about religion in their own
homes, based on their own values.
[81]     
With respect to Mr. Al Jaboury’s parenting time, Ms.
Chyher wanted it to continue as per Justice Audet’s December 15, 2021, court
order pending S.’s 14th birthday on December 9, 2024, and for then
to be a graduated schedule of unsupervised parenting time culminating in Mr. Al
Jaboury having unsupervised parenting time every second weekend as of February
28, 2025, as well as the holiday schedule recommended by Ms. Morinville.
[82]     
Ms. Chyher requests in her draft order that I remain
seized of the matter regarding any issues which might arise in relation to the
graduated parenting schedule.
[83]     
Ms. Chyher also seeks orders regarding communication,
travel and the children’s names as per Ms. Morinville’s recommendations.
[84]     
Ms. Chyher very much fears that once Mr. Al Jaboury has
unsupervised parenting time, the children will be  affected by his negativity
towards she, and the relationships she has built with them after much hard work
will revert to how it was in 2021.
[85]     
Mr. Al Jaboury seeks an order for joint decision-making
authority and unsupervised parenting time on a week on/week off basis with the
exchange occurring on Mondays before school, as well as some specific time
around Eid for Mr. Al Jaboury and Christmas for Ms. Chyher. With respect to
travel, Mr. Al Jaboury seeks an order permitting both parents to travel with
the children to Hague Convention signatory countries on 30 days notice to the
other.
[86]     
The OCL, on behalf of the children, seeks an order that
the children reside with their parents on a shared parenting basis, with
specific provisions around Eid, Christmas and Easter, along with some corollary
orders regarding communication and travel.
[87]     
The OCL submitted that the children’s views and preferences
are very clear and consistent, and given their ages and levels of maturity, they
must be very seriously considered and given appropriate weight. She submits,
moreover, that the point in time of the trial, the boys’ views appeared to be
genuinely and independently held.
[88]     
The OCL submitted further, however, that even if they
are not independently held, but are a product of influence by or pressure from
Mr. Al Jaboury, they should still be seriously considered. In support of this
submission, Ms. Carvallo relied upon a 2023 article by Ian Ross from the
Canadian Family Law Quarterly, entitled “Beyond Lip Service: Key Issues for
Decision-Makers When Considering Children’s Views and Wishes in Child
Protection Proceedings” (42 CFLQ 29).  Although written in the context of CYFSA
proceedings, Ms. Carvallo submitted that the principles are equally applicable
in Family proceedings. After reviewing children’s rights to express their views
and be heard pursuant to Article 12 of the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of the Child (“UNCRC”), Mr. Ross notes at page 5 of the article:
[89]     
On the issue of the increasing weight to be given to
children’s views as the age and mature, Mr. Ross stated:
[90]      On the issue of influence and/or alienation, Mr. Ross noted at page 9
of the article that:
[91]     
Reference was also made by Mr. Ross to cases of alienated
children thus at page 11:
[92]     
Additionally, in reviewing the best interests factors
delineated in Subsection 16(3) of the Divorce Act, I note that the court
is required to consider “the
child’s views and preferences, giving due weight to the child’s age and
maturity, unless they cannot be ascertained”. With respect to the other factors
to be considered, both parents are able to meet the physical needs of the
children, both have positive relationships with them, and both have cultural,
linguistic and religious heritage to share with them. Mr. Al Jaboury, however,
has proven himself incapable of promoting the children’s relationship with
their mother, and Ms. Chyher has no ability (for good reason) to communicate
with Mr. Al Jaboury. Pursuant to subsection 16(3)(j), I am also to be cognizant
of any family violence, and its impact on the parties’ abilities to cooperate
and coparent.
[93]     
The evidence led at this trial reveals that “the
problem” in this case is not Ms. Chyher or her decision to leave the marriage
on July 22, 2020. The problem in this case is Mr. Al Jaboury.
[94]     
First, Mr. Al Jaboury has created a narrative, and has
led the children to believe in that narrative, indeed insist in the face of all
evidence to the contrary, that Ms. Chyher “cheated” on Mr. Al Jaboury with her
now partner, Mr. Dash. Ms. Chyher testified that although she met Mr. Dash
shortly after the children started attending Zen Martial Arts Studio in 2017,
she did not befriend him until the spring of 2022, almost two years after the
separation, when she began to help with the renovations for the studio’s new
building in lieu of paying for classes. Although Ms. Chyher was also a student
at Zen, she stopped attending immediately upon separation due to a) having no
money, and b) not wanting anything to be awkward for the children, who were
reluctant to see her. In fact, she did not attend the studio between July 22,
2020, and the spring of 2021 after the kids returned to her care and she
started taking them. Mr. Dash testified that while he knew of Ms. Chyher, as a
parent and a student at Zen, he did not know her, nor have any contact with her
from the time she left Zen in July of 2020 until he delivered a table and some
chairs from the Zen building to her new home in late 2020 or early 2021. She
then returned to the studio with the kids, and he  again knew her as a parent
and a student. As a favour to him, Ms. Chyher did volunteer to look after his
dog for one weekend in April of 2021, during which weekend Mr. Al Jaboury, who
had care of the children, returned them to Ms. Chyher’s care at 5:00 a.m. on
the pretence that he had to go to the hospital, seemingly with the intent of
finding Mr. Dash in her home, which he was not. As of August 2021, moreover,
the boys were no longer welcome to attend Zen, due to A.’s unruly and in
appropriate behaviour towards another student at the end of summer camp. The
boys did not recommence classes at Zen until it reopened after COVID at its new
location in 2022. Both Mr. Dash and Ms. Chyher testified that they started
spending some time together, as friends, along with the kids in or about March/April
of 2022, and they only became romantically involved in August of 2022. Ms.
Chyher and the boys ended up moving into Mr. Dash’s home in or about May of
2023.
[95]     
Nevertheless, Mr. Al Jaboury created a narrative which
would serve to justify why Ms. Chyher left the marriage in July of 2020, one
which squarely placed the blame for the demise of the relationship on her,
especially in the eyes of her sons.
[96]     
However, Ms. Chyher had plenty of reason to leave her
marriage. While I appreciate that Mr. Al Jaboury was not found guilty of the
crimes with which he was charged in accordance with the test of beyond a
reasonable doubt, I have no hesitation in finding that on a balance of probabilities
the instances of domestic violence described by Ms. Chyher occurred in the
manner in which she described them. Ms. Chyher was a very credible witness; she
was open, frank and willing to provide the court with testimony which was not
flattering to her, including that she had once used a kitchen implement to
discipline one of the boys and that she had put her hand over S.’s mouth on two
occasions to stop him from screaming. While there were some small discrepancies
in some of Ms. Chyher’s testimony, for example about the dates on which certain
incidents might have occurred, overall, her evidence was consistent with
statements she had previously given, and which had been documented.
[97]     
Mr. Al Jaboury, on the other hand, simply outright
denied Ms. Chyher’s allegations or was vague about them and/or deflected blame
to her. Mr. Al Jaboury took little to no responsibility for what went wrong in
the relationship and what his role in that was.
[98]     
I find that Ms. Chyher was the victim of physical abuse
at the hands of Mr. Al Jaboury on more than one occasion, and that she was
subject to sexual impropriety, if not abuse.
[99]     
However, even more insipid than were those instances of
physical abuse and/or intimidation was the coercive and controlling behaviour,
be it financial, sexual or emotional, employed by Mr. Al Jaboury during most of
his relationship with Ms. Chyher.
[100]  Ms. Chyher left the relationship on July 22, 2020, because she could
not take it anymore. She, very painfully, opted not to speak to or see her
children in Mr. Al Jaboury’s presence post-separation because she could not
take it anymore. She prefers not to have any direct contact with
Mr. Al Jaboury to this day because she cannot take it anymore. Ms. Chyher
cannot be faulted for the steps she has taken to extricate herself from Mr. Al
Jaboury’s control. She is not, and never was, “the problem”, but she has
attempted to fix the problem, to the degree that she could, by completely
cutting off any contact or access to her that Mr. Al Jaboury had.
[101]  Second,
Mr. Al Jaboury, for no reason that I could ascertain at trial, kept the
children from Ms. Chyher for five months, despite that she was asking within
days of her departure to have them return to her, and for adequate parenting
arrangements to be made. All the evidence led at trial, including Mr. Al
Jaboury’s, confirmed without any shadow of a doubt that Ms. Chyher had been the
primary, indeed practically sole, caregiver to the children since the day A.
was born. While there were some moments of frustration described, and even of
inappropriate physical discipline exercised by both parents on the children
over the years, Ms. Chyher was demonstrably a very caring, devoted, and loving
parent to A. and S., and they were very attached to her. This was particularly
true in relation to A.’s diagnosis with epilepsy at approximately eight years
of age. Ms. Chyher was exceptionally attuned to A., and was ever present and
watchful over him, sometimes to his chagrin.
[102]  Notwithstanding
that this was the case, Mr. Al Jaboury used the five months during which he had
exclusive domain over the children, again with NO valid explanation or
justification, to completely turn the boys against their mother. Mr. Dash’s
evidence in this regard was quite telling. He described the boys from the time
that they joined Zen Martial Arts Studio in 2017 to July of 2020, as being “two
normal, young boys who came as many as five times a week”. They were good kids
with good senses of humor, sharp-minded and funny, who smiled a lot. They were
very connected and affectionate with their mother. Mr. Dash indicated that
within 10 to 15 days of July 22, 2020, A. and S. had changed entirely; their
demeanor was dark and foreboding, and for the most part, they didn’t talk,
except to say negative things about their mom, such as “mom doesn’t love us, if
she did she’d have come back”, and “mom has been beating us for five years”.
Mr. Dash indicated that he and his staff members had been seeing the boys up to
five times a week for five years, and never had they seen or had any indication
of them being abused or mistreated by Ms. Chyher. Mr. Dash indicated that he
had never seen anything like the behaviours that A. and S. were displaying
towards Ms. Chyher when they returned to Zen in her care in 2021; they wouldn’t
listen to her, treated her terribly, laughed at her and mocked her. Unlike
prior to July of 2020, the boys showed no affection to Ms. Chyher, and there
was no hugging or kissing between them. A. was, additionally very aggressive to
Ms. Chyher.
[103]  It
is unfathomable to think that a parent would do what Mr. Al Jaboury did to
these kids. The irrefutable evidence that he did so, however, comes not only
from Mr. Dash, whom one might argue is not an impartial witness, but from Ms.
Morinville and many of the collaterals to whom she spoke, including Ms. Hasbani
and at least two child protection workers from the CAS of Ottawa. It also comes
from what happened once Mr. Al Jaboury’s parenting time with the children
became supervised – A. and S. began to turn around; they became less stressed, less
belligerent, and less aggressive; they started to relax more around Ms. Chyher
and began to enjoy their time with her; they began to call her “mom” again,
rather than stating  at her “hey” or “you”, and they began to accept small
gestures of physical affection from her. This, compared with how the children
behaved between January and December of 2021 is nothing short of remarkable. The
proof, as they say, is in the pudding. Minimizing Mr. Al Jaboury access to and
ability to negatively influence the children made all the difference in the
world, and clearly evinced that it was he who was causing the difficulties, not
the other way around.
[104]  There
is no doubt that Mr. Al Jaboury, despite his protestations to the contrary, severely
alienated the kids from Ms. Chyher. Fortunately, through the interventions of
the court in December of 2020 and December of 2021, and all the hard work,
perseverance and dedication of Ms. Chyher and the professionals with whom she
worked, Ms. Chyher’s relationships with the children have been restored to the
degree to which they have.
[105]  Nevertheless, in keeping with L. (N.) v. M. (R.R.),
referenced in paragraph 91 above, there is a real risk, in my view, that A. and
S. will feel confused and angry if their voices are not heard and given due
weight in this case. They are now 15 and 14 years-of-age respectively, and
their views have been very clearly and consistently expressed to Ms. Morinville
and to Ms. Cooper. As I have indicated above, A. and S. are now able to
identify positives in Ms. Chyher’s home and with her and Mr. Dash (though they
do not tell Mr. Al Jaboury about the positives they experience, particularly
with Mr. Dash). They have matured and have come to understand that they are in
the middle of the conflict between their parents, a place in which they no
longer wish to be. They appear to now be tired of the conflict, which contrasts
with their formerly extreme positions in favour of Mr. Al Jaboury.
[106]  [A.]
and [S.] know not what their father has done to them (or to their mother); it
is best that it remains that way. The boys, thankfully, now express loving both
of their parents and wish to live with them equally. Notwithstanding
the real fear that the children’s behaviours will revert to those they
displayed in the late 2020 and in 2021 with unfettered contact with Mr. Al
Jaboury, I find that the only option that is in A and S.’s best interests at
this point is to order that there be a shared parenting regime on a week
on/week off basis, which shall commence as of March 1, 2025. Child support
should be adjusted from that date forward to a shared parenting set-off amount.
[107]  Mr.
Al Jaboury has expressed concerns throughout these proceedings, including as it
relates to Ms. Morinville’s assessments, that he has been subjected to bias as a
Muslim man of Middle Eastern descent. Mr. Al Jaboury’s challenges, however, are
not grounded in ethnicity or religion; rather, they are grounded in his personal
attributes. Mr. Al Jaboury is a highly manipulative and controlling individual,
whose needs come before all else. His particular need to punish Ms. Chyher for
leaving the marriage has wreaked havoc on her and on the children. Given my
above findings on domestic violence, especially in relation to Mr. Al Jaboury’s
penchant to employ coercive and controlling behaviors, and in
keeping with the court’s obligations as set out in subsection 16(3)(j) of the Divorce
Act, I will not impose upon Ms. Chyher the burden of attempting to make
decisions jointly with Mr. Al Jaboury. She will have sole decision-making
authority over A. and S. as it relates to all major decisions, except that the
parties will be free to engage the children in the religious practices of their
choice in their own homes.
[108]  Mr.
Al Jaboury may consider that he is the successful party in relation to the
outcome of the trial. He is not; rather, it is the expressed views and
preferences of [S.] and [A.], who are now 14 and 15 years of age respectively, which
have ruled the day. Ironically, as I indicated at the outset of these reasons,
this is a case in which a shared parenting regime could have, and should have,
been in place from shortly after July 22, 2020. It is only due to the
machinations of Mr. Al Jaboury that: a) the boys completely unjustifiably did
not see their mother for five months after separation; b) the boys were
subjected to a difficult, imposed and abrupt change to their primary residence
in December of 2020; and c) the boys were subjected to three years of supervised
parenting time with their father and were deprived of the very thing they have
expressed wanting – more time with him. Having said that, I do believe that Mr.
Al Jaboury loves the kids and cherishes his relationship with them. They certainly
love, indeed, idolize him. It may be that Mr. Al Jaboury’s own needs have
simply gotten in the way of putting the boys first. I hope that someday he will
be able to reflect on the damage he has done, and that he does not repeat it in
the future, for their sake.
[109]  It
is my understanding that of late, Ms. Chyher requested another reopening of the
trial on the basis that Mr. Al Jaboury has since December 10, 2024, stopped
exercising supervised parenting time, and has, in fact, been seeing the
children outside of the existing court order, including during school hours. I
declined to reopen the case as my Reasons for Decision were expected to be
released imminently. Even, however, if Mr. Al Jaboury has been doing what is
alleged, it would not have changed my decision. A change to the parenting
schedule is what the children need, and it is so ordered.
[110]  In
her endorsement of December 15, 2021, Justice Audet ordered at paragraph 3,
subparagraph 5: “On a without prejudice basis, and subject
to the trial judge’s discretion, for the time being all therapy and
supervision costs shall be the equal responsibility of both parents, but the
mother’s 50% share of those costs shall be covered by the father in full and
deducted from the equalization payment ultimately owing by him to the mother.”
(Emphasis added).  Having heard all the evidence, and given my findings above,
I exercise my discretion and order that Mr. Al Jaboury shall be solely
responsible for the costs of supervision of his parenting time from its
commencement to its termination. Ms. Chyher shall not be required to contribute
to same.
[111]   Finally, I request that A. and S.’s OCL deliver the following
message to them from me:
[112]  For
the above reasons, there shall be a final order as follows:
[113]  If
the parties are unable to agree on the issue of costs for the trial by March 7,
2025, written submissions of no more than three typed, 12-point, double-spaced
pages, along with Offers to Settle and Bills of Costs, may be made to me on
10-day intervals from that date and I will make a decision.