[1]              
The appellant, L.H., appeals from a decision of the
Consent and Capacity Board (the “CCB”) dated May 21, 2024, which confirmed the
finding of the respondent, Dr. Jeanetta Viljoen, that L.H. was incapable of
consenting to treatment with antipsychotic medication. The CCB also confirmed
L.H.’s involuntary status, but that decision is not appealed. The specific
issue in this appeal is whether L.H. had the ability to appreciate the
reasonably foreseeable consequences of consenting to, or refusing, treatment
with antipsychotic medication.
[2]              
L.H. was 55 years old at the time of the hearing before the CCB. She
holds a PhD in educational leadership, and has had a long and successful career
as an educator, including as a professor.
[3]              
L.H. has scoliosis, kyphosis and congenital hearing loss, and uses a
walker. Prior to her current admission to Joseph Brant Hospital, she lived in
an apartment in a senior living home with comprehensive supports.
[4]              
L.H. has a psychiatric history of more than ten years with persecutory
and paranoid delusions. She has had multiple mental health apprehensions and
hospitalizations, and many incidents of police involvement.
[5]              
L.H. believes that one of her former students, E.G., was interested in
her romantically and followed her. Collateral information obtained by Dr.
Viljoen indicates that L.H. has been fixated on E.G. since 2016, and has
received at least 25 cautions from police due to her behaviour with respect to
her delusions regarding E.G. Among other things, she reported E.G. to the FBI,
accusing him of threatening to kill President Obama, President Bush, and Prime
Minister Trudeau. In October 2022, L.H. was charged with criminal harassment of
E.G.
[6]              
Between October 22, 2019 and September 28, 2020, L.H. was dispensed
olanzapine, an antipsychotic medication she had been prescribed during a
hospitalization in 2019. Dr. Viljoen indicated that L.H.’s records document clear
improvement in L.H.’s mental state while taking olanzapine, including a
decrease in her persecutory and paranoid delusions, and a decrease in her
obsession with E.G. During that time, her engagement with police decreased
substantially. Her engagement with police increased after September 28, 2020.
[7]              
L.H. has received police cautions not to have contact with multiple
neighbours, police members, Oakville town council, and community members. She
has had 178 police occurrences. In the majority of them, she is the
complainant.
[8]              
On May 9, 2024, L.H. was admitted involuntarily to Joseph Brant Hospital
on a Form 1, due to concerns about her mental health. A nurse noted L.H. had
increased paranoia and delusions, and an escalation in paranoia and accusations
against E.G. In addition, L.H. was hearing voices and responding to them.
[9]              
On May 12, 2024, L.H. was assessed by Dr. Bawks, a psychiatrist at
Joseph Brant Hospital. Dr. Bawks found that L.H. was not capable of consenting
to treatment, and that she met the criteria to be admitted to hospital as an
involuntary patient. The following day, L.H. applied to the CCB for a review of
her finding of incapacity and to review her involuntary status.
[10]          
On May 13, 2024, L.H. was seen by Dr. Van Impe for a psychiatric
consultation. Dr. Van Impe opined that L.H. had a mental disorder with very
severe delusions. L.H. denied any mental illness. She told Dr. Van Impe to make
a police report and get a warrant for E.G.’s phone. Dr. Van Impe found L.H. was
clearly incapable of consenting to her own treatment, and had “zero insight
into delusions and the impact they hold on her behaviour.” Dr. Van Impe
concluded that L.H. did not appreciate, understand, or believe that
antipsychotic medication could be of any potential benefit to her because she
denied any mental disorder that could respond to antipsychotic medication.
[11]          
On May 14, 2024, Dr. Viljoen became L.H.’s attending physician. They met
on May 14, 2024. During their conversation, L.H. repeatedly insisted Dr.
Viljoen report E.G. to the police for sexual harassment. She alleged E.G. was
grooming children, using “military-grade broadband” to harass her, and indicated
that she believed the police were friends with E.G. and protecting him.
[12]          
Dr. Viljoen asked L.H. about threatening voicemails she had left for the
head of security at Joseph Brant Hospital. L.H. denied leaving the messages and
said it was “AI.” She has asserted at other times that the head of security at
Joseph Brant Hospital is E.G.’s girlfriend.
[13]          
Dr. Viljoen concluded that L.H. was incapable of consenting to
treatment.
[14]          
In the documents Dr. Viljoen submitted to the CCB, she states that the
finding of incapacity was made by Dr. Bawks on May 12, 2024. However, because
Dr. Viljoen had become L.H.’s attending physician, she was the attending
physician at the CCB hearing.
[15]          
Dr. Viljoen delivered a document package to the CCB, including a Consent
and Capacity Board Summary for Incapacity to Consent to Treatment, and
documentation excerpted from L.H.’s clinical records. Dr. Viljoen gave no oral
evidence in chief, but answered questions from L.H.’s counsel and the CCB. L.H.
also gave evidence at the hearing.
[16]          
The CCB Summary for Incapacity to Consent to Treatment was included in
the document package for the CCB. It indicates that the plan of treatment for
L.H. is treatment of psychosis with antipsychotic agents, oral or injectable.
[17]          
The CCB summary indicates that the evidence that L.H. is unable to
appreciate the reasonably foreseeable consequences is:
[18]          
The document package to the CCB also included Dr. Viljoen’s consultation
notes of the May 14, 2024 meeting (dated May 16, 2024). The notes with respect
to the mental status exam Dr. Viljoen undertook of L.H. state:
[19]          
The CCB instructed itself that the onus of proof to establish incapacity
to consent to treatment under the Health Care Consent Act, 1996, S.O.
1996, c. 2, Sch. A (“HCCA”) always lies on the attending physician, on a
balance of probabilities. It noted that it must be satisfied on the basis of
clear, cogent and compelling evidence that the physician’s onus has been
discharged.
[20]          
The CCB directed itself to consider all of the evidence properly before
it, including hearsay evidence which it noted it may accept and consider, but
had to carefully weigh.
[21]          
With respect to the question of capacity to consent to treatment, the CCB
noted that s. 4(2) of the HCCA presumes a person to be capable to
consent to treatment and places the onus to establish otherwise on the health
practitioner.
[22]          
The CCB set out the test for capacity to consent to treatment in s. 4(1)
of the HCCA, which provides that a person is capable with respect to a
treatment if the person is able to understand the information that is relevant
to making a decision about the treatment and able to appreciate the reasonably
foreseeable consequences of a decision or lack of decision.
[23]          
The CCB noted that Dr. Viljoen was relying only on the second branch of
the test to establish incapacity to consent to treatment. It thus asked itself
whether the evidence established that L.H. was able to appreciate the
reasonably foreseeable consequences of a decision or lack of decision about the
proposed treatment.
[24]          
The CCB noted Dr. Viljoen’s evidence that she had last assessed L.H. on
the day of the hearing and stated she would continue to find L.H. incapable.
Dr. Viljoen’s evidence was that L.H. has a diagnosis of psychosis, with
symptoms including thought disorder, persecutory delusions and auditory
hallucinations. Dr. Viljoen testified that L.H. was unable to acknowledge the
possibility of either having a mental condition or any symptoms. In Dr.
Viljoen’s view, L.H. was unable to pass the second branch of the capacity test
because she had anosognia, or lack of insight into her condition.
[25]          
The CCB referred to Dr. Viljoen’s evidence that she had reviewed the
diagnosis, symptoms and treatment with L.H., as well as the side effects of
treatment. The CCB also noted her evidence that she had explained to L.H. that
previous treatment with olanzapine had resulted in her phone calls to police
declining, but L.H. was unable to acknowledge any change in her mental
condition while dispensed olanzapine. L.H. believed that olanzapine had been
prescribed to help her with sleep.
[26]          
The CCB referred to L.H.’s evidence denying that she was psychotic or
had delusions or hallucinations, and that she denied the possibility that her
beliefs could be related to a mental condition.
[27]          
While accepting that L.H. testified to the best of her ability, the CCB
indicated that where her evidence conflicted with the evidence of Dr. Viljoen,
it preferred the evidence of Dr. Viljoen. It noted that at times, L.H.’s
testimony reflected some of the symptoms identified by Dr. Viljoen, including
her thought disorder and delusions about E.G. The CCB concluded that L.H. was
“wholly unable to consider the possibility that she had a mental condition or
that she was possibly affected by the manifestations of such.” It found it
“compelling that L.H. was unable to appreciate any change in her condition with
treatment despite documentation to the contrary.” The CCB determined that
L.H.’s mental condition prevented her ability to consider the reasonably
foreseeable consequences of a treatment decision, and confirmed the finding of
incapacity regarding antipsychotic medication.
[28]          
The question on this appeal is whether the CCB erred in confirming Dr.
Viljoen’s finding that L.H. was incapable of consenting to treatment. To answer
it, I must determine the following issues:
[29]          
L.H. seeks an order anonymizing these reasons.
[30]          
 Confidentiality and sealing
orders and related publication bans are governed by a discretionary test that
balances the public interest in open courts with other public interests that
the open court principle may compromise. As the Supreme Court of Canada described in Sherman Estate v. Donovan, 2021 SCC 25, at para. 38:
[31]          
All three prerequisites must be met before a protective order can be
made: Sherman Estate,
para. 38.
[32]          
In this case, court openness poses a serious risk to an important public
interest, that is protecting the privacy of a person who is engaged in
proceedings regarding their capacity to consent to treatment with antipsychotic
medication. An unnecessary intrusion into L.H.’s privacy may discourage others
from either seeking treatment, or appealing an order requiring them to have
treatment, if their identifiable personal health details are publicly
disclosed. In this case, L.H. has also published academic literature that she
does not wish to see unjustifiably discredited by any association between her mental
health and her body of work.
[33]          
The order sought is narrow and tailored: L.H. seeks only anonymization
in these reasons. The public is still able to access these reasons and
understand the process of the court. The only thing they are prevented from
knowing is L.H.’s name.
[34]          
I find that the benefits of the anonymization order are significant. The
deleterious effects are minor.
[35]          
I thus grant the anonymization order.
[36]          
As a statutory appeal, the appellate standard of review applies. Questions
of law are reviewed on a correctness standard, while findings of fact may only
be overturned where there is palpable and overriding error: Canada
(Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v. Vavilov, 2019 SCC 65, at
para. 37; Housen v.
Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33.
[37]          
As the Court of Appeal held in B.L. v. Pytyck, 2021 ONCA 67, at
para. 22:
[38]          
In Starson v. Swayze, 2003 SCC 32, the Supreme Court of Canada
considered the test for incapacity in s. 4 of the HCCA. At para. 13, the
Court summarized four important points:
[39]          
As I have noted, it is the last of these points that is in issue in this
appeal.
[40]          
Of the ability to appreciate the reasonably foreseeable consequences of
a decision or lack thereof, the Supreme Court of Canada wrote in Starson,
at para. 18, that three common clinical indicators of a person’s ability to
appreciate the consequences of accepting or declining treatment are: (i)
whether the person is able to acknowledge the fact that the condition for which
treatment is recommended may affect him or her; (ii) whether the person is able
to assess how the proposed treatment and alternatives, including no treatment,
could affect his or her life or quality of life, and (iii) whether the person’s
choice is not substantially based on a delusional belief. The Court found that
“these indicators provide a useful framework for identifying what ‘ability to
appreciate’ means in concrete terms.”
[41]          
The Court also underscored that “the right to refuse unwanted medical
treatment is fundamental to a person’s dignity and autonomy”: Starson,
at para 75. The CCB’s mandate is to adjudicate on capacity only; its conception
of a patient’s best interests is irrelevant: Starson, at para. 76. It is
an error to equate the presence of a mental disorder with incapacity: Starson,
at para. 77.
[42]          
With respect to the second element of the test for incapacity, the Court
identified two important points, at para. 79:
[43]          
The Court went on to quote from Professor Weisstub with approval, at
para. 79:
[44]          
The Court went on to explain that a patient need
not describe his mental condition as an illness, or describe it negatively. A
patient need not agree with the physician’s opinion regarding the cause of the
condition. “Nonetheless, if the patient’s condition results in him being unable
to recognize that he is affected by its manifestations, he will be unable to
apply the relevant information to his circumstances, and unable to appreciate
the consequences of his decision”: Starson, at para. 79.
[45]          
The Court also highlighted that the HCCA requires a patient to
have the ability to appreciate the consequences of a decision; not actual
appreciation of the consequences. The Court directed that, in practice, the
determination of capacity should begin with an inquiry into the patient’s
actual appreciation of the parameters of the decision being made, including the
nature and purpose of the proposed treatment; the foreseeable benefits and
risks of treatment; the alternative courses of action available and the
expected consequences of not having the treatment. It held that a patient who
shows an appreciation of these parameters has the ability to appreciate the
decision he makes: Starson, at para. 80.
[46]          
The Court went on to note that a patient’s failure to demonstrate actual
appreciation does not inexorably lead to a finding of incapacity. A lack of
appreciation may derive from causes that do not undermine the patient’s ability
to appreciate the consequences, including the attending physician’s failure to
adequately inform the patient of the consequences of the decision.
“Accordingly, it is imperative that the Board inquire into the reasons for the
patient’s failure to appreciate consequences. A finding of incapacity is
justified only if those reasons demonstrate that the patient’s mental disorder
prevents him from having the ability to appreciate the foreseeable consequences
of the decision”: Starson, at para. 81.
[47]          
Amicus argues that the CCB made an extricable error of law in
failing to follow the guidance from Starson, para. 80, that holds that
the determination of capacity should begin with an inquiry into the patient’s
actual appreciation of the parameters of the treatment decision being made. In
this case, no such inquiry was undertaken. Rather, Dr. Viljoen and the CCB, and
also Dr. Van Impe, ended the inquiry into capacity having concluded, consistent
with para. 79 of Starson, that L.H.’s condition results in her being
unable to recognize that she is affected by its manifestations, such that she
is unable to apply the relevant information to her circumstances, and unable to
appreciate the consequences of her decision.
[48]          
Considering this issue requires an analysis of the Court’s direction in Starson,
and particularly with respect to paragraphs 79-81.
[49]          
The Court in Starson, at para. 80, strongly suggests that the
determination of capacity must begin with an assessment of the patient’s actual
appreciation of the reasonably foreseeable consequences of a decision or lack
thereof.
[50]          
A patient with actual appreciation of those consequences will have met a
higher standard than that which is required for capacity: the ability to
appreciate the reasonably foreseeable consequences of a decision or lack
thereof.
[51]          
The Supreme Court stops short of requiring the inquiry into the
patient’s actual appreciation. It uses “should,” not “must,” and places its guidance
in the context of real-world practice. The Court ends para. 80 of Starson by
indicating that if the patient shows an appreciation of the parameters of the
decision being made (that is, actual appreciation), the patient has the ability
to appreciate the decision he makes (that is, ability to appreciate). When one
recognizes the higher level of appreciation demonstrated by actual
appreciation, one can understand this conclusion as a statement that a patient
with actual appreciation will have met (indeed, exceeded) the ability to
appreciate standard required by the test for capacity.
[52]          
Paragraph 81 of Starson instructs that a lack of actual
appreciation may be due to causes that do not undermine a patient’s ability to
appreciate consequences, such as a lack of appropriate information having been
provided. Thus, where a patient does not demonstrate actual appreciation of the
reasonably foreseeable consequences of a decision or lack thereof, one cannot
conclude that they do not have the ability to appreciate those consequences
without further inquiry into why they do not demonstrate actual appreciation.
[53]          
I note that although the Supreme Court does not mandate an assessment of
the patient’s actual appreciation, the Court of Appeal in Anten v. Bhalerao,
2013 ONCA 499, at para. 23, after quoting para. 80 of Starson, held that
“this inquiry [into the ability to appreciate the consequences of the decision]
must start with some evidence as to the foreseeable benefits and risks of
treatment and the expected consequences of not having treatment.” See also Salem
v. Dr. Hastings, 2015 ONSC 5071, at para. 39.
[54]          
Dr. Viljoen relies on the decisions of the Court of
Appeal in Gajewski v. Wilkie, 2014 ONCA 897, and of this court in P.R.
v. Legault, 2015 ONSC 7716 to argue that the inquiry into a patient’s
actual appreciation is not always required.
[55]          
In Gajewski, the appellant had been found not
criminally responsible on account of mental disorder on charges of assault and
attempted kidnapping. At first, the appellant acknowledged having a fixed false
belief at the time of the index offences, and agreed with the diagnosis of
delusional disorder. After receiving information about the nature of his
disorder and medications he should consider taking, he selected a particular
antipsychotic medication. However, the medication could not be given to him
because of abnormally high levels of liver enzymes in his blood, which had to
be addressed first. By the time the appellant’s liver enzymes had normalized,
he expressed a different view of his mental condition, denying that he suffered
from a delusional order, and expressing his belief that he had been persecuted
by the victim of the index offences. He denied any benefit in taking the
medication. As a result, the attending physician found him incapable of
consenting to treatment.
[56]          
At the CCB hearing, the appellant testified that he
believed he had delusions, and he also believed they were true. He could not
explain the discrepancy in his evidence. The physician’s finding of incapacity was
confirmed by the CCB, and subsequently on appeal to the Superior Court. The
question then came before the Court of Appeal.
[57]          
The appellant submitted that he had weighed the pros
and cons of the proposed treatment and disagreed that it was in his best
interest. He was concerned about his physical health and the potential adverse
effects of the proposed medication.
[58]          
In rejecting his argument on the second branch of the
capacity test, the Court of Appeal found that the evidence supported the CCB’s
finding that the appellant was unable to see that he was suffering from the
manifestations of a mental disorder at the time of the hearing. The moments
where he purported to accept that he had delusions were contradicted by his
other testimony and by the clinical observations made by the physician. “It was
open to the board to conclude that the appellant did not truly believe that he
suffered from delusions. It follows from the cited passages from Starson and
Giecewicz that the appellant was not able to apply the relevant
information to his circumstances and thus was not able to appreciate the
reasonably foreseeable consequences of taking or not taking the proposed
medication”: Gejewski, at para. 49.
[59]          
In P.R., at para. 18, this court relied on Gejewski:
[60]          
In P.R., the court distinguished the decisions
in Salem and Anten on the basis that those cases did not consider
circumstances where there is clear evidence that the patient does not recognize
that he or she suffers from a major mental disorder, and as such, is unable to
apply the relevant information to their situation.
[61]          
In Landry v. Strike, 2020 ONSC 6832, at para. 9,
this court found that the CCB did not need to embark on the analysis into the
appellant’s appreciation of the parameters of the decision being made because
the appellant’s condition rendered him unable to recognize that he was affected
by its manifestations, and he was thus unable to appreciate the consequences of
his decision, as set out in para. 79 of Starson. The court concluded
that the CCB applied the correct approach.
[62]          
In my view, the law I have reviewed above is not
inconsistent. Rather, it explains that the correct approach to a determination
of a patient’s ability to appreciate the reasonably foreseeable consequences of
a decision or lack thereof is to first inquire into the patient’s actual appreciation
of the parameters of the decision before them, as described in para. 80 of Starson.
If a patient does not demonstrate an actual appreciation of the parameters of
the decision, it becomes necessary to inquire into why they do not, as
described in Starson in para. 81. If the reasons demonstrate that it is
the patient’s mental disorder that prevents them from having the ability to
appreciate the foreseeable consequences of the decision, a finding of
incapacity is justified.
[63]          
However, consistent with para. 79 of Starson, para.
49 of Gejewski, and P.R. and Landry, there are occasions
when the inquiry into a patient’s actual ability to appreciate the parameters
of the decision will not be required. Specifically, this is the case where the
evidence is clear that a patient’s condition results in him being unable to
recognize the possibility that he is affected by that condition, or its
manifestations, such that he will be unable to apply the relevant information
to his circumstances.
[64]          
In this case, there was ample evidence before the CCB
to allow it to conclude that L.H. was unable to recognize the possibility that
she is affected by a mental condition or its manifestations. Some of that
evidence came from her very own testimony. In these circumstances, the CCB was
not required to inquire into L.H.’s actual appreciation of the parameters of
the decision to be made, and it did not err in law by not doing so.
[65]          
Amicus argues that
jurisprudence requires that the physician provide evidence demonstrating that
they discussed the expected risks and benefits of the proposed treatment with
the patient prior to finding them incapable: see for example, Salem, at
paras. 36, 39, Anten, at paras. 22-23.
[66]          
This issue overlaps in significant measure with the
issue I address above. If my conclusion had been that the CCB and Dr. Viljoen
were required to inquire into L.H.’s actual appreciation of the parameters of
the decision prior to concluding that she is incapable as to treatment, the
question of the information that had been given to L.H. by Dr. Viljoen would be
relevant. I agree with amicus that the documentary record is sparse on,
for example, the nature of the information L.H. was given with respect to the
benefits of the proposed treatment.
[67]          
However, because the evidence clearly demonstrates that
L.H. is unable to allow the possibility that she may be affected by a mental
condition or its manifestations, the inquiry into her actual appreciation of
the parameters of the decision is not required, and whether the evidence is
robust on this point is not relevant to the finding of L.H.s incapacity.
[68]          
Amicus also suggests that L.H. may argue that the CCB erred in
confirming the finding of incapacity because Dr. Viljoen’s evidence concerning
incapacity was not corroborated by other material evidence.
[69]          
The parties agree that s. 14 of the Evidence Act applied in this
case and requires corroboration of Dr. Viljoen’s evidence “by some other
material evidence.”
[70]          
Amicus notes that Dr. Bawks’ notes were not included in the
document package to the CCB. I agree that Dr. Bawks’ finding of incapacity,
without more, is not sufficient to be corroborating evidence.
[71]          
However, I find that Dr. Viljoen’s evidence was corroborated by other
material evidence, and specifically: (i) the notes of Dr. Van Impe which
document L.H.’s lack of insight into her delusions and the impact they hold on
her behaviour, and her inability to appreciate that antipsychotic medication
could be of any potential benefit because of her insistence that she does not
have a mental disorder that could respond to antipsychotic medication; and (ii)
the testimony of L.H. herself, in which she denied the possibility that she is
affected by a mental disorder or its manifestations. I note that L.H. continued
to strongly deny the possibility that she has a mental condition in her
submissions before me on the appeal.
[72]          
In conclusion, I grant the appellant’s request to anonymize her identity
in this appeal.
[73]          
I dismiss the appellant’s appeal.
[74]          
There shall be no order as to costs.