[1]              
The plaintiffs seek damages from both defendants arising from a policy
of insurance on a hunting camp and outbuildings destroyed by fire in 2018.  They
say the replacement value was in excess of $140,000.  Both defendants have
moved for non suit dismissing the claims.
[2]              
The plaintiffs say that the defendant Finnegan failed in its duty to the
plaintiffs to ensure that the insurance policy adequately protected their
property and acted in bad faith.
[3]              
Specifically, they say that the defendant Finnegan failed to advise the
unsophisticated defendants that the policy did not provide replacement cost
coverage in the event of a destruction of the buildings situated on the
property.
[4]              
The plaintiffs further say that the defendant Commonwell failed in its
duty not to close the file while the issues with the policy were live.
[5]              
The defendants Finnegan and Commonwell say that replacement insurance
was not available for this type of property and that had been explained to the plaintiffs.
They argue that the plaintiff Jordan lacks credibility and that, in any event,
the plaintiffs have been referred by this court to arbitration and the
plaintiff Neilson has presented no evidence by affidavit or otherwise on the
issues. It is not disputed that a cheque in the amount of $54,000 was sent out
to the plaintiffs.
[6]              
For the reasons set out below, I am granting the summary judgment
motions and dismissing the claims of both plaintiffs as against all defendants.
[7]              
The order of Fraser J. dated October 6, 2022 sending this matter to arbitration
was clear and bound all parties. This case’s course, following a disagreement,
is governed by the insurance policy that was issued. Even if I were wrong on
that issue, I accept that there is no credible evidence that supports the
plaintiffs’ position that the policy limits were not explained by Finnegan or
that Commonwell acted in bad faith.
[8]              
The plaintiff Jordan argues that he presumed his policy was for
replacement value insurance but agreed that he did not discuss that belief with
the defendants. His position in proceeding in this case seemed to be motivated
by the belief that the defendants and the police thought that he was
responsible for the apparent arson at the property. There was no evidence at
all that this was the case and that would have been inconsistent with the
issuance of the $54,000 cheque to the plaintiffs.  At trial, he admitted that
before the claim was issued, he knew he had a cash value only policy.
[9]              
Even if I accepted that negligence was proven here, which I do not,
there is no evidence to support the claim for damages as the only evidence of
the hunt camp value was that established by the Appraisal Award, $32,918.26.
[10]          
Finally, I conclude that the revised claim for $10 million dollars
should not have been accepted for filing and was totally lacking any basis on
the facts here for its issuance. If it was done for a tactical reason, it
clearly was both improper and counterproductive. The settlement cheque sent to
the plaintiff in the circumstances was more than appropriate and should have
resolved this relatively simple claim.
[11]          
Accordingly, all claims in this matter are dismissed against both the
defendants with costs.  If the parties are unable to agree on costs, they can
provide written submissions to me no more than two pages double-spaced on a
timetable agreed to by them within 30 days of the release of this decision.  I
would ask that the court be advised if an agreement has been reached.