[1]                 
The Plaintiff, BN
Trading, had a contract to sell some mining equipment to a purchaser in
Vietnam. The Plaintiff contracted
with the Defendant, Best International Cargo Inc., to transport
this equipment from the manufacturing facility to the Port of Montreal. The mining equipment was sourced in Quebec by the
[2]                 
The equipment was
picked up from the MC Mines facility on October 26th, 2022 by a
truck belonging to GT Intermodal. The
truck was involved in a motor vehicle accident in Quebec on the way to the Port
of Montreal. The equipment was
significantly damaged.
[3]                 
BN Trading
brought an action against Best Cargo. Best
Cargo defended this action and brought third-party claims against both GT
Intermodal and MC Mines. MC Mines has
brought this motion seeking to set aside the service of the claim on it as
improper. MC Mines also seeks to have
the third-party claim dismissed and/or stayed as it is more properly brought in
Quebec.
[4]                 
For the reasons that follow, I am dismissing MC Mines’ request
to have the service of the Statement of Claim in
the third party action set aside. I
am also dismissing their motion to have the third party action stayed. That action will continue in Ontario.
[5]                   
The Plaintiff, Ba
Dinh Nguyen, doing business as BN Trading- Import and Export, is an importer
and exporter of aggregate construction equipment. It is a Canadian-registered company and is based in Brampton.
[6]                 
The Defendant,
Best International Cargo Inc., is a broker who arranges international shipments
for clients. It is also a
Canadian-registered company and is also based in Brampton.
[7]                 
The third-party
MC Mines is a Quebec-registered company, carrying on business in Quebec. It manufactures warehouses and sells
various mining equipment.
[8]                   
The third party, G.T. Intermodal, is a Quebec-registered company that is in
the business of transporting goods, particularly by road.
[9]                 
In May of 2022,
the Plaintiff contracted with Best International to ship some aggregate mining equipment
(crushers) to a purchaser in Vietnam. The
contract required Best International to arrange for transport from the MC Mines warehouse in Quebec to the Port of
Montreal, and then on to Vietnam through a number of other ports.
[10]            
The equipment had
been purchased by the Plaintiff from MC Mines.
Part of the contract
between MC Mines and the Plaintiff required
MC Mines to pack the equipment into containers. Best International was not responsible for the packing portion of the operation.
[11]            
The equipment was
large and required a number of shipments to move it from the MC Mines site to
the Port of Montreal. On the second
day of shipment, there was a motor vehicle
accident and some of the equipment was damaged. BN Trading claims significant losses
from Best International as a result
of the damage to the equipment and the delay in shipping that
resulted.
[12]            
Best International argues that it was not responsible for any of these losses. Best International also claims
that, if it was responsible for these losses, then the third parties are
negligent and should provide contribution and indemnity. Best International has commenced
litigation against both MC Mines and GT Intermodal
by way of a third party claim in Ontario
flowing from the original statement
of claim brought by BN
Trading.
[13]            
Best
International served its claim on MC Mines on December 9th, 2024. MC
Mines brought a motion challenging both the service of the claim and the
jurisdiction of this Court to consider the claims made against it. MC Mines argues
that the claim was improperly served outside of Ontario without leave because
it