[1]              
This is a trial dealing with damages, in
particular, whether the plaintiff 1815212 Ontario Inc. (“1815”) suffered
economic losses following an explosion and fire at an apartment building it
owned at 399 Markham Road in Toronto, which occurred on September 14, 2010. The
building suffered some physical damage. 1815’s insurer, Intact, paid for
repairs.
[2]              
The plaintiffs, which include the three
individuals who were shareholders of 1815 from 2010 to 2015, seek consequential
economic losses arising from, among other things, claims that the building
experienced higher vacancy rates following the incident, there was an inability
to increase rents, the plaintiffs were unable to proceed with a plan to create
several additional apartments in unused or underused spaces on the ground floor
and basement thereby losing additional rent, lost opportunities to charge for
parking, laundry and storage fees, and a diminution in value of the building.
[3]              
For the first several days of the trial I heard
from the principal fact witness for the plaintiffs, Mr. Bedros Avedian, who,
through a numbered company, was one of the three owners of 1815 and who,
through another company owned by him, Orion Group Properties Ltd. (“Orion”),
managed the building. Orion manages and owns apartment and commercial
buildings. Mr. Avedian gave detailed evidence about, among other things,  the
acquisition of the building and what happened in the building after the
explosion. This included evidence about vacancies, rental income, potential
rent increases, financing and other issues such as modernization of the
elevators. He also testified about the plan to create 17 additional units,
which did not go ahead.
[4]              
The third witness called by the plaintiffs was
Mr. Ivor Gottschalk, whom the plaintiffs sought to have qualified as an expert
in forensic accounting with expertise in the quantification of damages and in
particular the quantification of revenue losses. He prepared a report
calculating lost rent revenues which the plaintiffs wished to have entered as
expert opinion evidence.
[5]              
The defendants[1]
did not dispute Mr. Gottschalk’s expertise. This was not surprising as Mr.
Gottschalk is a Chartered Professional Accountant with over 35 years of
experience as an investigative and forensic accountant who has been qualified
as an expert witness many times in this Court and elsewhere on forensic issues
and quantification of losses. His evidence has been well-received by judges in
other cases: see, e.g., Moses v. Metzer, 2016 ONSC 1765 at para. 87.
Further, and of relevance to this case, Mr. Gottschalk has been active and
well-recognized in his profession, including serving as the Chair of the
Standards Committee of the Chartered Professional Accountant Canada’s Alliance
for Excellence in Investigative and Forensic Accounting.
[6]              
However, the defendants submitted that Mr
Gottschalk’s report and his evidence relating to it should not be admitted.
They argued that the methodology followed by Mr. Gottschalk, and his report,
are fundamentally flawed and do not meet the requirements necessary to admit opinion
evidence.
[7]              
By agreement, I heard all of Mr. Gottschalk’s
evidence in a voir dire. Mr. Gottschalk reviewed his methodology and the
conclusions in his report, and was cross-examined at length. Following
submissions, I gave a very brief ruling orally, holding that Mr. Gottschalk’s
evidence was not admissible, with reasons to follow.  These are my reasons.
[8]              
Opinion evidence is presumptively inadmissible.
Exceptionally, it is admitted when the criteria set out in Supreme Court of
Canada decisions in R. v. Mohan, 1994
CanLII 80 (SCC), [1994] 2 S.C.R. 9, and White Burgess Langille
Inman v. Abbott and Haliburton Co., 2015 SCC 23, [2015] 2 S.C.R.
182, are met.
[9]              
As a starting point, one must be alive to the
risk that expert opinion evidence can distort the fact-finding process. Trials
are decided by triers of fact based on the facts as they find them and must not
“devolve to trial by expert”: White Burgess at para. 18. Expert evidence
must be carefully limited to situations where specialized knowledge or skill is
required to assist the trier of fact.
[10]          
As the Supreme Court stated in White Burgess,
there are two steps to deciding whether to admit expert opinion evidence. 
First, “the proponent of the evidence must establish the threshold requirements
of admissibility.” This requires meeting the four factors in Mohan: (1)
relevance; (2) necessity in assisting the trier of fact; (3) absence of an
exclusionary rule; and (4) a properly qualified expert. If the evidence does
not meet these criteria, it must be excluded.
[11]          
Mohan also underlined
the important role of trial judges in assessing whether otherwise admissible
expert evidence should be excluded because its probative value is overborne by
its prejudicial effect — a residual discretion to exclude evidence based on a
cost-benefit analysis. This has become known as the second, “gatekeeping” step,
in which the trial judge must exercise discretion by balancing “the potential
risks and benefits of admitting the evidence in order to decide whether the
potential benefits justify the risks.” The Supreme Court quoted Doherty J.A. in
R. v. Abbey, 2009
ONCA 624, 97 O.R. (3d) 330, who stated that at this stage the “trial judge
must decide whether expert evidence that meets the preconditions to
admissibility is sufficiently beneficial to the trial process to warrant its
admission despite the potential harm to the trial process that may flow from
the admission of the expert evidence.”
[12]          
It must also be borne in mind that the burden is
on the party seeking to adduce the evidence to satisfy the court on a balance
of probabilities that the evidence should be admitted.
[13]          
White Burgess
also addressed the duty an expert witness owes to the Court to be independent
and unbiased. This includes ensuring that expert evidence is “the independent
product of the expert uninfluenced as to form or content by the exigencies of
litigation”: para. 27, quoting from National Justice Compania Naviera S.A.
v. Prudential Assurance Co., [1993] 2 Lloyd’s Rep. 68 (Q.B.) at p. 81.
[14]          
The Supreme Court elaborated on this duty in
para. 32 of White Burgess:
[15]          
The Court went on to find that compliance with
this duty should be addressed at the admissibility stage, and not simply “go to
weight” at the end of the trial. As Binnie J. stated in R. v. J.-L.J,  2000
SCC 51, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 600 at para. 28, quoted at para 45 of White
Burgess: “The admissibility of the expert evidence should be scrutinized at
the time it is proffered, and not allowed too easy an entry on the basis that
all of the frailties could go at the end of the day to weight rather than
admissibility.”
[16]          
The Court must be satisfied, therefore, that an
expert has met the test of independence and impartiality, failing which the
expert’s evidence is inadmissible.  Further, even if the test is met, “remaining
concerns about the expert’s compliance with his or her duty should be
considered as part of the overall cost-benefit analysis which the judge
conducts to carry out his or her gatekeeping role”: White Burgess, para.
34.
[17]          
This requirement of independence and
impartiality is found in the Rules of Civil Procedure. Rule 53 requires
experts to certify that they are aware of and will comply with their duty to
the court. In this case, Mr. Gottschalk has signed the required Form 53 in
which he has acknowledged that it is his duty:
[18]          
Mr. Gottschalk has also acknowledged that this
duty “prevails over any obligation which I may owe to any party by whom or on
whose behalf I am engaged.”
[19]          
The plaintiffs have not satisfied me that the
evidence of Mr. Gottschalk should be admitted as expert opinion evidence.
[20]          
The evidence fails the necessity requirement,
which is at the heart of why opinion evidence is, exceptionally, admitted: when
an issue calls for special knowledge or skill that the judge or jury lacks. As
the Supreme Court observed in White Burgess at para. 14, quoting C.
Tapper, Cross and Tapper on Evidence (12th ed. 2010), at p.530, “the law
recognizes that, so far as matters calling for special knowledge or skill are
concerned, judges and jurors are not necessarily equipped to draw true
inferences from facts stated by witnesses. A witness is therefore allowed to
state his opinion about such matters, provided he is expert in them.”
[21]          
Here, Mr. Gottschalk’s evidence is not necessary.
While “forensic accountants” are commonly employed to assess data to calculate
losses, there is often little, if any, specialized knowledge or independent
professional judgment applied. Rather, as in this case, Mr Gottschalk, and his
colleague who did much of the work, simply reviewed data and applied figures
provided to them by the plaintiffs to come up with a calculation of total
losses.
[22]          
Mr. Gottschalk and his colleague reviewed rent
rolls for the period of time requested by the plaintiffs, from September 2010,
when the explosion occurred, to July 2015 when the individual plaintiffs sold
their interest in 1815 and the building. From those rent rolls – versions of
which were entered as evidence by Mr. Avedian – Mr. Gottschalk found that there
was no change in occupancy for 89 of the apartments during the period, and that
159 apartments on the rent rolls saw changes in tenants. The rent rolls also
provided information about the amount of rent paid by the tenants during the
five-year period, which was added up by Mr. Gottschalk, or his colleague.
[23]          
The information in the rent rolls is factual
evidence found in the record in this trial. Extracting information such as how
many tenants moved out or the total amount of rent received requires no special
expertise.  Mr. Avedian and his staff at Orion extracted this type of
information from earlier rent rolls when considering whether to buy the
building.
[24]          
Mr. Gottschalk then applied a number of
assumptions, or adjustments, as requested by the plaintiffs, which would have
increased the rent paid in the two categories of apartments, and calculated the
difference in rent revenue as part of the loss to the plaintiffs.
[25]          
The first assumption Mr. Gottschalk made to
reach a loss calculation was to apply the “guideline rent increases” which are set
by Ontario but which were not imposed on tenants during the five-year period.
These rates are readily available. Mr. Gottschalk obtained them from the
internet. He simply calculated the increased revenue that would have been
obtained had the rents been increased in accordance with the provincial
guidelines.
[26]          
Second, an Order had been obtained from the
Landlord Tenant Board (“LTB”) in 2010 permitting specific increases due to capital
improvements in the building. The LTB Order was entered as an exhibit through
Mr. Avedian. The increases were not imposed, and so Mr. Gottschalk calculated
the additional rent that could have been obtained if they had been applied to
include as part of the losses.
[27]          
Third, in May 2010, due to a reduction in the
amount of property taxes charged by the City of Toronto, the building's tenants
became eligible for a twelve-month rent reduction of 1.23%, which was then
amended for certain tenants to 0.74%. Mr. Gottschalk obtained this information
from the LTB Order. Those percentages have been applied by Mr. Gottschalk to
the rental calculations of what could have been obtained.
[28]          
Fourth, Mr. Gottschalk was asked by the
plaintiffs to assume that as a result of a planned elevator modernization, the
base rent for all tenants would have been subject to an annual increase of
1.13%, beginning with each tenant's first annual renewal on or after August 1,
2012. The evidentiary basis for this figure came from a report prepared by
another witness, who applied provisions of the Residential Tenancies Act,
2006, SO 2006, c 17, and Ontario Regulation 516/06, to calculate the amount
of increase above the guidelines which might have been approved by the LTB due
to the modernization of the elevators. Mr. Gottschalk was provided with this
figure and simply applied it to his calculation of the rent that could have
been obtained for the apartments.
[29]          
Mr. Gottschalk also calculated possible lost
revenues for 17 additional units that the plaintiffs claim would have been
built and ready for occupancy on January 1, 2012, based on “market rents”
provided to him by Mr. Avedian and as instructed by the plaintiffs’ counsel.
Mr. Gottschalk then applied the 1.13% increases reflecting the elevator
modernization. As Mr. Gottschalk was told to assume these new units would have
been available January 1, 2012, he also applied the guideline rate increases to
these units starting on January 1, 2013.
[30]          
After making these calculations, Mr. Gottschalk
compared the projected rents based on his adjustments to the actual rents paid to
come up with a “calculation” of lost revenues.
[31]          
This is, essentially, all Mr. Gottschalk did. He
took figures provided to him and made mathematical calculations to come up with
a projected figures that could be compared to the revenue actually obtained,
and stated his conclusion that the difference was the loss suffered by the
plaintiffs.
[32]          
In my view this is not expert evidence. It
involved simple math. While there was considerable data to review on the rent
rolls, and several calculations had to be made, it required no special skill.  Counsel,
or a witness such as Mr. Avedian, could look at the rent rolls to determine
which tenants left and which units turned over, and calculate the rent actually
obtained. Calculation of the losses simply involved using the numbers provided
to Mr Gottschalk or obtained from public sources, to adjust the rent income
accordingly.
[33]          
Mr. Gottschalk’s calculations are helpful, in
that he has made the mathematical calculations, but the fact that evidence may
be helpful does not mean that it is necessary. As Cromwell J. stated in White
Burgess at para. 21, quoting from  R. v. D.D., 2000
SCC 43, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 275 at para.. 46: “the necessity requirement exists
‘to ensure that the dangers associated with expert evidence are not lightly
tolerated’ and that ‘[m]ere relevance or ‘helpfulness’ is not enough’.”
[emphasis added]
[34]          
To meet the necessity test, an expert must
engage in skilled analysis to reach conclusions that involve applying expertise
that a trier of fact lacks. As stated in Piccolo v. Piccolo, c.o.b. Sam’s
Auto Body Shop, 2014 ONSC 5280, at paras. 13 – 15, the necessity
requirement is not met unless the expert performs his own “skilled analysis” uninfluenced
by the expert’s client or clients. Where it is simply a series of mathematical
calculations based on a client’s instructions, the necessity test is not met. Despite
being dressed up as opinion evidence, it is not really expert opinion evidence
at all.
[35]          
The Saskatchewan Court of Appeal addressed this
issue in Graff v. Bennett, 1995 CanLII 4000 (SK CA), in which the Court noted
that “the ‘expert’ services of a ‘chartered accountant’ or ‘forensic’
accountant were not required to make the calculations that were placed before
the jury.” As Tallis J.A. continued, “the calculations involved relatively
simple mathematics” that could be “easily prepared”, even by computer programs.
[36]          
Similar circumstances exist here. Mr.
Gottschalk’s evidence is not necessary as it is simply arithmetic calculations
The calculations require no special expertise and could be completed by counsel
or lay witnesses. Accordingly, on this basis the evidence is inadmissible.
[37]          
I also conclude that the evidence does not meet
the test for independence and impartiality, as Mr. Gottschalk did not challenge
or question any of the assumptions he was asked to apply.  He simply did what
he was instructed to do. This is particularly concerning when Mr. Gottschalk,
based on his knowledge and experience, ought to have questioned the assumptions
to comply with his professional obligations and his duty to the Court.
[38]          
Mr. Gottschalk agreed that, as a forensic
account and as an expert witness, he is governed by the CPA’s Standard
Practices for Investigative and Forensic Accounting Engagements, published
in 2006. Mr. Gottschalk is very familiar with these Standards as he
chaired the committee that created them.
[39]          
The Standards contain specific
requirements for expert witnesses, similar to the Court’s requirements, which
include the duty to be independent and unbiased, to be clear when something is
outside their expertise, and to “never assume the role of an advocate.” The Standards
also call on accountants to adopt an “investigative mindset” which, the Standards
state:
[40]          
Mr. Gottschalk agreed that this investigative
mindset must also be applied in cases of loss quantification and dispute engagements,
such as in this case. In my view, adopting an investigative mindset is consistent
with the independence required of an expert in fulfilling their duty to the
Court to provide “fair, objective and non-partisan” opinion evidence.
[41]          
Unfortunately, in not challenging any
assumptions, Mr. Gottschalk did not adopt an investigative mindset. Instead,
when confronted with his failure to do so, Mr. Gottschalk responded by saying
that as long as he states the assumptions in his report he has met the Standards.
I cannot accept that answer. It is inconsistent with the plain wording of the Standards
and with Mr. Gottschalk’s position that the Standards apply. Assumptions
must of course be clearly stated, but they must also be assessed and
scrutinized by the expert to determine whether their application makes sense,
regardless of which side has retained the expert.
[42]          
The failure to assess the assumptions means that
the report is not the independent product prepared by Mr. Gottschalk applying
his specialized expertise and judgment. It is simply a platform to illustrate
the plaintiffs’ case or, put another way, is advocacy.  As O’Connor A.C.J.O.
stated in Alfano v. Piersanti,  2012 ONCA 297at para. 108:
[43]          
One example in the evidence which illustrates
the bias which can result from the lack of independent analysis and an
investigative mindset relates to the “market rents” used by Mr. Gottschalk.
[44]          
As has been noted, Mr. Gottschalk was provided
by Mr. Avedian with what were represented to be market rents for the apartments
in 2013. Mr. Gottschalk simply accepted those figures and referred to them as “market
rents” in his report, albeit noting that they were provided by Mr Avedian. However,
despite having done valuations of this kind in the past and knowing that real
estate appraisers can provide analyses and expert opinions on market rents, Mr.
Gottschalk did not question these numbers at all. He did not inquire about
where or how Mr. Avedian came up with his “market rents” or ask if the
plaintiffs had obtained any expert opinion on market rents.
[45]          
When pressed on this, Mr. Gottschalk, somewhat
remarkably, defended his lack of investigation by saying that he found Mr. Avedian’s
rent figures “plausible” based on his experience as a “lay person” who pays
rent. He then said that “forensic accountants do this all the time”, relying on
assumptions from other people, and asserted again that this is fine as long as one
clearly states the assumptions. But stating assumptions, while important, does
not make a report independent and unbiased, or “fair, objective and
non-partisan.” Nor, of course, does stating assumptions make a report the
product of independent analysis or an investigative mindset.
[46]          
This does not mean that every assumption made in
an expert report must be explored and tested; there may be assumptions that are
rooted in common sense or are obvious in the circumstances of the case. Mr.
Gottschalk was not challenged, for example, on his use of guideline rate figures,
or the above guideline figures permitted by the LTB Order of 2010.
[47]          
The failure to question or otherwise adopt an
investigative mindset to the “market rents” supplied by Mr. Avedian, and the
continued use of those rates in Mr Gottschalk’s report is also concerning as other
evidence of market rents for the apartments existed at the time the report was
prepared. When Mr. Avedian testified, he was confronted with an email he had
written to a lender in May 2013 which set out his view of the rental rates he
believed he could obtain for the apartments he proposed to construct, and for
which he would need financing. Those suggested rents are lower than the figures
Mr. Avedian provided to Mr. Gottschalk several years later for use in this
litigation. Mr Gottschalk was not aware of Mr. Avedian’s email until it was
shown to him in cross-examination.
[48]          
Further, after Mr. Gottschalk prepared his
report in 2018, the plaintiffs obtained a report from a real estate appraisal
expert in 2019 whose opinion was that the rental rates provided by Mr. Avedian
were above market, preferring the lower, actual rates charged to the 89 units
that did not have tenancy changes as being “in line with market rental rates.” Mr.
Gottschalk learned about this in cross-examination, despite the fact that the
appraisal report was prepared for this lawsuit several years ago.
[49]          
The fact that other information about market
rates existed illustrates the importance of adopting an investigative mindset
and highlights the mischief that can result from a report that simply parrots assumptions
and lacks independence. As Mr. Gottschalk stated when confronted with these
different rent rates, had he been informed of them he would have investigated and
sought an explanation. Mr. Gottschalk agreed that this raised a concern that he
was being used as an advocate for the plaintiffs. He agreed that he has an
obligation to remain objective and not be a dupe for his client.
[50]          
Of course, it is ultimately for me at the
conclusion of this trial to decide the revenue losses, if any, suffered by the
plaintiffs. However, an expert report that addressed the reasonableness of
market rates and where they derived, rather than uncritically adopting figures provided
by the plaintiffs would have been in accordance with the expert’s professional
obligations and his duty to the Court. The current report meets neither
standard.
[51]          
There are other examples of the lack of
questioning of assumptions by Mr. Gottschalk which can also illustrate why the
conclusions lack independence and reliability.  However, a discussion of them
is not necessary for this interlocutory ruling during the trial and I will go
no further.
[52]          
I do observe that Mr. Gottschalk exercised some
independent judgment in a few ways in making his calculations, such as how he
chose to treat extended vacancies and his treatment of market rates provided as
“averages.” However these assumptions did not involve the application of any special
knowledge or expertise and did not appear to be grounded in the  evidence. This
raises additional concerns about the scope and appropriateness of the proposed
expert evidence.
[53]          
In short, Mr. Gottschalk simply took the
plaintiffs’ information and manufactured a report to reflect the plaintiffs’
position. He did not provide an independent and objective opinion of the
plaintiffs’ losses which was the product of his independent judgment “uninfluenced by who has retained him … or the
outcome of the litigation”: White Burgess, para. 32. This is a threshold requirement, and I would exclude the
evidence on this basis as well.
[54]          
In conclusion, Mr. Gottschalk’s evidence is not
admissible as expert opinion evidence.