[1]              
The Respondent
father brings a motion for the following relief:
[2]              
The Applicant
mother seeks the following:
[3]              
The parties had
a seven-year cohabitation and marriage, and share a five-year-old daughter, P. 
Their dispute is high conflict, with several motions and endorsements.  Despite
being initiated in 2021, this matter has yet to go to trial.
[4]              
In November
2021, the Respondent was charged with uttering death threats in relation to an
alleged incident the previous April.  The criminal matter was resolved by way
of a peace bond.  However, as a result there were restrictions on his
activities for a period of time.
[5]              
Currently, the
parties have a 2-2-3 parenting schedule.  On April 22, 2022, Justice
Kristjanson made an order including, inter alia, the following terms:
[6]              
The parties
dispute the interpretation of this order.  The Respondent says that if Her
Honour intended the parties to be able to attend off-weeks activities she would
have worded paragraph 8 the same as paragraph 9.  The Respondent points out
paragraph 41 in her endorsement where Justice Kristjanson states that while P.
was exposed to arguments between the parties, “the court does not have that
concern” since the parties no longer lived together and had minimal contact.
[emphasis added].  The Applicant states that the lack of a specific prohibition
on attendance indicates the opposite, especially given paragraph 9 and, in any
event, the order was made three years ago in a very different context.
[7]              
The Respondent
originally brought this motion returnable on December 5, 2024. The motion was
adjourned on terms on a without prejudice basis in order that the parties
attend a case conference before Justice Kraft.  When they were unable to
resolve the matter, the motion was scheduled for today.  In their costs, the
parties include time spent preparing for and attending the conference.
[8]              
The parties are
diametrically opposed about how they communicate and what has led to this
motion.
[9]              
The Respondent
states that the parties cannot communicate effectively and therefore should
interact as little as possible.  He deposes that, after three years, the
Applicant started showing up at P.’s biweekly dance class that he organized on
his parenting weeks after the Applicant refused to cooperate.  The Applicant
also attended P.’s gymnastics class that occur on his time. He accuses the
Applicant of standing close to him, brushing up against him, recording him
surreptitiously, interfering with his parenting time, and upsetting the child.
[10]          
The Applicant
flatly rejects the above arguments.  As she puts it:
[11]          
In her
materials, the Applicant did not address whether she has surreptitiously
recorded the Respondent when she attended the dance or gymnastics classes.  I
note that during questioning which occurred at the end of 2024, the Applicant
declined to answer questions about this, taking them under advisement.  Justice
Kristjanson had noted the Applicant engaging in this behaviour in 2022, which
Her Honour regarded as “odious”.
[12]          
The court’s
primary consideration is the best interests of the child.
[13]          
I find that the
Kristjanson order implies that, when one parent has charge of P., they shall be
responsible for taking her to extracurricular activities.  Justice Kristjanson
noted the high degree of acrimony between the parties.  I find it implausible
that she would have intended for the off-week parent to be able to attend at
those routine activities on the other parent’s time.
[14]          
In the
alternative, if the Kristjanson order is better understood as silent on this
issue, for the following reasons it would not change my ruling.
[15]          
Both parties
cited decisions in which courts have come down on either side of this issue. 
Some of those have dismissed attempts to keep parents separate during routine
extracurricular activities; others have not.  The question is highly
fact-specific and contextual.
[16]          
On the motion
record before the court, I find that the parties are unable to effectively
communicate in a consistent way.  The matter is high-conflict.  Given the
constraints of a one-hour motion, and that fact that the parties’ views and
perspectives are diametrically opposed, I am unable to assign responsibility
for this dynamic in either direction.
[17]          
There is no
clear information about the nature of the space in which the parties may
interact should they both attend the routine extracurricular activities.  I am
satisfied that the gymnastics venue is larger than the dance venue.  I am also
satisfied that the dance venue separates parents from the actual studio.  I
find it more plausible than not that the dance studio has limited space for
observers.
[18]          
While it is
optimal for a child to view their parents interacting in a normal and cordial
way, if the parents cannot or will not do that it is clearly better for the
child to be shielded from conflict.
[19]          
I am unable to
determine whether P. is upset at her mother attending her activities on her
father’s time.  However, I find that the parties’ potential for conflict could
unacceptably and negatively affect P. There is no indication that P. will
suffer any harm if her parents refrain from attending activities on the other’s
time.
[20]          
Other people in
the Respondent’s life, including his current partner and their children, attend
P.’s activities.  This contributes to an already tense atmosphere.
[21]          
The Applicant’s
desire to be present at all of P.’s activities is natural.  However, her
materials suggest that a focus on her own emotional and family needs.  The
court has no reason to doubt the Applicant’s love for and devotion to P.  Yet,
the Applicant’s insistence on attending extracurricular activities on the
Respondent’s time where he has expressed discomfort about that is of some
concern.  P. attends activities during the mother’s weeks at which the two can
share the special bond the Applicant describes as so important.  In addition,
the order sought allows both parents to attend significant events, including
recitals and competitions, regardless of on whose time they occur.
[22]          
The question
about whether the Applicant has engaged in surreptitious recordings is a
further concern.  I recognize that the parties attended questioning in December
where the Applicant took under advisement a question about whether she had
recorded the Respondent at these activities.  I recognize that the parties have
until March 3, 2025, to respond to undertakings made.  Nevertheless, the
allegation is straightforward and forms a central part of Mr. Denda’s claims. 
The Applicant could have addressed it in her sworn statement.   She only
deposed that she “did not take her phone out to hold it next to him.”  I note
that the Applicant filed a 26-page affidavit that went into exhaustive detail
on many points.  The fact that she did not address this allegation is
puzzling.
[23]          
In prior
proceedings involving the parties, this court has expressed concern about
surreptitious recordings.  Such recordings would appear to be inconsistent with
the spirit of the section 30 report.  At a minimum, the possibility that such
recordings have occurred affects the force of the recommendation that both
parties be able to attend routine activities.
[24]          
In view of the
above, the court finds that, at present, it is not in P.’s best interests for
the parties to attend routine extracurricular activities falling on each
other’s parenting time.  The Respondent’s request shall be granted.
[25]          
The Respondent
father was successful on this motion and is entitled to some costs.
[26]          
The Respondent
uploaded costs totaling $12,739.  This includes attendance at the case
conference before Justice Kraft in December.
[27]          
I acknowledge
that this proceeding required more counsel time than usual.  However, I decline
to award substantial costs. First, the issue is not especially complex. 
Second, I find that both parties are clouded by their emotions and antagonism. 
At the same time, and third, I do not fault the mother for wanting to attend
P.’s activities.  While I reject her interpretation of the Kristjanson order,
and I am concerned by her opacity on the question of recordings, I do not find
her arguments so devoid of merit as to amount to bad faith or to merit a
substantial costs award.  Both parties must take the necessary steps to move
this dispute to a final resolution whether that be by way of a trial or final
settlement.
[28]          
The Applicant
shall pay costs of $7,600 inclusive of disbursements and HST.
[29]          
The
Respondent’s motion is granted in part: