[1]         
The applicant/father, Mr. Patel, and the
respondent/mother, Ms. Hamdaoui, were married in November 2015 in Morocco (Ms.
Hamdaoui’s home country). The couple separated on November 23, 2023, also in
Morocco.  The parties have two children of the marriage, R (born May 2018) and
J (born April 2021).  Ms. Hamdaoui and the children travelled from Morocco to
Canada on April 13, 2024, and remain here.
[2]         
The separation was caused by Mr. Patel’s
proposal that he practice polygamy, something that the couple specifically
forbade in their original marriage contract.  According to the parties,
polygamy is legal in Morocco in certain circumstances, and requires the wife’s
consent.
[3]         
Mr. Patel seeks an order that the children
return to Morocco pursuant to the Hague Convention, arguing that the
family relocated from Canada, and Morocco was the habitual residence of the
children at the time of their removal.
[4]         
Ms. Hamdaoui opposes the return of the
children.  Ms. Hamdaoui says that Ontario is and has always been the habitual
residence of the children and argues that the family’s absence from Canada was
merely a lengthy trip to visit other countries. She therefore asks the court to
dismiss this application and find that Ontario has jurisdiction to hear the
parenting issues.
[5]         
For the reasons that follow, I find that the
children were wrongfully removed from Morocco to Canada in April 2024, and that
the defences of consent and grave risk of harm are not proven. Given these
findings, the court is required to order the return of the children to
Morocco.  In arriving at this decision, the court relies upon and adapts the
undertakings given to Mr. Patel:
[6]         
Of course, given these undertakings, the court
also expects Mr. Patel to ensure the safety of Ms. Hamdaoui and the children in
Morocco including, but not limited to not being physically, verbally or
otherwise abusive towards Ms. Hamdaoui, her family or the children. This
includes ensuring that Ms. Hamdaoui is not arrested or otherwise detained in
Morocco.
[7]         
The court also expects both parties not to
disparage or belittle each other, including to/or in the presence of the
children.
[8]         
In accordance with the scheduling order, the
parties filed evidence by way of affidavit and cross examinations were
conducted during the hearing.
[9]         
No out of court cross examinations were
conducted.
[10]       The following evidence was filed:
[11]      
At the outset of the hearing, there was
disagreement regarding an additional affidavit from Ms. Hamdaoui dated January
14, 2025, with effective service on the first day of the hearing. Ultimately,
the respondent did not wish to rely on this additional affidavit.  It was not
uploaded to Case Centre and the court did not review it.
[12]      
The vast majority of materials were filed in
English. Where documents were in another language, the parties arranged for
official translations for the court. The only exception to this was text
messages by the parties.  The majority of these messages were in English with
occasional Arabic characters. The Arabic words were not translated for the
court and neither party relied on them in their evidence.
[13]      
Both parties swore affidavits and testified in
English. Ms. Hamdaoui testified that she speaks four languages:  a Moroccan
dialect, Arabic, French and English. Mr. Patel did not give evidence about
whether he spoke any languages in addition to English.
[14]      
During the marriage, Ms. Hamdaoui and Mr. Patel
communicated in English.
[15]      
Neither party requested interpretation during
the hearing.  Neither party expressed any difficulty with comprehension in
their affidavits or during the hearing.
[16]      
Both parties were cross-examined vigorously during
the hearing.
[17]      
Mr. Patel is a Canadian citizen and has two
children from a previous marriage, Hu and Ha, both in their late teens. Hu and
Ha were living in Canada in 2015.
[18]      
The parties married in Morocco in 2015, after
meeting online.  Both parties had been divorced previously.  Ms. Hamdaoui was a
Moroccan citizen. The parties signed an agreement in the same month they
married, setting out several terms, including that the couple would not engage
in polygamy.
[19]      
Mr. Patel sponsored Ms. Hamdaoui to Canada. The
parties lived in Richmond Hill (a community just north of Toronto) in a house
on which only Mr. Patel was on title. Mr. Patel had owned this house with his
previous wife and bought out her interest at the time of their divorce.
[20]      
The parties owned two vehicles in Ontario. (It
is not known when Ms. Hamdaoui acquired her vehicle.  There is reference to her
working on obtaining her Ontario driver’s license in 2022).
[21]      
The parties had their first child in May 2018
and their second chid in April 2021.
[22]      
The evidence is that the family did travel,
although it was curtailed by the pandemic.  Mr. Patel recalls visiting Morocco
approximately four weeks per year. There is also a reference to the family
having gone to the United Arab Emirates for one – two months. Ms. Hamdaoui said
that the family travelled frequently but gave no evidence about the length of
the trips prior to 2022.
[23]      
At some point, Hu started to experience mental
health issues. The family originally departed Ontario in March 2022 with Hu so
that Mr. Patel could find a medical diagnosis and care for him. Hu was later
diagnosed with schizophrenia and requires institutional care.  The parties
disagree about the level of care he is receiving but that is irrelevant to this
case.  What is relevant is that Hu is living in the same city as his father but
does not live in the same dwelling as the parties and their children.
[24]      
The parties agree on the following dates and
places:
[25]      
Although the parties agree on the dates and
places noted above, they disagree about the purpose of the travel. Mr. Patel
says that the travel to Istanbul in 2022 and Casablanca in 2023 were
relocations and that the return to Canada in 2023 was to prepare the house for
sale.  Ms. Hamdaoui says that the travel was simply that – extended travel with
no intention of giving up Ontario as their home.
[26]      
Mr. Patel started divorce proceedings in Morocco
in February 2024.  Mr. Patel also started a second proceeding regarding
parenting in October 2024.  Ms. Hamdaoui has responded to both proceedings, and
they are ongoing.
[27]      
Mr. Patel submitted affidavit evidence from a
Moroccan lawyer, Mr. Reda Oulamine and tendered him, in writing, as an expert.
[28]      
The court reviewed Mr. Oulamine’s CV,
acknowledgement of expert’s duty and affidavit. Briefly, Mr. Oulamine received
his legal education in France and the United States.  He has practiced law in
both Morocco and the United States.  His early career in Morocco (1998 to 2000)
was in corporate-commercial non-litigation work. He worked in the US between
2001 and 2004, including some time doing document review in non-family law
litigation cases. In 2004, Mr. Oulamine returned to Morocco and opened his own
firm which offers services in business law, family law, criminal law and legal
reform consulting.  He has practiced family law in Morocco for 18 years.
[29]      
For the purposes of this hearing, I find that
Mr. Oulamine is qualified to provide evidence on the rights and obligations of
parents in Moroccan family law, specifically on the topics of custody and
guardianship.
[30]      
Mr. Oulamine’s affidavit opined on the following
Moroccan legal principles:
[31]      
Mr. Oulamine was not cross examined and his
evidence was not challenged.
[32]      
Ms. Hamdaoui did not submit any expert evidence
regarding legal issues in Morocco.
[33]       Neither party argued that this court lacks jurisdiction. This court
has jurisdiction under the Convention on the Civil Aspects of
International Child Abduction, Can.T.S. 1983 No. 35 (Hague Convention)
because:
[34]       Article 3 of the Hague Convention defines whether there has
been a wrongful removal or retention in Canada from a contracting state. To
succeed in proving that the children were wrongfully removed from Morocco to
Canada, the applicant, Mr. Patel, must satisfy the court that:
[35]      
The purpose of this hearing is not to determine
the merits of custody unless the court determines that the children should not
be returned to Morocco. The decision about wrongful removal and whether to
return is not based on who should have custody, parenting time, or
decision-making responsibility. Rather, the Hague Convention presumes
that the interests of children who have been wrongfully removed are better
served by immediately returning them to their original jurisdiction where the
issues regarding their best interests will be determined. The purpose is to
restore the status quo which existed before the wrongful removal or retention[2].
[36]      
The parties agree that Ms. Hamdaoui took the
children from Morocco to Canada on or about April 13, 2024.
[37]      
The Ludwig framework asks the court to
determine the jurisdiction in which the child was habitually resident
immediately before the date of removal. In this case, April 13, 2024.
[38]      
However, Ms. Hamdaoui asks the court to assess
habitual residence as of a different date:  November 29, 2024, when Mr. Patel
started this application and 7.5 months after the removal.
[39]      
Ms. Hamdaoui argues that in cases of open-ended
or indeterminate consent, the date is usually fixed as when the left behind
parent first formally asserted his right or demanded the child’s return[3].
[40]      
Ms. Hamdaoui also argues that, despite the
agreement of the parties on date of removal, the court is not bound to accept
the dates of alleged wrongful retention (and by extension, removal) by the
parties. It is a factual determination to be made by the court[4].
[41]      
The court agrees that it is not bound to accept
an agreed upon date of removal and it is a question of fact. However, I find
there is no basis to depart from the agreed-upon removal date in this case.
[42]      
The law cited by Ms. Hamdaoui in favour of using
November 29, 2024 as the date to assess habitual residence is inapplicable to
these facts.  There was no consent (open-ended or indeterminate) by Mr. Patel
for the children to leave Morocco for Canada.  Indeed, all of the evidence is
that Mr. Patel had no advance knowledge of the trip.  He therefore could not
have consented to the trip.
[43]      
On the facts of this case, the date of removal
(April 13, 2024) should be used to assess habitual residence.
[44]      
The separate issue of consent/acquiescence as a
defence to the allegedly wrongful removal is addressed below in the Stage Two
analysis.
[45]      
The parties agree on the legal test for habitual
residence.  In 2018, the Supreme Court of Canada adopted a hybrid test for
habitual residence, meaning that the court must consider any and all relevant
factors (including, but not limited to, parental intention) to determine the
focal point of the child’s life[5].
[46]       In 2019, the Ontario Court of Appeal provided a detailed, stepwise
framework for implementing the hybrid test[6]:
[47]      
Determining habitual residence is a fact-finding
exercise. It does not require the court to find that a child has no connection
with one jurisdiction and all the connections with another jurisdiction. That
is not practical, nor does it reflect the reality of many families in 2025, who
have close and legitimate ties to more than one jurisdiction.
[48]       It is not disputed that the family was in Morocco at the time of
separation (November 2023) and when Ms. Hamdoui took the children to Canada (April
2024). The core question is why the children were in Morocco.  Mr. Patel says
it is because the family had relocated from Canada.  Ms. Hamdaoui says it was
because they were on a lengthy trip and always intended to return to Canada. In
assessing these competing positions, the court considered the following factors
as a whole:
[49]       Citizenship:  this cosmopolitan family
had citizenship and permanent residence in different countries, summarized as
follows:
[50]      
As noted above, the children were Moroccan
citizens because they were born to a Moroccan parent (Ms. Hamdaoui). Even so,
the family had to arrange for Moroccan citizenship to be confirmed for the
children and Ms. Hamdaoui took these steps. The parties disagree about why this
was done. Mr. Patel says it was evidence of their relocation and Ms. Hamdaoui
says it was to facilitate travel.
[51]      
Likewise, the parties disagree about why the
family obtained permanent residency in Turkey and why Mr. Patel obtained
permanent residency in Morocco.  Mr. Patel says it is because the family
intended to relocate (first to Istanbul, then to Morocco) and Ms. Hamdaoui says
obtaining permanent residency was just to facilitate travel.
[52]      
Given the connections that the family members
had with various jurisdictions, the court does not find citizenship and/or
permanent residence dispositive in determining habitual residence.
[53]      
Family and Friend Connections:  Ms. Hamdaoui is originally from Morocco and her parents and sister
still live there. The children had strong relationships with their grandparents
and aunt.  Although Mr. Patel did not have any of his own family in Morocco, Hu
also came to Istanbul and Casablanca.  Mr. Patel says his father recently
relocated to Morocco, but that information is irrelevant to this case as Mr.
Patel’s father moved to Morocco after the children were taken to Canada.
[54]      
Mr. Patel had many family connections in Canada,
including his two older children, his parents and his ex-wife. He had owned the
Richmond Hill home since before the parties were married. He ran a business
from Ontario, although the labour force was international. He stopped working
in the business a few years ago and started litigation against his business
partner. There is no evidence as to what jurisdiction the litigation is in.
[55]      
Ms. Hamdaoui led no evidence of any family or
friend connections in Canada.  Her mother visited from Morocco on a visitor
visa, but the precise dates were not given.  There was no evidence of
activities, friends or community in general. Perhaps the most stark example of
this was that Ms. Hamdaoui sought out the services of a women’s shelter upon
her arrival in Ontario in April, 2024 (as opposed to seeking the support of
friends or other community members).  Ms. Hamdaoui asserts that it was always
the family’s plan to return to Ontario, but she offers no evidence of
connections in support of this.
[56]      
Ms. Hamdaoui does point to her registration for
a doula course through the Canadian Doula Institute on May 31, 2023.  This
course was on-line, not in person.  Ms. Hamdaoui’s position is that doulas are
not professionally recognized in Morocco so that she could only work in Canada.
Assuming this is correct (there was no supporting evidence), there was no
evidence of any coursework completed between May 2023 and the date of this
case, nor was there any evidence of Ms. Hamdaoui’s intention to work outside
home. Indeed, her evidence emphasized that the parties occupied traditional
roles in the marriage, with Mr. Patel responsible for supporting the family
economically and Ms. Hamdaoui responsible for domestic support and childcare.
[57]      
On balance, the evidence demonstrates that Ms.
Hamdaoui’s connections to Morocco were much stronger than her connections to
Canada.
[58]      
Contemporaneous communications re: going to Morocco
and References to Moving: as noted above, Mr. Patel
took his son to various locations in spring, 2022 seeking a diagnosis and
treatment for him. During those travels (early March to early June 2022) Ms.
Hamdaoui and the children stayed with her parents in Morocco.  Mr. Patel says
that the family decided to relocate to Istanbul to get treatment for H and also
because Ms. Hamdaoui was not happy in Canada. In January 2023, the family
returned to Ontario in order to prepare the house for sale (this topic is
addressed below).  Ms. Hamdaoui stayed in Ontario for six months with the
children. The family then landed in Morocco in June 2023.
[59]      
Against this factual backdrop, there are
numerous communications between the parties with references to moving from
Canada, as opposed to travelling, including the following statements from Ms.
Hamdaoui regarding moving from Canada.
[60]      
I find that Ms. Hamdaoui’s own contemporaneous
language in 2023 illustrates that she regarded the travel to Morocco as a move,
she contemplated that it may be for several years, and she was looking forward
to living in Morocco.
[61]      
 Housing and Transportation:  in Morocco,
the parties signed a one-year lease on an apartment.  Ms. Hamdaoui says she
only signed the lease as the local authorities wanted a Moroccan citizen on the
contract, but she offered no evidence in support of this proposition. The
parties also purchased a car for Ms. Hamdaoui’s use in Morocco.
[62]      
In Turkey, the parties also leased an apartment
for a year, but did not stay for the full term of the lease. Ms. Hamdaoui
testified that this was not unusual, in that Mr. Patel did not have any
difficulty paying for things that they did not intend to use.
[63]      
In Ontario, the family lived in a house in
Richmond Hill. Mr. Patel was the sole person on title. He owned the house prior
to the parties marrying. The parties occupied the home when they were in Canada.
[64]      
Ms. Hamdaoui and the children were in Ontario
between mid-January 2023 and June 1, 2023.  Mr. Patel says the purpose of this
visit was to ready the house for sale and that a lengthy time was required in
order to address issues with the house which had occurred because of being
absent for many months (raccoon infestation, etc).
[65]      
Ms. Hamdaoui maintains that the home was sold
surreptitiously. She thought the house was going to be rented out on AirBnB and
that Mr. Patel told her it was necessary to post a sold sign in order to avoid
paying taxes. Her evidence is that she had no idea the house was sold until she
arrived in Canada on April 13, 2024. She offers no evidence about:
[66]      
There is contemporaneous evidence which
contradicts Ms. Hamdaoui’s position, showing that the parties exchanged
messages regarding the house sale and Ms. Hamdaoui participated in readying the
home for sale. There is no question that the parties contemplated renting the
house out, if it did not sell, but there are multiple references to the plan
for sale.  This evidence includes:
[67]      
In addition to the sale of the home, the parties
agree that both of their vehicles were sold and many of their belongings were
sold.  Ms. Hamdaoui says that furniture was left in the house, ostensibly for
their return, but there is no evidence of this.
[68]      
Mr. Patel also relies on the agreement of
purchase and sale dated June 13, 2023 showing the closing date as September 12,
2023 (which was later amended to December, 2023).  This agreement is not proof
of Ms. Hamdaoui’s knowledge of the sale as there is no evidence that she ever
saw this agreement. She was not a party to the agreement.
[69]      
There is a dispute as to whether this house was
the matrimonial home, whether Mr. Patel engaged in impropriety when the home
was sold (in that he certified on the closing documents that he was not a
spouse for the purposes of the transaction) and whether he had any obligation
to share the proceeds of sale with Ms. Hamdaoui.  These issues are not before
the court in this Hague application.
[70]      
On balance, these contemporaneous communications
show that Ms. Hamdaoui was aware that the home was for sale and that it sold
for $2.2M in June 2014.
[71]      
Schooling:  The
younger child (born April 2021) was not enrolled in classes in any location.
The older child (born May 2018) was not enrolled in any school in Ontario, even
when she was in Ontario from January 15 to June 1, 2023, when the child was
five and eligible for school. I find this is a significant fact. If Ontario was
the habitual residence of the children and they were going to continue their
education in this province, one would expect the older child to have attended
school during this 5.5-month period.
[72]      
In Morocco, the older child was enrolled at
Ecole George Wilhelm in Casablanca.  The school document states that she was
enrolled in kindergarten started September 1, 2023, and left the school on
January 31, 2024.
[73]      
The older child’s precise school attendance in
Casablanca was not in evidence.  Although she was registered effective
September 1, 2023, the parties are agreed that she was in Ontario until early October
2023, so could not have attended the Wilhelm School in September.
[74]      
The parties also disagree on the purpose of the
enrolment. Mr. Patel maintains that the child was registered for kindergarten
whereas Ms. Hamdaoui maintains that the child attended infrequently, and the
sole purpose of the registration was to give the child some exposure to French
(which the child did not speak). Regardless of which position is accepted, the
practical reality is that the older child was registered in school in
Casablanca and did attend, even if not full-time.
[75]       On April 24, 2023, the parties exchanged a text in which Ms.
Hamdaoui asked Mr. Patel if he was 100% sure they would be in Morocco until the
children were in their 20’s.  If not, Ms. Hamdaoui was unsure if they needed to
learn French, noting that English is the international language in the event
the family moves to another country eventually. I find this text significant
for two reasons:
[76]      
The parties agree that Ms. Hamdaoui was
home-schooling the children.  She says she was doing so using the Ontario
curriculum. There was no evidence of this, such as the actual curriculum or
home school plan. This is particularly important given that the older child
could have been in school in Ontario from January to June 2023, but she was not
placed there.
[77]      
The schooling arrangements for the older child
favours the habitual residence being Morocco.
[78]      
  Activities for children: there was no
evidence of what activities the children were enrolled in while in Ontario.
Given their young ages, this is not surprising. Once in Istanbul, both children
were enrolled in gymnastics lessons. The older child was enrolled in karate
lessons in Casablanca.  It seems that the older child was taking Quran lessons
in Ontario, Istanbul and Morocco, but there is a dispute between the parties as
to whether these lessons were online or in person once in Morocco.  As noted
above, Ms. Hamdaoui contemplated hiring an in-person teacher once the family
moved to Morocco.
[79]      
The fact that the older child was enrolled in
karate in Morocco is a fact in favour of habitual residence as opposed to a
trip.
[80]      
Healthcare for Children: Mr. Patel points to evidence that both children saw paediatricians
in Casablanca (he had evidence of three appointments post separation).  Ms.
Hamdaoui agreed in cross examination that the children saw physicians
frequently in Morocco.
[81]      
The parties also agree that the children had
OHIP cards (Ontario Health Insurance Program) and that those cards were renewed
in the spring of 2023.
[82]      
I do not find the healthcare information
persuasive for either party’s position on habitual residence. There is no
evidence that the children were or were not enrolled in medical practices in
either country. It is only prudent to ensure that registration for
government-insured programs (like OHIP) is kept current, especially for
children.  It is not surprising that young children would require medical care,
sometimes frequently.
[83]      
  Communications with Friends and Family:
Mr. Patel provided some text messages with friends and family, referring to the
move to Morocco.  Ms. Hamdaoui did not provide any corresponding messages with
the exception of a contradiction. Ms. Hamdaoui’s sister swore an affidavit in
which she said that Ms. Hamdaoui “indicated to me that he and Mustafa [Mr.
Patel] were travelling for a few months between Canada, Turkiye, and Morocco,
and that they would eventually be returning back to Canada.” The sister was not
cross examined on the affidavit.
[84]      
However, there is a contradictory text from the
sister on November 27, 2023 (four days after the couple separated and the day
Mr. Patel left the couple’s apartment in Morocco).  The court is unable to put
much weight on the text as Mr. Patel did not provide the full chain, but the
sister writes: I don’t understand why do you keep lying?  What Canada?  She
literally lives with you here in Morocco you guys all came back to live here,
but you decided to get divorced cause you have some other girl in your life
that you want to marry and took mariams [sic] passports and your [children’s]
passports to pressure her accept you to have a second wife...”
[85]      
Airline Tickets: 
Mr. Patel produced airlines tickets as proof of travel on specific dates.  He
placed considerable emphasis on the fact that one-way tickets were purchased at
various times.  The court does not accept that one-way tickets are necessarily
evidence of a lack of intention to return.  Many years ago, round trip tickets
were cheaper than one-way tickets. That is a relic of another time. This family
travelled widely and frequently.  The presence (or absence) of one-day tickets
is not persuasive for either party.
[86]      
Separation in November 2023:  The parties separated in November 2023. The parties have different
accounts of how happy or smooth the relationship was leading up to the date of
separation. The parties agree that, in November 2023, Mr. Patel proposed taking
another wife (if not more) and having a polygamous marriage.  The evidence
given by the parties is that polygamy is legal in Morocco provided that the
spouses consent.  However, Ms. Hamdaoui’s evidence is that polygamy is
forbidden when the marriage contract excludes it[8]. 
Ms. Hamdaoui felt pressured to consent or else Mr. Patel would divorce her.
[87]      
For Ms. Hamdaoui, the polygamy proposal
shattered the foundations of her marriage.  She married Mr. Patel in 2015 with
a contract stating, among other things, that their relationship would not
include polygamy. Mr. Patel displayed a more nonchalant attitude in his
evidence, comparing the marriage agreement to any other contact (like a real
estate agreement of purchase and sale) which was open to negotiated amendment.
[88]      
While the court does not, for a moment, discount
or diminish the profound upset, grief and disappointment that Ms. Hamdaoui
experienced in November 2023 when faced with a choice of agreeing to a
polygamous relationship or ending her marriage, Mr. Patel’s proposal to take
multiple wives is not relevant to the determination of habitual residence.  The
question is where the children were habitually resident in April 2024, not November
2023.
[89]      
I do find that Mr. Patel’s proposal to take
multiple wives in relevant in one respect.  It was this fracturing of the
relationship which made Ms. Hamdaoui change her mind about being in Morocco. 
As she stated in cross examination, it was not the divorce itself that was
upsetting, but rather the way in which Mr. Patel chose to do it. This made Ms.
Hamdaoui rethink her presence in Morocco.
[90]      
Ms. Hamdaoui was angry that Mr. Patel held her
passport and those belonging to the children immediately after separation.
There is competing evidence regarding Ms. Hamdaoui’s passport – Mr. Patel says
he returns it, and Ms. Hamdaoui denies this. They do agree that he kept the
children’s passports. In December 2023, Mr. Patel texted Ms. Hamdaoui and
stated that he had kept the children’s passports as he did not want the
children to leave Morocco without his consent.
[91]      
Plan to Orchestrate Move to Morocco:  Ms. Hamdaoui argues that the travel to Istanbul and then to
Casablanca was part of a larger long-term plan on the part of Mr. Patel to get
her to move to Morocco so that he could propose polygamy or separate in a
jurisdiction where she had fewer rights. Her evidence in response to a cross
examination question (but not part of her affidavit) was that, during
separation discussions, Mr. Patel commented that he never would have separated
in Canada where he would have had to give Ms. Hamdaoui half of his wealth.
[92]      
Ms. Hamdaoui’s own evidence is that she felt
that Mr. Patel had been “planning this since Turkey”, not Canada. This is
supported by Mr. Patel’s own communications about when he started to consider a
second wife.
[93]      
The court understands that Ms. Hamdaoui felt
betrayed by Mr. Patel’s request for her consent for a polygamous marriage when
he made the proposal in November 2023.  However, there is no evidence that Mr.
Patel proposed leaving Canada under false pretenses.
[94]      
Return to Canada in September 2023:  the family returned to Canada for a month in September 2023. There
is differing evidence about the reason for the return.  Mr. Patel says it was
to complete the house sale and wind up their Canadian affairs (although the
house did not actually close until December 2023). Ms. Hamdaoui wanted to
return for her Canadian citizenship ceremony. Indeed, Mr. Patel complained in a
text that Ms. Hamdaoui had been bothering him about making this trip.
[95]      
Focal Point of Lives Defined as Person, not
Place:  As noted above, the test for habitual
residence requires the court to find the “focal point of the child’s life,
namely the family and social environment in which its life has developed,”
immediately prior to removal.  Ms. Hamdaoui argues that, due to the children’s young
ages and their strong bond to her, the court should define their focal point as
a person (her) and not a place.
[96]       Evidence from Other Affiants:  the
analysis above focuses on the evidence given by Mr. Patel and Ms. Hamdaoui. As
noted above, the court also received affidavits from Mr. Patel’s father (in
support of the applicant) and Mr. Patel’s mother and Ms. Hamdaoui’s sister (in
support of the respondent).  For the most part, these affidavits were not useful
to the court for the following reasons:
[97]      
Having considered all the evidence submitted by
each party, and considered all of the above factors as a whole, I find that the
preponderance of evidence demonstrates that the children were habitually
resident in Morocco just prior to their removal to Canada in April 2024.
[98]      
If the court is wrong in finding that the
children were habitually resident in Morocco at the time of their removal to
Canada in April 2024, that does not lead inexorably to the conclusion that
Canada was the habitual residence. It cannot be ignored that the family relocated
from Canada to Istanbul for a significant period of time before moving to
Morocco. While in Istanbul, the parties signed a year-long lease on an
apartment and registered both children in gymnastics lessons.  If Morocco was
not the habitual residence of the children in April 2024, then Istanbul would
be the alternative, not Canada.
[99]      
Based on the evidence from the legal expert, Mr.
Oulamine, the court is satisfied that Mr. Patel had custody rights at the time
the children were removed from Morocco.  Ms. Hamdaoui does not dispute this.
[100]   
 Following separation in November 2023, Mr.
Patel saw the children very rarely.  However, it was not for a lack of trying.
He sent multiple messages to Ms. Hamdaoui, asking to arrange for parenting
time.
[101]   
Ms. Hamdaoui asks the court to find that Mr.
Patel’s requests were insincere and hollow, but there is insufficient evidence
to do so. The practical reality is that Mr. Patel was asking to see his
children following the separation.
[102]    Unfortunately, almost no parenting time occurred because of an
impasse created by both parties:
[103]   
The law is clear that exercising rights of
custody is assessed using a low threshold.  The court will only find rights of
custody were not being exercised in clear cases of abandonment[9]. This threshold is not met in
this case.
[104]   
 The final step in the wrongful removal test is
whether delay is a bar to return.  Ms. Hamdaoui argues that it is.
[105]   
As agreed by the parties, Ms. Hamdaoui took the
children from Morocco to Canada on April 13, 2024.  Mr. Patel says he reported
the removal to the Canadian central authority in August 2024, but later
realized that the Canadian central authority did not contact Ms. Hamdaoui.
[106]   
Mr. Patel then started this application on
November 29, 2024, and served it by email on the same date.
[107]   
There was no evidence before this court of Mr.
Patel’s communications with the Canadian central authority in August 2024. 
However, that evidence was not necessary as it is ultimately irrelevant to the
delay argument.
[108]   
Article 12 of the Hague Convention states that
children wrongfully removed or retained shall be returned forthwith if the time
has been less than a year between the date of wrongful removal/retention and
the date of commencement of proceedings.
[109]   
In this case, Mr. Patel’s application was
started well with the one-year requirement.
[110]   
Mr. Patel’s alleged delay is not a bar to the
return of the children.
[111]   
The conclusion of the Stage One analysis is that
the children were wrongfully removed from Morocco.
[112]    Ms. Hamdaoui asserts two defences to mandatory return under Article
13 of the Hague Convention. She argues, in the alternative:
[113]   
The onus of proof is on the party asserting
acquiescence using clear, cogent and unequivocal evidence[10].
[114]   
Delay in commencing a Hague application,
particularly within one year of the children’s removal, does not constitute
consent or acquiescence. [11]
[115]   
Consent or acquiescence can be a defence to
wrongful removal. Consent is overt agreement.  Acquiescence is unstated
consent, agreeing tacitly, silently, or passively[12].
[116]   
In this case, consent is not a relevant defence.
Mr. Patel cannot have consented to the removal of the children prior to April
13, 2024, because he did not know that the children were leaving Morocco. Once
the children arrived in Canada, at no point did Mr. Patel overtly agree to
their relocation.
[117]   
The only question on this defence is whether Mr.
Patel acquiesced to the removal after the children had arrived in Canada and he
learned of the children’s whereabouts.
[118]    There is no question that, on one day, Mr. Patel appeared to have
acquiesced.  Ms. Hamdaoui says that Mr. Patel sent “repeated texts” on May 23, 2023,
which constitute acquiesce. The court disagrees with the characterization of
“repeated.”  Mr. Patel sent multiple texts over a 2-minute period (5:55am to 5:56am)
on May 23, 2024, all of which appear to be the same chain, in a stream of
consciousness style, unbroken by any response from Ms. Hamdaoui.  The relevant
excerpts from Mr. Patel’s May 23 messages state:
[119]    Reading only the May 23, 2024, messages from 5:55am, Mr. Patel seems
to have acquiesced. However, the court must consider the entirety of the
communications and actions. The May 23 text messages are informed by other
evidence, including:
[120]    One other text bears mention. Ms. Hamdaoui points to a text from Mr.
Patel which states that they are wasting each other’s time, discussing the same
points over and over. Mr Patel states: “I’m no longer interested in anything. I
want nothing from you. I ask for nothing. Not even asking to meet the
[children]. Not even for Eid. Please take care of yourself and our [children]”.
[121]    Ms. Hamdaoui provided no date for this communication.  Mr. Patel
says it was sent months after separation in a moment of frustration. There is
no evidence about whether it was sent before or after the children were removed
from Morocco. The court’s view is that this communication is similar to the May
23 communication regarding housing in Ontario – it is not consistent with Mr.
Patel’s overall narrative and is an outlies in the entire context of the case.
[122]   
On cross examination, Mr. Patel stated that he
offered to buy an apartment and a car for Ms. Hamdaoui in Canada because he was
worried; seeing the phone number of a women’s shelter in Brampton made him
fearful that the children were staying in a shelter and were not safe. Mr.
Patel also testified that he was trying anything to get Ms. Hamdaoui to
respond.
[123]   
Regardless of Mr. Patel’s motivations on May 23
(children’s safety or trying to illicit a response from Ms. Hamdaoui), looking
at the offers of housing and transportation against the backdrop of the other
communications before and after that date do not amount to clear, unequivocal
acquiescence. This defence cannot succeed.  I find that Mr. Patel did not
acquiesce to the children remaining in Canada.
[124]   
Article 13(b) of the Hague Convention
permits a court to refuse to return a child where there is a grave risk that
his or her return would expose the child to physical or psychological harm or
otherwise place the child in an intolerable situation.
[125]   
Like consent/acquiescence, the onus is on the
party alleging grave risk (in this case, Ms. Hamdaoui) to prove it on a balance
of probabilities with considerable evidence that is clear and convincing[14].
[126]   
The test is a high one.  Both the risk and the
harm must be substantial[15].
[127]   
The court can also consider the test in the
context of a parent, upon whom a child is dependent, coming to harm: [16]
[128]    In assessing the presence or absence of a grave risk, the court
should ask three questions:
[129]   
Ms. Hamdaoui does not allege any abuse or
coercive control (physical, mental, financial or otherwise) prior to the date
of separation.  As of the date of separation, Ms. Hamdaoui says that she felt
immense pressure from Mr. Patel to agree to polygamy.  She feels that he kept
her passport and the children’s passports as a method of exerting control over
her.
[130]   
The text messages show that Mr. Patel very much
wanted Mr. Hamdaoui to agree to polygamy as opposed to the alternative
(divorce), but he was prepared to go ahead with divorce. Ms. Hamdaoui made it
clear that she would not consent to polygamy.
[131]   
The parties separated on November 23, 2023, and
Mr. Patel left the Morocco apartment on November 27, 2023.  Following this, Ms.
Hamdaoui points to two incidents which are the basis for the grave risk
defence.
[132]   
First, Mr. Patel attended at Ms. Hamdaoui’s apartment.
It is acknowledged that Mr. Patel did not say anything or touch anyone during
this visit. He sat in a chair, silent, playing music on his phone and filming
his family. In cross examination, Ms. Hamdaoui agreed that this incident was
not erratic, dangerous or scary, but described it as weird.  The court finds
the behaviour to have been unusual and perhaps intimidating, but not violent.
[133]   
Second, on January 7, 2024, Mr. Patel got into a
scuffle with Ms. Hamdaoui’s mother over a book. There was a brief video
produced which shows a short altercation with both parties trying to move away
from each other. Ms. Hamdaoui recorded this incident.  In her cross
examination, she stated that the viewer could not see her “fighting him [Mr.
Patel] off” in the video because she was also making the video. The scuffle
could not have been severe or prolonged if Ms. Hamdaoui was able to continue
videoing the incident.
[134]   
Mr. Patel also used the phrase “Break your
heads” in front of the children.  According to Ms. Hamdaoui, this made the
children fearful of their father.
[135]   
While none of this behaviour reflects well on
Mr. Patel and while he should have ensured not to use threatening language like
“break heads” in front of the children, these incidents do not rise to the level
of satisfying the 13(b) defence.
[136]   
In answering questions one and two above, the
alleged past violence was not severe and is unlikely to recur. The past
violence was not life threatening. With respect to the third question, there
was no direct affidavit evidence from either party regarding Mr Patel being
amenable to control by the Moroccan justice system. However, there was a text
from Mr. Patel post separation which disparaged the Canadian justice system and
expressed a preference for the Moroccan justice system, primarily because
Morocco was a Muslim country.  This, coupled with the fact that Mr. Patel chose
to initiate proceedings in Morocco indicate that he will abide by the rulings
of a Moroccan court.
[137]   
In addition to looking at physical and psychological
violence, the court must also query whether there is coercive control.
[138]   
 In this case, Mr. Patel has committed to
financially support Ms. Hamdaoui and the children by way of formal undertaking.
Prior to the undertaking, he also made similar offers in text messages.
[139]    Although there was no financial control, there were other
expressions of concern.    Emotions were running high after the marital
separation in November 2023 and the messages reflect that both parties were in
a heightened state. Although this often occurs during the dissolution of a
marriage, there are certain messages from Mr. Patel which leave the distinct
impression that he was attempting to intimidate Ms. Hamdaoui. The messages
include, but are not limited to:
[140]    In addition, Ms. Hamdaoui testified that Mr. Patel told her:
[141]   
I find that the very high threshold of grave
risk of harm is not met. However, the court does not condone any form of
threats or intimidation between spouses no matter how upset a party is.  Canadian
family law does not tolerate violence. This tenet informs all aspects of family
law, including parenting time and decision making.
[142]   
Costs were not addressed during the hearing.
[143]   
 Neither party advised of a costs agreement.
Neither party uploaded a bill of costs prior to, or during the hearing, in
breach of the Central West Practice Direction.[18]
[144]   
The parties are encouraged to agree on costs. If
they will not, written costs submissions will be served, filed and uploaded to
Case Centre on the following schedule:
[145]   
These deadlines cannot be varied unless by court
order.  If submissions are not received by these deadlines, the court will
proceed on the basis that costs are not being sought.
[146]   
Costs submissions will be double spaced, in
12-point font, and three pages, maximum (exclusive of offers, authorities and
bills of costs).
[147]   
The submissions and bills of costs will pertain
only to the Ontario proceeding and shall not seek to recover any costs for any
litigation conducted in Morocco.
[148]   
I therefore make the following orders:
[149]   
The parties shall forward an order to my
Judicial Assistant  Pamela.Marsh@ontario.ca
by March 5, 2025 date for signing.  If there is any dispute regarding the form
and content of the order, the parties may contact Ms. Marsh to organize a 9am
appointment.