[1]              
The Applicant is the mortgagee under a Vendor
Take Back (“VTB”) mortgage which has matured and is in default. The Respondent
is the purchaser and mortgagor in relation to a commercial property located in
Ottawa.
[2]              
There are actions started in Toronto (Court
files CV-23-709899 and CV-23-713867) in which the Respondent disputes the validity
of the security or at least the amount owing.  It advances claims for equitable
setoff for liquidated and unliquidated damages, and asserts indemnity claims
against the Applicant, the principal of the Applicant or what the Respondent
claims are related corporations.
[3]              
The Applicant served a demand under the mortgage
before the Toronto proceedings were launched but it has not taken steps to
enforce its contractual power of sale nor has it commenced a mortgage action. 
Instead, the Applicant brings this freestanding application to appoint a court
appointed receiver under the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act (“BIA”) or
the Courts of Justice Act (“CJA”) or both.
[4]              
While I heard extensive argument concerning the merits
of the setoff claims and whether or not equitable setoff is available under the
circumstances, this is not the forum to determine that question. There are
extensive, complex and disputed questions of fact and legal and equitable
arguments that cannot appropriately be determined in what was scheduled as a two-hour
hearing on a regular motions list.  There is sufficient complexity to this
issue and the factual matrix underlying the dispute that I cannot conclude the
Respondent’s claims against the Applicant are frivolous or vexatious.  There
are, in any event, motions pending in the Toronto actions which may (or may
not) dispose of that question.
[5]              
The Respondent also challenges the Application
on jurisdictional grounds.  It argues that the appointment of a Receiver or an
Interim Receiver under the BIA, requires a finding of insolvency or bankruptcy. 
The Respondent argues that it is not insolvent simply because it has halted
payment on a disputed security claim.   Similarly, the Respondent argues that
s. 101 of the CJA provides for the appointment of a receiver “by an
interlocutory order” and as there is neither an underlying proceeding nor an
intended proceeding, s. 101 is not available.
[6]              
After hearing argument, I advised the parties
that I am not prepared to grant a Receivership at this time for the following
reasons:
[7]              
In conclusion, the Application is dismissed. 
This is without prejudice to a subsequent application on proper grounds and
without prejudice to any relief sought in the Toronto actions.
[8]              
The parties are encouraged to move all of the
related proceedings to the Commercial List in Toronto or alternatively to seek
to transfer the Toronto proceedings to Ottawa where the property is located. 
Nothing good can come of parallel proceedings in two different Regions before
different judges.
[9]              
I expect that counsel can reach agreement on
costs but if that is not the case, I will entertain cost submissions in writing
on a timetable to be agreed between counsel in the next 30 days.