[1]          The
plaintiffs launched a motion for an Order striking out the statement of
defence of the defendants pursuant to Rule 34.15(1)(b) of the Rules of Civil
Procedure.
[2]          In a
decision released on December 31, 2024, this Court dismissed the plaintiffs’
request to strike out the statement of defence of the defendants Jamieson
Wellness Inc. and Body Plus Nutritional Products Inc. in connection with the defendants’
failure to attend at their examinations for discovery on September 26-27, 2024.
[3]          However,
this Court awarded the plaintiffs costs thrown away incurred in connection with
those missed examinations, awarding the plaintiffs $15,823.77. While the
plaintiffs sought costs thrown away of $39,389.54, this Court determined that
the amount ultimately awarded reflected the value of “preparation that has been
wasted and that will have to be repeated”, observing that in the “specific
factual circumstances present in the immediate case … the plaintiffs should not
be presently required to bear the entire financial burden associated with these
missed examinations”.
[4]          This Court
also made a finding that the plaintiffs’ launching of this motion, immediately
after the defendants’ failure to attend at the examinations for discovery,
without obtaining particulars relating to why the defendants failed to attend, was
likely not the most time or cost efficient manner to address the issues raised
in this motion.  In this regard, the Court noted that  the plaintiffs’ decision
to proceed with the motion given the circumstances surrounding the failure of
the defendants to attend at their examinations for discovery tied into the
consideration of the issues of delay and increased costs of litigating this
action.
[5]         
In its decision, the Court encouraged the parties to agree on the
issue of costs. If the parties were not able to agree on costs, they were
invited to make written submissions.
[6]         
The parties were not able to agree on the issue of costs.  I
received written costs submissions from the parties on January 21st
2025 (plaintiffs’ costs submissions), January 24th 2025 (responding
costs submissions of the defendants) and January 27th 2025 (reply
costs submissions of the plaintiffs).
[7]         
Pursuant to Rule 57.01(6), the plaintiffs filed a Costs Outline
prior to the hearing of the motion.  The defendants did not file a costs
outline on the hearing date of the motion.  However,  after the Court released
its decision, the defendants provided the Court with a Costs Outline on January
24th 2025, with their written responding costs submissions.
[8]         
  Given the
divided result in the motion, the plaintiffs submit that the appropriate costs
disposition is that each party bear its own costs of the motion for three main
reasons.
[9]         
First, the plaintiffs reference the
circumstances of the motion.   In this regard, the plaintiffs argue that their
motion was brought after the defendants’ examinations for discovery, scheduled on
dates offered by the defendants, were missed despite the Notices of Examination
having been properly served twice on former counsel for the defendants (on
August 9th and again on August 28th, 2024). In the
aftermath of non-attendance, despite the plaintiffs serving their motion record
for discovery relief on October 2nd, now-former counsel for the defendants
remained silent until multiple purported instances of counsel “inadvertence”
were disclosed in an affidavit served on October 22nd, 2024.  The
affidavit was served on the same date that the plaintiffs served their factum
in support of the October 31st motion. The plaintiffs argue that by
this time, the plaintiffs had incurred substantially all of their costs
associated with bringing the motion.
[10]      The plaintiffs further submit that
the defendants’ first and only offer to settle the motion was a without
prejudice Rule 49 offer sent on October 24th, 2024, after
substantially all of the plaintiffs’ motion costs had been incurred.   The
defendants offered $7,500 on account of costs thrown away.  It did
not offer any amount for the costs of the motion,
instead providing that any other costs be in the cause of the
action.  The plaintiffs argue that if this offer is the yardstick for determining “success” on the motion,
the plaintiffs beat that offer by obtaining more than
double the amount in costs thrown away. Against this backdrop, the plaintiffs
argue that a costs disposition for each party to bear its own costs is quite
reasonable.
[11]      Finally, the plaintiffs argue that the defendants disclaimed an entitlement
to costs on the hearing date of the motion. The plaintiffs submit that to now
seek a costs disposition that awards them costs is unfair and ought not be
permitted.
[12]      In support of this argument, the plaintiffs rely on the decision of Nasir
v. Grafton-Fraser Inc., 2014 ONSC 4697 at paras. 30-32,(“Nasir”)
where although the plaintiff was successful on its motion and would ordinarily
be entitled to costs, the court exercised its discretion and ordered that each
party bear its own costs due to the plaintiff's initial stance of not seeking
costs.  I note that the facts in the immediate case are distinguishable from
the facts in Nasir, as in Nasir, the plaintiff advised the court
that no costs were being sought despite the fact that the plaintiff was
successful on the motion.  In the immediate case, the plaintiffs argue that the
defendants advised the Court during the oral hearing of the motion that they
would not be seeking costs of the motion regardless of the outcome.  However,  after
the Court’s decision was released, the plaintiffs argue that the defendants resiled
from their initial position and are now seeking costs.
[13]      The
plaintiffs  also argue that if the Court agrees with the plaintiffs’ submission
that each party ought to bear its own costs of the motion, it should therefore
award a token amount of costs to the plaintiffs to account for the legal
expense associated with what the plaintiffs believe are unnecessary costs submissions. The plaintiffs argue
that this matter ought to have been resolved consensually. The
plaintiffs have proposed this costs outcome to the defendants but they have not
agreed.
[14]      The defendants’ position is that the defendants should be awarded
costs of this motion.  In support of this position, the defendants highlight
the Court’s findings that the defendants were largely successful in responding
to the relief sought in the motion.  The defendants also reference the Court’s reasons
for decision which called into question the necessity of the plaintiffs’ motion
and the delay and expense it created.
[15]      The defendants are asking for costs of the motion.   Their position
is that given that the catalyst for the motion was
unfortunate errors by the defendants’ former counsel, the defendants seek
only $15,823.77, representing roughly 34% of the actual legal fees incurred. The
defendants argue that making such an award would recognize that neither party
was blameless.  In this regard, the defendants underscore that former counsel
for the defendants inadvertently erred in respect of the cancelled
examinations, and the plaintiffs were not justified in bringing the motion to
strike and in refusing the offer to settle the motion which would have avoided
much of the expense and delay caused by the motion.
[16]      The defendants incurred $46,619.00 + HST in legal fees to urgently
prepare for and argue this motion. This amount is generally comparable to the
$37,840.50 + HST listed in the plaintiffs’ Costs Outline dated October 28, 2024.
[17]      Taking into account the result of the motion, and the Court’s
findings at paragraph 128 of its Reasons for Decision, the defendants submit
that a modest costs award is appropriate.
[18]      In line with the plaintiffs’ written submissions, the Court also has
a clear recollection of defence counsel indicating during his oral submissions
that the absence of the defendants’ Costs Outline was due to the fact that the
defendants would not be seeking costs if they were successful in the motion. 
The Court’s recollection is also echoed in bench book notes where the Court’s
notes confirm defence counsel’s position that regardless of the outcome of the
motion, the defendants would not be seeking costs.
[19]      Consistent with this position, it is also noteworthy that the
defendants did not bring a costs outline to the hearing as required pursuant to
Rule 57.01(6) of the Rules of Civil Procedure.  The defendants only
delivered a costs outline  on January 24th 2025, after the Court’s
decision was released on December 31st, 2024.
[20]      Defence counsel’s position is that he does not recall waiving the
right to seek costs and argues that the Court’s invitation to the parties in
its Reasons to make brief written costs submissions in the event that they were
unable to resolve the issue of costs is inconsistent with defence counsel
having agreed to waive costs.
[21]       In order to address this argument advanced by the defendants the
Court can confirm that it was aware of defence counsel’s stated position that
the defendants were waiving the right to seek costs when the Court invited counsel
to attempt to agree on the issue of costs.  At the time that the invitation was
made, the Court considered that the plaintiffs enjoyed some success on the
motion and might wish to seek costs related to the motion.
[22]      Ultimately, I agree with the submissions of plaintiffs’ counsel and I
find that counsel for the defendants did indeed relay the position to the Court
that regardless of the outcome of the motion, the defendants would not be
seeking costs. In my view, it would be unfair to allow the defendants to resile
from their stated position of not seeking costs, after the decision was released
by the Court.
[23]      This is particularly so since the defendants did not serve a costs
outline on the hearing date of the motion as required pursuant to Rule 57.01(6). 
This Rule provides that  unless the parties have agreed on costs, every party
who intends to seek costs for that step shall give to every other party
involved in the same step, and bring to the hearing, a costs outline.  There
are several good reasons for this rule, one being that having to declare the
amount of costs that a party will seek if successful on a motion, in advance of
the motion being decided, encourages parties to be reasonable in terms of the
costs being sought on a motion.
[24]      It should be clear that in making this finding, I am not suggesting
in any fashion that counsel for the defendants is attempting to mislead the
court.  Rather, I find that given the lengthy submissions of both counsel made
on the hearing date of the motion and in light of the many issues raised and
addressed at the hearing of the motion, counsel may not clearly recall making
this particular submission to the court regarding costs.
[25]      In any event, even if, on the hearing date of the motion, the
defendants had submitted a costs’ outline and sought costs, this would not have
altered my decision that no costs should be ordered flowing from this motion.
[26]      Because the defendants were largely successful in opposing this
motion, in the ordinary course, the defendants would be entitled to their costs,
as costs generally follow the event.  However, a court can exercise its
discretion, particularly where a party is seeking the court’s indulgence, or
where actions on the part of a party led to the bringing of a motion, as is the
case here. (S.N. v. G[…] Inc. and P.T., 2014 ONSC 4697 (CanLII), at
para. 31)  In assessing costs, the court is to consider Rule 57 factors
including inter alia, complexity, conduct of counsel in lengthening or
shortening the hearing and what an unsuccessful party might expect to have to
pay.
[27]      In
this regard, I have considered that while the defendants were largely
successful on this motion, the launching of the motion itself was rooted in unfortunate
errors made by the defendants’ former counsel.  Moreover, the plaintiffs did
have some moderate success with respect to the request for costs thrown away.
[28]      Ultimately,
in considering the circumstances surrounding the bringing of this motion, and
after having reviewed and considered the costs submissions of both parties and
having considered the factors in Rule 57.01 and section 131(1) of the Courts
of Justice Act, I am of the view that it is fair, reasonable, proportionate
and within the parties’ reasonable expectations that no costs shall be ordered
payable to either party and each party shall bear its own costs.