[1]              
The plaintiff brought a motion for Summary
Judgment seeking a declaration that she was wrongfully dismissed from her
employment by the defendant, a declaration that the defendant breached the
employment contract between them, damages, pre-judgment and post-judgment
interest and costs.
[2]              
The plaintiff submits that she was terminated
from her employment with the defendant without cause and without notice. While
she was terminated, she was provided with four months pay in lieu of notice.
[3]              
The issue is whether the plaintiff is entitled to
reasonable notice pursuant to the common law or whether the liability of the
defendant is limited to the notice set out in the Offer of Employment Letter and/or
the Employment Agreement.
[4]              
The facts are not significantly disputed. The
plaintiff, Moyra Miller, was employed by WellSky, a technology company (and its
predecessors) for nearly 12 years but left that employment to work for the
defendant. She resigned from WellSky on December 15, 2021. At that time, her
salary was $175,515 in Canadian funds plus bonuses (which was anticipated to be
$50,000 based on past bonuses paid), incentive payments, as well as stock
options.
[5]              
At the time of her resignation from WellSky, Ms.
Miller, who was 61 years old, was the most senior employee of that company in
Canada, she managed client relationships in Canada and the United States, she
was responsible for the operation of the account management teams and she was
the Director of WellSky’s Canadian subsidiary. She was considered a valuable
employee at WellSky and represented the company at industry conferences.
[6]              
Ms. Miller began having discussions with
AlayaCare Inc. (AlayaCare), a software-as-a-service company for the homecare
industry in Ontario commencing in the Fall of 2021 when she was approached by
the defendant. WellSky was AlayaCare’s biggest competitor. Although the
plaintiff attests that she was not interested in leaving her employer, she was
prepared to meet with Mr. Brady Murphy who was the co-founder of AlayaCare when
he messaged her through LinkedIn and invited her to meet with him and other
“team members who would try and convince [her] to leave WellSky and join
AlayaCare as an executive employee”.[1]
[7]              
The plaintiff continued her discussions with Mr.
Murphy by telephone and through him met Mr. Adrian Schauer, the Chief Executive
Officer of AlayaCare. Further messages were exchanged through LinkedIn. The
plaintiff met with Mr. Murphy in person on October 20, 2021, at which time they
had a discussion during which she disclosed to him her salary, bonuses and
stock options. The plaintiff expressed a concern that if she left her
employment with WellSky to work for AlayaCare, they might sue her. AlayaCare
undertook in writing to pay for a lawyer to defend any action that WellSky
might bring.
[8]              
According to the affidavit of Adrian Schauer,
the Chief Executive Officer of AlayaCare, sworn January 5, 2024, the plaintiff
indicated to him, that she had grown unhappy with WellSky. Ms. Miller’s
evidence (by affidavit) is that although things were not perfect with her
then-employer, she did not intend to leave.
[9]              
On November 23, 2021, Ms. Miller accepted an
invitation to attend at the AlayaCare offices in Toronto, Ontario to meet with
other “team members”.
[10]          
AlayaCare offered Ms. Miller a compensation
package to work for them that included an increased salary, bonuses, and equity
in the form of Restricted Share Units or “RSUs” set to vest in the future. The
plaintiff would stand to forfeit any unvested equity in RSUs and stock options
she had with WellSky, for a forfeiture of approximately $407,465 in U.S dollars
if she left WellSky.
[11]          
These discussions continued culminating in a
letter containing an Offer of Employment that was sent to Ms. Miller on
November 27, 2021. The parties entered into an Employment Agreement in writing
on December 15, 2021, which incorporated the Offer Letter into its terms. The
Offer Letter included the following term:
[12]          
Furthermore, the Employment Agreement contains
the following term at para. 13:[2]
[13]          
The plaintiff accepted the offer and gave notice
by email to WellSky on December 15, 2021, which was to be effective January 7,
2022.
[14]          
After the plaintiff began working for AlayaCare,
she noticed some “red flags” that caused her concern. She states that her
duties were changed and she was not performing the duties set out in the Offer
Letter and Employment Contract she signed.[3]
[15]          
Shortly after her resignation from WellSky, Ms.
Miller received a letter from a lawyer representing WellSky who indicated that
WellSky believed she was working for a competitor and had taken confidential
information with her upon leaving WellSky. WellSky thereafter commenced
litigation seeking an injunction against the plaintiff. AlayaCare retained
counsel on behalf of the plaintiff and defended that claim. The motion for an
injunction against Ms. Miller brought by WellSky was ultimately dismissed and
the action was thereafter dismissed.
[16]          
Ms. Miller was employed by AlayaCare from
January 17, 2022, until August 15, 2022, in the position of Vice President,
Client Services until her employment was terminated without cause.
[17]          
Ms. Miller had a phone conversation with Mr.
Schauer on August 9, 2022, wherein he indicated that her employment with
AlayaCare would be terminated in the near future. On August 15, 2022, the
plaintiff was terminated by letter due to “a reduction in its [AlayaCare’s]
workforce” without notice. That letter was apparently sent by email to all
staff to announce a restructuring of the company. The letter (and a revised
letter dated August 17, 2022) included information about a severance package in
exchange for signing a release.
[18]          
The terms of the plaintiff’s employment with
AlayaCare included a base salary of $200,000, with a bonus “up to $40,000”. The
bonus would have been paid following an assessment in November or December
annually of the plaintiff’s performance. Ms. Miller did not receive any bonus
payment after her termination, nor did she receive any payout for the RSUs
which would have vested over a three-year period. Ms. Miller was paid
$66,666.67 after the date of termination which represents four months’ salary.
[19]          
Following the termination of her employment, the
plaintiff felt betrayed. She had been recruited to leave her secure employment
with WellSky by the promise of increased financial benefits. The plaintiff took
some time to process the situation and take care of her elderly mother and
stepfather before returning to the workforce. She began to seek out employment
commencing in October 2022 and ultimately secured employment with AxisCare on
February 28, 2023. She had to accept a lower compensation package than the one
with AlayaCare.
[20]          
Mr. Schauer who is the Chief Executive Officer
and Director of AlayaCare provided an affidavit in which he attests that during
negotiations with Ms. Miller, changes were made to the Employment Agreement at
the request of the plaintiff (i.e. an extra week of vacation was added and a
clause indicating that AlayaCare would indemnify the plaintiff in the event
that WellSky took legal action against her). He notes that she did not request
any change to the clauses related to the rights and obligations of the parties
to terminate her employment. Further, she did not specifically request that
AlayaCare recognize her prior work with WellSky as a term of her employment.
[21]          
In August 2022, AlayaCare decided to restructure
as a result of slower than expected revenue growth and, as a result, it reduced
its workforce by 80 employees, including the plaintiff.
[22]          
Mr. Schauer attests that Ms. Miller was also
offered, in exchange for signing a release, six months of pay subject to
mitigation in the form of a reduction of 50 percent of that amount if she
secured alternative employment, continued vesting of any RSUs until February
13, 2023, which would have amounted to 840 RSUs and outplacement services.[4]
Ms. Miller did not accept this offer.
[23]          
Mr. Schauer attests that despite her rejection
of this offer, the 840 RSUs due to vest in January 2023 have been credited to
Ms. Miller. Ms. Miller attests that she has no access to the account and does
not have any vested RSUs from AlayaCare.
[24]          
After the hearing of this motion, but before the
court’s ruling was released, the Court of Appeal of Ontario released its
decision in Dufault v. The Corporation of the Township of Ignace, 2024
ONCA 915. At the request of counsel for the plaintiff/moving party, the parties
were permitted to make further submissions in writing on the applicability of
that case to these circumstances.
[25]          
The parties agree that this is an appropriate
case for summary judgment to be granted. The plaintiff submits that the issues
to be decided are:
[26]          
The plaintiff takes the position that the terms
of the Employment Agreement are unenforceable insofar as they conflict with the
Employment Standards Act, 2000, S.O. 2000, c. 41 (“ESA”), and,
accordingly, the plaintiff is entitled to reasonable notice upon termination
(and not the shorter period of notice set out in the Employment Agreement).
[27]          
In considering what period would constitute
reasonable notice, the plaintiff submits that there is significant evidence of
inducement by AlayaCare to cause the plaintiff to leave her previous employment
and work for the defendant. Accordingly, the plaintiff takes the position that
she should be treated as a 12.5-year employee in a senior role who was
terminated at age 62 and should have been given a lengthy period of notice
totalling 22 months.
[28]          
It is the submission of the plaintiff that the
court should find that she was wrongfully terminated and is entitled to damages
in lieu of a 22-month notice period. She was paid four months’ salary and was
promised that one third (1/3) of the RSUs would be vested but they have not
been.
[29]          
The plaintiff suggests that where, as here,
there is evidence of inducement and the promise of job security, even
short-term employees are entitled to be awarded notice periods in the range of
18-22 months. It would be unfair to fix the notice period on the basis of the
plaintiff’s short employment with AlayaCare given all of the circumstances.
[30]          
It is submitted by the defendant that the
plaintiff was a short-term employee who was terminated without cause but who
was provided with pay in lieu of notice in excess of what she was entitled to
under the ESA.[5]
[31]          
The defendant takes the position that even if
the terms of the Employment Agreement are unenforceable, the offer letter,
which does not “contract out” of the ESA, governs the terms of the plaintiff’s
employment.
[32]          
 It is the position of the defendant that Ms.
Miller has received all that she is entitled to and AlayaCare is not liable for
damages in lieu of notice for her termination.
[33]          
Alternatively, the defendant submits that the
damages sought by the plaintiff are excessive and do not constitute reasonable
notice. The defendant denies that Ms. Miller was induced to leave her previous employment
and argues that if the court finds that she was, this is but one factor to be
considered in determining what constitutes reasonable notice in the
circumstances.
[34]          
Further, the defendant submits that the
plaintiff had no entitlement to RSUs as part of her entitlement on termination
based on the terms of the Offer Letter and the RSU Plan and Grant documents.
Despite this, AlayaCare provided 840 RSUs which were due to vest on January 15,
2023.[6]
[35]          
The defendant submits that the RSUs do not have
inherent value because AlayaCare is a privately owned company. Their value can
only be realized upon sale of the business or if the business were to “go
public”. No owner of the RSUs has the right to obtain the cash value for them,
including the plaintiff.
[36]          
Rule 20.04(2) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, R.R.O.1990, Reg.
194 (Rules) states that:
[37]          
An employee who is dismissed without cause is
entitled to reasonable notice to afford them a reasonable amount of time to
secure alternative employment.[7]
[38]          
In Andros v. Colliers Macaulay Nicolls Inc.,
2019 ONCA 679, at paras. 18-19, the court of Appeal addressed the issue of
contractual notice versus reasonable notice and said:
[39]          
In Movati Athletic (Group) Inc v. Bergeron,
2018 ONSC 7258, the Divisional Court set out at para. 24 the steps to be
followed to determine whether a contractual provision can rebut common law
notice. The steps to be followed are:
[40]          
In Dufault v. The Corporation of the Town of
Ignace, 2024 ONCA 915, the Court of Appeal determined that the
motion judge did not err in determining that the termination “for cause” clause
in the employment contract in this case was unenforceable since it did not
comply with the minimum requirements of the ESA.
[41]          
The court upheld its earlier finding in Waksdale
v. Swegon North America Inc., 2020 ONCA 391 (which was followed in Rahman
v. Cannon Design Architecture Inc., 2022 ONCA 451), where it
determined that the termination provisions in an employment contract must be
read as a whole and if one termination provision in an employment contract
violates ESA minimum standards, then all provisions in the contract are invalid
(at para. 23).
[42]          
Accordingly, it is irrelevant whether an
employee is terminated with or without cause, if either clause in an employment
contract is found to violate the ESA, then both clauses are invalid and
unenforceable: Dufault, at para. 24.
[43]          
In Waksdale, the court said that even if
an employer’s actions comply with its ESA obligations on termination, that
compliance does not save a termination clause that violates the ESA (at
para.8).
[44]          
The oft-quoted decision of Bardal v. The
Globe & Mail Ltd. (1960), 24 D.L.R (2d) (H.C.J.) at p. 145, sets out
the basic principles to be applied in a determination of what constitutes
reasonable notice of termination:
[45]          
In Wallace v. United Grain Growers Ltd.,
1997 CanLII 332 (SCC), [1997] 3 S.C.R. 701, at paras. 82-83, the Court held that the Bardal factors
are not exhaustive and a factor that can be considered in determining what
constitutes reasonable notice is whether the employee was induced to leave
previous secure employment. Iacobucci J. speaking for the majority of the Court
said at para. 85:
[46]          
In Love v. Acuity Investment Management Inc.,
2011 ONCA 130, the appellant who was also a 2 percent owner of the company was
dismissed without cause at age 50 after approximately two-and-a-half years of
service. The court held in that case that determining an appropriate notice
period required the weighing and balancing of a variety of relevant factors. At
para. 19, Goudge J.A. said:
[47]          
The parties agree to the following:
[48]          
At the outset, I find that this is an
appropriate case to grant summary judgment.
[49]          
The court must next determine whether the
plaintiff was entitled, upon termination of her employment by the defendant, to
reasonable notice under the common law, or to contractual notice as outlined in
the Offer Letter and/or Employment Agreement.
[50]          
The plaintiff submits that the termination
clauses contained in the Employment Agreement are void because they violate the
ESA and, accordingly, the court should award damages in lieu of notice under
the common law.
[51]          
The plaintiff suggests that there are four
distinct issues with the wording of the Employment Agreement that should lead
the court to determine that it is unenforceable:
[52]          
Clause 11 in the Employment Agreement entitled
“Termination by AlayaCare for Cause” states:
[53]          
Sections 54, 57 and 58 of the ESA set out
minimum notice requirements upon termination of employment even if there is
“cause” except for “prescribed employees” as set out ins s. 55 of the ESA. The
provision in the Employment Agreement outlined above permits AlayaCare to
terminate Ms. Miller for “cause” including “any cause recognized at law” or
“serious reason” without notice or payment in lieu.
[54]          
This very issue was addressed in Rahman
at paras. 26-30. The factors that can trigger disentitlement to notice are set
out in s. 2(1) of the regulation Termination and Severance of Employment,
O.R. 288/01, under the ESA. It sets out those categories of employees who are
not entitled to notice or payment and includes the following:
[55]          
In Rahman, the court held that a
provision permitting termination without notice and without payment in lieu for
“just cause” that falls short of wilful misconduct violates s. 5 of the ESA and
renders it void. Section 5 of the ESA says that an employer cannot contract out
of an employment standard.
[56]          
In this case, like Rahman, the
terminology falls short of “wilful misconduct” and permits the employer to
terminate Ms. Miller’s employment without notice or payment for “cause” or “serious
reason”. At para. 30 of Rahman, the court said:
[57]          
Accordingly, since the terms of the Employment
Agreement violate the ESA, it is unenforceable.
[58]          
However, because the defendant relies on the
Offer Letter as the relevant governing document even if the Employment
Agreement is found to be void for violating the ESA, I must consider the
provisions of that document as well.
[59]          
The Offer Letter contains only one paragraph in
relation to termination of employment. It states:
[60]          
In Rahman, there was an offer
letter which contained terms that conflicted with the employment contract also.
In that case because of a stipulation in the Offer Letter that in such a
situation the terms of the offer letter prevailed, the court relied on the
Offer Letter as the governing document (at para. 16).
[61]          
In this case, the parties agreed that in the
event that there is a conflict between the Offer Letter and the Employment
Agreement, the Offer Letter would govern. A similar clause is included in the
Employment Agreement.
[62]          
The plaintiff points out that the Offer Letter
provides only the “minimum” obligation on the defendant and does not limit or
displace Ms. Miller’s entitlement at common law. It does not set out that it is
the only entitlement due to an employee.
[63]          
It is not clear that this clause has the effect
of stating that the common law no longer applies.
[64]          
The presumption that an employee is entitled to
reasonable notice may be rebutted if the contract specifies some other period
of notice as long as it meets or exceeds the minimum requirements of the ESA:
see Machtinger v. HOJ Industries Ltd., 1992 CanLII 102 (SCC), at
p. 998. But the intention of the parties to rebut the right to reasonable
notice at common law must be set out in clear and unambiguous language: see Nemeth
v. Hatch Ltd., 2018 ONCA at para. 8.
[65]          
A high degree of clarity is required to reflect
the intention of the parties to rebut the right to reasonable notice at common
law and any ambiguity will be resolved in favour of the employee: see Movati
at para. 10.
[66]          
According to the plaintiff, because both the
Offer Letter and the Employment Agreement entitle the plaintiff to base salary
only upon termination without cause therefore, they both violate the provisions
of the ESA. Accordingly, they are unenforceable. That provision does not
specifically state that Ms. Miller is entitled to benefits and/or bonuses in
addition to base salary.
[67]          
In Wood, at para. 37, Laskin J.A.
said:
[68]          
The provision in the Offer Letter does not
address any benefits and/or bonuses payable upon termination and, in accordance
with the principles outlined in Wood, is unenforceable.
[69]          
Having found, for the reasons outlined above,
that the plaintiff is not restricted to contractual notice of termination, I
have concluded that it follows that she is therefore entitled to reasonable
notice upon termination.
[70]          
To determine what constitutes reasonable notice
in the circumstances of this case, the court must look at all the relevant
factors in a holistic manner without giving disproportionate weight to one
factor over another: see Singer v. Nordstrong Equipment Limited,
2018 ONCA 364, at para. 6. There is no formula to determine what constitutes
reasonable notice, but the non-exhaustive list of factors outlined in Bardal
along with other relevant factors, including whether the plaintiff was
induced to leave her previous employment have been considered.
[71]          
The plaintiff was employed with AlayaCare for a
short period of time – seven months, but she argues that her previous
employment of 12 years with WellSky (and its predecessors) should be factored
into the assessment of the length of her employment.
[72]          
One of the reasons Ms. Miller was recruited by
AlayaCare was because of the experience she had in this specialized area. She
was hired to work in a senior executive position which likely would not have
been available to her had she not had the work experience with WellSky.
[73]          
I agree with the plaintiff that although she was
only employed by AlayaCare for a short period of time, some credit must be
given for the fact that she had 12 years of secure employment in the
software-as-a-service health care industry. That is the reason she was
recruited by Mr. Murphy to join AlayaCare.
[74]          
However, I also note that while the plaintiff
made a request to amend the Offer Letter and the Employment Agreement to
include an extra week of vacation and to indemnify her from legal action by her
former employer, she did not specifically request that she be credited with her
years of experience in the industry.
[75]          
Accordingly, I have taken into account the fact that
the plaintiff was a 12-year employee of WellSky, and the fact that she had a
great deal of experience in what has been described as a “niche” industry as
one of the factors to be considered in assessing the period of reasonable
notice.
[76]          
 She was hired in an executive supervisory
position with AlayaCare, a position of responsibility. However, once she
started her employment with AlayaCare she was given only a small team to work
on a small project. She initially reported to the COO of the company, George
Psihairis, and subsequently was told to report to the senior vice-president.
[77]          
In Love v. Acuity Investment Management Inc.,
the Court of Appeal overturned the decision of the trial judge finding that
he had overemphasized the appellant’s short length of service (2.5 years) and
underemphasized the nature of the appellant’s employment. He was a senior
vice-president who reported directly to the chief executive officer and was one
of nine owners in the company. These factors favoured a longer notice period.
In that case, the Court of Appeal substituted a period of nine months notice
for the five-month notice period ordered at trial.
[78]          
In this case, the plaintiff was employed in a
senior executive position, reporting to the COO of the company. She was paid a
substantial salary and was entitled to bonuses as well as an equity share in
the company in the form of RSUs which would vest in the future. This factor
favours a lengthier period of notice.
[79]          
The plaintiff was 62 years old at the time of
her termination.
[80]          
The plaintiff submits that this factor weighs
heavily in the assessment of what constitutes reasonable notice.
[81]          
In Wallace, at para. 85, the court found
that inducements are properly included among the factors which tend to lengthen
the notice requirement, but the importance of an inducement in deciding the
notice period will vary depending upon the nature of the inducement.
[82]          
Some of the factors taken into account to
determine whether there has been an inducement were set out by Bordin J. in Grimaldi
v. CF+D Custom Fireplace Design Inc., 2023 ONSC 6708, at paras. 52-53:
[83]          
In this case, I have determined that the
plaintiff did not seek out employment with the defendant, AlayaCare quite
clearly sought her out. Whether or not the plaintiff was dissatisfied with how
things were at WellSky does not alter this fact. She did not approach the
defendant. Their communications began with a LinkedIn message sent by Brady
Murphy to Ms. Miller on September 26, 2021, with the title “Bold moves?”. In
that message Mr. Murphy tells the plaintiff that “At AlayaCare we’re looking to
grow and the CEO and I believe your talent pool would really help us grow and
learn more about the US market”.
[84]          
Although there is no evidence that Ms. Miller
undertook any sort of due diligence before accepting the offer of employment,
she did express concern about facing litigation from WellSky and was assured
that AlayaCare would assist her. She was assured that she would be an executive
at AlayaCare. The details of the phone conversations and Zoom meetings as well
as the in-person meetings between the plaintiff and Mr. Murphy come from the
affidavit of Ms. Miller since there is no evidence before the court from Mr.
Murphy.
[85]          
On October 7, 2021, Mr. Murphy sent a LinkedIn
message to Ms. Miller which stated:
[86]          
Despite the position of the defendant that Ms.
Miller was not “lured” or induced to leave her employment and join AlayaCare,
by his own words, Mr. Murphy inquired to learn the extent of the plaintiff’s
compensation with WellSky for the purpose of determining “what it would take”
to persuade her to leave that employment and join AlayaCare.