[1]              
            The action arises out of a motor
vehicle collision which occurred on November 24, 2015.
[2]              
            The defendant moves for summary
judgment dismissing the action on the basis that it was commenced after the
limitation period had expired.
[3]              
            The plaintiff was born on December
18, 1972. At the time of the collision, she was employed as a PSW.
[4]              
            On April 15, 2015, that is
approximately seven months prior to the motor vehicle collision, she was
injured in the workplace and suffered a concussion type injury from two blows
to the head.
[5]              
            She was scheduled to return to work
on November 26, 2015, that is two days after the collision occurred. She stated
on discovery that “my work concussion had got better. That’s why I got cleared
to go back to work”.
[6]              
            Because of the intervening motor
vehicle collision, her actual return to work was in January 2016.
[7]              
            She did not return back to full-time
hours. And she did not work overtime or premium shifts. However, she suffered
no loss of income until 2020.
[8]              
            The evidence is that she was treated
by her family doctors for both injuries and was compliant with their treatments
and referrals. Her symptoms persisted. There were some improvements over time.
[9]              
            At the request of her employer, she
consulted with a clinical psychologist whose area of practice was in clinical
neuropsychology, Dr. Day. She attended for clinical examination by him in
November 2019 and he filed his report dated March 12, 2020. On July 21, 2020,
he met with the plaintiff to discuss his report and diagnoses.
[10]          
            Subsequent to that meeting, she
retained a lawyer who commenced this litigation by way of a statement of claim
issued November 8, 2021.
[11]          
            The defendant submits that the
limitation period for commencing this action began to run on the date of the
collision. In the alternative, the defendant submits that, at the latest, the
limitation period began to run on March 4, 2019 when the plaintiff was referred
by her family doctor to Providence Continuing Care Centre (PCCC) for the acquired
brain injury clinic as per the recommendation of the neurologist, Dr. Riopelle,
which had been made on July 5, 2018. At that time, Dr. Riopelle was of the
opinion that it was premature to offer a prognosis without MRI imaging of her
brain and cervical cord.
[12]          
            It is the plaintiff’s submission
that the limitation period did not begin to run until the feedback session with
Dr. Day where he explained his diagnoses and that she had suffered second
impact syndrome which was likely contributing to her prolonged recovery and
more complicated response to her injuries. He diagnosed her with mild
neurocognitive disorder due to a traumatic brain injury, adjustment disorder,
and somatic symptom disorder.
[13]          
            The parties are agreed on the
applicable law with respect to motions for summary judgment.
[14]          
            The parties agree that sections 4
and 5 of the Limitations Act, 2002, S.O. 2002, c. 24, Sched. B, are
applicable.  There is a presumption that the limitation period began on the
date of the collision, unless the plaintiff proves otherwise.
[15]          
            The parties agree that the Insurance
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. I.8, sections 267.5(3) and (5) bar liability for
healthcare expenses or nonpecuniary loss resulting from bodily injury arising
directly or indirectly from the use or operation of an automobile unless the
injured person has sustained permanent serious impairment of an important
physical, mental or psychological function.
[16]          
            Damages are sustained and a cause of
action established when it is reasonably discoverable that the injury meets the
legal threshold of “permanent serious impairment” under the Insurance Act.
(Peixeiro v. Haberman, 1997 CanLII 325 (SCC), [1997] 3 SCR 549, para 44). The plaintiff does
not need to know the extent of the injuries to start the limitation clock
however no cause of action exists until sufficient severity of injury exists. (para.
30)
[17]          
            The question is not whether the
plaintiff believes that her injury meets the criteria but whether there is a
sufficient body of evidence available to be placed before a judge that, in
counsel’s opinion, there is a reasonable chance of persuading a judge, on the
balance of probabilities, that the injury qualifies under the threshold. When
such a body of material has been accumulated, then and only then should the
limitation begin to run. The court must afford a degree of latitude to a
plaintiff in making this very individual and complicated determination. Ioannidis
v. Hawkings, 1998 CanLII 14822 (ON SC), [1998] O.J. No. 1421 (Gen. Div). The court also noted that
determination of whether a claim meets the threshold, or not, is one about
which reasonable people may often disagree.
[18]          
            In Mapletoft v. Service, 2008
CanLII 6935 (ONSC) para. 36, the court stated that it could not accept the
argument that it is not open to a defendant to deny that injuries meet the
threshold test while simultaneously arguing that the limitation period has
expired. The court noted that the defendant in that case conceded that it may
have trouble riding in both of these directions at trial, but it is entitled to
plead alternative and potentially contradictory defences, the court noted that
discoverability cannot mean that the limitation period does not run until the
plaintiff knows for sure that the injury crosses the threshold.
[19]          
            Another applicable principle is that
plaintiffs are expected to act diligently and not sleep on their rights, M.
(K.) v. M (H.), 1992 CanLII 31 (SCC), [1992] 3 S.C.R. 6; Fennell v. Deol, 2016 ONCA 249.
[20]          
            I have taken into consideration that
the deductible for cases of this nature in 2016 was $36,000 and in 2017 was
approximately $37,300.
[21]          
            In Grant Thornton LLP v. New
Brunswick, 2021 SCC 31, the court stated that the plaintiff does not need
to know the exact extent or type of harm it has suffered or the precise cause
of its injury in order for limitation period to run. (Para.46). A plausible
inference of liability is enough. (Para 47).
[22]          
            The court in Everding v. Skrijel,
2010 ONCA 437 put the principle this way:
[23]          
            Justice Perell in Pereira v.
Contardo, 2014 ONSC 6894 cited the decision of Belobaba J: “It is one thing
to know you have constant pain. It is quite another thing to be told that the
pain has been medically diagnosed as chronic pain that could clear the
“permanent and serious” threshold under the Insurance Act”. To the same effect
is the decision in Hurley v. Punitharanjan, 2015 ONSC 7337 at para. 29, “None
of the medical reports before the motion judge opines that the plaintiff’s
injuries constituted, on a balance of probabilities, a serious and permanent
injury such that it met the requirements… of the Insurance Act”. Para.31.
[24]          
            The moving party reviewed the
medical records and employment forms of the plaintiff. These demonstrate
regular attendances by the plaintiff for assessment and treatments.
[25]          
            It is significant that all of these
forms referred to her injuries as post concussion syndrome or concussion.
[26]          
            Except for 1. the ambulance call
report: head/brain trauma; and 2. a hospital visit on September 8, 2016 which
was for a pain in the back occurring while at work, and the record for which had
written “brain injury” and under Past Medical History recircled “IBS LT. Sided
Brain Injury 2015,” there is no reference to a brain injury until Dr. Day’s
diagnosis of “mild neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury (repeated
concussions, the second while still recovering from the first, with persistent
posting concussion symptoms including poor stamina.”) It is his examination and
report and feedback that first informs the plaintiff that second impact
syndrome is likely contributing to prolonged recovery and more complicated
response to her injuries. He reports that most concussions would be expected to
resolve, and symptoms diminish within a matter of months. Indeed, that was the
plaintiff’s experience, from her workplace injuries.
[27]          
            The forms and medical records
indicate “indefinite” with respect to duration of restrictions, or “indeterminate”
or “unknown.”
[28]          
            The family doctor indicated on
November 1, 2016 that the expected date of return to work full time was unknown
and that the prognosis is guarded or full recovery.
[29]          
            The medical record dated December 1,
2016 indicates that the patient was counselled with respect to a potential
prognosis and never reaching 100% or previous baseline. The reference is to
post concussion syndrome.
[30]          
            In a note dated January 5, 2017,
neurologist, Dr. Riopelle, was of the opinion that she should be out of the
workforce and supported until such time as her migraine symptomology is
improved. This same doctor, on July 5, 2018, reported mild to moderate
concussion with persistent symptoms but reported that it was premature to give
a prognosis for potential improvement and recommended MRI imaging of the brain
and cervical spinal cord.
[31]          
            On January 10, 2018, the family
doctor reported that there were no pending specialist referrals, that the
expected date of return to work full time was unsure, and that the medical
prognosis towards full recovery was guarded.
[32]          
            On March 13, 2018, the family doctor
reported that a sudden cure of her post concussion syndrome is unlikely to
happen. A note from the family doctor dated March 21, 2018 again reported that
expected date of return to work full time was unsure and a medical prognosis
towards full recovery was guarded.
[33]          
            Dr. Riopelle in his note of July 5,
2018, referenced above, also notes that the plaintiff was diagnosed with post
concussion syndrome and had attended post concussion rehab at Providence
Continuing Care. He listed the persistent symptoms including work restrictions.
[34]          
            The results of the MRI are dated January
20, 2019, and counsel are agreed that it showed no significant findings with
respect to the brain or spinal cord attributable to the motor vehicle
collision.
[35]          
            On March 4, 2019, the family doctor
reported that he would refer the plaintiff to PCCC acquired brain injury
clinic.  Upon doing so, he was informed that there was a three year wait list.
[36]          
            On referral, the plaintiff was
examined by Dr. Day in November 2019. His written report was completed in March
2020, and he had a feedback session with her in July 2020.
[37]          
            It was subsequent to this feedback
session that the plaintiff hired a lawyer and the statement of claim was
issued.
[38]          
            It was not until March 2022 that the
plaintiff’s employer put her on permanent part-time employment. She had not
suffered a loss of income until 2020.
[39]          
            The defendant pointed out that in
the course of her examination for discovery and cross-examination on this
motion, the plaintiff attributed her persistent symptoms and concerning
incidents to the motor vehicle collision. Counsel for the plaintiff responds
that this is with the benefit of hindsight which is not the relevant timeframe
to be considered on the motion.  I agree with plaintiff’s counsel on this
point.
[40]          
            I find that the plaintiff exercised
due diligence, attending for regular consultation and treatment and compliant
with directions from her medical caregivers.
[41]          
            I find that the plaintiff reasonably
expected to recover from what she understood to be concussion injuries and
symptoms just like she had from the workplace concussion. Indeed Dr. Day
confirms that that was a reasonable expectation.
[42]          
            The plaintiff swears that Dr. Day
was the first doctor who explained to her that she had a traumatic brain
injury. That is borne out by the record. She swore that her understanding is
that a traumatic brain injury is more severe than a concussion. She swore that
she always thought that a concussion was an injury that would resolve. Indeed,
that was her experience from her workplace concussion. She swore that she
didn’t realize that her injury from the motor vehicle collision was medically
complicated by the previous workplace concussion until Dr. Day explained and pointed
it out to her. She also pointed out that Dr. Day diagnosed psychological
impairments including adjustment disorder and somatic symptom. This is borne
out by the record.  I acknowledge that Dr. Day did not use the word, “permanent.
[43]          
            I accept her evidence that this
triggered the plaintiff retaining a law firm in connection with the motor
vehicle collision for the first time.  There is evidence that 2 law firms had
previously represented her in respect of WSIB.
[44]          
            I find that none of the medical
reports and forms opined that the plaintiff’s motor vehicle collision injuries
constituted, on a balance of probabilities, a serious and permanent injury such
that it met the threshold criteria.
[45]          
            In my view, the referral to the PCCC
acquired brain injury clinic did not start the limitation period to run.
[46]          
            I find that there was not a
sufficient body of evidence for the plaintiff to have known that there was a
reasonable chance of persuading a judge, on the balance of probabilities, that
her injuries met the threshold before the feedback session with Dr. Day. The
court must afford a degree of latitude to a plaintiff in making that
determination. I find that it was only at that point that she could plausibly
infer that she had a substantial chance to succeed in recovering a judgment for
damages.
[47]          
            As stated in the cases, it is one
thing for the plaintiff to suffer from symptoms that her medical experts
attribute to post concussion syndrome, from which she had recovered previously,
and a completely different thing to be told by a specialist medical
practitioner to whom she was referred that she was suffering from a mild neurocognitive
disorder due to traumatic brain injury resulting from repeated concussions with
the effect of second impact syndrome contributing to her prolonged recovery and
more complicated response to her injuries, and in addition, from 2
psychological impairments.
[48]          
            In my view, this case is
distinguishable from Sorita v. Toronto Transit Commission, 2016 ONSC
2508. In the present case, I find that Dr. Day does provide new information to
the plaintiff and does contain a detailed analysis of her ongoing symptoms
including the reason why that is the case.
[49]          
            I find that it was not until July
2020 that there was a substantial body of evidence that could have been used to
overcome the Insurance Act threshold and that this action was commenced
within the applicable limitation time.
[50]          
            I find that the plaintiff has met
the onus on her to overcome the presumption.
[51]          
            For these reasons, and despite the
very capable submissions made on behalf of the defendant, this motion for
summary judgment is dismissed.
[52]          
            I thank counsel on both sides for
their excellent and focused written and oral submissions.
[53]          
            Counsel advised that they have
agreed upon the costs of this motion and therefore, I make no order in that
regard.